

 
CYBERCRIME AND CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY  
IN CYBERSPACE 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND 
PREDICTIVE MODELING 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

 
CYBERCRIME AND  
CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the eBook tab. 
 

 
CYBERCRIME AND CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY  
IN CYBERSPACE 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND 
PREDICTIVE MODELING 
 
 
 
KRISTIJAN KUK  
AND  
DRAGAN RANĐELOVIĆ 
EDITORS 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

 
Copyright © 2017 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions to 
reuse content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s website and 
locate the “Get Permission” button below the title description. This button is linked directly to the 
title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit copyright.com and search by 
title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 
Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is 
assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information 
contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary 
damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any 
parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts 
to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this 
book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in 
this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject 
matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in 
rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS 
JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A 
COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-570-4 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques:  
The Potential Application to Crime Investigation  
in Cyber Space 
1 
D. Marinković and T. Civelek 
Chapter 2 
Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical 
Support  of Police Work 
19 
N. Milić, B. Popović, V. Ilijazi and E. Ilijazi 
Chapter 3 
Cybercrime Influence on Personal, National and 
International Security while Using the Internet 
53 
I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić  
and R. Stainov 
Chapter 4 
Some Aspects of the Application  of Benford’s  
Law in the Analysis of the Data Set Anomalies 
85 
D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović, M. Ljubić  
and V. Surovy 
Chapter 5 
Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns  
of Social Online Networks 
121 
G. Savić and M. Kuzmanović 
 
 

Contents 
vi
Chapter 6 
Information Retrieval and Development of 
Conceptual Schemas in E-Documents for  
Serbian Criminal Code 
151 
V. Nikolić, P. Đikanović and S. Nedeljković 
Chapter 7 
Development of the Android-Based Secure 
Communication Device 
175 
A. Jevremović, M. Veinović, G. Šimić, N. Savanović 
and D. Ranđelović 
Author Contact Information 
195 
Index 
 
197 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
This book on knowledge discovery in cyberspace consists of a current 
collection of research with contributions by authors from different nations in 
different disciplines. After reading this book, the reader should be able to: 
understand the fundamental nature of cyberspace; understand the role of 
cyber-attacks; learn analytical techniques and the challenges of predicting 
events; learn how languages and culture are influenced by cyberspace; and 
learn techniques of the cyberspace public opinion detection and tracking 
process. Understanding cyberspace is the key to defending against digital 
attacks. The book takes a global perspective, examining the skills needed to 
collect and analyze event information and perform threat or target analysis 
duties in an effort to identify sources for signs of compromise, unauthorized 
activity and poor security practices. The ability to understand and react to 
events in cyberspace in a timely and appropriate manner will be key to future 
success. Most of the collections are research-based practices that have been 
done throughout the years.  
This book is a practical handbook of research on dealing with 
mathematical methods in crime prevention for special agents, and discusses 
their capabilities and benefits that stem from integrating statistical analysis and 
predictive modeling. The authors hope that the presented work will be of great 
use to police investigators and cyber special agents interested in predictive 
analytics.  
 
 
Synopsis of Book Chapters  
 
The book comprises seven chapters. In Chap. 1, Marinković, D. and 
Civelek, T. present potential applications based association rules algorithms. 

K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
viii
The goal of used algorithms is that tendencies (often ‘hidden’) can be revealed 
as well internet identity, political opinion, music preferences, religion etc. 
However, the Web space, especially social media, is invaluable source of data 
and often the first place crime investigators are referring to it in order to obtain 
relevant information. Automatic data search and matching is a powerful tool 
enabling the fast and efficient searching of large databases for crime 
investigators. In their experiment authors tried to establish how efficient is 
above afforementioned a_priori algorithm in blog analysis when association 
rules are utilized.  
Chapter 2 by Milić, N. et al. present some of the GIS technology 
capabilities in the function of analytical support of police work at all levels of 
police organization and management. In addition to the visualization of 
geospatial data, GIS technology provides analytical capacity primarily in 
analyzing geospatial distribution of crime incidents. Comparing to the textual 
crime reports (bulletins), crime maps inform law enforcement officers much 
faster and easier about the spatial distribution of crime. The innovative 
functionalities of predictive analytic solutions are briefly described by authors. 
The aim of chapter 3 by Cvetanoski, I. et al. is to stress the danger of 
cybercrime activities in cyberspace and its impact on personal, national and 
international security. Today, modern technology gives great opportunity to 
use on-line tools for performing cybercrime activities, which means that 
anyone can create malicious software for crime activities in cyberspace. The 
authors ware used a simple linear regression in order to predict computer 
crime in the future. The results of their research present that simple linear 
regression model can be used to make a prediction for computer crime in a 
year or two in the future, but it is not a good model to make a prediction very 
far into a future. 
In Chap. 4. Joksimović et al. presented generally accepted theoretical 
analysis and assumptions regarding the implementation of the Benford's Law. 
The implementation of this law in the analysis of the anomalies in some 
numerical data in various scientific disciplines is also part of this chapter. The 
authors shows how the mutual usage of the Benford's Law and specific laws of 
mathematical statistics, successfully detects potential irregularities in the 
numerical data and leads the forensic analyst forward in the area of the 
detection of the potential fraud. 
The next chapter (Chap. 5, by Savić, G. and Kuzmanović, M.) discusses 
intend to investigate the relationship between concerns of Online Social 
Networks or OSN users and their behavior and attitudes towards privacy. 
Therefore, the behavior is investigated throughout the groups of questions 

Preface 
ix
concerning the habits of using OSNs, leaving real personal data or connecting 
with unknown people. In this chapter, authors focus on the relationship 
between privacy concerns and actual behavior of the online social network 
users in Serbia. 
Text analysis and classification techniques might be used to improve 
efficiency and effectiveness of e-government services, especially the ones 
provided by law enforcement agencies by using techniques of automatic text 
reports analysis, Nikolić, V. et al. (Chap. 6) propose concepts representing the 
documents via the conceptual schemas. The authors presented data mining and 
Lucene library spaces architecture, as well as the core Lucene, and then the 
possibility of its application. Their case study deal with the possibilities of 
Lucene indexing and Lucene searching of data and documents within 
unstructured crime text documents in Serbian language. 
The final chapter by Jevremović A., et al. presents a model for the 
development of its custom system for secure communication depending on 
custom encryption algorithms. They discuss key issues related to the 
development of mobile devices for secure communication based on the 
Android platform. This chapter also analyzes the choice between processing 
encryption systems and absolutely secured encryption systems. Therefore, the 
solution presented in the chapter proposes building of its custom algorithm in 
the form of Linux kernel modules. 
We would like to express our special thanks to the eight reviewers who 
participated in the peer review process: 
 
 
Alaa Hussein Al-hamami, Dean of Database Security, College of 
Computer Sciences and Informatics, Amman Arab University, Jordan 
 
Damir Delija, Digital Forensic Department, INsig2, Croatia 
 
Dimitar Bogatinov, Military academy "General Mihailo Apostolski"-
Skopje, "Goce Delchev" University – Shtip, Macedonia 
 
Ejub Kajan, State University of Novi Pazar, Serbia 
 
Lepiokhin Alexander, Department of legal informatics, The Ministry 
of internal Affairs of the Republic of Belarus, Belarus 
 
Ranka Stanković, HLT Group, University of Belgrade, Serbia 
 
Wei Wang, Department of Public Security Fundamentals, National 
Police University of China, China 
 
Yuri Savva, Orel State University, Russian Federation 
Kristijan Kuk, 
Dragan Ranđelović 


In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
COMPUTER-BASED DATA 
ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES: 
THE POTENTIAL APPLICATION TO 
CRIME INVESTIGATION IN CYBER SPACE 
 
 
Darko Marinković1,*, PhD and Turhan Civelek2, PhD  
1Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies, 
Department of Criminalistics, Belgrade, Serbia 
2Kirklareli University, Engineering Faculty, 
Software Engineering Department, Kırklareli, Turkey 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Collecting the most versatile information about individuals and their 
storing in different databases represent the reality of the contemporary 
society. The growth in the quantity of information has exceeded man’s 
power to process and analyze them in a traditional manner, making 
computerized techniques and means, especially data mining techniques, a 
necessity for these purposes. Although widely applied in the public 
administration and economy domain, computerized data search and 
comparison so far have not reached their full potential in the area of 
crime investigation and forensics. Law enforcement agencies and forensic 
laboratories collect large quantities of various data originating not only 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: D. Marinkovic, Email: darko.marinkovic@kpa.edu.rs. 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
2
from a person’s criminal activities, but his/her social activities as well 
(i.e., blogs, social media, etc.). The very success of a crime investigation 
depends to a large extent on the availability of relevant data (referring to 
persons, objects or events) and finding often hidden relationship among 
them. Web space, especially social media, is invaluable source of data 
and often the first place crime investigators refer to in order to obtain 
relevant information. 
 
Keywords: data analysis, data surveillance, data mining, cyber space, crime 
investigation 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
It is a general view today that exceptional organization of human society 
inevitably relies on collecting and managing the most various data related to 
their members. The efficient functioning of the government as well as non-
governmental sector requires the existence of numerous information registers 
about different entities (individuals, organizations, etc.), covering all aspects 
of their activities. Utilization of computer-based information systems has 
largely increased the possibility of collecting, processing and analyzing data 
for different purposes including surveillance of individuals and their 
behaviour. The essential importance of computer storing and processing of 
information is not only in the speed of carrying out various operations, but 
primarily in the possibility to access the integrated mutually linked data 
coming from different sources. The state-of-the art information technology 
makes it possible to get these data from different networked databases in split 
seconds. 
Collecting and storing (naturally legal and legitimate) different kind of 
information about individuals represents the reality of the modern society, as is 
the fact that the persons these data refer to cannot have the absolute power 
over them. However, they have the right to feel secure from possible misuses 
of these data. This is why the issue of the protection of personal data today is 
highlighted even more, particularly being prominent in functioning and 
performing the activities of state administration institutions and judiciary, 
including police. Accordingly, with regards to the availability of personal data, 
they must have certain limitations due to the general interest, and in the same 
or similar way as when their other freedoms and rights are limited. The task of 
the legal science, law-makers and legal practice is to define standard 
foundations for collection and management of the most versatile data, i.e., the 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
3
conditions under which they can be used for socially justified purposes. On the 
other hand, the actual (primarily technical) possibilities are increasing from 
day to day for more comprehensive, complex and sophisticated exploiting of 
personal data, including the data on individual activities in all fields of life and 
work. Among other things, the exploiting of such data can yield good results 
in fighting crime as well. 
The explosive growth of quantity of data and databases they are stored in 
has exceeded man’s power to process and analyze them by traditional means 
requiring new and different (naturally computer-based) analyzing techniques 
and means. Regardless of the purpose they are used for, automatic data search 
and comparison are based on the databases where certain data are stored, on 
the one hand, and on the other hand, on the application of computers 
(understood as hardware) and related programs (software) used for the search, 
comparison and analysis of these data. 
 
 
DATA SURVEILLANCE AS A SPECIAL FORM OF 
PERSONAL SURVEILLANCE 
 
Surveillance may be defined as a systematic investigation or monitoring of 
movements or communications of one or more persons in order to collect 
information about them, their activities and connections. For a long time the 
surveillance has been implemented by direct physical observation, as well as 
by various devices used for support, including telescopes, cameras, directed 
microphones, telephone bugs, etc. The conventional surveillance forms require 
hard work, cost much and last long [1]. 
During the 20th century the work of public administration has increasingly 
included the intensive use of personal data. The expansion of network traffic 
and flow of information has additionally contributed to the huge amounts of 
data interchanged to be widely available. Personal surveillance through 
personal data has become easily achievable, and at the same time much more 
inexpensive and simpler than conventional techniques of physical or electronic 
surveillance. As a result, new technology called data surveillance emerged, 
enabling and facilitating surveillance of large number of people by comparing 
and pairing data (collected from various sources) referring to them. Ever since 
it started being applied, the data surveillance has become a topic of numerous 
government publications and its effects and influences have been discussed by 
many researchers, mostly sociologists and to some extent lawyers as well.  

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
4
In the Anglo-Saxon literature this phenomenon is usually referred to as 
dataveillance, essentially representing the control, comparison and analysis of 
systemized personal data obtained while monitoring their activities during 
criminal investigations. According to Clarke [2], two essential modalities of 
personal surveillance through data are:  
 
1. personal dataveillance, such as checking or proving the veracity of 
concrete, extraordinary or extra works and transaction, which are 
contrary to internal regulations of a certain service or organization, 
and  
2. the surveillance of a large, usually unidentified number of persons 
(mass dataveillance), such as checking and proving of veracity of all 
transactions which are contrary to internal regulations of a certain 
organization. 
 
In addition to two above mentioned models, there are also a number of 
facilitative and support techniques, such as techniques for integration of data 
stored in various databases. In comparison to conventional forms of 
surveillance, dataveillance is automated, and therefore cheaper and more 
reliable. This is why its application during the last 30 years has flourished, in 
the beginning in wealthy societies with the developed and sophisticated 
information technologies, but recently also in the developing countries where 
many of them have legislation problems due to insufficiently developed 
mechanisms of civil rights protection.  
 
 
CRIME INVESTIGATION ASPECTS OF COMPUTER  
SEARCH AND COMPARISON OF DATA 
 
Computer search, analysis and comparing of data for crime-investigation 
purposes may be versatile, with various expectations and results of application. 
In the same manner as the large number of data stored in appropriate databases 
serves to the efficient performance of public administration or banking, it can 
be very useful in crime investigation.  
The factors helping in the evaluation of relevance of data mining 
techniques application in crime suppression range from the activities from 
which the databases result to their quality (the degree of uncertainty, precision 
and completeness). Police agencies and forensic laboratories collect large 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
5
quantities of various data as a result of processing a variety of criminal 
activities. Accordingly, one group of data obtained within the forensic crime 
scene investigation consists of the information referring to collected material 
of physical origin (for instance, biological traces, traces of tools, fingerprints, 
shoeprints, illegal drugs seizures, etc.). This kind of data may be presented 
numerically and may be subject to categorization. The features extracted from 
these materials are often imprecise (in principle because of the instruments 
used for analysis and measurements), incomplete (fragmentary) and uncertain. 
The discovered and processed material samples are usually categorized 
into three groups: 1) useless samples (for instance, the obvious clarity of the 
contents without any calculations or they are irrelevant for the problem 
observed), 2) useful samples, which provide direct important information that 
can be worked with, and 3) pattern that requires interpretation, and which 
cannot be classified into two previous categories, and therefore must be 
examined by the experts in the given field [3]. 
The researchers have developed various automated data mining techniques 
which can be utilized for crime suppression both in the field of local police 
work and at the national level. Thus the entity extraction technique identifies 
the patterns from databases such as texts, images or audio materials. It is used 
for the automatic identification of faces, addresses, vehicles or personal 
characteristics from narrative police reports. This technique provides 
important data for crime analysis [4], but its achievements depend to a large 
extent on the availability of large quantity of pure input data.  
Cluster 
techniques 
systematize 
data 
into 
groups 
with 
similar 
characteristics in order to maximize or minimize the similarity of the data 
within a certain group, for instance, for identification of the suspects who 
commit crimes in the similar manner or to differentiate between criminal 
groups belonging to different gangs.  
Association rule discovery finds the groups of data that appear often in 
one database and the patterns of their appearance are defined as regularities. 
This technique is often used to trace computer network intruders so that the 
certain rules of association could be deduced from the history of interaction 
among the users. The researchers can also use this technique for intruder 
profiling in order to try to detect (or prevent) possible attacks on the network. 
For detection of social media users or tracking of their behaviours, external 
attacks from network, determination of network hackings, there are algorithms 
that can be used to solve these issues. 
Sequence pattern detection (or string pattern detection) finds sequences 
that appear often in one set of transactions that occurred at various times. 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
6
Pointing to the hidden patterns is useful for crime analysis, but in order to 
obtain meaningful results a rich and highly structured database is required. 
Deviation detection uses certain measures for the study of data which 
noticeably differ from other data. The researchers may use this technique to 
detect frauds, hacking into network systems and for other crime analyses. 
However, such activities may sometimes seem usual at first sight, which 
makes identification of deviating data more difficult.  
Classification finds common features among various criminal entities and 
organizes them into previously defined classes. This technique is used for the 
identification of so called spam e-mail messages, based on linguistic patterns 
and structural features of the sender. Often used for prediction of crime trends, 
classification may reduce time required for identification of criminal entities. 
 
 
COMPUTER DATA SEARCH AND COMPARISON TECHNIQUE 
 
There should be a terminological difference between the concepts of 
(computer) data search and comparison. The search includes reviewing and 
analysis of data contained in certain databases in order to find information 
referring to a certain person, action or process which are not visible at first 
sight. Defined in such a way, the computer data search is mostly contained in 
data mining techniques. On the other hand, comparison implies to have a 
certain amount of data or features in advance, which are then entered and 
compared with other data from a certain database in order to find common 
characteristics between them which connect them and make them similar or 
the same (pairing). The procedure of computer comparison is almost entirely 
equalized with the procedure of computer matching [5].  
In various fields of research (primarily statistics and artificial intelligence) 
the automated analysis procedures have been developed that reveal hidden 
contents within large datasets. The process used to achieve this is usually 
called data mining. It refers to the automated analytic process shaped for the 
effective and efficient exploration of large data sets in order to reveal and use 
valuable, “hidden” information which refer to hitherto unknown facts and 
relations [6]. In other words, data mining can be understood as finding the 
previously unknown and potentially useful information or knowledge from 
large data sets. The basic principle is to create computer programs which scan 
such data sets and automatically search for certain, previously defined 
patterns. The potential data mining technology depends much on the nature of 
the available data sets and it is successfully applied in various professional 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
7
fields, for instance in the remote resource management, biometrics, speech 
recognition or business and marketing [7]. The data mining procedure uses 
algorithms in order to find the important hidden contents in large sets, the 
interpretation and understanding of which enables better diagnostics of state of 
affairs, better predictions and finally better decision-making. 
The basic functions of data mining are: 1) classification, i.e., exploring of 
entity features and their sorting into previously determined classes; 2) 
clustering, i.e., segmenting of a heterogeneous set of entities into 
homogeneous sub-groups, clusters; 3) evaluation, i.e., predicting of unknown 
values of continuous variables; 4) detection of changes and deviations in data 
from previously measured or standard values; 5) detecting associations and 
finding items in transaction which imply the presence of other items in the 
same transaction, etc. Some authors [9] classify data mining functions into two 
sets - the first one is directed analysis, based on supervised learning, including 
classification, evaluation and prediction, and the second one is undirected 
analysis, based on unsupervised learning, including grouping, association 
rules, description and visualization. The dominant view of the nature of data 
mining is that it helps reveal only the hypotheses about complex facts and their 
relations (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Association Rule Mining 
 
Association rules algorithms often generate many irrelevant rules that are 
subsequently rejected during the validation process. Domain expert has to 
specify constraints on the types of rules of interest before the rule discovery 
stage and reduce the number of discovered rules that are irrelevant. 
Data mining algorithms are finite set of steps that find out patterns in large 
data sets. Patterns may be described by rules IF ... THEN, decision tables, 
neural networks, genetic algorithms, linear and nonlinear models. There is not 
a generally acceptable and good data mining algorithm applicable to all 
situation and decision problems [10].  
This algorithm search should not be performed only by one algorithm, 
instead various machine learning algorithms should be applied. In addition, 
each of them will have optimal results for specific (different) data type. To 
determine the best learning algorithm, Kappa values, F-measure values can be 
comprised with true learning ratio. However, knowing learning algorithms 
success rates does not always bring us to the end. In this case, accuracy rate, 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
8
precision, recall and F-measure values should be considered to compare 
success rates [11]. 
 
 
Data and Method of Analysis 
 
A data mining tool - WEKA [12] evaluates the data from the surveys by 
using machine learning algorithms. Also, it produces a confusion matrix which 
is a digital output summary of made predictions. 
Accuracy rate is used for model performance. It is the ratio of correctly 
classified sample numbers to total sample numbers. 
 
Accuracy rate = 
)
(
)
(
TN
FN
FP
TP
TN
TP




 
(1) 
 
Error rate, is the contemporary part of accuracy rate. İt is the ratio of 
incorrectly classified numbers of samples to total numbers of samples. 
 
Error Rate = 
)
(
)
(
TN
FN
FP
TP
FN
FP




 
(2) 
 
Precision is the ratio of positive numbers of samples to positive numbers 
of samples plus total numbers of samples. 
 
Precision 
)
(
)
(
FP
TP
TP
P


 
(3) 
 
Recall is the ratio of positive numbers sample to total positive numbers 
sample. 
 
Recall 
)
(
)
(
FN
TP
TP
R


 
(4) 
 
F-measure is the harmonic average of recall and precision values. If value 
is closer to 1, it means that learning is good. 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
9
F-measure 
)
(
2
)
(
K
D
DK
F


 
(5) 
 
Kappa value (K) determines the concurrence reliability of comparison 
between observers. Kappa value is between -1 and 1. If value is 1, there is an 
exact concurrence comparison between observers.  
 
Kappa value
)
1(
)
(
)
(
c
c
o
P
P
P
K



 
(6) 
 
Negative values of kappa (K < 0) are meaningless in terms of reliability. If 
kappa value is between 0.41 and 0.60, it is acceptable; if it is between 0.61 and 
1, then learning is successful. When F-measure value is closer to 1 at current 
algorithm it means that machine learning is better than other algorithms [13]. 
Data suitable for association rules must be in transactional form. 
Basically, data mining systems can identify frequent sets in transactional 
databases and perform data analysis. The apriori is a classic algorithm for 
frequent item set mining and association rule learning over the transactional 
databases [14]. Data must be in transaction databases where one table exists 
with attributes Transaction ID (unique identifies the record) and transaction 
items (items which belong to one transaction) as shown in Table 1. It is 
obvious that such relation is not in the first normal form, and therefore a 
necessary preparation of data from transactional databases must be performed 
in order to implement apriori algorithm. 
 
 
Figure 1. The process of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) [8]. 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
10
Table1. Data in the transaction database form 
 
Transaction ID 
Transaction Items 
1 
A, B, C 
2 
A, B, C, D, E 
3 
A, C, D 
4 
A, C, D, E 
5 
A, B, C, D 
 
 
Figure 2. Flowchart of apriori algorithm. 
The goal of apriori algorithm is extracting rules in the form XY, where 
X and Y are itemsets. Two main parameters are considered for evaluation 
metrics: support [15] and confidence [16]: 
 
 
Support: The rule holds with support supp in T (the transaction data 
set) if supp % of transactions contain X U Y.  
 
 
(7) 
 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
11
 
Confidence: The rule holds with confidence conf in T if conf % of 
transactions that contain X also contain Y.  
 
 (8) 
 
Association rules mining using apriori algorithm uses a bottom-up 
approach, breadth-first search and a hash tree structure to count the candidate 
itemsets efficiently. A two-step apriori algorithm is explained with the help of 
flowchart as shown in Figure 2 and explained below: 
 
 
 
To select interesting rules from the set of all possible rules generated, 
constraints on various measures of significance and interest can be used. The 
best-known constraints are minimum thresholds on support and confidence.  
 
Table 2. Blogger dataset attributes 
 
Attributes Data Type Description 
Degree 
Nominal 
Education (high, medium, low) 
Caprice 
Nominal 
Political caprice (left, middle, right) 
Topic 
Nominal 
Topics (Impression, political, tourism, news, scientific) 
LMT 
Nominal 
Local media turnover (yes, no) 
LPSS 
Nominal 
Local, political and social space (yes, no) 
PB 
Nominal 
Professional blogger (yes, no) 
 
Step 1. Generate frequent itemsets of length 1.  
Step 2. Repeat until no new frequent itemsets are identified  
 
a) Generate length (k + 1) candidate itemsets from length k 
frequent itemsets  
b) Prune candidate itemsets containing subsets of length k that are 
infrequent 
c) Count the support of each candidate by scanning the database 
d) Eliminate candidates that are infrequent, leaving only those that 
are frequent. 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
12
POSSIBILITIES OF DATA MINING UTILIZATION IN 
ANALYSING CYBER SPACE TENDENCIES 
 
Apriori algorithm can be a very useful tool for pattern discovery in cyber 
space, which can be helpful in crime investigation. From law enforcement 
agencies point of view, blog is considered a form of public data providing 
most valuable information about their creator and his followers. Blog is a web 
site that contains online personal reflections, comments, and often hyperlinks 
provided by the writer, and represents a very popular form among various 
social media users (especially mature ones presenting political statements). 
They are considered as exceptional way for Internet user interconnection based 
on similar interests. Many researchers (mostly sociologists) consider blogs as 
social phenomena in cyber space [17]. 
It is also known that blog writer is often unaware that different methods 
for blog analysis can reveal some personal information about him/her. 
Rosanna et al. have shown in their study that some personal features (e.g., a 
log of daily activities, information about friendships and relationships) can be 
efficiently extracted by analysing blogs and public behaviour in web [18].  
There are a lot of companies which support free blog facilities in order to 
collect data and perform different analyses (economical, social, political, etc.). 
Beside common features such as age, education, or blog topic, a lot of other 
(often ‘hidden’) tendencies can be revealed as well (internet identity, personal 
affinities such as political opinion, music preferences, religion, etc.).  
In our experiment we tried to establish how efficient the above mentioned 
apriori algorithm is in blog analysis when association rules are utilized. For 
that purpose we used real and authentic dataset obtained from UCI machine 
learning repository website [19]. The title of the dataset is ‘Blogger’, and it is 
prepared by using real data from users tend to cyber space in Kohkiloye and 
Boyer Ahmad Province in Iran. This dataset contains a total number of 6 
attributes and 100 instances including the rate and importance of education, 
the role of political beliefs, interesting topics, the effect of state mass media 
and political and social conditions related to the professional tendency field, 
etc. All data provided in this dataset is nominal. The data in each instance 
belong to different types of bloggers: professional bloggers and seasonal 
(temporary) bloggers. In this dataset, the variable “PB” defining professional 
bloggers is described as ‘those internet users in the survey who adopt blog as 
an effective digital media and are interested in digital writing in continuous 
time intervals. Seasonal (temporary) bloggers are not professional bloggers 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
13
and follow blogging in discrete time periods.’ Finally the followings are 
considered as the main data fields which include: education, political caprice, 
topics, local media turnover (LMT) and local, political and social space 
(LPSS), as shown in Table 2. 
WEKA has been used to explore the behaviour of the apriori algorithm 
for extracting the significant patterns for users’ professional tendency 
detection of blogs. The data is initially stored in MS Excel sheet, then 
converted into attribute relation file format (ARFF file), which is the 
acceptable format to WEKA tool. Minimum support defined by the tool for the 
generated rule is 0.25 (25 instances) and minimum confidence is 0.9. 
Association rules for personal features detection of the analyzing public 
behaviour in webs are defined as: 
 
• 
Rule 1. topic = political pb = yes 28 ==> lmt = yes 28 < conf: (1) > 
lift:(1.16) lev:(0.04) [3] conv:(3.92) 
• 
Rule 2. topic = political lpss = yes pb = yes 26 ==> lmt = yes 26 < 
conf:(1) > lift:(1.16) lev:(0.04) [3] conv:(3.64) 
• 
Rule 3. degree = high lpss = yes 31 ==> lmt = yes 30 < conf: 
(0.97) > lift:(1.13) lev:(0.03) [3] conv:(2.17) 
• 
Rule 4. degree = high topic = political 28 ==> lmt = yes 27 < 
conf:(0.96) > lift:(1.12) lev:(0.03) [2] conv:(1.96) 
• 
Rule 5. lpss = yes pb = yes 48 ==> lmt = yes 46 < conf:(0.96) > 
lift:(1.11) lev:(0.05) [4] conv:(2.24) 
• 
Rule 6. caprice = left lpss = yes 38 ==> lmt = yes 36 < conf: 
(0.95) > lift:(1.1) lev:(0.03) [3] conv:(1.77) 
• 
Rule 7. topic = political 35 ==> lmt = yes 33 < conf:(0.94) > 
lift:(1.1) lev:(0.03) [2] conv:(1.63) 
• 
Rule 8. topic = political lpss = yes 31 ==> lmt = yes 
29 < conf:(0.94) > lift:(1.09) lev:(0.02) [2] conv:(1.45) 
• 
Rule 9. degree = high pb = yes 30 ==> lmt = yes 28 < conf:(0.93) > 
lift:(1.09) lev:(0.02) [2] conv:(1.4) 
• 
Rule 10. caprice = left lpss = yes pb = yes 30 ==> lmt = yes 
28 < conf:(0.93) > lift:(1.09) lev:(0.02) [2] conv:(1.4) 
 
If WEKA output is analysed, different rules can be noticed. One of them 
regarding Rule 1 and Rule 2 suggest that for professional blogger (pb) writing 
political topic, a high local media turnover is achieved. On the other side if 
activity in local, political and social space is involved, it does not contribute to 
additional local media turnover. 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
14
After detailed WEKA output analysis, the most significant patterns 
generated using apriori algorithm can be summarized as follows: 
 
a) If blog topic = political,  
b) If degree = high, 
c) If caprice = left, 
d) If lpss = yes, and 
e) If pb = yes 
 
Then local media turnover is high, and is very likely to be confirmed 
through real local media function. Gharehchopogh and Khaze in their work 
performed decision tree analyse on the same database set [20]. Their findings 
are as follows:  
 
• 
Among the interested subjects for blogging, politics is marked as the 
most significant. They identified that major community of bloggers 
belongs to the political party of so called reformists-leftists, which has 
a great tendency to professional blogging.  
• 
Most bloggers having high education (bachelor’s degree, M.Sc. and 
Ph.D.) constitute the group which has professional approach to 
blogging.  
• 
Professional bloggers do not have definite opinion about the effects 
that local political and social conditions have on blogging. It is also 
the same about those who believe in local media function on the 
tendency toward blogging.  
 
In our experiment using the same database set, and based on created 
association rules, our findings are as follows:  
 
“If political issues are considered important in blogging, then local, 
political and social conditions must also be considered as basic factor in 
recognizing professional approach in blogging.” 
 
We have to emphasise here that every estimated information or 
relationship, no matter how small or unimportant it may seem, can be crucial 
in ongoing criminal investigation where discovering ‘hidden’ connections is of 
most importance. 
Consequently, the best learning algorithm is based on kappa and f-
measure values. The higher the kappa and f-measure values, the better the 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
15
learning. After considering the best algorithm according to these pieces of 
information, that search should be used for same data types. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The great challenge all police and intelligence agencies are facing is an 
accurate and efficient analysis of crime data, the scope of which is constantly 
increasing. For instance, complex criminal conspiracies are often hard to 
reveal because the information on suspects may be geographically scattered 
and may include large number of people. Computer crimes disclosing can also 
be difficult because the extensive network traffic and frequent online 
transactions create a huge quantity of data out of which only a small portion 
refers to illegal actions. Police agencies and forensic laboratories collect large 
quantities of various data, as a result of criminal activities processing. It can be 
said that the automatic data searching and matching techniques have been 
insufficiently used so far in this field, although they could contribute 
significantly, particularly in discovering crimes which are difficult to 
anticipate and prevent. Extenuating circumstance in their application is, among 
other things, huge versatility of data that should be processed and considered. 
Those involved in criminal investigations who have years of experience 
can often precisely analyze crime trends, but with the increased frequency and 
complexity of criminal acts human errors also appear; consequently, the time 
required for analysis increases as well, while the offenders have more time to 
destroy evidence and avoid being arrested. Automatic data search and 
matching is a powerful tool enabling fast and efficient searching of large 
databases for crime investigators, who may not be skilled for analysis. In 
addition to this, utilization of specific purpose (analysis) software (such as 
WEKA, SPSS, RapidMiner, etc.) often costs less than hiring or training of the 
staff. Data mining techniques are generally considered as less prone to errors 
than people, emphasising the need for their application in different areas 
including security related issues such as crime investigation. Special 
understanding of the relationship between the possibilities of the analysis and 
the characteristics of a certain type of crime can help investigators to apply 
these techniques more efficiently in order to identify trends and patterns, 
locate problem area(s), and even predict a crime.  
 
 

Darko Marinković and Turhan Civelek 
16
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Marinković, D. (2008). Tajni audio nadzor kao dokazna radnja - različiti 
modaliteti i analiza rešenja u zakonodavstvu Srbije. Sprečavanje i 
suzbijanje savremenih oblika kriminaliteta III (collected papers), 
Beograd, pp. 228-256. 
[2] 
Clarke, R. (1988). Information technology and dataveillance. 
Communications of the ACM, 31(5), pp. 498-512.  
[3] 
Terrettaz-Zufferey A. L. et al. (2006). Assesment of Data Mining 
Methods for Forensic Case Data Analysis. Varstvoslovje, Fakulteta za 
varnostne vede, Ljubljana, pp. 350-354. 
[4] 
Kuk, K. (2015). Veštačka intelegencija u prikupljanju i analizi podataka 
u policiji. Nauka, bezbednost, policija, 20(3), pp. 131-148. 
[5] 
Clarke, R. (1994). Dataveillance by governments: The technique of 
computer matching. Information Technology and People, 7(2), pp. 46-
85.  
[6] 
Peng, Yi, et al. (2008). A descriptive framework for the field of data 
mining and knowledge discovery. International Journal of Information 
Technology and Decision Making, 7(4), 639-682. 
[7] 
Witten, Ian H., Eibe F. (2005). Data Mining: Practical machine learning 
tools and techniques. Morgan Kaufmann. 
[8] 
Fayyad, U. M. et al. (1996). From Data Mining to Knowledge 
Discovery: An Overview. Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, Cambridge, pp. 1-34. 
[9] 
Berry, M., Linoff G. (2000). Mastering Data Mining, New York. 
[10] Kuk, K., Mehic, A., Kartunov, S. (2015). The importance of data mining 
technologies and the role of intelligent agents in cybercrime. Archibald 
Reiss Days, Thematic Conference Proceedings of International 
Significance, Volume III, Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies, 
Belgrade, pp. 223-232. 
[11] Aydogan, E. K., Gencer, C., Akbulut, S. (2008). Churn Analysis and 
Customer Segmentation of a Cosmetics Brand Using Data Mining 
Techniques, Journal of Engineering and Natural Sciences, 26(1), pp. 42-
56. 
[12] Garner, S. R. (1995). Weka: The waikato environment for knowledge 
analysis. Proc New Zealand Computer Science Research Students 
Conference, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand, pp. 57-64.  
[13] Han, J., Kamber, M., (2006). Data Mining Concepts and Techniques. 
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, Elsiver Inc. 

Computer-Based Data Analysis Techniques 
17
[14] Agrawal, R., Srikant, R. (1994). Fast Algorithms for Mining Association 
Rules in Large Databases. Proceedings of the 20th International 
Conference on Very Large Data Bases, VLDB, Santiago de Chile, 12-15 
September 1994, pp. 487-499. 
[15] Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T., Swami, A. (1993). Mining Association Rules 
between Sets of Items in Large Databases. Proceedings of the 1993 
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, 
Washington DC, 26-28 May 1993, pp. 207-216. 
[16] Hipp, J., Güntzer, U., Nakhaeizadeh, G. (2000). Algorithms for 
Association Rule Mining - A General Survey and Comparison. ACM 
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 2(1), pp. 58-64. 
[17] Wyld, D., (2007). The Blogging Revolution: Government in the Age of 
Web 2.0, BM Center for the Business of Government, Washington, DC.  
[18] Rosanna, E., Cassie, A. Bradley, E., Okdie, M, (2010). Personal 
Blogging Individual Differences and Motivations, IGI Global, pp. 292-
301. 
[19] UCI Machine Learning Repository (2013). Available from: http:// 
archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.htm. 
[20] Gharehchopogh, F.S., Khaze, S.R. (2012). Data Mining Application for 
Cyber Space Users Tendency in Blog Writing: A Case Study. 
International Journal of Computer Applications, 47(18), pp. 40-46. 


In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
SPATIAL DATA VISUALIZATION  
AS A TOOL FOR ANALYTICAL SUPPORT  
OF POLICE WORK 
 
 
Nenad Milić1, PhD, Brankica Popović2,*, PhD, 
Venezija Ilijazi3 and Erzen Ilijazi4 
1Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies,  
Department of Criminalistics, Belgrade, Serbia 
2Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies,  
Department of Informatics and Computer Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia 
3Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Serbia,  
Sector for Analyitics and ICT, Belgrade, Serbia 
4Office of Information and Communications Technology, 
United Nations, Department of Management, New York, NY, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Development of the information technology during the 80s has 
significantly improved the way data is collected, stored and processed. As 
a consequence police function becomes data driven more than ever 
before. Crime analysis units became the new element in police 
organizations’ structures worldwide and analytical information became 
important prerequisite for effective policing. Having in mind that 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: B. Popovic, Email: brankica.popovic@kpa.edu.rs. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
20
virtually everything police do is related to an address or location, 
connecting locations with people (offenders, victims, community 
members) and their activities is becoming a powerful tool (almost a 
necessity) in understanding and managing communities security problems 
by law enforcement agencies. For that reason, visualization of spatial data 
receives a significant place in crime analysis. A number of sophisticated 
specialized software aiming to help police in conducting effective crime 
analysis exists, but accessibility of geospatial data sources make it 
feasible for police to use Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and 
crime mapping as essential tools. In addition to the visualization of 
geospatial data, GIS technology provides analytical capacity primarily in 
analyzing geospatial distribution of crime incidents. Therefore, it can be 
utilized to discover different factors contributing to crime in order to give 
timely and relevant information to all levels of police management, help 
them to make better decisions, target resources and formulate strategies, 
and enhance police proactive actions against crime.  
The aim of this chapter is to present some of the GIS technology 
capabilities in the function of analytical support of police work at all 
levels of police organization and management. The following cases are 
discussed in particular: optimization of police resources utilization 
(resource location based on network analysis), hotspot policing, crime 
data dissemination through Internet (Internet crime maps), offender 
targeting through geographic profiling algorithm and Crime Information 
Warehouse (CIW) Solutions. Lastly, innovative functionalities of 
predictive analytic solutions are briefly described. 
 
Keywords: spatial data, visualization, GIS, crime mapping, crime analysis, 
police 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Historically, it can be noticed that the police agencies tasks and 
responsibilities have remained substantially the same. It is the amount and 
complexity of police duties that have been magnified in modern society, but 
from police it was always required permanent readiness and high expertise in 
solving the most complex problems in the field of security [32].  
Police efficiency depends on many parameters, but we could say that 
essentially it depends on data management (collecting, storing, processing, and 
using). In order to solve a security problem, a police officer must have reliable 
information about its origin, manifestation forms and the consequences it 
causes [14]. For making a good decision, it is of great importance that such 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
21
information is reliable, reflecting the true state of relating object, phenomenon 
or processes, in the given time and geographic space (location). It is required 
(with imperative) that information flows, their quantity and quality are 
managed in a systematic manner (computer-based Information Systems) and 
that they are in compliance with the specific requirements of law enforcement 
officers.  
Since modernization of society is followed with dramatically increased 
information volume, police work has become unsustainable without utilization 
of modern Information and Communication Technology (ICT) as well as 
advanced methods and techniques of problem solving and decision-making 
[28]. Therefore, for the purpose of identifying, monitoring, analysis and 
research on complex security phenomena, data visualization techniques are 
taking the prominent role. 
With rapid development of mobile and geospatial technologies and 
recognizing that almost 80% of the information has a spatial reference,1 police 
agencies have intensively employed Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
and other technologies for mapping and analyzing crime data. They can be 
utilized to discover factors contributing to crime in order to give timely and 
relevant crime information to police executives helping them to make better 
decisions, to devise better problem solutions, and target resources2 in a more 
efficient and effective way, especially enhancing police proactive actions 
against crime.  
We can say that, in a way, modern technology utilization in police gave 
strong impetus to the shift from classical reactive model (wait-and-respond) to 
proactive one (predict and prevent), having an important role in analytical 
support of police work. 
The aim of this chapter is to present different ways in which GIS 
technology can improve police work at all levels of police organization and 
management. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the first section 
the process of crime analysis is briefly presented. In the second section the 
importance of modern analytical tools in crime analysis is described, 
especially GIS and crime mapping. In the next section specific 
implementations in police are discussed, in particular the optimization of 
police resources utilization (resource location), hotspot policing, crime data 
dissemination through the Internet (Internet crime maps), offender targeting 
                                                           
1 Read more in: Dempsey, C. 2012. “Where is the phrase ‘80% of data is geographic’ from?” 
GIS Lounge, https://www.gislounge.com/80-percent-data-is-geographic/ 
2  E.g., cellular phone geoposition utilization for surveillance, or crowd movement monitoring in 
order to coordinate police resources during large public gathering events, etc. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
22
through geographic profiling algorithm and Crime Information Warehouse 
(CIW) Solutions. After a short glance at innovative functionalities of 
predictive analytic solutions, we conclude this chapter. 
 
 
CRIME ANALYSIS  
 
Rapid development of ICT has significantly improved the technology of 
data collection and processing, whose end result - analytical information - 
becomes an important factor in effective policing, making a solid base for new 
discipline - crime analysis [1]. Crime analysis is required to enable police 
officers to better identify problems, find out solutions and resources necessary 
to address the problems and assess the achieved results [15].  
According to Boba crime analysis is defined as ‘systematic study of crime 
and disorder problems as well as other police–related issues - including 
sociodemographic, spatial, and temporal factors - to assist the police in 
criminal apprehension, crime and disorder reduction, crime prevention, and 
evaluation’ [1]. Crime analysis involves the application of social science data 
collection procedures, analytical methods, and statistical techniques, 
employing both qualitative and quantitative techniques to analyze data 
valuable to police agencies and their communities. Even though this discipline 
is called crime analysis, it actually includes much more than just the 
examination of crime incidents. As suggested by the International Association 
of Crime Analysts (IACA), it includes ‘the analysis of crime and criminals, 
crime victims, disorder, quality of life issues, traffic issues, and internal police 
operations, and its results support criminal investigation and prosecution, 
patrol activities, crime prevention and reduction strategies, problem solving, 
and the evaluation of police efforts’ [19].  
In order to avoid inconsistency and disagreement in both definitions and 
typology of crime analysis, the IACA proposed the professional standards and 
definitions of analytical methodologies, technologies, and core concepts 
relevant to the profession of crime analysis. According to them there are four 
major categories of crime analysis, suggesting that Criminal investigative 
analysis, which is also sometimes called “profiling” is almost always part of 
the tactical crime analysis process and therefore should not be considered to be 
a separate type of crime analysis. Those categories ordered from specific to 
general are:  

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
23
1.  “Crime intelligence analysis - the analysis of data about people 
involved in crimes, particularly repeat offenders, repeat victims, and 
criminal organizations and networks.  
2. Tactical crime analysis - the analysis of police data directed towards 
the short-term development of patrol and investigative priorities and 
deployment of resources. Its subject areas include the analysis of 
space, time, offender, victim, and modus operandi for individual high-
profile crimes, repeat incidents, and crime patterns, with a specific 
focus on crime series.  
3. Strategic crime analysis - the analysis of data directed towards 
development and valuation of long-term strategies, policies, and 
prevention techniques. Its subjects include long-term statistical trends, 
hotspots, and problems.  
4. Administrative crime analysis - is analysis directed towards the 
administrative needs of the police agency, its government, and its 
community.” [19]  
 
Different processes and techniques deployed for each type of crime 
analysis are shown in Table 1.  
 
Table 1. Processes and techniques deployed for each type of crime 
analysis (according to [19]) 
 
Processes and techniques include (but are not limited to) 
Crime intelligence 
analysis 
Tactical crime 
analysis 
Strategic crime 
analysis 
Administrative 
crime analysis 
 Repeat offender 
and victim 
analysis 
 Criminal history 
analysis  
 Link analysis  
 Commodity flow 
analysis  
 Communication 
analysis  
 Social media 
analysis  
 Repeat incident 
analysis  
 Crime pattern 
analysis  
 Linking known 
offenders to 
past crimes  
 
 Trend analysis  
 Hotspot analysis  
 Problem 
analysis 
 
 Districting and 
re-districting 
analysis  
 Patrol staffing 
analysis  
 Cost-benefit 
analysis  
 Resource 
deployment for 
special events 
 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
24
While crime intelligence analysis and tactical crime analysis products are 
usually internal and kept confidential,3 the products of strategic and 
administrative crime analysis are more likely to be distributed externally to 
inform audiences outside the police agency. Tactical crime analysis and 
administrative crime analysis can be performed largely from the data that 
comes from internal sources (police databases and computer-aided dispatch). 
Contrary, although it often starts with the data from police databases, both 
crime intelligence analysis and strategic crime analysis depend on the 
deliberate collection of additional data from a variety of other sources in order 
to obtain a broader context of analysed phenomenon [19]. Crime analysts 
review all available data, both from police records and from other sources, 
with the goal of identifying patterns as they emerge. Analyses of these patterns 
and trends can provide the information about the nature of crime (who, what, 
when, where, how and why), helping in the development of effective tactics 
and strategies in preventing victimization and reducing crime.  
The three most important kinds of information that crime analysts use are 
sociodemographic,4 temporal and spatial. Sociodemographic information can 
be used for establishing an identity of crime suspects, or on a broader level, to 
determine the characteristics of groups and how they relate to crime. Temporal 
analysis is conducted for examination of short-term and mid-term patterns 
(such as patterns by day of the week, time of day or time between incidents 
within a particular crime series), as well as examination of long-term patterns 
in crime (such as patterns by month, the seasonal nature of crime and trends 
over several years) [1, 16]. Nevertheless, it is the spatial nature of crime and 
other police-related issues that are central for understanding the nature of a 
problem, facilitating a larger role for spatial analysis in crime analysis.  
There is a number of sophisticated specialized software aiming to help 
police in conducting effective crime analysis.5 Typical crime analysis tools 
include Statistical Analysis, Link Analysis, and Data Visualization and Crime 
Mapping software.6 Police agencies are adding a new tool, Predictive 
software, to assist their efforts [17]. Predictive analytics solutions apply 
sophisticated statistical data exploration and machine-learning techniques to 
historical information to help agencies uncover hidden patterns and trends - 
even in large, complex datasets. In the context of its support to Predictive 
                                                           
3 in order to  avoid  compromising  an  investigative strategy. 
4 Personal characteristics of individuals and groups, such as sex, race, income, age, education, 
etc. 
5 More on: http://www.iaca.net/resources.asp?Cat=Software. 
6 More on http://www.it.ojp.gov/documents/analyst_toolbox.pdf. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
25
policing, it provides information that creates the needed situational awareness 
among officers and staff. Even more, it can help to find not only where a crime 
will most likely occur, but also when and who the suspect or victim is likely to 
be. Emerging possibilities of predictive analytics will be briefly described 
later.  
Analytical information is valuable only if it is accessible and easily 
understood by the people who can act on it. Visualization solutions such as 
graphing and mapping along with statistical modeling are gaining in popularity 
since they can deliver results clearly and cost effectively, often in real time.  
 
 
Role of Place in Assessing Crime 
 
As was previously noticed, one of the most important aspects of the crime 
is the location [3]. Practically everything the police are doing is related to an 
address or location. Each call for police intervention and going to the scene 
has the appropriate geographical coordinates. In addition, considering the 
crime as a product of human behavior, it is understandable why the crimes 
geographical distribution is not random [26].  
Today, the concentrated nature of crime is accepted as a fact, allowing 
policing strategies shift from traditional reactive towards cutting edge 
proactive (and/or location-based) policing approaches such as hotspots 
policing, problem-oriented policing, intelligence-led policing, community-
oriented policing and Compstat management strategies [9]. All of them are 
centered on directing crime prevention and crime reduction responses based on 
crime analysis results [35].  
Having that in mind crime mapping takes a significant place in the context 
of crime analysis in order to facilitate understanding of the characteristics of 
the spatial (geographical) distribution of crime and other events of importance 
to the police work in a given time [23].  
 
 
CRIME MAPPING AND GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS IN CRIME ANALYSIS 
 
Crime mapping is an essential factor in the police agencies efficiency. It 
represents a powerful tool for police analysts, providing valuable assistance to 
police officers in problem identification and analysis (assessing the situation), 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
26
finding appropriate strategy for problem solving (decision-making) and 
analysis of the effects of its utilization (problem solution evaluation) [23]. 
From a research and policy perspective, crime mapping is used to understand 
patterns of incarceration and recidivism, help target resources and programs, 
evaluate crime prevention or crime reduction programs and further 
understanding of causes of crime [8]. Importance of crime mapping is 
reflected in the fact that: 
 
 
It facilitates visual and statistical analysis of spatial distribution of 
crime and other events; 
 
It allows the analyst to relate different data sources to a common 
denominator - geographical space; 
 
It facilitates the presentation of the results of analytical work [7]. 
 
Although crime mapping and spatial crime analysis are not new concepts, 
it is the emerging GIS technology that significantly contributes to their wide 
utilization in crime analysis. Three important roles of GIS and crime mapping 
that are generally accepted are: 
 
 
Database management, 
 
Spatial analysis, and 
 
Data visualization. 
 
Having in mind the rule that “A picture is worth a thousand words” the 
advantage of GIS utilization in crime mapping is evident. GIS has the unique 
capacity to overlay different data sources (thematic layers) in digital map 
layers in order to visualize them and use for further analysis (as shown in 
Figure 1a). In other words, GIS ingests all available data such as historical 
crime rates, police reports, department vehicle travel routes, traffic patterns, 
camera footage, details of officer deployments, locations of critical 
infrastructure or gang territories and other variables and displays them on 
maps [23]. For example, through a hyperlink, an analyst can access and 
visualize documents relevant to the crime event (e.g., official reports, photos 
from the crime scene, etc.) (see Figure 1b). 
 
 
 
 
 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
27
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1. a) Layer organization enhances relationship determination between different 
types of data. Simple selection of wanted thematic layer results in its visualization. b) 
By activating a hyperlink, an analyst accesses the criminal report and photos from the 
investigating documentation relating to the committed offense. 
However, beside the visualization of spatial data, a major benefit of GIS 
technology lays in its analytical capability. In the context of law enforcement 
and GIS, the analysis involves the interaction of statistical data in a geographic 
setting (see Figure 2a). The analytical capabilities of GIS software are 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
28
sophisticated and accurate. Today police analysts/officers have a number of 
tools available to them. The most common are those, which facilitate: 
 
 
Hotspots identification - Hotspot displays typically use a statistical 
technique called cluster analysis, which separates data into logical 
groupings.  
 
Correlation analysis - correlations determine how closely two separate 
factors are related (see Figure 2b). Although it alone does not prove 
causality, it shows when there appear to be connections between 
factors. 
 
Regression analysis - Regression analysis helps find the natural 
relationships among the characteristics someone is studying. If 
hotspots show where something is happening and correlation shows 
apparent relationships among factors, regression helps show why by 
demonstrating how the factors interact [13]. 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 2. Map showing: a) the spatial distribution of robberies (banks, post office, 
pharmacy stores, currency exchange stores, casino and gambling facilities) in Belgrade 
municipality Cukarica in 2008-2010 period. b) Result of the nearest neighbor 
hierarchical spatial clustering technique (CrimeStat III), in order to find events closer 
to each other than expected from the random distribution. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
29
To summarize, GIS allows crime analysts to map, visualize, and analyze 
crime incident patterns and to identify crime hotspots along with other trends 
and patterns. In that way it can help law enforcement management to 
formulate strategies, perform better tactical analysis (e.g., crime forecasting, 
geographic profiling) and make better decisions. Consequently, crime mapping 
and GIS can be used for deciding the proper place for new police facilities 
according to the future crime problems. Mapping also facilitates the 
identification of some side effects of police actions, such as ‘displacement’7 
[29] and ‘diffusion of benefits’8 [6]. Additionally, mapping can provide 
specific information on crime and criminal behavior to the public, enhancing 
the connection of law enforcement with local community in order to prevent 
crime. Emerging web-based GIS (and other internet) technologies are opening 
new opportunities for crime mapping utilization in crime analysis and 
prevention. Some of these applications will be further described in the next 
section. 
 
 
SPECIFIC IMPLEMENTATIONS OF GIS  
TECHNOLOGY IN POLICE WORK 
 
As was previously emphasized there are many models of GIS technology 
application in police agencies. We choose to describe briefly the most popular 
ones which are well known and established (resource allocation, hotspot 
identification), as well as the emerging ones (geographic profiling, internet 
crime maps, crime warehouse solutions).  
 
 
Resource Location Allocation  
 
Police resources (human, material and technical) which can be used in a 
specific geographic (national) space are limited. With the increasing number 
of requests to act and less available resources, one of the main problems that 
police management faces today is the optimization of resource utilization [25].  
                                                           
7 Displacement is said to occur if crime reductions in the target area lead to crime increases 
elsewhere (in neighboring areas, or in the same area but at different times). 
8 Opposite to crime displacement, diffusion of benefits entails the reduction of crime (or other 
improvements) in the areas that are related to the targeted crime prevention efforts, but not 
targeted by the response itself. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
30
Location problems are related to the determination of the place or position 
of object(s) in the space in order to find optimal ways of their use. From a 
technology standpoint, the best way to locate resources in a policing 
organization is to move from a reactive stance to a more predictive posture - to 
get officers where they need to be, when they need to be there, and with the 
right information for them to act quickly and decisively. An advance in ICT, 
especially GIS technology, along with different spatial techniques, has made 
the necessary progress to help assume this predictive posture.  
Determination of resource location can be performed through objective 
function maximization or minimization, at one or more criteria each ranked 
according to importance, both for single-criteria and multi-criteria problems 
respectively [25]. There are several types of models used for location problems 
for single facility locations (center of Gravity, Grid, Centroid) and multi 
facility location (Multiple gravity, Mixed integer programming, Simulation, 
Heuristics). The most popular are Proximity-Based Models, whose aim is to 
minimize impedance (time, distance) between two objects, and Maximize 
Coverage Models (MCM) whose aim is to locate facilities in a way that as 
many demand points as possible are allocated to solution facilities within the 
impedance (distance) cutoff.9 Both can be performed as continuous location 
models (models in the plane) or as network location models [25].  
According to Klose and Drexl, continuous location models are 
characterized by two essential attributes:  
 
 
Continuous solution space - facilities can be located on every point in 
the plane, and 
 
Distance - measured with a suitable metric (typically Manhattan10 and 
Euclidean11 distance) [20].  
 
After determination of coordinates 

y
x,
 for each facility, the objective of 
continuous location model is to minimize the sum of distances between the 
facilities and k given demand points. When we look at a single facility,12 the 
corresponding optimization problem of finding facility location 

y
x,
 in a 
                                                           
9 
More 
on: 
http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/latest/extensions/network-analyst/location-
allocation.htm. 
10 grid or right-angle distance metric. 
11 straight-line distance metric. 
12 So-called Weber problem (Klose and Drexl, 2005). 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
31
way that the sum of the (weighted) distances 


y
x
d
w
k
k
,
 to given demand 
points
K
k 
 located in 

k
k b
a ,
 is minimized:  
 









K
k
k
k
y
x
y
x
d
w
SWP
v
,
,
min
,
 where 






2
2
,
k
k
k
b
y
a
x
y
x
d




    (1) 
 
can be solved efficiently by means of an iterative procedure [20]. An 
extended version of the problem required to locate p, 1<p<|K| facilities and to 
allocate demand to the chosen facilities is denoted as multi-source Weber 
problem (MWP). 
In network location models, space is viewed as a graph in which nodes 
represent demand points and potential facility sites, and where distances are 
estimated as the shortest paths in a graph. The network location model 
corresponding to the single facility location is called 1-median problem, and 
for continuous multi-source Weber model it is called p-median problem [20].  
Network analysis can be performed by standard commercial GIS software 
packages, such as ESRI’s ArcGIS®, whose extension Network Analyst13 
contains tools necessary for the preparation and performance of network 
analysis (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3. Functionalities of ESRI’s ArcGIS® Network Analyst extension. 
A few examples of GIS utilization for solving police location problems 
are briefly described. 
 
                                                           
13 More 
on 
http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/latest/extensions/network-analyst/location-
allocation.htm. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
32
Assessment of Police Patrols Area Covering Capacity 
Taking into account given constraints regarding time and distance, as well 
as the network model attributes for specific area, GIS can estimate and 
visualize police patrol coverage area (Figure 4).  
That information might be vital for estimating an optimal coverage model, 
which should enable that available police resources (vehicles, officers) arrive 
to the destination (e.g., crime scene) as soon as possible.  
 
 
Figure 4. Possible ways for visualization of area coverage in accordance with the given 
constraints (distance/time). 
Optimization of Police Resources Employment 
The determination of optimal positions of police patrols in order to have 
maximal coverage of a given area is shown in Figure 5. On condition that 
maximal distance (Manhattan) between an object and a patrol is 3000 m from 
ten proposed locations (Figure 5a), maximal coverage can be obtained with six 
locations (numbered and marked with triangle symbol in Figure 5b).  
Benefits of ‘location’ analysis in GIS environment are reflected in the fact 
that GIS data visualization capabilities allow coverage model shortcomings 
spotting, their correction, and then the simple and rapid assessment of 
(un)justification of the corrected model. For example, one can examine the 
assumption as to the impact of elimination sites 1 and 4 on the overall 
coverage capacity, and the extent to which this loss can be compensated by 
different positioning locations 2 and 3, i.e., whether they can take requests for 
location services 1 and 4 without impairing its capacity coverage. It is 
observed that after the elimination of location 1 and 4, the total capacity of the 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
33
coverage has not been significantly disrupted (Figure 6a). With additional 
correction of location 3, all the events will be covered with four locations 
(including those who have previously remained uncovered (Figure 6b). In 
other words, corrections performed on the situation shown in Figure 5b further 
optimize the coverage model in a way that the number of sites (patrols) 
decreases, while the total coverage capacity remains almost unchanged [25].  
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. The determination of the minimum number of locations from which it is 
possible to achieve maximum coverage.  
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Total coverage capacity a) after location 1 and 4 elimination, b) after 
additional correction of site 3 location.  

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
34
Optimal Route Estimation 
When we talk about optimal territory coverage (police stations, patrol 
area, etc.), the basic requirement that arises is that in case of need the police 
officers arrive at the site of intervention as fast as possible. It should be noted 
that the shortest route is not always the fastest one, and in order to make a 
valid choice one must have different characteristics (attributes) of road 
infrastructure. It means that all kind of obstacles (roadblocks, a street closed 
due to maintenance work, ramp locations, etc.) must be taken into 
consideration while performing optimal route searching. In addition, the true 
position of police patrols (in real time) should be available through GPS and 
TETRA14 (TErrestrial Trunked RAdio) devices integration. The obtained 
optimal route is then visualized, whereby a user can have at their disposal the 
additional information about street name, segment length or the time it takes to 
pass it (Figure 7a).  
In a situation where a police vehicle needs to visit multiple locations, GIS 
application can find the optimal route that will connect objects in the user 
specified order, or to find other more optimal sequence of visiting the 
facilities. This situation becomes more complex if time constraints are 
introduced (e.g., prisoners transport to different courts and police stations with 
different arrival/departure times at each of them), when it might not be rational 
to go first to the nearest facility but to the other further away, and return later 
to the closer one (Figure 7b). In this and similar cases, GIS applications find 
the optimal route in a short time.  
 
 
Hotspot Policing  
 
Crimes tend to concentrate at particular geographic locations where 
favorable opportunities exist [2, 34]. These concentrations or clusters of crime 
are commonly referred to as hotspots [31]. Proliferation of GIS software 
contributes to the fast and easy hotspot maps creation, making them a central 
part of crime analysis and hotspot policing. Therefore, hotspot policing refers 
to the concentration of police resources in a small discrete area “that has a 
greater than average number of criminal events, or an area where people have 
a higher than average risk of victimization” [10]. Inaccuracy in hotspots 
                                                           
14 TETRA is a digital trunked mobile radio standard developed to meet the needs of traditional 
Professional Mobile Radio (PMR) user organisations such as Public Safety, Transportation, 
Government, 
Military, 
etc. 
More 
on: 
http://www.etsi.org/technologies-clusters/ 
technologies/tetra. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
35
identifications may affect police effectiveness, as well as the citizens’ quality 
of life,15 or even their rights. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. Network analysis application in the function of the optimal route estimation 
for a) single and b) multiple locations. 
                                                           
15 For example, placing the label “high crime area” on a safe area may cause stigmatizing effect, 
which may hinder economic development of the particular neighborhood. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
36
Hotspot identification techniques are often evaluated by their ability to 
predict future crimes based on historic crime data. For that purpose, different 
predictive measures can be utilized. The three most frequently used are: 
 
 
Hit rate (HR), defined as the proportion of new crimes that occur 
within the areas where crimes were predicted to occur: 
 
N
n
HR 
   
 
 
 
(2)
 
 
where n  is the number of crimes in the areas where crimes are predicted to 
occur (hotspots) and N  is the number of crimes in the whole study area; 
 
 
Predictive accuracy index (PAI), described as the ratio of the hit rate 
to the proportion of the study area that consists of hotspots,  
 
A
a
N
n
area
spot
hot
of
on
proportion
HR
PAI


_
_
_
_
   
(3)
 
 
where a  is the total area occupied by hotspots, and A  is the size of entire 
study area;  
 
 
Recapture rate index (RRI), defined as a ratio of predicted and 
historic hotspot densities, standardized for changes of the total area 
density in each year: 
 
1
2
1
2
_
_
_
_
_
N
N
n
n
ratio
crime
total
ratio
crime
spot
hot
RRI


  
 
(4)
 
 
Today a variety of spatial statistic techniques is available for hotspots 
identification and analysis. They are classified in two broad groups: those 
applied on point data and those applied on aggregated data [22], but still there 
is no agreement among researchers which one of them is the best in terms of 
accuracy in predicting future crimes. In order to facilitate hotspot 
identification, various software applications were developed. Although much 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
37
of the spatial analysis can be done in GIS environment (e.g., ArcGIS Spatial 
Analyst provides a range of spatial modeling and analysis tools),16 different 
software applications (such as the CrimeStat software)17 have the ability to 
perform many of these analyses. The main goal of this analysis is to assess 
whether crime locations are randomly scattered across space, or instead show 
systematic patterns in the form of clusters (more points are systematically 
closer together than they would be in a purely random case) or dispersion 
(more points are systematically further away from each other than under 
randomness). Well known hotspot analysis techniques includes grid mapping, 
covering ellipses, kernel density and heuristics [27].  
An example of covering ellipse methodology is the nearest neighbor 
hierarchical clustering (Nnh) which identifies groups of incidents that are 
spatially close. It is a hierarchical clustering routine that groups points together 
based on a given criterion. The CrimeStat Nnh routine defines a threshold 
distance and compares the threshold to the distances for all pairs of points. 
Only points that are closer to one or more other points than the threshold 
distance are selected for clustering (see Figure 2b). 
One of the most popular techniques with both academics and the crime 
analyst professionals is Kernel Density Estimation (KDE). The idea is to 
spread out each crime’s expected contribution to the future crime risk over a 
certain area using a mathematical function called a kernel. KDE is a statistical 
analysis approach used to interpolate a continuous surface of crime data based 
on initial crime data points from different locations. This is created by 
‘overlaying a grid (with n equally sized cells) on top of the study area and 
calculating a density estimates based on the center points of each grid cell. 
Each distance between an incident and the center of a grid cell is then 
weighted based on a specific method of interpolation (the kernel function) and 
the bandwidth (search radius) [10].’ The approach produces a contour map, a 
heat map, or a surface view map with the more heavily weighted areas of high 
crime visually represented. The hot spots can then be defined as the areas 
                                                           
16 ArcGIS Spatial Analyst allows the user to create, query, map, and analyze cell-based raster 
data, perform integrated raster/vector analysis, derive new information from existing data, 
query information across multiple data layers and fully integrate cell-based raster data with 
traditional vector data sources. More information are available at www.esri.com. 
17 The purpose of CrimeStat is to provide supplemental statistical tools to aid law enforcement 
agencies and criminal justice researchers in their crime mapping efforts. CrimeStat is 
Windows-based and interfaces with most desktop GIS programs. It calculates various spatial 
statistics and writes graphical objects to ArcGIS, MapInfo, Surfer for Windows and other GIS 
packages. More information about CrimeStat are available at http://nij.gov/topics/technology/ 
maps/pages/crimestat.aspx. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
38
above a certain threshold on each map. KDE produces hotspot maps with the 
highest PAI, becoming stronger with longer time used for the prediction base 
[5]. An example of Kernel density estimation map obtained in ESRI’s 
ArcGIS® Spatial Analyst is shown in Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 8. Kernel density estimation map of robberies in the urban part of the Cukarica 
municipality (Belgrade). 
 
Geographical Profiling 
 
Recent developments in criminological theory have encouraged crime 
analysts to focus on geographic patterns of crime, by examining situations in 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
39
which victims and offenders come together in time and space. This process is 
referred to as geographic profiling [16].  
Geographic profiling, introduced in the early 1990s, represents a 
geospatial crime analysis technique that attempts to determine where a serial 
offender most likely resides. The predictions are based on the locations of 
these crimes, other geographic information about the case and the suspect, and 
certain assumptions about the distance offenders will travel to commit crimes 
[30]. Different algorithms could be used to calculate the area boundaries. It 
must be emphasized that this technique should not be used to pinpoint a 
particular location or suspect, since being a statistical technique, it gives 
results in terms of probability, not certainty.  
Geographic profiling involves application of advanced spatial analysis 
techniques for crime distribution under the auspices of the criminology 
theoretical framework, and above all routine activities theory, rational choice 
theory and crime pattern theory [16].  
The three most popular models for geographical profiling of unknown 
offenders are Rosmo’s model (so called “criminal geographic targeting” 
algorithm), Canter’s model and Levine’s model (journey-to-crime analysis). 
All three models are implemented in the appropriate software solutions: 
Rigel18 (Rossmo), Dragnet19 (Canter) and CrimeStat20 (Levine) [30]. Levine’s 
model differs from the other two models in that it is not geographic profiling 
model in the true sense of the word, as pointed out by his creator, rather it is a 
model which estimates the crime trip (i.e., the road which offender utilize in 
his crime action) [22]. 
It is clearly convenient to display the output of geographic profiling 
software on a Geographic Information System that also shows streets, 
landmarks, political boundaries, and other geographic features of the areas 
around the crimes. Output is in the form of color shadings (two-dimensional 
map) and the height of the surface (in the case of three-dimensional diagram), 
representing the offender’s likely base of operations.  
Despite the fact that geographic profiling is a relatively new discipline, it 
is gaining in popularity after successful implementation in resolving several 
serial crimes in the United States and Canada. Today, there is a number of 
software packages that can be freely downloaded from the Internet, as the 
                                                           
18 More on http://ecricanada.com/products/rigel-analyst/. 
19 More on http://www.i-psy.com/publications/publications_dragnet.php. 
20 More on http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/CrimeStat/. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
40
price for commercial products (with more advanced capabilities) is in constant 
decline. 
 
 
Figure 9. A screenshot of the Rigel geographic profiling software from Environmental 
Criminology Research Inc website.21 
 
Internet Crime Maps 
 
Wide utilization of the internet technology has enabled police 
organizations to post cartographic representations of crime (crime maps) on 
their internet sites, ensuring constant public access to up-to-date crime 
information. In a simple and fast way, they enable citizens to obtain 
information on crime trends in a given geographic area and make their own 
judgment about their safety. In that way, pressure on the police organization is 
reduced, and significant police resources are released to be used for other 
purposes [24]. Particularly convenient are the so-called ‘interactive’ crime 
maps which can perform query (by place, execution time, the type of offenses, 
etc.) defined by citizens interested in monitoring local criminal activity, giving 
immediate response regarding the subject of their interest (Figure 10).  
Today web-based crime mapping is a common practice in modern police 
organization, mostly focused on supporting community policing [8]. Emerging 
software packages have additional analytical functionality such as pattern 
analysis and crime prediction.  
                                                           
21 More on http://ecricanada.com/technologies/. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
41
There are some controversial issues in the field of GIS and crime 
mapping. One is so called ‘spatial labeling’ where labeling an area as 
dangerous might produce serious consequences to the community of that area 
in terms of economic, sociological, and criminological perspective [9]. 
Another controversial issue is the privacy of the people (especially crime 
victims), where GIS and crime mapping may cause transgression of privacy 
and confidentiality of people’s lives [33]. That is especially true for the 
Internet crime maps [21]. Some detailed information such as gender, time, 
place, ethnicity and age of criminals or victims might be used for creation of 
web-based maps, where overlaying specific crimes with them may 
inadvertently reveal the identity of a victim.22 In a public information system, 
mechanisms must be devised to ensure privacy protection in order to balance 
the public right to information and privacy of the crime victim [9]. Therefore, 
the most important thing is to provide that individual identification is either 
confidential or impossible (anonymous).  
 
 
Figure 10. Example of interactive crime map from CrimeReports™ website.23 
 
 
 
                                                           
22 Who is later often stigmatized on that basis (e.g., rape victim). People therefore often hide 
information of their victimization from law enforcement agencies knowing that others could 
recognize them with small efforts on the Internet. 
23 Source: https://preview.crimereports.com/#!/ accessed on 05/31/2016. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
42
Crime Information Warehouse (CIW) Solution  
 
Crime analysis is data-intensive with difficulties to coordinate effectively 
the volume of information from multiple systems. Police agencies have 
numerous (mostly computer-based but there still exist paper-based) 
information systems to collect data for the Compstat24 process and other crime 
analyses [4]. Since data and information are scattered among different 
subjects, they must be collected and integrated before analyzing in order to 
assemble the big picture. In response, as the natural evolution of Compstat, the 
IBM and Cognos proposed Crime Information Warehouse (CIW) Solution.25  
IBM’s CIW data model is the heart of the solution, reporting and analysis 
are delivered by business intelligence software from Cognos with GIS 
mapping enabled by Esri (ArcGIS) (Figure 11). Esri and IBM have developed 
several innovative integrated solutions for better decision making through 
proven analytics and optimized management of business information.26 Esri 
Maps for IBM Cognos is integrated with the Esri cloud.27 
CIW represents a consolidated repository for all crime data for reporting, 
analysis, and deployment. The solution incorporates advanced Web-enabled 
tools like geographic imaging software and live video feeds for a detailed view 
of an enforcement area and provides user access with Cognos for crime 
analysis, mapping, reports, and statistics. Users can access any information 
stored within the warehouse to report, analyze and understand crime statistics 
based on any number of different factors [18]. Departments can use this instant 
information to redeploy and reconfigure resources in response to crime trends. 
With techniques of real-time information gathering (data and video) and 
predictive analytics, CIW technologies are moving to the next level towards 
smarter cities with more integrated law enforcement agencies [18]. These 
solutions apply data-mining techniques in order to help agencies uncover 
hidden patterns, associations, correlations and trends, even in large complex 
datasets of structured and unstructured data (emails, videos, cell phone calls, 
chat room interactions, etc.). It is expected that utilization of data warehouse, 
deep analytics and data visualization will lead to better hotspots and crime 
                                                           
24 Compstat is a performance management system that is used to reduce crime and achieve other 
police department goals. Compstat emphasizes information-sharing, responsibility and 
accountability, and improves effectiveness. 
25 The IBM-Cognos Crime Information Warehouse, more on ftp://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/ 
data/sw-library/cognos/demos/bp_od_blueprints/resources/br_ibm_crime_warehouse.pdf. 
26 More on http://www.esri.com/partners/partners-alliance/ibm/solutions. 
27 More on http://www.esri.com/~/media/Files/Pdfs/library/fliers/pdfs/esri-maps-ibm-cognos.pdf. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
43
trends prediction, which will allow more efficient deployment of police 
resources.  
 
 
Figure 11. Interactive mapping abilities of Crime Information Warehouse.28 
 
Predictive Policing 
 
Predictive policing has become one of the hottest emerging areas in law 
enforcement. It can be described as ‘the application of analytical techniques - 
particularly quantitative techniques - to identify likely targets for police 
intervention and prevent crime or solve past crimes by making statistical 
predictions’ [27]. All types of data can be analyzed, both structured and 
‘unstructured’ (such as emails, text messages, audio and video files, health 
records, journals, etc.). Both the volume and the quality of these data will 
determine the usefulness of any approach. Obtained information can serve for 
                                                           
28 Source: ftp://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/data/sw-library/cognos/demos/bp_od_blueprints/ 
resources/br_ibm_crime_warehouse.pdf. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
44
better anticipation of what types of intervention will be needed and where, in 
order to plan and make the best use of available resources. 
In the context of predictive policing, according to Perry et al., predictive 
methods can be divided into four broad categories [27]: 
 
1. Methods for predicting crimes: approaches used to forecast places and 
times with an increased risk of crime.  
2. Methods for predicting offenders: approaches used to identify 
individuals at risk of offending in the future.  
3. Methods for predicting perpetrators’ identities: techniques are used to 
create profiles that accurately match likely offenders with specific 
past crimes.  
4. Methods for predicting victims of crimes: approaches used to identify 
groups or, in some cases, individuals who are likely to become 
victims of crime. 
 
We have already emphasized that these analytical techniques produce 
estimates, consequently the results - ‘predictions’- are probabilistic, not 
certain. There are a number of different predictive techniques that can be used 
to predict crime risk, whose categorization is shown in Table 2. 
Short explanation of hotspot techniques was already given in section 
‘Hotspot policing’. In contrast with hotspot mapping which relies only on past 
crimes data, regressions methods use a wide range of data in estimating future 
crime risk. Widely used data mining methods aim to: a) predict a category 
(commonly referred to as classes) for an outcome (Classification); b) 
subdivide data into groups (clusters) with similar attributes (Clustering). 
Spatial clustering algorithms are widely used for estimation of statistically 
significant hotspots. Data mining also includes some of the most complex 
methods, including the neural network and support vector machine families to 
make predictions. Near-repeat methods are based on the assumption that future 
crimes will occur very near to the current crimes in both time and place. 
Spatiotemporal analyses include various environmental and temporal features 
of the crime location, which are used for analyzing both short-term series and 
long-term problems or hotspots. Risk terrain analyses attempt to: (a) identify 
geographic features that contribute to crime risk, and (b) make predictions 
about crime risk based on how close given locations are to these risk-inducing 
features. Although, from the user perspective, both risk terrain model and 
hotspot method produce qualitatively the same output, they are very different 
methods. Hotspot methods are fundamentally clustering techniques, while 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
45
Risk terrain modeling is a classification approach. One major advantage of risk 
terrain approaches is that it can predict new hotspots, even in the area with no 
recent crimes, on the base of similarity to other hotspots [27]. 
 
Table 2. Categorization of different predictive techniques  
that can be used to predict crime risk (according to [27]) 
 
Category 
Technique 
Data 
hotspot analysis 
 Grid mapping 
 Covering ellipses 
 Kernel density 
 Heuristics 
using crime data 
only 
regression 
methods 
 Linear 
 Stepwise 
 Splines 
 Leading indicators 
using a range of data 
data mining 
techniques 
 Clustering 
 Classification 
using a range of data 
near-repeat 
methods 
 Self-exciting point process 
 ProMap 
 Heuristic 
over next few days, 
using crime data 
only 
Category 
Technique 
Data 
spatiotemporal 
analysis 
 Heat maps 
 Additive model 
 Seasonality 
using crime and 
temporal data 
risk terrain 
analysis 
 Geospatial predictive analysis 
 Risk terrain modeling 
using geography 
associated with risk 
 
Despite the public expectation, and even some misunderstanding among 
users, predictive methods do not predict where and when the next crime will 
be committed. They predict only the relative level of risk that a crime will be 
associated with a particular time, place and person(s). 
It is reported that utilization of predictive software can significantly 
reduce serious crime. For example, IBM’s Blue CRUSH (Criminal Reduction 
Utilizing Statistical History) software enabled the Memphis Police to evaluate 
incident patterns throughout the city and forecast criminal ‘hotspots’ so they 
could allocate resources, deploy personnel and increase public safety reducing 
crime by more than 30 percent in 4 years [18]. Los Angeles Police Department 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
46
is one of the few in the USA using PredPol29 software that automatically 
generates maps for police of where and when crimes may occur [12]. PredPol 
is a cloud-based software-as-a-service (SaaS) in which unique crime 
prediction methodology combines available crime data with advanced 
mathematics, cloud computing and computer learning (including indispensable 
experience of veteran police) techniques. By analyzing input data - type, place, 
and time of crime, an output in the form of red box (dimension 500 by 500 
foot) is shown, pointing to the district areas with the highest risk for criminal 
activity for that shift (Figure 12). The results are more accurate and more 
actionable recommendations for when and where crime is most likely to occur 
thus allowing police to show up before crime happens.30 
 
 
Figure 12. Predictive Policing Screen Shot: PredPol™ a cloud-based SaaS for crime 
prediction (adopted from [11]). 
 
                                                           
29 More on http://www.predpol.com/. 
30 PredPol's Innovative Predictive Policing Software Results in Dramatic Crime Reduction, 
avaliable 
at 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/predpols-innovative-predictive-
policing-software-results-in-dramatic-crime-reduction-227802601.html. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
47
CONCLUSION 
 
Police officers are engaged on a daily basis in the collection of data 
necessary for fulfilling their responsibilities. The collected data are analyzed 
and in the form of different analytical products disseminated to its users. 
Having in mind that the most of activities undertaken by the police officers 
have a spatial component (X and Y coordinates), cartographic visualization of 
these data takes significant place in the crime analysis process. The importance 
of spatial data visualization in the police practice has been recognized more 
than a century ago, when the first crime maps appeared on the police stations’ 
walls [16]. Comparing to the textual crime reports (bulletins), crime maps 
inform law enforcement officers much faster and easier about the spatial 
distribution of crime. 
Intensive development of information and communication technologies 
has extended the existing analytical methods and added some new ones, thus 
forming new approaches to solving crime problems. Crime mapping and GIS 
technology are such examples. Helping police officers to be better informed 
about crime and other events of importance for their activities, crime maps 
enable more effective identification of problems and their causes, which is the 
prerequisite for efficient work aimed at their elimination. In this way, spatial 
visualization becomes an important decision making support tool at all levels 
of police organization - from a street police officer, to the top management of 
the police organization. 
Nowadays when the limited resources should be effectively deployed in 
order to combat crime and to respond to growing citizens' demands, focusing 
them on the place and at the time when they are most needed becomes an 
essential prerequisite for the effective performance of the police functions. In 
this regard, the identification of crime hotspots becomes a part of everyday 
police analysts’ activities. Although the human eye and brain can be a good 
‘tool’ for geospatial data processing, visual method cannot be sufficient to 
enable making correct conclusions. This is particularly evident in cases where 
complex spatial distribution of crimes is analyzed. In this context GIS tools 
have an important role. They can enable analysts to ‘see’ what is invisible to 
the human eye. Timely recognition of problematic locations (e.g., hotspots) 
and placing them into the focus of police attention, could lead to opportunity 
reduction and yield clear crime prevention benefits. 
In order to facilitate access to crime maps, police organizations use the 
benefits of the Internet technology. Ensuring constant access to the current 
crime data (24/7), the Internet crime maps enable citizens to get the data about 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
48
crime distribution and crime trends in a fast and easily accessible way. The 
most popular are interactive crime maps that allow users to perform their own 
queries (by the type, place or time of crime, etc.), and get answers to the 
questions they are interested in. Specialized internet-based software will 
enable up-to-date information that creates the needed situational awareness 
among officers helping them to react timely.  
Emerging predictive analytics capability which combines real-time 
information gathering with data mining techniques helps law enforcement 
officers to uncover hidden patterns, associations, correlations and trends in 
large complex datasets of structured and unstructured data. Even more, it can 
help to find not only where a crime will most likely occur, but also when and 
who the suspect or victim is likely to be, helping police officers to react before 
crime is committed (prevent it). With the development of machine learning 
techniques, data mining solutions will produce results almost in real time and 
it will not be long before we start talking about ‘smart police’ as a part of the 
future ‘smart cities’ in the ‘smart world’.  
At the end we would like to emphasize that wide utilization of the 
aforementioned techniques for crime analysis is to a large extent the result of 
spatial visualization techniques development, which make it possible for end 
users (police officers) to understand and exploit a product of complicated 
analytical methods when presented in a form of the visual data (map).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Boba, Rachel. 2005. Crime analysis and crime mapping. SAGE 
Publications. 
[2] 
Braga, Anthony A., Papachristos, Andrew V., Hureau, David M. 2010. 
“The concentration and stability of gun violence at micro places in 
Boston, 1980–2008.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 26:33–53. 
[3] 
Braga, Anthony A., Weisburd, David L. 2010. Policing Problem Places: 
Crime Hot Spots and Effective Prevention (Studies in Crime and Public 
Policy) 1st Edition, Oxford University Press. 
[4] 
Bureau of Justice Assistance. 2013. “Compstat: Its origins, evaluation 
and future in law enforcement agencies.” Bureau of Justice 
Assistance&Police Executive Research Forum. Washington DC. 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/App/Publications/abstract.aspx?ID=265292. 

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
49
[5] 
Chainey, Spencer; Tompson, Lisa and Uhlig Sebastian. 2008. “The 
utility of hotspot mapping for predicting spatial patterns of crime.” 
Security Journal, 21(1):4-28. 
[6] 
Clarke, Ronald V., Weisburd, David. 1994. “Diffusion of crime control 
benefits: Observations on the reverse of displacement.” In Crime 
prevention studies, 2:165-184, edited by Ronald V. Clarke, Monsey, 
NY: Criminal Justice Press. 
[7] 
Cohen, Jacqueline and Wilpen L. Gorr. 2006. “Development of Crime 
Forecasting and Mapping Systems for Use by Police in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, and Rochester, New York, 1990-2001.” ICPSR04545-v1. 
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social 
Research, 2006-08-31. http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR04545.v1. 
[8] 
Crime Tech Solutions. 2015. “What is Geospatial Crime Mapping?” 
Crime Technology Weekly, October 20. Accessed January 28, 2016. 
https://fightfinancialcrimes.com/2015/10/20/what-is-geospatial-crime-
mapping/. 
[9] 
Daglar, Murat and Argun, Ugur. 2016. “Crime Mapping and 
Geographical Information Systems in Crime Analysis.” International 
Journal of Human Sciences, 13(1):2208-2221. doi:10.14687/ijhs. 
v13i1.3736. 
[10] Eck, John E., Chainey, Spencer; Cameron, James G., Leitner, Michael 
and Wilson, Ronald E. 2005. Mapping crime: Understanding hotspots. 
Washington DC: National Institute of Justice. https://www.ncjrs.gov/ 
pdffiles1/nij/209393.pdf. 
[11] Friend, Zach. 2013. “Predictive Policing: Using Technology to Reduce 
Crime.” FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, April, 2013. Accessed April 12, 
2016. https://leb.fbi.gov/2013/april/predictive-policing-using-technology 
-to-reduce-crime. 
[12] GCN Staff. 2014. “Seattle police deploy SeaStat crime mapping tech.” 
GCN, September 23. Accessed April 5, 2016. https://gcn.com/articles/ 
2014/09/23/seastat-seattle-crime-mapping.aspx. 
[13] GIS for Crime Analysis, Law Enforcement, and Public Safety. 2014. 
American 
Sentinel 
University. 
Accessed 
February 
20, 
2016. 
http://www.americansentinel.edu/blog/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/ 
AS_GIS-Crime-eBook-Final.pdf. 
[14] Goldstein, Herman. 1990. Problem-oriented policing, McGraw Hill, 
New York. Available at http://www.popcenter.org/library/reading/ 
pdfs/goldstein_book.pdf. 

Nenad Milić, Brankica Popović, Venezija Ilijazi et al. 
50
[15] Gottlieb, Steven; Arenberg, Sheldon and Singh, Raj. 1994. Crime 
analysis: From first report to final arrest, CA: Alpha Publishing. 
[16] Harries, Keith D. 1999. Mapping crime: Principle and practice, U.S. 
Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, National Institute of Justice, 
Washington DC. https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/178919.pdf. 
[17] Hubler, David. 2013. “Predictive analysis grows as crime-prevention 
tool.” GCN. January 15. Accessed March 10, 2016. https://gcn. 
com/articles/2013/01/15/predictive-analysis-crime-prevention-tool.aspx. 
[18] IBM. 2011. “Predictive Crime Fighting.” IBM’s 100 Icons of Progress, 
March 17. Accessed March 7, 2016. http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/ 
history/ibm100/us/en/icons/crimefighting/. 
[19] International Association of Crime Analysts. 2014. “Definition and types 
of crime analysis.” Standards, Methods&Technology White Paper 2014-
02, Overland Park, KS. http://www.iaca.net/Publications/Whitepapers/ 
iacawp_2014_02_definition_types_crime_analysis.pdf. 
[20] Klose, Andreas and Drexl, Andreas. 2005. “Facility location models for 
distribution system design.” European Journal of Operational Research, 
162(1):4-29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2003.10.031. 
[21] Kounadi, Ourania; Bowers, Kate and Leitner, Michael. 2015. “Crime 
mapping on-line: Public perception of privacy issues.” European journal 
on criminal policy and research, 21(1):167-190. 
[22] Levine, Ned. 2015. CrimeStat: A Spatial Statistics Program for the 
Analysis of Crime Incident Locations (v 4.02). Ned Levine and 
Associates, Houston, TX and the National Institute of Justice, 
Washington, DC. 
[23] Milc, Nenad. 2012. “Crime mapping in a function of problem oriented 
policing (in Serbian).” NBP - Journal of Criminalistics and Law, 
Belgrade, 1:123-140. 
[24] Milic, Nenad. 2012a. “Crime mapping in a function of improving 
partnership between the police and the local community (in Serbian).” 
Bezbednost, 3:138-159. 
[25] Milic, Nenad and Subosic Dane. 2013. “Location problems solving in 
the function of police resources engagement optimization (In Serbian).” 
In thematic proceeding Structure and function of police organization - 
tradition, status, perspective - II, Academy of criminalistic and police 
studies, Belgrade, Serbia, pp. 239-251. 
[26] Paulsen, Derek J., Robinson, Matthew B. 2004. Spatial aspects of crime: 
Theory and Practice, Pearson Education.  

Spatial Data Visualization as a Tool for Analytical Support 
51
[27] Perry, Walter L., McInnis, Brian; Price, Carter C., Smith, Susan C., 
Hollywood, John S. 2013. Predictive Policing: The Role of Crime 
Forecasting in Law Enforcement Operations, Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation, 2013. http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR233. 
html.  
[28] Popovic, Brankica. 2013. “Role of ICT in modern police organization 
(In Serbian).” In thematic proceeding Structure and function of police 
organization - tradition, status, perspective - II, Academy of 
criminalistic and police studies, Belgrade, Serbia, pp. 251-270. 
[29] Reppetto, Thomas A. 1976. “Crime prevention and the displacement 
phenomenon.” Crime and Delinquency, 22(2):166-177. 
[30] Rich, Tom and Shively, Michael. 2004. A Methodology for Evaluating 
Geographic Profiling Software, National Institute of Justice’s Document 
No.: 208993, Washington DC. https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/ 
grants/208993.pdf. 
[31] Sherman, Lawrence W., Gartin, Patrick R., Buerger, Michael E. 1989. 
“Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine activities and the criminology of 
place.” Criminology, 27(1):27−56. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-9125.1989. 
tb00862.x. 
[32] Walker, Samuel and Katz, Charles. 2012. The police in America: An 
introduction, 8th edition, McGraw-Hill Education. 
[33] Wartell, Julie and McEwen, Тhomas. 2001. Privacy in the Information 
Age: A Guide for Sharing Crime Maps and Spatial Data, US 
Department of Justice, Washington DC. https://www.it.ojp.gov/ 
documents/d/188739.pdf. 
[34] Weisburd, David; Bushway, Shawn; Lum, Cynthia and Yang, Sue-Ming. 
2004. “Trajectories of crime at places: a longitudinal study of street 
segments in the city of Seattle.” Criminology, 42(2):283–322. doi: 
10.1111/j.1745-9125.2004.tb00521.x. 
[35] Wood, Tyler. 2015. “What is Crime Analysis?” Crime Technology 
Weekly, December 11. Accessed March 28, 2016. https://fightfinancial 
crimes.com/tag/data-visualization/. 
 


In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  
 
 
 
CYBERCRIME INFLUENCE ON PERSONAL, 
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY 
WHILE USING THE INTERNET 
 
 
I. Cvetanoski1,*, MD, J. Achkoski, PhD,  
D. Rančić2, PhD and R. Stainov3, PhD 
1Military Academy “General Mihailo Apostolski”- Skopje,  
associate member of “Goce Delchev” University, Shtip Macedonia 
2Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Niš, Serbia 
3University of Applied Science Fulda, Fulda, Germany 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The aim of this chapter is to stress the danger of cybercrime activities 
in cyberspace and its impact on personal, national and international 
security in the 21st century. Insignificant approaches towards this 
phenomenon may lead to unpredictable consequences even for the state’s 
security.  
The new millennium brought information society growth which 
enabled the nations to be linked in the global cyber space that lead to fast 
data transfer throughout the world. Globalization of the cyberspace 
caused new risks and threats which are invisible for the eyes and stealthy 
for the ears. The cyber-criminals act conspiratorially through the 
cyberspace; they penetrate in the system privacy and conduct the crime in 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: I. Cvetanoski, Email: igorcvetanoski@yahoo.com. 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
54
such manner that we are even not aware of being victimized. Cybercrime 
starts as personal, but it ends as international security threat. 
During the research we will stress on the motives which encourage 
cyber-criminals to execute cybercrimes on individuals, private 
sector/business companies or state institutions. Furthermore, we will 
define categories and types of cybercrime. Also, there will be presented 
the methods of cybercrime, such as: hacking, social engineering, 
phishing, pharming, denial of services attacks, distributed denial of 
services, malicious software usage, adware, steganography and etc.. 
There will be presented some examples of cybercrimes that occurred in 
the world in order to note that no state is immune on this threat in the 21st 
century. And finally, some examples of cybercrime will be shown since 
they were noticed in the past few years in Macedonia accompanied with 
some statistics. We will also present simple linear regression as a model 
for short range predictions (a year or two in the future). 
In the future, cybercrime will have increasing rate and it will cause 
more significant damages due to the development of the information-
technology society. Today, modern technology gives great opportunity to 
use on-line tools for performing cybercrime activities, which means that 
anyone can create malicious software for crime activities in cyberspace. 
 
Keywords: cyberspace, cyber-criminals, malicious software, malware and 
virus prevention, simple linear regression 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The modern IT society enables global connection of the people through 
cyberspace. Communications through cyberspace enable rapid transfer of 
information, but they increase the risk to be compromised. The cyberspace as a 
new battlespace creates new threats, new warriors and new challenges in the 
21st century. 
The cyberspace consists of many interconnected computers, servers, 
routers, switches and fiber optic cables. Proper use of cyberspace is the basis 
for the economy and national security. Provision of cyberspace is an extensive 
undertaking that requires coordinated action and commitment from all 
stakeholders of society: governments, states, local governments, private sector 
and citizens [4]. 
Nowadays, modern societies depend on cyberspace for normal 
functioning. The threat of cyber war and its alleged effects are source of a 
great concern for governments and armed forces in the world. The fact that 

Cybercrime Influence … 
55
several serious cyber attacks are being carried out in these moments while 
debating the exact definition of cyber war, can serve as an illustration of what 
can be expected if the real cyber war occur in the future. There is real 
inconvenience to identify the perpetrators of cyber attack, so they have plenty 
of time to conceal their real identity [2]. 
Perhaps the movie “Matrix” starring Keanu Reeves is one of the many 
stories about the future and the evolutionary process of cyberspace, about the 
evolution of the war, about change of the perception of the man to the 
machine, about the technological development and the development of 
artificial intelligence, about switching roles between the humans and the 
machines, about the world in which the machines manage the people, about 
virtual world created by the progress of machinery using the possibilities of 
cyberspace and smooth mutual communication through the established 
network connections. 
The scope of this chapter is cybercrime and the basis for the cybercrime 
definition is that this type of crime includes any criminal act relating to 
computers, computer networks and computer systems. The convention on 
Cybercrime 2001 of the Council of Europe in its preamble defines cybercrime 
as “activities that are directed against the integrity, confidentiality and 
availability of computer systems and data networks, as well as any misuse of 
these system networks and computer data” [10]. 
Malicious hackers are responsible for the cyber attacks. They have a basic 
objective to penetrate into the computer, data network or computer system 
through cyberspace, with the ultimate objective being disruption of the 
stability of the system, taking over control of the system (so called zombie 
system), denial of services attacks, stealing the personal data, stealing the 
monetary funds from their own accounts, propaganda, spying, changes to data, 
abuse of critical infrastructure and many other criminal activities with the help 
of malicious software (viruses, worms and etc.). 
It is difficult to understand the motives for committing cybercrime, 
however, following grounds are very common: 
 
 
Political/religious 
 
Financial benefit, 
 
Idealistic (activities held only to prove the capabilities without 
expectation of reward or a financial benefit) 
 
Curiosity, adventure (beginners who have not entered the criminal 
leads, but they do it for fame, without the knowledge and skills) [13]. 
 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
56
One of the characteristics of cyber attacks is that it is difficult to identify 
the perpetrators of the attacks and even countries that committed those attacks. 
 
 
CYBERCRIME METHODS OF ACTION 
 
Cybercrime evolution is continuous and it has high speed changing forms. 
The types of cybercrime depend only on the aspirations of the malicious 
hackers. Cybercrime as crime has differentiated the following main elements: 
 
 
Story - what happened, 
 
Circumstances - as happened 
 
Mental state of perpetrators which is necessary for crime classification 
and cyber criminal profiling. 
 
Cybercrime can be grouped based on the role of the computer in the 
execution of the crime, where the computer can be: 
 
 
apparent target (unauthorized entry into the computer, data theft); 
 
means of attack (credit card fraud, sending spam and pictures); 
 
When connected to everyday crime (trafficking in drugs and people, 
child pornography and etc.); 
 
When it is based on evidence for committing cybercrime. 
 
Recent studies have shown that crime associated with computers has 
increasing rate, which primarily refers to the violation of intellectual property 
(unauthorized copying and theft of copyright) and software piracy. There are 
many types of cybercrime but some of them are: 
 
 
theft of computer services;  
 
software piracy; 
 
disclosure, theft and alteration of computer data and information; 
 
extortion using a computer; 
 
misuse of stolen passwords; 
 
child pornography; 
 
transmission destructive viruses; 
 
Industrial and political espionage [18]. 
 

Cybercrime Influence … 
57
The most frequently used methods for cyber-attacks by malicious hackers 
are: 
 
 
Hacking as activity that performs malicious hackers (cyber-criminals). 
The main goal of malicious hackers is to enter unauthorized in the 
system and to take procedures for authorization and identification, to 
disrupt the proper functioning of the system, to steal data and 
information system etc.. Malicious hackers can be rented from various 
companies, to work as spies for some governments or they may have 
some connections with organized crime and terrorist groups and so 
on. The reasons for these actions are different: material gain, revenge, 
entertainment and etc. [12]. 
 
Social engineering, this method uses the people as the weakest line of 
defense of any organization. Common term for this activity is people 
hacking [1]. 
 
Malicious software is software that involves the use of viruses, 
worms, trojans, spywares etc.. 
 
Attacks for access prohibition (DoS - Denial of Services Attacks) are 
used for blocking the system that is targeted to claim the huge demand 
for services per time. This action disables the system to give an 
answer to the requests and therefore cause complete blockage of that 
system. 
 
Fraud bank card. 
 
Phishing attacks. Тhese attacks enable malicious hackers to use fake 
e-mail messages and fraudulent websites of financial institutions, 
while trying to mislead consumers to disclose the confidential 
personal data [5]. 
 
 
SECURITY RISKS AND THREATS WHILE  
USING THE INTERNET 
 
With the emergence and use of the Internet, the term security of computers 
and computer networks, gets wider meaning which includes: protection of data 
and computer network from malicious hackers. The trend of globalization has 
further impact on security in Information Technology (IT) sector. The 
undefined legal provisions on security risks and threats in the Internet-space at 
a global level enable safe zones for offenders and malicious hackers. The large 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
58
number of Internet users make difficult and impossible to search for violators 
of the laws, relating to the abuse of the Internet. The most common ways of 
endangering the computers over the Internet are: 
 
 
Downloading malicious software that is attached on e - mail; 
 
Open ports on the personal computer - PC (mostly due to the already 
installed malicious software), which can take control of the computer, 
known as Distributed Denial of Services attacks - DDoS, Denial of 
Services - DoS, ARP fraud (Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) 
spoofing), SYN flood (SYN flooding) and the like; 
 
Visiting suspicious websites (usually placed on free servers) which 
mostly through Java or ActiveX inserts malicious software on the 
computer; 
 
Installing and launching the suspicious programs that have been 
infected with malicious software; 
 
Security vulnerabilities in programs that are used on computer 
(operating system, browser, users of e-mail and so on) that ask daily 
update (download) of security accessories (update); 
 
Using the so-called patches (crack) that allow illegal use of software; 
 
Network identity theft (Phishing) which involves collecting personal 
data (username, password, number of credit cards, telephone number 
and etc.) and the user is not even aware of being victimized; 
 
Forwarding fake websites (Pharming) with the modification of the 
local DNS (Domain Name System) server computer that has 
previously been infected with malicious software; 
 
Reckless using of the services of social networks: Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn, Myspace [20]…  
 
When accessing the Internet, the computer sends a message to the 
appropriate web page and in return expects information for allowed access to 
it. Often, this feedback brings unwanted malicious software created by 
malicious hackers. So, the firewall can’t recognize what is inside the packet. 
This software starts to be installed on the computer, so it can be only a slight 
discomfort or a serious threat to the computer system, personal data and 
sensitive financial information. Usually inconveniences are visible and easy to 
detect, while dangerous threats are invisible, silent and difficult to detect [33]. 
The malicious software (Malware) under the definition of NIST (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology) refers to “program that is often secretly 

Cybercrime Influence … 
59
deposited in the system in order to compromise the confidentiality, integrity or 
availability of data, applications and operating system or trying another way to 
harass the victim.” In other words, malicious software can be used to delete or 
destroy valuable information; to slow down the performance of the computer 
to a complete standstill or spying and stealing important personal data from the 
victim’s computer [30]. Malware includes all malicious programs, such as 
computer viruses, worms, Trojan horse or Trojan, Rootkit, Backdoor, 
Spyware, Adware, Phishing, Pharming and others. 
Viruses are malicious programs that infect the user’s computer in order to 
cause damage (deletion and destruction of data, programs and operating 
system) to the computer users. A computer virus is a program code that is 
placed into individual files of the application or system software. They usually 
consist of two parts: self-modifying code that allows propagation of the virus 
and the main code (payload) in which the contents can be harmful. Infection 
on the computer with viruses can be through the Internet or through portable 
devices. Polymorphic viruses are those which change their code whenever 
multiply in order to avoid the chance to be detected by the antivirus program.  
Worms are malicious programs that are written in the working memory of 
the computer and they remain active. Worms spread by placing identical 
copies on other computers, in that way they can in a short time infect a large 
number of computers. The range of possible damages ranging from causing 
damage to the operating system (OS), extinguishing the PC slowdown or work 
with network resources, to open and close the CD/DVD ROM, displacing the 
characters on the keyboard of the computer and etc.. 
Trojan horses or Trojans are malicious programs that act as useful 
programs, essentially causing great damage to the computer. They are thought 
to originate from legal sources, but they disable anti-virus program and 
firewall, so they allow access to the user’s computer [8]. Trojans unlike other 
malicious software must be activated by hackers over the Internet. The most 
common operations that a hacker can perform on the computer that is infected 
with a Trojan horse are: 
 
 
Collection and theft of confidential information - passwords, bank 
accounts and etc.; 
 
Installing software (including other types of malicious software); 
 
Download, installation, deletion, creation and modification of files; 
 
Review of the user’s desktop; 
 
Adding BotNet computer network (DDoS attacks); 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
60
 
Collecting and downloading the text that is entered through the 
keyboard (keylogging) and  
 
Taking the resources of the computer system and its slowdown [20]. 
 
 
Spy Programs (Spyware) 
 
According to Trend Micro Inc. definition, spywares are: “Malicious 
programs that send user data to a third party without the knowledge or consent 
of the user.” 
There are two types of spywares: 
 
 
Legal spyware programs and 
 
Commercial spyware programs - illegal malicious programs. 
 
Legal spyware programs are those one that are installed on the computer 
by the owners of the company, in order network administrators to be able to 
monitor the activities of employees. These programs are used for protection of 
intellectual property, data and computer networks, and parental supervision of 
children and juveniles (at the request of a parent). Other legal cases for using 
these programs are for the purpose of the authorities of the state in order to 
monitor terrorists, criminals and other law-breakers. 
Commercial spyware programs are programs of the companies which are 
created for collecting information of users’ habits when viewing Internet 
content. These programs are illegal and they collect users’ information easily. 
The greatest benefit of spywares has the marketing industry. The spywares, in 
accordance to their purpose, can be divided into the following categories: 
 
 
Internet URL Loggers, 
 
Screen Recorders, 
 
E-mail Recorders,  
 
Chat Loggers, 
 
Keyloggers,  
 
Password Recorders, 
 
Tracking Cookies, 
 
Browser Hijackers, 
 
Modem Hijackers and  
 
PC Hijackers [8]. 

Cybercrime Influence … 
61
Rootkit Programs 
 
Rootkit (root-administrator and kit-equipment, tools) is a malicious 
software that can be composed of several programs whose main task is to 
conceal the signs that the system is compromised, designed in order to 
surreptitiously taking control on operating system by other malware (e.g., 
keylogger program). Using the rootkit does not have to be mean, but the term 
rootkit is increasingly associated with undesirable behavior of the operating 
system and the malicious program. Contrary to what its name form can imply, 
rootkit is not assigning administrative privileges to the user, but provides 
access, moves and modifies system files and processes. 
 
 
Backdoor Programs 
 
Backdoor is a program that is installed from the viruses, worms or Trojan 
horses (without the user’s knowledge), which is used to bypass authentication 
(verification process the personal data of the user in the moment of application 
or connection of the operating system), with the ultimate goal to enable 
smooth and unauthorized access to the operating system. Backdoor is using the 
flaws and weaknesses of the operating system. Backdoor Trojans open the 
“side entrance” of the embattled computer and allow unauthorized use of 
hardware and software resources of embattled operating system. 
 
 
Adware Programs 
 
Adware (ad- advertising, advertisement and ware - programming package) 
is any software package, some malicious software, which starts automatically, 
displays or downloads advertisements from the computer while using or after 
installation. Computers have the ability to collect large amounts of personal 
data and transferred to third parties including companies and advertising 
networks. Industry for on-line advertising is big and competitive business, 
powered by buying and selling of personal data, such as Internet browsing 
behavior and the nature of the users. There are many ways to collect such 
information. One way is contracting with the websites of social networks 
(Social Networking) [20]. Another way is to set so called Cookies on our 
search engine to monitor our behavior and interests on the Internet or make an 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
62
agreement with the research teams of applications for smart phones – that can 
even use GPS (Global Positioning System) to find our location [30]. 
The cookies, pop-ups and adware are tools for monitoring our behavior 
when we are on-line on the Internet and are used to promote various products. 
Many cookies are safe tools for the sole purpose of monitoring and collecting 
information from the Internet. In the most of the cases adware programs are 
made of pop-up ads that cause nothing else than unwanted nuisances. The 
main problem with these tools is that malicious hackers and on-line criminals 
largely use them to access and enter our computer and collect our personal 
information without we’ve been aware of it. Some of the data of the user who 
visits a website are detected through log files. These files register those data 
targeted at the creator of the website [33]. 
 
 
Phishing – Catching a Personal Data 
 
Phishing attacks include activities that unauthorized users using false 
messages in emails and fake websites of some financial institutions (e.g., 
“Ebay”, “Paypal”, etc.) are trying to mislead the user revealing personal data. 
In this context, this primarily refers to data such as credit card numbers, 
usernames, passwords, PIN codes and etc. [5]. Phishing attacks are carried out 
in several stages: gathering intelligence; design and preparation of the attack 
and carrying out the attack. Fake emails and web pages that are used for these 
attacks look very similar to the original. These attacks can be found through 
URL (uniform resource locator) address of the fake website. For example, if 
we visit the “eBay” then the final part of the domain in the URL address 
should end with: “ebay.com”. Accordingly, websites that have the URL 
http://www.ebay.com http://cgi3.ebay.com are valid web pages, while 
http://www.ebay.vaidate-info.com and http://www.ebay.login123.com are fake 
web pages that can be used by malicious hackers. If the URL contains IP 
(Internet Protocol) address, like 12.30.229.107, instead of the domain name, 
more than certain imply that someone wants to capture (phish) personal data 
from the computer [20]. Table 1 shows the categories of websites infected 
with phishing.  
“The New New Internet” which represents a web page for cyber security, 
in the past period has given a special emphasis to the malicious hackers who 
lately are more active on social networking sites and activate phishing attacks 
by Instant messaging, Facebook, Twitter and other social networks [30]. 
 

Cybercrime Influence … 
63
Table 1. Website categories infected with phishing [15] 
 
Websites categories infected with phishing 
Rank 
Category 
Rank 
Category 
1 
Free web pages 
6 
Travel 
2 
Education 
7 
Shopping 
3 
Sports 
8 
Health and Medicine 
4 
Business 
9 
Real Estate 
5 
Computers and Technology 
10 
Fashion and Beauty 
 
 
Pharming Programs 
 
Pharming unlike Phishing directs users to fake websites without the user 
being aware of it. The phishing web pages usually use the domain name for 
the address, while their exact location is determined by the IP address. The 
user gets to write the domain name into their web browser and press enter; the 
domain name is converted into an IP address through DNS (Domain Name 
Server). Thus web browser connects to the server with that IP address and 
takes data from the website. Once the user visits the website, DNS entrance on 
that side often remembers the DNS cache of computer user. Thus computer 
must constantly access the DNS server whenever the user wants to access the 
website. One of the ways of Pharming is an e-mail that has a code of a virus 
that infects the local DNS cache user. For example, instead of IP address 
17.254.3.183 which essentially is the address of www.apple.com, it can be 
changed to another website by hackers. Pharmers – can infect some DNS 
servers, which means that any user who uses that server will be redirected to 
the wrong website. Usually most of the DNS servers have protection measures 
that protects from these attacks. However, this does not mean that they are 
100% immune to attacks by malicious hackers. These attacks can act on 
multiple users at once in cases when large DNS server is modified [6]. 
Methods pharming and phishing are the best known methods of identity theft 
and other personal data of the user. Categories of websites that were probably 
compromised with malware in 2013 are shown in Table 2 [15]. 
 
 
 
 
 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
64
Table 2. Websites categories infected with malware [15] 
 
Websites categories infected with malware 
Rank 
Category 
Rank 
Category 
1 
Travel 
6 
Education 
2 
Transportation 
7 
Search Engines and Portals 
3 
Business 
8 
Arts 
4 
Sports 
9 
Restaurants and Dining 
5 
Leisure and Recreation 
10 
Real Estate 
 
 
Scareware Programs 
 
The term scareware marks several classes of programs for fraud, often 
with little or no profits that are sold to consumers because of some unethical 
marketing. These programs are made as to cause shock or perception of theft 
among users. The most frequently used tactic is convincing the user that the 
computer is infected with a virus so it is recommended to download antivirus 
program to remove the virus. Recommended antivirus is mostly commercial 
and users must pay their use. The term programs fraud is often used to 
describe a product while performing the desired operation and also produces 
many warnings for the purposes of the application of commercial firewall or 
programs for cleaning the registry (registry cleaner software). These classes of 
programs mark and often display continuous warning messages to users. Even 
more, some websites display windows with new ads (pop-up) or 
advertisements (banners) with text that emphasizes the user that the computer 
is infected with malware, and because of that they suggest scanning the 
computer by clicking on offered window. These programs are not linked with 
the installed malicious programs; they give false warnings, and are made as 
coming from the operating system. The user can infect his/her computer even 
if he/she presses the window to cancel or close the message. Some types of 
programs that steal user’s data are also ranked in the scareware programs 
because they shift the appearance of the background of the computer, they 
install icons (for the operating system Windows), and continuously inform the 
user that their computer is infected with some form of malicious software. One 
example for this type of fraud is SpySheriff. It is a program for stealing user 
data posing as a program to remove these malicious programs. 
 
 

Cybercrime Influence … 
65
Another form of scareware programs are the so called joke programs 
(prank software) that are intended to intimidate the user to use the unexpected 
images, sounds or video messages. First distributed program of this type was 
for computer Amiga in 1991, and was called NightMare. This virus did not 
take actions in the same time with booting the operating system, but in random 
selected period of time altered the entire background and burned horrible 
sounds. These viruses have recently been designed on such way to display 
window on which when something is written, it will erase all data on the 
computer no matter of whether that action will be taken or not. However, the 
actual effect is that these malicious programs are used to intimidate the user, 
and never delete data from your computer. 
 
 
Ransomware Programs 
 
These malicious programs are defined as programs that exploit the 
vulnerability of the personal computer in order to break their operating system 
and to encrypt those files. Once this happens the attacker keeps locked these 
files till victim’s willingness to pay a certain amount of money. If the 
operating system has previously been attacked by a worm or Trojan horse, an 
attacker can easily penetrate in poorly configured operating system. In the 
most of the cases, during the attack usually false messages are used in order to 
detect the vulnerabilities of used antivirus program and to insert them in the 
operating system through the most vulnerable port of the system. The next step 
is contacting the user. The attacker sends an e-mail to the victim or a window 
appears on the victim’s screen with an advertising message that requires 
encryption key to unlock the files. Very often instructions are given in 
accordance to recover data. When the attacker using the tools of ransomware 
malicious programs, will take control of the data, he/she will encrypt them 
with a sophisticated algorithm. The decryption password is given to the victim 
in the moment when the certain amount of price is paid. The attacker inform 
the victim with instructions message for steps which should be taken to 
recover the data, which is located in the same directory as the encrypted data 
[7]. At the end of 2013 users of the operating system Windows faced such a 
threat known as “CryptoLocker”, which once swept computer, encrypt all 
personal files and folders so that users cannot access the same [21]. 
 
 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
66
Steganography  
 
Steganography involves concealing secret messages in the multimedia 
files (images, video file, audio file and etc.). This means that the process of 
steganography usually involves inserting a secret message in a transmission 
medium that in this case is used as a carrier and its primary role is 
concealment of permanent secret message. The carrier should be the content 
that does not draw any attention to itself (image, text, audio or video and etc.). 
This package composed of a secret message and a holder where the message is 
located is called steganography medium or stego. Besides the use of 
steganography for good causes (protection of intellectual property rights, 
confidentiality in communications and etc.), very often it is used for illegal 
activities as the malicious software transmission is, and could be used for 
computer assault [7]. Today, there are many examples for using steganography 
in the process of secret communications between terrorist organizations.  
Other malicious programs not subject to the processing of this chapter, 
that is necessary to be mentioned are: dialer (communicator, elector of 
numbers), DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service – distributed attacks for 
refusal of services), botnet network, exploit, keylogging, Boot viruses, hoax 
(fraud), scam, macro viruses, malware dropper and others [20].  
Disgruntled insiders are employees of public institutions or private 
companies whose objectives are to cause damage to the system or to steal 
sensitive data from the company in which they are employed. According to the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in the United States, insider attacks are 
twice more likely than attacks from third parties [34]. In this context social 
engineering increasingly has been applied. This method exploits the weakest 
“line of defense” of any organization – people. As a new trend, in foreign 
literature this term is known as people hacking where the trust of people is 
abused for personal gains [1]. 
 
 
SOME EXAMPLES OF CYBERCRIME NOTICED  
IN THE PAST FEW YEARS 
 
Security risks and threats, that are mentioned above permanently exist in 
the Internet-space. For these reasons everyone who is using this space should 
be aware of the risks and threats that constantly lurk in both. Furthermore, 
there are a few examples of malicious programs that were popular in 2013. 

Cybercrime Influence … 
67
For example, on September 6, 2013, the distributors of malicious software 
invented false news aiming to attract public opinion about the possibility of 
US air strikes against Syria. For this purpose messages have used the title “The 
United States Began Bombing” and were made to look like legitimate 
newsworthy Broadcasting station “CNN” (“The Cable News Network”) of the 
United States. The trend of these campaigns is that they are becoming faster in 
real time. The real time to create attack with malware software from examples 
before Syria till the case in Syria was steadily declining. 
In March, 2013 when the new Pope was elected, the first attack by 
malicious software started exactly after 55 hours of the election. In April 2013, 
after the bombings of the Boston Marathon in the US, after 27 hours, in order 
to attract the public opinion the first malicious software attack had been 
implemented. 
In the case of Syria the attackers did not wait, so the attacks were faster 
than the events on the ground. All this confirms that the Internet has a great 
power to attract public opinion. Nowadays, the past several military campaigns 
confirmed the motto “the one who will attract the world public opinion on his 
side will win the war.” [15]. 
The campaign from the end of July 2013 referred to the arrival of the baby 
– Prince George (“royal baby”) in the UK. This malware campaign was 
initiated aiming to cause great interest. This news contrary to a previous had 
all characteristics of web malware software. This news leads to a page with 
three hidden links to pages infected with malicious software. The script 
“<turncoat.js>” in its background activates “Blackhole Exploit Kit” without 
being noticed by the user. Only visible content on the page was the message 
“Connecting to server”. “Blackhole Exploit Kit” is one of the favorite tools 
that are commonly used by cyber criminals nowadays. It scans the target 
system and then downloads the most appropriate malware software depending 
on the operating system, browser type, PDF format and etc.. 
As an illustration, in May 2006 the main news in the newspapers in the 
United States was the theft of data from insurance of veterans. The chronology 
of this case is as follows: an employee of the insurance company in order to 
develop appropriate documents necessary for ensuring veterans and not to 
break the given deadlines beyond the prescribed norms and safety rules, has 
put the relevant data on his notebook (laptop) and took the data to work at 
home. But in the meantime, portable computer had been stolen from his home 
with the data in it. The company estimated that if these data are in the wrong 
hands, it can cause serious consequences for the US and it could lead to a 
complete collapse of the pension fund. Because of the seriousness of the 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
68
problem they created large expert team, which decided to publish this 
information through the media in order to point to the thief on the possible 
consequences (in order to convince the thief to destroy laptop). On the other 
side, representatives of the IT sector of insurance company had undertaken all 
necessary measures to protect the data from possible abuse [31]. The outcome 
was such that luckily there were no consequences for the pension fund and the 
state after all, but because of negligence and breach of security procedures by 
one person contingency funds, time and extra work for data protection were 
spent. 
The report “The high-tech crime” 2011 of the company Norton, which is 
designed for software solutions, estimated that consumers lost about 114 
billion US dollars. The newspapers made a comparison and found that profits 
from cybercrime are equivalent to profit from the global drug trade. 
In June, 2012 the FBI performed operation “Card Shop”, in which 24 
people from thirteen countries on four continents were arrested, for stealing 
and selling of credit card data. FBI succeeded to capture them due to the fact 
that secretly placed online carding forum called “Carder Profit”, who worked 
on the principle invitation only and was constantly monitored by members of 
the FBI. Stolen data were returned to the banks; more than 400.000 victims of 
cyber crime were protected and it avoids loss of 205 million US dollars [14]. 
Assistant Director of the FBI from the USA, Janice K. Fedarcyk, said that: 
“From New York to Norway and Japan to Australia, Operation “Card Shop” 
was directed against sophisticated, highly organized cyber criminals involved 
in buying and selling stolen identities, used credit cards, forged documents and 
sophisticated hacking tools. Two-year-old secret FBI investigation conducted 
on 4 continents is proof of commitment to eradicate rampant criminal behavior 
of the Internet” [32]. This action also involved computer crime unit from the 
Ministry of Interior from Macedonia. According to the FBI in Macedonia were 
accommodated only orders for searching and interrogation of two persons for 
whom there were grounds for suspicion that they are involved in cybercrime. 
However in this action coordinated by the FBI, there weren’t arrested entities 
from Macedonia [27]. 
In 2012, the Computer Crime Unit of the Ministry of Interior (MI) in 
Macedonia detects cybercrime attack which made damage and unauthorized 
entry into a computer system in public procurement for a hundred and fifty 
police vehicles. Namely, on September 3, 2012 Bureau for Public Safety 
(BPS) filed an application with respect to other issues of a technical nature in 
the operation of the electronic procurement system in Macedonia in 
implementing electronic auction of MI for the purchase of motor vehicles. 

Cybercrime Influence … 
69
Furthermore, from the analysis of the log files (logs) for access to the site, it 
was established that increased traffic coming from 119 different IP (Internet 
Protocol) addresses from various countries of the world. Obviously, the goal 
was an attack for prohibited access to the electronic system of BPS which was 
bombed with simultaneous claims of 119 different IP addresses that blocked 
the electronic system [29]. 
In February, 2014 the Dutch police arrested four Dutch and one German, 
and they closed the trading in the so-called “Dark web – Utopia”. These 
people were suspected of being involved in illicit drugs, stolen credit cards, 
weapons and etc.. Two of the arrested were suspected of having established 
another web site called “Dark web” known as the “Black Market Reloaded”. 
In the operation were found and seized the following things: personal 
computers, hard drivers, USB sticks and 900 so called “Beatcoin” that had a 
value between 400.000 and 600.000 euros [26]. 
The number of criminal activities in the area of cybercrime that occurred 
worldwide and on domestic level is significantly higher than the above 
mentioned. The aim is to show that no country is immune to this modern threat 
nowadays, which is constantly changed in shape and capacity. Cybercrime like 
any other crime knows no borders, nations or individuals, but it’s well known 
environment is the cyberspace. 
 
 
SOME STATISTICS FOR CYBERCRIME IN MACEDONIA, 
NOTICED IN THE PAST FEW YEARS 
 
Furthermore, in this chapter we are going to use simple linear regression 
for data analysis. The simple linear regression is a statistical method that 
allows us to summarize and study relationships between two continuous 
(quantitative) variables. This lesson introduces the concept and basic 
procedures of simple linear regression. The goal is to find the equation of the 
straight line [23]: 
 
𝐘= 𝛼+  𝛽 𝑋+  𝜀   
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
X is the independent variable, Y is the dependent variable, β is the slope 
of the fitted line, α is the intercept of the fitted line, and ε is the error term. 
When there is only one predictor variable, the prediction method is called 
simple regression. In simple linear regression, the predictions of Y when 
plotted as a function of X form a straight line. Linear regression consists of 
finding the “best” fitting straight line through the points. The “best” fitting line 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
70
is called a regression line. The black diagonal line in Figure 1 is the 
regression line and consists of the predicted score on Y for each possible value 
of X.  
 
Table 3. Example data 
 
X 
Y 
1.00 
1.00 
2.00 
2.00 
3.00 
1.30 
4.00 
3.75 
5.00 
2.25 
 
 
Figure 1. A scatter plot of the regression line for example data in Table 3 (The black 
line consists of the predictions, the points are the actual data, and the vertical lines 
between the points and the black line represent errors of prediction) [9]. 
The error of prediction (Y-Y’) for a point is the value of the point minus 
the predicted value (Y’ – the value on the line). So far, the most common 
criterion which was used for the “best” fitting line is the line that minimizes 
the sum of the squared errors of prediction. That criterion was used to find the 
line in Figure 6. Even though, the regression line nowadays is computed with 
statistical software still, the calculations are relatively easy and are given 
further in the text. MX is the mean of x, MY is the mean of y, SX is the standard 
deviation of x, SY is the standard deviation of y, and r is the correlation 
between X and Y. 

Cybercrime Influence … 
71
The slope (β) can be calculated as follows: 
 
𝛃= 𝑟 Sy 
Sx  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
and the intercept (α) can be calculated as: 𝛂= 𝑀𝑦− 𝛽𝑀𝑥  
(3) 
 
The regression equation is simpler if variables are standardized, so that 
their means are equal to 0 and standard deviations are equal to 1, for then 
β = r and α = 0. This makes the regression line: 
 
𝐙𝐲′ = (𝑟)(𝑍𝑥)  
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
 
 
where ZY’ is the predicted standard score for Y, r is the correlation, and ZX is 
the standardized score for X. Note that the slope of the regression equation for 
standardized variables is r [9]. 
Further, we are going to present and analyse computer crime in 
Macedonia in the period of 2012th to 2015th. In 2012, there was 1 (one) 
reported case of production and distribution of child pornography via 
computer system [35]. In 2013, there were 91 incidents: 74 cases of 
unauthorized penetration into a computer system, 4 cases of computer fraud, 
and 13 cases of credit card fraud. In 2014, there were 103 incidents of 
computer crime: 76 cases of unauthorized penetration into a computer system, 
4 cases of computer fraud, 4 cases of abuse of credit cards, 18 cases of 
production and use of a fraudulent credit card, and 1 case of computer forgery 
[36]. In 2015, there were 48 incidents of computer crime [37]. These data is 
shown in Figure 2. Further it is used for data analysis.  
In this chapter we are using linear regression to produce a scatter plot and 
along with that a trendline –regression line (Figure 3). So, our data set is the 
situation of computer crime in Macedonia over various years (data in  
Figure 2). The first column of Table 4 shows various years and third column 
shows rate of computer crime during that years. In order to simplify Table 4, 
instead of years in the first column we create second column of values 0, 1, 2, 
3 respectively for the years since 2012. 
 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
72
    
Figure 2. Chart for detailed data for computer crime in Macedonia from 2012 to 2015 
year. 
Equation for a regression line on the chart is y = 15.3x+37.8 (as shown in 
Figure 3). R squared value (0.182) shows little or no correlation between 
various years and computer crime in Macedonia. The value 15.3 means that on 
average, computer crime is going up about 15.3 (coefficient slope) times each 
year. The value of 37.8 (coefficient intercept) is the model prediction of 
computer crime in the year 0 (2012), and notice that line do not hit the dot. We 
can use this regression line to make a prediction for computer crime in a year 
or two in the future, but it is not a good model to make a prediction very far 
into a future. Standard error is the same thing as a residual standard deviation, 
and in this case it is 51.295. P-value for the slope coefficient is pretty high 
value, so it means we do believe that there is little or no relationship between 
computer crime and years. 
 
Table 4. Computer crime during years in Macedonia 
 
Year 
Years since 2012 
Computer crime  
2012 
0 
1 
2013 
1 
91 
2014 
2 
103 
2015 
3 
48 
 

Cybercrime Influence … 
73
 
Figure 3. Linear regression chart for computer crime during years in Macedonia. 
 
Figure 4. Share of Internet users who caught a virus or other computer infection [11]. 
The Figure 4 shows the share of Internet users who caught a virus or other 
computer infection in Macedonia, Turkey, Greece, Bulgaria, Slovenia and 
Croatia. Compared with 2010, the share of internet users who caught a virus or 
other computer infection resulting in loss of information or time, dropped in 
all countries by 2015, except Macedonia and Croatia. As shown in Figure 4, 
the most remarkable fall was detected in Bulgaria (from 58% in 2010 to 28% 
in 2015, or a decrease by 30 percentage points), followed by Slovenia (-21 pp), 
Turkey and Greece (both -9 pp). Contrary to these countries, Croatia (+8pp) 
and Macedonia (+3pp), remark grow in loss of information or time due to 
catching virus or other computer infection through Internet. The Figure 4 
shows that Macedonians were the most exposed nation on hackers’ attacks in 
comparison to other countries shown on the Figure 4 (78% of Internet users in 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
74
Macedonia caught a virus or other computer infection, contrary to 41% in 
Croatia) [11]. 
Some of the reasons for growing percentage of hackers’ attacks in 
Macedonia are:  
 
No national strategy and policy for information security; 
 
No appropriate legal framework dealing with information security 
which is in accordance with existing international conventions and 
agreements; 
 
No established Centers for Incident Registration and Support in case 
of breach of information security;  
 
The growing rate of Internet users in Macedonia (over 60%);  
 
Emergence of broadband Internet and new features such as DSL or 
cable Internet (this enables decline in prices for consumer goods and 
greater penetration in the Macedonian households); 
 
Low cyber security awareness among the population; 
 
Ignorance, negligence and violation of safety rules and procedures. 
 
 
Figure 5. Selected on-line activities not done because of security concerns, 2015 (% of 
Internet users) [11]. 
In addition, the Figure 5 shows a significant share of Internet users who 
did not use the Internet in 2015 for personal activities because of their 
concerns about cybersecurity. In particular, more than 1 Internet user out of 5 
did not buy or order goods or services on-line for private use in Macedonia 
(38%) and Slovenia (24%). These security concerns discouraged 19% of 

Cybercrime Influence … 
75
Internet users from e-shopping in Bulgaria, 15% in Greece, 14% in Croatia 
and 11% in Turkey. The security concerns kept more than 1 Internet user out 
of 5 from e-banking activities only in Greece (22%). In Macedonia, this was 
the case for 19% of Internet users in 2015, and for the rest of the countries 
details are shown in Figure 5. Using the Internet with a mobile device via 
wireless connection from places other than home was limited or avoided, due 
to security concerns and only 6% of Internet users in Macedonia did it. The 
highest percentage for this criterion had Bulgaria (8%) and the lowest had 
Greece, only 2% of Internet users. The other details for this criterion as 
regards to other states are shown in Figure 5 [11]. 
 
 
SECURITY MEASUREMENTS FOR PROTECTION OF 
SECURITY RISKS AND THREATS ON THE INTERNET 
 
Security measurements show that it is recommended using of known and 
reputable antivirus program which includes tools against spywares/malwares. 
It is necessary to install software patches and security updates on daily basis. 
Firewall allows us protection from external attackers, while protecting our 
computer or network from malicious or unnecessary Internet traffic. This type 
of protection is especially important for users who are constantly connected to 
the Internet via cable or digital connectivity with modems [30].  
Computer Security Solutions:  
 
1. Set a password in accordance with the standards;  
2. Installation, maintenance and updating of anti-virus program;  
3. Activation of automatic updates for antivirus;  
4. Setting personal security settings on the web browser;  
5. Controlling Internet connection;  
6. Protection of the wireless network;  
7. Connect the computer to the switch port (if another computer 
connects then there will be no service);  
8. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). 
 
The basic steps how to be smart on the Internet. 
 
1.  Protection against malware and reduce the spam:  

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
76
1.1  Never open the links in the e-mail message from an unknown 
source;  
1.2  No need to open an attachment from the email if we do not expect 
or do not know the sender;  
1.3  Antivirus scanning of attachments from e-mail prior to opening;  
1.4  Always delete e-mail in the spam without an opening;  
1.5  No need to give the address of the e-mails of people who do not 
know us. 
 
2.  Personal protection from fraud while being active in the Internet 
space:  
2.1  Mandatory checks if we visit a secure page;  
2.2  Using a secure way for e-banking;  
2.3  Never send information for the financial status via e-mail;  
2.4  Never respond to e-mail offering easy earnings;  
2.5  There should not be a transfer of money or give credit card 
information or bank account to any unknown people on the 
Internet. 
3.  Protecting the identity and privacy:  
3.1  Never share personal information via e-mail, SMS or through the 
pages of social networking with unknown people;  
3.2. Avoid using public computers or Wi-Fi hotspots for entering 
personal data. 
 
 
Security of the social networks:  
 
1. Adjust the privacy profile;  
2. Protecting the username with strong password;  
3. Discretion in accepting friends;  
4. Never click on suspicious links – even when they come from friends;  
5. Do not post information that may be sensitive to the family, such as: 
birthdays, address and the like;  
6. Do not post inappropriate and personal pictures of family or friends, 
or those which our friends asked not to be publicly published [24].  
 
We should not install too many types of security software on our 
computer. Too many of these programs can affect the performance of the 
computer and the effectiveness of the software. Finally we need to protect 

Cybercrime Influence … 
77
against unwanted e-mail messages or pop-up ads that claim to contain anti-
virus program. These messages usually are Trojan horses waiting to infect our 
computer. 
It is necessary to check private and security settings of web browser to our 
computers or mobile smart phones, which often are bought with installed web 
browsers (Safari, Firefox, and Chrome, Internet Explorer or other). Search 
engines often come with default settings that provide a balance between the 
computer’s security and functionality of web pages. Settings set limits on the 
extent to which computers will enable Internet applications - such as cookies, 
ActiveX and Java – that help websites to perform important functions. If our 
search engine allows unlimited interaction cookies or other applications that 
monitor Internet activity, can easily be targeted, by contrast, if completely 
block these applications then the website will not function effectively. It is 
therefore necessary to find a balance, so for more detailed information it is 
best to visit the producer of relevant search engine where we can inform 
ourselves for the setting of personal and security information [30].  
As regards to the necessary measures and actions that should be taken to 
increase the security of information systems in state institutions, the following 
steps should be considered: 
 
 
To develop and adopt the necessary legal framework in order to 
improve information security, and in accordance with existing 
international conventions and agreements; 
 
Developing of National strategy and policy for information security, 
 
Modification of existing laws on important areas that is sensitive to 
the threat of information security (e.g., E – Government, E – 
infrastructure; E – business, E – Health, E – education; E – citizens 
and E – documents); 
 
Determination of the person/department/sector for information 
security (CISCO - Chief Information Security Officer), in every 
state/public institution; 
 
Implementation of activities for the purpose of raising awareness of 
the risks, threats and challenges in cyberspace, the need to protect the 
information and quick recovery from possible cyber incident/attack 
(these activities will refer to the following subjects: general 
employees and citizens in society, non-governmental sector (NGO), 
sector economy, government/public institutions and enterprises and 
local government); 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
78
 
Appointment of state organizational infrastructure to deal with these 
incidents (Centers for Incident Registration and Support in case of 
breach of information security); 
 
Involvement in international activities to increase cooperation, 
development projects and other activities related to combat 
information incidents [19]. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The methods and forms of cybercrime are in constant evolution. They 
require continuous monitoring and studying by the authorities. Their ability to 
adapt to the new environment shows the necessity of preventive measures in 
order to protect cyberspace. The new millennium, the Internet revolution, new 
ways of warfare, new enemies, new tactics and techniques of warfare, new 
leaders, new world order and a new world security card only confirm the role 
of security and intelligence in the modern world to fight against cybercrime. 
Everyone who is connected to the Internet is constantly exposed to 
security risks and threats from malicious software. The malicious software is 
located in the Internet-space which is created, updated, upgraded, modified 
and distributed to target groups by malicious hackers. Motives for creating 
malicious software are of different nature (espionage, crime, entertainment and 
etc.). One of the biggest dangers is disgruntled insiders within each 
organization. Searching the Internet with an open IP address is an additional 
security risk. Also, security risk means open access to the web page, while all 
our activities are detected in the browser history, cookie store and so on. 
Cybercrime is increasingly appearing in more complex forms difficult to 
detect and prevent. The malicious software as one of the methods of 
cybercrime is accessible in cyberspace. Nowadays, it is unnecessary to be a 
great specialist of computer equipment or a good programmer in order to 
create malicious software for criminal activities, because many of the 
malicious software already exists in the Internet-space. Codes of malicious 
software are built and placed on a web site or forum for malicious hackers who 
waited on its use by any person who wants to create a cyber-attack. Social 
engineering has always been a good tool for criminals to access information of 
a personal nature of the potential target for implementation of activities in the 
area of cybercrime. Information gathered through social engineering in many 
cases resort to negligence and accident.  

Cybercrime Influence … 
79
Cyber criminals usually use the phishing because they know that there are 
people who have the resources (computers) but lack of knowledge, they are 
reckless and curious, and therefore they often become victims of this method 
of cybercrime. 
Protection against malicious software on the Internet is by constantly 
updating antivirus program, installing and enabling a firewall, check the 
private and security settings of the search engines, password protection, raising 
awareness of using external memory devices (USB, CD and etc.), working 
with a hidden IP address, using concealed search (incognito) and other 
measures for computer protection. 
In this chapter, simple linear regression was used in order to predict 
computer crime in the future, due to the previous years. The results of this 
research showed that simple linear regression model can be used to make a 
prediction for computer crime in a year or two in the future, but it is not a good 
model to make a prediction very far into a future. 
The possibilities for action of cyber criminals are huge and they use all 
their methods. However, the biggest threat to the operation of cyber criminals 
in cyberspace will occur due to: low awareness of employees about the threats 
and risks in this area, ignorance, negligence and violation of safety rules and 
procedures. This means, however, that most cybercrime would be performed 
because of the people as a security risk. 
Prevention of the threat of cybercrime requires the establishment of a 
separate institution/team to deal with the threats and challenges in cyberspace, 
globally known as Computer Emergency Response/Readiness Team (CERT). 
This team has not been yet established in Macedonia, although during 2013 its 
formation was announced, with the task of protecting and providing 
recommendations for the protection of IT systems of government institutions 
and the private sector. Its establishment was announced once again in “The 
Program of the Government of Republic of Macedonia 2014 – 2018”. The 
deadline for its constitution in accordance to this Government Program was 
June 2015, but it did not happen, probably due to the political crisis in 
Macedonia. Debates on the rationality for the establishment of these teams 
were also leading on the forum of the Internet portal “IT” on the theme 
“Developing CERT/CIRT team in Macedonia”. In addition to the question 
“Should we create CERT/CIRT team in Macedonia?” 78% of surveyed IT 
members voted “yes” for the establishment of these teams, which is a high 
percentage of the justification for establishing these teams. 
The expectation in the future is that cybercrime is going to grow and 
become more complex, more serious, covered and to cause major damage due 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
80
to the development of information-technology society and the greater 
opportunity to use the tools for cybercrime available on-line. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Kevin, Beaver. 2010. Hacking For Dummies, 3rd Edition. Wiley 
Publishing, Inc. 111 River Street Hoboken, NJ, 386. Accessed 
December 15, 2011. http://www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/hacking. 
[2] 
Benjamin, S. Buckland, Fred, Schreier, and Theodor, H. Winkler. 
Democratic governance challenges of cyber security. Accessed 
December 15, 2013. http://www.fbd.org.rs/akcije/POJEDINACNE/ 
CYBER%20ZA%20WEBSITE.pdf. 
[3] 
Barry, G.Buzzan (1983). People, states and fear. Skopje, 2010: 
Academic press, 112. 
[4] 
Dejan, Vuletic. Cyber warfare as a form of information warfare. 
Accessed December 15, 2013. http://www.itvestak.org.rs/ziteh_04/ 
radovi/ziteh-32.pdf. 
[5] 
CARNet Croatian Academic and Research Network. Phishing attacks. 
CCERT-PUBDOC-2005-01-106. CARNetCERT in association with 
LS&S. Accessed December 16, 2013. http://www.cert.hr/sites/default/ 
files/CCERT-PUBDOC-2005-01-106.pdf. 
[6] 
CARNet Croatian Academic and Research Network. Online extortion. 
CCERT-PUBDOC-2009-06-268. CARNetCERT in association with 
LS&S. Accessed December 16, 2013. http://www.cert.hr/sites/default/ 
files/CCERT-PUBDOC-2009-06-268.pdf. 
[7] 
CARNet Croatian Academic and Research Network. Steganography. 
CCERT-PUBDOC-2006-04-154. CARNetCERT in association with 
LS&S. Accessed December 16, 2013. http://www.cert.hr. 
[8] 
CARNet Croatian Academic and Research Network. Spyware 
programs. 
CCERT-PUBDOC-2009-10-280. 
CARNetCERT 
in 
association with LS&S. Accessed December 16, 2013. http://www. 
cert.hr/sites/default/files/CCERT-PUBDOC-2009-10-280.pdf. 
[9] 
David, M.Lane. Introduction to Linear Regression. Accessed March 26, 
2016. http://onlinestatbook.com/2/regression/intro.html. 
[10] ETS 185 – Convention on Cybercrime, 23.XI.2001. Council of Europe. 
Accessed 
December 
15, 
2013. 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/ 
meetdocs/2014_2019/documents/libe/dv/7_conv_budapest_/7_conv_bu
dapest_en.pdf. 

Cybercrime Influence … 
81
[11] Eurostat Newsrelease. 1 out of 4 internet users in the EU experienced 
security related problems in 2015. Accessed June 26, 2016. 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7151118/4-08022016-
AP-EN.pdf/902a4c42-eec6-48ca-97c3-c32d8a6131ef. 
[12] Kimberly, Graves. 2010. Certified Ethical Hacker Study Guide. Wiley 
Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana, 392. Accessed January 8, 2014. 
http://files.laitec.ir/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/CEH-Study-Guide.pdf. 
[13] Novak, Djordjijevic. 2011. Defending Cyberspace: International Law 
must address Internet – based security threats. Per Concordiam. Journal 
of European Security and Defence Issues, 2 (2), 21 – 27. 
[14] Sue, Halpern. 2013. Are hackers heroes? Forum for security and 
democracy. Edition views and signposts, number 3 March 2013. 
Accessed 
December 
15, 
2013. 
http://www.fbd.org.rs/akcije/ 
POJEDINACNE/VIP3.pdf. 
[15] Internet Threats Trend Report – October 2013. Commtouch. Accessed 
August 
17, 
2014. 
https://www.pallas.com/fileadmin/img/content/ 
publikationen/2013-Q3_Commtouch-Internet-Threats-Trend-
Report.pdf. 
[16] Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS – 
CERT). Cyber Threat Source Descriptions. Accessed February 7, 2014. 
http://ics-cert.us-cert.gov/content/cyber-threat-source-descriptions. 
[17] Macedonians were the most exposed nation on hackers attacks in 
comparison to other EU countries.09 February 2016. Accessed 
February 
25, 
2016. 
http://www.dnevnik.mk/default.asp?ItemID= 
48586E6D0DBAAF45AC36A06A9671AEC0 
[18] Milan, Milosavljevic, and Gojko, Grubor. 2009. Computer crime 
investigation- 
Methodological 
technological 
base. 
Singidunum 
University – Serbia, 291. Accessed December 15, 2013. http:// www. 
seminarski-diplomski.rs/biblioteka/Istraga%20kompjuterskog% 
20kriminala.pdf. 
[19] Metamorphosis guidebook on Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), No. 4 (2007). Information security and why should 
we protect? Accessed February 5, 2014. http://www.metamorphosis. 
org.mk/ 
[20] Nikola, Banjari. 2013. Security risks on the Internet and solutions for 
data protection. Singidunum University – Serbia, 2013. Accessed 
December 15, 2013. 

I. Cvetanoski, J. Achkoski, D. Rančić et al. 
82
[21] New virus locks the data and required to pay $ 300. BusinessInsider. 
Accessed January 4, 2014. http://brkajrabota.mk/tehnologija/internet/ 
30378-nov-virus-gi-zakluccua-komjuterite-i-bara-da-platite-300-dolari. 
[22] Organized crime. Seminar work. Accessed February 13, 2014. 
http://www.maturskiradovi.net/forum/attachment.php?aid=2015. 
[23] PennState, Eberly College of Science. STAT 501. Lesson 1: Simple 
Linear Regression. Accessed March 25, 2016. https://onlinecourses. 
science.psu.edu/stat501/node/257. 
[24] Protecting Yourself Online. What Everyone Needs to Know. 
Commonwealth оf Australia 2010. Australian Government. Copyright 
Administration, Attorney General’s Department, National Circuit, 
Barton ACT. 
[25] 2600. Accessed May 21, 2014. http://www.ag.gov.au/cca. 
[26] Dejan, Sokolovski. 2014. “Dutch authorities turned off the online black 
market Utopia”. Internet portal IT. Accessed February 3, 2014. 
http://it.com.mk/holandskite-vlasti-go-izgasija-tsrniot-onlajn-pazar-
utopia/ 
[27] Dejan, Sokolovski. 2012. “MI and the FBI together against cyber crime, 
24 persons from 13 countries were arrested”. Internet portal IT. June 27. 
Accessed February 15, 2014. http://it.com.mk/mvr-i-fbi-zaedno-protiv-
kompjuterski-kriminal-24-uapseni-od-13-drzhavi/ 
[28] StATS: What is a correlation? (Pearson correlation). Accessed 
February 18, 2016. http://www.pmean.com/definitions/correlation.htm. 
[29] “There was computer crime in bidding for police vehicles”. 2012. 
Internet portal МКД. September 19. Accessed Feruary 15, 2014. 
http://www.mkd.mk/59923/crna-hronika/sepak-imalo-kompjuterski-
kriminal-pri-naddavanjeto-za-policiskite-vozila. 
[30] Тhe Cyber security handbook. A cyber security guide. Accessed August 
6, 2014. www.NJConsumerAffairs.gov. 
[31] USAID/Project eGovernment. Ministry of Information. Metamorphosis. 
2010. Fundamentals and development of e - government. Accessed 
February 13, 2014. http://www.mio.gov.mk/files/pdf/Osnovi%20i% 
20razvoj%20na%20e-Vlada%202010%20-%20mk.pdf. 
[32] U.S. Attorney’s Office. Southern District of New York. 2012. 
“Manhattan U.S. Attorney and FBI Assistant Director in Charge 
Announce 24 Arrests in Eight Countries as Part of International Cyber 
Crime Takedown”. Тhe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). June 26. 
Accessed February 17, 2014. http://www.fbi.gov/newyork/press-
releases/2012/manhattan-u.s.-attorney-and-fbi-assistant-director-in-

Cybercrime Influence … 
83
charge-announce-24-arrests-in-eight-countries-as-part-of-international-
cyber-crime-takedown. 
[33] Understanding Internet Security. What you need to protect yourself 
online. 2004 Big Planet, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Big Planet is a 
registered trademark. Accessed August 26, 2014. http://www. 
bigplanetusa.com/library/bp/pdf/bpis_understanding_security.pdf. 
[34] United States Government Accountability Office, Information Security: 
Cyber Threats and Vulnerabilities Place Federal Systems at Risk 
(Washington DC: US GAO, 2009); William A. Wulf and Anita K. 
Jones, “Reflections on Cybersecurity,” Science 326 (13 November 
2009): 943-4; See Martin Charles Golumbic, Fighting Terror Online: 
The Convergence of Security, Technology, and the Law (New York: 
Springer, 2007). 
[35] United States Department of State. OSAC, Bureau of Diplomatic 
Security. Macedonia 2014 Crime and Safety Report. Accessed March 
25, 2016. https://www.osac.gov/pages/ContentReportDetails.aspx?cid= 
15074. 
[36] United States Department of State. OSAC, Bureau of Diplomatic 
Security. Macedonia 2015 Crime and Safety Report. Accessed March 
25, 2016. https://www.osac.gov/pages/ContentReportDetails.aspx?cid= 
17677. 
[37] United States Department of State. OSAC, Bureau of Diplomatic 
Security. Macedonia 2016 Crime and Safety Report. Accessed March 
25, 2016. https://www.osac.gov/pages/ContentReportDetails.aspx?cid= 
18939. 
 


In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
SOME ASPECTS OF THE APPLICATION  
OF BENFORD’S LAW IN THE ANALYSIS OF 
THE DATA SET ANOMALIES 
 
 
D. Joksimović1,, PhD, G. Knežević2, PhD,  
V. Pavlović3, PhD, M. Ljubić4, PhD  
and V. Surový5, PhD 
1Full time professor, The Academy of Criminalistic and police studies, 
Belgrade, Serbia 
2Associate professor, Singidunum University, Belgrade, Serbia 
3Full professor, University of Pristina, Faculty of Economics (Kosovska 
Mitrovica), Serbia 
4Associate professor, John Naisbitt University, Belgrade, Serbia 
5Faculty of Economic Informatics, University of Economics,  
Bratislava, Slovakia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this chapter the contemporary generally accepted theoretical 
analysis and assumptions regarding the implementation of Benford’s Law 
are presented. It seems interesting to introduce the perspective to 
Benford’s Law as a consequence of the universal law of nature stating 
                                                           
 Corresponding author: D. Joksimovic, Email: dusan.joksimovic@kpa.edu.rs. 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
86
that nature strives for the maximum entropy or disorder, as well as the 
perspective in which Benford’s Law, aspires to find its place in the 
contemporary theory of everything in nature. 
The implementation of this law in the analysis of the anomalies in 
some numerical data in various scientific disciplines is also part of this 
article. The incorrect numerical data that describes the specific 
occurrence can be the consequence of an unintentional error in the 
formation of the numerical data (as a consequence of bad design of an 
experiment, the imperfections of the detection of the numerical data, a 
badly set up model of some process that generates the set of numerical 
data, etc.), but also the consequence of intentional abuse. 
Using the Monte Carlo simulation, we determine the average values 
and standard deviation of the relative frequency of the first type error for 
the Mean Absolute Deviation test and for the Pearson 𝜒2 test of 
Benford’s Law, for the first digit, and the first two digits and we 
determine the acceptable length of series for the application of these tests, 
in the context of acceptable first type errors. 
We make the practical implementation of Benford’s Law by testing it 
on the data gathered from the International Monetary Fund, World 
Economic Outlook Database. We use two groups of data. The first group 
is the data regarding the Gross domestic product and the other group 
comprises the Current Account Balances for the 184 countries in the 
period from 1980 to 2016. 
The specific perspective provided in this chapter regards the 
implementation of this law in the forensic analysis of frauds, especially in 
the analysis of the numerical data that describes various sociological, 
econometrical and financial irregularities. We show how the mutual 
usage of Benford’s Law and specific laws of mathematical statistics, 
successfully detect potential irregularities in the numerical data and 
advances the forensic analyst’s potential fraud detection in this area. 
 
Keywords: Benford’s Law, Benfords’ distributions, analysis numerical data, 
forensics 
 
 
INTRODUCTION - THE HISTORY OF BENFORD’S LAW 
 
In the second part of the 19th Century, the astronomer Simon Newcomb, 
remarked that the first pages of the logarithm table are used more heavily that 
the last pages. Back in that time, the common logarithm table was used for the 
multiplication and divisions of big numbers. He concluded that the numbers 
that start with the smaller digits were used more often than the numbers with 
the bigger digits. In 1881 he published the scientific article [1] describing his 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
87
findings, without getting into the assumptions and theoretical analysis of the 
phenomena. This article went unnoticed and was forgotten easily. 
In the year of 1938 the physicist Frank Benford came to the same 
conclusion as Simon Newcomb. Benford tested this hypothesis using the 
20229 data of big numbers from 20 different sources and 2968 data of small 
numbers from 10 different sources. Sources were found in the natural and 
social occurrences, such as numbers used for the published journals, the length 
of a river, the value of some physical constant, the mortality rates, statistics in 
baseballm, etc. Different from Newcomb, Benford in his work [2] determined 
the mathematical law of frequency distribution of leading digits in the 
numbers, that became known as Benford’s Law. 
Starting from the second half of the 80’s of the last century, this l aw 
started to be used more often in the analysis of the consistency of the 
numerical data expressed in various social and natural phenomena. Nowadays, 
the theoretical analysis of this law in the area of finding a better mathematical 
basis and its implementation is still a current issue in contemporary scientific 
society [3-4]. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS OF BENFORD’S LAW AND THEIR  
MUTUAL EQUIVALENCY 
 
It is commonly understood that for any base where 𝐵> 1 any positive 
real number (𝑥> 0, 𝑥∈𝑅), can be expressed as 
 
𝑥= 𝑀𝐵(𝑥) ∙𝐵𝑘 
 
where 𝑘∈𝑍, a 𝑀𝐵(𝑥) ⊂[1, 𝐵). The number 𝑀𝐵(𝑥) will denote mantissa of 
the number 𝑥. We can conclude that the following equation is proven to be 
true 
 
𝑀𝐵(𝑥) = 𝑥
𝐵𝑘=
𝑥
𝐵[log𝐵𝑥] = 𝐵log𝐵𝑥
𝐵[log𝐵𝑥] = 𝐵log𝐵𝑥−[log𝐵𝑥] 
 
where [log𝐵𝑥] will denote the whole part of the number log𝐵𝑥, or the greatest 
integer less than or equal to log𝐵𝑥. 
In scientific practice we can find two mutually equivalent definitions of 
Benford’s Law. Benford’s Law as a function of probability distributions of 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
88
mantissa numerical data and Benford’s Law for the joint probability 
distribution of representing first k digits of significant numerical data. 
Definition 2.1. (Benford’s Law for the function of the probability 
distribution of mantissa) 
Random variable X, whose realizations are only positive values in the base 
𝐵> 1, is recognized under Benford’s Law if, and only if the function of the 
probability distribution of a random variable determined by the mantissa of the 
random variable X, M(X), in that base is recognized under the following 
logarithm law 
 
𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) ≤𝑚) = log𝐵𝑚 
 
where 𝑚∈[1,𝐵). 
Definition 2.2. (Benford’s Law for the joint probability distribution of 
leading k digits in the numbers) 
Random variable X, whose realizations are only positive values in the base 
𝐵> 1, follow Benford’s Law if, and only if joint probability distribution first 
k significant digits of their realization,(𝐶𝑗)𝑗=1,2,…,𝑘, (𝑘∈𝑁∗), satisfies the 
following law 
 
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐1, 𝐶2 = 𝑐2, … , 𝐶𝑘= 𝑐𝑘) = log𝐵(1 +
1
∑
𝐵𝑘−𝑖𝑐𝑖
𝑘
𝑖=1
) 
 
where 𝑐1 ∈(1,2,… , 𝐵−1), 𝑐𝑗>1 ∈(0,1,2, … , 𝐵−1). 
At first glance we find that the definition 2.2. can be used only for the 
discrete random variables, but this is not correct, because the condition is that 
k belongs to the unlimited set of positive integers, going to the infinity 
(𝑘∈𝑁∗). 
Also, we can notice that because of the continuity the following 
expression is valid: 
 
𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) ≤𝑚) = 𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) < 𝑚) + 𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) = 𝑚) = 𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) < 𝑚), 
 
because it is 𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) = 𝑚) = 0. 
Mutual equivalence of these definitions can be proven. 
 
 
 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
89
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF BENFORD’S LAW 
 
Form the Definition 2.2. we can easily show that for the random variable 
X that satisfies Benford’s Law in the base 𝐵> 1 so the following is valid: 
 
 
1. The Probability of Showing the First Significant Digit 
 
1. 𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐1) = log𝐵(1 +
1
𝑐1), 𝑐1 ∈(1,2,… , 𝐵−1). 
 
This characteristic in the base 𝐵= 10, was detected in the first works of 
Newcomb [9] and Benford [3]. 
 
 
2. Probability of Showing K-Significant Digit Where 𝒌≥𝟐, 
(𝒌∈𝑵∗) is: 
 
1. For 𝑘≥2, (𝑘∈𝑁∗) 
 
𝑃(𝐶𝑘= 𝑐𝑘) =
∑log𝐵(1 +
1
𝑖∙𝐵+ 𝑐𝑘
)
𝐵𝑘−1−1
𝑖=𝐵𝑘−2
 
 
𝑐𝑘∈(0,1,2, … , 𝐵−1). 
 
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐1, 𝐶2 = 𝑐2) = log𝐵(1 +
1
𝑐1∙𝐵+𝑐2), 𝑐1 ∈(1,2,… , 𝐵−1) , 𝑐2 ∈
(0,1,2,… , 𝐵−1). 
 
Numerical and graphical analysis of the characteristics 1 and 2 is covered 
in the next section (it was shown with only the distribution with the bases B = 
10, 9, 6). This shows that, starting with the fourth significant digit and onward 
in all of the bases (digits 𝐶𝑘≥4), almost all is uniformly distributed, and we can 
say that for the probable distribution of the third digit. That is why the 
implementation of Benford’s Law in practice is constrained to the analysis of 
the probability distribution of the first two significant numbers, and only 
sometimes is it the analysis of the distribution of the third significant number 
in the set of numerical data. 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
90
 
 
Figure 1. (Continued) 
 
 
 
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
The first significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the first digits in the base B=10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
The second significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the second digits in the base B=10

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
91
 
Figure 1. The probability distributions of the first, second and third digits in the base B 
= 10. 
 
Figure 2. (Continued) 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
The third significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the third digits in the base B=10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
The first significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the first digits in the base B=9

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
92
 
 
Figure 2. The probability distributions of the first, second and third digits in the base B 
= 9. 
 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
The second significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the second digits in the base B=9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
The third significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the third digits in the base B=9

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
93
 
 
Figure 3. (Continued) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
The first significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the first digits in the base B=6
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
The second significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the second digits in the base B=6

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
94
 
Figure 3. The probability distributions of the first, second and third digits in the base B 
= 6. 
 
Figure 4. (Continued) 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
The third significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the third digits in the base B=6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
The fourth significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the fourth digits in the base B=10

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
95
 
 
Figure 4. The probability distributions of the fourth digit in the bases B = 10,9,6. 
 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
The fourth significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the fourth digits in the base B=9
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
The fourth significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the fourth digits in the base B=6

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
96
3. The Occurrence of the Significant Digits with the Realizations 
of the Events That Satisfy Benford’s Law Are Not Mutually 
Exclusive Events 
 
We can easily state that from the Definition 2.2. for 𝑘≥2, (𝑘∈𝑁∗) is 
valid 
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐1, 𝐶2 = 𝑐2, … , 𝐶𝑘= 𝑐𝑘) ≠∏𝑃(𝐶𝑖= 𝑐𝑖)
𝑘
𝑖=1
 
 
This property shows that the appearance of the significant digits within the 
realization of the events that satisfy Benford’s Law, are not mutually exclusive 
events. This fact opens many questions in the area of investigating these 
distributions and finding some universal law, which is in the essence of events 
that satisfy Benford’s Law. On the other hand, these events are from a large 
number of scientific disciplines and areas, and at first glance they seem 
completely unrelated, and some scientific and academic researchers consider 
that Benford’s Law is one of the detectors of the existence of the Theory of 
Everything, to which leading scientists have tried to come closer in the last 
decades. 
 
 
Figure 5. The probability distributions of the first two digits in the bases B = 10. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Second digits
The probability distributions of the first two digits in the base B=10
First digits
Probability

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
97
4. Theoretical Possibility of Generating a Random Variable  
for Benford’s Law 
 
Taking into consideration that the (Definition 2.1.) is valid 
 
𝑃(𝑀𝐵(𝑥) ≤𝑚) = log𝐵𝑚, where 𝑚𝜖[1, 𝐵). 
 
We can generate the random variable mantissa 𝑀𝐵(𝑥), that satisfies 
Benford’s Law in the base 𝐵> 1, generating 𝐵𝑼→𝑴𝐵, where the random 
variable 𝑼 is uniformly distributed in the interval (0,1), therefore, 
𝑼 ~ 𝒰(0,1). 
One of the consequences of this characteristic is that the set of one digit 
numerical data that satisfy Benford’s Law can be generated using [𝐵𝑼], where 
with the [
] we denote the whole part of the number and where the 𝑼 is 
uniformly distributed within the interval (0,1), respectively 𝑼 ~ 𝒰(0,1). 
Therefore, taking into consideration that the following is valid 𝑀𝐵(𝑥) =
𝐵log𝐵𝑥−[log𝐵𝑥], we can conclude that the random variable X satisfy Benford’s 
Law if, and only if the random variable log𝐵𝑋−[log𝐵𝑋] is uniformly 
distributed in the interval (0,1), e.g., log𝐵𝑋−[log𝐵𝑋]~𝒰(0,1), or 
log𝐵𝑋𝑚𝑜𝑑 1 ~ 𝒰(0,1). Otherwise, the number log𝐵𝑋−[log𝐵𝑋] represents 
the fractal part of the number log𝐵𝑋. 
So, the following is valid: 
 
𝐥𝐨𝐠𝑩𝑿𝒎𝒐𝒅 𝟏~𝓤(𝟎,𝟏) ⇔𝑿 𝒔𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒇𝒚 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝑩𝒆𝒏𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒏𝒅′𝒔 𝑳𝒂𝒘 
(2) 
 
Based on the Kronecker-Weyl theorem, that states that for each irrational 
number 𝛼𝜖𝑅\𝑄, sequence 𝑧𝑛= 𝑛∙𝛼, where (𝑛∈𝑁∗) uniformly distributed 
based on modul 1, therefore 𝑛∙𝛼 𝑚𝑜𝑑 1 ~ 𝒰(0,1), and identity (2), is valid 
for all irrational numbers 𝛼𝜖𝑅\𝑄, sequence 𝐵𝑛𝛼, where (𝑛∈𝑁∗), satisfy 
Benford’s Law in the base 𝐵> 1. 
Sequence {𝒂𝒏} satisfy Benford’s Law if, and only if 𝐥𝐨𝐠𝑩𝒂 is an irrational 
number. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
98
5. The Hypothesis of the Scale and Base Invariance for the Data 
That Satisfy Benford’s Law 
 
The event space ℳ𝐵 for which the Definition 2.1., in the base B > 1, is 
defined as 
 
ℳ𝐵= { ⋃𝑆∙𝐵𝑘
∝
𝑘=−∝
, 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑙 𝑆⊆[1, 𝐵)} 
 
The event space ℳ𝐵 we call mantissa algebra, which is, σ-algebra as a sub 
σ-field of the Borel. 
So, for any set E it is valid: 
 
𝐸∈ℳ𝐵⇔𝐸= ⋃𝑆∙𝐵𝑘
∝
𝑘=−∝
, 𝑆𝜖𝓑([1,𝐵)) 
 
where 𝓑([1, 𝐵)) denotes Borel’s set [1, 𝐵). 
This σ-algebra ℳ𝐵 has the following properties: 
 
a) Each non empty set in ℳ𝐵 is infinite with the accumulation points at 
0 and + ∝ 
b) ℳ𝐵is closed under scalar multiplications, 
 
(𝑒> 0, 𝐸𝜖ℳ𝐵⇒𝑒∙𝐸 𝜖ℳ𝐵) 
 
c) ℳ𝐵 is closed under integral roots, but not integral powers, e.g., 
 
(𝑚∈𝑁, 𝐸∈ℳ𝐵⇒𝐸
1
𝑚∈ℳ𝐵) 
 
d) ℳ𝐵 is self similar in the sense that (𝐸∈ℳ𝐵⇒𝐵𝑚∙𝐸𝜖ℳ𝐵) for all 
𝑚∈𝑍. 
 
Property b) is in the essence of the scale invariance hypothesis, and the 
properties c) and d) are in the essence of the base invariance hypothesis for the 
occurrences whose realization satisfies Benford’s Law, and for the numerical 
data that has some properties of Benford’s Law. 
 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
99
Hypothesis of the scale and base invariance for the numerical data, can be 
formulated, but not strictly mathematically, in the following way: 
Scale invariance hypothesis: If some random variable X satisfy Benford’s 
Law, then the random variable 𝒂∙𝑿, where 𝑎> 0, 𝑎∈𝑅, also satisfy this law, 
multiplied with some positive scalar remains coherent with Benford’s Law 
properties under the numerical data that has those properties. 
We can say that this hypothesis was tested theoretically and practically 
and it passed them all. In 1995 Hill found that in the base 𝐵= 10, probability 
density under the field (𝑅+, ℳ10) is scale invariant if, and only if that 
probability satisfy the Benford’s Law [5]. 
The base invariance hypothesis is much more sensitive. This one tries to 
answer the question if Benford’s Law property of some random occurrence or 
set of numerical data which is detected in the base 𝐵> 1, is valid on that set 
even when the set of data is converted into the other base? It was shown that 
[5] that Benford’s Law properties transfer into the other base for the Borel 
sets, while for the Dot set we cannot be sure of that. In that case the 
combination of probabilities that satisfy the Benford’s Law and Dirac 
measures of the probability with the constant one, help to preserve the 
property of the base. 
Above all it was presented that if some random variable satisfies the 
hypothesis of the scale invariance than that also satisfies the base invariance 
hypothesis, but the inverse does not hold true. 
 
 
6. Hypothesis of the Sum Invariance 
 
The random variable is the sum invariant in the sense that if for any 
natural number 𝑛∈𝑁 the expected sum of mantissa of all entries starting with 
the fixed n-tuple of significant digits is the same as that for any other n-tuple. 
It was presented that the random variable is the sum invariant only if it 
satisfies Benford’s Law. 
The sum-invariance for Benford’s Law data is proven in the sense of the 
expected sums, in the real Benford’s Law data that sum is not exactly equal, as 
some variance exists. The analysis of this variance leads to certain results that 
assure the practical usage on the data that satisfy Benford’s Law. 
 
 
 
 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
100 
7. Benford’s Law as a Consequence of Closed System Aspiration 
to the Maximum Entropy 
 
One of the universal laws in the universe is the law on maximum entropy 
that states that all isolated systems in the universe have an aspiration to the 
maximum entropy, or disorder. This is the state in which all the possibilities 
are equally possible. It shows that [6-8] Benford’s Law is the consequence of 
that universal law. That is why even in the most contemporary Theory of 
Everything, Benford’s Law is analyzed as one of the potential paths to that 
comprehensive solution. However, the fact that Benford’s Law is derived from 
the maximum entropy of the system in which it is used, shows us the 
successful implementation of this law in the large spectrum of natural and 
social events. 
 
 
TESTING OF BENFORD’S LAW USING A SET  
OF NUMERICAL DATA 
 
Let us take the sample set comprising of N numerical data 𝑋̅ =
{𝑥̅𝑖| 𝑖= 1,2,… , 𝑁}. It was developed to undertake a specific number of tests 
that investigate whether the significant numbers of this set deviate from 
Benford’s Law. All of these tests is constructed under the method of statistical 
hypothesis where the hypothesis 
 
H0: Significant numbers of the sample satisfy Benford’s Law 
 
and an alternative hypothesis that is accepted or rejected depending on the 
nature of the test 
 
H1: Significant numbers of the sample do not satisfy Benford’s Law. 
 
Test significance is 𝛼= 0,05, that means if the alternate hypothesis is to 
be accepted we can say that the significant numbers do not satisfy Benford’s 
Law. 
In large number of iterations this shows the anomaly of the observed data, 
and the possibility of having an error (intentional and unintentional). As a 
matter of fact, we have considered the data that are a realization of events that 
satisfy Benford’s Law. If we do not accept the alternate hypothesis this does 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
101 
not mean that the set of data do not satisfy Benford’s Law, but it can be the 
consequence of the fact that we do not have the adequate level of significance 
that the data needs to satisfy Benford’s Law. 
There are many tests developed and used for the testing of Benford’s Law 
at the numerical data (test of the Mean Absolute Deviation, Pearson 𝜒2 test, 
Kuiper test, Z-test, Test of the sum invariance, Test of the factors of distortion, 
Second level test, Test of doubling the digits, Test the last two digits...). 
In this paper we are going to describe the mean absolute deviation test and 
Pearson 𝜒2. 
 
 
Test of the Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD-Mean Absolute 
Deviation) 
 
Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) is calculated for the first, the second 
and the first two digits 
 
𝑀𝐴𝐷(𝐶1) = 1
9 ∑|𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖) −𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖)|
9
𝑐𝑖=1
 
 
𝑀𝐴𝐷(𝐶2) = 1
10 ∑|𝑃(𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑖) −𝑃(𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑖)|
9
𝑐𝑖=0
 
 
𝑀𝐴𝐷(𝐶1𝐶2) = 1
90 ∑∑|𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑗) −𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑗)|
9
𝑐𝑗=0
9
𝑐𝑖=1
 
 
where with the 𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖), 𝑃(𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑖), 𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑗) we denote the 
probability distribution for the first, the second and the first two significant 
digits in the sample 𝑋̅ = {𝑥̅𝑖| 𝑖= 1,2,… , 𝑁}, a sa 𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖), 𝑃(𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑖), 
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑗) we denote the probability for the first, the second and the 
first two digits shown in Benford’s Law, according to the Definition 2.2. 
With this test there are no critical values that are exactly mathematically 
determined, but instead there are critical values obtained by the experience 
with the practical tests and they are [9]. 
 
 
 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
102 
Table 1. Critical values for the mean absolute deviation test 
 
Decisions 
First digit 
Second digit 
First two digits 
Close agreement 
<0,004 
<0,008 
<0,0006 
Accepted agreement 
0,004-0,008 
0,008-0,012 
0,0006-0,0012 
Marginal agreement 
0,008-0,012 
0,012-0,016 
0,0012-0,0018 
No agreement at all 
>0,012 
>0,016 
>0,0018 
 
We have done the testing of the relative frequency of showing the first 
type error in the base B = 10, which we generated several times (100 times to 
be precise) Benford’s Law string of different length data (from 100 to 10000 
data set) and based on Table 1, taking the values for the “No agreement at all,” 
we determine the relative frequency showing of the first type error. 
Such testing were done an additional 100 times and using the common 
methods we obtained the value for the average value and standard deviation of 
the relative frequency of the first type error. 
We did the testing using the software MATLAB. 
Results are shown in the following Figures. 
From Figure 6 and 7 we can conclude that the relative frequency of the 
first type error for the Mean Absolute Deviation calculated for the first digit is 
acceptable for the string of data whose number is higher than 1,000 and for the 
first two digits for the data sets whose number is higher than 3000. For the 
smaller strings of data, relative frequency of the first type error shows that the 
tests are not applicable. 
 
 
Pearson 𝝌𝟐 
 
Pearson 𝜒2 test denote ∑
(𝑂𝑖−𝐸𝑖)2
𝐸𝑖
𝑘
𝑖=1
~𝜒𝑘−1
2
, where Oi - sample frequency, 
Ei - expected frequency 
The appearance of the characteristics of the set classified into k classes. In 
this case number of classes is equal to the number of digits for which the 
analysis is (k = 9 for the analysis of the first digit, k = 10 for the analysis of the 
second digit, k = 90 for the analysis first two digits), and this test is then: 
 
𝑁∙∑(𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖) −𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖))2
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖)
9
𝑐𝑖=1
~𝜒8
2 
 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
103 
𝑁∙∑(𝑃(𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑖) −𝑃(𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑖))2
𝑃(𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑖)
9
𝑐𝑖=0
~𝜒9
2 
 
𝑁∙∑∑(𝑃(𝐶̅1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶̅2 = 𝑐𝑗) −𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑗))
2
𝑃(𝐶1 = 𝑐𝑖, 𝐶2 = 𝑐𝑗)
9
𝑐𝑗=0
9
𝑐𝑖=1
~𝜒89
2  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Average relative frequency and standard deviation of relative frequency of 
type I error MAD(C1)-test in the base B = 10. 
0
500
1000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1))
0
500
1000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1))
0
5000
10000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1))
0
5000
10000
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1))

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
104 
 
 
Figure 7. Average relative frequency and standard deviation of relative frequency of 
type I error MAD(C1C2)-test in the base B = 10. 
 
0
500
1000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1C2))
0
500
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
x 10
-3
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1C2))
0
5000
10000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1C2))
0
5000
10000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-MAD(C1C2))

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
105 
Critical values are taken from the 𝜒𝑛2 tables for the level of significance 
𝛼= 0,05, or for some other level of significance. This test is very sensitive to 
the deviations of Benford’s Law, and it is sensitive to the enlargement of the 
sample N. 
In the same way as with the testing of the relative frequency of showing 
the first type error for the MAD tests, we tested the relative frequency of 
showing the first type error for the 𝜒2 test, for the first digit and for the first 
two digits. Critical values are taken from the 𝜒𝑛2 tables for the level of 
significance 𝛼= 0,05. 
Results are shown in the following Figures: 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Average relative frequency and standard deviation of relative frequency of 
type I error 𝜒2(𝐶1) - test in the base B = 10. 
0
500
1000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1))
0
500
1000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1))
0
5000
10000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1))
0
5000
10000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1))

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
106 
 
 
Figure 9. Average relative frequency and standard deviation of relative frequency of 
type I error 𝜒2(𝐶1𝐶2) test in the base B = 10. 
0
500
1000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1C2))
0
500
1000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1C2))
0
5000
10000
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Number of data set
Av.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1C2))
0
5000
10000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Number of data set
St.dev.rel.freq.(type I error-Chi sq.(C1C2))

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
107 
 
 
Figure 10. (Continued) 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
The first significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the first digits-Gross domestic product,current prices
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
The second significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the second digits-Gross domestic product,current prices

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
108 
 
Figure 10. Probability distribution of the first, the second and the first two digits-Gross 
domestic product, current prices. 
Figure 8 and 9 show that the relative frequency of showing the first type 
error is acceptable for the whole length of observed strings of data. 
We undertake the practical implementation of Benford’s Law by testing it 
on the data gathered from the International Monetary Fund, World Economic 
Outlook Database. We use two groups of data. The first group is the data 
regarding the Gross domestic product and the other group comprises the 
Current account balances for the 184 countries in the period from 1980 to 
2016. The first group of data contains the 6266 useful data, and the other 
group contains 6243 data considered to be useful. We use the program code 
that we created in the software package MATLAB. The results are shown in 
Table 2 and the graphs for the probability for the first, second and the first two 
digits for both groups of data are shown also. 
The test shows that for the group of data containing Gross domestic 
product, Benford’s MAD and χ2 for the first, second and the first two digits 
does not show the irregularity of data. 
Regarding the data in the group Current account Balances Benford’s 
MAD and χ2 for the first digit does not show the irregularities, MAD test for 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Second digits
The probability distributions of the first two digits-Gross domestic product,current prices
First digits
Probability

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
109 
the second digit shows the acceptable differences, while the χ2 of the second 
digit and MAD and χ2 of the first two digits shows the probability, and we are 
almost sure, that the result does not comply with Benford’s Law. This result 
can be the consequence of the way by which the data are calculated regarding 
Current Account Balances because it is about the difference of the two groups 
of data that both are Benford’s Law groups. But this could be the consequence 
of the possible irregular Current Account Balances reported by some 
countries. 
 
Table 2. Benford’s MAD and χ2 test for the first, second and the first  
two digits 
 
 
Gross domestic product, current prices 
Current account balance 
MAD (C1) 
0.0024 
0.003 
MAD (C2) 
0.0034 
0.0084 
MAD (C1C2) 
0.000954 
0.0019 
Χ28 (C1) (Chi square (C1)) 
7.9118 
6.0233 
Χ29 (C2) (Chi square (C2)) 
12.5121 
79.3184 
Χ289 (C1C2) (Chi square (C1C2) 
75.758 
299.1518 
Pvalue (C1) 
0.5755 
0.7598 
Pvalue (C2) 
0.2598 
4.344*10-24 
Pvalue (C1C2) 
0.8582 
3.52*10-35 
 
 
Figure 11. (Continued) 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
The first significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the first digits-Current account balance

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
110 
 
 
Figure 11. Probability distribution of the first, the second and the first two digits-
Current account balance. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
The second significant digit
Probability
The probability distributions of the second digits-Current account balance
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
5
10
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Second digits
The probability distributions of the first two digits-Current account balance
First digits
Probability

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
111 
SOME EXAMPLES OF BENFORD’S LAW IMPLEMENTATION 
 
General conditions that some of the numerical data should coincide in 
order to satisfy Benford’s Law were subject to the analysis of many papers and 
researchers. 
Some of these conditions are as follows: 
 
 
data must describe a similar phenomenon, i.e., that they have the same 
nature or the same set of sources that generate them (financial 
transactions, the results of various measurements of length, volume, 
etc. ...) 
 
no need for boundaries of minimum or maximum values 
 
data must have an incidental nature, rather than some previously 
generated data using a pattern, such data are serial numbers, phone 
numbers, personal identification numbers, social security numbers, 
tax numbers, car registration, account numbers ... 
 
data should comprise of more small than large numbers, and that the 
average value is less than the median (positive asymmetry), the higher 
the ratio of the mean divided by a median, the more the data are 
suitable for this analysis. 
 
data should be reported under the same units of measurement 
 
data should include at least two orders of magnitude. 
 
Examples of events that generate data that satisfy Benford’s Law are: the 
price of securities on the stock exchange, financial transactions, bank cards, 
some processes in telecommunication and computer systems, processes that 
describe recurrent sequences (Fibonacci sequence, fractals) The natural 
demographic population growth processes of plants and animals, and many 
others. Subject to Benford’s Law analysis can also be the frequency of 
categorical data. 
Some examples of the usage of this law are: 
 
 
In mathematics [10-20] it seems that many dynamic systems generate 
data that are subject to Benford’s Law. Also, many recurrence 
relations, as well as solutions to certain classes of difference equations 
are associated with Benford’s Law. Markow chains are also 
associated with this law. The first digit of prime numbers also follow 
Benford’s Law. In this case the observer pattern must be very large (n 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
112 
> 106 prime numbers). Newton iterative procedure generates data that 
are subject to this law, and so on. 
 
In the area of economy [21-31] we can find some famous examples of 
the application of Benford’s Law. Mark J. Nigrini analyzed tax 
returns. This is the beginning of the use of this law for the detection of 
fraud. The basic assumption is that the frequency of significant digits 
that do not follow Benford’s Law suggests a possible irregularity in 
the transactions. This method was quickly adopted by some 
supervisory authorities and recognized as a valid audit procedure. So 
now there are standard software packages that use Benford’s Law. It 
has a highly regarded role in detecting fraud. In the detection of 
scams, Benford’s Law can be applied and this is the most widely used 
area for this law. This method was soon discovered and applied in the 
detection of fraud with credit cards and other forms of electronic 
transaction fraud. Detection of fraud is not the only application of this 
law. Creative material accounting causes many misstatements in 
financial reports and that is why Benford’s Law is needed. It is 
applied in the analysis of structural deficiencies in macroeconomic 
data, the analysis of investment programs, accounting reports, traffic 
reports, forensic accounting, etc. ... 
 
In informatics and computing science it is shown, based on the Law of 
Benford, that computer design that minimizes the storage space is 
based on the base B = 8. It is also used for analysis of the size of the 
files in the folders, as well as the duration of the analysis of various 
processes in multi-user environments, and it is also used in cyber 
security, neural networks, digital forensics [32-42], etc. ... 
 
In cryptology Benford’s Law is used in the steganography, the 
stylometry (analysis of linguistic styles and habits of individuals’ 
writing) and in image forensics [43-53]. 
 
This law is also applied in a number of other problems in various fields, in 
almost all natural and social events and random processes such as: biology, 
psychology, medicine, demographics, physics, astronomy, geology, time series 
analysis [54-69], etc. ... 
Benford’s Law cannot be used in the following cases: 
 
 
 
 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
113 
Data analysis where data are normalized to some process (min-max 
normalization, normalization using standards covering deviations, etc.). 
 
 
if the sample has more dimensions and if in some dimension some 
data are missing, 
 
if it is only part of the elements of the sample subject to multiplication 
by a number. Therefore, data must be presented in a single measuring 
system 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Benford’s Law has determined the probability of occurrence of significant 
digits in the realization of random variables and in the analysis of numerical 
data, in a very wide range of events. Under certain conditions this law has a 
universal character. It is valid in all the various systems and its application is 
found in almost all natural and social phenomena, and in the analysis of the 
events that have some system of measurement. 
So far it has been the most used in forensics, in the analysis of intentional 
fraud, especially in the various financial statements and the interpolation 
process analysis (Newton’s iterative process), in the optimizing of computer 
systems, accelerating algorithms, deciphering hidden messages, and in many 
other analyzes. As of yet it has not been exactly mathematically proven why 
numerical data under certain conditions meet Benford’s Law distribution. For 
some specific events such evidence exists, but not in general. In a modeled 
problem of the existence of Benford’s Law distribution, it is shown that it is a 
consequence of the law of universal aspirations of closed system to move to a 
state with maximum entropy, and it is present in all natural and social 
phenomena, which in a given analysis can be considered to be closed. 
Mathematical implications of this law are defined in a specific Borel σ-field, 
which is called algebra mantissa. 
Our Monte-Carlo simulations of relative frequency of showing the first 
type error, points to the inapplicability of the Mean Absolute Deviation tests of 
the first digit for the strings whose length does not pass the 1000 data sets, as 
well as the inapplicability of the Mean Absolute Deviation data tests for the 
first two digits for the strings whose length is no more than 3000 data sets. 
Also, it confirms that the Pearson 𝜒2 test of the first digit and first two digits is 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
114 
applicable for all length of data sets. Applicable means that the first type error 
is acceptable. 
We carry out the practical implementation of Benford’s Law by testing it 
on two groups of data. The first group is the data regarding the Gross 
Domestic Product and the other group comprises the Current Account 
Balances for the 184 countries in the period from 1980 to 2016. The test shows 
that for the group of data containing Gross Domestic Product, Benford’s MAD 
and χ2 for the first, second and the first two digits does not show the 
irregularity of data. Regarding the data in the group Current Account 
Balances, Benford’s MAD and χ2 for the first digit does not show the 
irregularities, MAD test for the second digit shows the acceptable differences, 
while the χ2 of the second digit and MAD and χ2 of the first two digits shows 
the probable, and we are almost sure, that the result does not comply with 
Benford’s Law. This result can be the consequence of the way by which the 
data are calculated regarding Current Account Balances because it is about the 
difference of the two group of data that both are Benford’s groups. But this 
could be the consequence of the possible irregular Current Account Balances 
reported by some countries. 
We believe that the implementation of this law will be more prominent, 
and it will be used in practice, and also in the scientific analysis of a multitude 
of phenomena in many different areas. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Newcomb, S. 1881. “Note on the frequency of use of the different digits 
in natural numbers.” American Journal of Mathematics 4 (1): 39-40. 
[2] 
Frank Benford. 1938. The Law of Anomalous Numbers, Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 78, No. 4, p. 551-572. 
[3] 
Arno Berger, Theodore P. Hill. 2011. “A Basic Theory of Benford’s 
Law,” Probability Surveys, Vol. 8, 1-126. 
[4] 
Drien Jamain. 2011. “Benford’s Law,” Dissertation Report, Department 
of Mathematics, Imperial College, London. 
[5] 
Theodore P. Hill. 1995. “A Statistical Derivation of the Significant Digit 
Law,” Statistical Science, Vol. 10, No 4, 354-363. 
[6] 
Michaele Ciofalo. 2009. “Entropy, Benford’s first Digit Law and The 
Disribution of Everything,” Palermo, Italy: Dipartamento di Ingenieria 
Nucleare Universita degli Studi di Palermo. 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
115 
[7] 
Oded Kafri. 2009. “Entropy Princip in Direct Derivation of Benford’s 
Law,” Varicom Communications. 
[8] 
Sofia B. Villas-Boas, Qiuzi Fu, George Judge, 2015. “Is Benford’s Law 
a Univerzal Behavioral Theory?,” Econometrics, 3, 698-708. 
[9] 
Philip D. Drake, Mark J. Nigrini. 2000. “Computer Assisted Analytical 
Procedures Using Benford’s Law,” Journal of Accounting Education 18, 
127-146. 
[10] Berger, A and Eshun, G. 2014. A characterization of Benford’s Law in 
discrete-time linear systems. Journal of Dynamics and Differential 
Equations, Springer; published online 15 September 2014. ISSN/ISBN: 
1040-7294. DOI: 10.1007/s10884-014-9393-y. 
[11] Berger, A and Eshun, G. 2014. Benford solutions of linear difference 
equations. Theory and Applications of Difference Equations and 
Discrete Dynamical Systems, Springer Proceedings in Mathematics and 
Statistics Volume 102, pp. 23-60. ISSN/ISBN: 978-3-662-44139-8. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-44140-4_2. 
[12] Berger Arno and Hill Theodore P. (2015). An Introduction to Benford’s 
Law. 
Princeton University 
Press: Princeton, NJ. 
ISSN/ISBN: 
9780691163062. 
[13] Berger, A, Hill, TP, Kaynar, B and Ridder, A. 2011. Finite-state Markov 
Chains Obey Benford’s Law. SIAM Journal of Matrix Analysis and 
Applications 32(3), 665-684. 
[14] Dickinson, JR. 2002. A universal mathematical law criterion for 
algorithmic validity. Developments in Business Simulation and 
Experiential Learning 29, 26-33. 
[15] Eliahou, S, Massé, B and Schneider, D. 2013. On the mantissa 
distribution of powers of natural and prime numbers. Acta Mathematica 
Hungarica, Volume 139, Issue 1 (2013), pp. 49-63, DOI: 10.1007/s1047 
4-012-0244-1. ISSN/ISBN:0236-5294. 
[16] Massé, B and Schneider, D. 2014. The mantissa distribution of the 
primorial numbers. Acta Arithmetica 163, pp. 45-58. ISSN/ISBN: 0065-
1036. DOI: 10.4064/aa163-1-4. 
[17] Massé, B and Schneider, D. 2015. Fast growing sequences of numbers 
and the first digit phenomenon. International Journal of Number Theory 
11:705, pp. 705-719. DOI:10.1142/S1793042115500384. 
[18] Miller Steven J (ed.) (2015). Benford’s Law: Theory and Applications. 
Princeton University Press: Princeton and Oxford. ISSN/ISBN: 978-0-
691-14761-1. 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
116 
[19] Wojcik, MR. 2014. A characterization of Benford’s law through 
generalized scale-invariance. Mathematical Social Sciences, Volume 71, 
September 2014, pp. 1-5. DOI:10.1016/j.mathsocsci.2014.03.006. 
[20] Berger, A. and Eshun, G. 2016. A Characterization of Benford’s Law in 
Discrete-Time Linear Systems, Journal of Dynamics and Differential 
Equations, June 2016, Vol. 28, Issue 2, pp. 431-469, doi:10.1007/s10884 
-014-9393-y. 
[21] Gava, AM and Vitiello, L. 2014. Inflation, Quarterly Balance Sheets and 
the Possibility of Fraud: Benford’s Law and the Brazilian case. Journal 
of Accounting, Business and Management Vol. 21 Issue 1, pp. 43-52. 
ISSN/ISBN: 0216-423X. 
[22] Geyer, D and Drechsler, C. 2014. Detecting Cosmetic Debt Management 
Using Benford’s Law. The Journal of Applied Business Research, 2014, 
30 (5), pp. 1485-1492. 
[23] Lin, F and Wu, S-F. 2014. Comparison of cosmetic earnings 
management for the developed markets and emerging markets: Some 
empirical evidence from the United States and Taiwan. Economic 
Modelling, Vol. 36, pp. 466-473. DOI:10.1016/j.econmod.2013.10.002. 
[24] Mir, TA, Ausloos, M and Cerqueti, R. 2014. Benford’s law predicted 
digit distribution of aggregated income taxes: the surprising conformity 
of Italian cities and regions. Eur. Phys. J. B (2014) 87: 261. 
ISSN/ISBN:1434-6028. DOI:10.1140/epjb/e2014-50525-2. 
[25] Nigrini Mark J. 2012. Benford’s Law: Applications for Forensic 
Accounting, Auditing, and Fraud Detection. John Wiley and Sons, 
Hoboken, New Jersey. ISSN/ISBN:978-1-118-15285-0. 
[26] Nigrini Mark J. 2011. Forensic Analytics: Methods and Techniques for 
Forensic Accounting Investigations. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, 
New Jersey. ISSN/ISBN:978-0-470-89046-2. 
[27] Özer, G and Babacan, B. 2013. Benford’s Law and Digital Analysis: 
Application on Turkish Banking Sector. Business and Economics 
Research Journal Vol. 4 Issue 1, pp. 29-41. ISSN/ISBN: 1309-2448. 
[28] Tödter Karl-Heinz. 2015. Benford’s Law and Fraud in Economic 
Research. In: Steven J. Miller (ed.), Benford’s Law: Theory and 
Applications, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp. 244-
256. ISSN/ISBN:978-0-691-14761-1. 
[29] Marijana Ljubic. 2011. “Stress Testing As An Instrument of Risk 
Control In Banks,” Megatrend Review, 2011. Vol. 8(1), 303-323. 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
117 
[30] G. Knežević, Mizdraković, V. Arežina, N. 2012. “Management as a 
cause and effect of creative accounting suppresion,” Management, FON, 
(17), 62, 5-11. 
[31] S. Muminovic, V. Pavlovic, 2013. “Application Benford’s Law in 
Forensic Accounting,” Revizor, No 61, 59-69. 
[32] Arshadi, L and Jahangir, AH. 2014. Benford’s Law behavior of Internet 
traffic. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Volume 40, 
April 2014, pp. 194-205. ISSN/ISBN: 1084-8045. DOI:10.1016/j.jnca. 
2013.09.007. 
[33] Goldoni, E, Savazzi, P and Gamba, P. 2012. A novel source coding 
technique for wireless sensor networks based on Benford’s Law. 2012 
IEEE Workshop on Environmental Energy and Structural Monitoring 
Systems (EESMS), 26-28 Sept. 2012, pp 32-34. ISSN/ISBN: 978-1-
4673-2739-8. 
[34] Koskivaara, E. 2004. Artificial neural networks in analytical review 
procedures. Managerial Auditing Journal 19(2), pp. 191-223. 
[35] Krakar, Z and Žgela, M. 2009. Application of Benford’s Law in 
information 
systems 
auditing. 
Journal 
of 
Information 
and 
Organizational Sciences, 33(1), pp. 39-51. 
[36] Odueke, A and Weir, GRS. 2012. Triage in Forensic Accounting using 
Zipf’s Law. Issues in Cybercrime, Security and Digital Forensics. 
Edited by G. R. S. Weir and A. Al-Nemrat. Glasgow. University of 
Strathclyde Publishing. 2012. pp. 33-43. 
[37] Ravikumar, B. 2008. The Benford-Newcomb Distribution and 
Unambiguous Context-Free Languages. International Journal of 
Foundations of Computer Science 19(3), 717-727. ISSN/ISBN: 0129-
0541. 
[38] Shi, YQ. 2009. First digit law and its application to digital forensics. In: 
H. J. Kim, S. Katzenbeisser, and A.T.S. Ho (Eds.), Digital 
watermarking: Seventh International Workshop (IWDW ’08) (pp. 444-
456). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISSN/ISBN:978-3-642-04437-3. DOI:10. 
1007/978-3-642-04438-0_37. 
[39] Winter, C, Schneider, M and Yannikos, Y. 2011. Detecting Fraud Using 
Modified Benford Analysis. Advances in Digital Forensics VII, 7th IFIP 
WG 11.9 International Conference on Digital Forensics, Orlando, FL, 
US, January 31 - February 2, 2011, Revised Selected Papers. Gilbert 
Peterson and Sujeet Shenoi (Editors). IFIP Advances in Information and 
Co. ISSN/ISBN: 1868-4238. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-24212-0_10. 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
118 
[40] Winter, C, Schneider, M and Yannikos, Y. 2012. Model-Based Digit 
Analysis for Fraud Detection overcomes Limitations of Benford 
Analysis. Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES 2012), Seventh 
International Conference, August 20-24, 2012, Prague, Czech Republic. 
IEEE CS volume E4775, pages 255-261. IEEE Computer Society. 
ISSN/ISBN: 978-1-4673-2244-7. DOI:10.1109/ARES.2012.37. 
[41] Xu, B, Wang, J, Liu, G and Dai, Y. 2011. Photorealistic computer 
graphics forensics based on leading digit law. Journal of Electronics 
(China) 28(1) pp. 95-100. DOI: 10.1007/s11767-011-0474-3. 
[42] Raftopoulou, P, Koubarakis, M, Stergiou, K and Triantafillou, P. 2005. 
Fair resource allocation in a simple multi-agent setting: search 
algorithms and experimental evaluation. International Journal on 
Artificial Intelligence Tools 14(6), 887-899. 
[43] Andriotis, P, Oikonomou, G and Tryfonas, T. 2013. JPEG 
steganography detection with Benford’s law. Digital Investigation 9(3-
4), pp. 246-57. DOI:10.1016/j.diin.2013.01.005. 
[44] Birajdar, GK and Mankar, VH. 2013. Digital image forgery detection 
using passive techniques: A survey. Digital Investigation, Vol. 10, No. 
3, pp. 226-245. DOI:10.1016/j.diin.2013.04.007. 
[45] Zenkov, AV. 2015. Deviation from Benford’s law and identification of 
author peculiarities in texts. Computer Research and Modeling, vol. 7, 
no. 1, pp. 197-201 (in Russian). ISSN/ISBN: 2076-7633. 
[46] Chen, W and Shi, YQ. 2009. Detection of Double MPEG Compression 
Based on First Digit Statistics. In: H. J. Kim, S. Katzenbeisser, and 
A.T.S. Ho (Eds.), Digital watermarking: Seventh International 
Workshop (IWDW’08) (pp. 16-30). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
[47] Fu, D, Shi, YQ and Su, W. 2007. A generalized Benford’s law for JPEG 
coefficients and its applications in image forensics. Proceedings of 
SPIE, Volume 6505, Security, Steganography and Watermarking of 
Multimedia Contents IX, San Jose, California, January 28 - February 1, 
2007, pp. 65051L-65051L-11. DOI:10.1117/12.704723. 
[48] Li, XH, Zhao, YQ, Liao, M, Shih, FY and Shi, YQ. 2012. Detection of 
tampered region for JPEG images by using mode-based first digit 
features. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2012: 
190. DOI: 10.1186/1687-6180-2012-190. 
[49] Pérez-González, F, Heileman, G and Abdallah, CT. 2007. A 
generalization of Benford’s Law and its application to images. European 
Control Conference’2007, Kos, Greece, July 2007, pp. 3613-3619. 
ISSN/ISBN: 9783952417386. 

Some Aspects of the Application of Benford’s Law … 
119 
[50] Perez-Gonzalez, F, Heileman, GL and Abdallah, CT. 2007. Benford’s 
Law in Image Processing. Image Processing, pp I-405-I-408. ICIP 2007. 
IEEE International Conference. ISSN/ISBN: 1522-4880. 
[51] Piva, A. 2013. An Overview on Image Forensics. ISRN Signal 
Processing, vol. 2013, Article ID 496701, 22 pages, 2013. doi:10.1155/ 
2013/496701. ISSN/ISBN:2090-5041. 
[52] Qadir, G, Zhao, X and Ho, ATS. 2010. Estimating JPEG2000 
Compression for Image Forensics Using the Benford’s Law. Proc. of 
SPIE Vol. 7723, pp. 77230J1-77230J10. DOI:10.1117/12.855085. 
[53] Tong, S, Zhang, Z, Xie, Y and Wu, X. 2013. Image Splicing Detection 
Based on Statistical Properties of Benford Model. Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Computer Science and Electronics 
Engineering (ICCSEE 2013), pp. 0792-0795. ISSN/ISBN: 978-90-
78677-61-1. DOI:10.2991/iccsee.2013.200. 
[54] Campos, L, Salvo, AE and Flores-Moya, A. 2016. Natural taxonomic 
categories of angiosperms obey Benford’s law, but artificial ones do not. 
Systematics and Biodiversity, in press. ISSN/ISBN: 1477-2000 (Print)/1. 
DOI:10.1080/14772000.2016.1181683. 
[55] Cournane, S, Sheehy, N and Cooke, J. 2014. The novel application of 
Benford’s second order analysis for monitoring radiation output in 
interventional radiology. Physica Medica 30(4), pp. 413-418. DOI:10. 
1016/j.ejmp.2013.11.004. 
[56] De Vries, P and Murk, AJ. 2013. Compliance of LC50 and NOEC data 
with Benford’s Law: An indication of reliability?. Ecotoxicology and 
Environmental Safety 98 (2013) 171-178. DOI:10.1016/j.ecoenv.2013. 
09.002. 
[57] Kreuzer, M, Jordan, D, Antkowiak, B, Drexler, B, Kochs, EF and 
Schneider, G. 2014. Brain electrical activity obeys Benford’s law. 
Anesth. Analg. 118(1), pp. 183-91. DOI:10.1213/ANE.00000000000000 
15. 
[58] Alexopoulos, T and Leontsinis, S. 2014. Benford’s Law in Astronomy. 
Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy, 35(4), pp. 639-648. 
ISSN/ISBN: 0250-6335. DOI: 10.1007/s12036-014-9303-z. 
[59] Biau, D. 2015. The first-digit frequencies in data of turbulent flows. 
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications Volume 440, pp. 
147-154. DOI:10.1016/j.physa.2015.08.016. 
[60] Eliazar, II. 2013. Benford’s Law: A Poisson Perspective. Physica A 392 
(16) pp. 3360-3373. DOI:10.1016/j.physa.2013.03.057. 

D. Joksimović, G. Knežević, V. Pavlović et al. 
120 
[61] Geyer, A and Martì, J. 2012. Applying Benford’s law to volcanology. 
Geology 40(4), pp. 327-330. 
[62] Hill, TP and Fox, RF. 2016. Hubble’s Law Implies Benford’s Law for 
Distances to Galaxies. Journal of Astrophysics and Astronomy 37(1), pp. 
1-8. ISSN/ISBN: 0973-7758. DOI: 10.1007/s12036-016-9373-1. 
[63] Nigrini, MJ and Miller, SJ. 2007. Benford’s Law Applied to Hydrology 
Data—Results and Relevance to Other Geophysical Data. Mathematical 
Geology 39(5), 469-490. ISSN/ISBN: 0882-8121. 
[64] Pain, J-C. 2013. Regularities and symmetries in atomic structure and 
spectra. High Energy Density Physics, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 392-401. DOI: 
10.1016/j.hedp.2013.04.007. 
[65] Sottili, G, Palladino, DM, Giaccio, B and Messina, P. 2012. Benford’s 
Law in Time Series Analysis of Seismic Clusters. Mathematical 
Geosciences Volume 44, Number 5 (2012), pp. 619-634. DOI:10.1007/s 
11004-012-9398-1. 
[66] Roukema, BF. 2014. A first-digit anomaly in the 2009 Iranian 
presidential election. Journal of Applied Statistics 41(1), pp. 164-199. 
DOI:10.1080/02664763.2013.838664. 
[67] Pericchi, L and Torres, DA. 2011. Quick anomaly detection by the 
Newcomb-Benford Law, with applications to electoral processes data 
from the US, Puerto Rico and Venezuela. Statistical Science 26(4), pp. 
502-16. DOI:10.1214/09-STS296. 
[68] Günnel, S and Tödter, KH. 2009. Does Benford’s Law hold in economic 
research and forecasting?. Empirica 36, 273-292. 
[69] Breunig, C and Goerres, A. 2011. Searching for Electoral Irregularities 
in an Established Democracy: Applying Benford’s Law Tests to 
Bundestag Elections in Unified Germany. Electoral Studies 30(3) 
September 2011, pp. 534-545. 
 
 

In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  
 
 
 
BEHAVIOUR AND ATTITUDES VS. PRIVACY 
CONCERNS OF SOCIAL ONLINE NETWORKS  
 
 
Gordana Savić*, PhD and Marija Kuzmanović, PhD 
University of Belgrade, Faculty of Organizational Sciences, Serbia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The Online Social Networks (OSNs) are widely used in commercial 
or personal purposes, including entertainment. The main value of OSNs 
is in their ability to facilitate and ease communication between end users. 
They also enable users who are physically remote to maintain 
relationships and stay up to date with current events. 
Therefore, the popularity and market potential of different OSNs has 
been growing over time along with the growth of user engagement and 
they still continue to increase. The number of network users worldwide 
reached 2.2 billion as of 2016. The leading social network is Facebook 
with above 1.5 billion mainly active users worldwide, as of 2016. 
According to Internet World Stat, 73.5% of the European Union citizens 
use the Internet on a regular basis, while 51.24% of them use Facebook. 
In Serbia, 66.20% of the population uses the Internet, but 72.51% of them 
also use the most popular OSN – Facebook. This data motivated us to 
conduct a survey which would determine if the OSN users in Serbia have 
concerns about their privacy.  
We intend to investigate the relationship between concerns of OSN 
users and their behaviour and attitudes towards privacy. For that purpose, 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: G. Savic, Email: gordana.savic@fon.bg.ac.rs. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
122 
the online survey is conducted with 641 respondents in Serbia. The 
behaviour is investigated throughout the groups of questions concerning 
the habits of using OSNs, leaving real personal data or connecting with 
unknown people. The attitude is investigated by the questions regarding 
the opinion about possibility of using personal data by the provider or 
third party, posting the photos by the friend, data transparency or 
possibility of customizing network. Privacy concerns are investigated by 
the Westin Privacy Segmentation Index which divides users into the 
groups of fundamentalists, pragmatists and unconcerned. We found that 
largest group of OSN users are Privacy Pragmatists (335), followed by 
group of Privacy Fundamentalist (283) and smallest group are Privacy 
Unconcerned (23). Those fundamentalists belong to a group of older 
ONS users who are mainly concerned for their privacy. The most of them 
(90.5%) have been, or they are not sure whether they have been, exposed 
to private data harassment. On the opposite, the unconcerned users are the 
most flexible group, spending a lot of time on OSNs, concerning that 
their data have not been exposed in 69.6%. 
 
Keywords: OSNs privacy, online survey, behaviour and attitudes, concerns, 
privacy segmentation index 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Online Social Networks (OSNs) are widely used in commercial or 
personal purposes, including entertainment. The main value of OSNs is in 
their ability to facilitate and ease communication between end users. They also 
enable users who are physically remote to maintain relationships and stay up 
to date with current events. This helps to create social capital [33]. 
 Therefore, the popularity and market potential of different OSNs has been 
growing over time along with the growth of user engagement and they still 
continue to increase. As of the 4th quarter of 2014, the average time per day 
spent on social networks by global Internet users is 101.4 minutes surfing 
social networks, while the number of network users worldwide reached 2.2 
billion as of 2016. Leading social networks are Facebook with almost 1.5 
billion active users worldwide per month as of 2015, followed by 
communication networks such as WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger or the 
photo-sharing social network Instagram. Recently, social networking has 
demonstrated a clear shift towards mobile platforms. As of the first quarter of 
2015, some 580 million Facebook users accessed the social network 
exclusively via a mobile device, up from 341 million users in the 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
123 
corresponding quarter of the previous year. Furthermore, according to industry 
experts, in a few years most interactions on Facebook will be conducted from 
a mobile device. This data is taken over from Statistics and facts about Social 
Networks [32].  
According to the Internet World Stat [38], 46.4% of the world population 
uses the Internet. European countries are even more developed and their 
population has the advantage of using the Internet in business and private life. 
Therefore, 73.5% of the EU citizens use the Internet on a regular basis, while 
51.24% of them also use Facebook. Even though Serbia belongs to the group 
of developing non-EU member countries, it is positioned somewhat below the 
European average of the Internet users with 66.20% of its population. 
However, 72.51% of them are also users of the most popular OSN – Facebook. 
This data can lead to the conclusion that there are more unemployed, flexible, 
younger OSN users who are not concerned about their privacy in Serbia than 
in other countries.  
Generally, OSN users are unaware of the risks and threats that exist on 
these networks starting from privacy violations, identity theft to sexual 
harassment which is especially dangerous for adolescents [10]. As a 
consequence, OSN users are willing to share their private data and data about 
their friends. This data can be connected to demographic data (name, age, 
birthplace, place of living), education, vocation, current location, photos, and 
private and business habits. All of these data can be harvested by operators or 
third-parties and exploited for different purposes, which can jeopardize the 
user’s privacy.  
For example, harmful private and personal datacan be exposed to third 
parties (private persons or companies), and even the government [25]. The 
companies can use this data to create personalized commercials or for direct 
marketing. The data can be obtained without direct access to an individual’s 
online profile; personal details can be exposed without the Internet users’ 
knowledge. All these findings should lead to the increase in privacy concerns 
of OSN users.  
We intend to investigate the relationship between OSN users’ concerns, 
their behaviour when using the Internet and attitudes towards privacy. The 
research is done through a survey conducted with 635 respondents from Serbia 
in 2016. On one hand, the behaviour and attitudes are investigated through 
groups of questions about the habits of using OSNs, revealing actual personal 
data or data about friends, or connecting with unknown people. On the other 
hand, the opinion about the possibility of using their personal data by the 
provider or third party, photos posted by a friend, data transparency or the 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
124 
possibility of customizing networks are investigated. Privacy concerns are 
investigated using the Westin Privacy Segmentation Index [20], which divides 
users into groups of fundamentalists, pragmatists and unconcerned. We 
assumed that fundamentalists are older, mainly concerned about their privacy, 
probably having experience with private data harassment and consequently 
spending less time on the OSNs in comparison to the group of pragmatists and 
unconcerned users. As opposed to that, the unconcerned users should be the 
most flexible group, spending significant amounts of time on OSNs and 
leaving actual data on all networks used.  
This chapter is structured as follows. A comprehensive literature review 
on general customer and information privacy concerns of OSNs users is 
presented in the next section. The results of the survey conducted in Serbia are 
given in Section 3. Finally, a conclusion and references are given at the end of 
the chapter. 
 
 
RELATED WORKS 
 
 
Consumer Information Privacy Concerns 
 
Extensive evidence suggests that worldwide consumers recognise the 
problem of a lack of information privacy and control over personal 
information [9]. The literature on privacy offers several theories on the 
relationship between consumers’ information privacy concerns and their 
willingness to share personal information [27]. The first studies on general 
privacy concerns emerged in the late 1960s [41]. Westin’s main focus was on 
individual privacy rights and control over information collected by 
organizations based on individuals’ perceptions of distrust and fears of abuse 
with information technology [40]. 
The Westin-Harris consumer privacy surveys from the late 1970s until 
2004 have focused on several privacy areas, from general privacy concerns to 
more focused areas in marketing, medical, and online commerce [20]. The 
research resulted in a methodology known as Privacy Segmentation Index 
(PSI) that divides respondents into three privacy-sensitive segments (privacy 
fundamentalist, pragmatist and unconcerned) based on their level of privacy 
concern. The PSI captures general privacy attitudes about consumer control, 
business, and laws and regulations. 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
125 
Westin studied how PSI has changed over time. He showed that during 
1994-2003 the percentage of Fundamentalists in the public remained almost 
the same – around 25%, but the number of Unconcerned decreased from 42% 
in 1993 to 12% in 2000 and reduced further to 10% in 2003. However, the 
Pragmatist group varied between 30% and 64% in 2003 [20]. Westin mentions 
that a steady decrease of unconcerned consumers might be due to the fact that 
people learned more about technology and also became aware of the various 
means of protecting their privacy. 
In their study, Krasnova, Hildebrand, and Guenther [19] show that 17.3%, 
72.6% and 10.1% belonged to privacy fundamentalists, pragmatists and 
unconcerned 
groups, 
respectively. 
Recent 
research 
suggests 
that 
approximately 49% of individuals are Fundamentalists, 40% are Pragmatists, 
and 10% are Unconcerned [42]. 
Wang and Petrison [39] demonstrated that certain consumers (particularly 
in the older age groups) are more negative about potential threats to their 
privacy than others. Sheehan and Hoy [30] showed that consumers who 
believe they do not have control over their personal information are more 
concerned about privacy. Malhotra et al. [24] have identified consumer 
concern factors related to privacy practices and developed survey instruments 
to measure user information privacy concerns such as data collection 
procedures, control, and awareness of privacy practices.  
Numerous other studies have analyzed privacy concern, and applied 
diverse instruments for measuring it [29]. Recent studies have focused on 
privacy in an online environment. 
The findings indicate that consumers are willing to provide both online 
and offline companies with basic information, but are more protective of 
personal information and are less comfortable sharing more sensitive 
information [15, 9]. Graeff and Harmon [11] pointed out that a vast majority 
of consumers believed that the Internet has made it easier for someone to 
obtain personal information about them. In his study, Ha [13] showed that 
online users want highly visible privacy policies telling them precisely how a 
company will use their personal information. Chen and Rea [6] reported more 
specific protective behaviour suggesting that users will cease web site access if 
too much personal information is requested when registering on the site.  
Berendt et al. [3] argue that while many users have strong opinions on 
privacy and state privacy preferences, they are unable to act accordingly. Once 
they are in an online interaction, they often do not monitor and control their 
actions sufficiently. They also state that online privacy statements seem to 
have no impact on behaviour [9]. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
126 
Information Privacy Concerns of OSN Users 
 
Boyd and Ellison [4] define OSNs as web-based services that allow 
individuals to create a profile and connect to friends within a bounded system 
[19]. Debatin [7] emphasizes that the main purpose of participating in social 
networks is the exchange of information, most of it highly personal, and the 
maintenance and expansion of one’s social relationships. Thus, privacy 
protection in online social networks seems to be an oxymoron.  
Hugl [17] highlights the necessity to focus on multidimensional and 
multidisciplinary frameworks of privacy, considering a so-called “privacy 
calculus paradigm” and rethinking “fair information practices” from an 
increasingly ubiquitous environment of OSNs. 
Barnes [2] refers to public versus private boundaries and a so-called 
“paradoxical world of privacy”: while adults are concerned about potential 
privacy threats, teenagers make personal data public.  
Gross and Acquisti [12] analyzed the online behaviour of students at 
Carnegie Mellon University who have used a popular OSN and highlight 
diverse potential attacks on various facets of privacy. Authors stated that the 
informal character of online social networking and the possibility to 
communicate casually enables users to manage a large number of contacts 
with relatively little effort [7]. In addition, OSNs enable users to control the 
impression they make on others by allowing them to decide how much they 
are willing to self-disclose as well as by offering privacy settings to 
strategically manage access to personal information. This is additional 
motivation for users to post frequently and to voluntarily share large amounts 
of personal information. Gross and Acquisti [12] conclude that only a minimal 
percentage of users change the permissive default of high privacy preferences, 
and personal data therefore is generously shared. On the other hand, OSNs 
pose many privacy risks for their users, ranging from unauthorized use of their 
information to harmful activities by other users, such as cyber-stalking, 
harassment, and reputation damage [6, 16, 26]. 
Young and Quan-Haase [43] also draw attention to Facebook use by 
undergraduate students. They found that 99.35% of the respondents use their 
actual first and last name in their profile; nearly two-thirds present their sexual 
orientation and interests; 83.1% provide their e-mail address; 92.2% their date 
of birth, 80.5% their current town of residence, 97.7% present an image of 
themselves, and 96.1% photos of friends [17]. Similarly, Tufekci [37] found 
that 94.9% of Facebook users reported using their actual names, while 75.6% 
disclose their relationship status. 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
127 
Staddon et al. [31] consider both overall social network privacy concern 
and aspects of concern related to transparency and control, with special 
attention on comprehension of information sharing in the network, control 
over information sharing in the network, and sharing practices of users in 
relation to their friends in the network. They found that each aspect of privacy 
concern is strongly associated with self-reported engagement across several 
measures; users who report higher concern are less engaged while those who 
report more control and comprehension over sharing of their information in 
the network are more engaged. 
Pew Internet Report studies demonstrate that 58% of OSN users have 
restricted access to their entire OSN profile or to parts of their profiles [21, 
22]. 
Studies on online privacy behaviour have shown that OSN users tend to be 
rather careless with their personal data [7]. Although most users have a general 
awareness of possible privacy risks, they do not always act accordingly. For 
instance, most Facebook users have hundreds of friends, and statistically, 
about one-third of users will accept complete strangers as friends [8]. 
A broad range of privacy paradox (attitude-behaviour dichotomy) research 
finds OSN users actual behaviour during privacy transactions to be in 
contradiction with their concerns on privacy risks when sharing personal 
information [28]. Namely, OSN users showing high-levels of general privacy 
or information sharing concerns are still willing to share higher amounts of 
personal information [27]. 
Acquisti and Gross [1] demonstrated a gap between the information 
participants said they cared about protecting online, and what they were 
showing publicly on Facebook. Madejski, Johnson, and Bellovin [23] 
measured privacy attitudes and intentions and compared these against the 
privacy settings on Facebook. They also found that there are inconsistencies 
between users’ sharing intentions and their privacy settings. 
Haddidi and Hui [14] compared individuals’ behaviour with regard to 
friendship requests by using 40 fake identities of well-known film stars and 
ordinary people on Facebook. They show that usually users do not accept 
random friendship requests.  
Keith et al. [18] compared OSN user’s intent to share actual information 
with ones who do not share and found no support between privacy concerns 
and actual information share but did found a weak relationship between 
sharing intentions and actual behaviour suggesting disclosure behaviours are 
better predictors of actual behaviour [27]. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
128 
Sutanto et al. [34] found users with privacy concerns were more than 
willing to share their information for personalization benefits on a privacy safe 
mobile platform. Taddicken [35] finds that social situations of ‘quid pro quo’ 
have a much higher impact than privacy concerns on willingness to share 
personal information in social networks. 
 
 
EMPIRICAL STUDY 
 
 
Study Goals  
 
Our study was broadly designed to explore respondent behaviour in using 
online social networks and to determine whether there is a connection between 
their attitudes (using the Westin Privacy Segmentation Index), habits and 
demographics. Therefore, in this chapter, we focus on the relationship between 
privacy concerns and actual behaviour of the online social network users in 
Serbia. 
 
 
Measurement Instrument 
 
In April and May of 2016, an online survey was conducted in Serbia to 
determine privacy concerns and behaviour. The research was conducted as an 
online questionnaire since we opted for an empirical investigation of privacy 
concerns and privacy-related behaviour of OSN users in Serbia. 
The questionnaire was administered as a Google document that can be 
easily shared online. It consisted of four sections (see Table 1). Section A 
comprises the socio-demographic questions regarding gender, age, level of 
education, employment status and marital status. Section B contains questions 
related to general behaviour of OSN users; while Section C contains questions 
related to behaviour with regard to personal and friend’s privacy. Section D 
comprises questions regarding privacy concerns with OSN use. This section 
also comprises three questions from the Westin Privacy Segmentation Index. 
In addition, a special question relates to the experience of privacy violation 
and the misuse of data on OSN. 
 
 
 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
129 
The Westin Privacy Segmentation Index  
 
Privacy Segmentation Index (PSI) has been widely used to measure 
privacy attitudes and categorize individuals into three privacy groups: 
fundamentalists, pragmatists, and unconcerned [20, 42]. It was developed by 
Harris Interactive in cooperation with Alan Westin [41]. In recent years the 
PSI is based on the following three statements [15, 20]: 
 
Q1:  OSN users have lost all control over how personal information is 
collected and used by companies (providers). 
Q2:  Most companies (providers) handle the personal information they 
collect about OSN users in a proper and confidential way. 
Q3:  Existing laws and organizational practices provide a reasonable level 
of protection for OSN user privacy today. 
 
Respondents have to rank their position regarding each statement on a 
four point scale: 1-Strongly Disagree, 2-Somewhat Disagree, 3-Somewhat 
Agree, 4-Strongly Agree. Based on their responses to these three questions, 
Westin used the following procedure for dividing respondents into three 
categories [20]. 
First, responses to the individual questions are classified as follows: 
 
 
For Q1, responses of “Strongly Agree” or “Somewhat Agree” are 
considered privacy-concerned.  
 
For Q2 and Q3, responses of “Strongly Disagree” or “Somewhat 
Disagree” are considered privacy-concerned. 
 
Next, participants are categorized according to the following rules [42]: 
 
1. Privacy fundamentalists are respondents who give privacy concerned 
responses to all questions. These respondents are the most protective 
of their privacy. They feel companies should not be able to acquire 
personal information for their organizational needs and think that 
individuals should be proactive in refusing to provide information.  
2. Privacy unconcerned are respondents who give responses that are not 
privacy-concerned to all questions. These consumers are the least 
protective of their privacy – they feel that the benefits they may 
receive from companies after providing information far outweigh the 
potential abuses of this information. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
130 
Table 1.Survey definition 
 
 
Section Category/Corresponding Survey Question 
A 
Demographic data 
B 
Actual behaviour in using OSNs (general) 
 
For what purposes do you use OSN?  
Business only,  
Private only,  
Both private and business  
 
Frequency of performing different activities: 
establishing new friendships, chatting, general 
information sharing, informing about social events, etc. 
Frequently,  
Occasionally,  
Never 
 
What network is your primary choice? 
 
 
Frequency of use of the particular OSN (Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram, …) 
5-point scale  
Every day, ..., Never 
 
Total daily time spent on OSNs on average  
(in hours) 
C 
Actual behaviour (privacy issues) 
 
Personal data shares at networks (actual name, profile 
picture, e-mail, phone number, date of birth, 
occupation, place of residence, relationship status) 
 
Always,  
Sometimes (depending on 
the social network),  
Never 
 
Sharing intentions:  
Who has access to a variety of personal information 
and activities? 
Public,  
Friends,  
Friends of friends,  
Selected friends 
 
Privacy related behaviour 
Check in during a visit to certain places 
Accessing applications that are trying to collect my 
personal data 
Accessing my profile from public computers 
I accept friend requests from strangers 
I tag friends in photos without asking them 
It bothers me when friends tag me in photos without 
asking me 
Always,  
Sometimes,  
Never 
 
D 
Privacy concern 
 
Privacy Segmentation Index (three questions)  
4-point scale* 
 
I'm concerned about the privacy of the personal data 
I'm concerned about the privacy of friends personal 
data 
I'm worried that parents (superiors or colleagues) have 
access to my information 
5-point scale  
Strongly agree 
… 
Strongly disagree 
* Details are explained in the section “The Westin Privacy Segmentation Index.” 
 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
131 
3. Privacy pragmatists are all other respondents, i.e., participants who 
give a mix of privacy-concerned and not privacy-concerned 
responses. These respondents weigh the potential pros and cons of 
sharing information, and evaluate the protections that are in place and 
their trust in the company or organization. After this, they decide 
whether it makes sense for them to share their personal information. 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Invitations to participate in the study were distributed via OSNs and the 
responses were collected from April to May 2016. The overall sample is 
consisted of OSN users of all ages, gender and professional statuses. The final 
sample comprises of 641 respondents who fully completed the survey. The 
analyses of their demography structure and responses regarding the privacy 
behaviour and concerns are given in this section.  
 
 
Demography 
 
The statistics regarding demographic data is shown in Table 2. The sample 
mainly consisted of women (69%). The overall sample average age is 27.4 
(SD = 9.612), while the respondents are between 16 and 65. The majority of 
them completed high school (51.2%) or gained one of the university degrees 
(39.9% in total), and they are either students (8.9% in high school and 48.2% 
at university), or employed (36.3%). 
 
 
General Behaviour in Using OSNs 
 
Section B of the survey has shown that a negligible number of respondents 
use OSNs solely for business purposes (only 8), the largest number of 
respondents use OSNs exclusively for private use, 324 out of 641 (50.5%). 
The remaining 309 respondents (48.3%) use OSNs both for private and 
business purposes. 
Mainly students and the employed use OSNs for business purposes, while 
the majority of users who use OSNs exclusively for private purposes are 
mainly students, the unemployed and pensioners. This proved to be a 
statistically significant difference at the level of p<0.01. The differences 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
132 
related to gender and other demographic characteristics and the purpose of 
using OSNs are not statistically significant. Figure 1 shows the frequency of 
performing different activities at OSNs.  
 
Table 2.Demographic data 
 
Demographic 
Category 
Percent 
Gender 
 
Male 
31% 
 
Female 
69% 
Age 
 
 
 
16-24 
57.10% 
 
25-34 
17.47% 
 
35-44 
17.00% 
 
>45 
8.43% 
Level of education 
 
Primary school 
8.9% 
 
High school 
51.2% 
 
Undergraduate 
18.4% 
 
Master degree 
19.0% 
 
PhD degree 
2.5% 
Employment status 
 
Students (high school) 
8.9% 
 
Students (university) 
48.2% 
 
Unemployed 
6.1% 
 
Employed 
36.3% 
 
Retired 
0.5% 
Relationship status 
 
Single 
44.3% 
 
In relationship 
37.6% 
 
Married 
18.1% 
 
Another statistically significant (p<0.01) result indicates that men use 
OSNs for exploring more often (55.3%) than women (38.1%). The difference 
in behaviour regarding relationship factors (p<0.01) is also statistically 
significant. More specifically, there is a difference between the respondents 
who are married, in a relationship or single. The majority of respondents who 
are married (73.3%) have never used an OSN for making new relationships. 
Similarly, 62.2% of the respondents who are in a relationship have never used 
an OSN for this purpose. However, 45.1% of single respondents claimed that 
they have also never used an OSN for making a new relationship. As for the 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
133 
employment status, the employed respondents use OSNs for making new 
relationships in the lowest percent (31.3%), while students are leaders in this 
segment with as much as 57.9% of the whole segment.  
When it comes to chatting, there is a significant difference between those 
who are married, in a relationship and single, including the employment status 
(p<0.01). Only 2.5% of the singles are claimed that are not chatters, while the 
percentage of those who are married and are not chatters is 15.5%. Most high 
school students (100%) and university students (97.1%) chat, and the lowest 
percent of the employed are chatters (12.5% never chatting) in comparison to 
the other groups such as unemployed, students, etc. 
 
 
Figure 1. Frequency of performing OSN activities. 
The majority of the respondents use an OSN for sharing information – 
only 2.7% have never shared information. The students are also leaders in this 
segment. Actually, 78.6% of university students often used OSNs for sharing 
information, while high school students mainly do not use them for this 
purpose. This result is in full compliance with the statistics of the responses to 
the question about what activities OSNs are used for. Namely, the students in 
high school use OSNs for being informed about social events the least (26.3%, 
p<0.01), but they often use OSNs for sharing photos and videos (more than 
50%, p<0.05). In addition, about 50% of women share, while just 4.8% of 
women and 11% of men do not share their photos and videos (p<0.01). The 
“behave question” regards using of the different applications such as games 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
134 
and quizzes reveals that only 17.8% of users in the whole sample use them, 
high school students being the most frequent users (24.7%, p<0.01) 
Furthermore, the majority of respondents use Facebook as their primary 
choice (69.6%). This result is expected since it is in line with Internet World 
Stat findings [38]. Details on the use of other OSNs are given in Figure 2.  
Facebook is the most popular OSN among users aged 35-44 (80.7%). In 
the youngest group of respondents (16-24), in addition to Facebook (63.7%), 
the top choices are Instagram (14.8%) and WhatsApp (14.6%). Viber is the 
best quoted (about 11%) among the other specified OSNs with significance 
level p<0.01. In terms of the frequency of use of a particular network, the 
statistics is as follows: three OSNs, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube, were 
the most prominent by the fact that a large number of respondents use them 
every day (Figure 3). Only 1.6% of respondents have never used Facebook, 
while it is used on daily bases by 76.4% of all respondents. YouTube has 
never been used by only 1.1%, but 61% of the respondents use it on a daily 
basis. Instagram is used on a daily basis by 30.9% of the respondents (mostly 
younger respondents aged up to 34), but the share of those who never use it is 
quite large (41.3%). LinkedIn is mostly used by the employed aged 35-44, but 
a large proportion of respondents (64.3%) never used it. And finally, Pinterest 
has never been used by 76.4% of the respondents and only 1.9% of them use it 
on a daily basis. The average time per day spent on all social networks is 3.98 
hours with standard deviation of 2.985. No statistically significant correlation 
between the time spent on OSNs and age categories appeared. 
 
 
Figure 2. OSNs primary choice (in %). 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
135 
 
 
Figure 3. User distribution per most frequently used OSNs. 
 
Behaviour in Using OSN Regarding Privacy 
 
The first set of questions regarding privacy is related to personal data and 
their public placement and online availability. For the majority of items, 
respondents answered that it depended on the OSN. But there were those who 
never reveal their actual personal information (such as name, birthday, etc.) 
regardless of the OSN. However, there are those who always leave their actual 
personal information. The detailed results are shown in Figure 4. 
As for the sharing intentions, the majority of the respondents share 
personal data, photos, videos and posts with all friends (Figure 5). 
In the next set of questions, tagging behaviour is the most interesting. 
Actually, those who are married, tag friends without asking considerably more 
seldom than others (6%), while 18.75% of those who are in a relationship and 
20.8% of those who are single tag friends without permission.  
 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
136 
 
Figure 4. Personal data sharing (in %). 
 
Figure 5. Distribution of sharing intentions. 
It was also interesting to further explore and crosstab issues related to 
tagging behaviour. The observed correlations are statistically significant at 
level p<0.01:  
 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
137 
 
93 (14.5%) of the respondents who never tag others would always 
mind if someone else tagged them.  
 
99 (15.4%) of the respondents who never tag others would be 
bothered sometimes if someone else tagged them. 
 
48 (7.5%) of the respondents who never tag others are never bothered 
to have someone else tag them. 
 
70 (10.9%) of the respondents who always tag others are never 
bothered to have someone else tag them. 
 
31 (4.8%) of the respondents who always tag others would sometimes 
be bothered to have someone else tag them. 
 
Only 10 (1.6%) of the respondents who always tag others would 
always be bothered if somebody else tagged them.  
 
 
Data Privacy and Safety Concerns  
 
Data privacy and safety concerns are expressed through Westin Privacy 
Segmentation Index [41].  
Figure 6 shows the distribution of responses to the three PSI questions. In 
Q1, agreement means privacy-concerned, while in Q2 and Q3, disagreement 
means privacy-concerned. Therefore, the majority of respondents think that 
OSN users may lose control over private information distribution (50.39% 
strongly agree and 33.95% somewhat agree). Only 2.03% of the respondents 
disagree with this. Such responses also indicate privacy concern. 
The distribution of the responses to questions about concerns for friends’ 
data privacy and the concern that parents (superiors or colleagues) could have 
access to their private information (Q2 and Q3) are very similar. The majority 
of the respondents (around 45%) somewhat disagree with the statement that 
providers behave properly (Q2) and that laws protect users (Q3). On the other 
hand, only 6.24% agree with statement Q2 and 4.84% agree with statement 
Q3. These statistics also indicate that a high level of privacy concern exists 
among OSN users in Serbia. The obtained results are in line with the concerns 
level in other countries, e.g., 92% of Americans and Brits are concerned to 
some extent for their privacy online [36] which is 42% more than in the 
previous year. Interestingly, the average share (around 8%) of the unconcerned 
online users in those countries is still slightly higher than in Serbia. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
138 
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the Westin categories. Approximately 
52% of the respondents are pragmatists, 44% are fundamentalists, and nearly 
4% are unconcerned. 
We examined whether demographic variables predicted respondents 
Westin categories or their responses to the individual Westin questions, using 
the chi-square test. The results indicate that the majority of women (56.1%) 
are pragmatists, while most men are fundamentalists (53.8%), at statistical 
significance level p<0.01. Young people aged 16-24 are mostly pragmatists 
(59.8% of them), while users aged 25-34 are almost equally spaced in 
pragmatists and fundamentalists (49.1% and 48.2%). Respondents aged 35-44 
(as high as 60.6%) and above 45 (as high as 56.6%) are mostly 
fundamentalists. The highest percent of the unconcerned are young people 
aged up to 24 – 69.6% at statistical significance level p<0.01. The pensioners 
and the employed are mostly fundamentalists (66.7% and 58.8%), while the 
students are mostly pragmatists (68.4% and 59.9%). As high as 10.3% of all 
unemployed are unconcerned, and 8.8% of all students are also unconcerned. 
Moreover, 56% of those who are single, and 52.7% of those in a relationship 
are pragmatists, while the majority of those married are fundamentalist (56%). 
These results are statistically significant at level of p<0.1. 
 
 
Figure 6. Distribution of three Westin questions responses. 
 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
139 
 
Figure 7. Distribution of the Westin categories. 
We also explored the habits in using OSNs and concluded that 
fundamentalists use Instagram much less than pragmatists and unconcerned. 
Only 22.6% of them use it on a daily basis, while this share of the 
unconcerned is 39.1% and 37.3% of the pragmatists (p<0.01). 
 
 
Figure 8. Experience of privacy violations. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
140 
In addition, we explored the impact of abuse and violation of privacy on 
OSNs (see Figure 8). 
A correlation between privacy abuse experience and PSI is significant at 
level p<0.1. The majority of those who have had such experiences are among 
the fundamentalists (51.9%), while the majority of those who never had such 
experiences are among the pragmatists (57%). Those who do not know if their 
privacy has been violated, are evenly distributed among the fundamentalists 
(49.8%) and pragmatists (48.4%) and the least number of them is unconcerned 
(only 1.8%). Meanwhile, just 5.1% of those who have not had a bad 
experience belong to the group of unconcerned. 
There is no significant correlation between PSI and revealing the actual 
name, phone number, email, date of birth, residence or employment status, but 
there is a statistically significant correlation between posting an actual photo 
and PSI. Namely, 73.9% of privacy unconcerned always post actual photos, 
while the others 26.1% claim that it depends on the network. 
The crosstab PSI versus location checking shows statistical significance 
with the conclusion that more than a half of the fundamentalists (54.8%) have 
never checked location, while this share is much smaller (34.8%) among the 
unconcerned. Fundamentalists are also the most cautious and the largest shares 
of them do not tag friends without prior asking, while only 10% always tag 
friends (see Figure 9). Surprisingly, greater shares of pragmatists do tag 
friends without prior asking (21.5%) than the share of unconcerned (13%). 
 
 
Figure 9. Tagging friends within Westin categories. 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
141 
 
Figure 10. Disagreement with tagging within Westin categories. 
 
Figure 11. Concern about data privacy. 
On the other hand, fundamentalists are much more bothered if someone 
tags them without asking: 25.1% are bothered always and 45.6% are bothered 
occasionally (Figure 10). Once again, a share of the unconcerned that does not 
want to be tagged without asking is unexpectedly large (17.4%). The lowest 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
142 
percent of respondents who complain about tagging without asking (16.1%) is 
in the group of pragmatists. Meanwhile, this is still less than the shares of 
pragmatists who always tag others (21.5%). 
The last section of the questionnaire answered the concerns about the 
privacy of personal data and photos of the users and their friends and concerns 
whether the parents (superiors or colleagues) could have access to their 
information. Most respondents showed moderate concern (Figure 11).  
Respondents are mostly concerned about their personal data privacy 
(mean score 3:05, standard deviation 1.144). They are less concerned about the 
privacy of information on friends (mean score 2.63, standard deviation 1.054), 
and just 5.1% of them are extremely concerned. The respondents are least 
concerned that parents or a superior could have insight into their activities and 
posts on an OSN (mean score 2.07, standard deviation 1.245). As high as 
47.7% of the respondents were assigned grade 1 (not at all concerned) and 
only 5.8% had grade 5 (extremely concerned) as a response to the statement 
“I’m worried that parents (superiors or colleagues) have access to my 
information.” 
With regard to respondents’ age, the youngest respondents (up to 24) are 
mostly concerned about their personal data with an average score of 3.1, as 
well as those aged 45-54 (3.2). Women are more concerned about their 
personal information than men. When it comes to information about friends, 
respondents aged 35-45 are the most concerned, and concern declines with 
age. And in this issue, women also show greater concern than men. 
 
 
Figure 12. (Continued) 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
143 
 
 
Figure 12. Concern about data privacy within Westin segments. 
With the third question from this group (“I’m worried that parents 
(superiors or colleagues) have access to my information”), the situation is 
similar. The most concerned are the youngest respondents, or one could say 
that they are not worried because the average score of responses is only 2.11, 
which indicates that most of them replied that they are slightly concerned. 
A statistically significant correlation (p<0.01) is observed between PSI 
and the level of concerns regarding personal information privacy (Figure 12). 
None of the unconcerned assigned score 5 (extremely concerned), while a very 
small number of them are very concerned (8.7%). The average score for this 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
144 
group of respondents is 2.34. The distribution of responses for fundamentalists 
and pragmatists is observed to be almost normal. The average score for 
pragmatists is 2.96 and 3.21 for the fundamentalists. There are only 6% 
unworried fundamentalists and as many as 16.6% are extremely worried. 
There is also a correlation (p<0.01) between the PSI and the level of 
concern regarding friends’ privacy. Again, none of the unconcerned assigned 
score 5, i.e., no one is extremely concerned, while a very small number of 
them are very concerned (8.7%). There are even 30.4% of unconcerned users. 
The average score over this segment of respondents was 2.13. On this issue, 
the pragmatists have shown less concern for the privacy of friends’ data than 
the privacy of their own personal data (average score 2.51) and only 3.6% are 
extremely concerned, and even 19.7% are absolutely unconcerned. 
Fundamentalists were again most concerned with the average grade 2.82. 
Among fundamentalists, only 6% of users sample are not at all worried and as 
many as 16.6% are extremely worried. 
When it comes to concerns that parents or superiors could have access to 
data, images and the information shared on OSNs, there is no statistically 
significant difference between members of three segments according to PSI. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The study focuses on understanding the relationship between the concerns 
of OSN users, their actual behaviour and concerns regarding privacy. The 
results reveal that general behaviour of OSN users in Serbia mainly depends 
on marital and employment status, e.g., depends on general occupancy and 
interests. Namely, singles use OSNs for establishing new relationships and 
chatting, while university students most often use OSNs for sharing 
information and photos and informing about social events and playing games 
and solving quizzes. Furthermore, the majority of the respondents (72.51%) 
use Facebook, and for a large share of 69.6% it is their primary choice. The 
results are in line with Internet World Stat findings [38], but the percent is still 
considerably higher. According to them, 46.4% of the Internet users 
worldwide prefer and use Facebook. This means that there are more OSN 
users in Serbia than world’s average, especially regarding Facebook. Having 
that in mind, the main issue should be their online privacy protection and 
concerns. 
Meanwhile, as with other research in the literature [28, 27], our survey 
discloses a privacy paradox (concerns-behaviour dichotomy). According to the 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
145 
Privacy Segmentation Index [20, 42], Serbian OSN users are almost evenly 
distributed into groups of pragmatists and fundamentalists, and only nearly 4% 
are unconcerned. The results from Serbia are in line with the recent results 
which suggested that approximately 49% of individuals are fundamentalists, 
40% are pragmatists and around 10% are unconcerned according to [42]. 
There are more fundamentalists among older users (above 35 years of age) and 
married people than in the other groups, as expected. Apparently, a lower 
percent of Serbian OSN users are unconcerned. Therefore, we expected that 
users in Serbia would be more cautious regarding data privacy and behaviour 
than in other parts of the world. However, the actual online behaviour is in 
contradiction with user concerns when sharing personal information. There is 
no significant correlation between PSI categories and revealing the actual 
name, phone number, e-mail, date of birth, residence or employment status. 
Namely, actual behaviour of OSN users revealed that most respondents share 
actual personal data, photos, videos and posts, mainly with all friends. 
The results of our study indicate that most users in Serbia always share 
actual personal data or sharing behaviour depends on a currently used OSN. 
More precisely, 98% of the respondents use their actual first and last name and 
98% post an actual photo in their profiles. These results are in line with Young 
and Quan-Haase [43] and Tufekci [37] findings. Unlike Tufekci [37] who 
demonstrates that as many as 75.6% of the respondents reveal their 
relationship status, our survey showed only 20% of the respondents always did 
so. But, as much as 40% of OSN users have never revealed their relationship 
status. 
However, the survey revealed that respondents were moderately 
concerned for their data privacy (mainly youngsters), slightly less concerned 
for their friends data privacy and the least concerned that parents or a superior 
could have had insight into their activities and posts on an OSN. Their 
experience with the misuse of data was in line with the Westin category to 
which they belong. The majority of those who have had such experiences were 
among the fundamentalists, but the majority of those who never had such 
experiences fall into the group of the pragmatists.  
Limitations of our study are reflected in the predictive power of Westin’s 
categories and the assumptions underlying his Privacy Segmentation Index. 
Namely, our findings have failed to establish a significant correlation between 
the Westin categories and actual privacy-related behaviours on OSNs. This is 
because Westin index captures broad, generic privacy attitudes. Moreover, the 
instrument was created in 1995 for the American market and has not been 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
146 
significantly updated since then. Thus, it has to be adapted to be more in tune 
with today’s Internet-focused and technology-based society. 
The robustness of the results could be checked on a larger sample or a 
sample of a different structure. The data collected come mainly from 
Facebook, which could affect user’s answers. The majority of the sample in 
our survey is comprised of young people (up to 24). Although this category is 
the most active on OSNs, the analysis should be carried out on a larger sample 
of users older than 24 years of age, since it is known that there are a number of 
such users, and their number constantly increases. 
Future research should be directed towards the improvement of the Westin 
Privacy Segmentation Index or the development of a new approach for 
segmentation, which is based on the preferences of the users, but which would 
take into account their current behaviour and concrete characteristics of OSNs. 
A tool that could be useful for this purpose is conjoint analysis. The method 
was originally developed to measure consumer preferences, but proved to be 
very useful and applicable in many other areas. The characteristics of this 
approach are that the preferences are measured at the individual level, and it 
allows post hoc segmentation based on the results. Perhaps the results would 
have showed a smaller gap between attitudes and behaviour than in this study 
using the Westin Privacy Segmentation Index. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Acquisti, A., and R. Gross. “Imagined communities: Awareness, 
information sharing, and privacy on the Facebook.” In Privacy 
Enhancing Technologies. Springer, 2006. 
[2] 
Barnes, S.B. “A privacy paradox: Social networking in the United 
States.” First Monday 11, no. 9 (2006). 
[3] 
Berendt, B., O. Gunther, and S. Spiekermann. “Privacy in e-commerce: 
stated preferences vs. actual behavior.”Communications of the ACM 48, 
no. 4 (2005): 101-106. 
[4] 
Boyd, D., and N. Ellison. “Social Network Sites: Definition. History. 
and Scholarship.” Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 13, 
no. 1 (2007). 
[5] 
Chen, K., and A.I. Rea Jr. “Protecting personal information online: A 
survey of user privacy concerns and control techniques.” The Journal of 
Computer Information Systems 44, no. 4 (2004): 85. 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
147 
[6] 
Clark, L.A., and S.J. Roberts. “Employer’s use of social networking 
sites: a socially irresponsible practice.” Journal of Bussines Ethics 95 
(2010): 507-525. 
[7] 
Debatin, B. “Ethics, privacy, and self-restraint in social networking.” In 
Privacy online, 47-60. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 
[8] 
Debatin, B., J.P. Lovejoy, A.K. Horn, and B.N. Hughes. “Facebook and 
online privacy: Attitudes, behaviors, and unintended consequences.” 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 15, no. 1 (2009): 83-
108. 
[9] 
Dolnicar, S., and Y Jordaan. “Protecting consumer privacy in the 
company's best interest.” Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ) 14, no. 
1 (2006): 39-61. 
[10] Fire, M, R Goldschmidt, and Y Elovici. “Online Social Networks: 
Threats and Solutions.” IEEE COMMUNICATION SURVEYS and 
TUTORIALS 16, no. 4 (2014): 2019-2036. 
[11] Graeff, T.R., and S. Harmon. “Collecting and using personal data: 
consumers’ awareness and concerns.” Journal of Consumer Behaviour 
19, no. 4 (2002): 302-318. 
[12] Gross, R., and A. Acquisti. “Information revelation and privacy in 
online social networks.” Proceedings of the 2005 ACM workshop on 
Privacy in the electronic society. 2005. 71-80. 
[13] Ha, H. “Factors influencing consumer perceptions of brand trust 
online.” Journal of Product and Brand Management 13, no. 5 (2004): 
329-342. 
[14] Haddidi, H., and P. Hui. “To add or not to add: privacy and social 
honeypots.” Proceedings of the ICC 2010: IEEE International 
Conference on Communications. Capetown, South Africa: IEEE, 2010. 
[15] Harris Interactive. A survey of Consumer privacy attitudes and 
behaviours. PLI/Harris, 2001. 
[16] Hoy, M.G., and G. Milne. “Gender differences in privacy-related 
measures for young adult facebook users.” Journal of Interactive 
Advertising 10, no. 2 (2010): 28-45. 
[17] Hugl, U. “Reviewing person's value of privacy of online social 
networking.” Internet Research 21, no. 4 (2011): 384-407. 
[18] Keith, M.J., S.C. Thompson, J. Hale, P.B. Lowry, and C. Greer. 
“Information disclosure on mobile devices: Re-examining privacy 
calculus with actual user behavior.”International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 71, no. 12 (2013): 1163-1173. 

Gordana Savić and Marija Kuzmanović 
148 
[19] Krasnova, H., T. Hildebrand, and O. Guenther. “Investigating the value 
of privacy in online social networks: conjoint analysis.” ICIS 2009 
Proceedings. 2009. 173. 
[20] Kumaraguru, P, and L. F. Cranor. “Privacy indexes: a survey of 
Westin's studies.” 2005. 
[21] Lenhart, A. Adults and social network websites. Pew Internet Report, 
2012. 
[22] Madden, M. Privacy management on social media sites. Pew Internet 
Report, 2012. 
[23] Madejski, M, M.L. Johnson, and S.M. Bellovin. “The failure of online 
social network privacy settings.” Columbia University Computer 
Science, 2011. 
[24] Malhotra, N.K., S.S. Kim, and J. Agarwal. “Internet Users‘ Information 
Privacy Concerns (IUIPC): The Construct, the Scale, and a Causal 
Model.” Information Systems Research 15, no. 4 (2004): 336-355. 
[25] Miller, C. C. “Tech Companies Concede to Surveillance Program.” The 
New York Times. May 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/08/ 
technology (accessed May 2016). 
[26] Mishna, F., A. McLuckie, and M. Saini. “Real-world dangers in an 
online reality: a qualitative study examining online relationships and 
cyber abuse.” Social Work Research 33, no. 2 (2009): 107-118. 
[27] Motiwalla, L.F., Li Xiaobai, and X Liu. “Privacy Paradox: Does Stated 
Privacy 
Concerns 
Translate 
into 
the 
Valuation 
of 
Personal 
Information?”PACIS, 2014: 281. 
[28] Norberg, P.A., D.R. Horne, and D.A. Horne. “The Privacy Paradox: 
Personal Information Disclosure Intentions Versus Behaviors.”The 
Journal of Consumer Affairs 41, no. 1 (2007): 100-126. 
[29] Preibusch, S. “Guide to measuring privacy concern: Review of survey 
and observational instruments.” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 71, no. 12 (2013): 1133-1143. 
[30] Sheehan, K.B., and M.G. Hoy. “Dimensions of privacy concern among 
online consumers.” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 19, no. 1 
(2000): 62-74. 
[31] Staddon, J., D. Huffaker, L. Brown, and A. Sedley. “Are privacy 
concerns a turn-off?: engagement and privacy in social networks.” 
Proceedings of the eighth symposium on usable privacy and security. 
ACM, 2012. 10. 

Behaviour and Attitudes vs. Privacy Concerns … 
149 
[32] Statistics 
and 
facts 
about 
Social 
Networks. 
Mart 
2016. 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-
ranked-by-number-of-users/ (accessed May 15, 2016). 
[33] Steinfield, C, N.B Ellison, and C Lampe. “Social capital, self-esteem, 
and use of online social network sites.” Journal of Applied 
Developmental Psychology 29 (2008): 434–445. 
[34] Sutanto, J., E. Palme, C.H. Tan, and C.W. Phang. “Addressing the 
Personalization-Privacy Paradox: An Empirical Assessment from a 
Field Experiment on Smartphone Users.”Mis Quarterly 37, no. 4 
(2013): 1141-1164. 
[35] Taddicken, M. “The ‘Privacy Paradox’ in the Social Web: The Impact 
of Privacy Concerns, Individual Characteristics, and the Perceived 
Social Relevance on Different Forms of Self‐Disclosure.” Journal of 
Computer‐Mediated Communication 19, no. 2 (2014): 248-273. 
[36] Truste Privacy Blog. 2015. http://www.truste.com/blog/2015/01/28/ 
data-privacy-concern-consumers/ (accessed May 2016). 
[37] Tufekci, Z. “Can you see me now? Audience and disclosure regulation 
in online social network sites.” Bulletin of Science, Technology and 
Society 28, no. 1 (2008): 20-36. 
[38] Usage 
and 
Population 
Statistics. 
April 
2016. 
http://www. 
internetworldstats.com/stats4.htm (accessed May 2016). 
[39] Wang, P., and L.A. Petrison. “Direct marketing activities and personal 
privacy.” Journal of Direct Marketing 7, no. 1 (1993): 7-19. 
[40] Westin, A. “Intrusions: Privacy Tradeoffs in a free society, Public 
Perspective.” Public Perspective, 2000: 8-11. 
[41] Westin, A. Privacy and Freedom. New York: Atheneum, 1967. 
[42] Woodruff, A, V Pihur, S Consolvo, L Schmidt, L Brandimarte, and A 
Acquisti. “Would a Privacy Fundamentalist Sell Their DNA for $1000... 
If Nothing Bad Happened as a Result? The Westin Categories, 
Behavioral Intentions, and Consequence.” SOUPS, 2014: 1-18. 
[43] Young, A.L., and A. Quan-Haase. “Information revelation and internet 
privacy concerns on social network sites: a case study of Facebook.” 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Communities and 
Technologies (C&T’09). Pennsylvania: ACM, 2009. 


In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND 
DEVELOPMENT OF CONCEPTUAL  
SCHEMAS IN E-DOCUMENTS FOR  
SERBIAN CRIMINAL CODE 
 
 
Vojkan Nikolić*, PhD, Predrag Đikanović, PhD  
and Slobodan Nedeljković 
Ministry of Interior, SATIT, Belgrade, Serbia 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
In the process of developing e-Government, Serbian government has 
implemented a lot of e-Government services which produce a large 
amount of data and text documents, and whose citizens use more and 
more these services in their everyday lives. Text documents are in 
Serbian language and commonly in HTML, PDF and Microsoft Word 
format. Considering an increased amount of the text documents, Serbian 
e-Government has indicated the need for certain data and information 
extraction from the variety of existing text documents which are usually 
in a format prepared for print. 
In order to offer technical solution for a case, the authors have 
developed a dedicated application that includes Lucene library. Lucene is 
a specialized library for an implementation of the indexing and searching 
over a large amount of data. The procedure of quick search within 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: V. Nikolic, Email: vojkan.nikolic@mup.gov.rs. 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
152
unstructured text documents in Serbian language leads to an efficient 
detection and processing of criminal offenses and contributes to an 
increased level of security in the Republic of Serbia. In this paper, the 
authors deal with the possibilities of Lucene indexing and Lucene 
searching of data and documents within unstructured crime text 
documents in Serbian language aiming to find elements of crime in 
cyberspace. 
 
Keywords: text mining, natural language processing, unstructured data, 
apache lucene 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A rapid expansion of Internet as the main medium for sharing information 
and internet availability has encouraged more and more people to create and 
share data, information and knowledge. Considering the fact that the 
Government of the Republic of Serbia (RS) [1] has implemented [2, 3] a large 
number of e-Government services during the process of e-Government 
development, the use of these services on daily base leads to producing a large 
amount of data and documents which are mostly in the form of text in text 
documents and for these services are necessary the data and information which 
should be extracted from a variety of existing text documents which are 
usually in the format prepared for print [4, 5]. Bearing in mind the amount of 
documents, no one has enough time to read all these documents and be able to 
“extract” important information contained in them. It is obvious that there is a 
need to select and separate the documents. 
One approach to this problem is so called text mining [6]. The aim of text 
depth analysis is finding interesting and nontrivial information, as well as 
knowledge in unstructured text documents, then clustering and classifying 
them. Natural language common in such documents is not suitable for an 
analytical processing that gives unstructured text. For processing these 
documents on a computer, the documents should be adapted and prepared for 
computer processing. This process involves a lot of series of activities and 
procedures. 
The concepts and application of Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
represent a set of techniques and methods for an automatic text generation in a 
natural language. This concept is applicable and it supports many languages. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 153
Trends in the development of e-Government indicate the necessity of NLP 
application within e-Government services of the Republic of Serbia [7, 8]. 
For providing technical solution of an indexing process and a subsequent 
process of searching through information of an unstructured data in the RS e-
Government in Serbian language was used Lucene library spaces [9]. Lucene 
allows index any text documents realized in a free form and is used as virtually 
any data source, as long as we can extract textual data. Lucene is used for 
indexing and searching data stored in HTML documents, Microsoft Word 
documents, PDF files, and so on. The greatest amount of unstructured 
documents in e-Government RS is precisely in these formats.  
This paper considers ways in which text analysis and classification 
techniques might be used to improve efficiency and effectiveness of e-
government services, especially the ones provided by law enforcement 
agencies by using techniques of automatic text reports analysis, and make 
information available to decision makers. With an increasing number of 
anonymous reports submitted by citizens electronically in relation to various 
areas of crime leads to aggravation of the process of analyzing applications 
and performing analytical conclusions. This problem appears to be more 
complex because such an obtained information is not filtered or guided in a 
detective-led interview and results in obtaining an irrelevant information. The 
authors of the paper are in the process of developing a Decision Support 
System (DSS) that is based on combination of natural language processing 
techniques, similarity measures, and machine learning, i.e., “Naive 
Bayes”classifier for analysis in the field of crime determines the similarities 
and differences between the report’s crime. The paper presents an algorithm 
essential to the DSS and its evaluation. 
In this paper, the authors elaborate the possibilities of Lucene full-text 
indexing of unstructured text documents and searching for the data related to 
crime in general in Serbian language. 
 
 
1. STATE OF THE ART IN DOMAIN RS CRIMINAL LAW  
 
The set of all text documents which represent the laws of the Republic of 
Serbia is a huge repository of the data. Representatives of the Serbian 
Government produce and use on a daily basis a large amount of text 
documents in a connection with the law. A special set of laws are laws relating 
to criminal law and one of them is the Criminal Code. An Applicable Criminal 
Code has been published and amended in the following official gazettes (“RS 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
154
Official Gazette, no. 85/2005, 88/2005, 107/2005, 72/2009, 111/2009, 
121/2012, 104/2013 and 108/2014) [10].  
Serbian Criminal Code in its 36 chapters regulates the matter of guilt and 
sanction provisions in relation to criminal offenses. One segment of the 
Criminal Code regulates the matter of bodily injury. Those criminal offenses 
are processed in the Criminal Code in many aspects. For the purpose of this 
research, we focused on the offenses defined in the Criminal Code as bodily 
injury and consequently selected three articles of the Code: 
 
1. Serious Bodily Injury (Article 121) 
2. Light Bodily Injury (Article 122) 
3. Coercion (Article 135). 
 
 
Criminal Offenses against People 
 
This group of crimes includes criminal offenses where someone has been 
killed, bodily injured or endangered to death, has suffered bodily injury, or a 
case when someone’s health has been seriously impaired. Violence, abuse and 
neglect are categorized by levels by the Procedures for Handling Cases of 
Violence, abuse and neglect as follows: 
 
 
First level: head bumps, pushing, pinching, scratching, hitting, 
pulling, biting, tripping, kicking, fouling, and destroying things. 
 
Second level: slapping, bumping, kicking, tearing someone’s clothes 
with force, plunder and destruction of property, slipping the chair, 
pulling ears and hair. 
 
Third level: beating, strangling, throwing, causing burns, food, sleep 
deprivation, exposure to cold temperatures, weapon attack. 
 
A Physical abuse is a form of a physical force against someone in a way 
that a person is physically endangered and the consequences are visible 
immediately in a form of bruises or scars. Since a physical assault means every 
action against a body resulting in violation or violation of bodily integrity, 
bodily injuries caused by a physical attack or kicking are also defined as a 
crime. 
Criminal Code covers serious and slight injuries. The limit is not always 
easy to draw. This largely depends on an opinion given by medical experts, 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 155
but serious bodily injury is the one that endangers someone's life or damages 
someone’s health. 
Forensic medicine classifies bodily injury in two levels: 
 
1. Light bodily injury (easy and temporary damage to health); 
2. Serious bodily injury is divided in three sub-levels: 
(a) a serious bodily injury (with no other attributes, so-called an 
ordinary bodily injury); 
(b) an aggravated bodily injury defined as especially dangerous, 
serious bodily injury resulting in weakening of a vital function of 
someone’s body or an organ, or permanent serious health 
impairment or disfigurement; 
(c) a serious bodily injury resulting in death. 
 
There is a group of criminal offenses where a perpetrator does not directly 
endanger a victim, such as (a) leaving someone in condition or circumstances 
dangerous to life or health (exposure to danger), (b) a perpetrator causes 
certain circumstances and doesn’t provide help to someone who is in mortal 
danger but is able to provide help without risk to others, (c) leaving someone 
because a perpetrator is in circumstances dangerous to life and health. In 
addition, beatings, using dangerous tools in fights or quarrels and illegal 
abortions are also considered as crimes against a person. 
 
 
EuroVoc Thesaurus 
 
EuroVoc is a multilingual thesaurus specifically developed for processing 
the documentary information of the EU institutions. EuroVoc is a controlled 
vocabulary 
which 
contains 
exclusively 
selected 
and 
recommended 
terms/names with the aim of an organizing knowledge. Its content is a 
hierarchical list of terms (descriptors) which may represent a social and 
political life of the EU classified under the relevant terms. Each term 
automatically includes all equivalents of recommended descriptors in all 
languages. Use of EuroVoc is a great advantage in the text mining because it 
allows standardization of terminology for subject indexing that enables greater 
precision during searching documents. EvroVoc is available on the website 
[11]. 
The first and second version of EuroVoc provided parallel terms in nine 
languages and it was a successful translation of thematic concepts from one 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
156
language to another, while the third-a multilingual version included other 
languages such as Slovenian, Croatian, and Serbian. 
 
 
1.1. Semantic Resources in Serbian Language 
 
There are four types of semantic indexing resources (also called controlled 
indexing languages): - Controlled Vocabulary, Taxonomy, Thesaurus and 
Ontology [12]. The thesaurus as one kind of semantic resources [13] is a 
network of controlled vocabularies. It is a higher level compared to 
taxonomies. It is a data representation including associative relationships in 
addition to hierarchical relationships. The structure of EuroVoc depends on 
semantic relationships (at the specific level of descriptors and non-
descriptors): 
scope 
note, 
micro-thesaurus 
relationship, 
equivalence 
relationship, hierarchical relationship, associative relationship [14]. The 
thesaurus has equivalence (USE/UF), broader term (BT), narrower term (NT) 
and related term (RT) relationships. So formed relationships enable the 
structure and scope for the thesaurus. 
For instance, having in mind that a broader term for “physical assault” is 
“criminal law” and the narrower terms are “criminal offense against a person” 
and “criminal offense” determine the scope of a set of data relating to these 
terms. In order to realize granular and more consistent indexing, using 
semantically relationships, can be used an expanded set of links. It provides a 
very efficient process of searching from the perspective of an user. 
Developed by approach [15] to semantic annotation of texts is to move 
beyond bag-of-words representation, using atoms of lexical knowledge to 
represent the elementary word meanings (senses), and converting the text into 
a graph linking senses rather than words. WordNet synsets are well suited for 
that purpose, grouping words into sets of synonyms related to word 
definitions, providing sense identifiers and recording semantic relations 
between synsets. The sense clustering methods are referenced in the WordNet 
and EuroWordNet and ensure relations between the sets of synonyms 
(synsets). Synsets represent the senses of the words, which are grouped into 
clusters. Text annotated at a higher abstraction level can be clustered in a 
better way because similarities between texts are more cleared. 
 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 157
 
Figure 1. EuroVoc -The term of a criminal offense in the dictionary of criminal law. 
The clustering provides methods by using different types of information 
[16]: “information concerning the similarity of the words found in the synsets 
describing different senses; information on the similarity of the relations 
between themselves and other synsets of the network; probabilistic 
information extracted from corpora; syntactic criteria concerning alternations 
with similar sub categorization frames; semantic criteria concerning the 
semantic class of arguments, the subject domain and the underlying predicate 
argument structures” (Resnik, 1995; Jiang and Conrath,1997; Mihalcea and 
Moldovan, 2001; Palmer et al., 2006). 
Serbian WordNet (SrpWN) represents a lexical semantic network, 
containing synsets with glosses and various semantic relations, such as 
antonyms, metonymy, causation, category domain, etc. [17]. Through 
interlingual relations, it is connected to English WordNet (versions 2.0 and 
3.0) and wordnets of many other languages. 
In order to avoid the repetition of words in the texts that have been 
translated (translators commonly use synonyms and near-synonyms) 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
158
translators use translation equivalents (TEs) of a polysemous word. These 
words are semantically similar in the target language (TL). 
 
 
Figure 2. Serbian WordNet [18]. 
 
2. KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTION FROM UNSTRUCTURED 
DOCUMENTS VIA TEXT MINING TECHNIQUES 
 
Today, text mining technologies and data provide a new generation of 
tools for the analysis and visualization of both structured data and text [19]. 
Text mining techniques played a vital role in the last few years in extraction of 
knowledge from unstructured documents, especially in crime detection and 
prevention [20]. The main objective of this study is to propose a text mining 
approach to expand upon the special analytical capabilities of the investigative 
effort carried out by law enforcement personnel [21]. One text document can 
be unstructured, structured (business reports) and semi-structured. Some of 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 159
basic text mining tasks are Information Retrieval of documents in response to 
a “query document”, where special case is when the query text document can 
consist a few keywords (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3. Lucene document matcher. 
To address this problem the Information Retrieval system indexes the 
documents and queries. Indexing is the process that extracts descriptor terms 
from a document or a query. 
The term frequency is an important factor in the indexing phase. Generally 
such frequent terms in a corpus are not more representatives of the contents of 
documents, they are not holders of information. Weighting techniques are used 
to assign a high weight to rare words. The best weighting technique known 
according to [22] are relying on TF-IDF measure. 
TF-IDF doesn’t measure how often a keyword appears, but offers a 
measurement of importance by comparing how often a keyword appears 
compared to expectations gathered from a larger set of documents.  
 
 
Figure 4. TF-IDF measure. 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
160
2.1. Query and Document Models 
 
Translating the query and document from raw strings into something we 
can do computation what is the first hurdle in computing a similarity score. To 
do so, we use “query models” and “document models.” The “models” here are 
just a fancy way of saying that the document vectors are represented in some 
other way that makes computation possible. 
The similarity between two documents is a function of the angle between 
their vectors in the term vector space. The similarity between query (q) and 
documents (d) is expressed by the cosine of the angle between two vectors (q 
and d) in the next formula: 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
The above image illustrates this process for the query “fizičkinapad” (en. 
“physical assault”) and the document Crime court Republic of Serbia (Figure 
5), according with query and document models in [23]. 
The final step in computing the similarity score runs the query and 
document representations using a scoring function. 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
Figure 5. The process for the query “fizičkinapad” and the Crime court  
Republic of Serbia. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 161
The vector space model is unable to discriminate between different 
meanings of the same word. 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
No associations between words are made in the vector space 
representation. 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
There is not a connection between topics and words. If a search engine 
determines that a particular query is time sensitive, it will return news results, 
or if it thinks the query intent is transactional, it will display results by topics. 
Topic modelling provides methods for automatically organizing, 
understanding, searching, and summarizing large electronic archives. The 
types of query and document models are commonly used in search: VSM 
(Vector Space Model), LSA (Latent Semantic Analysis), pLSA (probabilistic 
Latent Semantic Analysis) and LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation). 
The more abstract representations of the query are entity extraction or 
latent topic representations (LDA) [23]. Indeed, Google knows that 
“fizičkinapad” is news in the Serbian web-magazine Telegraf. 
To extract the semantic relationships between words, we don't have to 
address specific data which is “the term”, but the overall meaning contained in 
these terms, we have to treat as “concepts”. The concepts are in some ways 
terms containers; each concept contains a set of terms that has semantically the 
same meaning [24]. Semantic resources can retrieve concepts from terms. The 
most used semantic resources are controlled vocabularies, taxonomies, 
thesauri and ontology’s. 
The use of terminological resources improves the research process. It 
allows us to find documents that exactly meet the need expressed by a query, 
but also the documents that partially meet this need. However, for a query 
containing the two terms T1 and T2, a document D1 containing once these two 
terms and a document D2 containing 30 times the two terms, in some cases, 
the semantic indexing cannot decide which of the 2 documents respond better 
to the query. Usually the document D2 is more relevant; it contains lots of 
information about the two terms. It would therefore be wise to return to the 
user of the document D2 before D1. 
 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
162
 
Figure 6. Vector TF-IDF – terms and paragraphs. 
As document structure often builds a hierarchy into sections, paragraphs 
and sentences, we can decompose each document into the vector stat space 
representation of non-overlapping and sequential extracts that correspond to 
them and store such decompositions into a term-by-extract matrix (tem) (also 
called “term-location” matrix in [25].) The choice of the hierarchy’s level that 
the decomposition will rely on, can result in a document representation using 
term-by-section (tsm), term-by-paragraph (tpm) or term-by-sentence (tsm) 
matrices. 
The extraction is done by projecting terms on a semantic resource (such as 
a thesaurus). The result is a set of related concepts represented by a graph. It is 
a conceptual graph that describes the content of documents. 
Furthermore, the fine granularity of the semantic descriptions found in 
existing resources, combined to the great divergences in their structure and 
content; put a hindrance to their compatibility. Usually, classic indexing 
according to [26] allows to link descriptors of a query to the indexes of a 
document, exclusively if the intersection of the two sets is not empty. Because 
of this reason, relations of synonymy, equivalence, ... etc. are ignored. When 
searching the term physical assault, the user would be potentially interested in 
documents containing the term bodily injury, because the “bodily injury” word 
is only a derivation form of the general meaning “physical assault”. The use of 
a terminological resource (semantics) as thesauri or ontology’s can treat 
descriptors as concepts rather than simple terms. They allow passing from 
simple indexing to semantic indexing. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 163
 
Figure 7. Graph of concepts representing the documents. 
According to the semantic indexing process [12] and the concepts 
weighting there are three main steps for a semantic indexing and weighting: 
 
 
Terms extraction. 
 
Concepts extraction. 
 
Concepts weighting. 
 
 
3. A TEXT SEARCH ENGINE LIBRARY IN INFORMATION 
RETRIEVAL- APACHE LUCENE 
 
Information retrieval (IR) refers to the process of searching documents, 
information within documents or metadata about documents. Lucene lets you 
add searching capabilities to your applications. It is a mature, free, open-
source project implemented in Java; it’s a project in the Apache Software 
Foundation, licensed under the liberal Apache Software License. As such, 
Lucene is currently, and has been for quite a few years, the most popular free 
IR library [27]. 
 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
164
 
Figure 8. Basics of search engine. 
Applications such as Amazon are among a commercial application that 
uses Lucene for indexing and allows effective searching [28]. Lucene is able 
to index text from a various formats such as PDF, HTML and Microsoft Word, 
and also in various languages [29]. One of the Lucene concepts is presented on 
Figure 8. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 165
The process of indexing consists of several procedures and operations that 
make the Lucene indexing method [30]. All these operations areseparate and 
discrete into three operational groups: 
 
 
extracting text from the document, 
 
analysis, 
 
adding to the index. 
 
Essentially each of these groups are quite different and relatively complex 
operations. The first step in indexing is to extract the text from the original 
document content. Then, the extracted text is used to create the document. The 
resulting document is made up of fields. Such developed text fields are 
analyzed and formed a set of tokens. The last step in the indexing of text 
documents is to combine token with the corresponding indices. 
In order to index the document using Lucene, we have to convert in the 
plain text format for Lucene processing, and then create a Lucene document. 
To create an index, for the document in PDF format, is first necessary to use 
the method to extract the information in the form of text from PDF manuals 
and then extracted text is used to create documents. Similar approach is used 
for indexing of Word, or any other document that is not in full plain text 
format. Also, for HML or HTML documents using plain text characters, you 
need to properly prepare your data for indexing. When you get the text that 
you want to index and create a document with the fields, the text needs to 
undergo a process of analysis. 
Analysis of converting text data into the base unit time called token. This 
is the process of converting raw text in tokens. Lucene, this is achieved by 
using Analyzer, Tokenizer and Token Filter classes. Tokenizer is responsible 
for the input component pieces, the tokens. Token filters can further modify 
the tokens produced by Tokenizer. 
Once you create Lucene document fields, you can invoke the Index 
Writer. After that, Lucene first analyzes the text, and then text data is divided 
into tokens, and then perform a large number of operations. Using Lucene 
filter, you perform a search for a specific word or set of words that can be 
written using small and capital letters. 
During the analysis, text data passes through several operations: the 
removal of common words, ignoring punctuation, stemming of words to 
reduce them to the root-form, the changing of words to lowercase, etc. 
Analysis takes place immediately prior to indexing and query. Analysis 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
166
converts text data into symbols, and these symbols are added to the terms of 
the Lucene index. 
Lucene library contains a variety of built-in analyzer. Some of them are: 
SimpleAnalyzer, StandardAnalyzer, StopAnalyzer and SnowballAnalyzer. 
They are different in a way they treat text and mode of application and the 
type of used filter. Such analysis can have advantages. The removal of pre-
indexing, decrease the size of the index, can have a negative impact on 
processing precise queries. Applying Lucene can have more control over the 
process of analysis using custom analyzer. 
After analyzing the input text and creation of its representation, Lucene 
index is corrected. Lucene uses the data structure known as an inverted index. 
The inverted index uses both disk space and enabling faster look up key time. 
Its structure is inverse, because the tokens that are used are extracted from an 
input document form in the form of look up keys. This mechanism ensures that 
the document is not treated as a central entity. This means that directly it seeks 
concrete word in index instead of scanning the entire document. 
Lucene’s default scoring system works very well for most cases. It uses 
seven different variables to determine the final ranking of each document. 
Along TF and IDF variables, there are (from lucenetutorial.com): 
 
 
coord = number of terms in the query found in the document, 
 
lengthNorm = measure of the importance of a term according to the 
total number of terms in the field, 
 
queryNorm = normalization factor so that queries can be compared, 
 
boost (index) = boost of the field at index-time, 
 
boost (query) = boost of the field at query-time. 
 
The similarity measure uses mathematical techniques to estimate the 
degree of semantic similarity between two documents or terms/concepts. It is 
based on the meaning of terms/concepts to find the similarity value. For the 
default similarity measure (DefaultSimilarity) Lucene use Cosine similarity. 
This default similarity function is based on TF-IDF similarity. The following 
formula (straight from Lucene’s Similarity function) illustrates the basic 
factors used to score a document (Equation 5). 
 
 
 
(5) 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 167
Before starting to analyze the results, we want to clarify the evaluation of 
query results for those readers who have little or no knowledge about criminal 
code. Suppose that we have a query (as one version of root word “kazna”) that 
should retrieve three articles of the law as documents (i.e., the set of relevant 
documents is size 3). One can select the single search result by a GUI front-
end to the Lucene Luke tool, on the Explain control panel. This pops up 
another window which explains the query score. In the query details for 3 
documents, we see that the input has been parsed into text: “kazna”. Here is 
the text of the explanation: 
 
0.2813weight(contents:kejriwal in 8) [DefaultSimilarity], result of: 
0.2813fieldWeight in 8, product of: 
1.0000tf(freq=1.0), with freq of: 
1.0000termFreq=1.0 
1.1252idf(docFreq=14, maxDocs=17) 
0.2500fieldNorm(doc=8) 
 
where the ranking score is calculated as 1.0000* 1.1252 * 0.2500 = 0.2813. 
 
 
4. CASE STUDY: INFORMATION RETRIEVAL IN CRIMINAL 
CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA 
 
Serbian Criminal Code in its 36 chapters regulates the matter of guilt and 
sanction provisions in relation to criminal offenses. One segment of the 
Criminal Code regulates the matter of bodily injury. Those criminal offenses 
are processed in the Criminal Code in many aspects. For the purpose of the 
research, we focused on the offenses defined in the Criminal Code as bodily 
injury and consequently selected three articles of the Code which are as 
follows: a) Serious Bodily Injury (Article 121), b) Light Bodily Injury (Article 
122) c) Coercion (Article 135) of the Criminal Code of the Republic Serbia. 
For the interpretation of this Code it is essential to define the meaning of 
physical injury by major users. 
As its primary aspect, it uses a great deal of intelligence to determine 
which documents are the most important for you based on your query. For the 
purpose of our experiment, we used the RS Criminal Code written in Latin 
script and in Serbian language, which in contrast to English contains the 
following signs: č, ć, ž, đ and š.  

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
168
To execute the process of indexing, these signs need to be identified and 
supported by Lucene for Serbian. This feature has Lucene 5.2.0 version that 
we have used. This version of Lucene also has an editor where it is possible to 
monitor the indexing and later retrieval. This is LUKE 5.2.0. Luke is a 
development and diagnostic handy tool which provides access to already 
existing Lucene indexes and allows you to display and modify their content, 
reconstruct the original document fields and edit them and re-insert to the 
index. 
For the purpose of normalization in the context of indexing is used: 
 
 
public class SerbianNormalizationFilterFactory 
 
extendsTokenFilterFactory 
 
In this experiment we used StandardAnalyzer Lucene 5.2.0. If you use 
StandardAnalyzer (), then you use the STOP_WORDS_SET, which is a set of 
basic English stop-words. 
Since the text is in Serbian language, we could directly use 
StandardAnalyzer (). For our purposes, it was necessary to include stop-words 
in Serbian language. This was done by inserting a new argument set to 
StandardAnalyzer () and defining over CharArraySet as follows: 
 
 
CharArraySet set = IndexFiles.fromFileToCharArrraySet(stopwPath); 
 
Analyzer analyzer = new StandardAnalyzer(set); 
 
Using CharArraySet it is possible to reintroduce stop-words into the text 
file stop.txt and define the code of the location where this file is through 
stopwPath. Actually we have only defined paths .txt files where they are. The 
code is defined as follows: 
 
String docsPath = “D:/Na1”; 
String stopwPath = “D:/NaS/stop.txt”; 
String indexPath = “D:/Na”; 
 
docPath is the way where we accommodate the input document to Lucene 
indexes, stopwPath input document Serbian stop-words and the places 
indexPath Lucene index files.  
 
 
 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 169
 
Figure 9. Stop-words list. 
We have added about 700 most common words as stop-words: koju, 
koje,... Part of this list is shown in Figure 9.  
Experimenting with the scoring system in Lucene may determine 
relevance of some document to the query. How often a query term appears in a 
document, we can see in Luke. Using Luke, we can open up our index and see 
its content. It should give us statistics on the elements, number of documents 
indexed, etc. Luke can also be used to run raw Lucene searches against our 
index [31]. Top ranking terms on the right we see the terms stored most 
frequently in field of Luke named _content. 
 
 
4.1. Conceptual Graph Construction 
 
Using a morphosyntactic analyzer (such as Bag of Words on lexically 
supported query expansion system VeBRanka) descriptors (terms) of 
documents in Serbian can be extracted. It is an extraction of terms which better 
represent the informational content of documents. Generally, so frequent word 
in a document denotes an important concept. The arrows in the conceptual 
graph going from higher weight concepts to lower weight concepts. Then 
corresponding concepts are found either manually or via projection on a 
semantic resource (such as a EuroVoc thesaurus). Then, we obtain a 
conceptual graph as follows: 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
170
During a research phase (user querying) we want to find the most relevant 
documents by applying weighting method by TF-IDF. The operative term will 
be “povreda” or some root or variant thereof. We will search for this term in a 
half dozen simple documents, as illustrated in the table below. 
 
 
Figure 10. Multi-graph of concepts. 
 
Figure 11. Multi-graph of concepts. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 171
Each of the three columns illustrates a polysemy, a word or phrase with 
multiple, related meanings. Column 1 associates “nastupiti” and “smrt” with 
“napad”, “sposobnost” and “unakaženost”, while column 3 associates 
“nastupiti” and “smrt” with “ubistvo”, “sila” and “otmica”. Consequently, the 
terms can be transformed into concepts. For each concept we calculate its 
weight according to all documents and the resulted weights are stored in the 
index of the concept. Then we project the documents on this graph. The idea is 
to schematize the relations between concepts and documents. Then we get a 
graph as follows: 
 
 
Figure 12. Multi-graph of concepts enriched with documents. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The aim of this study is to present the possibilities of access to Lucene 
indexing and Lucene searching data and unstructured text documents related to 
crime in Serbian language in order to find elements of crime in cyberspace. 
This research is based on Vector Space Model where Tf-Idf measure is applied 
on query and Lucene index, in order to advance searching data process for 
creating a conceptual model. The emphasis is on three articles of the Criminal 
Code of the Republic of Serbia law relating to physical violation. Considering 
the criminal activity is also presented in cyberspace, fast search techniques are 
important for detection and processing criminal offenses in order to increase 
the level of security in the Republic of Serbia.  

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
172
In addition, the paper presents the possibilities of technology and Lucene 
indexing and searching of unstructured data and documents within e-
Government of the Republic of Serbia in Serbian language. First, we presented 
data mining and Lucene library spaces architecture, as well as the core Lucene, 
and then the possibility of its application. 
We based our research on 540 questions asked to users concerning these 
articles of the law. In the paper are presented search results and ranking of 
those three documents (articles of the Criminal Code of the Republic of 
Serbia) constituting three articles of the RS Criminal Code related to a 
personal injury. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
The strategy and action plan for the development of electronic 
administration until 2013 (“RS Official Gazette”, Nos. 55/05, 71/05-
correction, 101/07 and 65/08). 
[2] 
Nikolić, V;Đikanović, P;Batoćanin, D. e-Government Republic of 
Serbia: The registration of motor vehicles and trailers, YU INFO, 2013.  
[3] 
Nikolić, V;Protić, J;Đikanović, P. G2G integraatioin MOI ofRepublic of 
Serbia with e-Government PORTAL, ETRAN, 2013. 
[4] 
Randjelović, D; Popović, B;Nikolić, V;Nedeljković, S. Intelligent search 
terms in the case of police services in eGovernment, New information 
technology for analitycal decision-making in the biological, economic 
and social systems, State university in Novi Pazar, 2014. 
[5] 
Dragović, R;Ivković, J;Dragović, D;Klipa, Đ;Radišić, D;Nikolić, V. 
Decision support system to support the strategic management of the state 
administration, YU INFO, 2015. 
[6] 
Ning, 
Zhong;Yuefeng, 
Li; 
Sheng-Tang, 
Wu.“Effective 
Pattern 
Discovery for Text Mining”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and 
Data Engineering, vol.24, no. 1, pp. 30-44, January 2012, 
doi:10.1109/TKDE.2010.211. 
[7] 
Peter,Teufl; Udo, 
Payer; Guenter,Lackner. 
From 
NLP 
(Natural 
Language Processing) to MLP (Machine Language Processing), 
Computer Network Security, (2010). 
[8] 
Stevic, 
Z; 
Rajcic-Vujasinovic, 
M; 
Radovanovic, 
I; 
Nikolic,  
V.Modeling 
and 
Sensing 
ofElectrochemical 
Processesupon 
DiracPotentiostaticExcitation of Capacitive Charging/Discharging,Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci.,10(2015)6020-6029. 

Information Retrieval and Development of Conceptual Schemas … 173
[9] 
Lucene (http://lucene.apache.org/). 
[10] Nikolić, V;Markoski, B;Ivković, M; Kuk, K;Djikanović, P. Information 
retrieval for unstructured text documents in Serbian into the crime 
domain, str. 6., CINTI, 2015. 
[11] The EU’s multilingual thesaurus http://eurovoc.europa.eu/. 
[12] Nabil, R; Amine, L; Issam, A. Ben Lahmar El Habib, Labriji El 
Houssine, A New Approach that improves TF-IDF Weighting Measure, 
International Journal of Information and Communication Technology 
Research, Volume 5 No. 10, October 2015. 
[13] Catherine,Roussey; et al. Uneméthoded'indexationsémantiqueadaptée 
aux corpus multilingues, L’Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de 
Lyon, N°d’ordre 01 ISAL 0059, (2001). 
[14] http://www.iskoi.org/doc/development.htm. 
[15] http://www.fizyka.umk.pl/publications/kmk/12-Wordnet-glosses.pdf. 
[16] Apidianaki, M. Discovering semantic relations by means of 
unsupervised sense clustering, Proceedings of the LREC Workshop 
“Semantic relations. Theory and Applications”, 18 May, Valletta, Malta, 
pp. 3-11., (2010).  
[17] http://sm.jerteh.rs/Default.aspx. 
[18] http://serbian-dictionary.com/wordnet. 
[19] http://www.megaputer.com/down/dm/white_papers/crime_pattern_case.
pdf. 
[20] Nael, T;Elyezjy, Alaa M. Elhaless, Investigating Crimes using Text 
Mining and Network Analysis, International Journal of Computer 
Applications, (0975 – 8887) Volume 126 – No.8, September 2015. 
[21] Helbicha, M;Hagenauera, J;Leitnerb, M; Edwards, R. Exploration of 
unstructured narrative crime reports: an unsupervised neural network 
and point pattern analysis approach, Cartography and Geographic 
Information Science, 2013. 
[22] Pascal, Soucey; Guy, W. Mineau. (2005), «Beyond TFIDF Weighting 
for text Categorization in the vector space model», IJCAI’05 
Proceedings of the 19th international joint conference on Artificial 
intelligence. 
[23] https://moz.com/blog/determining-relevance-how-similarity-is-scored. 
[24] Florian, 
SEYDOUX. 
(2006), 
exploitation 
de 
connaissances-
sémantiquesexternesdans 
les 
représentationsvectoriellesenrecherche-
documentaire, 
ÉCOLE 
POLYTECHNIQUE 
FÉDÉRALE 
DE 
LAUSANNE. 

Vojkan Nikolić, Predrag Đikanović and Slobodan Nedeljković 
174
[25] Roelleke, T; Tsikrika, T;Kazai, G.A general matrix framework for 
modelling information retrieval. J. Information Processing and 
Management, 42, 4–30, 2006. 
[26] CHURCH; et al. (1990). CHURCH K.W and HANKS P., «Word 
association 
norms, 
mutual 
information 
and 
lexicography». 
Computational Linguistic, vol 1, Mars 1990, pp. 22-29. 
[27] Hatcher, E;Gospodnetić, O; McCandless, M. Lucene in action, Manning 
Publications, 2009. 
[28] http://wiki.apache.org/lucene-java/PoweredBy. 
[29] Paul, T. (2004). The Lucene Search Engine. http:// www.javaranch.com/ 
journal/2004/04/Lucene.html. 
[30] Nikolić, V;Nedeljković, S;Djikanović, P. Information retrieval for 
unstructured text documents: Lucene indexing, EUROBREND, 2015. 
[31] Nikolić, V;Ivković, M;Nedeljković, S;Djikanović, P. Information 
retrieval for unstructured text documents: Lucene searching, AIIT, 2015. 
 
 

In: Knowledge Discovery in Cyberspace 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-566-7 
Editors: K. Kuk and D. Ranđelović 
© 2017 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7  
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANDROID-BASED 
SECURE COMMUNICATION DEVICE 
 
 
Aleksandar Jevremović1,*, PhD, Mladen Veinović1, PhD 
Goran Šimić2, PhD, Nikola Savanović1, MD 
and Dragan Ranđelović3, PhD 
1Singidunum University, Belgrade, Serbia 
2Military Academy, Belgrade, Serbia 
3The Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies, Belgrade, Serbia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The possibility of achieving protected communication has long been 
a privilege just for professional services and systems that can afford great 
investment for the development of specialized devices for this purpose. 
Today, the popularization of open-source development model enabled 
significantly reduction of development costs and maintaining high levels 
of security. This development implies the inclusion of existing 
components that enables verifying implemented principles if it is 
necessary. This paper discusses key issues related to the development of 
mobile devices for secure communication based on the Android platform. 
 
Keywords: custom cipher algorithm, network system security 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: A. Jevremovic, Email: ajevremovic@singidunum.ac.rs. 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
176 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The possibility of achieving protected communication has long been a 
privilege only for professional services and systems that are able to make big 
investments for the development of specialized devices. At this level as safety 
communication can be considered only one that is based on the coding 
algorithm developed by the end user. In addition, the principles of operation of 
such cipher algorithms may not be known to anyone other than the system end 
user. From this approach the popular cipher algorithms (DES, AES, etc.) 
cannot be considered as safety ones [1]. 
Therefore, already built and in-the-box communication protecting systems 
running out of the question. Cryptographic solutions require reliable (safety) 
platform for implementation (hardware and system software) which can be 
verified (open source systems). Method of implementation and confidence in 
the cryptology synchronization procedures and resynchronization are a key 
factor for confidence in their custom cryptology solution. Such an 
implementation prevents the existence of secret doors through which the 
cipher keys can “leak”. Moreover, the procedures about cryptology keys 
manipulation are essential for such considerations (storage, selection, 
distribution, deleting etc.). 
Today, the popularization of open-source development model enabled 
significant reduction of development costs and maintaining high levels of 
security. This development implies usage of already built components that 
enables verifying implemented principles if it is necessary. 
This paper discusses key issues related to the development of mobile 
devices for secure communication based on the Android platform. This 
research is based on the collected experience [2-9] in the development of top 
level communication protection systems based on Linux platform. 
 
 
NETWORK LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Mobile computer networks include the 4G mobile telephony using 
standardized protocol stacks, OSI and TCP/IP. This standardization allows 
chaining protocols at different levels in order to achieve optimal performance 
of various network applications and variety of infrastructures. From the aspect 
of telecommunications such stratification allows the implementation of the 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 177 
cipher system at various levels (from physical to the application), depending 
on the capabilities and needs of a particular telecommunications system. 
Encryption system implementation based on physical layer requires the 
use of special telecommunication infrastructure and such a system would not 
be possible to use on the Internet network. In addition, these systems are 
implemented at the hardware level, which can significantly increase the cost of 
development. Such systems are not flexible, requiring adaptation in 
accordance with protected device physical interfaces. Also, they are 
specialized in non - standardized way and therefore, they need significant 
funds to invest in the development and implementation. On the other hand, the 
implementation of encryption functions at the hardware level leaves minimal 
space for “back door”. 
Implementation of the encryption system on the application layer is 
mainly easy objective in cases where developers develop complete application 
protocol, or when they have modifying the source code of existing one. 
Otherwise, when it is necessary to protect the enclosed application protocols, 
this may represent an impossible task. Moreover, it is necessary for users to 
manage some cryptography function (e.g., selection of the encryption system, 
algorithm, the encryption key, etc.), which significantly burden their work and 
increases the possibility of errors. An implementation of the protection system 
at the application level is not reusable for more than one application protocol 
and it represents another disadvantage of such implementation. 
 
 
Figure 1. Different communication levels for implementation of encryption systems. 
However, it should be noted that for the implementation of a protection 
system at these levels, in the scenario to achieve maximum performance and 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
178 
safety, it is necessary to have the ability to modify the kernel of operating 
system. 
Implementation of the encryption system on the network or transport layer 
represents the optimal choice for the aspect of compatibility with a variety of 
telecommunication infrastructures and the Internet, as well as from the aspect 
of all application protocols that the device uses. In this case preference is given 
to the network layer since the encryption function implementation at this level 
protects [10] the different protocols of the transport layer (TCP, UDP, etc.). 
Further, IPsec protection subsystem at the network layer can be easily used in 
combination with its custom cipher algorithm. However, it should be noted 
that for the realization of a system of protection at these levels, it is necessary 
to have the ability to modify the kernel of operating system in order to achieve 
maximum performance and safety. 
 
 
SYSTEM LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION 
 
One of the key issues for the implementation of custom encryption system 
is choice of computer system level on which it will be implemented. In 
general, there are three possible levels of implementation: so called user space 
(in the form of an application or service), implementation at the level of the 
kernel of operating system and at the hardware level. 
 
 
Figure 2. Levels of implementation of custom encryption system. 
Basic advantage of implementation of custom cipher algorithm at the user 
space is the ability to use a wide range of programming languages, libraries 
and architecture. Further, such a system is easy to install because there is no 
need for modification of the operating system or hardware. On the other hand, 
the implementations of custom cipher algorithm at the user space are limited. 
Routing communications data of other applications and services on encryption 
system is generally far from simple and often impossible. In addition, the 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 179 
realization of this level will have a negative impact on the performance of the 
encryption system. 
Implementation of custom cipher algorithm at the hardware level may 
represent a good solution if there is requirement of high performances and use 
of resources that are located outside the computer system. On the other hand, 
such a realization is usually very expensive. In addition, any changes to the 
system are much more difficult and expensive to implement than software 
changes. Finally, the user must have the ability to independently design and 
produce the desired hardware or he has to have ability to thoroughly oversee 
this process if it is running by somebody else. At the hardware level it can be 
achieved maximum speed of encryption and decryption produced via a 
dedicated crypto processor. Dedicated processor design techniques are well 
known to everyone. However, the technology for the realization of these 
processors has only a few countries in the world whose realizations the rest of 
the world does not trust. 
Our experience indicates that the kernel of operating system represents 
optimal place for the implementation of custom cipher algorithm (full list of 
references are sited in introductory part). It can achieved improved 
performance due to reduced number of system calls. In addition, the 
cryptosystem in the core of operating system can easily be paired with the 
protocols of the transport and network layer as well as data link layer. 
However, for such an approach it is necessary to have access to the source 
code of the kernel, which is enabled within the Linux operating system. 
 
 
COMPUTED AND ABSOLUTE SECURITY 
 
The protection level is one of the first issues that should be determined in 
the very beginning project phase. There are two possible solutions: the 
processing encryption systems and absolutely safety encryption systems. 
The safety processing ciphering algorithms are designed to use the keys of 
limited length (usually 128 to 4,096 bits). Due to limited key length breaking 
the cipher text is possible by trying all possible combinations of bits (keys) to 
find the corresponding (total search space of all possible keys). Estimated 
number of combinations to try to find used one is 2n-1/2, where n represents 
the length of used key. Breaking of cipher text encrypted with keys longer than 
256 bits is practically irrational due a lot of CPU time needed, so these 
encryption systems are considered efficient. For breaking of cipher texts 
encrypted by using of commercial ciphering algorithms (DES, 3DES, AES, 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
180 
etc.) there is no confidence that the complete cipher key search is necessary. It 
is suspected that there are shortened ways for that and there is also reasonable 
suspicion that these shortened procedures are known to those who have 
designed algorithms listed. It is based on some information published, mainly 
via the Internet. A particular problem is the use of asymmetric encryption 
system (RSA) due to fact that scientifically (mathematically) it has not been 
proven that there are no shortened procedures for breaking algorithm. 
Once designed cipher systems obsolete quickly. The development of 
processors, computers and networks facilitating faster search of keys, and such 
systems have to be examined and changed after a few years of use. The safety 
processing encryption systems are been attacked by using weaknesses of 
computer protocols, built-in backdoors, or human mistakes. 
Different of safety processing ciphering algorithms, the content encrypted 
by using absolutely safety encryption systems cannot be broken, regardless of 
the amount of processing power engaged for this purpose. More precisely, it is 
achieved by using unique cipher key (so called one time pad). This further 
implies that the key length must be equal to or greater than the length of a 
message to be encrypted. Moreover, a new key has to be used for each 
message. Due to everyday improvement of storage media (more capacity at a 
reduced cost) it is becoming more realistic that absolutely safety encryption 
systems can be successfully applied for the protection of real-time 
communication. For instance, one time pad systems can be used for protection 
of standard voice-coder systems instead ordinary used safety processing 
ciphering algorithms. 
In both cases, regardless of which encryption system is used, there has to 
be established safety communication channel for exchanging the keys between 
sides in communication. Development of special protocols which enable the 
exchange of a secret keys through unsafe channel [11-13] can be used as 
alternative way for this purpose. However, according to published results the 
performances of such protocols are still unsatisfactory as well as confidence in 
them. These are the main reasons that they are not used in absolutely safety 
encryption systems. 
A simple and usable-in-practice method for absolutely safety encryption is 
bitwise processing of message with XOR logical function (exclusive 
disjunction) in which a bit array that came out of a random number generator 
is used as second operand [14] (so called sequential or Bit-for-bit encryption). 
It is well known that such systems are the most resistant to errors in the 
channel (one false bit in the cipher text affects only one bit decoded 
incorrectly in an open message), which is important for mobile 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 181 
communications. Precondition for such a system is that both sides have to 
have the same secret random bit array by same or greater length than the 
length of messages to be exchanged. The same simple function (XOR) is used 
in both of encryption and decryption of message. Random bit arrays can be 
segmented and their segments can be indexed in order that the same segment 
will never be used twice. 
 
 
Figure 3. Implementation model for absolutely safety communication. 
The weakest part of proposed solution is necessity of the secret key 
exchange channel. The second one is the length of secret key - it should be 
equal to or greater than the total length of all messages to be exchanged within 
the planned period of use (e.g., one communication session). In case of 
intensive exchange of voice or video messages, the length of this series can be 
measured in tens or even hundreds of gigabytes for the planned use period of 
one month between the only two points that communicate. However, given the 
level of protection which is thus obtained, the problems that are avoided 
(Connections, exchange session key, etc.) and low CPU requirements, 
proposed solution should be put in consideration for practical applications. 
 
 
LINUX AND ANDROID 
 
The kernel of Linux operating system is used as basis for Android devices. 
This way numerous functions of the Linux operating system can be used in 
Android devices. In addition, since the code of Linux kernel is publicly 
available, this core part of operating system can be controlled, modified and 
extended in order to improve security features. Of course, in the development 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
182 
of security systems the practice is that all components that are not required are 
removed to simplify the system and to reduce the potential risk of installation 
of back-doors. 
 
 
Figure 4. Android architecture. 
Support for IPsec protection system already exists in the Linux kernel, as 
AH and ESP protocols. Cipher algorithms used in these protocols are also 
implemented in the kernel, and they can be accessed via the standardized 
Cryptographic API. This means that user defined cipher algorithm can be 
implemented as a kernel module and it can be used for communication 
protection via IPsec protection system. 
 
 
Figure 5. Model of applying user defined cipher algorithm by using Cryptographic API 
of Linux kernel. 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 183 
Another advantage of implementation of user defined cipher algorithm as 
a kernel module its exploitation is not limited just for communication 
protection. It can be used for many other purposes. For instance, it can be used 
for the protection of file-system (theft device scenario). Additionally, the 
algorithm can easily be relocated to external hardware [15] (a case in which 
the cipher algorithm acts as a device driver). 
 
 
Trusting to Compiler, Hardware and Firmware 
 
After checking of kernel source code and necessary Android components, 
making modifications on them by incorporating custom cipher algorithm, the 
following steps are compiling and installation on devices to be protected. The 
first potential problem occurs at the first step, i.e., compiling of the source 
code. It has to be made on an absolutely clean computer system (or on a 
system that does not hold undocumented functionality), and using proven 
compiler. Otherwise, back-door functionality can be inserted at this stage and 
in this way to undo all efforts to develop a secure system. 
The hardware devices procured on the market are also unreliable. 
Attaching the “back door” at the hardware level has long been the subject of 
suspicion researchers in this field, and recent discoveries make such a doubt 
more confirmed [16]. Accordingly, the hardware of the device must also be 
thoroughly checked before use or independently developed. The same method 
should be followed for all the firmware incorporated in the device. 
 
 
RANDOM ARRAY GENERATOR 
 
Specific hardware device is constructed in order to obtain appropriate 
random arrays for XOR function. This is a noise generator which is analyzed 
to examine whether it is possible to use such a signal for encrypting purposes. 
In generating true random number (TRNG) it is very important that there is a 
source which continuously emits random information. To get a quick and 
efficient true random array, we constructed generator that emits noise from 
bipolarized transistor type NPN BC547A. Pseudorandom generator (PRNG) 
was directly connected to the sound card in computer. This approach allowed 
us to convert analog noise, emitted from the generator, into a digital signal and 
then examine generated noise. 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
184 
 
Figure 6. The architecture of the proposed solution. 
It is important to define two types of pseudorandom generator (PRNG) 
and their characteristics. Random numbers are divided into two basic classes, 
which are called deterministic and non-deterministic. Deterministic random 
numbers are produced by using some specific algorithm which performs 
sequence of operations initialized by input parameter ordinary called seed. 
Non-deterministic generators produce and generate outputs that are 
unpredictable and depend on a physical origin that is beyond human control. 
The following is a description of noise generator constructed in the active 
mode. 
The electrical circuit of the pseudorandom generator is based on paired 
symmetrical BC547A transistor circuits [17] (Figure 6). 
This electrical circuit with parallel connection represents a simple solution 
in which transistors, as active semiconductor devices, generate random noise 
as they are not absolutely identical regardless they are of the same type 
(BC547A), series and producer. 
 
 
 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 185 
CONDUCTED ANALYSIS AND EXPERIMENTS 
 
Shannon theorem represented the basis for measuring entropy of generated 
random array. Different tools are used for this purpose: audio card for A/D 
signal conversion, Sound Forge suit for digital sound processing, MATLAB 
for data processing, and finally - Java implemented tools for performing 
statistical NIST tests [18]: Maurer test, serial test, poker test, frequency, gap 
and tests of entropy with overlapping and non-overlapping. Generated noise 
from the pseudo-random generator (PRNG), to a sixteen-bit (16-bit), at the 
frequency 44.100Hz, in the stereo mode is represented on the next illustration 
(Figure 7). 
Presented signal was generated from the pseudo-random generator for a 
period of one minute. The generated noise was recorded as wav bit stream. 
This stream is captured and loaded to MATLAB for further manipulation. It 
should be pointed out that bit stream still represents output levels of real signal 
captured from BC547A. Its double values are just encoded by A/D conversion. 
In the next stage, ‘binary array with redundancy’ acquisition is performed and 
resulted in wavbinary 10848600 x 16 matrix (Figure 8). It means that there are 
10848600 16-bit samples generated in one minute of time. 
 
 
Figure 7. Recorded stereo analog noise. 
 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
186 
 
Figure 8. Binary array with redundancy. 
In order to improve entropy of given digital signal, wavbinary matrix is 
converted into a hexadecimal string, which is considered as a signal of interest. 
This conversion reduces wavbinary matrix size 32 times. As a result the signal 
at this stage is presented by 2712150 x 2 matrix. In the next step hexadecimal 
characters are converted into double-precision floating-point numbers stored 
into matrix named wavedata with the same size (2712150 x 2). Finally, real 
numbers are converted into a binary sequence, with uniform distribution and 
without redundancy, ready to be used for encryption purposes (Figure 9). 
 
   
 
Figure 9. Real numbers obtained by conversion of hex.string into double (left), the 
resulting binary sequence (right). 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 187 
 
Figure 10. 3D representation of resulted binary sequence. 
Randomness of such a signal is proved by a series of standard NIST tests. 
It could be also verified by its footprint analysis. Figure 10 shows the resulting 
binary sequence in 3D space. It is obvious that it has uniform distribution 
(horizontal plain). The distribution of signal levels is also uniform which is 
verified by repeating statistical correlation measurements up to obtaining 
satisfactory confidence level (entropy calculated on resulting binary sequence 
is 1). As a final conclusion the proposed solution provides fully random 
(totally disordered) bit sequence which is not predictive. 
Further, sequence of statistical test is performed. Maurer universal 
statistical test [19] is examining the possibilities for compression array without 
loss of information. For array that can be significantly compressed it is 
considered that is not array of random bits due to the fact that the compression 
array is more efficient if array shows periodic performance. The following 
table shows results of Maurer statistical test, which is recommended by NIST. 
The 6 seconds noise is generated at 16 bits and frequency of 44100Hz, so there 
is enough amount of information for the aforementioned statistical test. Below 
is a tabulation of completed test. Focus of test was if sequence can be 
compressed without losing any information. Regarding to P-Value that was 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
188 
less then probability, it could be assumed that sequence source was from 
random resource and observed sum was acceptable due to its value which was 
higher than 387,840 (which is applicable). 
Performed test obtains generating of non-redundant 264600 bits (or 
approximately 33 KB) and it takes at least 6 seconds. During this period audio 
card practically produced double – 529200 bytes (through stereo channels) 
from generated noise. For further analysis, generated random bit array was 
compared with the appropriate ones available on the Internet. Web services 
offered at random.org were used for this purpose.  
At the analog physical level, footprints of noise signals are different 
(Figures 11, 12) which imply their difference in randomness. The noise signal 
produced from constructed generator has more uniform distribution of bits 
than the one downloaded from the Web (random.org). Further statistical 
analysis and comparison verify such considerations. 
 
Table 1. Maurer test of constructed generator 
 
Maurer’s test 
Observed sum 
456584.6075373749 
Observed fn 
5.21453411988779 
Expected fn 
5.2177052 
Variance 
2.954 
P-Value 
0.9985278848454993 
P-Value (Decimal) 
0.99852788484549925840383 
 
 
 
Figures 11 and 12. Generated noise (constructed generator - left, random.org - right). 
 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 189 
Table 2. Entropy overlapping 
 
Entropy overlapping 
Random.org < 
generator 
Type of 
test 
random.org 
Result 
Constructed 
generator 
Result 
Monobit 
0.9999999970453606 
0.9999999851224279 
False 
Bigram 
0.9999938028778617 
0.999998712659246 
True 
Trigram 
0.9999776564462013 
0.9999971314264103 
True 
4x4 Matrix 0.9999632491279191 
0.9999918362253594 
True 
 
Tables 2 and 3 represent comparative statistical tests of entropy 
overlapping and non-overlapping generated binary string, which can be 
accessed through the website random.org and constructed generator. 
Result of entropy overlapping test show that sequence is statistically 
random, and it no contains any recognizable patterns. Noise generator of 
random.org has better result only on Monobit test, where we observed 
expected 50% frequency. In Monobit test, we focus on proportion of zeroes 
and ones for given sequence. When we observed m-grams – probabilities test 
and probabilities of random.org and constructed generator the results were 
better of constructed generator. For matrices test, we checked linear 
dependence. We repeated test for entropy non-overlapping (non-periodic) 
matching test, as shown in Table 3. 
In both of overlapping and non-overlapping scenarios randomness 
obtained by proposed solution with BC547A generator is better than one from 
referenced website (random.org) except in case of monobit test type. 
Nevertheless, in this case there is a minor difference between calculated 
entropies. 
 
Table 3. Entropy non-overlapping 
 
Entropy non-overlapping 
Random.org 
< generator 
Type of test 
random.org 
Result 
Constructed generator 
Result 
Monobit 
0.9999999970453606 
0.9999999851224279 
False 
Bigram 
0.9999850632203415 
0.9999935149038766 
True 
Trigram 
0.9999443542760401 
0.9999798584606167 
True 
4x4 Matrix 
0.9999632491279191 
0.9999918362253594 
True 
 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
190 
CONCLUSION 
 
Highly secure systems for communication protection cannot be depending 
on already built solutions regardless of fact that their producers published 
almost all details of implementation. This paper presents a model for the 
development of its custom system for secure communication depending on 
custom encryption algorithms. The basic requirement is that all system 
components which can affect the safety have to be developed and tested and 
approved by the authors themselves. Linux/Android platform is proposed as a 
solution as it has the most of the necessary functions and that complete source 
code is publicly available. 
Cipher algorithms will be firstly incorporated at the telecommunication 
level as a part of development of safety network system. Such solution will 
aggregate particular implementations for each application protocol. More 
precisely, the proposal includes IPsec security extensions as the 
implementations below the network level make use of Internet impossible.  
On the computer system, custom cipher algorithm can be implemented in 
user (application) space, the core of the operating system or at a hardware 
level. Although the implementation in user space represents the simplest 
approach, such a realization is difficult to protect the growing number of 
application protocols. Lowering of performances is also expected. The 
implementation at a hardware level should be appropriate regarding to the 
performances and security level, but such an approach is difficult to implement 
and rigid for modifications. Therefore, the solution presented in the paper 
proposes building of its custom algorithm in the form of Linux kernel 
modules. 
This paper also analyzes the choice between processing encryption 
systems and absolutely secured encryption systems. With regard to the 
possibilities of modern devices based on Android, with the focus on the 
capacity of modern storage media, absolutely secured encryption systems are 
partially preferred. 
The final problem in the implementation of safety communication device 
is how to obtain a “clean” platform on which the source code of the cipher 
algorithm, core of operating system and other necessary software would be 
compiled. In addition, the hardware platform on which such software would be 
deployed should be “clean” - other words it has to be without “back doors”. 
This is the only way the user has a full control over the system.  
For solution proposed at OS level, specific hardware device is designed in 
order to obtain bit array used for XOR message encryption. This tool acts as a 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 191 
truly random number generator owing to using incidental processes in 
semiconductor circuit which producing electrical noise. Such a signal is post 
processed in several stages for obtaining format appropriate for encryption and 
improving its randomness. The second characteristic is proved by standard 
statistical NIST tests and obtained entropy is on satisfactory level (almost 
one). 
In the future works the focus will be on implementation, case studies and 
system evaluation through different use case scenarios. Measurement of 
performances and energy consumption will be analyzed as well. Encryption 
processes need extra processing power and it is necessary to optimize 
solutions according to concrete needs. Sustainability of solution requires 
ability of system adaptation to each particular encrypting scenario. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
Authors of this paper were participants on scientific projects - TR32054, 
III44006, III44007 and ON174008 funded by Ministry of Education, Science 
and Technology Development Republic of Serbia. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2006. “IP Security under Linux OS”, 
Proceedings of 50th ETRAN Conference, Belgrade, Serbia, pp: 114-
117. 
[2] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2006. “IPsec – Analyzing Influence of 
Cryptographic 
Algorithm 
on 
Lan 
Networks 
Traffic”, 
14. 
Telecommunications Forum Telfor, IEEE, Belgrade, Serbia. 
[3] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2008. “Custom Cipher Algoritm for 
AJAX Requests Protection in Web applications”, Proceedings of 52th 
ETRAN Conference, Belgrade, Serbia. 
[4] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2009. “Zaštita bežičnih komunikacija 
korišćenjem sopstvenog šifarskog algoritma”, 17. Telecommunications 
Forum Telfor, Belgrade, Serbia. 
[5] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar. 2011. Integracija sopstvenih kriptoloških 
sistema u standardnu računarsko-telekomunikacionu infrastrukturu”, 
Univerzitet Singidunum, Belgrade, Serbia, pp. 1-122. 

Aleksandar Jevremović, Mladen Veinović, Goran Šimić et al. 
192 
[6] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2009. “Modifikacija IKEv2 protokola u 
cilju izbora radnog tajnog ključa simetričnih šifarskih sistema”, Zbornik 
radova 53. konferencije za elektroniku, telekomunikacije, računarstvo, 
automatiku i nuklearnu tehniku - Etran, Belgrade, Serbia. 
[7] 
Snyder, Bill. 2014. “Snowden: The NSA planted backdoors in Cisco 
products”, InfoWorld. 
[8] 
Appelbaum, Jacob. 2013. “To Protect And Infect - The Militarization of 
the Internet”, 30C3: 30th Chaos Conference, Hamburg, Germany. 
[9] 
Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2008. “Analysis and Implementation of 
Custom Cipher Algorithm for IPsec under Linux OS”, International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, IJCSNS, Vol.8 
No.7, pp. 80-86. 
[10] Milosavljević, Milan et al. 2013. “Protokol za generisanje i razmenu 
apsolutno tajnih kriptoloških ključeva putem javnih kanala u 
savremenim računarskim mrežama”, Zbornik radova 57. konferencije za 
elektroniku, telekomunikacije, računarstvo, automatiku i nuklearnu 
tehniku - Etran, Zlatibor, Serbia. 
[11] Tatović, Milomir et al. 2014. “One method for generating uniform 
random numbers via civil air traffic”, Sinteza 2014, Belgrade, Serbia, 
pp. 606-609.  
[12] Saarinen, Markku – Juhani, 2004. “Linux for the Information 
Smuggler”, Technical Aspects of Network Centric Warfare, Vol 17, 
Finnish National Defence College, pp. 228-239. 
[13] Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2008. “Model for Implementation of 
Custom Cipher and Steganographic Algorithms in Case of Web Image 
Galery”, 16. Telecommunications Forum Telfor, IEEE, Belgrade, 
Serbia. 
[14] Jevremović, Aleksandar et al. 2008. “Implementation of Propriatery 
Cipher Algorithm on Linux Operating System”, Singidunum revija, 
Univerzitet Singidunum, Vol.5 No.1, pp. 92-102. 
[15] Šarac, Marko et al. 2012. “Analiza sigurnosti SSL saobraćaja u 
bežičnim računarskim mrežama”, XI međunarodni naučno-stručni 
simpozijum INFOTEH-JAHORINA 2012, Jahorina, Republika Srpska. 
[16] Diffie, Whitfield and Hellman, Martin. 1976. “New directions in 
cryptography”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, pp. 644–654. 
[17] Eather, David. 2004. “Random Number Generation with a Simple 
Transistor Junction Noise Source”, open access Internet resource at 
http://imotp.sourceforge.net/noise.pdf. 

Development of the Android-Based Secure Communication Device 193 
[18] Rukhin, Andrew et al. 2010. “A Statistical Test Suite for Random and 
Pseudorandom Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications, 
NIST Special Publication 800-22, Rev. 1a, Computer Security, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 131 pages. 
[19] Coron, Jean-Sebasitien and Naccache, David. 2002. “An Accurate 
Evaluation of Maurer’s Universal Test, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Vol. 1556, pp 57-71. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTHOR CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
 
Kristijan Kuk, PhD 
Assistant Professor 
Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies,  
Department of Informatics and Computer Sciences,  
196 Cara Dusana street, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia 
Email: kristijan.kuk@kpa.edu.rs, kukkristijan@gmail.com 
 
 
Dragan Ranđelović, PhD 
Full Professor and Head of the Department 
Academy of Criminalistic and Police Studies,  
Department of Informatics and Computer Sciences, 
196 Cara Dusana street, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia 
Email: dragan.randjelovic@kpa.edu.rs 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
abstraction, 156 
abuse, 55, 58, 68, 71, 86, 124, 140, 148, 154 
access, 2, 26, 40, 42, 47, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 
63, 65, 69, 78, 123, 125, 126, 127, 130, 
137, 142, 143, 144, 168, 171, 179, 192 
accessibility, 20 
accountability, 42 
accounting, 112, 117 
adaptation, 177, 191 
administrators, 60 
adolescents, 123 
adults, 126 
advertisements, 61, 64 
adware, 54, 62 
age, 12, 24, 41, 123, 125, 128, 131, 134, 
142, 145, 146 
agencies, ix, 1, 4, 12, 15, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 
29, 37, 41, 42, 48, 153 
algorithm, viii, ix, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
20, 22, 39, 65, 153, 175, 176, 177, 178, 
179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 190 
alternative hypothesis, 100 
android platform, ix, 175, 176, 190 
annotation, 156 
armed forces, 54 
arrest, 50, 83 
artificial intelligence, 6, 55 
aspiration, 100 
assault, 66, 154, 156, 160, 162 
assessment, 32 
association rule, vii, 5, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14 
association rules algorithms, vii, 7 
asymmetry, 111 
atoms, 156 
attachment, 76, 82 
attacker, 65 
attitudes, viii, 121, 122, 123, 124, 127, 128, 
129, 145, 146, 147 
Attorney General, 82 
audit, 112, 117 
authentication, 61 
authorities, 60, 78, 82, 112 
awareness, 25, 48, 74, 77, 79, 125, 127, 147 
B 
back-doors, 182 
bandwidth, 37 
banking, 4 
banks, 28, 68 
base, 22, 38, 39, 45, 81, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92, 
94, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 
112, 152, 165 
behaviors, 147 
behaviour and attitudes towards privacy, 
121 

Index 
198 
Belarus, ix 
benefits, vii, 29, 47, 49, 128, 129 
Benfords’ distributions, 86 
black market, 82 
blogger, 11, 13 
blogs, 2, 12, 13 
bottom-up, 11 
brain, 47 
broadband, 74 
browser, 58, 63, 67, 78 
browsing, 61 
Bulgaria, 73, 75 
Bureau of Justice Assistance, 48 
C 
cables, 54 
calculus, 126, 147 
campaigns, 67 
case study, ix, 149, 191 
categorization, 5, 44, 157 
category d, 157 
causality, 28 
causation, 157 
challenges, vii, 54, 77, 79, 80 
child pornography, 56, 71 
children, 60 
Chile, 17 
China, ix, 118 
cipher systems, 180 
cities, 42, 48, 116 
citizens, 35, 40, 47, 54, 77, 121, 123, 151, 
153 
civil rights, 4 
clarity, 5 
classes, 6, 7, 44, 64, 102, 111, 165, 184 
classification, ix, 6, 7, 45, 56, 153 
cleaning, 64 
cluster analysis, 28 
cluster techniques, 5 
clustering, 7, 28, 37, 44, 152, 156, 157, 173 
clusters, 7, 34, 37, 44, 156 
CNN, 67 
coding, 117, 176 
commerce, 124 
commercial, 31, 40, 64, 121, 122, 123, 164, 
179 
communication, ix, 47, 55, 121, 122, 175, 
176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 190 
communication technologies, 47 
community, 14, 20, 22, 23, 25, 40, 41, 146 
compatibility, 162, 178 
complexity, 15, 20 
compliance, 21, 133 
comprehension, 127 
compression, 187 
computation, 160 
computer, viii, 2, 3, 5, 6, 16, 21, 24, 42, 46, 
55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 68, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 
82, 111, 112, 113, 118, 152, 176, 178, 
179, 180, 183, 190 
computer fraud, 71 
computer search, 4 
computer systems, 55, 111, 113 
computer use, 59, 63 
computerized data search and comparison, 1 
computing, 46, 112, 160 
conceptual model, 171 
conference, 173 
confidentiality, 41, 55, 59, 66 
conformity, 116 
connectivity, 75 
consent, 60 
consumer goods, 74 
consumers, 57, 64, 68, 124, 125, 129, 147, 
148, 149 
containers, 161 
contingency, 68 
contour, 37 
contradiction, 127, 145 
controversial, 41 
convention, 55 
cooperation, 78, 129 
correlation, 28, 42, 48, 70, 71, 72, 82, 134, 
136, 140, 143, 144, 145, 187 
cosmetic, 116 
cost, 3, 25, 177, 180 
Council of Europe, 55, 80 
covering, 2, 37, 113 

Index 
199 
CPU, 179, 181 
credit card fraud, 56, 71 
crime analysis, 5, 6, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
26, 29, 34, 39, 42, 47, 48, 50 
crime investigation, 1, 2, 4, 12, 15, 81 
crime mapping, 20, 21, 25, 26, 29, 37, 40, 
41, 47, 48, 49, 50 
crimes, 5, 15, 23, 25, 36, 39, 41, 43, 44, 46, 
47, 51, 154, 155 
criminal activity, 40, 46, 171 
criminal acts, 15 
criminal behavior, 29, 68 
criminal investigations, 4, 15 
Criminal Offenses, 154 
criminals, 22, 41, 53, 54, 57, 60, 62, 67, 68, 
78, 79 
critical infrastructure, 26, 55 
critical value, 101 
Croatia, ix, 73, 75 
cryptography, 177, 192 
currency, 28 
current prices, 108, 109 
cyber-attack, vii, 57, 78 
cyber-criminals, 53, 54, 57 
cybersecurity, 74 
cyberspace, vii, viii, 53, 54, 55, 69, 77, 78, 
79, 81, 152, 171 
Czech Republic, 118 
D 
danger, viii, 53, 155 
data analysis, 2, 9, 69, 71 
data collection, 22, 125 
data mining, ix, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 44, 
45, 48, 172 
data mining algorithms, 7 
data mining techniques, 1, 4, 5, 6, 15, 45, 48 
data processing, 47, 185 
data search and comparison, 3, 6 
data set, 6, 7, 10, 71, 102, 113 
data structure, 166 
data suitable for association rules, 9 
data surveillance, 2, 3 
data transfer, 53 
database, 5, 6, 10, 14 
DDoS, 58, 59, 66 
decision makers, 153 
decomposition, 162 
deficiencies, 112 
democracy, 81 
demographic characteristics, 132 
demographic data, 123, 131 
demography, 131 
denial, 54, 55 
Department of Justice, 51 
dependent variable, 69 
deployments, 26 
depth, 152 
destruction, 59, 154 
detection, vii, viii, 5, 7, 13, 86, 112, 118, 
120, 152, 158, 171 
developing countries, 4 
deviation, 70, 101, 102, 142 
dichotomy, 127, 144 
diffusion, 29 
disclosure, 56, 127, 147, 149 
discomfort, 58 
discrete random variable, 88 
disorder, 22, 86, 100 
dispersion, 37 
displacement, 29, 49, 51 
distribution, viii, 20, 25, 26, 28, 39, 47, 48, 
50, 71, 88, 89, 108, 110, 113, 115, 116, 
135, 137, 138, 144, 176, 186, 187, 188 
DNA, 149 
DOI, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 
drugs, 5, 56, 69 
dynamic systems, 111 
E 
earnings, 76, 116 
e-banking, 75, 76 
eBay, 62 
e-commerce, 146 
economic development, 35 
education, 12, 14, 24, 77, 123, 132 
e-Government, 151, 152, 153, 172 
election, 67, 120 

Index 
200 
electronic surveillance, 3 
e-mail, 6, 57, 58, 63, 65, 76, 77, 126, 130, 
145 
emerging markets, 116 
employees, 60, 66, 77, 79 
employment, 128, 133, 140, 144, 145 
employment status, 128, 133, 140, 144, 145 
encryption, ix, 65, 177, 178, 179, 180, 186, 
190 
endangered, 154 
enemies, 78 
energy, 191 
energy consumption, 191 
enforcement, 1, 29, 42 
engineering, 54, 57, 66, 78 
enlargement, 105 
entropy, 86, 100, 113, 185, 186, 187, 189, 
191 
environment, 16, 32, 37, 69, 78, 112, 125, 
126 
equipment, 61, 78 
espionage, 56, 78 
ethnicity, 41 
European Union, 121 
evidence, 15, 56, 113, 116, 124 
evolution, 55, 56, 78 
execution, 40, 56 
expertise, 20 
exploitation, 173, 183 
exposure, 154, 155 
extraction, 5, 151, 158, 161, 162, 163, 169 
extracts, 159, 162 
F 
Facebook, 58, 62, 121, 122, 123, 126, 127, 
130, 134, 144, 146, 147, 149 
families, 44 
FBI, 49, 68, 82 
fear, 80, 124 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 66, 
82 
fiber, 54 
fights, 155 
filters, 165 
financial, 55, 57, 58, 62, 76, 86, 111, 112, 
113 
financial institutions, 57, 62 
financial reports, 112 
fingerprints, 5 
flaws, 61 
flooding, 58 
food, 154 
force, 154 
forecasting, 29, 120 
forensics, 1, 86, 112, 113, 117, 118, 119 
formation, 79, 86 
formula, 160, 166 
fouling, 154 
foundations, 2 
fraud, viii, 58, 64, 66, 71, 76, 86, 112, 113 
frequency distribution, 87 
friendship, 127 
funds, 55, 68, 177 
G 
gambling, 28 
gangs, 5 
GAO, 83 
Geographic Information System, 21, 39 
geography, 45 
geology, 112 
Germany, 53, 120, 192 
GIS, viii, 20, 21, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 
37, 41, 42, 47, 49 
globalization, 57 
Google, 128, 161 
governance, 80 
governments, 16, 54, 57 
GPS, 34, 62 
grants, 51 
graph, 31, 156, 162, 169, 170, 171 
gravity, 30 
Greece, 73, 75, 118 
Gross Domestic Product, 114 
grouping, 7, 156 
growth, 1, 3, 53, 121, 122 
guilt, 154, 167 

Index 
201 
H 
hacking, 6, 54, 57, 66, 68, 80 
hair, 154 
harassment, 122, 124, 126 
health, 43, 154, 155 
height, 39 
high school, 131, 132, 133 
hiring, 15 
history, 5, 23, 50, 78 
horses, 59, 61, 77 
hotspots, 23, 25, 28, 29, 34, 36, 37, 42, 44, 
45, 47, 49, 76 
human, 2, 15, 25, 29, 47, 180, 184 
human behavior, 25 
hypothesis, 87, 98, 99, 100 
I 
ICC, 147 
ICS, 81 
identification, 5, 6, 25, 28, 29, 36, 41, 47, 
57, 111, 118 
identity, viii, 12, 24, 41, 55, 58, 63, 76, 97, 
123 
image, 5, 65, 66, 112, 118, 126, 144, 160 
improvements, 29 
incarceration, 26 
income, 24, 116 
income tax, 116 
independent variable, 69 
indexing, ix, 151, 153, 155, 156, 159, 161, 
162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 168, 171, 172, 
174 
individuals, 1, 2, 24, 44, 54, 69, 112, 124, 
125, 126, 127, 129, 145 
industry, 60, 123 
infection, 73 
Information and Communication 
Technologies, 81 
information retrieval, 174 
information sharing, 127, 130, 146 
information technology, 2, 19, 124, 172 
infrastructure, 34, 77, 78, 177 
injuries, 154 
institutions, 2, 54, 66, 77, 79, 155 
integration, 4, 34 
integrity, 55, 59, 154 
intellectual property, 56, 60, 66 
intellectual property rights, 66 
intelligence, 15, 23, 24, 25, 42, 62, 78, 167, 
173 
International Monetary Fund, 86, 108 
intervention, 25, 34, 43 
investment, 112, 175, 176 
IP address, 63, 69, 78, 79 
Iran, 12 
issues, ix, 5, 14, 15, 22, 24, 41, 50, 68, 130, 
136, 175, 176, 178, 179 
Italy, 114 
J 
Japan, 68 
Java, 58, 77, 163, 185 
Jordan, ix, 119 
judiciary, 2 
justification, 32, 79 
juveniles, 60 
K 
keylogging, 60, 66 
L 
labeling, 41 
language processing, 152, 153 
languages, vii, 152, 155, 156, 157, 164 
laptop, 67 
law enforcement, viii, ix, 12, 20, 21, 27, 29, 
37, 41, 42, 43, 47, 48, 153, 158 
laws, viii, 58, 77, 86, 100, 124, 129, 137, 
153 
laws and regulations, 124 
lawyers, 3 
lead, 29, 42, 47, 53, 67, 123 
learning, 7, 8, 9, 14, 24, 46 

Index 
202 
legislation, 4 
level of education, 128 
lexical knowledge, 156 
linear, viii, 7, 45, 54, 69, 71, 73, 79, 80, 82, 
115, 116, 189 
linear dependence, 189 
linear systems, 115 
Linux operating system, 179, 181 
local community, 29, 50 
local government, 54, 77 
longitudinal study, 51 
Lucene, ix, 151, 153, 159, 163, 164, 165, 
166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174 
M 
Macedonia, ix, 53, 54, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 
74, 79, 83 
machine learning, 7, 8, 9, 12, 16, 48, 153 
machinery, 55 
magnitude, 111 
majority, 125, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 
138, 140, 144, 145, 146 
malicious software, viii, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 
61, 64, 66, 67, 78, 79 
malware, 54, 58, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 75 
management, viii, 2, 20, 21, 25, 26, 29, 42, 
47, 116, 148 
manipulation, 176, 185 
mapping, 20, 21, 25, 26, 29, 37, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50 
marital status, 128 
marketing, 7, 60, 64, 123, 124, 149 
Mars, 174 
mass, 4, 12 
mass media, 12 
materials, 5 
mathematical methods, vii 
mathematics, 46, 111 
matrix, 8, 162, 174, 185, 186 
measurements, 5, 111, 113, 159, 187 
media, viii, 2, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 42, 68, 
148 
median, 31, 111 
medical, 124, 154 
medicine, 112, 155 
memory, 79 
messages, 6, 43, 57, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 77, 
113, 181 
metamorphosis, 81 
methodology, 37, 46, 124 
Microsoft, 151, 153, 164 
Microsoft Word, 151, 153, 164 
military, 67 
Ministry of Education, 191 
misunderstanding, 45 
misuse, 55, 56, 128, 145 
mobile communication, 181 
mobile device, ix, 75, 122, 147, 175, 176 
mobile telephony, 176 
modelling, 161, 174 
models, 4, 7, 29, 30, 31, 39, 50, 160, 161 
modern society, 2, 20 
modernization, 21 
modifications, 183, 190 
modules, ix, 190 
modus operandi, 23 
mortality, 87 
mortality rate, 87 
motivation, 126 
multidimensional, 126 
multimedia, 66 
multiplication, 86, 113 
music, viii, 12 
N 
national security, 54 
national strategy, 74 
natural evolution, 42 
natural language processing (NLP), 152, 
153, 172 
neglect, 154 
networking, 122, 146 
neural network, 7, 44, 112, 117, 173 
New Zealand, 16 
nodes, 31 
Norway, 68 
NSA, 192 

Index 
203 
O 
obstacles, 34 
offenders, 15, 20, 23, 39, 44, 57 
Office of Justice Programs, 50 
online social networks, 126, 128, 147, 148 
operating system, 58, 59, 61, 64, 65, 67, 
178, 179, 181, 190 
operations, 2, 22, 39, 59, 165, 184 
opportunities, 29, 34 
optimal performance, 176 
optimization, 20, 21, 29, 30, 50 
organ, 6, 155 
OSN users, viii, 121, 123, 127, 128, 129, 
131, 137, 144, 145 
overlay, 26 
P 
pairing, 3, 6 
parallel, 155, 184 
parents, 130, 137, 142, 143, 144, 145 
participants, 127, 129, 131, 191 
password, 58, 65, 75, 76, 79 
peer review, ix 
pensioners, 131, 138 
perpetrators, 44, 55, 56 
personal computers, 69 
personal surveillance, 3, 4 
physics, 112 
piracy, 56 
plants, 111 
platform, ix, 128, 175, 176, 190 
playing, 144 
police, vii, viii, 2, 5, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 40, 42, 43, 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 68, 69, 82, 85, 172 
policy, 26, 50, 74, 77 
political crisis, 79 
political party, 14 
politics, 14 
population, 74, 111, 121, 123 
population growth, 111 
pop-up ads, 62, 77 
predicate, 157 
prevention, vii, 22, 23, 25, 26, 29, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 54, 79, 158 
principles, 175, 176 
prisoners, 34 
privacy concerns, ix, 122, 123, 124, 125, 
127, 128, 146, 148, 149 
private information, 137 
private sector, 54, 79 
probability, 39, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92, 94, 95, 
96, 99, 101, 108, 109, 113, 188 
probability distribution, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92, 
94, 95, 96, 101 
problem solving, 21, 22, 26 
procurement, 68 
producers, 190 
professionals, 37 
profit, 68 
programming, 30, 61, 178 
programming languages, 178 
project, 163, 171, 179 
propaganda, 55 
propagation, 59 
protection, 2, 4, 41, 57, 60, 63, 66, 68, 75, 
76, 79, 81, 126, 129, 144, 176, 177, 178, 
179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 190 
psychology, 112 
public administration, 1, 3, 4 
public opinion, vii, 67 
public safety, 45 
Puerto Rico, 120 
P-value, 72 
Q 
quality of life, 22, 35 
quantitative technique, 22, 43 
query, 37, 40, 159, 160, 161, 162, 165, 166, 
167, 169, 171 
questionnaire, 128, 142 
quizzes, 134, 144 

Index 
204 
R 
race, 24 
radiation, 119 
radio, 34 
radius, 37 
ramp, 34 
random numbers, 184, 192 
rape, 41 
rationality, 79 
reading, vii, 49 
real numbers, 186 
real time, 25, 34, 48, 67 
reality, 1, 2, 148 
recall, 8 
recidivism, 26 
recognition, 7, 47 
recovery, 77 
recurrence, 111 
redundancy, 185, 186 
regression, viii, 28, 45, 54, 69, 70, 71, 72, 
73, 79, 80, 82 
regression equation, 71 
regression line, 70, 71, 72 
regression method, 45 
regression model, viii, 79 
regulations, 4 
relevance, 4, 169, 173 
reliability, 9, 119 
religion, viii, 12 
reputation, 126 
requirement, 21, 34, 179, 181, 190 
researchers, 3, 5, 6, 12, 36, 37, 96, 111, 183 
resource allocation, 29, 118 
resource management, 7 
resource utilization, 29 
resources, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 29, 30, 32, 
34, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 50, 59, 60, 61, 
79, 156, 161, 162, 179 
response, 29, 40, 42, 142, 159 
robberies, 28, 38 
root, 61, 98, 165, 167, 170 
routes, 26 
rule discovery, 5, 7 
rules, viii, 5, 7, 10, 11, 13, 67, 74, 79, 129 
S 
SaaS, 46 
safety, 40, 67, 74, 79, 137, 176, 178, 179, 
180, 181, 190 
scatter, 70, 71 
scatter plot, 70, 71 
school, 131, 132, 133 
science, 2, 22, 82, 112 
scope, 15, 55, 156 
search space, 179 
search terms, 172 
secret key, 180, 181 
secure communication, ix, 175, 176, 190 
security, vii, viii, 15, 20, 21, 53, 54, 57, 58, 
62, 68, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 
83, 111, 112, 148, 152, 171, 175, 176, 
181, 190 
security practices, vii 
security threats, 81 
seed, 184 
self-esteem, 149 
semantics, 162 
semiconductor, 184, 191 
senses, 156, 157 
sequence pattern, 5 
Serbia, ix, 1, 19, 50, 51, 53, 81, 85, 121, 
122, 123, 124, 128, 137, 144, 145, 151, 
152, 153, 160, 167, 171, 172, 175, 191, 
192 
servers, 54, 58, 63 
sex, 24 
sexual harassment, 123 
sexual orientation, 126 
shape, 69 
shock, 64 
showing, 28, 102, 105, 108, 113, 127 
side effects, 29 
signals, 188 
significance level, 134, 138 
signs, vii, 61, 167, 168 
simple, viii, 27, 32, 40, 54, 69, 79, 82, 118, 
162, 170, 178, 180, 184, 192 
simple linear regression, viii, 54, 69, 79 
simulation, 86 

Index 
205 
simulations, 113 
sleep deprivation, 154 
Slovakia, 85 
SMS, 76 
social activities, 2 
social capital, 122 
social events, 100, 112, 130, 133, 144 
social media, viii, 2, 5, 12, 23, 148 
social network, ix, 58, 61, 62, 76, 121, 122, 
126, 127, 128, 130, 134, 147, 148, 149 
social phenomena, 12, 113 
social relations, 126 
social relationships, 126 
social security, 111 
social situations, 128 
society, 1, 2, 21, 53, 54, 77, 80, 87, 146, 
147, 149 
software, viii, 3, 15, 20, 24, 27, 31, 34, 36, 
39, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 48, 54, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 61, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 75, 76, 78, 
79, 102, 108, 112, 176, 179, 190 
solution, ix, 26, 30, 42, 100, 151, 153, 176, 
179, 181, 184, 187, 189, 190, 191 
solution space, 30 
South Africa, 147 
spam, 6, 56, 75, 76 
speech, 7 
spending, 122, 124 
spyware, 60 
stability, 48, 55 
staffing, 23 
stakeholders, 54 
standard deviation, 70, 71, 72, 86, 102, 103, 
104, 105, 106, 134, 142 
standardization, 155, 176 
stars, 127 
statistic technique, 36 
statistics, viii, 6, 37, 42, 54, 86, 87, 131, 
133, 134, 137, 149, 169 
stigmatized, 41 
stock, 111 
stock exchange, 111 
storage, 112, 176, 180, 190 
storage media, 180, 190 
strategic management, 172 
stratification, 176 
stress, viii, 53, 54 
structure, 11, 120, 131, 146, 156, 162, 166 
styles, 112 
success rate, 7 
supervision, 60 
suppression, 4, 5 
surveillance, 2, 3, 4, 21 
synchronization, 176 
Syria, 67 
T 
tactics, 24, 78 
Taiwan, 116 
target, vii, 20, 21, 26, 29, 56, 67, 78, 158 
teams, 62, 79 
techniques, vii, ix, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 16, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 30, 36, 37, 39, 42, 43, 44, 45, 
46, 48, 78, 118, 146, 152, 153, 158, 159, 
166, 171, 179 
technology, viii, 3, 4, 6, 16, 20, 21, 22, 26, 
27, 29, 30, 34, 37, 40, 42, 47, 49, 54, 80, 
125, 146, 148, 158, 172, 179 
telecommunications, 176 
telephone, 3, 58 
territory, 34 
terrorist groups, 57 
terrorist organization, 66 
terrorists, 60 
testing, 86, 101, 102, 105, 108, 114 
text mining, 152, 155, 158 
theft, 56, 58, 59, 63, 64, 67, 123, 183 
Theory of Everything, 96, 100 
thesaurus, 155, 156, 162, 169, 173 
threats, 53, 54, 57, 58, 66, 77, 78, 79, 123, 
125, 126 
time constraints, 34 
time periods, 13 
time series, 112 
time use, 38 
tourism, 11 
trade, 68 
trafficking, 56 
training, 15 

Index 
206 
transactions, 4, 5, 10, 11, 15, 111, 112, 127 
transfer of money, 76 
transgression, 41 
transistor, 183, 184 
translation, 155, 158 
transmission, 56, 66 
transparency, 122, 123, 127 
transport, 34, 178, 179 
turbulent flows, 119 
Turkey, 1, 73, 75 
turnover, 11, 13, 14 
U 
U.S. Department of Commerce, 193 
uniform, 62, 186, 187, 188, 192 
United Nations, 19 
United States (USA), 39, 46, 48, 66, 67, 83, 
116, 146 
universe, 100 
unstructured data, 42, 48, 152, 153, 172 
updating, 75, 79 
urban, 38 
user data, 60, 64 
user space, 178, 190 
V 
validation, 7 
valuation, 23 
Valuation, 148 
variables, 7, 26, 69, 71, 113, 138, 166 
vector, 37, 44, 160, 161, 162, 173 
vehicles, 5, 32, 68, 82, 172 
Venezuela, 120 
versatility, 15 
victimization, 24, 34, 41 
victims, 20, 22, 23, 39, 41, 44, 68, 79 
videos, 42, 133, 135, 145 
violence, 48 
virus, 54, 59, 63, 64, 65, 73, 75, 77, 82 
viruses, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 65, 66 
visualization, viii, 7, 20, 21, 26, 27, 32, 42, 
47, 48, 51, 158 
vocabulary, 155 
vulnerability, 65 
W 
war, 54, 55, 67 
Washington, 17, 48, 49, 50, 51, 83 
weapons, 69 
web, 12, 29, 40, 41, 58, 62, 63, 67, 69, 75, 
77, 78, 125, 126, 161 
web browser, 63, 75, 77 
web pages, 62, 63, 77 
web space, viii, 2 
websites, 57, 58, 61, 62, 63, 64, 77, 148 
WEKA, 8, 13, 14, 15 
White Paper, 50 
Wi-Fi, 76 
windows, 64 
wireless sensor networks, 117 
word meanings, 156 
working memory, 59 
world order, 78 
worldwide, 19, 69, 121, 122, 124, 144 
worms, 55, 57, 59, 61 
Y 
yield, 3, 47 
young people, 138, 146 
 

