
T RUTH A ND A C TUALITY 

Br THE SAME AUTHOR: 
THE FI RST AND LAST F REED OM 
EDUCATI ON AND THE SIGNI FICANCE OF 
LI FE 
C OMMENT A RIE S ON LIVI NG 
C OMMENTA RIE S ON LIVING: SEC OND 
SE RIES 
C OMMENTARIE S ON LIVING: T HIRD 
SERIES 
LIFE A HEAD 
T HI S  MATTE R  O F  CULTURE 
F REE D OM FROM T HE KN OWN 
THE O NLY REVOLUTI O N  
THE U RGENCY O F  C H A NGE 
THE IMP O S SIBLE QUE STI ON 
BEY O N D  VI OLENCE 
THE A WAKENING O F  INTELLIGE N CE 
BEGINNINGS OF LEA RNING 
KRISHNAMU R TI ' S  N OTEB O OK 

J. Krishnamurti 
TRUTH AND ACTUALITY 
tfj 
1817 
Published in San Francisco by 
HARPER & ROW, PUBLISHERS 
New York 
Hagerstown 
San Francisco 
London 

TRUTH AND ACTUALITY. Copyright© 1978 by Krishnamurti Foun­
dation Trust Ltd., London. For information address Krishnamurti 
Foundation of America, P.O. Box 216, Ojai, California 93023. All 
rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of 
this bok may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever with­
out written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied 
in critical articles and reviews. For information address Harper & 
Row, Publishers, Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022. 
Published simultaneously in Canada by Fitzhenry & Whiteside 
Limited, Toronto. 
FIRST UNITED STATES EDmON 
ISBN: 0-06-064873-2 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 77-20450 
78 79 80 81 82 83 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

E DITOR'S NOTES AND INSCRIPTIONS 
In Part I the discussions are taken from a series between ]. 
K rishnamurti and David Bohm, professor of Theoretical Physics at 
London University. Part II is the Authentic Report of Talks and 
Dialogues at Brockwood Park which took place in the autumn of 
1975. The Questions and Answers in Part II come from Talks at 
Saanen given in 1975 and 1976. 
"What is the relationship between truth and reality? Reality 
being, as we said, all the things that thought has put together. 
Reality means, the root meaning of that word is, things or 
thing. And living in the world of things, which is reality, we 
want to establish a relationship with a world which has no 
things-which is impossible." 
"Actuality means 'What is' . .
. Are you facing in yourself 
what actually is going on . .  You don't take actuality and 
look at it." 
"Man has been concerned throughout the ages to discover 
or live in 'Truth'." 
C.ANDG. WD. 


Chapter 
C ON TENTS 
Part I 
Discussions between ]. K rishnamurti and 
Professor David Bohm 
I 
REALITY, ACTUALITY, TRUTH 
15 
What is truth and what is reality? Is there any 
connection? 
Reality 
as 
"res", 
"thing" -the 
content of thought and consciousness. 
Reality independent of thought: nature. Illusion, 
the false, as part of reality. 
Actuality, the fact. Every thing conditioned and 
determining every other thing: all inter-related. 
Thought is part of this. Reality as experienced 
cannot be independent of man. 
Consciousness 
as reality can run straight or 
cr()()kedly. 
The sane, .whole man's thread runs straight. The 
sane, whole man is truth. 
Truth includes all that is, it is one. Reality is 
multiple, conditioned. The true man comprehends 
reality and its conditioning. 
What is the relation of the scholar's knowledge of 
reality to truth? Can human consciousness, which 
is adulterated and runs false, comprehend truth? 
The false miror of consciousness. 
Reality creates its own energy. What is the energy 
of truth? Truth comprehends reality (not vice 
7 

CONTENTS 
versa) : then reality runs true. Meditation is not 
moving from one reality to another. 
2 
INSIGHT AND TRUTH. GULF BETWEEN REALITY AND 
TRUTH 
27 
Insight-action not of thought but of truth. 
Attempt to convey insight means a time-process. 
The action of reasoned thought is different from 
insight. Is there a thinking which is non-verbal? 
Has thought through which insight works a 
different order from other thought? 
How does insight take place? There must be 
insight before thought realises its limitations. 
The energy and force of insight; the weight of 
habit and conditioning. 
Thought can't dissolve conditioning. What will? 
Example: 
insight 
into 
"the 
observer 
is 
the 
observed" (the thinker is the thought). 
Truth is different from reality but men are tied to 
reality. Is the energy of truth different from that 
of reality? The gulf between reality and truth. 
"You come along with a basketful and I do not 
know how to receive it." 
No path to truth in the field of reality. The drum 
vibrates because it is empty. Reality is every­
thing; truth is no-thingness. 
The mind must be an empty house. What is the 
action of that emptiness in my life? 
We need truth and actuality, but our minds are 
occupied with reality. We seek security in reality; 
in nothingness there is complete security. Psycho­
logical and physical security discussed. A mind 
rooted in nothingness operates in the field of reality 
with intelligence. 
8 

CONTENTS 
To depend for security on the world of reality 
brings about inward disorganisation. 
3 
THE SEED OF TRUTH 
44 
The seed. A mystery which thought cannot touch; 
it is beyond the field of reality. 
Limitless progress is possible in the field of reality, 
but the essence escapes. The truth of that mystery 
empties the mind. Order in reality brings a certain 
silence to the mind, but this is not the total silence 
in which the truth of that mystery is. 
Part II 
Talks and Dialogues 
4 
RIGHT ACTION 
55 
What is right action in this disintegrating world? 
The word "religiousn. The fragmentary nature of 
thought. Freedom "from all the things thought 
has created in us". The tricks of thought. "You 
cannot go through reality to come to truth." 
Thought and the content of consciousness. Can 
there be order in the world of reality? To be 
aware of disorder. Reality and truth. About asking 
questions. 
Questions : ( 1 ) Order and disorder; total per­
ception. (2) Observation without the division 
caused by the "me". (3) Must we always live in 
crisis and challenge? (4) "Facing a terrible void"; 
has life significance? (5) Thought is afraid not to 
think. 
5 
THE PROBLEM OF FEAR 
72 
Can one be free of fear? Energy; the energy of 
duality; thought as a process of friction. Is there 
9 

C O N TEN TS 
another kind of energy. Desire and its arising. 
Why is there the inward sense of lack or want? 
Trying to fill the void; the movement of desire as 
thought, time and measure. 
Failure to face "what is". Does desire create fear? 
The root of fear. Psychological time; is it a pro­
jection of thought? Thought as becoming in 
psychological 
time. 
Fragmentary 
divisions 
of 
thought. 
To observe but not to analyse. Observing fear 
without naming, rationalising. Pursuit of desire 
and pleasure. Suffering and the consciousness of 
man. "We love God and kill human beings." 
Suffering; to "remain solidly with it". 
Another energy. 
6 
DIALOGUE-I 
86 
Questions about the biography ("The Years of 
Awakening") . The idea of the Bodhisattva or 
Avatar; the unconditioned mind. 
Awareness. The question of choice. Awareness as 
total sensitivity. Awareness is choiceless. Atten­
tion and responding from a centre. "Is there an 
activity which is not mechanical?" Functioning 
from conditioning and from past experience. 
Thought is mechanical. Is there a part of the mind 
untouched by conditioning? The mechanical must 
be understood first. Hurts; being hurt and past 
hurts. 
Image-forming. Clinging to the known, the image. 
Seeking security in words and images. Awareness 
without the observer. Security and being nothing. 
7 
DIALOGUE-II 
107 
Questions: ( I ) "I cannot see the whole of the 
observer because I only see in fragments." (2) 
IO 

CONTENTS 
"Attention requires tremendous vitality that we 
don't have." 
Observation must begin in relationship. To be 
related means to respond accurately; accuracy 
means with care. But one is related through 
images built by thought; inaccurate response. Are 
we aware of the images? 
Are images necesary? "Is life a process of infinite 
conflicts?" Chaos caused by images. Attention, 
inattention 
and 
image-forming. 
Relationship 
between 
one 
with 
images, 
another 
without. 
Changing one image for another (gurus). Can 
thought dispel images? Burdened with the past. 
First step: be aware you have images. "Learn 
about yourself, actually as you are." "Don't look 
from the past." No authority. "Psychologically 
the guru is 'me'." Lack of attention and paying 
attention to inattention. 
8 
SUFFER.ING; THE MEANING OF DEATH 
I30 
Three active principles: fear, pleasure, suffering. 
Physical and psychological suffering. Suffering 
distorts and darkens. Factors of suffering; attach-
ment to ideas, persons, to the past. To remain 
totally with suffering. Looking at suffering without 
the observer. Compassion gives a different kind of 
energy. The creative mind. The consciousness of 
the world. 
Death. Can time have a stop? Psychological time. 
The "me" is the essence of time. Re-incarnation; 
resurrection. Immortality, eternity. What happens 
at death with the "me" and "not me" unresolved ? 
The stream of human consciousness-the move­
ment of time in which all human beings are 
caught. The mutation in consciousness. 
I I  

CONTENTS 
Questions: (I) To transform consciousness: is this 
an ideal ? ( 2) The Christian message and your 
message: there is no message. 
9 
THE SACRED, RELIGION, MEDITATION 
I44 
Truth and its world of reality. Religion as a 
gathering together of energy. Reality is the world 
of things built on thought which is material and 
mechanical. Truth has no place there. Need to 
bring about order in the world ofreality. Thought 
has created disorder; how will order come about? 
The observation of disorder without thought. 
Can thought as time and measure come to a stop? 
Freedom and authority. The art of pure listening, 
seeing, learning. Control, comparison and atten-
tion: is a mutation possible? "There is no ending 
in the world of reality of time." Stillness and the 
timeless. Significance of meditation. 
Part III 
Some Questions and Answers 
IO 
RIGHT LIVELIHO OD 
I59 
II 
WILL 
I6J 
12 
EMOTIONS AND THOUGHT 
I63 
13 
BEAUTY 
I 64 
14 
THE STREAM OF "SELFISHNESS" 
166 
15 
THE UNIFYIN G FACTO R 
170 
12 

PART I 
Discussions between J. K rishnamurti and Professor 
David Bohm 


Chapter 1 
RE A L I T Y, A C TU A L I T Y , T RU TH 
KRISHNAMURTI : I was thinking about the question of what is 
truth and what is reality and whether there is any relationship 
between the two, or whether they are separate. Are they 
eternally divorced, or are they just projections of thought ? 
And if thought didn't operate, would there be reality ? I 
thought that reality comes from "res", thing, and that any­
thing that thought operates on, or fabricates, or reflects about, 
is reality. And thought, thinking in a distorted, conditioned 
manner is illusion, is self-deception, is distortion. I left it there, 
because I wanted to let it come rather than my pursuing 
it. 
Dr Bohm: The question of thought and reality and truth has 
occupied philosophers over the ages. It's a very difficult one. 
It seems to me that what you say is basically true, but there are 
a lot of points that need to be ironed out. One of the questions 
that arises is this : if reality is thought, what thought thinks 
about, what appears in consciousness, does it go beyond 
consciousness? 
K : Are the contents of consciousnes reality ? 
Dr B: That's the question ; and can we use thought as 
equivalent to consciousnes in its basic form ? 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: I wonder whether, just for the sake of completeness, we 
should include in thought also feeling, desire, will and reaction. 
15 

T R U T H  AN D 
A C T U A L I T Y  
I feel we should, if we are exploring the connection between 
consciousness, reality and truth. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: One of the points I'd like to bring up is: there is 
thought, there is our consciousness, and there is the thing of 
which we are conscious. And as you have often said, the 
thought is not the thing. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: We have to get it clear, because in some sense the thing 
may have some kind of reality independent of thought; we 
can't go so far as to deny all that. Or do we go as far as some 
philosophers, like Bishop Berkeley, who has said that all is 
thought ? Now I would like to suggest a posibly useful distinc­
tion between that reality which is largely created by our own 
thought, or by the thought of mankind, and that reality which 
one can regard as existing independently of this thought. For 
example, would you say Nature is real ? 
K : It is, yes. 
Dr B: And it is not just our own thoughts. 
K : No, obviously not. 
Dr B: The tree, the whole earth, the stars. 
K : Of course, the cosmos. Pain is real. 
Dr B: Yes. I was thinking the other day, illusion is real, in the 
sense that it is really something going on, to a person who is in 
a state of illusion. 
K : To him it is real. 
Dr B: But to us it is also real because his brain is in a certain 
state of electrical and chemical movement, and he acts from 
his illusion in a real way. 
16 

R E A L I T Y ,  
A C T U A L IT Y ,  T R U T H  
K : In a real way, in a distorted way. 
Dr B: Distorted but real. Now it occurred to me that one could 
say that even the false is real but not true. This might be 
important. 
K : I understand. For instance: is Christ real? 
Dr B: He is certainly real in the minds of people who believe 
in Him, in the sense we have been discussing. 
K : We want to find out the distinction between truth and 
reality. We said anything that thought thinks about, whether 
unreasonably or reasonably, is a reality. It may be distorted or 
reasoned clearly, it is still a reality. That reality, I say, has 
nothing to do with truth. 
Dr B: Yes, but we have to say besides, that in some way reality 
involves more than mere thought. There is also the question of 
actuality. Is the thing actual ? Is its existence an actual fact? 
According to the dictionary, the fact means what is actually 
done, what actually happens, what is actually perceived. 
K : Yes, we must understand what we mean by the fact. 
Dr B: The fact is the action that is actually taking place. 
Suppose, for example, that you are walking on a dark road 
and that you think you see something. It may be real, it may 
not be real. One moment you feel that it's real and the next 
moment that it's not real. But then you suddenly touch it and 
it resists your movement. From this action it's immediately 
clear that there is a real thing which you have contacted. But 
if there is no such contact you say that it's not real, that it was 
perhaps an illusion, or at least something mistakenly taken as 
real. 
K : But, of course, that thing is still a reality that thought 
thinks about. And reality has nothing to do with truth. 
Dr B: But now, let us go further with the discussion of "the 
17 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
thing". You see, the root of the English word "thing" is funda­
mentally the same as the German "bedingen", to condition, 
to set the conditions or determine. And indeed we must agree 
that a thing is neceMarily conditioned. 
K : It is conditioned. Let's accept that. 
Dr B: This is a key point. Any form of reality is conditioned. 
Thus, an illusion is still a form of reality which is conditioned. 
For example, the man's blood may have a diferent constitu­
tion because he's not in a balanced state. He is distorting, he 
may be too excited, and that could be why he is caught in 
illusion. So every thing is determined by conditions and it also 
conditions every other thing. 
K : Yes, quite. 
Dr B: Al things are inter-related in the way of mutual condi­
tioning which we call influence. In physics that's very clear, 
the planets al influence each other, the atoms influence each 
other, and I wanted to suggest that maybe we could regard 
thought and consciousnes as part of this whole chain of 
influence. 
K : Quite right. 
Dr B: So that every thing can influence consciousnes and it in 
tum can work back and influence the shapes of things, as we 
make objects. And you could then say that this is al reality, 
that thought is therefore also real. 
K : Thought is real. 
Dr B: And there is one part of reality influencing another part 
of reality. 
K : Also, one part of illusion influences another part of illusion. 
Dr B: Yes, but now we have to be careful because we can say 
there is that reality which is not made by man, by mankind. 
18 

R E A L I T Y ,  A C T U A L I T Y ,  T R U T H  
But that's still limited. The cosmos, for example, as seen by 
us is influenced by our own experience and therefore limited. 
K :  Quite. 
Dr B: Any thing that we see, we see through our own exper­
ience, our own background. So that reality cannot posibly be 
totally independent of man. 
K:No. 
Dr B: It may be relatively independent. The tree is a reality 
that is relatively independent but it's our consciousnes that 
abstracts the tree. 
K : Are you saying that man's reality is the product of 
influence and conditioning? 
Dr B: Yes, mutual interaction and reaction. 
K : And all his illusions are also his product. 
Dr B: Yes, they are all mixed together. 
K :  And what is the relationship of a sane, rational, healthy, 
whole man, to reality and to truth? 
Dr B: Yes, we must consider that, but first may we look at this 
question of truth. I think the derivation of words is often very 
useful. The word "true" in Latin, which is "verus", means 
"that which is". The same as the English "was" and "were", 
or German "wahr". Now in English the root meaning of the 
word "true" is honest and faithful; you sec, we can of ten say 
that a line is true, or a machine is true. There was a story I 
once read about a thread that ran so true; it was using the 
image of a spinning-wheel with the thread running straight. 
K: Quite. 
Dr B: And now we can say that our thought, or our conscious­
ness, is true to that which is, if it is running straight, if the man 
is sane and healthy. And otherwise it is not, it is false. So the 
19 

T RUT H 
A N D  
A C T U A L I T Y  
falsenes of consciousnes is not just wrong information, but it 
is actually running crookedly as a reality. 
K :  So you're saying, as long as man is sane, healthy, whole 
and rational, his thread is always straight. 
Dr B: Yes, his consciousnes is on a straight thread. Therefore 
his reality-
K : -is different from the reality of a man whose thread is 
crooked, who is irrational, who is neurotic. 
Dr B: Very different. Perhaps the latter is even insane. You 
can see with insane people how different it is-they sometimes 
cannot even see the same reality at al. 
K : And the sane, healthy, whole, holy man, what is his 
relationship to truth? 
Dr B: If you accept the meaning of the word, if you say truth 
is that which is, as well as being true to that which is, then you 
have to say that he is al this. 
K : So you would say the man who is sane, whole, is truth? 
Dr B: He is truth, yes. 
K : Such a man is truth. He may think certain things which 
would be reality, but he is truth. He can't think irrationally. 
Dr B: Well, I wouldn't say quite that, I'd say that he can 
make a mistake. 
K : Of course. 
Dr B: But he doesn't persist in it. In other words, there is the 
man who has made a mistake and acknowledges it, changes it. 
K : Yes, quite right. 
Dr B: And there is also the man who has made a mistake but 
his mind is not straight and therefore he goes on with it. But we 
!ZO 

R E A L I T Y ,  A C T U A L I T Y ,  T R U T H 
have to come back to the question : does truth go beyond any 
particular man; does it include other men, and Nature as well? 
K: It includes al that is. 
Dr B: Yes, so the truth is one. But there are many diferent 
things in the field of reality. Each thing is conditioned, the 
whole field of reality is conditioned. But clearly, truth itself 
canot be conditioned or dependent on things. 
K : What then is the relationship to reality of the man who is 
truth? 
Dr B: He sees al the things and, in doing this, he comprehends 
reality. What the word "comprehends" means is to hold it all 
together. 
K : He doesn't separate reality. He says, "I comprehend it, I 
hold it, I se it". 
Dr B: Yes, it's all one field of reality, himself and everything. 
But it has things in it which are conditioned and he compre­
hends the conditions. 
K : And because he comprehends conditioning, he is free of 
conditioning. 
Dr B: It seems clear then that al our knowledge, being based 
on thought, is actually a part of this one conditioned field of 
reality. 
K : Now another question. Suppose I am a scholar, I'm full 
of such conditioned and conditioning knowledge. How am I to 
comprehend truth in the sense of holding it all together? 
Dr B: I don't think you can comprehend truth. 
K : Say I have studied al my life, I've devoted all my life to 
knowledge, which is reality. 
Dr B: Yes, and it is also about a bigger reality. 
2I 

T R U T H  A N D  A CT U A L I T Y  
K : And suppose you come along and say, "Truth is some­
where else, it's not that". I accept you, because you show it to 
me, and so I say, "Please help me to move from here to that". 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : Because once I get that, I comprehend it. If I live here, 
then my comprehension is always fragmented. 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : Therefore my knowledge tells me, "This is reality but it is 
not truth". And suppose you come along and say, "No, it is 
not". And I ask : please tell me how to move from here to 
that. 
Dr B: Well, we've just said we can't move ... 
K : I'm putting it briefly. What am I to do? 
Dr B: I think I have to see that this whole structure of know­
ledge is inevitably false, because my reality is twisted. 
K :  Would you say the content of my consciousnes is 
knowledge? 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : How am I to empty that consciousnes and yet retain 
knowledge which is not twisted-otherwise I can't function­
and reach a state, or whatever it is, which wil comprehend 
reality. I don't know if I'm making myself clear. 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : 
What I'm asking is : my human consciousnes is its 
content, which is knowledge; it's a mesy conglomeration of 
irrational knowledge and some which is correct. Can that 
consciousnes comprehend, or bring into itself, truth? 
Dr B: No, it can't. 
22 

R E A L I T Y ,  A C T U A L I T Y , T R U T H  
K : Therefore, can this consciousnes go to that truth? It can't 
either. Then what? 
Dr B: There can be a perception of the falsenes in this con­
sciousnes. This consciousnes is false, in the sense that it does 
not run true. Because of the confused content it does not run 
true. 
K : It's contradictory. 
Dr B: It muddles things up. 
K : Not, "muddles things up"; it is a muddle. 
Dr B: It is a muddle, yes, in the way it moves. Now then, one 
of the main points of the muddle is that when consciousnes 
reflects on itself, the reflection has this character: it's as if 
there were a mirror and consciousnes were looking at itself 
through a miror and the miror is reflecting consciousnes as 
if it were not consciousnes but an independent reality. 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: Now therefore, the action which consciousnes takes is 
wrong, because it tries to improve the apparently independent 
reality, whereas in fact to do this is just a muddle. 
I would like to put it this way : the whole of consciousnes 
is somehow an instrument which is connected up to a deeper 
energy. And as long as consciousnes is connected in that way, 
it maintains its state of wrong action. 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: So on seeing that this consciousnes is reflecting itself 
wrongly as independent of thought, what is needed is somehow 
to disconnect the energy of consciousnes. The whole of con­
sciousness has to be disconnected, so it would, as it were, lie 
there without energy. 
K :  You're saying, don't feed it. My consciousnes is a muddle, 
23 

T RU T H 
A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
it is confused, contradictory, and all the rest of it. And its very 
contradiction, its very muddle, gives its own energy. 
Dr B: Well, I would say that the energy is not actually coming 
from consciousnes, but that as long as the energy is coming, 
consciousnes keeps the muddle going. 
K : From where does it come? 
Dr B: We'd have to say that perhaps it comes from something 
deeper. 
K : If it comes from something deeper, then we enter into the 
whole field of gods and outside agency and so on. 
Dr B: No, I wouldn't say the energy comes from an outside 
agency. I would prefer to say it comes from me, in some sense. 
K : Then the "me" is this consciousnes? 
Dr B: Yes. 
K :  So the content is creating its own energy. Would you say 
that? 
Dr B: In some sense it is. But the puzzle is that it seems im­
posible for this content to create its own energy. That would 
be saying that the content is able to create its own energy. 
K :  Actually, the content is creating its own energy. Lok, I'm 
in contradiction and that very contradiction gives me vitality. 
I have got opposing desires. When I have opposing desires I 
have energy, I fight. Therefore that desire is creating the 
energy-not God, or something profounder-it is stil desire. 
This is the trick that so many played. They say there is an out­
side agency, a deeper energy-but then one's back in the old 
field. But I realise the energy of contradiction, the energy of 
desire, of will, of pursuit, of pleasure, al that which is the 
content of 
my 
consciousnes-which is 
consciousnes-is 
creating its own energy. Reality is this; reality is creating its 
24 

R E A L I T Y , A C T U A LI T Y , T R U T H  
own energy. I may say, "I derive my energy deep down", but 
it's still reality. 
Dr B: Yes, suppose we accept that, but the point is that seeing 
the truth of this . . . 
K : ... that's what I want to get at. Is this energy diferent 
from the energy of truth? 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : It is diferent. 
Dr B: But let's try to put it like this: reality may have many 
levels of energy. 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: But a certain part of the energy has gone off the straight 
line. Let's say the brain feeds energy to al the thought pro­
ceses. Now, if somehow the brain didn't feed energy to the 
thought proces that is confused, then the thing might 
straighten out. 
K :  That's it. If this energy runs along the straight thread it is 
a reality without contradiction. It's an energy which is endles 
because it has no friction. Now is that energy different from 
the energy of truth? 
Dr B: Yes. They are different, and as we once discused, there 
must be a deeper common source. 
K : I'm not sure. You are suggesting that they both spring out 
of the same rot. 
Dr B: That's what I suggest. But for the moment there is the 
energy of truth which can comprehend the reality and-
K : -the other way it cannot. 
Dr B: No, it cannot; but there appears to be some connection 

T R U T H  A ND A C T U A L I T Y  
in the sense that when truth comprehends reality, reality goes 
straight. So there appears to be a connection at least one way. 
K : That's right, a one-way connection-truth loves this, this 
doesn't love truth. 
Dr B: But once the cor.nection has been made, then reality 
runs true and does not waste energy or make confusion. 
K :  You see, that's where meditation comes in. Generally, 
meditation is from here to there, with practice and al the rest 
of it. To move from this to that. 
Dr B: Move from one reality to another. 
K : That's right. Meditation is actually seeing what is. But 
generaly meditation is taken as moving from one reality to 
another. 

Chapter 2 
INSI GHT A ND TRUTH. GULF 
B ET W E EN RE ALIT Y A ND TRUT H 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am concerned with trying to find out if 
there is an action which is not a process of thought, an action 
which is of truth-if I can put it that way-an insight which 
acts instantly. I want to inquire into that question. 
Dr Bohm: Perhaps one action that acts instantly is to see false­
nes. 
K :  Yes. It's difficult to take examples. I have an insight into 
the fact that people believe in God-I'm taking that as an 
example. 
Dr B: What is the nature of your insight, then? 
K : The insight into the fact that God is their projection. 
Dr B: Yes, and therefore false. 
K : I have an insight. If I had a belief in God it would drop 
instantly. So it is not a proces of thought, it is an insight into 
truth. 
Dr B: Or into falseness. 
K : Or into falseness, and that action is complete, it's over and 
done with. I don't know if I'm conveying it : that action is 
whole, there is no regret, there is no personal advantage, there 
is no emotion. It is an action which is complete. Whereas the 
action brought about by thought, the investigation of an 
27 

T R U T H  A ND A C T U A L I T Y  
analysis whether there is a God or no God, is always 
incomplete. 
Dr B: Yes, I understand that. Then there is another action, in 
which you do use words, where you try to realise the insight. 
Let's say, you talk to people. Is that action complete or in­
complete? Say you have discovered about God . Other people 
are stil calling this a fact, and therefore . .. 
K : But the man speaks from an insight. 
Dr B: He speaks from an insight, but at the same time he starts 
a proces of time. 
K : Yes, to convey something. 
Dr B: To change things. Let's now consider that just to get it 
clear. 
It's 
starting 
from 
an 
insight 
but 
it's 
conveying 
truth. 
K :  Yes, but it's always starting from an insight. 
Dr B: And in doing that you may have to organise .. . 
K : .. . reasonable thinking and so on, of course. And the 
action of reasoned thought is diferent from the action of 
insight. 
Dr B: Now what is the diference when insight is conveyed 
through reasoned thought? To come back again to your insight 
about God : you have to convey it to other people, you must 
put it into a reasonable form. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: And therefore isn't there still some of the quality of the 
insight, as you convey it? You must find a reasonable way to 
convey it. Therefore in doing that, some of the truth of the 
insight is still being communicated in this form. And in some 
sense that is thought. 

I N S I G H T 
A N D 
T RUT H 
K : No, when conveying to another that insight verbally, one's 
action will be incomplete unles he has insight. 
Dr B: That's right. So you must convey what will give some­
one an insight. 
K : Can you give an insight? 
Dr B: Not realy, but whatever you convey must somehow do 
something which perhaps canot be further described. 
K : Yes. That can only happen when you yourself have 
dropped the belief in God. 
Dr B: But there is no guarantee that it wil happen. 
K : No, of course not. 
Dr B: That depends on the other person, whether he is ready 
to listen. 
K : So we come to this point : is there a thinking which is 
non-verbal ? Would this be what communicates insight? 
Dr B: I would say there is a kind of thinking that communi­
cates insight. The insight is non-verbal, but the thinking itself 
is not non-verbal. There is the kind of thinking which is 
dominated by the word and there is another kind of thinking 
whose order is determined, not by the word, but by the insight. 
K : Is the insight the product of thought? 
Dr B: No, but insight works through thought. Insight is never 
the product of thought. 
K : Obviously not. 
Dr B: But it may work through thought. I wanted to say that 
the thought through which insight is working has a diferent 
order from the other kind of thought. I want to distinguish 
those two. You once gave an example of a drum vibrating from 
1.19 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
the emptiness within. I took it to mean that the action of the 
skin was like the action of thought. Is that right? 
K :  Yes, that's right. Now, how does insight take place? Be­
cause if it is not the product of thought, not the process of 
organised thought and all the rest of it, then how does this 
insight come into being? 
Dr B: It's not clear what you mean by the question. 
K : How do I have an insight that God is a projection of our 
own desires, images and so on? I see the falseness of it or the 
truth of it; how does it take place? 
Dr B: I don't see how you could expect to describe it. 
K : I have a feeling inside that thought cannot possibly enter 
into an area where insight, where truth is, although it operates 
anywhere else. But truth, that area, can operate through 
thought. 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : But thought cannot enter into that area. 
Dr B: That seems clear. We say that thought is the response of 
memory. It seems clear that this cannot be unconditioned and 
free. 
K : I would like to go into this question, if I may : how does 
insight take place? If it is not the process of thought, then what 
is the quality of the mind, or the quality of observation, in 
which thought doesn't enter? And because it doesn't enter, 
you have an insight. We said, insight is complete. It is not 
fragmented as thought is. So thought cannot bring about an 
insight. 
Dr B: Thought may communicate the insight. Or it may com­
municate some of the data which lead you to an insight. For 
example, people told you about religion and so on, but 
30 

I N S I G H T  A ND T R U T H  
eventually the insight depends on something which is not 
thought. 
K : Then how does that insight come ? Is it a cesation of 
thought? 
Dr B: It could be considered as a cesation. 
K : Thought itseH realises that it cannot enter into a certain 
area. That is, the thinker is the thought, the observer, the 
experiencer, al the rest of it; and thought itseH realises, 
becomes aware, that· it can only function within a certain 
area. 
Dr B: Doesn't that itseH require insight? Before thought 
realises that, there must be an insight. 
K : That's just it. Does thought realise that there must be 
insight ? 
Dr B: I don't know, but I'm saying there would have to be 
insight into the nature of thought before thought would realise 
anything. Because it sems to me that thought by itseH cannot 
realise anything of this kind. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: But in some way, we said, truth can operate in thought, 
in reality. 
K :  Truth can operate in the field of reality. Now how does 
one's mind see the truth ? Is it a proces? 
Dr B: You're asking whether there is a proces of seeing. There 
is no proces, that would be time. 
K : That's right. 
Dr B: Let's consider a certain point, that there is an insight 
about the nature of thought, that the observer is the observed 
and so on. 
31 

T RU T H A ND A C T U A L I T Y  
K : That's clear. 
Dr B: Now in some sense thought must accept that insight, 
cany it, respond to it. 
K : Or the insight is so vital, so energetic, so full of vitality, 
that it forces thought to operate. 
Dr B: All right, then there is the necesity to operate. 
K : Yes, the necesity. 
Dr B: But you se, generally speaking it doesn't have that 
vitality. So in some indirect way thought has rejected the in­
sight, at 1east it appears to be so. 
K : Most people have an insight, but habit is so strong they 
reject it. 
Dr B: I'm trying to get to the bottom of it, to see if we can 
break through that rejection. 
K : Break through the rejection, break through the habit, the 
conditioning, which prevents the insight. Though one may 
have an insight, the conditioning is so strong, you reject the 
insight. This is what happens. 
Dr B: I looked up the word "habit" and it says, "A settled 
disposition of the mind", which sems very good. The mind is 
disposed in a certain fixed way which resists change. Now we 
get caught in the same question : how are we going to break 
that "very settled disposition"? 
K : I don't think you can break it, I don't think thought can 
break it. 
Dr B: We are asking for that intense insight which necesarily 
disolves it. 
K : So, to summarise : one has an insight into truth and reality. 
32 

I N S I G H T  A N D  T R U T H  
One's mind is disposed in a certain way, it has formed habits 
in the world of reality-it lives there. 
Dr B: It's very rigid. 
K : Now suppose you come along and point out the rigidity of 
it. I catch a glimpse of what you're saying-which is non­
thinking-and I see it. 
Dr B: In a glimpse only. 
K : In a glimpse. But this conditioning is so strong I reject it. 
Dr B: I don't do it purposely; it just happens. 
K : It has happened because you helped to create that hap­
pening. Is that glimpse, first of all, strong enough to disolve 
this? If it is not so strong, then it goes on. Can this conditioning 
disolve? You see, I must have an insight into the conditioning, 
otherwise I can't dissolve it. 
Dr B: Maybe we could look at it like this : conditioning is a 
reality, a very solid reality, which is fundamentally what we 
think about. 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: As we said in the previous dialogue, it's actual. Ordinary 
reality is not only what I think about, but it fits actuality to 
some extent-the actual fact. That's the proof .of its reality. 
Now, at first sight it sems that this conditioning is just as solid 
as any reality, if not more solid. 
K: Much more solid. Is that conditioning disolved, does it 
come to an end through thinking? 
Dr B: It won't because thinking is what it is. 
K : So thinking won't disolve it. Then what will? 
Dr B: We're back again. We see that it's only truth, insight. 
33 

T R U T H  A ND A C T U A L I T Y  
K : I think something takes place. I see I'm conditioned and I 
separate myself from the conditioning, I am diferent from the 
conditioning. And you come along and say "No, it isn't like 
that, the observer is the observed". If I can se, or have an 
insight, that the observer is the observed, then the conditioning 
begins to dissolve. 
Dr B: Because it's not solid. 
K : The perception of that is the ending of the conditioning. 
The truth is, when there is the realisation that the observer is 
the observed. Then in that realisation, which is truth, the 
conditioning disappears. How does it disappear? What is 
necessary for the crumbling of that structure? 
Dr B: The insight into the falseness of it. 
K : But I can have an insight into something that is false and 
yet I go on that way, accept the false and live in the false. 
Dr B: Yes. 
K : Now I don't know if I can convey something. I want to 
bring this into action in my life. I have accepted reality as 
truth, I live in that-my gods, my habits, everything-I live 
in that. You come along and say "Lok, truth is diferent from 
reality" and you explain it to me. How will I put away that 
tremendous weight, or break that tremendous conditioning?· I 
need energy to break that conditioning. Does the energy come 
when I se, "the observer is the observed" ? As we've said, I 
see the importance, rationally, that the conditioning must 
break down, I see the necesity of it : I see how it operates, 
the division, the conflict and all the rest of what is involved. 
Now when I realise that the observer is the observed, a totally 
different kind of energy comes into being. That's al I want to 
get at. 
Dr B: Yes, it's not the energy of reality then. I see it better 
34 

I NS I G H T  A N D  T R U T H  
when I say, "the thinker is the thought". It's actually the same 
thing. 
K :  Yes, the thinker is the thought. Now, is that energy differ­
ent from the energy of conditioning and the activity of the 
conditioning and reality? Is that energy the perception of 
truth ?-and therefore it has quite a different quality of energy. 
Dr B: It seems to have the quality of being free of, not being 
bound by the conditioning. 
K : Yes. Now I want to make it practical to myself. I see this 
whole thing that you have described to me. I have got a fairly 
good mind, I can argue, explain it, all the rest of it, but this 
quality of energy doesn't come. And you want me to have this 
quality, out of your compassion, out of your understanding, 
out of your perception of truth. You say, "Please, se that". 
And I can't se it, because I'm always living in the realm of 
reality. You are living in the realm of truth and I can't. There 
is no relationship between you and me. I accept your word, I 
see the reason for it, I see the logic of it, I see the actuality of 
it, but I can't break it down. 
How will you help-I'm using that word hesitantly-how 
can you help me to break this down? It's your job, because 
you see the truth and I don't. You say, "For God's sake, se 
this". How wil you help me? Through words? Then we enter 
into the realm with which I am quite familiar. This is actually 
going on, you understand? So what is one to do? What will 
you do with me, who ref uses to see something which is just 
there? And you point out that as long as we live in this world 
of reality, there is going to be murder, death-everything that 
goes on there. There is no answer in that realm for any of our 
problems. How will you convey this to me? I want to find 
out, I'm very keen, I want to get out of this. 
Dr B: It's only posible to communicate the intensity. We 
already discussed all the other factors that are communicated. 
35 

T R U TH 
A N D  A C T U A LIT Y 
K : You se, what you say has no system, no method, because 
they are all part of the conditioning. You say something totally 
new, unexpected, to which I haven't even given a single 
moment of thought. You come along with a basketful and I do 
not know how to receive you. This has been really a problem; 
to the prophets, to every ... 
Dr B: It seems nobody has realy succeeded in it. 
K : Nobody has. It's part of education that keeps us constantly 
in the realm of reality. 
Dr B: Everyone is expecting a path marked out in the field of 
reality. 
K :  You talk of a totally diferent kind of energy from the 
energy of reality. And you say that energy wil wipe al this 
out, but it will use this reality. 
Dr B: Yes, it will work through it. 
K :  It's all words to me, because society, education, economics, 
my parents, everything is here in reality. Al the scientists are 
working here, all the profesors, al the economists, everybody 
is here. And you say "Lok", and I ref use to look. 
Dr B: It's not even that one refuses, it's something more 
unconscious perhaps. 
K : So in discussing this, is there a thinking which is not in the 
realm of reality ? 
Dr B: One might ask whether there is such thought, in the 
sense of the response of the drum to the emptines within. 
K : That's a good simile. Because it is empty, it is vibrating. 
Dr B: The material thing is vibrating to the emptines. 
K :  The material thing is vibrating. Wait-is truth nothing­
nes? 
36 

I N S I G H T  
A N D 
TRUTH 
Dr B: Reality is some thing, perhaps every thing. Truth is no 
thing. That is what the word "nothing" deeply means. So truth 
is "no-thingnes". 
K : Yes, truth is nothing. 
Dr B: Because if it's not reality it must be nothing-no thing. 
K :  And therefore empty. Empty being-how did you once 
describe it ? 
Dr B: Leisure is the word-leisure means basically "empty". 
The English root of "empty" means at leisure, unoccupied. 
K : 
So you are saying to me, "Your mind must be un­
occupied". It mustn't be occupied by reality. 
Dr B: Yes, that's clear. 
K : So it must be empty, there mustn't be a thing in it which 
has been put together by reality, by thought-no thing. Noth­
ing means that. 
Dr B: It's clear that things are what we think about, therefore 
we have to say the mind must not think about anything. 
K: That's right. That means thought cannot think about 
emptines. 
Dr B: That would make it into a thing. 
K :  That's just it. You see, Hindu tradition says you can come 
to it. 
Dr B: Yes, but anything you come to must be by a path which 
is marked out in the field of reality. 
K :  Yes. Now, I have an insight into that, I see it. I see my 
mind must be unoccupied, must have no inhabitants, must be 
an empty house. What is the action of that emptiness in my 
life?-because I must live here; I don't know why, but I must 
37 

T R U T H  
A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
live here. I want to find out, is that action diferent from the 
other action ? It must be, and therefore . . . 
Dr B: It has to be. 
K : And how am I to empty my mind of the content which 
makes up consciousnes ? How am I to empty the content ? 
Content is reality, my consciousnes is reality. 
Dr B: Yes, the consciousnes is reality. It's not merely con­
sciousness of reality. 
K :  No, consciousnes is reality. And how is that content to be 
emptied, so that it is not reality-let's put it that way. 
Dr B: Yes, so it would be no thing. 
K :  How is it to be done? 
Dr B: We've often gone into this question of "how" already. 
There's something wrong with the question. 
K : Of course, something is wrong, because the very word 
"how" means reality, thought and all the rest of it. Do a 
miracle ! 
Dr B: That's what we need. 
K : How can you bring about a miracle in a man who lives in 
this consciousnes with its content ? I'm trying to find out, is 
there any action which will disolve the whole content ? Con­
sciousnes is not of reality, consciousnes is reality. That, I 
think, is the difference. 
Dr B: Let's try to make it more clear. Consciousnes is ordin­
arily thought to reflect reality. But it is reality. In some way we 
should make it clear that consciousnes reflects on what is 
actual. For example, we have the reality of the table in our 
minds and we may se its actual efect. So that consciousnes 
is some peculiar combination of reality and actuality, so far as 
I can se. 
38 

I NS I G H T  A N D  T R U T H  
K : Yes, I accept that. 
Dr B: Could I put it that instead we need truth and actuality. 
Could I say that the emptines works in actuality from truth, 
that the act of emptines is actuality to. 
K : Yes. But we are not in the state of the working of emptiness 
in actuality. One's mind is always occupied with desires, 
problems, sex, money, God, what people say-it's never empty. 
Dr B: When we start from where we are, it will not be much 
use to discuss how the empty mind will act because, as you 
said, our mind is now occupied. 
K :  You se, after all, one is seeking complete security, that's 
what one wants, and one is seeking security in reality. There­
fore one rejects any other security. 
Dr B: Yes, I think there is a conviction that reality is all there 
is, and that this is the only place where you could find it. 
K :  Yes. And suppose you come along and say, "Look, in 
nothingness there is complete security". 
Dr B: Yes, let's discus that, because at first sight it may seem 
very implausible. 
K : Of course. 
Dr B: One might ask how anything can come out of nothing. 
K : Just a minute. I say to you, "In nothingnes there is com­
plete security and stability". You listen and you get an insight 
into it ·because you're attentive and there is a conversation 
going on between us. And you say, "That is so". But your 
mind, which is occupied, says, "What on earth does this mean ? 
It's nonsense." 
Dr B: Perhaps that would be the first reaction. But later it 
would be more like this : it sounds reasonable on one side, but 
39 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
on the other side you do have to take care of your real material 
needs. 
K : That's understood. 
Dr B: There arises a conflict because what you are proposing 
appears to be reasonable, but it doesn't sem to take care of 
your material needs. Without having taken care of these needs 
you're not secure. 
K : Therefore they call the world of reality "ma ya". 
Dr B: Why is that? How do you make the connection ? 
K :  Because they say, to live in emptines is necesary and if 
you live there you consider the world as maya. 
Dr B: You could say all that stuff is illusion, but then you 
would find you were in real danger .
.
•
 
K : Of course. 
Dr B: So you seem to be calling for a confidence that nothing­
nes wil take care of you, physically and in every way. In 
other words, from nothingness, you say, there is security. 
K: No, in nothingnes there is security. 
Dr B: And this security must include physical security. 
K : No, I say, psychological security . . .  
Dr B: Yes, but the question almost immediately arises .
. . 
K : How am I to be secure in the world of reality ? 
Dr B: Yes, because one could say : I accept that it wil remove 
my psychological problems, but I still have to be physically 
secure as well in the world of reality. 
K : There is no psychological security in reality, but only com­
plete security in nothingnes. Then if that is so, to me, my 
whole activity in the world of reality is entirely diferent. 
40 

I N S I G H T  A ND T R U T H  
Dr B: I see that, but the question wil always be raised : is it 
different enough to . . .  
K : Oh yes, it would be totally diferent, because I'm not 
nationalistic, I'm not "English", I am nothing. Therefore our 
whole world is different. I don't divide . . . 
Dr B: Let's bring back your example of one who understands 
and the one who wants to communicate to the other. Somehow 
what doesn't communicate is the asurance that it wil take 
care of al that. 
K : It won't take care of all that. I have to work here. 
Dr B: Well, according to what you said, there is a certain 
implication that in nothingnes we will be completely secure in 
every way. 
K :  That is so, absolutely. 
Dr B: Yes, but we have to ask : what about the physical 
security ? 
K :  Physical security in reality ? At present there is no security. 
I am fighting all my life, battling economically, socially, 
religiously. If I am inwardly, psychologically, completely 
secure, then my activity in the world of reality is born of 
complete intelligence. This doesn't exist now, because that 
intelligence is the perception of the whole and so on. As long 
as I'm "English" or "something", I cannot have security. I 
must work to get rid of that. 
Dr B: I can se you'd become more intelligent, you'd become 
more secure-of course. But when you say "complete security" 
there is always the question : is it complete ? 
K :  Oh, it is complete, psychologicaly. 
Dr B: But not necesarily physically. 
4 1  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K :  That feeling of complete security, inwardly, makes me .
.
.
 
Dr B: It makes you do the right thing. 
K :  The right thing in the world of reality. 
Dr B: Yes, I see that. You can be as secure as you can posibly 
be if you are completely intelligent, but you cannot guarantee 
that nothing is going to happen to you. 
K :  No, of course not. My mind is rooted, or established, in 
nothingnes, and it operates in the field of reality with inteli­
gence. That intelligence says, "There you cannot have security 
unles you do these things". 
Dr B: I've got to do everything right. 
K : Everything right according to that intelligence, which is of 
truth, of nothingnes. 
Dr B: And yet, if something does happen to you, nevertheles 
you still are secure. 
K : Of course-if my house bums down. But you see we are 
seeking security here, in the world of reality. 
Dr B: Yes, I understand that. 
K :  Therefore there is no security. 
Dr B: As long as one feels that the world of reality is all there 
is, you have to sek it there. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: One can see that in the world of reality there is in fact 
no security. Everything depends on other things which are 
unknown, and so on. That's why there is this intense fear. 
K : You mention fear. In nothingnes there is complete 
security, therefore no fear. But that sense of no fear has a 
totally different kind of activity in the world of reality. I have 
42 

I N S I G H T  A N D  T R U T H  
no fear-I work. I won't be rich or por-I work. I work, not 
as an Englishman, a German, an Arab-all the rest of that 
nonsense-I work there intelligently. Therefore I am creating 
security in the world of reality. You follow ? 
Dr B: Yes, you're making it as secure as it can possibly be. The 
more clear and intelligent you are, the more secure it is. 
K :  Because inwardly I'm secure, I create security outwardly. 
Dr B: On the other hand, if I feel that I depend inwardly on 
the world of reality, then I become disorganised inwardly. 
K : Of course. 
Dr B: Everybody does feel that he depends inwardly on the 
world of reality. 
K : So the next thing is : you tell me this and I don't se it. I 
don't see the extraordinary beauty, the feeling, the depth of 
what you are saying about complete inward security. There­
fore I say, "Lok, how are you going to give the beauty of 
that to me ?" 
43 

Chapter 3 
T H E  S E E D  O F  T R U T H  
KRISHNAMURTI : If a seed of truth is planted it must operate, 
it must grow, it must function, it has a life of its own. 
Dr Bohm: Many milions of people may have read or heard 
what you say. It may seem that a large number of them 
haven't understood. Do you feel that they are all going eventu­
ally to see it ? 
K : No, but it's going on, they are worried about it, they ask, 
"What does he mean by this ?" The seed is functioning, it's 
growing, it isn't dead. You can say something false and that 
also operates. 
Dr B: Yes, but now we have a struggle between those two 
and we cannot foresee the outcome of this struggle ; we can't 
be sure of the outcome. 
K : You plant in me the seed that, "Truth is a pathles land". 
Also a seed is planted in my consciousnes that says, "There is 
a way to truth, follow me". One is false, one is true. They are 
both embedded in my consciousness. So there is a struggle 
going on. The true and the false, both are operating, which 
causes more confusion, more misery and a great deal of suffer­
ing, if I am sensitive enough. If I don't escape from that 
suffering what takes place ? 
Dr B: If you don't escape, then it's clear what wil take place. 
Then you will have the energy to see what is true. 
K :  That's right. 
44 

T H E  S E E D  O F  T R U T H  
Dr B: But now let's take the people who do escape, who seem 
to be a large number. 
K : They arc out, quite right, millions arc out. But stil, the 
struggle is going on. 
Dr B: Yes, but it is creating confusion. 
K : That is what they arc al doing. 
Dr B: Yes, but we don't know the outcome of that. 
K :  Oh yes, we do; dictatorship, deterioration. 
Dr B: I know, it gets worse. But now we want to get it clear. 
In a few people who f acc the suff cring, the energy comes to 
perceive the truth. And in a large number, who escape from 
suffering, things get worse. 
K : And they rule the world. 
Dr B: Now what is the way out of that ? 
K : They say there is no answer to that, get away from it. 
Dr B: That also won't do. 
K : They say you can't solve this problem, go away into the 
mountains or join a monastery, become a monk-but that 
doesn't solve anything. Al one can do is to go on shouting. 
Dr B: Yes, then we have to say we don't know the outcome of 
the shouting. 
K : If you shout in order to get an outcome, it is not the right 
kind of shouting. 
Dr B: Yes, that is the situation. 
K :  You talk, you point out. If nobody wants to pay attention 
it's their busines, you just go on. 
45 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Now I want to go further. You see, there is a mystery; 
thought cannot touch it. What is the point of it ? 
Dr B: Of the mystery ? I think you could see it like this : that 
if you look into the field of thought and reason and so on, you 
finally see it has no clear foundation. Therefore you see that 
"what is" must be beyond that. "What is" is the mystery. 
K :  Yes. 
Dr B: I mean, you cannot live in this field of reality and 
thought, because of al we said. 
K : No, of course not. But I don't mind, I have no fears. 
Dr B: You don't mind because you have psychological security. 
Even if something happens to you, it does not deeply afect 
you. 
K :  I live in the field of reality, that is my life. There I am 
consciously aware, and I struggle and keep going in that field. 
And I can never touch the other. I cannot say, "I can touch 
it" ; there is no "I" to touch it when you realy touch it. 
You say to me, "There is a mystery which pases al under­
standing". Because I am caught in this, I would like to get 
that. You say there is a mystery, because to you it is an 
actuality, not an invention, not a superstition, not self­
deception. It is truth to you. And what you say makes a 
tremendous impression on me, because of your integrity. You 
point it out to me and I would like to get it. Somehow I must 
get it. What is your responsibility to me ? 
You understand the position ? You say words cannot touch 
it, thought cannot touch it, no action can touch it, only the 
action of truth ; perhaps it will give you a feeling of that. And 
I, because I am a miserable human being, would like to get 
some of that. But you say, "Truth is a pathless land, don't 
follow anybody" -and I am left. 
I realise, I am consciously aware of the limitation of 
46 

TH E 
S E E D  O F  T R U T H  
thought, of al the confusion, misery, and all the rest of it. 
Somehow I can't get out of it. Is your compasion going to 
help me ? You are compassionate, because part of that extra­
ordinary mystery is compasion. Wil your compasion help 
me ?-obviously not. 
So what am I to do ? I have a consuming desire for that, 
and you say, "Don't have any desire, you can't have that, it 
isn't your personal property". Al you say to me is :  put order 
into the field of reality. 
Dr B: Yes, and do not escape suffering. 
K : If you actually put order into the field of reality then 
something wil take place. And also you say to me, it must be 
done instantly. 
Is that mystery something everybody knows ?-knows in the 
sense that there is something mysterious. Not the desire that 
creates mysteries, but that there is something mysterious in 
life apart from my suffering, apart from my death, from my 
jealousy, my anxiety. Apart from all that, there is a feeling 
that there is a great mystery in life. Is that it ?-that there is 
a mystery which each one knows ? 
Dr B: I should think that in some sense everybody knows it. 
Probably one is born with that sense and it gradually gets 
dimmed through the conditioning. 
K :  And has he got the vitality, or the intensity, to put away 
all that ? You see, that means "God is within you" -that is the 
danger of it. 
Dr B: Not exactly, but there is some sort of intimation of this. 
I think probably children have it more strongly when they are 
young. 
K : Do you think that modem children have that ? 
Dr B: I don't know about them, probably les. You se, living 
in a modem city must have a bad effect. 
47 

T RU T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K : Of course. 
Dr B: There are many causes. One is lack of contact with 
nature; I think any contact with nature gives that sense of 
mystery. 
K: Yes. 
Dr B: If you look at the sky at night, for example. 
K : But you see the scientists are explaining the stars. 
Dr B: Yes, I understand that. 
K : Cousteau explains the ocean ; everything is being explained 
away. 
Dr B: Yes, the feeling has been created that in principle we 
could know everything. 
K : So knowledge is becoming the curse. You see, perception 
has nothing to do with knowledge . Truth and knowledge don't 
go together; knowledge canot contain the imensity of 
mystery. 
Dr B: Yes, I think if we start with a little child, he may place 
the mystery in some part that he doesn't know. He could put 
it at the bottom of the ocean, or somewhere else outside, 
far away from where he is, and then he learns that people 
have been everywhere. Therefore the whole thing is made to 
appear non-existent. 
K :  Yes. Everything becomes so superficial. 
Dr B: That's the danger of our modem age, that it gives the 
appearance that we know more or les everything. At least that 
we have a general idea of the scheme, if not of the details. 
K : The other night I was listening to Bronowski, "The Ascent 
of Man". He explains everything. 
48 

T H E  S E E D  O F  T R U T H 
Dr B: The original impulse was to penetrate into this mystery, 
that was the impulse of science. And somehow it has gone 
astray. It give<; the appearance of explaining it. 
K :  May I ask, do you as a trained scientist get the feeling of 
this mystery? 
Dr B: I think so, yes. But I've always had some of that, you 
se. 
K :  But in talking now, do you get more of the intensity of it? 
Not because I feel intense, that's a totally different thing, that 
then becomes influence and all that. But in talking about some­
thing we open a door. 
Dr B: Yes. I think that my particular conditioning has a great 
deal in it to resist this notion of mystery, although I think that 
science is now going in a wrong direction. 
K :  But even the scientists admit that there is a mystery. 
Dr B: Y c<i, to some extent. The general view is that it could be 
eventually cleared up. 
K :  Cleared up in the sense of explained away. 
Dr B: My own feeling is that every particular scientific ex­
planation wil be a certain part of this field of reality, and 
therefore will not clear away the mystery. 
K : No, but it clears it away because I listen to you explaining 
everything, and then I say, "There is nothing". 
Dr B: That is the main point of distinguishing between trui:h 
and reality, because we could say, in the field of reality we may 
explain more and more broadly without limit. 
K : That is what the present day Communists are doing. 
Dr B: Not only the Communists. 
49 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K : Of course not, I'm taking that as an example. 
Dr B: I think you could say, anything in the field of reality 
can be explained, \we can penetrate more deeply and broadly, 
there is limitless rogress pĬble. But the ĭnee is not 
explained. 
K : No, I am asking a different question, I'm asking you, in 
talking like this, do you have an intimation of that mystery. 
Being a scientist, a serious person, perhaps you had an intima­
tion long ago. In talking now, do you feel it's no longer an 
intimation but a truth ? 
Dr B: Yes, it is a truth. 
K : So it's no longer an intimation ? 
Dr B: I think it's been a truth for some time now. Because it's 
implied in what we have been doing here at Brockwood. 
K : Yes. You see there is something interesting : the truth of 
that mystery makes the mind completely empty, doesn't it- ? 
it's completely silent. Or because it is silent, the truth of that 
mystery is. 
I don't know if I'm conveying anything. When the mind is 
completely silent, not in use, not meditated upon, and because 
it has put order in reality it is free from that confusion, there 
is a certain silence, the mind is just moving away from con­
fusion. Realising that is not silence, not moving away from that 
realisation but staying with it, means negating that which 
order has produced. 
Dr B: You say, first you produce order. Why is it necesary to 
produce the order first and then negate it ? 
K :  To negate is silence. 
Dr B: This is why it has to take place in that sequence. 
50 

T H E  S E E D  O F  T R U T H  
K : Because when I remove disorder there is a certain mathe­
matical order, and as a result of that order my mind is quiet. 
Dr B: You say that is not a true silence. 
K : No. Realising that is not true silence I negate the false 
silence, for the moment. So in the negation of that silence I 
don't want any other silence. There is no movement towards 
greater silence. Then this total silence opens the door to that. 
That is, when the mind, with all the confusion, is nothing-not 
a thing-then perhaps there is the other. 


P A R T  I I 
Talks and Dialogues 


Chapter 4 
R I G H T  A C T I O N  
"You cannot go through reality to come to truth; you must 
understand the limitation of reality, which is the whole 
process of thought." 
W E M u s T A L L be very concerned with what is going on 
in the world. The disintegration, the violence, the brutality, 
the wars and the dishonesty in high political places. In the 
face of this disintegration what is correct action ? What is one 
to do to survive in freedom and be totally religious ? We are 
using the word "religious" not in the orthodox sense, which is 
not religious. The meaning of that word is : gathering together 
al energy to find out what is the place of thought and where are 
its limitations and to go beyond it. That is the true significance 
and the meaning of that world "religious". So what is one to 
do in this disintegrating, corrupt, imoral world, as a human 
being-not an individual, because there is no such thing as 
the individual-we are human beings, we are collective, not 
individual, we are the result of various collective influences, 
forces, conditioning and so on. As human beings, whether we 
live in this country, or in America or in Russia or in India, 
which is going through terrible times, what is one to do ? 
What is the correct, right action ? To find this out, if one is at 
all serious-and I hope we are serious here, otherwise you 
wouldn't have come-what is one to do ? Is there an action 
that is total, whole, not fragmented, that is both correct and 
accurate, that is compasionate, religious in the sense we are 
using that word ? This has nothing whatsoever to do with 
55 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
belief, dogma, ritual, or the conditioning of a certain type of 
religious enquiry. What is a human being confronted with this 
problem to do ? 
To find an answer, not imaginary, fictitious or pretended, to 
find the true, the right answer one must enquire into the whole 
movement of thought. Because all our conditioning, al our 
activity, al our political, economic, social, moral and religious 
life is based on thought. Thought has ben our chief instru­
ment in al the fields of life, in al the areas, religious, moral, 
political, economic, social, and in personal relationships : I 
think that is fairly obvious. Please, if I may point out, we are 
talking this over together. We are enquiring into this together, 
sharing it, your responsibility is to share it, not just merely 
listen to a few ideas, agre or disagree, but to share it; which 
means you must give attention to it, you must care for it, this 
problem must be serious, this problem must be something that 
touches your mind, your heart, everything in life-otherwise 
there is no sharing, there is no communion, there is no com­
munication except verbaly or intellectually and that has very 
little value. So we are together enquiring into this question. 
What is the responsibility of thought ?-knowing its limita­
tion, knowing that whatever it does is within a limited area; 
and in that limited area is it posible to have correct, accurate 
response and action ? At what level does one find for oneself, 
as a human being, the right action ? If it is imaginary, per­
sonal, according to an idea, a concept, or an ideal, it ceases to 
be correct action. I hope we are understanding each other. 
The ideal, the conclusion is still the movement of thought as 
time, as measure. And thought has created al 9ur problems ; 
in our personal relationships, economically, socially, moraly, 
religiously, thought has not found an answer. And we are 
trying to find out if we can, this morning-and in the next 
two or three talks-what is the action which is whole, non­
traditional, non-mechanistic, which is not a conclusion, a pre­
judice, a belief. That is, I want to find out, if I am at all 
56 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
serious, how am I to act ? An action in which there is no pre­
tension, an action that has no regrets, an action that does not 
breed further problems, an action that wil be whole, complete 
and answer every issue, whether at the personal level, or at the 
most complex social level. I hope this is your problem. Unles 
we solve this problem very deeply, talking about meditation, 
about what is God, what is truth and al the rest of it, has 
very little meaning. One must lay the foundation, otherwise 
one cannot go very far. One must begin as close as possible to 
go very far, and the nearnes is you, as a human being living 
in this monstrous, corrupt society. And one must find for one­
self an action that is whole, non-fragmented, because the world 
is becoming more and more dangerous to live in, it is becom­
ing a desert and each one of us has to be an oasis. To bring 
about that-not an isolated existence-but a total human 
existence, our enquiry is into the problem of action. 
Can thought solve our problems, thought being the response 
of memory, experience and knowledge ? Memory is a material 
process ; thought is material and chemical-the scientists agree 
about this. And the things that thought has created in the world 
and in ourselves is the world of reality, the world of things. 
Reality means the thing that exists. And to find out what 
truth is one must be very clear where the limitations of reality 
are, and not let it flow into the world that is not real. 
One observes in the world and in oneself, thought has created 
an extraordinary complex problem of existence. Thought has 
created the centre as the "me" and the "you". And from that 
centre we act. Please look at it, observe it, you will see it for 
yourself; you are not accepting something the speaker is talking 
about, don't accept anything. You know, when one begins to 
doubt everything, then from that doubt, from that uncertainty 
grows certainty, clarity ; but if you start with imagination, 
belief, and live within that area you will end up always doubt­
ing. Here we are trying to investigate, enquire, look into things 
that are very close to us : which is our daily life, with all its 
57 

T R U T H  A N D  A CT U A L I T Y  
misery, conflict, pain, sufering, love and anxiety, greed, envy, 
al that. 
As we said, thought has created the "me", and so thought 
in itself being fragmentary makes the me into a fragment. 
When you say "I'', "me", "I want, I don't want, I am this, 
I am not that", it is the result of thought. And thought itself 
being fragmentary, thought is never the whole, so what it has 
created becomes fragmentary. "My world", "my religion", 
"my belief', "my country", "my god" and yours, so it be­
comes fragmentary. Thought intrinsically is a proces of time, 
measure, and therefore fragmentary. I wonder if you see this ?  
If you se this once very clearly, then we will be able to find 
out what is action, a correct, accurate action in which there is 
no imagination, no pretension, nothing but the actual. 
We are trying to find out what is action that is whole, that 
is not fragmentary, that is not caught in the movement of time, 
not traditional and therefore mechanical. One wants to live 
a life without conflict and live in a society that doesn't destroy 
freedom, and yet survive. As the societies and governments 
throughout the world are becoming more and more central­
_ ised, more and more bureaucratic, our freedom is getting les 
and les. Freedom is not what one likes to do, what one wants 
to do, that is not freedom. Freedom means something entirely 
different. It means freedom from this constant battle, constant 
anxiety, uncertainty, suffering, pain, al the things that thought 
has created in us. 
Now is there an action which is not based on the mechanical 
process of memory, on a repetition of an experience and there­
fore a continuing in the movement of time as past, present 
and future ? Is there an action that is not conditioned by en­
vironment ?  You know the Marxists say that if you control the 
environment then you will change man, and that has been 
tried and man has not changed. Man remains primitive, 
vulgar, cruel, brutal, violent and all the rest of it, though they 
are controlling the environment. And there are those who say 
58 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
don't bother about the environment, but believe in some 
divinity and that wil guide you ; and that divinity is the pro­
jection of thought. So we are back again in the same field. 
Realising al this what is a human being to do ? 
Can thought, which is a material, a chemical process, a 
thing, which has created al this structure, can that very 
thought solve our problems ? One must very carefully, dili­
gently, find out what are the limitations of thought. And can 
thought itself realise its limitation and therefore not spil over 
into the realm which thought can never touch ? Thought has 
created the technological world, and thought has also created 
the division between "you" and "me". Thought has created 
the image of you and the "me" and these images separate 
each one of us. Thought can only function in duality, in 
opposites, and therefore al reaction is a divisive process, a 
separative proces. And thought has created division between 
human beings, nationalities, religious beliefs, dogmas, political 
diferences, opinions, conclusions, al that is the result of 
thought. Thought has also created the division between you 
and me as form and name ; and thought has created the centre 
which is the "me" as opposed to you, therefore there is a divi­
sion between you and me. Thought has created this whole 
structure of social behaviour, which is esentially based on 
tradition, which is mechanical. Thought has also created the 
religious world, the Christian, the Buddhist, the Hindu, the 
Muslim, with al the divisions, all the practices, all the in­
numerable gurus that are springing up like mushrooms. And 
thought has created what it considers is love. Is compasion 
the result of "love", the result of thought ? That is our prob­
lem, those are all our problems. 
Yet we are trying to solve all these problems through 
thought. Can thought see itself as the mischief-maker, see 
itself as a necessary instrument in the creation of a society 
which is not immoral ? Can thought be aware of itself ? Please 
do follow this. Can your thought become conscious of itself ? 
59 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
And if it does, is that consciousnes part of thought ? One can 
be aware of the activities of thought, and one can choose 
between those activities as good and bad, worthwhile and not 
worthwhile, but the choice is stil the result of thought. And 
therefore it is perpetuating conflict and duality. Can thought 
be attentive to its own movements ? Or is there an entity out­
side the field of thought which directs thought ? I can say I 
am aware of my thoughts, I know what I am thinking, but 
that entity which says, "I know what I am thinking", that 
"I" is the product of thought. And that entity then begins to 
control, subjugate, or rationalise thinking. So there is an entity, 
we say, which is diferent from thought : but it is esentially 
thought. What we are trying to explain is : thought is tremen­
dously limited, it plays all kinds of tricks, it imagines, it creates 
a super-consciousnC$-but it is stil thought. 
So our problem then is : can thought realise for itself where 
it is esential to operate, where it is accurate in its operation, 
and yet totaly limited in every other direction ? That means, 
one has to go into this question of human consciousnes. This 
sounds very philosophical, very complicated, but it isn't. 
Philosophy means the love of truth, not love of words, not 
love of ideas, not love of speculations, but the love of truth. 
And that means you have to find out for yourself where reality 
is and that reality cannot become truth. You cannot go through 
reality to come to truth. You must understand the limitations 
of reality, which is the whole proces of thought. You know, 
when you look into yourself, knowing your consciousness, why 
you think, what your motives are, what your purposes are, 
your beliefs, your intentions, your pretentions, what your 
imaginations are, all that is your consciousnes; and that con­
sciousnes esentially is the consciousnes of the world. Please 
do see this. Your consciousness is not radically different from 
the consciousness of a Muslim, a Hindu, or anybody else, 
because your consciousness is filled with anxiety, hope, fear, 
pleasure, suffering, greed, envy, competition ; that is cons-
60 

R I G H T A C T I O N  
ciousnes. Your beliefs and your gods, everything is in that 
consciousnes. The content of that makes up your conscious­
nes, and the content of that is thought-thought that has filed 
consciousnes with the things it has created. Lok into your­
self and you wil see how extraordinary obvious it is. 
And from this content, which is conditioned, which is the 
tradition, which is the result of thought, we are trying to find 
a way to act within that area-within that area of conscious­
nes which thought has filed with the things of thought. And 
one asks : if thought cannot solve al our human problems­
other than technological or mathematical problems-then how 
can it limit itself and not enter into the field of the psyche, 
into the field of the spirit ?-we can use that word for the 
moment. As long as we function within that area we must 
always suffer, there must always be disorder, there must always 
be fear and anxiety. So my question is :  can I, can a human 
being bring about order in the world of reality ? And when 
thought has established order in the world of reality, then it 
wil realise its own tremendous limitations. I wonder if you 
see this ? We live in a world of disorder, not only outwardly 
but inwardly. And we have not ben able to solve this disorder. 
We try everything-meditation, drugs, accepting authority, 
denying authority, pursuing freedom and denying freedom­
we have done everything possible to bring about order­
through compulsion, through fear-but we still live in dis­
order. And a disordered mind is now trying to find out if there 
is a correct action-you follow ? A disordered mind is trying 
to find out if there is a right, accurate, correct action. And it 
will find an action which is incorrect, disorderly, not whole. 
Therefore in the world of reality in which we live we must 
bring about order. I wonder if you see this ? 
Order is not the acceptance of authority. Order is not what 
one wants to do. Order is not something according to a blue­
print. Order must be something highly mathematical, the 
greatest mathematical order is the total denial of disorder, and 
61 

T R U T H  A N D A C T U A L I T Y  
so within oneself, within the human being. Can you look at 
your disorder, be aware of it, not choosing particular forms of 
disorder, accepting some and denying others, but see the whole 
disorder ? Disorder implies conflict, self-centred activity, the 
acceptance of a conclusion and living according to that con­
clusion, the ideal and the pursuit of the ideal which denies 
the actual ; can you totally deny al that ? It is only when you 
deny totally al that, that there is order, the order that is not 
created by thought in the world of reality. You understand ? 
We are separating reality and truth. We say reality is every­
thing that thought has created ; and in that area, in that field, 
there is total disorder, except in the world of technology. In 
that field human beings live in complete disorder and this dis­
order is brought about, as we have explained, by conflict, by 
the pursuit of pleasure, fear, suffering, al that. Can you be­
come aware of all that and totally deny it-walk away from 
it ? Out of that comes order in the world of reality. 
In that world of reality behaviour is something entirely 
different. When you have denied all that, denied the "me", 
which is the product of thought, which creates the division, 
the thought that has created the "me" and the super-conscious, 
all the imaginations, the pretentions, the anxieties, the accept­
ance and the denial. That is the content which is so traditional ; 
to deny that tradition is to have order. Then we can go into 
the question of what truth is, not before ; otherwise it becomes 
pretentious, hypocritical, nonsensical. In that one has to under­
stand the whole question of fear, how human beings live in 
fear, and that fear is now becoming more and more acute, 
because the world is becoming so dangerous a place, where 
tyrannies are increasing, 
political 
tyranies, 
bureaucratic 
tyrannies, denying freedom for the mind to understand, to 
enquire. 
So can we as human beings, living in this disorderly, dis­
integrating world, become actually, not in theory or imagina­
tion, an oasis in a world that is becoming a desert ? This is 
62 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
realy a very serious question. And can we human beings 
educate ourselves totaly differently ? We can do that only if 
we understand the nature and the movement of thought as 
time, which means realy understanding oneseH as a human 
being. To look at ourselves not according to some psychologist, 
but to look at ourselves actualy as we are and discover how 
disorderly a life we lead-a life of uncertainty, a life of pain, 
living on conclusions, beliefs, memories. And becoming aware 
of it, that very awarenes washes away al this. 
For the rest of this morning can we talk over together, by 
question and enquiry, what we have talked about ? Please, 
you are asking questions not of me, not of the speaker. We are 
asking questions of ourselves, saying it aloud so that we can all 
share it because your problem is the problem of everybody 
else. Your problem is the problem of the world, you are the 
world. I don't think we realise that. You are actually the 
world, in the very deepest esence-your manners, your dres, 
your name and your form may be diferent-but esentially, 
deep down, you are the world, you have created the world 
and the world is you. So if you ask &. question you are asking 
it for the whole of mankind. I don't know if you see that ?­
which doesn't mean that you mustn't ask questions, on the 
contrary. Questioning then becomes a very serious matter, not 
a glib question and a glib answer, some momentary question 
and forget it till another day. If you ask, ask about a really 
human problem. 
Questioner: Did you say that by walking away from the dis­
order of traditions we create order ? Is that what you meant ? 
KlusHNAMURTI : Yes, that is what I meant. Now just a minute, 
that needs a great deal of explanation of what you mean by 
tradition, what you mean by walking away, what you mean 
by order. 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Q: In addition to that question, the seeing of this disorder 
already implies that the 'see-er' has gone, ·that you have walked 
away. 
K :  There are three things involved in this : order, walking 
away, and the observation of disorder. Walking away from 
disorder, the very act of moving away from it, is order. Now 
first, how do you observe disorder ? How do you observe dis­
order in yourself ? Are you looking at it as an outsider looking 
in, as something separate and there is therefore a division, 
you and the thing which you are observing ? Or are you look­
ing at it, if I may ask, not as an outsider, without the outsider, 
without the observer who says, "I am disorderly" ? Let us put 
it round the other way. When you look at something, those 
trees and that house, there is a space between you and that 
tree and that house. The space is the distance and you must 
have a certain distance to look, to observe. If you are too close 
you don't see the whole thing. So if you are an observer look­
ing at disorder, there is a space between you and that disorder. 
Then the problem arises, how to cover that space, how to 
control that disorder, how to rationalise the disorder, how to 
suppres it, or whatever you do. But if there is no space you 
are that disorder. I wonder if you ɭe that ? 
Q: How can I walk away from it ? 
K : I am going to show it to you ; I am going to go into that. 
You understand my question ? 
When you observe your wife, your husband, a boy or a 
girl-nowadays they don't marry--0r your friend, how do you 
observe him or her ? Watch it please. Go into it, it is very 
simple. Do you observe directly, or do you observe that per­
son through an image, through a screen, from a distance ? 
Obviously, if you have lived with a person-it doesn't matter 
if it's for a day or ten years-there is an image, a distance. 
You are separate from her or him. And when you observe dis-
64 

R I G H T  A C T I O N 
order you have an image of what order is ;  or an image which 
says, "this disorder is ugly". So you are looking at that disorder 
from a distance, which is time, which is tradition, which is the 
past. And is that distance created by thought ? Or does this 
distance actualy exist ? When you say, "I am angry", is anger 
diferent from you ? No, so you are anger. You are disorderly : 
not you separate from disorder. I think that is clear. 
So you are that disorder. Any movement-please follow 
this-any movement of thought away from that disorder is 
stil disorder. Because that disorder is created by thought. That 
disorder is the result of your self-centred activity, the centre 
that says, "I am diferent from somebody else" and so on. Al 
that produces disorder. Now can you observe that disorder 
without the observer ? 
Q: Then you will find in yourself what you are criticising in 
the other ? 
K : No, no. I am not talking about criticising the others. That 
has very little meaning, criticising others. 
Q: No, what you found in the other, you wil find it in yourself. 
K :  No, madam. The other is me ; esentially the other is me. 
He has his anxieties, his fears, his hopes, his despairs, his 
suffering, his pain, his lonelines, his misery, his lack of love 
and all the rest of it ; that man or women is me. If that is 
clear, then I am not criticising another, I am aware of myself 
in the other. 
Q: That is what I meant. 
K : Good. So is there an observation without the past, the 
past being the observer ? Can you look at me, or look 
at another, without all the memories, all the chicanery, all the 
things that go on-just look ? Can you look at your husband, 
wife and so on, without a single image ? Can you look at 
another without the whole past springing up ? You do, when 
65 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
there is an absolute crisis. When there is a tremendous chal­
lenge you do look that way. But we live such sloppy lives, we 
are not serious, we don't work. 
Q: How can you live permanently at crisis pitch ? 
K : I'll answer that question, sir, after we have finished this. 
So the walking away from it is to be totally involved in that 
which you observe. And when I observe this disorder without 
al the reactions, the memories, the things that crop up in one's 
mind, then in that total observation, that very total observa­
tion is order. I wonder if you see this ? Which raises the ques­
tion, have you ever looked at anything totally ? Have you 
looked at your political leaders, your religious beliefs, your 
conclusions, the whole thing on which we live, which is 
thought, have you looked at it completely ? And to look 
at it completely means no division between you and that which 
looks. I can look at a mountain and the beauty of it, the line 
of it, the shadows, the depth, the dignity, the marvellous isola­
tion and beauty of it, and it is not a proces of identification. 
I cannot become the mountain, thank God ! That is a trick 
of the imagination. But when I observe without the word 
"mountain", I see there is a perception of that beauty entirely. 
A pasion comes out of that. And can I observe another, my 
wife, friend, child, whoever it is, can I observe totaly ?  That 
means can I observe without the observer who is the past ? 
Which means observation implies total perception. There is 
only perception, not the perceiver. Then there is order. 
Q: If there is only perception and no perceiver, what is it 
that looks ? If I see that I am disorder, what is it that sees it ? 
K: Now go into it, sir. Disorder is a large word, let us look at 
it. When you see that you are violent and that violence is not 
different from you, that you are that violence-what takes 
place ? Let us look at it round the other way. 
What takes place when you are not the violence ? You say 
66 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
violence is diferent from "me", what happens then ? In that 
there is division, in that there is trying to control violence, 
in that there is a projection of a state of non-violence, the ideal, 
and conformity to that ideal ; therefore further conflict, and 
so on. So when there is a division between the observer and 
the observed, the sequence is a continuous conflict in different 
varieties and shapes ; but when the observer is the observed, 
that is when the observer says, "I am violent, the violence is 
not separate from 'me' ", then a totally different kind of 
activity takes place. There is no conflict, there is no rationalisa­
tion, there is no suppression, control, there is no non-violence 
as an ideal : you are that. Then what takes place ? I don't 
know if you have ever gone into this question. 
Q: Then what is "you" ? One cannot speak without "you". 
K :  No, madam, that is a way of speaking. Look, please. You 
see the diference between the observer and the observed. 
When there is a difference between the observer and the 
observed there must be conflict in various forms because there 
is division. When there is a political division, when there is a 
national division there must be conflict; as is going on in the 
world. Where there is division there must be conflict ; that is 
law. And when the observer is the observed, when violence is 
not separate from the observer, then a totally different action 
takes place. The word "violence" is already condemnatory ; it 
is a word we use in order to strengthen violence, though we 
may not want to, we strengthen it by using that word, don't 
we ? So the naming of that feeling is part of our tradition. If 
you don't name it then there is a totally diferent response. 
And because you don't name it, because there is no observer 
diferent from the observed, then the feeling that arises, which 
you cal violence, is non-existent. You try it and you will see 
it. You can only act when you test it. But mere agreement is 
not testing it. You have to act and find out. 
67 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
The next question was about challenge. Must we always 
live with chalenge ? 
Q: I said crisis. 
K : Crisis, it is the same thing. Aren't you living in crisis ? 
There is a political crisis in this country, an economic crisis, 
crisis with your wife or your husband ; crisis means division, 
doesn't it ? Which means crisis apparently becomes necesary 
for those people who live in darknes, who are asleep. If you 
had no crisis you would all go to sleep. And that is what we 
want-"For God's sake leave me alone ! "-to walow in my 
own little pond, or whatever it is. But crisis comes all the time. 
Now a much deeper question is : is it possible to live with­
out a single crisis and keep totally awake ? You understand ? 
Crisis, challenge, shock, disturbance exist when the mind is 
sluggish, traditional, repetitive, unclear. Can the mind become 
completely clear, and therefore to such a mind there is no 
challenge ? Is that possible ? 
That means, we have to go deeper still. We live on experi­
ences to change our minds, to further our minds, to enlarge 
our minds ; experiences, we think wil create, wil open the 
door to clarity. And we think a man who has no experience 
is asleep, or dull or stupid. A man who has no experience, but 
is fully awake, has an innocent mind, therefore he sees clearly. 
Now is that possible ? Don't say yes or no. 
Q: When you say he has no experience, do you mean in the 
sense that he is ignorant of basic life ? 
K : No, no. Sir, look. We are conditioned by the society in 
which we live, by the food we eat, clothes, climate. We are 
conditioned by the culture, by the literature, by the news­
papers, our mind is shaped by everything, consciously, or un­
consciously. When you call yourself a Christian, a Buddhist, 
or whatever it is, that is your conditioning. And we move from 
one conditioning to another. I don't like Hinduism so I jump 
68 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
into Christianity, or into something else. If I don't like one 
guru I just follow another guru. So we are conditioned. Is it 
posible to uncondition the mind so that it is totaly free ? That 
means is it poáible to be aware of your total conditioning­
not choose which conditionings you like, but total conditioning, 
which is only posible when there is no choice and when there 
is no observer. To see the whole of that conditioning, which 
is at both the conscious level as well as at the unconscious level, 
the totality of it ! And you can see the totality of something 
only when there is no distance between you and that-the 
distance created as movement of thought, time. Then you see 
the whole of it. And when there is a perception of the whole, 
then the unconditioning comes into being. But we don't want 
to work at that kind of thing. We want the easiest way with 
everything. That is why we like gurus. The priest, the politi­
cian, the authority, the specialist, they know, but we don't 
know; they wil tell us what to do, which is our traditional 
acceptance of authority. 
Q: A question about true action. Actually, as we are, every 
action is a self-centred activity. So when you see that, you 
are afraid to act because everything has no significance. That 
is a reality, there is no choice or imagination. You are facing 
a terrible void and you . . .  
K : I understand the question . . .  
Q: Even material activity. 
K : When there is an observation and you see you can't do 
anything, then you say there is a void. Just hold on to that 
sentence, to that phrase. There is an observation, you realise 
you can't do anything and therefore there is a void. Is that 
so ?  When I see that I have been able to do something before, 
there was no void. You understand ? I could do something 
about it, join the Liberal Party, become a neurotic or whatever 
it is-sorry ! (Laughter). Before I could do something and I 
69 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
thought by doing something there was no void. Because I had 
filed the void by doing something, which is running away from 
that void, that lonelines, that extraordinary sense of isolation. 
And now when I see the falseness of this doing, a doing about 
something-which doesn't give a significance or an answer­
then I say to myself, "I observe that I am the observer, and 
I am left naked, stark naked, void. I can't do anything. There 
is no significance to existence." Before, you gave significance 
to existence, which is the significance created by thought, by 
al kinds of imaginings, hope and all the rest of it, and sud­
denly you realise that thought doesn't solve the problems and 
you see no meaning in life, no significance. So you want to 
give significance to life-you understand ? You want to give 
it. (Laughter). No, don't laugh, this is what we are doing. 
Living itself has no meaning for most of us now. When we are 
young we say, "Well at least I'll be happy"-sex and al the 
rest of it. As we grow older we say, "My God, it is such an 
empty life", and you fil that emptines with literature, with 
knowledge, with beliefs, dogmas, rituals, opinions, judgements, 
and you think that has tremendous significance. You have 
filled it with words, nothing else but words. Now when you 
strip yourself of words you say, "I am empty, void". 
Q: These are still words. 
K : Still words, that is what I am saying. Still words. So when 
you se that thought has created what you considered to be 
significance, now when you see the limitation of thought, and 
that what it has created has no significance, you are left empty, 
void, naked. Why ? Aren't you still seking something ? Isn't 
thought still in operation ? When you say, "I have no signific­
ance, there is no significance to life", it is thought that has 
made you say there is no significance, because you want 
significance. But when there is no movement of thought, life 
is full of signi:ficance. It has tremendous beauty. You don't 
know of this. 

R I G H T  A C T I O N  
Q: Thought is afraid not to think. 
K :  So thought is afraid not to think. We wil go into that 
tomorrow : the whole problem of thought creating fear and 
trying to give significance to life. If one actually examines 
one's life, there is very little meaning, is there ? You have 
pleasant memories or unpleasant memories, which is in the 
past, dead, gone, but you hold on to them. There is al this 
fear of death. You have worked and worked and worked­
God knows why-and there is that thing waiting for you. And 
you say, "Is that all ?" So we have to go into this question of 
the movement of thought as time and measure. 
7 1  

Chapter 5 
T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
"If you can be totally fre of fear, then heaven is with you." 
W E M u s T B E serious in facing what we have to do in life, 
with al the problems, miseries, confusion, violence and suffer­
ing. Only those live who are really earnest, but the others 
fritter their life away and waste their existence. We were going 
to consider this morning the whole complex problem of fear. 
The human mind has lived so long, so many centuries upon 
centuries, putting up with fear, escaping from it, trying to 
rationalise it, trying to forget it, or completely identifying 
with something that is not fear-we have tried all these 
methods. And one asks if it is at all posible to be free totaly, 
completely of fear, psychologically and from that physio­
logically. We are going to discuss this, talk it over together, 
and find out for ourselves if it is at al possible. 
First, we must consider energy, the quality of energy, the 
types of energy, and the question of desire ; and whether we 
have sufficient energy to delve deeply into this question. We 
know the energy and friction of thought ; it has created most 
extraordinary things in the world technologically. But psy­
chologically we don't seem to have that deep energy, drive, 
interest to penetrate profoundly into this question of fear. 
We have to understand this question of thought bringing 
about its own energy and therefore a fragmentary energy, an 
energy through friction, through conflict. That is all we know : 
the energy of thought, the energy that comes through contra­
diction, through opposition in duality, the energy of friction. 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
Al that is in the world of reality, reality being the things with 
which we live daily, both psychologically and intellectually 
and so on. 
I hope we can communicate with each other. Communica­
tion implies not only verbal understanding, but actualy shar­
ing what is being said, otherwise there is no communion. There 
is not only a verbal communication but a communion which 
is non-verbal. But to come to that non-verbal communion, one 
must understand very deeply whether it is possible to com­
municate with each other at a verbal level, which means that 
both of us share the meaning of the words, have the same 
interest, the same intensity, at the same level, so that we can 
proceed step by step. That requires energy. And that energy 
can come into being only when we understand the energy of 
thought and its friction, in which we are caught. If you in­
vestigate into yourself you wil see that what we know, or 
experience, is the friction of thought in its achievement, in 
its desires, in its purposes-the striving, the struggle, the com­
petition. Al that is involved in the energy of thought. 
Now we are asking if there is any other kind of energy, 
which is not mechanistic, not traditional, non-contradictory, 
and therefore without the tension that creates energy. To find 
that out, whether there is another kind of energy, not imagined, 
not fantastic, not superstitious, we have to go into the question 
of desire. 
Desire is the want of something, isn't it ? That is one frag­
ment of desire. Then there is the longing for something, 
whether it be sexual longing or psychological longing, or so­
called spiritual longing. And how does this desire arise ? Desire 
is the want of something, the lack of something, mising some­
thing ; then the longing for it, either imaginatively, or actual 
want, like hunger; and there is the problem of how desire 
arises in one. Because, in coming face to face with fear, we 
have to understand desire-not the denial of desire, but in­
sight into desire. Desire may be the rot of fear. The religious 
73 

T R U T H A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
monks throughout the world have denied desire, they have 
resisted desire, they have identified that desire with their gods, 
with their saviours, with their Jesus, and so on. But it is still 
desire. And without the full penetration into that desire, with­
out having an insight into it, one's mind cannot posibly be 
free from fear. 
We need a different kind of energy, not the mechanistic 
energy of thought, because that has not solved any of our 
problems ; on the contrary, it has made them much more com­
plex, more vast, imposible to solve. So we must find a diferent 
kind of energy, whether that energy is related to thought or is 
independent of thought, and in enquiring into that one must 
go into the question of desire. You are following this ?-not 
somebody else's desire, but your own desire. Now how does 
desire arise ? One can see that this movement of desire takes 
place through perception, then sensation, contact and so 
desire. One ses something beautiful, the contact of it, visual 
and physical, sensory, then sensation, then from that the 
feeling of the lack of it. And from that desire. That is fairly 
clear. 
Why does the mind, the whole sensory organism, lack ? 
Why is there this feeling of lacking something, of wanting 
something ? I hope you are giving sufficient attention to what 
is being said, because it is your life. You are not merely listen­
ing to words, or ideas, or formulas, but actually sharing in 
the investigating process so that we are together walking in 
the same direction, at the same speed, with the same intensity, 
at the same level. Otherwise we shan't meet each other. That 
is part of love also. Love is that communication with each 
other, at the same level, at the same time, with the same 
intensity. 
So why is there the sense of lacking or wanting in oneself ? 
I do not know if you have ever gone into this question at all ? 
Why the human mind, or human beings, are always after 
something-apart from technological knowledge, apart from 
74 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
learning languages and so on and so on, why is there this 
sense of wanting, lacking, pursuing something al the time ?­
which is the movement of desire, which is also the movement 
of thought in time, as time and measure. Al that is involved. 
We are asking, why there is this sense of want. Why there is 
not a sense of complete self-sufficiency ? Why is there this long­
ing for something in order to fulfil or to cover up something ? 
Is it because for most of us there is a sense of emptines, lone­
lines, a sense of void ? Physiologicaly we need food, clothes 
and shelter, that one must have. But that is denied when there 
is political, religious, economic division, nationalistic division, 
which is the curse of this world, which has been invented by 
the W estem world, it did not exist in the Eastern world, this 
spirit of nationality ; it has come recently into being there too, 
this poison. And when there is division between peoples, 
between nationalities and between beliefs, dogmas, security 
for everybody becomes almost impossible. The tyrannical 
world of dictatorship is trying to provide that, food for every­
body, but it cannot achieve it. We know all that, we can move 
from that. So what is it that we lack ? Knowledge ?-know­
ledge being the accumulation of experience, psychological, 
scientific and in other directions, which is knowledge in the 
past. Knowledge is the past. Is this what we want ? Is this 
what we mis ? Is this what we are educated for, to gather all 
the knowledge we can posibly have, to act skilfully in the 
technological world ? Or is there a sense of lack, want, psy­
chologically, inwardly ? Which means you will try to fil that 
inward emptines, that lack, through or with experience, which 
is the accumulated knowledge. So you are trying to fil that 
emptines, that void, that sense of immense lonelines, with 
something which thought has created. Therefore desire arises 
from this urge to ifil that emptines. After all, when you are 
seeking enlightenment, or self-realisation as the Hindus call it, 
it is a form of desire. This sense of ignorance will be wiped 
away, or put aside, or dissipated by acquiring tremendous 
75 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
knowledge, enlightenment. It is never the proces of investigat­
ing "what is", but rather of acquiring; not actually looking 
at "what is", but inviting something which might be, or hope­
ful of a greater experience, greater knowledge. So we are 
always avoiding "what is". And the "what is" is created by 
thought. My lonelines, emptines, sorrow, pain, suffering, 
anxiety, fear, that is actually "what is". And thought is in­
capable of facing it and tries to move away from it. 
So in the understanding of desire-that is perception, see­
ing, contact, sensation, and the want of that which you have 
not, and so desire, the longing for it-that involves the whole 
process of time. I have not, but I will have. And when I do 
have it is measured by what you have. So desire is the move­
ment of thought in time as measure. Please don't just agree 
with me. I am not interested in doing propaganda. I don't 
care if you are here or not here, if you listen or don't listen. 
But as it is your life, as it is so urgently important that we be 
deadly serious-the world is disintegrating-you have to 
understand this question of desire, energy, and the enquiry 
into a different kind of non-mechanical energy. And to come 
to that you must understand fear. That is, does desire create 
fear ? We are going to enquire together into this question of 
fear, what is fear ? You may say, "Well let's forget about 
energy and desire and please help me to get rid of my fear" -
that is too silly, they are all related. You can't take one thing 
and approach it that way. You must take the whole packet. 
So what is fear, how does it arise ? Is there a fear at one 
level and not at another level ? Is there fear at the conscious 
level or at the unconscious level ? Or is there a fear totally ? 
Now how does fear arise ? Why does it exist in human beings ? 
And human beings have put up with it for generations upon 
generations, they live with it. Fear distorts action, distorts 
clear perceptive thinking, objective efficient thinking, which is 
necesary, logical sane healthy thinking. Fear darkens our 
lives. I do not know if you have noticed it ? If there is the 
76 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
slightest fear there is a contraction of all our senses. And most 
of us live, in whatever relationship we have, in that peculiar 
form of fear. 
Our question is, whether the mind and our whole being can 
ever be free completely of fear. Education, society, govern­
ments, religions have encouraged this fear; religions are based 
on fear. And fear also is cultivated through the worship of 
authority-the authority of a book, the authority of the priest, 
the authority of those who know and so on. We are carefully 
nurtured in fear. And we are asking whether it is at all pos­
ible to be totally free of it. So we have to find out what is 
fear. Is it the want of something ?-which is desire, longing. 
Is it the uncertainty of tomorrow ? Or the pain and the suffer­
ing of yesterday ? Is it this division between you and me, in 
which there is no relationship at all ? Is it that centre which 
thought has created as the "me" -the me being the form, the 
name, the attributes-fear of loosing that "me" ? Is that one 
of the causes of fear ? Or is it the remembrance of something 
past, pleasant, happy, and the fear of losing it ? Or the fear 
of suffering, physiologically and psychologically ? Is there a 
centre from which all fear springs ?-like a tree, though it has 
got a hundred branches it has a solid trunk and rots, and it 
is no good merely pruning the branches. So we have to go 
to the very rot of fear. Because if you can be totally free of 
fear, then heaven is with you. 
What is the root of it ? Is it time ? Please we are investigating, 
questioning, we are not theorising, we are not coming to any 
conclusion, because there is nothing to conclude. The moment 
you see the root of it, actually, with your eyes, with your feel­
ing, with your heart, with your mind-actually see it-then 
you can deal with it; that is if you are serious. We are asking : 
is it time ?-time being not only chronological time by the 
watch, as yesterday, today and tomorrow, but also psycho­
logical time, the remembrance of yesterday, the pleasures of 
yesterday, and the pains, the grief, the anxieties of yesterday. 
77 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
We are asking whether the root of fear is time. Time to fulfil, 
time to become, time to achieve, time to realise God, or what­
ever you like to call it. Psychologically, what is time ? Is there 
such a thing-please listen-as psychological time at all ? Or 
have we invented psychological time ? Psychologically is there 
tomorrow ? If one says there is no time psychologicaly as 
tomorrow, it wil be a great shock to you, won't it ? Because 
you say, "Tomorrow I shal be happy ; tomorrow I wil achieve 
something; tomorrow I wil become the executive of some 
busines; tomorrow I wil become the enlightened one ; tomor­
row the guru promises something and I'll achieve it". To us 
tomorrow is tremendously important. And is there a tomorrow 
psychologically ? We have accepted it : that is our whole 
traditional education, that there is a tomorrow. And when you 
look psychologicaly, investigate into yourself, is there a tomor­
row ? Or has thought, being fragmentary in itself, projected 
the tomorrow ? Please, we will go into this, it is very important 
to understand. 
One suffers physically, there is a great deal of pain. And 
the remembrance of that pain is marked, is an experience 
which the brain contains and therefore there is the remem­
brance of that pain. And thought says, "I hope I never have 
that pain again" : that is tomorrow. There has been great 
pleasure yesterday, sexual or whatever kind of pleasure one 
has, and thought says, "Tomorrow I must have that pleasure 
again". You have a great experience-at least you think it is 
a great experience-and it has become a memory ; and you 
realise it is a memory yet you pursue it tomorrow. So thought 
is movement in time. Is the root of fear time ?-time as com­
parison with you, "me" more important than you, "me" that 
is going to achieve something, become something, get rid of 
something. 
So thought as time, thought as becoming, is the root of fear. 
We have said that time is necessary to learn a language, time 
is necessary to learn any technique. And we think we can 
78 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
apply the same proces to psychological existence. I need 
several weeks to learn a language, and I say in order to learn 
about myself, what I am, what I have to achieve, I need time. 
We are questioning the whole of that. Whether there is time 
at al psychologically, actually ; or is it an invention of thought 
and therefore fear arises ? That is our problem ; and consciously 
we have divided consciousnes into the conscious and the 
hidden. Again division by thought. And we say, "I may be 
able to get rid of conscious fears, but it is almost impossible 
to be free of the unconscious fears with their deep rots in 
the unconscious". We say that it is much more difficult to be 
free of unconscious fears, that is the racial fears, the family 
fears, the tribal fears, the fears that are deeply rooted, instinc­
tive. We have divided consciousness into two levels and then 
we ask : how can a human being delve into the unconscious ? 
Having divided it then we ask this question. 
It is said it can be done through careful analysis of the 
various hidden fears, through dreams. That is the fashion. We 
never look into the whole proces of analysis, whether it be 
self-introspective, or professional. In analysis is implied the 
analyser and the analysed. Who is the analyser ? Is he different 
from the analysed, or is the analyser the analysed ? And there­
fore it is utterly futile to analyse. I wonder if you see that ? 
If the analyser is the analysed, then there is only observation, 
not analysis. But the analyser as diferent from the analysed­
that is what you all accept, all the profesionals, all the people 
who are trying to improve themselves-God forbid !-they al 
accept that there is a division between the analysed and the 
analyser. But the analyser is a fragment of thought which has 
created that thing to be analysed. I wonder if you follow this ? 
So in analysis is implied a division and that division implies 
time. And you have to keep on analysing until you die. 
So where analysis is totally false-I am using the word 
"false" in the sense of incorrect, having no value-then you 
are only concerned with observation. To observe !-we have 
79 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
to understand what is observation. You are following al this ? 
We started out by enquiring if there is a different kind of 
energy. I am sorry we must go back so that it is in your mind 
-not in your memory, then you could read a book and repeat 
it to yourself, which is nothing. So we are concerned with, or 
enquiring into energy. We know the energy of thought which 
is mechanical, a proces of friction, because thought in its very 
nature is fragmentary, thought is never the whole. And we 
have asked if there is a different kind of energy altogether and 
we· are investigating that. And in enquiring into that we see 
the whole movement of desire. Desire is the state of wanting 
something, longing for something. And that desire is a move­
ment of thought as time and measure : "I have had this, and 
I must have more". And we said in the understanding of fear, 
the root of fear may be time as movement. If you go into it 
you will see that it is the root of it : that is the actual fact. 
Then, is it posible for the mind to be totally free of fear ? 
For the brain, which has accumulated knowledge, can only 
function effectively when there is complete security-but that 
security may be in some neurotic activity, in some belief, in 
the belief that you are the great nation ; and al belief is 
neurotic, obviously, because it is not actual. So the brain can 
only function effectively, sanely, rationaly, when it feels com­
pletely secure, and fear does not give it security. To be free of 
that fear, we asked whether analysis is necesary. And we see 
that analysis does not solve fear. So when you have an insight 
into the proces of analysis, you stop analysing. And then there 
is only the question of observation, seeing. If you don't analyse, 
what are you to do ? You can only look. And it is very import­
ant to find out how to look. 
What does it mean to look ? What does it mean to look at 
this question of desire as movement in time and measure ? 
How do you see it ? Do you see it as an idea, as a formula, 
because you have heard the speaker talking about it ? There­
fore you abstract what you hear into an idea and pursue that 
80 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
idea-which is still looking away from fear. So when you 
observe, it is very important to ·find out how you observe. 
Can you observe your fear without the movement of escap­
ing, suppɥing, rationalising, or giving it a name ? That is, 
can you look at fear, your fear of not having a job tomorrow, 
of not being loved, a dozen forms of fear, can you look at it 
without naming, without the observer ?-because the observer 
is the observed. I don't know if you follow this ? So the obser­
ver is fear, not "he" is observing "fear". 
Can you observe without the observer ?-the observer being 
the past. Then is there fear ? You follow ? We have the energy 
to look at something as an observer. I look at you and say, 
"You are a Christian, a Hindu, Buddhist", whatever you are, 
or I look at you saying, "I don't like you'', or "I like you". If 
you believe in the same thing as I believe in you are my friend ; 
if I don't believe the same thing as you do, you are my enemy. 
So can you look at another without all those movements of 
thought, of remembrance, of hope, all that, just look ? Look 
at that fear which is the root of time. Then is there fear at all ? 
You understand ? You wil .find this out only if you test it, if 
you work at it, not just play with it. 
Then there is the other form of desire, which not only 
creates fear but also pleasure. Desire is a form of pleasure. 
Pleasure is diferent from joy. Pleasure you can cultivate, 
which the modem world is doing, sexually and in every form 
of cultural encouragement-pleasure, tremendous pleasure 
and the pursuit of pleasure. And in the very pursuit of pleasure 
there must be fear also, because they are the two sides of the 
same coin. Joy you cannot invite ; if it happens then thought 
takes charge of it and remembers it and pursues that joy 
which you had a year ago, or yesterday, and which becomes 
pleasure. And when there is enjoyment-seeing a beautiful 
sunset, a lovely tree, or the deep shadow of a lake-then that 
enjoyment is registered in the brain as memory and the pursuit 
of that memory is pleasure. 
8 1  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
There is fear, pleasure, joy. Is it possible-this is a much 
more complex problem-is it posible to observe a sunset, the 
beauty of a person, the lovely shape of an ancient tree in a 
solitary field, the enjoyment of it, the beauty of it-observe it 
without registering it in the brain, which then becomes 
memory, and the pursuit of that tomorrow ? That is, to see 
something beautiful and end it, not carry it on. 
There is another principle in man. Besides fear and pleasure, 
there is the principle of suffering. Is there an end to suffering ? 
We want suffering to end physicaly, therefore we take drugs 
and do al kinds of yoga tricks and all that. But we have never 
been able to solve this question of suffering, human suffering, 
not only of a particular human being but . the suffering of the 
whole of humanity. There is your suffering, and milions and 
millions of people in the world are suffering, through war, 
through 
starvation, 
through 
brutality, 
through 
violence, 
through bombs. And can that suffering in you as a human 
being end ? Can it come to an end in you, because your 
consciousnes is the consciousnes of the world, is the cons­
ciousness of every other human being ? You may have a 
different peripheral behaviour but basically, deeply, your 
consciousnes is the consciousness of every other human being 
in the world. Suffering, pleasure, fear, ambition, al that is 
your consciousnes. So you are the world. And if you are 
completely free of fear you affect the consciousnes of the 
world. Do you understand how extraordinarily important it is 
that we human beings change, fundamentally, because that 
wil affect the consciousnes of every other human being ? 
Hitler, Stalin affected all the consciousnes of the world, what 
the priests have achieved in the name of somebody has affected 
the world. So if you as human beings radically transform, 
are free of fear, you will naturaly affect the consciousnes of 
the world. 
Similarly, when there is freedom from suffering there is 
compassion, not before. You can talk about it, write boks 
82 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
about it, discuss what compasion is, but the ending of sorrow 
is the beginning of compasion. The human mind has put up 
with suffering, endles suffering, having your children killed 
in wars, and willingnes to accept further suffering by future 
wars. 
Suffering through education-
-modem education to 
achieve a certain technological knowledge and nothing else­
that brings great sorrow. So compasion, which is love, can 
only come when you understand fully the depth of suffering 
and the ending of suffering. Can t}lat suffering end, not in 
somebody else, but in you ? The Christians have made a 
parody of suff ering--sorry to use that word-but it is actually 
so. The Hindus have made it into an intellectual affair : what 
you have done in a past life you are paying for it the present 
life, and in the future there will be happines if you behave 
properly now. But they never behave properly now ; so they 
carry on with this belief which is utterly meaningles. But a 
man who is serious is concerned with compasion and with 
what it means to love ; because without that you can do what 
you like, build all the skyscrapers in the world, have marvel­
lous economic conditions and social behaviour, but without it 
life becomes a desert. 
So to understand what it means to live with compassion, 
you must understand what suffering is. There is suffering from 
physical 
pain, 
physical 
disease, physical 
accident, 
which 
generally affects the mind, distorts the mind-if you have had 
physical pain for some time it twists your mind ; and to be so 
aware that the physical pain cannot touch the mind requires 
tremendous inward awarenes. And apart from the physical, 
there is suffering of every kind, suffering in loneliness, suffering 
when you are not loved, the longing to be loved and never 
finding it satisfactory ; because we make love into something 
to be satisfied, we want love to be gratified. There is suffering 
because of death ; suffering because there is never a moment of 
complete wholeness, a complete sense of totality, but always 
living 
in 
fragmentation, 
which 
is 
contradiction, 
strife, 
83 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
confusion, misery. And to escape from that we go to temples, 
and to various fonns of entertainment, religious and non­
religious, take drugs, group therapy, and individual therapy. 
You know all those tricks we play upon ourselves and upon 
others-if you are clever enough to play tricks upon others. So 
there is this immense suffering brought by man against man. 
We bring suffering to the animals, we kil them, we eat them, 
we have destroyed species after species because our love is 
fragmented. We love God and kill human beings. 
Can that end ? Can suffering totally end so that there is 
complett: and whole compassion ? Because suffering means, 
the root meaning of that word is to have pasion-not the 
Christian passion, not lust, that is too cheap, easy, but to have 
compasion, which means pasion for al, for all things, and 
that can only come when there is total freedom from suffering. 
You know it is a very complex problem, like fear and 
pleasure, they are all inter-related. Can one go into it and see 
whether the mind and the brain can ever be free completely 
of all psychological suffering, inward suffering. If we don't 
understand that and are not free of it we will bring suffering 
to others, as we have done, though you believe in God, in 
Christ, in Buddha, in all kinds of beliefs-and you have killed 
men generation after generation. You understand what we do, 
what our politicians do in India and here. Why is it that 
human beings who think of themselves as extraordinarily alive 
and intelligent, why have they allowed themselves to suffer ? 
There is suffering when there is jealousy ; jealousy is a form of 
hate. And envy is part of our structure, part of our nature, 
which is to compare ourselves with somebody else ; and can you 
live without comparison ? We think that without comparison 
we shall not evolve, we shall not grow, we shall not be some­
body. But have you ever tried-really, actually tried-to live 
without comparing yourself with anybody ? You have read 
the lives of saints and if you are inclined that way, as you get 
older you want to become like that ; not when you are young, 
84 

T H E  P R O B L E M  O F  F E A R  
you spit on al that. But as you are approaching the grave you 
wake up. 
There are diferent forms of suffering. Can you look at it, 
observe it without trying to escape from it ?-just remain 
solidly with that thing. When my wife-I am not maried­
runs away from me, or looks at another man-by law she 
belongs to me and I hold her-and when she runs away from 
me I am jealous; because I posses, and in possesion I feel 
satisfied, I feel safe ; and also it is good to be possesed, that 
also gives satisfaction. And that jealousy, that envy, that 
hatred, can you look at it without any movement of thought 
and remain with it ? You understand what I am saying ? 
Jealousy is a reaction, a reaction which has been named 
through memory as jealousy, and I have been educated to run 
away from it, to rationalise it, or to indulge in it, and hate 
with anger and al the rest of it. But without doing any of 
that, can my mind solidly remain with it without any move­
ment ? You understand what I am saying ? Do it and you will 
see what happens. 
In the same way when you suffer, psychologically, remain 
with it completely without a single movement of thought. 
Then you will see out of that suffering comes that strange 
thing called passion. And if you have no pasion of that kind 
you cannot be creative. Out of that suffering comes com­
pasion. And that energy differs totally from the mechanistic 
energy of thought. 

Chapter 6 
D I A L O G U E  I 
"Nobody can put you psychologically into prison. You are 
already there ! " 
KRISHNAMURTI : This is in the nature of a dialogue between 
two friends, talking over their problems, who are concerned 
not only with their own personal afairs, but also with what 
is happening in the world. Being serious, these two friends 
have the urge to transform themselves and see what they can 
do about the world and al the misery and confusion that is 
going on. So could we this morning spend some time together 
having a friendly conversation, not trying to be clever, nor 
opposing one opinion against another opinion or belief, and 
together examine earnestly and deeply some of the problems 
that we have ? In this, communication becomes rather import­
ant ; and any one question is not only personal but universal. 
So if that is understood, then what shall we talk over together 
this morning ? 
Questioner: The corilpilation of your biography has caused 
much confusion and quite a lot of questions. I have boiled 
them down to a few. May I at least hand them over to you. 
K : Do you want to discuss the biography written by Mary 
Lutyens ? Do you want to go into that ? 
Q: No. 
K : Thank God ! (laughter). 
Q( r) : Briefly and then finish with it. 
86 

D I A L O G U E  I 
Q( 2) : I would propose that you go into the question of cor­
rect and incorrect thinking : that is a problem. Both kinds of 
thought, or thinking processes, are mechanical processes. 
K : I see. Can we discuss this ? Do you want to talk over the 
biography-have many of you read it ? Some of you. I was 
just looking at it this morning (laughter). Most of it I have 
forgotten and if you want to talk over some of the questions 
that have been given me, shal we do that briefly ? 
Basicaly the question is : what is the relationship between 
the present K and the former K ?  (laughter). I should think 
very little. The basic question is, how was it that the boy who 
was found there, "discovered" as it was called, how was it that 
he was not conditioned at al from the beginning, though he 
was brought up in a very orthodox, traditional Brahmin family 
with its superstitions, arrogance and extraordinary religious 
sense of morality and so on ? Why wasn't he conditioned 
then ? And also later during those periods of the Masters, 
Initiations and so on-if you have read about it-why wasn't 
he conditioned ? And what is the relationship between that 
person and the present person ? Are you really interested in all 
this ? 
Audience: Yes. 
K :  I am not. The past is dead, buried and gone. I don't 
know how to tackle this. One of the questions is about the 
Masters, as they are explained not only in Theosophy but in 
the Hindu tradition and in the Tibetan tradition, which main­
tain that there is a Bodhisattva ; and that he manifests himself 
rarely and that is called in Sanskrit Avatar, which means 
manifestation. This boy was discovered and prepared for that 
manifestation. And he went through al kinds of things. And 
one question that may be asked is, must others go through the 
same proces. Christopher Columbus discovered America with 
sailing boats in dangerous seas and so on, and must we go 
87 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
through all that to go to America ? You understand my ques­
tion ? It is much simpler to go by air ! That is one question. 
How that boy was brought up is totaly irrelevant ; what is 
relevant is the present teaching and nothing else. 
There is a very ancient tradition about the Bodhisattva that 
there is a state of consciousness, let me put it that way, which 
is the essence of compassion. And when the world is in chaos 
that essence of compassion manifests itself. That is the whole 
idea behind the Avatar and the Bodhisattva. And there are 
various gradations, initiations, various Masters and so on, and 
also there is the idea that when he manifests all the others 
keep quiet. You understand ? And that esence of compassion 
has manifested at other times. What is important in al this, if 
one may talk about it briefly, is : can the mind pasing through 
all kinds of experiences, either imagined or real-because 
truth has nothing to do with experience, one cannot possibly 
experience truth, it is there, you can't experience it-but 
going through all those various imagined, ilusory, or real 
states, can the mind be left unconditioned ? The question is, 
can the mind be unconditioned always, not only in childhood. 
I wonder if you understand this question ? That is the under­
lying problem or issue in this. 
So as we say, all that is irrelevant. I do not know if you 
know anything about the ancient tradition of India and Tibet 
and of China and Japan, about the awakening of certain 
energy, called Kundalini. There are now all over America, 
and in Europe, various groups trying to awaken their little 
energy called Kundalini. You have heard about all thiS, 
haven't you ? And there are groups practising it. I saw one 
group on television where a man was teaching them how to 
awaken Kundalini, that energy, doing all kinds of tricks with 
all kinds of words and gestures-which all becomes so utterly 
meaningless and absurd. And there is apparently such an 
awakening, which I won't go into, because it is much too 
complex and probably it is not necesary or relevant. 
88 

D I A L O G U E  I 
So I think I have answered this question, haven't I ?  
The other question asked was : Is there a non-mechanistic 
activity ? Is there 
a movement-movement means time-is 
there a state of mind, which is not only mechanical but 
not in the field of time ? That is what the question raised 
involves. Do you want to discuss that, or something else ? Some­
body also sent a written question, "What does it mean to be 
aware ? Is awareness different from attention ? Is awarenes 
to be practised systematically or does it come about natur­
ally ?" That is the question. Are there any other questions ? 
Q(r) : Would you go into the question of what it means, 
finding one's true will ? 
Q( 2) : What is the diference between denial and suppresion ? 
Q( 3) : When being together with another person I lose all 
my awarenes ; not when I am alone. 
K : Can we discuss awareness, begin with that and explore 
the whole thing, including the will of one's own destiny ? 
Q: What about earnestness and effort ? 
K : Earnestness and effort, yes. We are now discussing aware­
ness. Does choice indicate freedom ? I choose to belong to 
this society or to that society, to that cult, to a particular 
religion or not, I choose a particular job-choice. Does choice 
indicate freedom ? Or does freedom deny choice ? Please let us 
talk this over together. 
Q: Freedom means that no choice is needed. 
K : But we choose, and we think because we have the capacity 
to choose that we have freedom. I choose between the Liberal 
Party and the Communist Party. And in choosing I feel I am 
free. Or I choose one particular guru or another, and that 
gives me a feeling that I am free. So does choice lead to 
awarenes ? 
89 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Q: No. 
K : Go slowly. 
Q: Choice is the expression of conditioning, is it not ? 
K : That is what I want to find out. 
Q: It seems to me that one either reacts out of habit, or one 
responds without thinking. 
K : We will come to that. We wil go into what it means to 
respond without choice. We are used to choosing ; that is our 
conditioning. 
Q: Like and dislike. 
K : All that is implied in choice. I chose you as my friend, I 
deny my friendship to another. One wants to find out if aware­
ness includes choice. Or is awareness a state of mind, a state 
of observation in which there is no choice whatsoever ? Is that 
possible ? One is educated from childhood to choose and that 
is our tradition, that is our habit, that is our mechanical, 
instinctive reaction. And we think, because we choose there is 
freedom. What does awareness mean : to be aware ? It implies, 
doesn't it, not only physical sensitivity, but also sensitivity 
to the environment, to nature, sensitivity to other people's 
reactions and to my own reactions. Not, I am sensitive, but to 
other people I am not sensitive : that is not sensitivity. 
So awareness implies, doesn't it, a total sensitivity : to colour, 
to nature, to all my reactions, how I respond to others, all 
that is implied in awareness, isn't it ? I am aware of this tent, 
the shape of it and so on. One is aware of nature, the world 
of nature, the beauty of trees, the silence of the trees, the shape 
and beauty and the depth and the solitude of trees. And one is 
aware also of one's relationship to others, intimate and not 
intimate. In that awareness is there any kind of choice ?-in 
a total awareness, neurologicaly, physically, psychologically, 
go 

D I A L O G U E  I 
to everything around one, the influences, to al the noises and 
so on. Is one aware ?-not only of one's own beliefs but those 
of others, the opinions, judgements, evaluations, the conclu­
sions, all that is implied--otherwise one is not aware. And can 
you practise awareness by going to a school or college, or going 
to a guru who will teach you how to be aware ? Is that aware­
ness ? Which means, is sensitivity to be cultivated through 
practice ? 
Q: That becomes selfishness, concentration on oneself. 
K :  Yes, that is, unless there is total sensitivity, awareness 
merely becomes concentration on oneself. 
Q: Which excludes awareness. 
K : Yes, that is right. But there are so many schools, so many 
gurus, 
so 
many 
ashrams, 
retreats, 
where 
this 
thing 
is 
practised. 
Q: When it is practised it is just the old trick again. 
K :  This is so obvious. One goes to India or Japan to learn 
what it means to be aware-Zen practice, all that. Or is 
awareness a movement of constant observation ? Not only 
what I feel, what I think, but what other people say about 
me-to listen, if they say it in front of me-and to be aware 
of nature, of what is going on in the world. That is total 
awareness. Obviously it can't be practised. 
Q: It is a non-movement, isn't it ? 
K :  No, it is movement in the sense of, "alive". 
Q: It is a participation. 
K : Participation implies action. If there is action through 
choice, that is one kind of action ; if there is an action of 
total awareness, that is a totally different kind of action, 
obviously. Is one so aware ? Or do we indulge in the words, 
9 1  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
"being aware" ? You understand ? To be aware of the people 
around one, the colour, their attitudes, their walk, the way 
they eat, the way they think-without indulging in judgement. 
Q: Is it something to do with motive ? If you have a motive . . .  
K :  Of course. Motive comes into being when there is choice; 
that is implied. When I have a motive then choice takes place. 
I chose you because I like you, or you flatter me, or you give 
me something or other; another doesn't, therefore there is 
choice and so on. So is this possible ?-this sense of total 
awareness. 
Q: Is there a degree of awareness ? 
K : That is, is awarenes a process of time ? 
Q: Can one man be more aware than another ? 
K : Why should I enquire if you are more aware than I am ?  
Just a minute, let us go into it. Why this comparison ? Is this 
not also part of our education, our social conditioning, which 
says we must compare to progres ?--compare one musician 
with another, one painter with another and so on. And we 
think by comparing we begin to understand. Comparing 
means measurement, which implies time, thought, and is it 
possible to live without comparing at all ? You understand ? 
One is brought up, educated in schools, colleges and univer­
sities to compare oneself with "A", who is much cleverer than 
myself, and to try to reach his level-this constant measure­
ment, this constant comparison, and therefore constant imita­
tion, which is mechanical ! So can we find out for ourselves 
whether it is posible to be totally sensitive and therefore 
aware ? 
Q: Can you know if you are totally aware or not ? Can we 
be aware of our awareness ? 
K : No (laughter). 

D I A L O G U E  I 
Q: You can be aware when you are not aware. 
K : Watch it in yourself; verbally it becomes speculative. 
When you are aware do you know you are aware ? 
Q: No. 
K : Find out. Test it, madam, test it. Do you know when you 
are happy ? The moment you are aware that you are happy 
it is no longer happines. 
Q: You know when you have got a pain. 
K :  That is a diferent matter. When I have pain I am aware 
of it and I act, do something about it. That is one part of 
being aware, unles I am paralysed-most people are, in 
other directions ! 
So we are asking ourselves, not asking somebody else to tell 
us, but one is asking oneself if there is that quality of aware­
nes ? Does one watch the sky, the evening stars, the moon, 
the birds, people's reactions, the whole of it ? And what is the 
diference between that awarenes and attention ? In aware­
nes is there a centre from which you are aware ? When I 
say, "I am aware", then I move from a centre, I respond to 
nature from a centre, I respond to my friends, to my wife, 
husband or whatever it is-that centre being my conditioning, 
my prejudices, my desires, my fears and al the rest of it. In 
that awarenes there is a centre. In attention there is no centre 
at all. Now please listen to this for two minutes. You are now 
listening to what is being said and you are giving total atten­
tion. That means you are not comparing, you do not say, "I 
already know what you are going to say", or, "I have read 
what you have said etc. etc". Al that has gone, you are com­
pletely attentive and therefore there is no centre and that 
attention has no border. I don't know if you have noticed ? 
So, by being aware one discovers that one responds from a 
centre, from a prejudice, from a conclusion, from a belief, 
93 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
from a conditioning, which is the centre. And from that centre 
you react, you respond. And when there is an awareness of 
that centre, that centre yields and in that there is a total 
attention. I wonder if you understand this ? And this you 
cannot practise ; it would be too childish, mechanical. So we 
go to the next question, which is : "Is there an activity which 
is not mechanistic ?" That means, is there a part of the brain 
which is non-mechanical. Do you want to go into this ? No, 
no, please, this isn't a game. First of all one has to go into the 
question of what is a mechanical mind. 
Is the bra.in, which has evolved through millennia, is that 
totally mechanical ? Or is there a part of the brain which is 
not mechanical, which has never been touched by the machine 
of evolution ? I wonder if you see. 
Q: What do you mean by mechanical ? 
K :  We are going to discuss that, sir. Part of this mechanical 
proces is functioning within the field of conditioning. That is, 
when I act according to a pattern-Catholic, Protestant, 
Communist, Hindu, whatever it is, a pattern set by society, 
by my reading, or other influences, and accept that pattern or 
belief-then that is part of the mechanical process. The other 
part of the mechanical process is, having had experiences of 
innumerable kinds which have left memories, to act according 
to those memories : that is mechanical. Like a computer, 
which is purely mechanical. Now they are trying to prove it 
is not so mechanical, but let's leave that alone for the moment. 
Mechanical action is accepting tradition and following tra­
dition. One of the aspects of that tradition is acceptance and 
obedience to a government, to priests. And the mechanical 
part of the brain is following consciously or unconsciously a 
line set by thought as the goal and purpose. Al that and more 
is mechanical ; and we live that way. 
Q: Is thought of itself mechanical ? 
94 

D I A L O G U E  I 
K : Of course, that is the whole point. One has to discover 
this for oneself, not be told by others, then it becomes 
mechanical. If we discover for ourselves how mechanical our 
thinking, our feeling, our attitudes, our opinions are, if one 
is aware of that, it means thought is invariably mechanistic­
thought being the response of memory, experience, knowledge, 
which is the past. And responding according to the pattern of 
the past is mechanical, which is thought. 
Q: Al thought ? 
K : Al thought, of course. Whether noble, ignoble, sexual, or 
technolƽgical thought, it is al thought. 
Q: Thought of the great genius also ? 
K :  Absolutely. Wait, we must go into the question of what is 
a genius. No, we won't go into that yet. 
Q: If all thought is mechanical, the expresion which you often 
use, "clear thinking", seems to be a contradiction. 
K :  No, no. Clear thinking is to see clearly, clear thinking is 
to think clearly, objectively, sanely, rationally, wholly. 
Q: It is still thought. 
K : It is stil thought, of course it is. 
Q: So what is the use of it ? (laughter). 
K : If there was clear thought I wouldn't belong to any poli­
tical party ! I might create a global party-that is another 
matter. 
Q: Can we get back to your question as to whether there is a 
part of the brain which is untouched by conditioning ? 
K : That's right, sir ; this requires very careful, hesitant, en-
. 
N 
· 
"Y 
h 
. " 
"N 
th 
. 
't" "I have 
qmry. 
ot saymg, 
es, t ere IS , or, 
o, 
ere ISn 
. 
experienced a state where there is no mechanicalnes" -that is 
95 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
too silly. But to really enquire and find out, you need a great 
deal of subtlety, great attentive quality to go step by step into 
it, not jump. 
So we say most of our lives are mechanical. The pursuit of 
pleasure is mechanical-but we are pursuing pleasure. Now, 
how shal we find out if there is a part of the brain that is not 
conditioned ? This is a very serious question, it is not for 
sentimentalists, romantic people, or emotional people ; this 
requires very clear thinking. When you think very clearly you 
see the limitation of thinking. 
Q: Are we going to look very clearly at the bariers which 
intedere with an unconditioned mind ? 
K :  No, we are trying to understand, or explore together, the 
mechanical mind first. Without understanding the totality of 
that you can't find out the other. We have asked the question : 
"Is there a part of the brain, part of our total mind-in which 
is included the brain, emotions, neurological responses-which 
is not completely mechanical ?" When I put that question to 
myself I might imagine that it is not all mechanical because I 
want the other ; therefore I deceive myself. I pretend that I 
have got the other. So I must completely understand the move­
ment of desire. You follow this ? Not suppres it, but under­
stand it, have an insight into it-which means fear, time, and 
all that we talked about the day before yesterday. So we are 
now enquiring whether our total activity is mechanistic ? That 
means am I, are you, clinging to memories ? The Hitlerian 
memories and al that, the memories of various pleasurable 
and painful experiences, the memories of sexual fulfilment and 
the pleasures and so on. That is : is one living in the past ? 
Q: Always, I am . 
K : Of course ! So all that you are is the past, which is 
mechanical. So knowledge is mechanical. I wonder if you se 
this ? 
96 

D I A L O G U E  I 
Q: Why is it so dificult to see this? 
K :  Because we are not aware of our inward responses, of what 
actually is going on within ourselves-not to imagine what is 
going on, or speculate about it, or repeat what we have been 
told by somebody else, but actually to be aware of what is 
going on. 
Q: Aren't we guided to awarenes by experience ? 
K : No. Now wait a minute. What do you mean by exper­
ience ? The word itself means, "to go through" -to go through, 
finish, not retain. You have said something that hurts me, that 
has left a mark on the brain, and when I meet you that 
memory responds. Obviously. And is it posible when you hurt 
me, say something cruel, or justified, or violent, to observe it 
and not register it ? Try it, sir; you try it, test it out. 
Q: It is very difficult because the memory has already been 
hurt; we never forget it. 
K : Do go into this. From childhood we are hurt, it happens 
to everybody, in school, at home, at college, in universities, the 
whole of society is a proces of hurting others. One has been 
hurt and one lives in that consciously or unconsciously. So 
there are two problems involved : the past hurt retained in the 
brain, and not to be hurt; the memory of hurts, and never to 
be hurt; Now is that possible? 
Q: If "you" are not there. 
K : Go into it. You will discover it for yourself and find out. 
That is, you have been hurt. 
Q: The image of myself . . .  
K :  Go into it slowly. What is hurt ? The image that you have 
built about yourself, that has been hurt. Why do you have an 
image about yourself ? Because that is the tradition, part of 
97 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
our education, part of our social reactions. There is an image 
about myself, and there is an image about you in relation to 
my image. So I have got haH a dozen images and more. And 
that image about myseH has been hurt. You call me a fool and 
I shrink : it has been hurt. Now, how am I to disolve that 
hurt and not be hurt in the future, tomorrow, or the next 
moment ? You follow the question ? There are two problems 
involved in this. One, I have been hurt and that creates a 
great deal of neurotic activity, resistance, seH protection, fear ; 
all that is involved in the past hurt. Second, how not to be 
hurt any more. 
Q: One has to be totally involved. 
K : Lok at it and you will see. You have been hurt, haven't 
you-I am not talking to you personaly-and you resist, you 
are afraid of being hurt more. So you build a wall round 
yourself, isolate yourseH, and the extreme form of that isola­
tion is total withdrawal from al relationship. And you remain 
in that but you have to live, you have to act. So you are always 
acting from a centre that is hurt and therefore acting neurotic­
ally. You can see this happening in the world, in oneseH. And 
how are those hurts to be totaly disolved and not leave a 
mark ? Also in the future how not to be hurt at all ? The 
question is clear, isn't it ? 
Now how do you approach this question ? How to disolve 
the hurts, or how not to be hurt at all ? Which is the question 
you put to yourseH, which do you want answered ? Disolve 
all the hurts, or no more hurts ? Which is it that comes to you 
naturally ?  
Q: No more hurts. 
K : · So the question is : "Is it p<mible not to be hurt ?" Which 
means is it posible not to have an image about yourself? 
Q: If we see that image is false . . . 
98 

D I A L O G U E  I 
K : Not false or true. Don't you se, you are already operating 
in the field of thought ? Is it possible not to have an image at 
all about yourself, or about another, naturally ? And if there is 
no image, isn't that true freedom ? Ah, you don't see it. 
Q: Sir, if what happens to you is of no importance to you, then 
it doesn't matter and it won't hurt you. If you have managed 
to get rid of your self-importance . . .  
K :  The gentleman says if you can get rid of your self­
importance, your arogance, your vanity, then you won't be 
hurt. But how am I to get rid of all that garbage which I have 
collected ? (laughter). 
Q: I think you can get rid of it by being entirely aware of the 
relationship between yourself and your physical body and your 
thinking. How you control your physical body and . . .  
K :  I don't want to control anything, my body, my mind, my 
emotions. That is the traditional, mechanistic response. Sorry ! 
(laughter). Please go into this a little bit and you wil see. First 
of al, the idea of getting rid of an image implies that there is 
an entity who is different from the image. Therefore he can 
kick the image. But is the image different from the entity who 
says, "I must get rid of it" ? They are both the same, therefore 
there is no control. I wonder if you see that. When you see that 
you are no longer functioning mechanically. 
Q: Surely by destroying one image we are immediately build­
ing another one ? 
K :  We are going to find out if it is pC>Mible to be free of all 
images, not only the present ones but the future ones. Now why 
does the mind create an image about itself ? I say I am a 
Christian, that is an image. I believe in the saviour, in Christ, 
in al the rituals, why ? Because that is my conditioning. Go to 
India and they say, "What are you talking about, Christ ? I 
have got my own gods, as good as yours, if not better" 
99 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
(laughter). So that is their conditioning. If I am born in RUMia 
and educated there I say, "I believe in neither. The State is 
my god and Marx is the first prophet" and so on and so on. 
So the image formation is brought about through propaganda, 
conditioning, tradition. 
Q: Is that related to the fact that out of fear one behaves in a 
certain way which is not natural for one to behave ; and there­
fore one is not being oneself ? And that is making the image 
you are talking about. 
K :  The image is what we call ourself : 
"I must expres 
myself", "I must fulfil myself" . "Myself" is the image accord­
ing to the environment and culture in which one has been 
born. I believe there was a tribe in America, among the Red 
Indians, where anybody who had an image about himself was 
killed (laughter), was liquidated, because it led to ambition 
and all the rest of it. I wonder what would happen if they did 
it to all of us. It would be a lovely world, wouldn't it ? 
(laughter). 
So is it posible not to create images at all ? That is, I am 
aware that I have an image, brought about through culture, 
through propaganda, tradition, the family, the whole presure. 
Q: We cling to the known. 
K : That is the known, tradition is the known. And my mind 
is afraid to let that known go, to let the image go, because the 
moment it lets it go it might lose a profitable position in 
society, might lose status, might lose a certain relationship ; so 
it is frightened and holds on to that image. The image is merely 
words, it has no reality. It is a series of words, a series of 
responses to those words, a series of beliefs which are words. I 
believe in Marx, in Christ, or in Krishna or whatever they 
believe in in India. They are just words ideologically clothed. 
And if I am not a slave to words, then I begin to lose the 
100 

D I A L O G U E  I 
image. I wonder if you see how significant deeply rooted words 
have become. 
Q: If one is listening to what you say and realises that one has 
an image about oneself, and that there is a large discrepancy 
between the image one has of oneself and the ideal of 
freedom . . .  
K :  It is not an ideal . .  . 
Q: . . .  freedom itself . . .  then knowing that there is a discre-
pancy, can one think of freedom, knowing that it is just an 
idea ? 
K : Is freedom an abstraction, a word, or a reality ? 
Q: It is being free of relationship, is it not? 
K :  No please, we are jumping from one thing to another. Let 
us go step by step. We began by asking whether there is any 
part of the brain, any part of the total entity, that is not condi­
tioned ? We said conditioning means image-forming. The 
image that gets hurt and the image that protects itseH from 
being hurt. And we said there is only freedom-the actuality 
of that state, not the word, not the abstraction-when there is 
no image, which is freedom. When I am not a Hindu, Buddhist, 
Christian, Communist, Socialist, I have no label and therefore 
no label inside. Now is it pɒble not to have an image at all ? 
And how does that come ab.out ? 
Q: Isn't it all to do with the activity . . .  
K : Lok, we come to a point and go off after something else. 
One wants to find out whether it is ɓible to live in this world 
without a single image. 
Q: When there is no observer there is nothing observed, and 
yet one comes acros something in this silence . . .  
K : Madam, is this an actual fact that there is no observer in 
IOI 

T R l." T H  A N D  A C T l." A L I T Y  
your life-not only occasionaly. Is it pomble to be fre of the 
image that society, the emironment, culture, education has 
built in one ? Because one is al that ; you are the result of your 
environment, of your culture, of your knowledge, of your 
education, of your job, of your pleasure, you are al! that. 
Q: What happens to one's sense of orientation \\ithout a 
centre ? 
K : Al that comes a little later, please. 
Q: If you are aware of your conditioning does that fre you ? 
K :  Now, are you actualy aware-not theoreticaly or in the 
abstract-actually aware that you are conditioned this ·way, 
and therefore you have got an image ? 
Q: If you don't have the image then you don't know what 
your place is. 
K :  "If you have no image then you do not know what your 
place is." Listen to that carefully. If you have no image, you 
have no place in the world. Which means if you have no image 
you are insecure. Go step by step. Now are you, ha"ing a place 
in the world, secure ? 
Q: No. 
K : Be actual. 
Q: When you se that the image that you have built, which 
you are attached to, when you sec that it is just a load of 
words . . .  
K : You are finding security in a word : and it is not security 
at all. We have lived in words and made those words some­
thing fantastically real. So if you are seeking security, it is not 
in an image ; it is not in your environment, in your culture. 
One must have security, that is esential, food, clothes, and 
shelter; one must have it otherwise one can't function. Now 
1 02 

D I A L O G U E  I 
that is denied totally when I belong to a smal group. When I 
say I am a German, or a Rƾian, or an Englishman, I deny 
complete security. I deny security because the words, the 
labels have become important, not security. This is what is 
actually happening, the Arabs and the Israelis both want 
security, and both are accepting words and all the rest of it. 
Now we come to the point. Is it possible to live in this world, 
not to go off into some fantastic realm of illusion, or to some 
monastery, and to live in this world without a single image and 
be totally secure ? 
Q: How can we be secure in a sick society ? 
K :  I am going to go into this, madam, I'll show it to you.* 
Q: It is competitive, it is vicious. 
K : Please go with me. I'll show you that there is complete 
security, absolute security, not in images. 
Q: To be totally aware every moment, then your conditioning 
does not exist. 
K : Not if you are aware. Are you aware that you have an 
image and that image has been formed by the culture, the 
society ? Are you aware of that image ? You discover that 
image in relationship, don't you ? Now we are asking ourselves 
whether it is posible to be free of images. That means, when 
you say something to me that is vulgar, hurting, at the moment 
to be totally aware of what you are saying and how I am 
responding. Totally aware, not partially, but to be totally 
aware of both the pleasurable image and the displeasurable 
image. To be aware totally at the moment of the reaction to 
your insult or praise. Then at that moment you don't form an 
image. There is no recording in the brain of the hurt, the insult 
or the flattery, therefore there is no image. That requires 
* See Discussion about security, pages 39-43. 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
tremendous attention at the moment, which demands a great 
inward perception, which is only posible when you have 
looked at it, watched it, when you have worked. Don't just 
say, "Well, tell me all about it ; I want to be comfortable". 
Q: Who watches all this ? 
K : Now, who watches all this ? If there is a watcher, then the 
image is continuous. If there is no watcher there is no image. 
In that state of attention the hurt and the flattery are both 
observed, not reacted to. You can only observe when there is 
no observer, who is the past. It is the past observer that gets 
hurt. Where there is only observation when there is flattery or 
insult, then it is finished. And that is real freedom. 
Now follow it. 0ln this world, if I have no image, you say 
I shall not be secure. One has found security in things, in a 
house, in property, in a bank account, that is what we call 
security. And one has also found security in belief. If I am a 
Catholic living in Italy, I believe that ; it is much safer to 
believe what ten thousand people believe. There I have a 
place. And when my belief is questioned I resist. 
Now can there be a total awarenes of all this ? The mind 
becomes tremendously active, you understand ? Not just say­
ing, "I must be aware", "I must learn how to be attentive". 
You are tremendously active, the brain is alive. Then we can 
move from that to find out if there is in the brain a part that 
has not been conditioned at al, a part of the brain which is 
non-mechanistic. I am putting a false question, I don't know 
if you see that. Do see it quickly, do see it. Please just listen for 
two minutes, I am on fire ! 
If there is no image, which is mechanical, and there is free­
dom from the image, then there is no part of the brain that has 
been conditioned. 
Full 
stop ! 
Then my 
whole 
brain is 
unconditioned. 
Q: It is on fire ! 

D I A L O G U E  I 
K : Yes, therefore it is non-mechanistic and that has a totally 
diferent kind of energy; not the mechanistic energy. I wonder 
if you see this. Please don't make an abstraction of it because 
then it becomes words. But to see this, that your brain has been 
conditioned through centuries, saying survival is only possible 
if you have an image, which is created by the circle in which 
you live and that circle gives you complete security. We have 
accepted that as tradition and we live in that way. I am an 
Englishman, I am better than anybody else, or a Frenchman, 
or whatever it is. Now my brain is conditioned, I don't know 
whether it is the whole or part, I only know that it is condi­
tioned. There can be no enquiry into the unconditioned state 
until the conditioning is non-existent. So my whole enquiry is 
to find out whether the mind can be unconditioned, not to 
jump into the other, because that is too silly. So I am condi­
tioned by belief, by education, by the culture in which I have 
lived, by everything, and to be totally aware of that, not dis­
card it, not suppres it, not control it, but to be totally aware 
of it. Then you wil find if you have gone that far there is 
security only in being nothing. 
Q: What about images in racial prejudices? Do you belong to 
a conununity ? I quite agree with you. You don't want any 
psychological image but you must have a physical image for 
your physical survival . . .  even if you want to drop it everyone 
forces it on you. 
K : Sir, if one wants to survive physically, what is preventing 
it ? Al the psychological barriers which man has created. So 
remove all those psychological bariers and you have complete 
security. 
Q: No, because the other one involves you in it, not yourself. 
K : Nobody can put you into prison. 
Q: They kill you. 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K :  Then they kill you, all right (laughter). Then you wil find 
out how to meet death (laughter). Not imagine what you are 
going to feel when you die-which is another image. Oh, I 
don't know if you see all this. 
So nobody can put you psychologically into prison. You are 
already there (laughter). We are pointing out that it is possible 
to be totally free of images, which is the result of our condi­
tioning. And one of the questions about the biography is about 
that very point. How was that young boy, whatever he was, 
how was he not conditioned right through ? I won't go into 
that because it is a very complex problem. If one is aware of 
one's own conditioning then the whole thing becomes very 
simple. Then genius is something entirely different. And that 
leaves the question : What is creation ? 
1 06 

Chapter 7 
D I A L O G U E  I I  
"Are you facing in yourself what actually is going on ? And 
can you obseive another without the past-without all the 
accumulated memories, insults, hurts-so that you can look 
at another with clear eyes ?" 
Questioner ( 1) : You were going to speak on what is creation; 
could you say something about creative intelligence ? 
Q( 2) : Is there any reality in the belief in reincarnation ? And 
what is the nature and quality of the meditative mind ? 
Q( 3) : What is the difference between denial and suppresion 
of habits ? 
Q(4) : You were saying that for the mind to function sanely 
one must have great security, food and shelter. This seems 
logical. But it seems that in order to try and find a way to 
having this security one encounters the horrors and the diffi­
culties which make things so hard and imposible sometimes. 
What is the right action in this connection ? 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don't quite follow this. 
Q: How are we to live to have this basic security without 
taking part in al the horrors that are involved in it. 
K : You are asking, what is correct action in a world that is 
chaotic, where there is no security and yet one must have 
security. What is one to do ? Is that the question ? 
Q( 5) : I have a question which, when I ask it of myself, I 
1 07 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
always come up against a wall. I say, "I am the observer" and 
I would like to see the whole of the observer. I cannot see the 
whole of the observer because I can only see in fragments. So 
how is the observer to see the whole of the observer unles 
there is no observer ? How can the observer see the observer 
with no observer? 
K : How can one see the whole of the observer and can the 
observer watch himself as the observer. Is that the question ? 
Q(6) : This is about the state of mind in observation. Now 
when a situation occurs, what holds one to the observation that 
the observer is not different from what is observed ? There 
seems a lack of attention at the moment, at that point ; but that 
attention requires a tremendous vitality that we don't have. 
K : Have I understood the question rightly ? We do not have 
enough energy to observe wholly. Is that it ? 
Q: Yes. 
K :  Now which of these questions shall we talk over together? 
Q(7) : May I ask a question ? Can an act of willpower-I 
think you call it an act of friction-can this generate the 
vitality or the passion ? 
K : Can will generate sufficient energy to see clearly ? Would 
that be right ? 
Q: Yes. 
Q(8) : What happens to the brain and the proces of thought 
during hypnosis ? For medical reasons we use hypnosis. What 
is the process of thought in that particular case ? 
K :  We have got so many questions. What shall we begin 
with ? The observer ? 
Q: Yes. 
1 08 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
K : To see the whole of the obsexver one needs energy and how 
is that energy to be derived ? How is that energy to be 
acquired ? And will that energy reveal the totality of the nature 
and structure of the obsexver? Should we discuss that ? And 
what is the quality of the mind that has this meditative 
proces ? How is one to obsexve the whole of something, psycho­
logically ? How is one to be aware of oneself totally ? Can we 
begin with that ? 
Q: Surely one can only be aware of the totality if one loses 
oneself. 
K :  Yes, sir. Is it possible to see the totality of one's reactions, 
the motives, the fears, the anxieties, the sorrows, the pain, the 
totality of all that? Or must one see it in fragments, in layers? 
Shall we discuss that? How is one to be aware of the content 
of one's consciousnes ? 
What is consciousnes ? What do you think is consciousnes 
-under hypnosis, as well as when one is not hypnotised ? Most 
of us are hypnotised-by words, by propaganda, by tradition, 
by all the things that we believe in. We are hypnotised not only 
by external influence, but also we have our own peculiar 
proces of hypnotising ourselves inio believing something, or 
not believing and so on. Can one see the totality of one's 
consciousnes ? Let us enquire into this. 
Q: The obsexver cannot see it. 
K : Don't let us say one can, one cannot, it is so, it is not so. 
Let's enquire. 
Q: One has the feeling one has got to begin ! 
K :  We are going to begin, sir (laughter). How shall I begin, 
from where shall I begin ? To be aware of myself, myself being 
al the beliefs, the dogmas, conclusions, the fears, the anxieties, 
the pain, the sorrow, the fear of death, the whole of that­
where shall we begin to find out the content of this ? 
mg 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Q: You just asked what consciousnes was. 
K : We are going into that. 
Q: If one is going to observe, is it true that one has to stand 
outside the things that one is observing ? 
K :  Madam, I am asking, if I may, how shall I begin to 
enquire into the whole structure of myself. If I am interested, 
if I am serious, where shall I begin ? 
Q: Is the question, "Who am I ?" 
K : That becomes intellectual, verbal. I begin to know myself 
in my relationship to others-do let's face that fact. I canot 
know myself in abstraction. Whereas if I could observe what 
my reactions are in relationship to another, then I begin to 
enquire. That is much closer, more accurate and revealing. 
Can we do that ? That is, in my relationship to nature, to the 
neighbour and so on, I discover the nature of myself. So how 
do I observe my reactions in my relationship with another ? 
Q: Each time I see something about myself in a reaction it 
becomes knowledge, it becomes something retainable. 
K : I wonder if we are aware what takes place in our relation­
ship with another. You all sem to be so vague about this 
matter. 
Q: When I am very interested in some relationship I notice 
that I can't really observe. When I am angry in my relation­
ship I see immediately that I really can't observe what is going 
on. 
K : What do we mean by relationship ? 
Q: When we seem to want something . . .  
K : Lok at the word first, the meaning of the word. 
Q: I like to compare myself with the other person. 
1 1 0 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
K :  We are asking the meaning of the word itself, relationship. 
Q( I) : Communication. 
Q( 2) : It means you are relating to that person. 
K : When I say I am related to my wife, or to my husband, 
father, son, neighbour, what does that mean ? 
Q( 1) : I care for the person. 
Q( 2) : The whole human race is one's brother. 
Q(3) : I'd rather you told us. 
K : Ah !  (laughter). Relationship means-I am enqumng 
please, I am not stating it-doesn't relationship mean to 
respond accurately. To be related, the meaning in the diction­
ary is, to respond-relationship comes from that word. Now 
how do I respond in my relationship to you, or to my wife, 
husband and al the rest of it ? Am I responding according to 
the image I have about you ? Or are we both free of the 
images and therefore responding accurately ? 
Q: Isn't it largely subconscious ? 
K : First let us see what the word in itself means. 
Q: What do you mean by accurate ? 
K : Accurate means care-the word accurate means to have 
great care. If you care for something you act accurately. If 
you care for your motor you must be very well acquainted 
with it, you must know al the mechanical proceses of it. 
Accurate means infinite care ; we are using that word in that 
sense. When there is a relationship with another, either 
intimate, or distant, the response depends on the image you 
have about the other, or the image the other has about you. 
And when we act or respond according to that image, it is 
inaccurate, it is not with complete care. 
I I I  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Q: What is a love and hate relationship ?  
K :  We will come to that. I have an image about you and you 
have an image about me. That image has been put together 
through pleasure, fear, nagging, domination, possession, various 
hurts, impatience and so on. Now when we act or respond 
according to that image, then that action, being incomplete, is 
inaccurate, or without care, which we generaly call love. Are 
you aware that you have an image about another ? And having 
that image you respond according to the past, because the 
image has been put together and has become the past. 
Q: And also it is according to one's selfish desires. 
K :  I said that, fear, desire, selfishn͍. 
Q: You can't think of another person without an image ; how 
can you write a letter without an image ? 
K : How quickly you want to resolve everything, don't you. 
First of all, can we be aware that we have an image, not 
only about ourselves but about another ? 
Q: The two images are in relation, images of the other are in 
relation with the image of yourself. 
K : You see what you are saying-there is a thing different 
from the image. 
Q: The image of the other is made from the image of yourself. 
K : That is what we said. 
Q: Would anything practical help ? 
K : This is the most practical thing if you listen to this. The 
practical thing is to observe clearly what we are and act from 
there. Is one aware that one has an image about another ? And 
is one aware that one has an image about oneself ? Are you 
aware of thait ? This is a simple thing. I injure you, I hurt 
1 1 2 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
you, and you naturally have an image about me. I give you 
pleasure and you have an image about me. And according to 
that hurt or pleasure you react, and that reaction, being frag­
mentary, must be inaccurate, not whole. This is simple. Can 
we go on from there ? 
Now what do you do with the image you have built about 
another ? I am aware that I have an image about myself and 
I have an image about you, so I have got two images. Am I 
conscious of this ? Now if I have an image, why has this image 
been put together ?  And who is it that has put the image 
together ? You understand the question ? 
Q( 1) : Is it fear that creates the image ? 
Q( 2) : Is experience a necessary imaginative process ? 
Q( 3) : Previous images. 
Q ( 4) : Lack of attention. 
K : How does it come ? Not through lack of something, but 
how does it come ? You say through experience, through vari­
ous incidents, through words . . .  
Q: Retaining it all as memory. 
K : Which is al the movement of thought, isn't it ? So thought 
as movement, which is time, put this image together, created 
this image. It does it because it wants to protect itself. Am I 
inventing, or fabricating this, or is this actual ? 
Q: Actual. 
K :  That means "what is". Actuality means "what is". (Sorry, 
I am not teaching you English ! ) 
Q: It means that it then can see itself. 
K : No, no. You have an image about me, haven't you ? 
Q: Well, it is changing. 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K :  Wait, go slow (laughter). You have an image about me, 
haven't you, if you are honest, look into yourself, you see you 
have an image. How has that image been brought about ? 
You have read something, you have listened to something, 
there is a reputation, a lot of talk about it, some articles in 
the papers and so on. So all this has influenced thought and 
out of that you have created an image. And you have an 
image, not only about yourself but about the other. So when 
you respond according to an image about the speaker you are 
responding inaccurately ; in that there is no care. We said care 
implies attention, affection, accuracy. That means to act 
according to "what is". Now let's move from there. 
Q: Is not an image a thought form ? 
K :  We said that, a thought. 
Q: Thought has created images and it seems to imply that 
thought has created thought so . . .  
K :  Wait, we will get very far if we go slowly. So thought has 
built this image through time. It may be one day or fifty 
years. And I see in my relationship to another this image plays 
a tremendous part. If I become conscious, if I don't act 
mechanically, I become aware and see how extra.ordinarily 
vital this image is. Then my next question is : is it pˏible to 
be free of the image ? I have an image as a Communist, 
believing in all kinds of ideas, or as a Catholic-you follow ? 
This whole cultural economic, social background has built this 
image also. And I react according to that, there is a reaction 
according to that image. I think this is clear. 
Now is one aware of it ? Then one asks : is it necesary ? If 
it is necessary one should keep it, one should have the image . 
. If it is not necessary how is one to be free of it ? Now, is it 
necessary ? 
Q: Images form the whole chaos in the world where we live, 
so it is not necessary. 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
K : He says this whole image-making is bringing about chaos 
in the world. 
Q: Aren't we making a lot of judgements ? 
K : Are we making a lot of judgements ? 
Q: In making an image there is a lot of judgement. 
K : Yes, but we are asking a little more. We are asking 
whether it is necesary to have these images ? 
Q: No, we can be free of it. 
K : Is it necessary ? First let us see that. 
Q: No. 
K : Then if it is not necesary why do we keep it ? (laughter). 
Q: I have a feeling, being what we are, we can hardly help it. 
K : We are going to find out whether it is possible to be free 
of this image, and whether it is worth while to be free of this 
image, and what does it mean to be free of the image. 
Q: What is the relation with the chaos ? Is it judging that is 
wrong ? 
K : No, no, sir. Look, I have an image about myself as a 
Communist and I believe in Marx, his economic principles, I 
am strongly committed to that. And I reject everything else. 
But you think differently and you are committed to that. So 
there is a division between you and me, and that division 
invariably brings conflict. I believe that I am Indian and I 
am committed to Indian nationalism, and you are a committed 
Muslim and there is division and conflict. So thought has 
created this division, thought has created these images, these 
labels, these beliefs and so there is contradiction and division, 
which brings conflict and therefore chaos. That is a fact. So if 
you think life is a process of infinite conflicts, never-ending 
1 1 5 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
conflicts, then you must keep these images. I don't say it is, 
we are asking. I believe there have ben more than five 
thousand wars within the last two thousand years and we 
have accepted that. To have our sons kiled because we have 
these images. And if we see that is not necesary, that it is 
really a tremendous danger to survival, then I must find out 
how to be free of the images. 
Q: I think something else is involved in this, because you say 
we always react from the past, but what diference does it 
make-the past is a cyclic phenomenon that repeats so you 
can't prevent yourself, you know it is a fact that you wil 
repeat it in the same way al the time. 
K : We are talking about the necesity .
•
.
 
Q: (interrupting) You are pitting yourself against necesity . . .  
K : . . .  of having an image, or not having an image. If we 
are clear that these images are a real danger, realy a destruc­
tive process, then we want to get rid of them. But if you say : 
I keep my little image and you keep your little image, then we 
are at each other's throat. So if we can see very clearly that 
these images, labels, words, are destroying human beings .
.
•
 
Q: Krishnamurti, doesn't spiritual commitment give us the 
penetration or energy ? I mean if I am a committed Buddhist 
and I channel my energy in that direction, it doesn't neces­
sarily mean that I am in conflict with those who aren't 
Buddhists. 
K :  Just examine that please. If I am a committed human 
being, committed to Buddhism, and another is committed to 
the Christian dogma, and another to Communism . . .  
Q: That is not my concern. 
K : Isn't this what is happening in life ? Don't say it is not 
my business if you are a Communist. It is my business to see 
1 1 6 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
if we can live in security, in peace in the world, we are human 
beings, supposed to be intelligent. Why should I be committed 
to anything ? 
Q: Because it gives energy, the power of penetration. 
K :  No, no. 
Q: The danger is that we are moving away from the central 
fact. 
K : Yes, we are always moving away from the central fact. 
Q: We are doing that right now : the image is not necessary. 
K : People think it is necessary to be an Englishman, a 
German, a Hindu, a Catholic, they think it is important. They 
don't see the danger of it. 
Q(r) : Some people think it is not necessary. 
Q(2) : Why don't we se the danger ? 
K : Because we are so heavily conditioned, it is so profitable. 
My job depends on it. I might not be able to marry my son to 
somebody who is a Catholic. All that stuff. So the point is : if 
one sees the danger of these images, how can the mind free 
itself from them ? 
Q: Can "I" be there when no image is formed ? 
K : Images, whether they are old or new, are the same images. 
Q: Yes, but when an image is formed can I be aware ? 
K : We are first of all going to go into that. How is an image 
formed ? Is it formed through inattention ? You get angry with 
me and if at that moment I am totally attentive to what you 
say there is no anger. I wonder if you realise this ? 
Q: So the image and the image-former must be the same in 
that case. 
1 1 7 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
K :  Keep it very simple. I say something that doesn't give you 
pleasure. You have an image instantly, haven't you ? Now at 
that moment, if you are completely aware, is there 
an 
image ? 
Q: If you don't have that new image, all the other images are 
gone. 
K : Yes, that is the whole point. Can one be attentive at the 
moment of listening ? You are listening now, can you be totally 
attentive ? And when someone calls you by an unpleasant 
name, or gives you pleasure, at that moment, at that precise 
moment, can you be totally aware ? Have you ever tried this ? 
You can test it out, because that is the only way to find out, 
not accept the speaker's words. You can test it out. Then if 
there is no image-forming, and therefore no image, then what 
is the relationship between the two. You have no image about 
me, but I have an image about you ; then what is your relation­
ship to me ? You have no image because you see the danger of 
it, but I don't see the danger of it, I have my images and you are 
related to me, as wife, husband, father, whatever it is. I have 
the image and you have not. Then what is your relationship 
to me ? And what is my relationship to you ? 
Q: There is a barrier somewhere. 
K : Of course there is a barrier, but we are asking what is that 
relationship. You are my wife ; and I am very ambitious, 
greedy, envious, I want to succeed in this world, make a lot 
of money, position, prestige, and you say, "How aoourd all 
that is, don't be like that, don't be silly, don't be traditional, 
don't be mechanical, that is just the old pattern being 
repeated". What happens between you and me ? 
Q: Division. 
K : And we talk together about love. I go off to the office 
where I am brutal, ambitious, ruthless, and I come home and 
1 1 8 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
am very pleasant to you-because I want to sleep with you. 
What is the relationship ? 
Q(1) : No good. 
Q( 2) : No relationship. 
K :  No relationship at all. At last ! And yet this is what we 
call love. 
So what is the relationship between you and me when I 
have an image and you have no image? Either you leave me, 
or we live in conflict. You don't create conflict but I create 
conflict because I have an image. So is it possible in our 
relationship with each other to help each other to be free of 
images ? You understand my question ? I am related to you 
by some misfortune, sexual demands and so on and so on. I 
am related to you and you are free of the images and I am 
not, and therefore you care infinitely. I wonder if you see that ? 
To you it is tremendously important to be free of images-and 
I am your father, wife, husband or whatever it is. Then will 
you abandon me? 
Q: No. 
K :  Don't say "no" so easily. You care, you have affection, 
you feel totally differently. So what wil you do with me ? 
Q: There is nothing you can do. 
K : Why can't you do something with me ? Do go into it, 
don't theorise about it. You are all in that position. Life is 
this. 
Q( 1) : It depends if this person has the capacity to see what 
the truth of the matter is. 
Q(2) : See through it all and don't take any notice of it 
(laughter). 
1 1 9 

TR U TH 
A N D  A C T U A L IT Y  
K : When I am nagging you all the time ? You people just 
play with words. You don't take actuality and look at it. 
Q: Surely if you have no image in yourself and you look at 
another person, you won't see their image either. 
K : If I have no image I see very clearly that you have an 
image. This is happening in the world, this is happening in 
every family, in every situation in relationship--you have 
something free and I have not and the battle is between us. 
Q: I think that situation is in everything. 
K :  That is what I am saying. What do you do ? Just drop it 
and disappear and become a monk ? Form a community ? Go 
off in meditation and all the rest of it ? Here is a tremendous 
problem. 
Q( 1) : I tell you how I feel, first of all. 
Q( 2) : But surely this is fictitious, because we are trying to 
imagine. 
K : I have said that if you have an image and I have an 
image, then we live very peacefuly because we are both blind 
and we don't care. 
Q: That situation you have created for us because you want 
us to be free of images ! 
K : Of course, of course, I want you to be free of images 
because otherwise we are going to destroy the world. 
Q: I see that. 
K : The situation is not being created for you : it is there. 
Lok at it. 
Q: I have an image about you, and I have had it for a long 
time. And there are diferent kinds of images. I have been 
trying to get rid of those images because I have read that they 
1 2 0  

D I A L O G U E  I I  
have created problems for me. Now every time I try to work 
it out with you ; and yet it hasn't helped. 
K : I'll show you how to get rid of it, how to be free of images. 
Q: I don't believe you, sir. 
K : Then don't believe me (laughter). 
Q: Al the time you are just sitting there talking. Abstractions 
and abstractions. Me having an image about you means you 
are sitting up on the platform being an enlightened person. 
I am here as a listener, let's say a disciple or a pupil. Now I 
feel very strongly that is not actuality or reality because we are 
two human beings. But stil you are the king of gurus, you 
are the one who knows and . . .  (laughter). 
K : Please don't laugh, sirs, be quiet, he is telling you some­
thing, please listen. May I show you something ? 
If that image of the guru has not created a problem you 
would live with that guru happily, wouldn't you ? But it has 
created a problem, whether it is the guru, the wife, or the 
husband-it is the same thing. You have got the image about 
the speaker as the supreme guru (Krishnamurti and others 
laugh}-the word means, one who dispels ignorance, one who 
dispels the ignorance of another. But generally the gurus impose 
their ignorance on you. You have an image about me as the 
guru, or you have an image about another as a Christian and 
so on. If that pleases you, if that gives you satisfaction you 
wil hold on to it-won't you ? That is simple enough. If it 
causes trouble then you say, "It is terrible to have this" and 
you move away, form another relationship which is pleasant ; 
but it is the same image-making. So one asks : is it possible to 
be free of images. The speaker sits on the platform because it 
is convenient, so you can all se ; I can equaly sit on the 
ground but you will have the same image. So the height 
doesn't make any difference. 
1 2 1  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
The question is, whether the mind-the mind being part 
of thought, and thought has created these images-can thought 
dispel these images ? Thought has created it and thought can 
dispel it because it is unsatisfactory and create another image 
which will be satisfactory. This is what we do. I don't like 
that guru for various reasons and I go to another because he 
praises me, gives me garlands and says, "My dear chap, you 
are the best disciple I have". So thought has created this 
image. Can thought undo the image ? 
Q: Not if you are looking at it intellectually. But looking at 
it intellectually, you are not using your senses. 
K : I am asking that ·first. Lok at it. Can the intellect, reason­
ing, dispel the image ? 
Q: No. 
K : Then what will ? 
Q: The thing that stands in the way is merely sell, the "I". 
If you overcome this . . .  
K : I know; but I don't want to go into the much more com­
plex. problem of the "I''. 
Q: You say the image is what he means by the "I", but what 
do you mean by the "I" ? 
K : Of com10e, of course. How does thought get rid of the 
image without creating another image ? 
Q: If the guru causes trouble and it feels uncomfortable with 
the image, if one can see the trouble then perhaps that guru 
can help ? 
K : You are not going into it at all, you are just scratching on 
the surface. 
Q: Thought cannot get rid of the image. 
K : If that is so, then what will ? 
1 22 

D I A L O G U E I I  
Q: Understanding. 
K : Don't use words like understanding. What do you mean 
by understanding ? 
Q: Getting rid of the thoughts. 
K : Now who is going to get rid of thought ? 
Q: Is it a question of time ? Could it be that our energies are 
all in the past, and we need to think now ? 
K : Al the images are in the past. Why can't I drop all that 
and live in the now? 
Q: That is what I meant. 
K : Yes. How can I ? With the burden of the past, how to 
get rid of the past burden ? It comes to the same thing. 
Q: If one lives in the present, do the past images still come 
through ? 
K : Can you live in the present ? Do you know what it means 
to live in the present? That means not a single memory, 
except technological memories, not a single breath of the past. 
Therefore you have to understand the totality of the past, 
which is all this memory, experience, knowledge, imagination, 
images. You go from one thing to another, you don't pursue 
one thing steadily. 
Q( 1) : Please keep going with one having no image and the 
other having an image. 
Q(2) : Yes, but we don't answer it. 
K : I'll answer it, all right. You have no image and I have an 
image. What happens ? Aren't we eternally at war with each 
other ? 
Q: What am I going to do with you ? 
K : We are living on the same earth, in the same house, meet-
1 2 3  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
ing often, living in the same community, what wil you do 
with me ? 
Q: I would try to explain to him what I've learned. 
K : Yes, you have explained it to me, but I like my image 
(laughter). 
Q: Sir, we cannot know because we have these images of 
ourselves. 
K : That is al I am saying ! You are living in images and you 
don't know how to be free of them. These are al speculative 
questions. 
So let's begin again. Are you aware that you have images ? 
If you have images that are pleasant and you cling to them, 
and discard those which are unpleasant, you stil have images. 
The question really is, can you be free of them ? 
Q: Go and listen to some music. 
K : The moment that music stops you are back to those 
images. This is al so childish. Take drugs, that also creates 
various images. 
Q: Isn't there division between wanting to hold on to the 
images and wanting to let them go. 
K : What is the line, the division ? The division is desire, isn't 
it? Listen, sir. I don't like that image, I am going to let it go. 
But I like this image, I am going to hold on to it. So it is 
desire, isn't it? 
Q: I feel there is a pleasure-motive even in . .
. 
K : Of course. You don't stick to one thing, sir. 
Q: If I have no image, then the other has no image at al. 
K : How inaccurate that is. Because I am blind therefore you 
are also blind ! This is so illogical; do think clearly. 
1 24 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
What should I do so that there is no image-forming at al ? 
Let us think together. 
Q: I think most people-I am sorry-I think most people 
here are looking for consolation in your words, rather than 
anything else . . .  
K :  I am aware that I have images, I know. There is no ques­
tion of it, I know I have images. I have an image about my­
self and I have an image about you-that is very clear. If I 
am satisfied with you and we have the same images, then we 
are both satisfied. That is, if you think as I think-you like to 
be ambitious, I like to be ambitious-then we are both in 
the same boat, we don't quarrel, we accept it, and we live 
together, work together, are both ruthlessly ambitious. But if 
you are free of the image of ambition and I am not, the 
trouble begins. What then wil you do, who are free of that 
image, with me ? You can't just say, "Well it is not my busi­
nes" -because we are living together, we are in the same 
world, in the same community, in the same group and so on. 
What will you do with me ? Please just listen to this. Will 
you discard me, wil you tum your back on me, wil you run 
away from me, will you join a monastery, learn how to 
meditate ? Do all kinds of things in order to avoid me ? Or 
wil you say, "Yes, he is here in my house". What will you do 
with regard to me, who has an image ? 
Q: First I would ask you politely to listen. 
K : But I won't listen. Haven't you lived with people who are 
adamant in their beliefs. You are like that. 
Q: It is best not to waste one's time. 
K :  We are going to find out, sir. You see this is really a hypo­
thetical question because you have got images and you live in 
those images, and the other person lives in images. That is our 
dificulty. Suppose I have no images, and I haven't, I have 
1 25 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
worked at this for fifty years, so I have no image about my­
self, or about you. What is our relationship ? I say please listen 
to me, but you won't. I say please pay attention, which means 
care, to attend means infinite care. Wil you listen to me that 
way ? That means you really want to learn-not from me, but 
learn about yourself. That means you must infinitely care and 
watch yourself, not selfishly, but care to learn about yourself 
-,-not according to me, or to Freud, or Jung, or to the latest 
psychologist, but learn about yourself. That means, watch 
yourself; and you can only do that in your relationship with 
each other. You say, "You are sitting on that platform and 
you have gradually asumed, at least in my eyes, a position 
of authority, you have become my guru". And I say to you, 
"My friend just listen. I am not your guru. I won't be a guru 
to anybody." It is monstrous to be a guru. Are you listening 
when I say this ? Or do you say, "I can't listen to you because 
my mind is wandering". So when you listen, listen with ca.re, 
with affection, with attention, then you begin to learn about 
yourself, actually as you are. Then, from there we can move, 
we can go forward ; but if you don't do that, but keep on 
repeating, "Oh I have got my image, I don't know how to 
get rid of it" and so on, then we don't move any further. 
Now you have an image with regard to sex, that you must 
have a girl or a boy. We are so conditioned in this. I say to 
you please listen, are you aware that you are conditioned ?­
don't choose parts of the conditioning : be totally aware of 
your whole conditioning. We are conditioned much more at 
the deeper levels than at the superficial levels-is that clear ? 
One is conditioned very deeply, and superficially less so. 
Listening with your heart, not with your little mind, with your 
heart, with the whole of your being, is it possible to be totally 
aware of all this, the whole of consciousnes ? To be totally 
aware implies no observer. The observer is the past and there­
fore when he observes he brings about fragmentation. When 
I observe from the past, what I observe brings about a frag-
1 26 

D I A L O G U E  1 1  
mentary outlook. I only see parts, I don't see the whole. This 
is simple. So I have an insight that says, "Don't look from the 
past". That means, don't have an observer who is al the time 
judging, evaluating, saying, "This is right, this is wrong'', "I 
am a Christian, I am a Communist" -all that is the past. 
Now can you listen to that, which is a fact, which is actual, 
which is not theoretical ? You are facing actually what is. Are 
you facing in yourself what actually is going on ? And can you 
observe another without the past-without al the accumulated 
memories, insults, hurts-so that you can look at another with 
clear eyes ? If you say, "I don't know how to do it", then we 
can go into that. 
As we said, any form of authority in this matter is the 
reaction of submision to somebody who says he knows. That 
is your image. The profesor, the teacher knows mathematics, 
geography, I don't, so I learn from him, and gradually he 
becomes my authority. He knows, I don't know. But here, 
psychologically, I think I don't know how to approach myself, 
how to learn about it, therefore I look to another-the same 
proces. But the other is equally ignorant as me, because he 
doesn't know himself. He is tradition-bound, he accepts 
obedience, he becomes the authority, he says he knows and 
you don't know : "You become my disciple and I wil tell 
you". The same process. But it is not the same process psy­
chologicaly. Psychologically the guru is "me". I wonder if you 
see that ? He is as ignorant as myself. He has got a lot of 
Sanskrit words, a lot of ideas, a lot of superstitions; and I am 
so gullible I accept him. Here we say there is no authority, 
no guru, you have to learn about yourself. And to learn about 
yourself, watch yourself, how you behave with another, how 
you walk. Then you find that you have an image about your­
self a tremendous image. And you see these images create 
gre:it harm, they break up the world-the Krishna-conscious 
group, the Transcendental group, or some other group. And 
your own group ; you have your own ideas, you must have sex, 
1 2 7  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
you must have a girl, you must have a boy, and al the rest 
of it, change the girl, change the boy, every week. You live 
like that and you don't see the tremendous danger and wastage 
of life. 
Now we come to the point : how am I to be free of al 
image-making ? That is the real question. Is it posible ? I will 
not say it is, or it is not, I am going to find out. I am going 
to find out by carefully watching why images are made. I 
realise images are made when the mind is not giving its atten­
tion at the moment. At the moment something is said that 
gives pleasure, or something that brings about displeasure, to 
be aware at that moment, not afterwards. But we become 
aware afterwards and say, "My god, I must pay attention, 
terrible, I se it is important to be attentive and I don't know 
how to be attentive ; I lose it and when the thing takes place 
it is so quick ; and I say to myself I must be attentive". So I 
beat myself into being attentive-I wonder if you see this­
and therefore I am never attentive. So I say to myself, "I am 
not attentive at the moment something is said which gives 
pleasure or pain", I see that I ͝ inattentive. I have found 
that my whole mind, make-up, is inattentive, to the birds, to 
nature, to everything, I am inattentive-when I walk, when I 
eat, when I speak, I am inattentive. So I say to myself, "I am 
not going to be concerned with attention, but pay attention to 
inattention". Do you get this ? 
Q: Yes. 
K : I am not going to be concerned with being attentive, but 
I am going to see what is inattention. I am watching inatten­
tion, and I see I am inattentive most of the time. So I am 
going to pay attention to one thing at a time, that is, when I 
walk, when I eat, I am going to walk, eat, with attention. I 
am not going to think about something else, but I am going to 
pay attention to every little thing. So what has ben inatten­
tion becomes attention. I wonder if you se that ? 
1 28 

D I A L O G U E  I I  
So I am now watching inattention. That is, I am watching 
that I am not attentive. I look at a bird and never look at it, 
my thoughts are all over the place-I am now going to look 
at that bird ; it may take me a second but I am going to look 
at it. When I walk I am going to watch it. So that out of 
inattention, without any effort, there is total attention. When 
there is total attention, then when you say something pleasant 
or unpleasant there is no image-forming because I am totally 
there. My whole mind, heart, brain, al the responses are 
completely awake and attentive. Aren't you very attentive 
when you are pursuing pleasure ? You don't have to talk about 
attention, you want that pleasure. Sexually, when you want 
it, you are tremendously attentive, aren't you ? Attention 
implies a mind that is completely awake, which means it 
doesn't demand challenge. It is only when we have images 
that challenges come. I wonder if you sec this. Because of those 
images challenges come and you respond to the challenge 
inadequately. Therefore there is a constant battle between 
challenge and response, which means the increase of images; 
and the more it increases the more challenges come, and so 
there is always the strengthening of images. I wonder if you 
sec this ? Haven't you noticed people when they are chal­
lenged about their Catholicism or whatever it is, how they 
become more strong in their opinions ? So by being completely 
attentive there is no image formation, which means condition­
ing disappears. 
1 29 

Chapter 8 
S U F F E R I N G ; T H E M E A N I N G  
O F  D E A T H  
"The mutation in consciousness is the ending of time, which 
is the ending of the 'me' which has been produced through 
time. Can this take place ? Or is it just a theory like any 
other ?" 
M A v w E G o on with what we were discussing the other 
day ? We were saying that the crisis in the world is not out­
ward but the crisis is in consciousnes. And that consciousnes 
is its content : all the things that man has accumulated through 
centuries, his fears, his dogmas, his superstitions, his beliefs, his 
conclusions, and all the suffering, pain and anxiety. We said 
unless there is a radical mutation in that consciousnes, out­
ward activities will bring about more mischief, more sorrow, 
more confusion. And to bring about that mutation in con­
sciousnes a totally different kind of energy is required ; not the 
mechanical energy of thought, of time and measure. When we 
were investigating into that we said there are three active 
principles in human beings : fear, pleasure and suffering. We 
talked about fear at some length. And we also went into the 
question of pleasure, which is entirely different from joy, en­
joyment, and the delight of seeing something beautiful and 
so on. And we also touched upon sufering. 
I think we ought this morning to go into that question of 
suffering. It is a nice morning and I am sorry to go into such 
a dark subject. As we said, when there is suffering there can 
be no compasion and we asked whether it is at all posible for 
1 30 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G  O F  D E A T H 
human minds, for human beings right throughout the world, 
to put an end to suffering. For without that ending to sufer­
ing we live in darkness, we accept all kinds of beliefs, dogmas, 
escapes, which bring about much more confusion, more viol­
ence and so on. So we are going this morning to investigate 
together into this question of suffering, whether the human 
mind can ever be free from it totally ; and also we are going 
to talk about the whole question of death. 
Why do we accept suffering, why do we put up with it, 
psychologically ? Physical suffering can be controlled or put 
up with ; and it is important that such physical suffering does 
not distort clarity of thought. We went into that. Because for 
most of us, when there is physical pain, a continued suffering, 
it distorts our thinking, it prevents objective thinking, which 
becomes personal, broken up, distorted. If one is not actively 
aware of this whole proces of physical suffering, whether re­
membered in the past, or the fear of having it again in the 
future, then neurotic habits, neurotic activities take place. We 
spoke of that briefly the other day. 
We are asking if it is at al possible for human beings to end 
sufering at al levels of their existence, psychological suffer­
ing. And when we go into it in ourselves deeply, we see one 
of the major factors of this suffering is attachment-attach­
ment to ideas, to conclusions, to ideologies, which act as 
security ; and when that security is threatened there is a cer­
tain kind of suffering. Please, as we said the other day, we 
are sharing this together, we are looking into this question of 
suffering together. You are not merely listening to a talk, if I 
may point out, and gathering a few ideas and agreeing or dis­
agreeing, but rather we are in communication, sharing the 
problem, examining the question, the issue, actively ; and so 
it becomes our responsibility, yours as well as the speaker's, 
to go into this question. 
There is also attachment to persons; in our relationships 
there is a great deal of suffering. That is, the one may be free 
1 3 1 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
from this conditioning of fear and so on, and the other may 
not be and hence there is a tension. The word attachment 
means "holding on", not only physically but psychologically, 
depending on something. In a relationship, one may be free 
and the other may not be free and hence the conflict ; one may 
be a Catholic and the other may not be a Catholic, or a Com­
munist and so on. Hence the conflict that breeds continuous 
strain and suffering. 
Then there is the suffering of the unknown, of death ; the 
suffering of losing something that you were attached to in the 
past, as memory. I do not know if you have not noticed all 
these things in yourself ? And is it possible to live in complete 
rdationship with another without this tension, which is brought 
about through self-interest, 
through self-centred 
activity, 
desire pulling in different directions, and live in a rdationship 
in which there may be contradictions, for one may be free, 
the other may not be ? To live in that situation demands not 
only what is called tolerance-that absurd intellectual thing 
that man has created-but it demands a much greater thing, 
which is affection, love, and therefore compasion. We are 
going to go into that. 
We are asking whether man can end suffering. There are 
various explanations : how to go beyond it, how to rationalise 
it, how to suppress it, how to escape from it. Now we are 
asking something entirely different : not to suppres it, not to 
evade it, nor rationalise it, but when there is that suffering to 
remain totally with it, without any movement of thought, 
which is the movement of time and measure. 
One suffers : one loses one's son, or wife, or she runs away 
with somebody else ; and the things that you are attached to, 
the house, the name, the form, all the accumulated conclu­
sions, they seem to fade away, and you suffer. Can one look 
at that suffering without the observer ? We went into that 
question of what the observer is. We said the observer is the 
past, the accumulated memory, experience and knowledge. 
1 32 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G  O F  D E A T H 
And with that knowledge, experience, memory, one observes 
the suffering, so one dissociates oneself from suffering : one is 
different from suffering and therefore one can do something 
about it. Whereas the obseiver is the obseived. 
This requires a little care and attention, the statement that, 
"the obseiver is the obseived". We don't accept it. We say 
the obseiver is entirely diferent; and the obseived is something 
out there separate from the obseiver. Now if one looks very 
closely at that question, at that statement that the obseiver is 
the obseived, it seems so obvious. When you say you are 
angry, you are not different from anger, you are that thing 
which you call anger. When you are jealous, you are that 
jealousy. The word separates; that is, through the word we 
recognise the feeling and the recognition is in the past; so we 
look at that feeling through the word, through the screen of 
the past, and so separate it. Therefore there is a division 
between the obseiver and the obseived. 
So we are saying that when there is this suffering, either 
momentary, or a continuous endless series of causes that bring 
about suffering, to look at it without the obseiver. You are 
that suffering; not, you are separate from suffering. Totally 
remain with that suffering. Then you will notice, if you go 
that far, if you are willing to obseive so closely, that some­
thing totally different takes place : a mutation. That is, out 
of that suffering comes great pasion. If you have done it, 
tested it out, you will find it. It is not the pasion of a belief, 
pasion for some cause, passion for some idiotic conclusion. 
It is totaly different from the pasion of desire. It is something 
which is of a totally different kind of energy; not the movement 
of thought, which is mechanical. 
We have a great deal of suffering in what is called love. 
Love, as we know it now, is pleasure, sexual, the love of a 
country, the love of an idea, and so on-all derived from 
pleasure. And when that pleasure is denied there is either hatred, 
antagonism, 
or violence. 
Can 
there be love, not just 
I 33 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
something personal between you and me or somebody else, 
but the enormous feeling of compasion-paMion for every­
thing, for everybody. PaMion for nature, compasion for the 
earth on which we live, so that we don't destroy the earth, 
the animals, the whole thing . . .  Without love, which is com­
paMion, suffering must continue. And we human beings have 
put up with it, we accept it as normal. Every religion has 
tried to find a way out of this, but organised religions have 
brought tremendous suffering. 
Religious organisations throughout the world have done a 
great deal of harm, there have been religious wars, endles 
persecution, tortures, burning people, especialy in the West­
it wasn't the fashion in those days in the East. And we are 
speaking of-not the acceptance of suffering, or the putting up 
with suffering-but remaining motionless with that suffering ; 
then there comes out of it great compasion. And from that 
compassion arises the whole question of creation. 
What is creation, what is the creative mind ? Is it a mind 
that suffers and through that suffering has learnt a certain 
technique and expresses that technique on paper, in marble, 
with paint-that is, is creativeness the outcome of tension ? 
Is it the outcome of a disordered life ? Does creativenes come 
through the fragmentary activity of daily life ? I don't know 
if you are following all this ? Or must we give a totally differ­
ent kind of meaning to creativenes, which may not need 
expression at all ? 
So one has to go into this question within oneself very 
deeply, because one's consciousnes is the consciousness of the 
world. I do not know if you realise that ? Fundamentally 
your consciousness is the consciousness of the speaker, of the 
rest of the world, basically. Because in that consciousnes there 
is suffering, there is pain, there is anxiety, there is fear of 
tomorrow, fear of insecurity, which every man goes through 
wherever he lives. So your consciousnes is the consciousnes of 
the world, and if there is a mutation in that consciousness it 
1 34 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G O F  D E A T H 
afects the total consciousness of human beings. It is a fact. 
So it becomes tremendously important that human beings 
bring about a radical transformation, or mutation in them­
selves, in their consciousness. 
Now we can go into this thing called death, which is one 
of the major factors of suffering. As with everything else in life 
we want a quick, definite answer, an answer which will be 
comforting, which will be totally satisfactory, intellectually, 
emotionally, physically, in every way. We want immortality, 
whatever that may mean, and we want to survive, both 
physically and psychologically. We avoid death at any price, 
put it as far away as possible. So we have never been able 
to examine it closely. We have never been able to face it, 
understand it, not only verbally, intellectually, but completely. 
We wait until the last moment, which may be an accident, 
disease, old age, when you can't think, when you can't look, 
you are just "gaga". Then you become a Catholic, a Protest­
ant, believe in this or that. So we are trying this morning to 
understand, not verbally, but actually what it means to die­
which doesn't mean we are asking that we should commit 
suicide. But we are asking, what is the total significance of this 
thing called death, which is the ending of what we know as 
life. 
In enquiring into this we must .find out whether time has a 
stop. The stopping of time may be death. It may be the ending 
and therefore that which ends has a new beginning, not that 
which has a continuity. So first can there be an ending to 
time, can time stop ?-not chronological time by the watch, as 
yesterday, today, and tomorrow, the twenty-four hours, but 
the whole movement of time as thought and measure. That 
movement, not chronological time, but that movement as 
thought, which is the whole process of comparing, of measure­
ment, can al that process stop ? Can thought, which is the 
response of memory, and can experience as knowledge­
knowledge is always in the past, knowledge is the past 
I 35 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
--can that whole momentum come to an end ? Not in 
the 
technological 
field, 
we 
don't 
even 
have 
to 
discuss 
that, that is obvious. Can this movement come to an end ? 
Time as hope, time as something that has happened to which 
the mind clings, attachment to the past, or a projection from 
the past to the future as a conclusion, and time as a movement 
of achievement from alpha to omega-this whole movement 
in which we are caught. If one said there is no tomorrow, 
psychologically, you would be shocked, because tomorrow is 
tremendously important : 
tomorrow you are going to be 
happy, tomorrow you will achieve something, tomorrow wil 
be the fulfilment of yesterday's hopes, or today's hopes, and 
so on. Tomorrow becomes extraordinarily significant-the 
tomorrow which is projected from the past as thought. 
So we are asking, can all that momentum come to an end ? 
Time has created, through centuries, the centre which is the 
"me". Time is not only the past as attachment, hope, fu1fil­
ment, the evolving process of thought until it becomes more 
and more refined. But also that centre around which al our 
activities take place, the "me", the mine, we and they, both 
politically, religiously, economically and so on. So the "me" 
is the conclusion of time, adding to itself and taking away 
from itself, but there is always this centre which is the very 
essence of time. We are asking, can that movement come to 
an end. This is the whole problem of meditation, not sitting 
down and repeating some mantra, some words, and doing 
some tricks-that is all silly nonsense. I am not being intoler­
ant but it is just absurd. And it becomes extraordinarily 
interesting to find this out, enquire into this. 
Then what is death ? Can that be answered in terms of 
words, or must one look at it not only verbally but non­
verbally ? There is death, the organism dies, by misuse, by 
abuse, by over-indulgence, drink, drugs, accident, all the 
things that the flesh is heir to-it dies, comes to an end, the 
heart stops, the brain with all its marvellous machinery comes 
1 36 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G  O F  D E A T H 
to an end. We accept it-we are not afraid of the physical 
organism coming to an end but we are afraid of something 
totally different. And being afraid of that basically, we want 
to resolve that fear through various beliefs, conclusions, hopes. 
The whole of the Asiatic world believes in reincarnation, they 
have proof for it-they say so at least. That is-watch this, 
it is extraordinary-the thing that has been put together by 
time as the "me", the ego, that incarnates til that entity 
becomes perfect and is absorbed into the highest principle, 
which is Brahman, or whatever you like to call it. Time has 
created the centre, the "me", the ego, the personality, the 
character, the tendencies, and so on, and through time you 
are going to dissolve that very entity, through reincarnation. 
You see the absurdity ? Thought has created something as the 
"me", the centre, and through the evolutionary process, which 
is time, you wil ultimately dissolve that and be absorbed into 
the highest principle. And yet they believe in this tremend­
ously. The other day I was talking to somebody who is a great 
believer in this. He said, "If you don't believe it you are not 
a religious man", and he walked out. And Christianity has its 
own form of continuity of the "me", the resurrection-Gabriel 
blowing the trumpet and so on (laughter). When you believe 
in reincarnation, what is important is that you are going to 
live another life and you suffer in this life because of your 
past actions. So what is important is, if one is actually basically 
comitted wholly to that belief, it means that you must 
behave rightly, accurately, with tremendous care now. And 
we don't do that. That demands super-human energy. 
There are several problems involved in this. What is immor­
tality and what is eternity-which is a timeless state-and 
what happens to human beings who are still caught in this 
movement of time ? We human beings live extraordinarily 
complex, irresponsible, ugly, stupid lives, we are at each 
other's throats, we are battling about beliefs, about authority, 
politically and religiously, and our daily lives are a series of 
1 37 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
endless conflicts. And we want that to continue. And because 
our lives are so empty, so full of meaningles words, we say 
there is a state where there is no death, imortality-which 
is a state where there is no movement of time. That is, time 
through centuries has created the idea of the self, of the "me" 
evolving. It has been pt:t together through time, which is a 
part of evolution. And inevitably there is death and with the 
ending of the brain-cells thought comes to an end. Therefore 
one hopes that there is something beyond the "me", the super­
consciousnes, a spark of God, a spark of truth, that can never 
be destroyed and that continues. And that continuity is what 
we call immortality. That is what most of us want. If you 
don't get it through some kind of fame, you want to have it 
sitting near God, who is timeless. The whole thing is so absurd. 
Is there sc>mething which is not of time, which has no 
beginning and no end, and is therefore timeles, eternal ? Our 
life being what it is, we have this problem of death ; and if I, 
a human being, have not totally understood the whole quality 
of myself, what happens to me when I die ? You understand 
the question ? Is that the end of me ? I have not understood ; 
if I have understood myself totally, then that is a different 
problem, which we will come to. If I have not understood 
myself totally-I am not using the word "understand" intel­
lectually-but actually to be aware of myself without any 
choice, all the content of my consciousness-if I have not 
deeply delved into my own structure and the nature of con­
sciousnes and I die, what happens ? 
Now who is going to answer this question ? (laughter). No, 
I am putting it purposefully. Who is going to answer this 
question ? Because we think we cannot answer it we look to 
someone else to tell us, the priest, the books, the people who 
have said, "I know", the endles mushrooming gurus. If one 
rejects all authority-and one must, totally, all authority­
then what have you left ? Then you have the energy to find 
out-because you have rejected that which dissipates energy, 
1 38 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G  O F  D E A T H 
gurus, hopes and fears, somebody to tell you what happens-if 
you reject all that, which means all authority, then you have 
tremendous energy. With that energy you can begin to enquire 
what actually takes place when you have not totally resolved 
the structure and the nature of the self, the self being time, 
and therefore movement, and therefore division : the "me" 
and the "not me" and hence conflict. 
Now what happens to me when I have not ended that con­
flict ? You and I and the rest of the world, if the speaker has 
not ended it, what happens to us ? We are all going to die-I 
hope not soon but sometime or other. What is going to 
happen ? When we live, as we are living, are we so funda­
mentally diferent from somebody else ? You may be cleverer, 
have greater knowledge or technique, you may be more 
learned, have certain gifts, talents, inventiveness ; but you and 
another are exactly alike basically. Your colour may be differ­
ent, you may be taller, shorter, but in essence you are the 
same. So while you are living you are like the rest of the world, 
in the same stream, in the same movement. And when you 
die you go on in the same movement. I wonder if you under­
stand what I am saying ? It is only the man who is totally 
aware of his conditioning, his consciousness, the content of it, 
and who moves and dissipates it, who is not in that stream. 
Am I making this clear ? That is, I <'.ID greedy, envious, 
ambitious, ruthless, violent-so are you. And that is our daily 
life, petty, accepting authority, quarrelling, bitter, not loved 
and aching to be loved, the agonies of loneliness, irresponsible 
relationship-that is our daily life. And we are like the rest of 
the world, it is a vast endless river. And when we die we'll be 
like the rest, moving in the same stream as before when we 
were living. But the man who understands himself radically, 
has resolved all the problems in himself psychologically, he is 
not of that stream. He has stepped out of it. 
The man who moves away from the stream, his conscious­
nes is entirely different. He is not thinking in terms of time, 
1 39 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
continuity, or immortality. But the other man or woman is stil 
in that. So the problem arises : what is the relationship of the 
man who is out to the man who is in ? What is the relationship 
between truth and reality ? Reality being, as we said, al the 
things that thought has put together. The root meaning of 
that word reality is, things or thing. And living in the world 
of things, which is reality, we want to establish a relationship 
with a world which has no thing-which is impossible. 
What we are saying is that consciousness, with al its con­
tent, is the movement of time. In that movement all human 
beings are caught. And even when they die that movement 
goes on. It is so ; this is a fact. And the human being who sees 
the totality of this-that is the fear, the pleasure and the 
enormous suffering which man has brought upon himself and 
created for others, the whole of that, and the nature and the 
structure of the self, the "me", the total comprehension of 
that, actually-then he is out of that stream. And that is the 
crisis in consciousness. We are trying to solve al our human 
problems, economic, social, political, within the area of that 
consciousness in time. I wonder if you see this ? And therefore 
we can never solve it. We seem to accept the politican as 
though he was going to save the world, or the priest, or the 
analyst, or somebody else. And, as we said, the mutation in 
consciousness is the ending of time, which is the ending of 
the "me" which has been produced through time. Can this 
take place ? Or is it just a theory like any other ? 
Can a human being, can you actually do it ? When you do 
it, it affects the totality of consciousnes. Which means in the 
understanding of oneself, which is the understanding of the 
world-because I am the world-there comes not only com­
pasion but a totally different kind of energy. This energy, with 
its compasion, has a totally different kind of action. That 
action is whole, not fragmentary. 
We began by talking about suffering, that the ending of 
suffering is the beginning of compassion ; and this question of 
140 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G O F  D E A T H 
love, which man has reduced to mere pleasure ; and this great 
complex problem of death. They are all inter-related, they 
are not separate. It isn't that I am going to solve the problem 
of death, forgetting the rest. The whole thing is inter-related, 
inter-communicated. It is all one. And to see the totality of all 
that, wholly, is only possible when there is no observer and 
therefore freedom from all that. 
Questioner: I'd like to ask a question. You said towards the 
begining that it is important for each individual to transform 
his consciousnes. Isn't the fact that you say that it is important 
an ideal, which is the very thing to be avoided ? 
KRISHNAMURTI : 
When you see a house on fire, isn't it 
important that you put it out ? In that there is no ideal. The 
house is burning, you are there, and you have to do something 
about it. But if you are asleep and discussing the colour of 
the hair of the man who has set the house on fire . . . 
Q: The house on fire is in the world of reality, isn't it ? It is a 
fact. We are talking about the psychological world. 
K : Isn't that also a factual world ? Isn't it a fact that you 
suffer ? Isn't it a fact that one is ambitious, greedy, violent­
you may not be, but the rest-that is a fact. We say the house 
is a fact, but my anger, my violence, my stupid activities are 
something different ; they are as real as the house. And if I 
don't understand myself, disolve all the misery in myself, the 
house is going to become the destructive element. 
Q: Sir, as I understand it, your message and the message of 
Jesus Christ seem to reach towards the same thing, although 
stated differently. I had always understood your message and 
Jesus Christ's message to be quite different in content. About 
two years ago I was a Christian, so it is very difficult to get 
rid of statements that Jesus made, such as, "No man cometh 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
to the Father but by me". Although I find more sense in your 
mesage at the moment, how do you equate this? 
K :  It is very simple. I have no message. I am just pointing 
out. That is not a message. 
Q: But why are you doing it? 
K : Why am I doing it ? Why do we want a mesage ? Why do 
we want somebody to give us something ? When everything 
is in you. 
Q: It is wonderful. 
K : No, it is not wonderful (laughter). Please do look at it. 
You are the result of all the influences, of the culture, the 
many words, propaganda, you are that. And if you know how 
to look, how to read, how to listen, how to see, the. art of 
seeing, everything is there, right in front of you. But we don't 
have the energy, the inclination, or the interest. We want 
somebody to tell us what there is on the page. And we make 
that person who tells us into an extraordinary human being. 
We worship him, or destroy him, which is the same thing. So 
it is there. You don't need a message. Do look at it please. 
Is the bok important, or what you find in the book ? What 
you find in the book, and after you have read it you throw 
it away. Now in these talks, you listen, find out, go into it, and 
throw away the speaker. The speaker is not at al important. 
It is like a telephone. 
The other question is, "Why do you speak ?" Does that 
need answering ? Would you say to the flower on the wayside, 
"Why do you flower?" It is there for you to look, to listen, to 
see the beauty of it and come back again to look at the beauty 
of it. That is al. 
Q: (partly inaudible) We have the same message, the same 
words, we have it in ourselves, the guru. 

S U F F E R I N G ; 
T H E  M E A N I N G 
O F  D E A T H 
Q: (repeating) We have a guru in ourselves. 
K : Have you ? Guru means in Sanskrit, the rot meaning of 
that word means "heavy" 
Q: He said heaven. 
K :  Heaven, it is the same thing, sir. Have you a heaven in 
yourself ? My lord, I wish you had ! (laughter). In yourself 
you are so confused, so miserable, so anxious-what a set of 
words to use-heaven ! You can substitute God into heaven, 
heaven as God and you think you are quite different. People 
have believed that you had God inside you, light inside you, 
or something else inside you. But when you see actually that 
you have nothing, just words, then if there is absolutely 
nothing there is complete security. And out of that, everything 
happens, flowers. 
I43 

Chapter 9 
T H E 
S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  
M E D I T A T I O N  
"We are going to observe together what is reality, what are 
the limitations of thought, and whether thought can ever 
perceive truth. Or is it beyond the realm of thought ? 
"One must have this meditative quality of the mind, not 
occasionally, but all day long. And this something that is 
sacred affects our lives not only during waking hours but 
during sleep." 
I w o u L D L 1 K E this morning to talk about the question 
of what is sacred, what is the meaning of religion and of 
meditation. First we must examine what is reality and what is 
truth. Man has been concerned throughout the ages to dis­
cover, or live in truth ; And he has projected various symbols, 
conclusions, images made by the mind or by the hand and 
imagined what is truth. Or he has tried to find out through 
the activity and the movement of thought. And I think we 
should be wise if we would differentiate between reality and 
truth and when we are clear what reality is then perhaps we 
shall be able to have an insight into what is truth. 
The many religions throughout the world have said that 
there is an enduring, everlasting truth, but the mere asertion 
of truth has very little significance. One has to discover it for 
oneself, not theoretically, intellectually, or sentimentally, but 
actually find out if one can live in a world that is completely 
truthful. We mean by religion the gathering together of al 
energy to investigate into something : to investigate if there 
144 

T H E  S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
is anything sacred. That is the meaning we are giving it, not 
the religion of belief, dogma, tradition or rituals with their 
hierarchical outlook. But we are using the word "religion" in 
the sense : to gather together all energy, which wil then be 
capable of investigating if there is a truth which is not con­
trolled, shaped, or polluted by thought. 
The root meaning of the word reality is thing or things. And 
to go into the question of what is reality, one must understand 
what thought is. Because our society, our religions, our so­
called revelations are esentially the product of thought. It is 
not my opinion or my judgement, but it is a fact. Al religions 
when you look at them, observe without any prejudice, are 
the product of thought. That is, you may perceive something, 
have an insight into truth, and you communicate it verbally 
to me and I draw from your statement an abstraction and 
make that into an idea; then I live according to that idea. 
That is what we have been doing for generations : drawing an 
abstraction from a statement and living according to that 
abstraction as a conclusion. And that is generaly called 
religion. So we must find out how limited thought is and what 
are its capacities, how far it can go, and be totally aware that 
thought doesn't spill over into a realm in which thought has 
no place. 
I don't know if you can see this ? Please, we are not only 
verbally communicating, which means thinking together, not 
agreeing or disagreeing, but thinking together, and therefore 
sharing together; not the speaker gives and you take, but 
together we are sharing, therefore there is no authority. And 
also there is a non-verbal communication, which is much more 
difficult, because unles we see very clearly the full meaning 
of words, how the mind is caught in words, how words shape 
our thinking, and can go beyond that, then there is no non­
verbal communication, which becomes much more significant. 
We are trying to do both : to communicate verbally and non­
verbally. That means we must both be interested at the same 
145 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
time, at the same level, with the same intensity, otherwise we 
shan't communicate. It is like love; love is that intense feeling 
at the same time, at the same level. Otherwise you and I don't 
love each other. So we are going to observe together what is 
reality, what are the limitations of thought, and whether 
thought can ever perceive truth. Or is it beyond the realm of 
thought? 
I think we all agree, at least most of us do, even the scientists, 
that thought is a material proces, is a chemical proces. 
Thought is the response of accumulated knowledge as experi­
ence and memory. So thought is essentially a thing. There is 
no sacred thought, no noble thought, it is a thing. And its 
function is in the world of things, which is technology, learn­
ing, learning the art of learning, the art of seeing and listening. 
And reality is in that area. Unles we understand this rather 
complex problem we shall not be able to go beyond it. We may 
pretend, or imagine, but imagination and pretension have no 
place in a human being who is really serious and is desirous 
to find out what is truth. 
As long as there is the movement of thought, which is time 
and measure, in that area truth has no place. Reality is that 
which we think and the action of thought as an idea, as a 
principle, as an ideal, projected from the previous knowledge 
into the future modified and so on. All that is in the world of 
reality. We live in that world of reality-if you have observed 
yourself you wil see how memory plays an imense part. 
Memory is mechanical, thought is mechanical, it is a form of 
computer, a machine, as the brain is. And thought has its 
place. I cannot speak if I have no language; if I spoke in 
Greek you wouldn't understand. And learning a language, 
learning to drive a car, to work in a factory and so on, there 
thought is necesary. Psychologically, thought has created the 
reality of the "me". "Me", "my", my house, my property, my 
wife, my husband, my children, my country, my God-al 
that is the product of thought. And in that field we have 
146 

T H E  S A C R E D , 
R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
established a relationship with each other which is constantly 
in conflict. That is the limitation of thought. 
Unles we· put order into that world of reality we canot 
go further. We live a disorderly life in our daily activities ; that 
is a fact. And is it posible to bring about order in the world of 
reality, in the world of thought, socially, moraly, ethicaly and 
so on ? And who is to bring about order in the world of reality ? 
I live a disorderly life-if I do-and being disorderly, can I 
bring about order in all the activities of daily life ? Our daily 
life is based on thought, our relationship is based on thought, 
because I have an image of you and you have an image of me, 
and the relationship is between those two images. The images 
are the product of thought, which is the response of memory, 
experience and so on. Now can there be order in the world of 
reality ? This is really a very important question. Unles order 
is established in the world of reality there is no foundation for 
further enquiry. In the world of reality, is it posible to behave 
orderly, not according to a pattern set by thought, which is 
still disorder ? Is it posible to bring about order in the world 
of reality ? That is, no wars, no conflict, no division. Order 
implies great virtue, virtue is the esence of order-not follow­
ing a blueprint, which becomes mechanical. So who is to bring 
order in this world of reality ? Man has said, "God wil bring 
it. Believe in God and you will have order. Love God and 
you will have order." But this order becomes mechanical 
because our desire is to be secure, to survive, to find the easiest 
way of living-let us put it that way. 
So we are asking, who is to bring order in this world of 
reality, where there is such confusion, misery, pain, violence 
and so on. Can thought bring about order in that reality-a 
world of reality which thought has created ? Do you follow 
my question ? The Communists say control the environment, 
then there wil be order in man. According to Marx the State 
will wither away-you know all that. They have tried to bring 
order but man is in disorder, even in Russia ! So one has to 
1 47 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
find out, if thought is not to bring about order, then what wil ? 
I don't know if this is a problem to you, if it really interests 
you ? So one has to ask, if thought, which has made such a 
me8s of life, cannot bring clarity into this world of reality, then 
is there an observation in the field of reality, or of the field of 
reality, without the movement of thought. Are we meeting 
each other about this ? A human being has exercised thought ; 
he says there is disorder, I will control it, I will shape it, I wil 
make order according to certain ideas-it is al the product of 
thought. And thought has created disorder. So thought has no 
place in order, and how is this order to come about ? 
Now we wil go into it a little bit. Can one observe this 
disorder in which one lives, which is conflict, contradiction, 
opposing desires, pain, suffering, fear, pleasure and al that, 
this whole structure of disorder, without thought ? You under­
stand my question ? Can you observe this enormous disorder 
in which we live, externally as well as inwardly, without any 
movement of thought ? Because if there is any movement of 
thought, then it is going to create further disorder, isn't it ? 
So can you observe this disorder in yourself without any move­
ment of thought as time and measure-that is, without any 
movement of memory ? 
We are going to see whether thought as time can come to 
an end. Whether thought as measure, which is comparison, as 
time, from here to there-all that is involved in the movement 
of time-whether that time can have a stop ? This is the very 
essence of meditation. You understand ? So we are going to 
enquire together if time has a stop, that is, if thought as move­
ment can come to an end. Then only is there order and there­
fore virtue. Not cultivated virtue, which requires time and is 
therefore not virtue, but the very stopping, the very ending of 
thought is virtue. This means we have to enquire into the 
whole question of what is freedom. Can man live in freedom ? 
Because that is what it comes to. If time comes to an end it 
means that man is deeply free. So one has to go into this 
148 

T H E  S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
question of what is freedom. Is freedom relative, or absolute? 
If freedom is the outcome of thought then it is relative. When 
freedom is not bound by thought then it is absolute. We are 
going to go into that. 
Outwardly, politically, there is les and les freedom . We 
think politicians can solve all our problems and the politicians, 
especially the tyrannical politicians, asume the authority of 
God, they know and you don't know. That is what is going 
on in India, freedom of speech, civil rights, have been denied, 
like in all tyrannies. Democratically we have fredom of choice, 
we choose between the Liberals, Conservatives, Labour or 
something else. And we think that having the capacity to 
choose gives us freedom. Choice is the very denial of freedom. 
You choose when you are not clear, when there is no direct 
perception, and so you choose out of confusion, and so there 
is no freedom in choice-psychologically, that is. I can choose 
between this cloth and that cloth, and so on ; but psychologic­
ally we think we are free when we have the capacity to choose. 
And we are saying that choice is born out of confusion, out of 
the structure of thcmght, and therefore it is not free. We accept 
the authority of the gurus, the priests, because we think they 
know and we don't know. Now if you examine the whole idea 
of the guru, which is becoming rather a nuisance in this 
country and in America, the world over-I am sorry I am 
rather allergic to gurus (laughter), I know many of them, they 
come to see me (laughter). They say, "What you are saying is 
the highest truth"-they know how to flatter ! But we are 
dealing, they say, with people who are ignorant and we are 
the intermediaries : we want to help them. So they asume the 
authority and therefore deny freedom. I do not know if you 
have noticed that not one single guru has raised his voice 
against tyrany. 
A man who would understand what freedom is must totally 
deny authority, which is extraordinarily difficult, it demands 
great attention. We may reject the authority of a guru, of a 
I 49 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
priest, of an idea, but we establish an authority in ourselves-­
that is "I think it is right, I know what I am saying, it is my 
experience". All that gives one the authority to asert, which 
is the same thing as the guru and the priest. 
Can the mind be free of authority, of tradition, which means 
accepting another as your guide, as somebody to tel you what 
to do, except in the technological field ? And man must be free 
if he is not to become a serf, a slave, and deny the beauty and 
depth of the human spirit. Now can the mind put aside all 
authority in the psychological sense ?-if you put aside the 
authority of the policeman you will be in trouble. That 
requires a great deal of inward awarenes. One obeys and 
accepts authority because in oneself there is uncertainty, con­
fusion, loneliness, and the desire to find something permanent, 
something lasting. And is there anything lasting, anything that 
is permanent, created by thought ? Or does thought give to 
itself permanency ? The mind desires to have something it can 
cling to, some certainty, some psychological security. This is 
what happens in all our relationships with each other. I depend 
on you psychologically-because in myself I am uncertain, 
confused, lonely-and I am attached to you, I posses you, I 
dominate you. So living in this world is freedom possible, 
without authority, without the image, without the sense of 
dependency ? And is it freedom from something or freedom 
per se ? 
Now can we have freedom in the world of reality? You 
understand my question ?--can there be freedom in my rela­
tionship with you ? Can there be freedom in relationship 
between man and woman, or is that impossible ?-which 
doesn't mean freedom to do what one likes, or permisivenes, 
or promiscuity. But can there be a relationship between human 
beings of complete freedom ? I do not know if you have ever 
asked this question of yourself? You might say it is posible 
or not posible. The possibility or the imposibility of it is not 
an answer, but to find out whether freedom can exist, absolute 
1 50 

T H E  S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
freedom in our relationships. That freedom can only exist in 
relationship when there is order : order not according to you, 
or another, but order in the sense of the observation of 
disorder. And that observation is not the movement of thought, 
because the observer is the observed ; only then there is freedom 
in our relationship. 
Then we can go to something else. Having observed the 
whole nature of disorder, order comes into being in our life. 
That is a fact, if you have gone into it. From there we can 
move and find out whether thought can end, can realise its 
own movement, see its own limitation and therefore stop. We 
are asking, what place has time in freedom. Is freedom a state 
of mind in which there is no time ?-time being movement of 
thought as time and measure. Thought is movement, move­
ment in time. That is, can the brain, which is part of the mind 
-which has evolved through centuries with all the accumu­
lated memories, knowledge, experience-is there a part of the 
brain which is not touched by time ? Do you understand my 
question ? Our brain is conditioned by various influences, by 
the pursuit of desires ; and is there a part of the brain that is 
not conditioned at all ? Or is the whole brain conditioned and 
can human beings therefore never escape from conditioning ? 
They can modify the conditioning, polish, refine it, but there 
will always be conditioning if the totality of the brain is 
limited, and therefore no freedom. 
So we are going to find out if there is any part of the brain 
that is not conditioned. All this is meditation, to find out. Can 
one be aware of the conditioning in which one lives ? Can you 
be aware of your conditioning as a Christian, a Capitalist, a 
Socialist, a Liberal, that you believe in this and you don't 
believe in that ?-all that is part of the conditioning. Can a 
human being be aware of that conditioning? Can you be 
aware of your consciousnes ?-not as an observer, but that 
you are that consciousness. And if you are aware, who is it 
that is aware ? Is it thought that is aware that it is conditioned ? 
1 5 1  

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
Then it is still in the field of reality, which is conditioned. Or 
is there an observation, an awarenes in which there is pure 
observation ? Is there an act, or an art of pure listening ? 
Do listen to this a little bit. The word "art" means to put 
everything in its right place, where it belongs. Now can you 
observe without any interpretation, without any judgement, 
without any prejudice-just observe, see purely ? And also 
can you listen, as you are doing now, without any movement 
of thought. It is only possible if you put thought in the right 
place. And the art of learning means not accumulating-then 
it becomes knowledge and thought-but the movement of 
learning, without the accumulation. So there is the art of 
seeing, the art of listening, the art of learning-which means 
to put everything where it belongs. And in that there is great 
order. 
Now we are going to find out if time has a stop. This is 
meditation. As we said at the beginning, it is all in the field 
of meditation. Meditation isn't something separate from life, 
from daily life. Meditation is not the repetition of words, the 
repetition of a mantra, which is now the fashion and called 
transcendental meditation, or the meditation which can be 
practised. Meditation must be something totally unconscious. 
I wonder if you see this ? If you practise meditation, that is 
follow a system, a method, then it is the movement of thought, 
put together in order to achieve a result, and that result is 
projected as a reaction from the past and therefore still within 
the area of thought. 
So can there be a mutation in the brain ? It comes to that. 
We say it is possible. That is, a mutation is only posible when 
there is a great shock of attention. Attention implies no control. 
Have you ever asked whether you can live in this world with­
out a single control ?-of your desires, of your appetites, of the 
fulfilment of your desires and so on, without a single breath of 
control ? Control implies a controller : and the controller thinks 
he is diferent from that which he controls. But when you 
152 

T H E  S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
observe closely the controller is the controlled. So what place 
has control ? In the sense of restraint, suppresion, to control 
in order to achieve, to control to change yourself to become 
something else-all that is the demand of thought. Thought 
by its very nature being fragmentary, divides the controller 
and the controlled. And we are educated from childhood to 
control, to suppres, to inhibit-which does not mean to do 
what you like; that is imposible, that is too absurd, to 
immature. But to understand this whole question of contro] 
demands that you examine the desire which brings about this 
fragmentation ; the desire to be and not to be. To find out 
whether you can live without comparison, therefore without 
an ideal, without a future-all that is implied in comparison. 
And where there is comparison there must be control. Can you 
live without comparison and therefore without contro]-do 
you understand ? Have you ever tried to live without control, 
without comparison ? Because comparison and control are 
highly respectable. The word "respect" means to look about. 
And when we look about we see that all human beings, 
wherever they live, have this extraordinary desire to compare 
themselves with somebody, or with an idea, or with some 
human being who is supposed to be noble, and in that proces 
they control, suppres. Now if you see this whole movement, 
then one will live without a single breath of control. That 
requires 
tremendous 
inward 
discipline. 
Discipline 
means 
actually to learn, not to be disciplined to a pattern like a 
soldier. The word "discipline" means to learn. Learn whether 
it is posible to live without a single choice, comparison, or 
control. To learn about it ; not to accept it, not to deny it, but 
to find out how to live. 
Then out of that comes a brain which is not conditioned. 
Meditation then is freedom from authority, putting everything 
in its right place in the field of reality, and consciousnes 
realising its own limitation and therefore bringing about order 
1 53 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
in that limitation. When there is order there is virtue, virtue 
in behaviour. 
From there we can go into the question, whether time has 
a stop. Which means, can the mind, the brain itseH, be 
absolutely still ?-not controlled. If you control thought in 
order to be still, then it is still the movement of thought. Can 
the brain and the mind be absolutely still, which is the ending 
of time ? Man has always desired throughout the ages to bring 
silence to the mind, which he calls meditation, contemplation 
and so on. Can the mind be stil ?-not chattering, not imagin­
ing, not conscious of that stilnes, because if you are conscious 
of that stillnes there is a centre which is conscious, and that 
centre is part of time, put together by thought ; therefore you 
are still within the area of reality and there is no ending in the 
world of reality of time. 
Man has made, whether by the hand or by the mind, what 
he thinks is sacred, all the images in churches, in temples. Al 
those images are still the product of thought. And in that there 
is nothing sacred. But out of this complete silence is there 
anything sacred ? We began by saying that religion is not 
belief, rituals, authority, but religion is the gathering of al 
energy to investigate if there is something sacred which is not 
the product of thought. We have that energy when there is 
complete order in the world of reality in which we live-order 
in relationship, freedom from authority, freedom from com­
parison, control, measurement. Then the mind and the brain 
become completely still naturally, not through compulsion. If 
one sees that anything which thought has created is not sacred, 
nothing-all the churches, all the temples, all the mosques in 
the world have no truth-then is there anything sacred ? 
In India, when only Brahmins could enter Temples and 
Ghandi was saying that all people can enter temples-1 followed 
him around one year-and I was asked, "What do you say to 
that" ? I replied, God is not in temples, it doesn't matter who 
enters. That was of course not acceptable. So in the same way 
1 54 

T H E  S A C R E D ,  R E L I G I O N ,  M E D I T A T I O N  
we are saying that anything created by thought is not sacred, 
and is there anything sacred ? Unles human beings find that 
sacrednes, their life really has no meaning, it is an empty 
shell. They may be very orderly, they may be relatively fre, 
but unles there is this thing that is totally sacred, untouched 
by thought, life has no deep meaning. Is there something 
sacred, or is everything matter, everything thought, everything 
transient, everything impermanent? Is there something that 
thought can never touch and therefore is incorruptible, time­
les, eternal and sacred ? To come upon this the mind must be 
completely, totally still, which means time comes to an end ; 
and in that there must be complete freedom from all prejudice, 
opinion, judgement-you follow ? Then only one comes upon 
this extraordinary thing that is timeles and the very esence 
of compasion. 
So meditation has significance. One must have this medita­
tive quality of the mind, not occasionally, but al day long. 
And this something that is sacred afects our lives not only 
during the waking hours but during sleep. And in this proces 
of meditation there are all kinds of powers that come into 
being : one becomes clairvoyant, the body becomes extra­
ordinarily sensitive. Now clairvoyance, healing, thought trans­
ference and so on, become totally unimportant; all the occult 
powers become so utterly irrelevant, and when you pursue 
those you are pursuing something that will ultimately lead to 
illusion. That is one factor. Then there is the factor of sleep. 
What is the importance of sleep ? Is it to spend the sleeping 
hours dreaming ? Or is it possible not to dream at all ? What 
are dreams, why do we dream, and is it posible for a mind not 
to dream, so that during sleep, the mind being utterly restful, 
a totally different kind of energy is built in ?  
If during waking hours we are completely attentive to our 
thoughts, to our actions, to our behaviour, totally aware, then 
are dreams necessary ? Or are dreams a continuation of our 
daily life, in the form of pictures, images, incidents-a 
1 55 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
continuity of our daily conscious or unconscious movements ? So 
when the mind becomes totaly aware during the day, then you 
wil see that dreams become unimportant, and being unimport­
ant they have no significance and therefore there is no dream­
ing. There is only complete sleep ; that means the mind has 
complete rest : it can renew itself. Test it out. If you accept 
what the speaker is saying, then it is futile; but not if you 
enquire and find out if during tle day you are very very 
awake, watchful, aware without choice-we went into what 
it is to ·be aware-then out of that awarenes when you do 
sleep, the mind becomes extraordinarily fresh and young. 
Youth is the esence of decision, action. And if that action is 
merely centred round itself, round the centre of myself, then 
that action breeds misohief, confusion and so on. But when 
you realise the whole movement of life as one, undivided, and 
are aware of that, then the mind rejuvenates itself and has 
imense energy. Al that is part of meditation. 

P A R T  I I I  
Some Qjlestions and Answers 


Chapter 10 
R I G H T  L I V E L I H O O D  
Questioner: Is a motive necesary in busines ? What is the 
right motive in earning a livelihood ? 
KlusHNAMURTI : What do you think is the right livelihood ?­
not what is the most convenient, not what is the most profit­
able, enjoyable, or gainful ; but what is the right livelihood ? 
Now, how will you find out what is right ? The word "right" 
means correct, accurate. It cannot be accurate if you do 
something for profit or pleasure. This is a complex thing. 
Everything that thought has put together is reality. This tent 
has been put together by thought, it is a reality. The tree has 
not ben put together by thought, but it is a reality. Illusions 
are reality-the illusions that one has, imagination, al that is 
reality. And the action from those ilusions is neurotic, which 
is also reality. So when you ask this question, "What is the 
right livelihood", you must understand what reality is. Reality 
is not truth. 
Now what is correct action in this reality ? And how wil 
you discover what is right in this reality?-discover for your­
self, not be told. So we have to find out what is the accurate, 
correct, right action, or right livelihood in the world of reality, 
and reality includes illusion. Don't escape, don't move away; 
belief is an illusion, and the activities of belief are neurotic; 
nationalism and al the rest of it is another form of reality, but 
an illusion. So taking al that as reality, what is the right action 
there? 
Who is going to tell you ? Nobody, obviously. But when you 
1 59 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
see reality without illusion, the very perception of that reality 
is your intelligence, isn't it ? in which there is no mixture of 
reality and ilusion. So when there is observation of reality, the 
reality of the tree, the reality of the tent, reality which thought 
has put together, including visions, illusions, when you see al 
that reality, the very perception of that is your intelligence­
isn't it ? So your intelligence says what you are going to do. I 
wonder if you understand this ?  Inteligence is to perceive what 
is and what is not-to perceive "what is" and see the reality 
of "what is", which means you don't have any psychological 
involvement, any psychological demands, which are al forms 
of illusion. To se all that is inteligence ; and that intelligence 
will operate wherever you are. Therefore that wil tel you 
what to do. 
Then what is truth ? What is the link between reality and 
truth ? The link is this intelligence. Intelligence that ses the 
totality of reality and therefore doesn't cary it over to truth. 
And the truth then operates on reality through intelligence. 
1 60 

Chapter 1 1  
W I L L  
Questioner: I wish to know if effort of wil has a place in life. 
KRISHNAMURTI : Has the will a place in life ? What do we 
mean by life ?-going to the office every day, having a pro­
fesion, a career, the everlasting climbing the ladder, both 
religiously and mundanely, the fears, the agonies, the things 
that we have treasured, remembered, al that is life, isn't it ? 
All that is life, both the conscious as well as the hidden. The 
conscious of which we know, more or less ; and al the deep 
down hidden things in the cave of one's mind, in the deepest 
recesses of one's mind. All that is life : the ilusion and the 
reality, the highest principle and the "what is", the fear of 
death, fear of living, fear of relationship-all that. What place 
has wil in that ? That is the question. 
I say it has no place. Don't accept what I am saying ; I am 
not your authority, I am not your guru. Al the conltent of 
one's consciousnes, which is consciousnes, is created by 
thought, which is desire and image. And that is what has 
brought about such havoc in the world. Is there a way of 
living in this world without the action of w.il ? That is the 
present question. 
I know this, as a human being I am fully aware of what is 
going on within my consciousness, the confusion, the disorder, 
the chaos, the battle, the seeking for power, position, safety, 
security, prominence, all that ; and I see thought has creaJted 
al that. Thought plus desire and the multiplication of images. 
And I say, "What place has will in this ?" it is wil that has 
161 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
created this. Now can I live in this without wil ? Biologically, 
physiologically, I have to exercise a certain form of energy 
to learn a language, to do this and that. There must be a 
certain drive. I see all this. And I realise-not as a verbal 
realisation, as a description, but the. actual fact of it, as one 
realises pain in the body-I realise that this is the product of 
thought as desire and wil. Can I, as a human being, look at 
al this, and transform this without will ? 
Now what becomes important is what kind of observation 
is necesary. Observation to see actually what is. Is the mind 
capable of seeing actually "what is" ? Or does it always trans­
late into "what should be", "what should not be", "I must 
suppres", "I must not suppress", and all the rest of it ? There 
must be freedom to observe, otherwise I can't see. If I am 
prejudiced against you, or like you, I can't see you. So freedom 
is absolutely necesary to observe-freedom from prejudice, 
from information, from what has been learned, to be able to 
look without the idea. You understand : to look without the 
idea. As we said the other day, the word "idea" comes from 
Greek ; the root meaning of that word is to observe, to see. 
When we refuse to see, we make an abstraction and make it 
into an idea. 
There must be freedom to observe, and in that fredom wil 
is not necesary ; there is just freedom to look. Which means, 
to put it differently, if one makes a statement, can you listen 
to it without making it into an abstraction ? Do you understand 
my question ? The speaker makes a statement such as, "The 
ending of sorrow is the beginning of wisdom". Can you listen 
to that statement without making an abstraction of it ?-the 
abstraction being : "Is that poŻible ?", "What do we get from 
it ?", "How do we do it ?". Those are all abstractions-and not 
actualy listening. So can you listen to that statement .with al 
your senses, which means with all your attention ? Then you 
see the truth of it. And the perception of that truth is action 
in this chaos. 

Chapter 12 
E M O T I O N S  A N D  T H O U G H T  
Questioner: Are emotions rooted in thought? 
KRISHNAMURTI : What are emotions ? Emotions are sensations, 
aren't they ? You see a lovely car, or a beautiful house, a 
beautiful woman or man, and the sensory perception awakens 
the senses. Then what takes place ? Contact, then desire, Now 
thought comes in. Can you end there and not let thought 
come in and take over? I se a beautiful house, the right 
proportions, with a lovely lawn, a nice garden : al the senses 
are responding because there is great beauty-it is well kept, 
orderly, tidy. Why can't you stop there and not let thought 
come in and say, "I must have" and al the rest of it ? Then 
you wil see emotions, or sensations, are natural, healthy, 
normal. But when thought takes over, then all the mischief 
begins. 
So to find out for oneself whether it is posible to look at 
something with al the senses and end there and not proceed 
further-do it ! That requires an extraordinary sense of 
awarenes in which there is no control ; no control, therefore no 
conflict. Just to observe totaly that which is, and all the senses 
respond and end there. There is great beauty in that. For 
after al what is beauty ? 

Chapter 1 3  
B E A U T Y  
I s B E A u T y 1 N the world of reality ? Or is it not within 
the movement of thought as time ? Please follow this carefully 
because we are investigating together. I am not laying down 
the law. I am just asking myself : does beauty lie within the 
movement of thought as time ? That is, within the field of 
reality. There are beautiful 
paintings, 
statues, sculpture, 
matvellous cathedrals, wonderful temples. If you have been 
to India, some of those ancient temples are really quite extra­
ordinary : they have no time, there has been no entity as a 
human being who put them together. And those marvelous 
old sculptures from the Egyptians, from the Greeks, down to 
the Modems. That is, is it expresion and creation ? Does 
creation need expression ? I am not saying it does, or does not, 
I am asking, enquiring. Is beauty, which is both expresion 
outwardly and the sense of inward feeling of extraordinary 
elation, that which comes when there is complete cesation 
of the "me", with all its movements ? 
To enquire what is beauty, we have to go into the question 
of what is creation. What is the mind that is creative ? Can 
the mind that is fragmented, however capable, whatever its 
gifts, talent, is such a mind creative ? If I live a fragmented life, 
pursuing 
my 
cravings, 
my 
selfishness, 
my 
self-centred 
ambitions, pursuits, my pain, my struggle-is such a mind (I 
am asking) creative ?-though it has produced marvellous 
music, matvellous literature, architecture and poetry-English 
and other literature is filled with it. A mind that is not whole ' 

B E A U T Y 
can that be creative ? Or is creation only pżible when there is 
total wholeness and therefore no fragmentation ? A mind that 
is fragmented is not a beautiful mind, and therefore it is not 
creative. 

Chapter 1 4  
T H E  S T R E A M  O F  " S E L F I S H N E S S " 
O N E c A N s E E that thought has built the "me", the 
"me" that has become independent, 
the "me" that has 
acquired knowledge, the "me" that is the obseiver, the "me" 
that is the past and which pases through the present and 
modifies itself as the future. It is stil the "me" put together 
by thought, and that "me" has become independent of 
thought. That "me" has a name, a form. It has a label caled 
X or Y or John. It identifies with the body, with the face ; 
there is the identification of the "me" with the name and with 
the form, which is the structure, and with the ideal which it 
wants to pursue. Also with the desire to change the "me" into 
another form of "me", with another name. This "me" is the 
produce of time and of thought. The "me" is the word : 
remove the word and what is the "me" ? 
And that "me" suffers : the "me", as you, suffers. The "me" 
in suffering is you. The "me" in its great anxiety is the great 
anxiety of you. Therefore you and I are common ; that is the 
basic esence. Though you may be taller, shorter, have a 
different temperament, different character, be cleverer, all that 
is the peripheral field of culture ; but deep down, basically we 
are the same. So that "me" is moving in the stream of greed, 
in the stream of selfishness, in the stream of fear, anxiety and 
so on, which is the same as you in the stream. Please don't 
accept what I am saying--see the tmth of it. That is, you are 
selfish and another is selfish ; you are frightened, another is 
frightened ; you are aching, suffering, with tears, greed, envy, 
that is the common lot of all human beings. That is the stream 
1 66 

T H E  S T R E A M  O F  " S E L F I S H N E S S " 
in which we are living, the stream in which we are caught, all 
of us. We are caught in that stream while we are living ; please 
see that we are caught in this stream as an act of life. This 
stream is "selfishnes" -let us put it that way-and in this 
stream we are living-the stream of "selfishnes" -that expres­
sion includes al the descriptions of the "me" which I have just 
now given. And when we die the organism dies, but the selfish 
stream goes on. Just look at it, consider it. 
Suppose I have lived a very selfish life, in self-centred 
activity, with my desires, the importance of my desires, ambi­
tions, greed, envy, the accumulation of property, the accumu­
lation of knowledge, the accumulation of all kinds of things 
which I have gathered-all of which I have termed as "selfish­
nes". And that is the thing I live in, that is the "me", and 
that is you also. In our relationships it is the same. So while 
living we are together flowing in the stream of selfishnes. 
This is a fact, not my opinion, not my conclusion ; if you 
observe you will see it, whether you go to America, to India, 
or all over Europe, modified by the environmental presures 
and so on, but basically that is the movement. And when the 
body dies that movement goes on . . . That stream is time. 
That is the movement of thought, which has created suffering, 
which has created the "me" from which the "me" has now 
aserted itself as being independent, dividing itself from you ; 
but the "me" is the same as you when it suffers. The "me" is 
the imagined structure of thought. In itself it has no reality. It 
is what thought has made it because thought needs security, 
certainty, so it has invested in the "me" all its certainty. And 
in that there is suffering. In that movement of selfishnes, while 
we are living we are being carried in that stream and when 
we die that stream exists. 
Is it posible for that stream to end ? Can selfishnes, with 
al its decorations, with all its subtleties, come totally to an 
end ? And the ending is the ending of time. Therefore there is 
1 67 

T R U T H  A N D  A C T U A L I T Y  
a totaly diferent manifestation after the ending, which is : 
no selfishnes at al. 
When there is suffering, is there a "you" and "me" ? Or is 
there only suffering ? I identify myseH as the "me" in that 
suffering, which is the proces of thought. But the actual fact 
is you suffer and I sufer, not "I" sufer something independ­
ent of you, who are suffering. So there is only suffering . . . 
there is only the factor of suffering. Do you know what it 
does when you realise that ? Out of that non-personalised 
suffering, not identified as the "me" separate from you, when 
there is that suffering, out of that comes a tremendous sense 
of compasion. The very word "suffering" comes from the 
word "pasion". 
So I have got this problem. As a human being, living, know­
ing that I exist in the stream as selfishness, can that stream, 
can that movement of time, come totally to an end ? Both at 
the conscious as well as at the deep level ? Do you understand 
my question, after describing all this ? Now, how wil you find 
out whether you, who are caught in that stream of selfishnes, 
can completely step out of it ?-which is the ending of time. 
Death is the ending of time as the movement of thought if 
there is the stepping out of that. Can you, living in this world, 
with al the beastlines of it, the world that man has made, 
that thought has made, the dictatorships, the totalitarian 
authority, the destruction of human minds, destruction of the 
earth, the animals, everything man touches he destroys, in­
cluding his wife or husband. Now can you live in this world 
completely without time ?-that means no longer caught in 
that stream of selfishnes ? 
You see there are many more things involved in this ; 
because there is such a thing as great mystery. Not the thing 
invented by thought, that is not mysterious. The occult is not 
mysterious, which everybody is chasing now, that is the 
fashion. The experiences which drugs give are not mysterious. 
1 68 

T H E  S T R E A M  O F  " S E L F I S H N E S S " 
There is this thing called death, and the mystery that lies 
where there is a pos&bility of stepping out of it. 
That is, as long as one lives in the world of reality, which we 
do, can there be the ending of suffering in that world of 
reality ? Think about it. Lok at it. Don't say yes, or no. If 
there is no ending of suffering in the world of reality-which 
brings order-if there is no ending of selfishnes in the world 
of reality-it is selfishnes that creates disorder in the world of 
reality-if there is no ending to that then you haven't under­
stood, or grasped, the full significance of ending time. There­
fore you have to bring about order in the world of reality, in 
the world of relationships, of action, of rational and irrational 
thinking, of fear and pleasure. So can one, living in the world 
of reality as we are, end selfishnes ? You know it is a very 
complex thing to end selfishnes, it isn't just, "I won't think 
about myself". . . . This selfishnes in the £eld of reality is 
crea:ting chaos. And you are the world and the world is you. 
If you change deeply you afect the whole consciousnes of 
man. 
1 69 

Chapter 15 
T H E  U N I F Y I N G  F A C T O R  
W H A T 
1 s 
T H E unifying factor in meditation ? Because 
that is one of the most necesary and urgent things. Politicians 
arc not going to bring this unity however much they may 
talk about it. It has taken them thousands of years just to meet 
each other. What is that factor ? We arc talking about a totally 
different kind of energy, which is not the movement of thought 
with its own energy ; and wil that energy, which is not the 
energy of thought, bring about this unity ? For God's sake, this 
is your problem, isn't it ? Unity between you and your wif c or 
husband, unity between you and another. You se, we have 
tried to bring about this unity ; thought ses the necesity of 
unity and therefore has created a centre. As the sun is the 
centre of this world, holding all things in that light, so this 
centre created by thought hopes to bring mankind together. 
Great conquerors, great warriors, have tried to do this through 
bloodshed. Religions have tried to do it, and have brought 
about more division with their cruelty, with their wars, with 
their torture. Science has enquired into this. And because 
science is the accumulation of knowledge, and the movement 
of knowledge is thought, being fragmentary it canot unify. 
Is there an energy which wil bring about this unity, this 
unification of mankind ? We are saying, in meditation this 
energy comes about, because in meditation there is no centre. 
The centre is created by thought, but something else, totally 
different, takes place, which is compasion. That is the unify­
ing factor of mankind. To be-not to become compasionate, 
that is again another deception-but to be compasionate. 
1 70 

T H E  U N I F Y I N G  F A C T O R 
That can only take place when there is no centre, the centre 
being that which has been created by thought-thought which 
hopes that by creating a centre it can bring about unity, like a 
fragmentary government, like a dictatorship, like autocracy, 
all those are centres hoping to create unity. Al those have 
failed, and they wil inevitably fail. There is only one factor, 
and that is this sense of great compasion. And that com­
pasion is when we understand the full width and depth of 
suffering. That is why we talked a great deal about suffering, 
the suffering not only of a human being, but the collective 
suffering of mankind. Don't understand it verbally or intellec­
tualy but somewhere else, in your heart, feel the thing. And 
as you are the world and the world is you, if there is this birth 
of compasion you will inevitably bring about unity, you can't 
help it. 
1 7 1  


