
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE TRANSFORMATION OF MAN 
 
The Wholeness of Life 
 
 
 
 
by J. Krishnamurti 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Transformation of Man: The Wholeness of Life 
Copyright © 1978 Krishnamurti Foundation Trust Ltd 

CONTENTS 
 
Part I 
Abridged discussions between Krishnamurti, Professor David Bohm 
and Dr David Shainberg 
 
Dialogue I 
Dialogue II 
Dialogue III 
Dialogue IV 
Dialogue V 
Dialogue VI 
Dialogue VII 
 
Part II 
The substance of the public talks given in Ojai, California; Saanen, Switzerland; 
and Brockwood Park, England, during 1977 
 
I. Meditation is the emptying of the content of consciousness 
II. The ending of conflict is the gathering of supreme energy which is a 
form of intelligence 
III. Out of negation comes the positive called love 
IV. Death—a great act of purgation 
V. Action which is skilful and which does not perpetuate the self 
VI. Reason and logic alone will not discover truth 
VII. Intelligence, in which there is complete security 
VIII. In negation the positive is born 
IX. Because there is space, there is emptiness and total silence 
X. The state of the mind that has insight is completely empty 
XI. Where there is suffering you cannot possibly love 
XII. Sorrow is the outcome of time and thought 
XIII. What is death? 
XIV. That emptiness is the summation of all energy 
XV. When the me is not, then compassion comes into being 
XVI. The division between the observer and the observed is the source of 
conflict 

XVII. When there is an ending to consciousness with its content there is 
something entirely different 
XVIII. Without clarity, skill becomes a most dangerous thing 
XIX. How is one to know oneself? 
 
Part III 
Two Dialogues 
Krishnamurti talks with a small group at Ojai drawn from the Krishnamurti 
schools and Foundations in Canada, England, India and USA 
 
Dialogue I 
Dialogue II 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I 
 
 
SEVEN DIALOGUES 
 
between Krishnamurti, Dr David Bohm, Professor of 
Theoretical Physics at Birkbeck College, University of 
London, and Dr David Shainberg, a Psychiatrist 
of New York City 
 
 
Abridged from videotape recordings 
at Brockwood Park, Hampshire, in May 1976 

DIALOGUE I 
 
May 17 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: Can we talk about the wholeness of life? Can one be aware of 
that wholeness if the mind is fragmented? You can’t be aware of the whole if you 
are only looking through a small hole. 
 
Dr Shainberg: Right. But on the other hand in actuality you are the whole. 
 
K: Ah! That is theory. 
 
S: Is it? 
 
Dr Bohm: A supposition, of course it is. 
 
K: Of course, when you are fragmented how can you assume that you are the 
whole? 
 
S: How am I to know I am fragmented? 
 
K: When there is conflict. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: When opposing desires, opposing wishes, opposing thoughts bring conflict. 
Then you have pain, then you become conscious of your fragmentation. 
 
S: Right. But at those moments it often happens that you don’t want to let go of 
the conflict. 
 
K: That is a different matter. What we are asking is: Can the fragment dissolve 
itself, for then only it is possible to see the whole. 
 
S: All you really know is your fragmentation. 
 
K: That is all we know. 
 
B: That is right. 
 
K: Therefore let’s stick to that. 
 
B: The supposition that there is a whole may be reasonable but as long as you are 
fragmented you could never see it. It would be just an assumption. 
 
K: Of course, right. 

S: Right. 
 
B: You may think you have experienced it once, but that is also an assumption. 
 
K: Absolutely. Quite right. 
 
S: You know, I wonder if there is not a tremendous pain or something that goes 
on when I am aware of my fragmentation—a loneliness somehow. 
 
K: Look, sir: Can you be aware of your fragment? That you are an American, 
that I am a Hindu, Jew, Communist or whatever—you just live in that state. You 
don’t say, “Well I know I am a Hindu”—it is only when you are challenged, it is 
only when it is said, “What are you?” that you say, “I am an Indian, or a Hindu, 
or an Arab”. 
 
B: When the country is challenged then you have got to worry. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
S: So you are saying that I am living totally reactively? 
 
K: No, you are living totally in a kind of miasma, confusion. 
 
S: From one piece to the next, from one reaction to the next reaction. 
 
K: So can we be aware, actually, of the various fragments? That I am a Hindu, 
that I am a Jew, that I am an Arab, that I am a Communist, that I am a Catholic, 
that I am a businessman, that I am married, that I have responsibilities; I am an 
artist, I am a scientist—you follow? All this sociological fragmentation. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: As well as psychological fragmentation. 
 
S: Right right. That is exactly what I started with. This feeling that I am a 
fragment. 
 
K: Which you call the individual. 
 
S: That I call important, not just the individual. 
 
K: You call that important. 
 
S: Right. That I have to work. 
 
K: Quite. 

S: It is significant. 
 
K: So can we now, in talking together, be aware that I am that? I am a fragment 
and therefore creating more fragments, more conflict, more misery, more 
confusion, more sorrow, because when there is conflict it affects everything. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Can you be aware of it as we are discussing? 
 
S: I can be aware a little as we are discussing. 
 
K: Not a little. 
 
S: That’s the trouble. Why can’t I be aware of it? 
 
K: Look, sir. You are only aware of it when there is conflict. It is not a conflict in 
you now. 
 
B: But is it possible to be aware of it without conflict? 
 
K: That is the next thing, yes. That requires quite a different approach. 
 
B: But I was thinking of looking at one point—that the importance of these 
fragments is that when I identify myself and say “I am this”, “I am that”, I mean 
the whole of me. The whole of me is rich or poor, or American, or whatever, and 
therefore it seems all-important. I think the trouble is that the fragment claims it 
is the whole, and makes itself very important. 
 
S: Takes up the whole life. 
 
B: Then comes a contradiction, and then comes another fragment saying it is the 
whole. 
 
K: You know this whole world is broken up that way, outside and inside. 
 
S: Me and you. 
 
K: Yes, me and you, we and they... 
 
B: But if we say “I am wholly this”, then we also say “I am wholly that”. 
 
S: This movement into fragmentation almost seems to be caused by something. It 
seems to be... 
 
K: Is this what you are asking? What is the cause of this fragmentation? 

S: Yes. What is the cause of the fragmentation? What breeds it? What sucks us 
into it? 
 
K: We are asking something very important, which is: What is the cause of this 
fragmentation? 
 
S: That is what I was getting into. There is some cause... I have got to hold on to 
something. 
 
K: No. Just look at it, sir. Why are you fragmented? 
 
S: Well, my immediate response is the need to hold on to something. 
 
K: No, much deeper than that. Much deeper. Look at it. Look at it. Let’s go 
slowly into it. 
 
S: OK. 
 
K: Not immediate responses. What brings this conflict which indicates I am 
fragmented, and then I ask the question: What brings this fragmentation? What is 
the cause of it? 
 
B: Right. That is important. 
 
K: Yes. Why are you and I and the majority of the world fragmented? What is 
the cause of it? 
 
B: It seems we won’t find the cause by going back in time to a certain... 
 
S: I am not looking for genetics, I am looking for right this second... 
 
K: Sir, just look at it. Put it on the table and look at it objectively. What brings 
about this fragmentation? 
 
S: Fear. 
 
K: No, no, much more. 
 
B: Maybe the fragmentation causes fear. 
 
K: Yes, that’s it. Why am I a Hindu?—if I am, I am not a Hindu, I am not an 
Indian, I have no nationality. But suppose I call myself a Hindu. What makes me 
a Hindu? 
 
S: Well, conditioning makes you a Hindu. 
 

K: What is the background, what is it that makes me say “I am a Hindu”? Which 
is a fragmentation, obviously. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: What makes it? My father, my grandfather—generations and generations 
before me, 10,000 or 5,000 years, they have been saying you are a Brahmin. 
 
S: You don’t say or write I am a Brahmin, you are a Brahmin. Right? That is 
quite different. You say I am a Brahmin because... 
 
K: It is like you saying I am a Christian. Which is what? 
 
S: Tradition, conditioning, sociology, history, culture, family, everything. 
 
K: But behind that, what is behind that? 
 
S: Behind that is man’s... 
 
K: No, no. Don’t theorize. Look at it in yourself. 
 
S: Well, it gives me a place, an identity; I know who I am then, I have my little 
niche. 
 
K: Who made that niche? 
 
S: Well, I made it and they helped me make it. I am cooperating in this very... 
 
K: You are not cooperating. You are it. 
 
S: I am it. Right. That’s right. The whole thing is moving towards... putting me in 
a hole. 
 
K: So what made you? The great-great-grandparent created this environment, this 
culture, this whole structure of human existence, with all its misery, all its 
conflict—which is the fragmentation. 
 
S: The same action that makes man right now. 
 
K: Exactly. The Babylonians, the Egyptians, we are exactly the same now. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
S: This is all giving me my second-hand existence. 
 

K: Yes. Proceed. Let’s go into it. Let’s find out why man has brought about this 
state. Which we accept—you follow? Gladly or unwillingly, we are of it. I am 
willing to kill somebody because he is a Communist or a Fascist, an Arab or a 
Jew, a Protestant or a Catholic or whatever it is. 
 
S: Well, everywhere, the doctors, lawyers... 
 
K: Of course, of course. The same problem. Is it the desire for security? 
Biological as well as psychological security? 
 
S: You could say yes. 
 
K: If I belong to something, to some organization, to some group, to some sect, 
to some ideological community, I am safe there. 
 
B: That is not clear: you may feel safe. 
 
K: I feel safe then. But it may not be safety. 
 
B: Yes, but why don’t I see that I am not really safe? 
 
K: Go into it. 
 
S: I don’t see it. 
 
K: Just look. I join a community... 
 
S: Right. I am a doctor. 
 
K: Yes, you are a doctor. 
 
S: I get all these ideas... 
 
K: Because you are a doctor you have a special position in society. 
 
S: Right. I have a lot of ideas of how things work. 
 
K: You are in a special position in society and therefore you are completely safe. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You can malpractice, but you are very protected by other doctors, other 
organizations—you follow? 
 
S: Right. 
 

K: You feel secure. 
 
B: It is essential that I shouldn’t enquire too far to feel secure, isn’t it? In other 
words I must stop my enquiry at a certain point. If I start to ask too many 
questions... 
 
K: ...then you are out! If I begin to ask questions about my community and my 
relation to that community, my relationship to the world, my relation to my 
neighbour, I am finished. I am out of the community. I am lost. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: So to feel safe, secure, protected, I belong. 
 
S: I depend. 
 
K: I depend. 
 
B: I depend wholly in one sense that if I don’t have that, then I feel the whole 
thing is sunk. 
 
S: You see, not only do I depend but every problem I now have is with reference 
to this dependency. I don’t know about the patient, I only know how the patient 
doesn’t fit into my system. 
 
K: Quite, quite. 
 
S: Because that is my conflict. 
 
K: He is your victim. 
 
S: That’s right, my victim. 
 
B: You see, as long as I don’t ask questions I can feel comfortable. But I feel 
uncomfortable when I do ask questions, very deeply uncomfortable. Because the 
whole of my situation is challenged. But then if I look at it more broadly I see the 
whole thing has no foundation—it is all dangerous. This community itself is in a 
mess, it may collapse. Even if the whole of it doesn’t collapse, you can’t count 
on the academic profession any more, they may not give money for universities. 
Everything is changing so fast that you don’t know where you are. So why 
should I go on with not asking questions? 
 
K: Why don’t I ask questions?—Because of fear. 
 
B: Yes, but that fear is from fragmentations. 
 

K: Of course. So is that the beginning of this fragmentation? Does fragmentation 
take place when one is seeking security? 
 
S: But why...? 
 
K: Both biologically as well as psychologically. Primarily psychologically, then 
biologically. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Physically. 
 
B: But isn’t the tendency to seek physical security built into the organism? 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. It is. I must have food, clothes, shelter. It is absolutely 
necessary. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And when that is threatened—if I questioned the Communist system 
altogether, living in Russia, I am a non-person. 
 
S: But let’s go a little bit slower here. You are suggesting that in my need for 
security, biologically, I must have some fragmentation. 
 
K: No, sir. Biologically, fragmentation takes place, the insecurity takes place, 
when psychologically I want security. 
 
S: OK. 
 
K: I don’t know if I am making myself clear. Wait a minute. That is: if I don’t 
psychologically belong to a group, then I am out of that group. 
 
S: Then I am insecure. 
 
K: I am insecure, and because the group gives me security, physical security, I 
accept everything they give me. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: But the moment I object psychologically to the structure of the society and the 
community I am lost. This is an obvious fact. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Yes. 

S: Were you suggesting then that the basic insecurity we live in is being 
conditioned, and the response to this—the answer to this—is a conditioned 
fragmentation? 
 
K: Partly. 
 
S: And that the movement of fragmentation is the conditioning? 
 
K: Sir, look: if there were no fragmentation, historically, geographically, 
nationally, we would live perfectly safely. We would all be protected, we would 
all have food, all have houses. There would be no wars, we’d be all one. He is 
my brother, I am him. He is me. But this fragmentation prevents that taking 
place. 
 
S: Right. So you are suggesting even more there—you are suggesting that we 
would help each other? 
 
K: I would help, obviously. 
 
B: We are going round in a circle because... 
 
K: Yes, sir, I want to get back to something, which is: if there were no 
nationalities, no ideological groups, and so on, we would have everything we 
want. That is prevented because I am a Hindu, you are an Arab, he is a Russian—
you follow? We are asking: Why does this fragmentation take place? What is the 
source of it? Is it knowledge? 
 
S: It is knowledge, you say. 
 
K: Is it knowledge? I am sure it is, but I am putting it as a question. 
 
S: It certainly seems to be. 
 
K: No, no. Look into it. Let’s find out. 
 
S: What do you mean by knowledge, what are you talking about there? 
 
K: The word to know. Do I know you? Or have I known you? I can never say I 
know you, I mean actually; it would be an abomination to say “I know you”. I 
have known you. But you in the meantime are changing—there is a great deal of 
movement going on in you. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: To say I know you means I am acquainted or intimate with that movement 
which is going on in you. It would be impudence on my part to say I know you. 

S: That’s right. 
 
K: So knowing—to know—is the past. Would you say that? 
 
B: Yes, I mean what we know is the past. 
 
K: Knowledge is the past. 
 
B: The danger is that we call it the present. The danger is that we call knowledge 
the present. 
 
K: That is just it. 
 
B: In other words, if we said the past is the past, then wouldn’t you say it needn’t 
fragment? 
 
K: What is that, sir? 
 
B: If we said—if we recognized, acknowledged, that the past is the past, that it is 
gone, and therefore what we know is the past, then it would not introduce 
fragmentation. 
 
K: No, it wouldn’t, quite right. 
 
B: But if we say what we know is what is present now, then we are introducing 
fragmentation. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
B: Because we are imposing this partial knowledge on the whole. 
 
K: Sir, would you say knowledge is one of the factors of fragmentation? It is a 
large pill to swallow! 
 
B: And also there are plenty of other factors. 
 
K: Yes. But that may be the only factor! 
 
B: I think we should look at it this way, that people hope through knowledge to 
overcome fragmentation. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: To produce a system of knowledge that will put it all together. 
 

K: Is that not one of the major factors, or perhaps the factor of fragmentation? 
My experience tells me I am a Hindu: my experience tells me that I know what 
god is. 
 
B: Wouldn’t we better say that confusion about the whole of knowledge is 
because of fragmentation? 
 
K: That is what we were saying the other day—art is putting things in their right 
place. So I will put knowledge in its right place. 
 
B: Yes, so that we are not confused about it. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
S: You know I was just going to read you this rather interesting example of a 
patient of mine who was teaching me something the other day. She said, “I have 
the feeling that the way you doctors operate is that you have certain kinds of 
patients, and if you do ‘x’ to them you will get a certain kind of effect. You are 
not talking to me, you are doing this to me hoping you will get this result.” 
 
K: Quite. 
 
S: That is what you are saying. 
 
K: No, a little more, sir, than that. We are saying, both Dr Bohm and I, we are 
saying that knowledge has its place. 
 
S: Let’s go into that. 
 
K: Like driving a car, learning a language and so on. 
 
B: If we drive a car using knowledge, that is not fragmentation. 
 
K: No, but when knowledge is used psychologically... 
 
B: One should see more clearly what the difference is. The car itself—as I see 
it—is a part, a limited part, that can be handled by knowledge. 
 
S: It is a limited part of life. 
 
B: Of life, yes. When we say, I am so and so, I mean the whole of me. And 
therefore I am applying the part to the whole. I am trying to take in the whole by 
the part. 
 
K: When knowledge assumes it understands the whole... 
 

B: But it is often very tricky because I am not explicitly spelling out that I 
understand the whole, but it is implicit by saying I, or everything, is this way. 
 
K: Quite, quite. 
 
B: It implies that the whole is this way, you see. The whole of me, the whole of 
life, the whole of the world. 
 
S: As Krishnaji was saying about never knowing a person—that is how we deal 
with ourselves. We say I know this and that about myself rather than being open 
to the new man. Or even being aware of the fragmentation. 
 
B: If I am talking about you then I shouldn’t say I know all because you are not a 
limited part like a machine. You see, the machine is fairly limited and you can 
know all that is relevant about it, or most of it anyway, Sometimes it breaks 
down. 
 
K: Quite. Quite. 
 
B: But when it comes to another person, that is immensely beyond what you 
could really know. The past experience doesn’t tell you the essence. 
 
K: Are you saying, Dr Bohm, that when knowledge spills over into the 
psychological field...? 
 
B: Well, also in another field which I call the whole in general. Sometimes it 
spills over into the philosophical field and then tries to make it metaphysical, the 
whole universe. 
 
K: That is purely theoretical and has no meaning for me personally. 
 
B: I mean that some people feel that when they are discussing metaphysics of the 
whole universe it is not psychological. It probably is, but some people may feel 
that they are making a theory of the universe, not discussing psychology. It is just 
a matter of language. 
 
K: Language, quite. 
 
S: Well you see what you are saying can be extended to what people are. They 
have a metaphysics about other people. I know all other people are not to be 
trusted. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: You have a metaphysics about yourself, saying I am such and such a person. 
 

S: Right. I have a metaphysics that life is hopeless and I must depend on these 
things. 
 
K: No, all that you can see is that we are fragmented. That is a fact. And I am 
aware of those fragmentations; there is an awareness of the fragmented mind 
because of conflict. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: You were saying before that we have got to have an approach where we are 
not aware of the fragmented mind just because of conflict. 
 
K: Yes. That’s right. 
 
B: Are we coming to that? 
 
K: Coming, yes. I said: What is the source of this conflict? The source is 
fragmentation, obviously. What brings about fragmentation? What is the cause of 
it? What is behind it? We said perhaps knowledge. 
 
S: Knowledge. 
 
K: Knowledge. Psychologically I use knowledge; I think I know myself, when I 
really don’t, because I am changing, moving. Or I use knowledge for my own 
satisfaction—for my position, for my success, for becoming a great man in the 
world. I am a great scholar, say. I have read a million books. This gives me 
position, prestige, a status. So is that it—that fragmentation takes place when 
there is a desire for security, psychological security, which prevents biological 
security? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You say right. Therefore security may be one of the factors. Security in 
knowledge, used wrongly. 
 
B: Or could you say that some sort of mistake has been made, that man feels 
insecure biologically, and he thinks, what shall I do, and he makes a mistake in 
the sense that he tries to obtain a psychological sense of security—by 
knowledge? 
 
K: By knowledge, yes. 
 
S: By knowing, yes. By repeating himself, by depending on all these structures. 
 
K: One feels secure by having an ideal. 
 

S: Right. That is so true. 
 
B: But somewhere one asks why the person makes this mistake. In other words if 
thought—if the mind had been absolutely clear, it would never have done that. 
 
S: If the mind had been absolutely clear—but we have just said that there is 
biological insecurity. That is a fact. 
 
B: But that doesn’t imply that you have to delude yourself. 
 
K: Quite right. Go on further. 
 
S: There’s that biological fact of my constant uncertainty. The biological fact of 
constant change. 
 
K: That is created through psychological fragmentation. 
 
S: My biological uncertainty? 
 
K: Of course. I may lose my job, I may have no money tomorrow. 
 
B: Now let’s look at that. I may have no money tomorrow. You see, that may be 
an actual fact, but now the question is: What would a man say if his mind were 
clear, what would be his response? 
 
K: He would never be put in that position. 
 
S: He wouldn’t ask that question. 
 
B: But suppose he finds himself without money? 
 
K: He would do something. 
 
B: His mind won’t just go to pieces. 
 
S: He won’t have to have all the money he thinks he has to have. 
 
B: Besides that, he won’t go into this well of confusion. 
 
K: No, absolutely. 
 
S: The problem 99 per cent of the time, I certainly agree, is that we all think we 
need more than this ideal of what we should have. 
 
K: No, sir. We are trying to stick to one point. What is the cause of this 
fragmentation? 

S: Right. 
 
K: We said knowledge spilling over into the field where it should not enter. 
 
B: But why does it do so? 
 
K: Why does it do so? That is fairly simple. 
 
S: My sense of it from what we have been saying is that it does so in the illusion 
of security. Thought creates the illusion that there is security. 
 
B: Yes, but why doesn’t intelligence show that there is no security? 
 
S: Why doesn’t intelligence show it? 
 
K: Can a fragmented mind be intelligent? 
 
S: No. 
 
B: Well, it resists intelligence. 
 
K: It can pretend to be intelligent. 
 
B: Yes. But are you saying that once the mind fragments then intelligence is 
gone? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: But now you are querying this problem. You are also saying that there can be 
an end to fragmentation. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
B: That would seem to be a contradiction. 
 
K: It looks like that but it is not. 
 
S: All I know is fragmentation. 
 
K: Therefore... 
 
S: That is what I have got. 
 
K: Let’s stick to it and prove it can end. Go through it. 
 
B: But if you say intelligence cannot operate when the mind is fragmented... 

K: Is psychological security more important than biological security? 
 
S: That is an interesting question. 
 
K: Go on. 
 
S: One thing we have condensed... 
 
K: No, I am asking. Don’t move away from the question. I am asking: Is 
psychological security more important than biological security, physical 
security? 
 
S: It isn’t but it sounds like it is. 
 
K: No, don’t move away from it. I am asking. Stick to it. Is it to you? 
 
S: I would say yes, psychological seems... 
 
B: What is actually true? 
 
S: Actually true, no. Biological security is more important. 
 
K: Biological? Are you sure? 
 
S: No. I think psychological security is what I actually worry about most. 
 
K: Psychological security. 
 
S: That is what I worry about most. 
 
K: Which prevents biological security. 
 
S: Right. I’ve figured that one out now. 
 
K: No, no. Because I am seeking psychological security in ideas, in knowledge, 
in images, in confusions, this prevents me from having biological, physical 
security—for myself, for my children, for my brothers. I can’t have it. Because 
psychological security says I am a Hindu, a blasted somebody in a little corner. 
 
S: No question. I do feel that psychological... 
 
K: So can we be free of the desire to be psychologically secure? 
 
S: That’s right. That is the question. 
 
K: Of course it is. 

S: That’s the nub of it, right. 
 
K: Last night I was listening to some people arguing on television—the chairman 
of this, the something of that, talking about Ireland, and various other things. 
Each man was completely convinced of what he was saying. 
 
S: That’s right. I am sitting on meetings every week. Each man thinks his 
category is the most important. 
 
K: So man has given more importance to psychological security than to 
biological, physical security. 
 
B: But it is not clear why he should delude himself in this way. 
 
K: He has deluded himself because—why, why? 
 
S: Images, power. 
 
K: No, sir, it is much deeper than that. Why has he given importance to 
psychological security? 
 
S: We seem to think that that is where security is. 
 
K: No. Look more into it. The me is the most important thing. 
 
S: Right. That is the same thing. 
 
K: No, me. My position, my happiness, my money, my house, my wife—me. 
 
B: Me. Yes. And isn’t it that each person feels he is the essence of the whole? 
The me is the very essence of the whole. I would feel if the me were gone that 
the rest wouldn’t mean anything. 
 
K: That is the whole point. The me gives me complete security, psychologically. 
 
B: It seems all-important. Of course. 
 
S: All-important. 
 
B: Yes, people say if I am sad then the whole world has no meaning—right? 
 
S: It is not only that; I am sad if the me is all-important. 
 
K: No. We are saying that in the me is the greatest security. 
 
S: Right. That is what we think. 

K: No. Not we think. It is so. 
 
B: What do you mean it is so? 
 
K: In the world that is what is happening. 
 
B: That is what is happening. But it is a delusion. 
 
K: We will come to that later. 
 
S: I think that is a good point. That it is so; that the me—I like that way of getting 
at it—the me is what is important. That is all it is. 
 
K: Psychologically. 
 
S: Psychologically. 
 
K: Me, my country, my god, my house. 
 
S: We have got your point. 

DIALOGUE II 
 
May 18—morning 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: May we go on where we left off yesterday? Or would you like 
to start something new? 
 
Dr Bohm: I thought there was a point that wasn’t entirely clear about what we 
were discussing yesterday. We rather accepted that security, psychological 
security, was wrong, was a delusion, but in general I don’t think we made it very 
clear why we think it is a delusion. You see, most people feel that psychological 
security is a good thing and quite necessary, and that when it is disturbed, when a 
person is frightened, or sorrowful even—so disturbed that he might require 
treatment—he feels that psychological security is necessary before he can even 
begin to do anything. 
 
K: Yes, right. 
 
B: I don’t think it’s at all clear why one should say it is not really as important as 
physical security. 
 
K: I think we have made it fairly clear but let’s go into it. Is there really 
psychological security at all? 
 
B: I don’t think we discussed that fully yesterday. 
 
K: Of course. Nobody accepts that. But we are enquiring into it, going into the 
problem of it. 
 
B: I think that if you told somebody who was feeling very disturbed mentally that 
there is no psychological security he would just feel worse. 
 
K: Collapse. Of course. 
 
Dr Shainberg: Right. 
 
K: We are talking of fairly sane, rational people. 
 
S: OK. 
 
K: We are questioning whether there is any psychological security at all. 
Permanency, stability, a sense of well-founded, deep-rooted existence, 
psychologically... I believe in something... 
 
S: ...and that gives me... 
 

K: It may be the most foolish belief... 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: ...a neurotic belief. I believe in it. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And that gives me a tremendous sense of vitality and stability. 
 
B: I can think of two examples: one is that if I could really believe that after 
dying I would go to heaven, make quite sure of it, then I could be very secure 
anywhere, no matter what happens. 
 
S: That would make you feel good. 
 
B: Well, I wouldn’t really have to worry; it would all be a temporary trouble; I 
would be pretty sure that in time it was all going to be very good. Do you see? 
 
K: Right. That is the whole Asiatic attitude, more or less. 
 
B: Or if I am a Communist, I think that in time Communism is going to solve 
everything; we are going through a lot of troubles now but it is all going to be 
worthwhile, and in the end everything will be all right. If I could be sure of that 
then I would feel very secure inside, even if conditions are hard now. 
 
S: OK. All right. 
 
K: So although one may have these strong beliefs which give one a sense of 
security, of permanency, we are questioning whether there is such a thing in 
reality, in actuality... 
 
S: Yes, yes. But I want to ask David something. Take a scientist, a guy who is 
going to his laboratory every day, or take a doctor—is he getting security from 
the very routinization of his life? 
 
K: His knowledge. 
 
S: Yes, from his knowledge. 
 
B: Well, he makes believe he is learning the permanent laws of nature, really 
getting something that means something. 
 
S: Yes. 
 

B: And also getting a position in society—being well known and respected and 
financially secure. 
 
S: He believes that these things will give him security. The mother believes that a 
child will give her security. 
 
K: Don’t you have security psychologically? 
 
S: Yes. I get a security out of my knowledge, out of my routine, out of my 
patients, out of seeing my patients, out of my position... 
 
B: But there is conflict in that because if I think it over a little bit I doubt it, I 
question it. I say it doesn’t look all that secure, anything may happen. There may 
be a war, there may be a depression, there may be a flood. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: There may be sane people all of a sudden in the world! 
 
B: So I say there is conflict and confusion in my security because I am not sure 
about it. But if I had an absolute belief in god and heaven... 
 
K: This is so obvious! 
 
S: It is obvious. I agree with you it is obvious but I think it has to be really felt. 
 
K: But, sir, you, Dr Shainberg, you are the victim. 
 
S: I’ll be the victim. 
 
K: For the moment. Don’t you have strong belief? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Don’t you have a sense of permanency somewhere inside you? 
 
S: I think I do. 
 
K: Psychologically? 
 
S: Yes, I do. I mean I have a sense of permanency about my intention. 
 
K: Intention? 
 
S: I mean my work. 
 

K: Your knowledge? 
 
S: ...my knowledge, my... 
 
K: ...status... 
 
S: ...my status, the continuity of my interest. You know what I mean? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: There is a sense of security and the feeling that I can help someone. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: And that I can do my work. 
 
K: That gives you security, psychological security. 
 
S: There is something about it that is secure. What am I saying when I say 
“security”? I am saying that I won’t be lonely. 
 
K: No, no. Feeling secure. That you have something that is imperishable. 
 
S: Which means—no I don’t feel it that way. I feel it more in the sense of what is 
going to happen in time. What am I going to have to depend on?—what is my 
time going to be?—am I going to be lonely, is it going to be empty? 
 
K: No, sir. 
 
S: Isn’t that security? 
 
K: As Dr Bohm pointed out, if one has a strong belief in reincarnation, as the 
whole Asiatic world has, then it doesn’t matter what happens. You may be 
miserable this life but next life you will be happier. So that gives you a great 
sense of “this is unimportant, but that is important”. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: And that gives me a sense of great comfort, for this is a transient world 
anyhow and eventually I will get to something permanent. 
 
S: That is in the Asiatic world; but I think in the Western world you don’t have 
that... 
 
K: Oh, yes, you have it. 
 

S: ...with a different focus. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: It is different but we have always had the search for security. 
 
S: Right, right. But what do you think security is? I mean, for instance, you 
became a scientist, you have your own laboratory, you pick up books all the 
time—right? What the hell do you call security? 
 
K: Having something... 
 
S: Knowledge? 
 
K: Something which you can cling to and which is not perishable. It may perish 
eventually but for the time being, it is there to hold on to. 
 
B: You feel that it is permanent. Like people in the past who used to accumulate 
gold because gold is the symbol of the imperishable. 
 
S: We still have people who accumulate gold... We have businessmen, they have 
got money. 
 
B: You feel it is really there. It will never corrode, it will never vanish and you 
can count on it. 
 
S: So it is something that I can count on. 
 
K: Count on, hold on to, cling to, be attached to. 
 
S: The me. 
 
K: Exactly. 
 
S: I know that I am a doctor. I can depend on that. 
 
K: Experience. And on the other hand, tradition. 
 
S: Tradition. I know that if I do this with a patient I will get a certain result—I 
may not get any good results but I’ll get this result. 
 
K: So I think that is fairly clear. 
 
B: Yes, it is clear enough that this is part of our society. 
 
K: Part of our conditioning. 

B: Conditioning, that we want something secure and permanent. At least we 
think so. 
 
S: I think there is a feeling in the West of wanting immortality. 
 
K: That’s the same thing. 
 
B: Wouldn’t you say that in so far as thought can project time, that it wants to be 
able to project everything as far as possible into the future? In other words the 
anticipation of what is coming is already the present feeling. If you anticipate 
that something bad may come you already feel bad. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
B: Therefore you would want to get rid of that. 
 
S: So you anticipate that it won’t happen. 
 
B: That it will all be good. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: I would say that security would be the anticipation that everything will be 
good in the future... 
 
K: Good. 
 
S: It will continue. 
 
B: It will become better; if it is not so good now it will certainly become better. 
 
S: So then security is becoming? 
 
K: Yes, becoming, perfecting, becoming. 
 
S: I see patients all the time. Their projected belief is, I will become—I will find 
somebody to love me; I see patients who say, “I will become the chief of the 
department”, “I will become the most famous doctor”, “I will become the best 
tennis player”. The best. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: Well, it seems it is all focused on anticipating that life is going to be good, 
when you say that. 
 
K: Yes, life is going to be good. 

B: But it seems to me you wouldn’t raise the question unless you had a lot of 
experience that life is not so good. In other words it is a reaction to having had so 
much experience of disappointment, of suffering... 
 
K: Would you say that we are not conscious of the whole movement of thought? 
 
B: It is only natural to feel I have had a lot of experience of suffering and 
disappointment and danger, and now I would like to be able to anticipate that 
everything is going to be good. At first sight it would seem that that is quite 
natural. But now you are saying it is not. 
 
K: We are saying there is no such thing as psychological security. We have 
defined what we mean by security. We don’t have to beat it over and over. 
 
S: No, I think we have got that. 
 
B: Yes, but is it clear now that these hopes are really vain hopes. That should be 
obvious, should it? 
 
K: Sir, there is death at the end of everything. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: You want to be secure for the next ten years, that is all, or fifty years. 
Afterwards it doesn’t matter. Or if it does matter you believe in something—that 
there is god, that you will sit on his right hand or whatever it is you believe. So I 
am trying to find out, not only that there is no permanency psychologically, but 
that there is no tomorrow psychologically. 
 
B: That hasn’t yet come out. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: When we say empirically that we know these hopes for security are false 
because first of all you say there is death, secondly you can’t count on anything; 
materially everything changes. 
 
K: Everything is in flux. 
 
B: Mentally everything in your head is changing all the time. You can’t count on 
your own feelings, you can’t count on enjoying a certain thing that you enjoy 
now, you can’t count on being healthy, you can’t count on money. 
 
K: You can’t rely on your wife, you can’t rely—on anything. 
 
S: Right. 

B: So that is a fact. But I am saying that you are suggesting something deeper. 
 
K: Yes, sir. 
 
B: But we don’t base ourselves only on that observation. 
 
K: No, that is very superficial. 
 
S: Yes, I am with you there. 
 
K: So, if there is no real security, basic, deep, then is there a tomorrow, 
psychologically? Then you take away all hope. If there is no tomorrow you take 
away all hope. 
 
B: What you mean by tomorrow is the tomorrow in which things will get better? 
 
K: Better, more—greater success, greater understanding, greater... 
 
B: ...more love. 
 
K: ...more love, always that. 
 
S: I think that is a little quick. I think that there is a jump there because as I hear 
you, I hear you saying there is no security. 
 
K: But it is so. 
 
S: But for me to say—to really say, “I know there is no security”... 
 
K: Why don’t you say that? 
 
S: That is what I am getting at. Why don’t I say that? 
 
B: Well isn’t it a fact—just an observed fact that there isn’t anything you can 
count on psychologically? 
 
S: Right. But you see I think there is an action there. Krishnaji is asking, “Why 
don’t you say there is no security?” Why don’t I? 
 
K: Do you, when you hear there is no security, see it as an abstracted idea or as 
an actual fact? Like that table, like your hand there, or those flowers? 
 
S: I think it mostly becomes an idea. 
 
K: That is just it. 
 

B: Why should it become an idea? 
 
S: That, I think, is the question. Why does it become an idea? 
 
K: Is it part of your training? 
 
S: Part—yes. Part of my conditioning. 
 
K: Part of a real objection to seeing things as they are. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: If you try to see that there is no security, something seems to be there which is 
trying to protect itself—let us say that it seems to be a fact that the self is there. 
Do you see what I am driving at? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: And if the self is there it requires security, and this creates a resistance to 
accepting as a fact that there is no security, and puts it as an idea only. It seems 
that the factuality of the self being there has not been denied. The apparent 
factuality. 
 
K: Is it that you refuse to see things as they are? Is it that one refuses to see that 
one is stupid?—not you—I mean one is stupid. To acknowledge that one is 
stupid is already... 
 
S: Yes. You say to me, “You refuse to acknowledge that you are stupid”—let us 
say it is me—that means then that I have got to do something... 
 
K: No. Not yet. Action comes through perception, not through ideation. 
 
S: I am glad you are getting into this. 
 
B: Doesn’t it seem that as long as there is the sense of self, the self must say that 
it is perfect? 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
S: Now what makes it so hard for me to destroy this need for security? Why can’t 
I do it? 
 
K: No, no. It is not how you can do it. You see you are already entering into the 
realm of action. 
 
S: That I think is the crucial point. 

K: I say first see it. And from that perception action is inevitable. 
 
S: All right. Now to see insecurity. Do you see insecurity? Do you actually see it? 
 
K: No. No. No. Do you actually see that you are clinging to something, some 
belief which gives you security? 
 
S: OK. 
 
K: I cling to this house. I am safe. It gives me a sense of pride, a sense of 
possession; it gives me a sense of physical and therefore psychological security. 
 
S: Right, and a place to go. 
 
K: A place to go. But I may walk out and be killed and I have lost everything. 
There might be an earthquake and everything gone. Do you actually see it? The 
seeing, the perception, of that is total action with regard to security. 
 
S: I can see that that is the total action. 
 
K: No, that is an idea, still. 
 
S: Yes, you’re right. I begin to see that this whole structure is the way I see 
everything in the world—right? I begin to see her, the wife, I begin to see these 
people—they fit into that structure. 
 
K: You see them, and your wife, through the image you have about them. 
 
S: Right. And through the function they are serving. 
 
B: Their relation to you, yes. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: That is right. That’s the function they serve. 
 
K: The picture, the image, the conclusion is the security. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: Yes, but why does it present itself as so real? I see that there is a thought, a 
process which is driving on, continually... 
 
K: Are you asking why has this image, this conclusion, become so fantastically 
real? 
 

B: Yes. It seems to be standing there real, and everything is referred to it. 
 
K: More real than the marbles, than the hills. 
 
B: Than anything, yes. 
 
S: More real than anything. 
 
K: Why? 
 
S: It is hard to say why. Because it would give me security. 
 
K: No. We are much further than that. 
 
B: Because, suppose abstractly and ideally you can see the whole thing as no 
security at all. I mean just looking at it professionally and abstractly. 
 
S: That is putting the cart before the horse. 
 
B: No, I am just saying that if it were some simple matter, with that much proof 
you would have already accepted it. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But when it comes to this, no proof seems to work. 
 
S: Right. Nothing seems to work. 
 
B: You say all that, but here I am presented with the solid reality of myself and 
my security and there is a sort of reaction which seems to say, well that may be 
possible but it is really only words. The real thing is me. 
 
S: But there is more than that. Why has it such potency? I mean, it seems to take 
on such importance. 
 
B: Well, maybe. But I am saying that the real thing is me, which is all important. 
 
S: There is no question about it. Me, me—me is important. 
 
K: Which is an idea. 
 
B: We can see abstractly that it is just an idea. The question is how do you break 
into this process? 
 
K: I think we can break into it, or break through it, or get beyond it only through 
perception. 

B: The trouble is that all that we have been talking about is in the form of ideas. 
They may be correct ideas but they won’t break into this. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Because this dominates the whole of thought. 
 
S: That is right. I mean you could even ask why are we here. We are here because 
we want to... 
 
K: No, sir. Look: If I feel my security lies in some image I have, a picture, a 
symbol, a conclusion or an ideal, I would put it not as an abstraction but bring it 
down. You see it is so. I believe in something. Actually. Now I say, why do I 
believe? 
 
B: Well have you actually done that? 
 
K: No, I haven’t because I have no beliefs. I have no picture, I don’t go in for all 
those kinds of games. I said “if”. 
 
S: If, right. 
 
K: Then I would bring the abstracted thing into a perceptive reality. 
 
S: To see my belief, is that it? 
 
K: See it. 
 
S: To see my belief. Right. To see that “me” in operation. 
 
K: Yes, if you like to put it that way. Sir, wait a minute. Take a simple thing. 
Have you a conclusion about something? A concept? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: Now wait a bit. How is that brought about? Take a simple thing—a concept 
that I am an Englishman. 
 
B: The trouble is that we probably don’t feel attached to such concepts. 
 
K: All right. 
 
S: Let’s take one that is real for me. Take the one about me being a doctor. 
 
K: A concept. 
 

S: That is a concept. That is a conclusion based on training, based on experience, 
based on the enjoyment of the work. 
 
K: Which means what? A doctor means—the conclusion means he is capable of 
certain activities. 
 
S: Right, OK. Let’s take it. Concretely. 
 
K: Work at it. 
 
S: So now I have got this concrete fact that I have had this training, that I get this 
pleasure from the work, I get a kind of feedback... 
 
K: Yes, sir. Move. 
 
S: All right. Now that is my belief. That belief that I am a doctor is based on all 
that, that concept. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: OK. Now I continually act to continue that. 
 
K: Yes, sir, that is understood. Therefore you have a conclusion. You have a 
concept that you are a doctor. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Based on knowledge, experience, everyday activity. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Pleasure and all the rest of it. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So what is real in that? What is true in that? Real, meaning actual. 
 
S: Well that is a good question. What is actual? 
 
K: Wait. What is actual in that? Your training. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Your knowledge. 
 
S: Right. 

K: Your daily operation. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: That’s all. The rest is a conclusion. 
 
B: But what is the rest? 
 
K: The rest: I am very much better than somebody else. 
 
B: Or else this thing is going to keep me occupied in a good way. 
 
K: In a good way. I will never be lonely. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But isn’t there also a certain fear that if I don’t have this then things will be 
pretty bad? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
S: Right, OK. 
 
B: And that fear seems to spur me on... 
 
K: Of course. And if the patients don’t turn up... 
 
B: Then I have no money, fear. 
 
K: Fear. 
 
S: No activity. 
 
K: So loneliness. So be occupied. 
 
S: Be occupied doing this, completing this concept. OK. Do you realize how 
important that is to all people, to be occupied? 
 
K: Of course, sir. 
 
S: Do you get the meat of that? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
S: How important it is to people to be occupied. I can see them running around. 
 

K: Sir, a housewife is occupied. Remove that occupation and she says: Please... 
 
B: “What shall I do?” 
 
S: We know that as a fact. Since we put electrical equipment into the houses the 
women are going crazy, they have nothing to do with their time. 
 
K: The result of this is the effect on the children—don’t talk to me about it. 
 
S: Right, OK. Let’s go on. Now we have got this fact. 
 
K: Now is this occupation an abstraction? Or actuality? 
 
S: Now this is an actuality. I am actually occupied. 
 
K: No. 
 
B: What is it? 
 
K: You are actually occupied—eh? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: Daily. 
 
S: Daily. 
 
B: Well what do you really mean by occupied? 
 
S: What do you mean? 
 
B: Well, I can say I am actually engaged in all these occupations—that is clear. I 
mean I am seeing patients as the doctor. 
 
S: You are doing your thing. 
 
B: I am doing my thing, getting my reward and so on. Being occupied seems to 
me to have a psychological meaning. There was something I once saw on 
television about a woman who was highly disturbed; it showed on the electro-
encephalograph, but when she was occupied doing arithmetical sums the electro-
encephalograph went beautifully smooth. She stopped doing the sums and it went 
all over the place. Therefore she had to keep on doing something to keep the 
brain working right. 
 
K: Which means what? 
 

B: Well what does it mean? 
 
K: A mechanical process. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: It seems the brain starts jumping all over the place unless it has this thing. 
 
K: A constant... 
 
B: Content. 
 
K: So you have reduced yourself to a machine. 
 
S: Don’t say it! No, it’s not fair. But it is true. I have, I mean I feel there is a 
mechanical... 
 
K: ...response. 
 
S: Oh, yes—commitment. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: But why does the brain begin to go so wild when it is not occupied? That 
seems to be a common experience. 
 
K: Because in occupation there is security. 
 
B: There is order. 
 
K: Order. 
 
S: In occupation there is a kind of mechanical order. 
 
B: Right. So we feel our security really means we want order, is that right? 
 
K: That’s it. 
 
B: We want order inside the brain. We want to be able to project order into the 
future, for ever. 
 
S: That’s right. But would you say that you can get it by mechanical order? 
 
B: Then you get dissatisfied with it; you say, “I am getting sick of this 
mechanical life, I want something more interesting.” 
 

K: That is where the gurus come in! 
 
B: Then the thing goes wild again. The mechanical order won’t satisfy it. It 
works only for a little while. 
 
S: I don’t like the way something is slipping in there. We are going right from 
one thing to another. I am working for satisfaction. 
 
B: I am looking for some regular order which is good, do you see? And I think 
that by my job as a doctor I am getting it. 
 
S: Yes. 
 
B: But after a while I begin to feel it is too repetitious. I am getting bored. 
 
S: OK. But suppose that doesn’t happen? Suppose some people remain satisfied 
with their jobs? 
 
B: Well they don’t really. I mean then they become dull. 
 
K: Quite. Mechanical. And you stop that mechanism and the brain goes wild. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: Right. So they may feel they are a bit dull and they would like some 
entertainment, or something more interesting and exciting. And therefore there is 
a contradiction, there is conflict and confusion. 
 
K: Sir, Dr Shainberg is asking what is disturbing him. He feels he hasn’t got his 
teeth into it. 
 
S: You are right. 
 
K: What is disturbing you? 
 
S: Well, it is this feeling that people will say that... 
 
K: No, you say, you. 
 
S: Let’s say I can get this order from occupying myself with something I like. 
 
K: Go on. Proceed. 
 
S: I do something I like and it gets boring, let’s say, or it might get repetitious, 
but then I will find new parts of it. And then I’ll do that some more because that 
gives me pleasure, you see. I mean I get a satisfaction out of it. 

B: Right. 
 
S: So I keep doing more of that. 
 
K: You move from one mechanical process, get bored with it, and move to 
another mechanical process. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: Get bored with it and keep going. 
 
S: That’s right. That’s it. 
 
K: And you call that living. 
 
S: That is what I call living. 
 
B: I see that the trouble is that I now try to be sure that I can keep on doing this, 
because I can always anticipate a future when I won’t be able to do it. I will be a 
bit too old for it, or else I’ll fail. I’ll lose the job or something. So I still have 
insecurity in that order. 
 
K: Essentially it is mechanical disorder. 
 
S: Masking itself as order. 
 
K: Now, wait a minute. Do you see this? Or is it still an abstraction? Because you 
know, as Dr Bohm will tell you, idea means observation, the original meaning is 
observation. Do you observe this? 
 
S: I see that, yes. 
 
B: Then the point is, are you driven to this because you are frightened of the 
instability of the brain? If you are doing something because you are trying to run 
away from the instability of the brain, that is already disorder. 
 
S: Yes, yes. 
 
B: In other words that will be merely masking disorder. 
 
S: Yes. Well then you are suggesting that this is the natural disorder of the brain? 
 
B: No, I am saying that the brain without occupation tends to go into disorder. 
 
K: In a mechanical process the brain feels secure, and when that mechanical 
process is disturbed it becomes insecure and disordered. 

S: Then gets caught up again in the mechanical process. 
 
K: Again and again and again and again. 
 
S: It never stays with that insecurity. 
 
K: No. When it perceives this process it is still mechanical. And therefore there is 
disorder. 
 
B: The question is why does the brain get caught in mechanism? 
 
K: Because it is the safest, the most secure way of living. 
 
B: Well, it appears that way, but it is actually very... 
 
K: Not appears, it is so for the time being. 
 
B: For the time being, but in the long run it is not. 
 
S: Are you saying we are time-bound, conditioned to be time-bound? 
 
K: No. Conditioned by our tradition, by our education, by the culture we live in, 
to operate mechanically. 
 
S: We take the easy way. 
 
K: The easy way. 
 
B: At the beginning the brain makes a mistake, let’s say, and says “This is 
safer”—but somehow it fails to be able to see that it has made a mistake; it holds 
to this mistake. In the beginning you might call it an innocent mistake; it says, 
“This looks safer and I will follow it” and it continues in this mechanical process 
rather than seeing that it is wrong. 
 
K: You are asking: Why doesn’t it see that this mechanical process is essentially 
disorder? 
 
B: That it is essentially disorder and dangerous. 
 
K: Dangerous. 
 
B: It is totally delusory. 
 
S: Why isn’t there some sort of feedback? In other words I do something and it 
comes out wrong. At some point I ought to realize that. Why haven’t I seen that 
my life is mechanical? 

K: Now wait. You see it? 
 
S: But I don’t. 
 
K: Wait. Why is it mechanical? 
 
S: Well, it is mechanical because it is all action and reaction. 
 
K: Why is it mechanical? 
 
S: It is repetitious. 
 
K: It is mechanical. 
 
S: It is mechanical. I want it to be easy. I feel that it gives me the most security to 
keep it mechanical. I get a boundary. It is mechanical because it is repetitious... 
 
K: You haven’t answered my question. 
 
S: I know I haven’t! I am not sure what your question is. 
 
K: Why has it become mechanical? 
 
S: Why? 
 
B: Why does it remain mechanical? 
 
K: Why does it become and remain mechanical? 
 
S: I think it remains mechanical... it is the thing we began with. 
 
K: No. Pursue it. Why does it remain mechanical? 
 
S: What has caused us to accept this mechanical way of living? I am not sure I 
can answer that. 
 
K: Look. Wouldn’t you be frightened? 
 
S: I would see the uncertainty. 
 
K: No, no. If the mechanical life one lives suddenly stopped, wouldn’t you be 
frightened? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
B: Wouldn’t there be some danger? 

K: That, of course. There is a danger that things might... 
 
S: ...go to pieces. 
 
K: ...go to pieces. 
 
S: It is deeper than that. 
 
K: Wait. Find out. Come on. 
 
S: It is not just that there is a genuine danger, that I would be frightened. It feels 
like things take on a terribly, moment-by-moment effect. 
 
K: No, sir. Total order would give complete security, wouldn’t it? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: The brain wants total order. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Otherwise it can’t function properly. Therefore it accepts the mechanical, 
hoping it won’t lead to disaster. Hoping it will find order in that. 
 
B: Could you say that perhaps in the beginning the brain accepted this not 
knowing that this mechanicalism would bring disorder—that it just went into it in 
an innocent state? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: And now it is caught in a trap, and somehow it maintains this disorder, it 
doesn’t want to get out of it. 
 
K: Because it is frightened of greater disorder. 
 
B: Yes. It says all that I’ve built up may go to pieces. In other words I am not in 
the same situation as when I first went into the trap because now I have built up a 
great structure. I’m afraid that structure will go to pieces. 
 
K: Yes, but what I am trying to get at is that the brain needs this order, otherwise 
it can’t function. It finds order in the mechanical process because it is trained 
from childhood—do as you are told, etc. There is a conditioning going on right 
from the start to live a mechanical life. 
 
B: And at the same time the fear of giving up this mechanism. 
 

K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: In other words you are thinking all the time that without this mechanism 
everything will go to pieces, especially the brain. 
 
K: Which means the brain must have order. And finds order in a mechanical 
way. Now do you see that actually the mechanical way of living leads to 
disorder? Which is tradition. If I live entirely in the past, which I think is very 
orderly, what takes place? I am already dead and I can’t meet anything. 
 
S: I am repeating myself always, right? 
 
K: So I say, “Please don’t disturb my tradition!” Every human being says, “I 
have found something which gives me order, a belief, a hope, this, or that, so 
leave me alone.” 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And life isn’t going to leave him alone. So then he gets frightened and 
establishes another mechanical habit. Now do you see this whole thing? And 
therefore an instant action clearing it all away, and therefore order. The brain 
says at last I have an order, which is absolutely indestructible. 
 
B: That doesn’t follow logically. 
 
K: It would follow logically if you go into it. 
 
B: Go into it. Can we reach a point where it really follows necessarily? 
 
K: I think we can only go into it if you perceive the mechanical structure which 
the brain has developed, attached and cultivated. 
 
S: Can I share with you something I see as you are talking? I see it like this. 
Don’t get impatient with me too quickly. I see it this way. Flashing through my 
mind are various kinds of interchange between people. The way they talk, the 
way I talk to them at a party. It is all about what happened before. You find them 
telling you who they are, in terms of their past. I can see what they will be. Like 
one guy who said, “I have just published my thirteenth book.” It is very 
important to him that I get that information, see. And I see this. And I see this 
elaborate structure. This guy has got it into his head that I am going to think this 
about him, and then he is going to go to his university and they will think that 
about him. He is always living like that and the whole structure is elaborate—
right? 
 
K: Are you doing that? 
 

S: When did you stop beating your wife! Of course I am doing it. I am doing it 
right now. And seeing the structure right now in all of us. 
 
K: But do you see that fragmentary action is mechanical action? 
 
S: That’s right. It is there, Krishnaji. That is the way we are. 
 
K: And therefore political action can never solve any human problems. Nor can 
the scientist—he is another fragment. 
 
S: But do you realize what you are saying? Let us really look at what you are 
saying. This is the way it is. This is the way life is. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: Right? This is the way it is. Years and years and years... 
 
K: Therefore why don’t you change it? 
 
S: But this is the way it is. We live in terms of our structures. We live in terms of 
history. We live in terms of our mechanics. We live in terms of our form. This is 
the way we live. 
 
K: It means that when the past meets the present and ends there, a totally 
different thing takes place. 
 
S: Yes. But the past doesn’t meet the present so often. I mean... 
 
K: I mean it is taking place now. 
 
S: Now. Right now. Right. We are saying it now. 
 
K: Therefore can you stop there? 
 
S: We must see it totally. 
 
K: No. The fact. The simple fact. The past meets the present. That is a fact. 
 
B: Let us say how does the past meet the present? Let us go into that. 
 
S: How does the past meet the present? 
 
B: Well, just briefly, I think that when the past meets the present the past stops 
acting. What it means is that thought stops acting so that order comes about. 
 
S: Do you think the past meets the present, or the present meets the past? 

K: How do you meet me? 
 
S: I meet you in the present. 
 
K: No. How do you meet me? With all the memories, all the images, the 
reputation, the words, the pictures, the symbols—with all that, which is the past, 
you meet me now. 
 
S: That’s right. That’s right. I come to you with a... 
 
K: The past is meeting the present. 
 
S: And then? 
 
K: Ends there. Does not move forward. 
 
S: Can it stop? What is the past meeting present? What is that action? 
 
K: I will show it to you. I meet you with the past, my memories, but you might 
have changed in the meantime. So I never meet you. I meet you with the past. 
 
S: Right. That is a fact. 
 
K: That is a fact. Now if I don’t have that movement going on... 
 
S: But I do. 
 
K: Of course you do. But I say that that is disorder. I can’t meet you then. 
 
S: Right. How do you know that? 
 
K: I don’t know it. I only know the fact that when the past meets the present and 
continues, it is one of the factors of time, movement, bondage, fear, and so on. If, 
when the past meets the present, one sees this, one is fully aware of this, 
completely aware of this movement, then it stops. Then I meet you as though for 
the first time, then there is something fresh. It is like a new flower coming out. 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: I think we will go on this afternoon. We haven’t really tackled the root of all 
this. The root, the cause, of all this disturbance, this turmoil, travail and anxiety. 
 
B: Why should the brain be in this wild disorder? 
 
K: I know, wild. You, Dr Shainberg, who are a doctor, an analyst, you have to 
ask that fundamental question—Why? Why do human beings live this way? 

DIALOGUE III 
 
May 18—afternoon 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: Shall we start where we left off? We were asking, weren’t we, 
why do human beings live this way? 
 
Dr Shainberg: What is the root? 
 
K: The turmoil, the confusion, the sorrow behind it all, the conflict, the violence. 
And so many people offer different ways of solving the problems—the gurus, the 
priests all over the world, the thousands of books, everybody offering a new 
solution, a new method, a new way of solving the problems. And I am sure this 
has been going on for a million years. “Do this and you will be all right. Do that 
and you will be all right.” But nothing seems to have succeeded in making man 
live in order, happily, intelligently, without this chaotic activity going on. Why 
do we human beings live this way—in this appalling misery? Why? 
 
S: Well, I have often said they do it because the very sorrow, the very turmoil, 
the very problems themselves, give them a sense of security. 
 
Dr Bohm: I don’t really think so. I think people just get used to it. Whatever 
happens you get used to it and you come to miss it after a while just because you 
are used to it. But that doesn’t explain why it is there. 
 
K: I was reading the other day that in 5,000 years there have been 5,000 wars—
and we are still going on. 
 
S: That’s right. A guy said to me once that he wanted to go to Vietnam to fight 
because otherwise his life was every night at the bar. 
 
K: I know, but that isn’t the reason. Is it that we like it? 
 
S: It is not that we like it; it is almost that we like not liking it. 
 
K: Have we all become neurotic? 
 
S: Yes. The whole thing is neurotic. 
 
K: Are you saying that? 
 
S: Yes. The whole of society is neurotic. 
 
K: Which means that entire humanity is neurotic? 
 

S: I think so. This is the argument we have all the time: Is society sick? And then 
if you say society is sick, what is the value you are using for comparison? 
 
K: Yourself, who is neurotic. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So when you are faced with this, that human beings live this way and have 
accepted it for millennia, you say, “Well they are all half crazy—demented, 
corrupt from top to bottom”, and then I come along and ask why? 
 
S: Why do we keep it up? Why are we crazy? I see it with my children. They 
spend 50 hours a week in front of the television box. That is their whole life. My 
children laugh at me, all their friends are doing it. 
 
K: No, moving beyond that—why? 
 
S: Why? Without it—what? 
 
K: No: not without it, what. 
 
S: That is what we run into. 
 
B: No, that is very secondary. You see, as we were saying this morning, I think 
we get to depend on it to occupy us, and war would seem some release from the 
boredom of the pub, or whatever, but that is secondary. 
 
K: And also when I go to fight a war, all responsibility is taken away from me. 
Somebody else becomes responsible—the general... 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: In the old days people used to think that war would be a glorious thing. When 
the first world war started in England everybody was in a state of high elation. 
 
K: So looking at this panorama of horror—I feel this very strongly because I 
travel all over the place and I see this extraordinary phenomenon going on 
everywhere—I say why do people live this way, accept these things? We have 
become cynical. 
 
B: Nobody believes anything can be done about it. 
 
S: That’s it. 
 
K: Is it that we feel that we cannot do anything about it? 
 

S: That’s for sure. 
 
B: That’s been an old story. People say human nature... 
 
K: ...can never be altered. 
 
B: Yes. That is not new at all. 
 
K: Not new. 
 
S: But it’s certainly true that people feel—let’s not say people—we feel, like I 
said this morning, that this is the way it is, this is the way we live. 
 
K: I know, but why don’t you change it? You see your son looking at the 
television for 50 hours; you see your son going off to war, killed, maimed, 
blinded—for what? 
 
B: Many people have said that they don’t accept that human nature is this way, 
that they will try to change it, and it hasn’t worked. The Communists tried it; 
others tried it. There has been so much bad experience, which all adds up to the 
idea that human nature doesn’t change. 
 
S: You know when Freud came along, he made history: he never said 
psychoanalysis is to change people. He said we can only study people. 
 
K: I am not interested in that. I know that. I don’t have to read Freud, or Jung, or 
you, or anybody, it is there in front of me. 
 
S: Right. So let’s say we know this fact about people, they don’t try to change. 
 
K: So what is preventing them? 
 
B: People have tried to change in many cases, but... 
 
S: OK. But now let’s say that they don’t try to change. 
 
K: They do. In a dozen ways they try to change. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: But essentially they are the same. 
 
B: You see, I think people cannot find out how to change human nature. 
 
K: Is that it? 
 

B: Well, whatever methods have been tried are entirely... 
 
S: Is that it? Or is it the fact that the very nature of the way they want to change is 
part of the process itself? 
 
B: No. 
 
K: That’s what he is saying. 
 
B: No, but I am saying both. I say the first part is that whatever people have tried 
has not been guided by a correct understanding of human nature. 
 
S: So it is guided by this very process itself. Right? By the incorrectness? 
 
B: Yes, let’s take the Marxists who say that human nature can be improved, but 
only when the whole economical and political structure has been altered. 
 
K: They have tried to alter it but human nature... 
 
B: ...they can’t alter it, you see, because human nature is such that they can’t 
really alter it. 
 
S: They make a mechanical change. 
 
K: Look at it, sir: take yourself—sorry to be personal—but if you don’t mind, 
you be the victim. 
 
S: Pig in the middle. 
 
K: Right. Why don’t you change? 
 
S: Well, the immediate feel of it is that there is still... I guess I shall have to say 
there is some sort of false security—the fragmentation, the immediate pleasures 
that are got from the fragmentation. In other words there is still that movement of 
fragmentation. That’s how come there is not the change. It is not seeing the 
whole thing. 
 
K: Are you saying that political action, religious action, social action, are all 
fighting each other? And we are that. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Is that what you are saying? 
 

S: Yes, I am saying that. My immediate response is: Why don’t I change? What 
is it that keeps me from seeing the total? I don’t know. I keep coming up with a 
kind of feeling that I am getting something from not changing. 
 
K: Is it the entity that wishes to change—which sets the pattern of change, and 
therefore the pattern is always the same under a different colour? I don’t know if 
I am making myself clear? 
 
S: Could you say it another way? 
 
K: I want to change, and I plan what to change, how to bring about this change. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: The planner is always the same. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: But the patterns change. 
 
S: That’s right. Yes. I have an image of what I want. 
 
K: So the patterns change, but I, who want to change, create the patterns of 
change. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: So I am the old and the patterns are the new but the old is always conquering 
the new. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But when I do that I don’t feel that I am the old... 
 
K: ...of course. 
 
B: I really don’t feel I am involved in that old stuff I want to change. 
 
K: It has been said a hundred million times. Do this and you will be transformed. 
You try to do it but the centre is always the same. 
 
B: And each person who does it feels that it has never happened before. 
 
K: Never before. Yes. My experience through reading some book is entirely 
different, but the experiencer is the same... 
 

B: The same old thing, right. 
 
K: I think that is one of the root causes of it. 
 
S: Yes, yes. 
 
B: It is a kind of sleight-of-hand trick whereby the thing which is causing the 
trouble is put into the position of the thing that is tryng to make the change. It is a 
deception. 
 
K: I am deceiving myself all the time by saying I am going to change that, 
become that. You read some book and say, “Yes how true that is, I am going to 
live according to that.” But the me who is going to live according to that is the 
same old me. 
 
S: Right, yes. That’s right. We run into this with patients. For instance, the 
patient will say, the doctor is going to be the one who is going to help me. But 
when I see that that doctor is... 
 
K: ...is like me. 
 
S: ...is like me, he is not going to be able to help. Then the patient goes to 
someone else—most of them go to another therapy. 
 
K: Another guru. After all they are all men too. A new guru, or an old guru—it is 
all the same old stuff. 
 
S: You are really getting at the issue, that the root is this belief that something, 
someone, can help you. 
 
K: No, the root remains the same—and we trim the branches. 
 
B: I think the root is something we don’t see because we put it in the position of 
the one who is supposed to be seeing. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: Say that another way. 
 
B: It is a sort of a conjuring trick. We don’t see the root because the root is put 
into the position of somebody who is looking for the root. I don’t know if you see 
it. 
 
K: Yes. The root says I am looking for the root. 
 
S: Right. 

B: It is like the man who says he is looking for his glasses, and he has got them 
on. 
 
S: Or like that Sufi story—you know the story?—a guy is looking for a key he 
has lost. The Sufi comes along and sees the guy crawling around under the 
lamppost, and he says, “What are you doing?” “I am looking for my key.” “Did 
you lose it here?” “No, I lost it over there but there’s more light over here.” 
 
B: We throw the light on the other part. 
 
K: Yes, sir. So if I want to change I don’t follow anybody because they are all 
like the rest of the gang. I don’t accept any authority in all this. Authority arises 
only when I am confused. When I am in disorder. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: So I say, can I completely change at the very root? 
 
B: Let’s look at that: there seems confusion in the language because you say “I”. 
 
K: Confusion in the language, I know. 
 
B: You say I am going to change and it is not clear what you mean by I. 
 
K: The I is the root. 
 
B: The I is the root, so how can I change? 
 
K: That is the whole point. 
 
B: You see the language is confusing because you say I have got to change at the 
root, but I am the root. So what is going to happen? 
 
S: What is going to happen, yes? 
 
K: No, no. How am I not to be I? 
 
B: Well, what do you mean by that? 
 
S: How am I not to be I? Let’s roll it back a second. You state you are not going 
to accept any authority. 
 
K: Who is my authority? Who? They have all told me, “Do this, do that, do the 
other. Read this book and you will change. Follow this system, you will change. 
Identify yourself with god, you will change.” But I remain exactly as I was 
before—in sorrow, in misery, in confusion, looking for help, and I choose the 

help which suits me most. Umpteen different ways have been tried to change 
man. Rewarding him, punishing him, promising him. Nothing has brought about 
this miraculous change. And it is a miraculous change. 
 
S: It would be, yes, yes. 
 
K: It is so. So, seeing this, I reject all authority. It is a reasonable, sane rejection. 
Now how do I proceed? I have got 50 years to live. What is the correct action? 
 
S: What is the correct action to live properly? 
 
K: If everybody said, “I can’t help you, you have to do it yourself, look at 
yourself”, then the whole thing would begin to act. Here is a man who says, “I 
am neurotic and I won’t go to any other kind of neurotic to make me sane”. What 
does he do? He doesn’t accept authority, because he has created the authority out 
of his disorder. 
 
B: Well, that is merely the hope that somebody knows what to do. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Because I feel this chaos is too much for me and I just assume that somebody 
else can tell me what to do. But that comes out of this confusion. 
 
S: Yes, the disorder creates the authority. 
 
K: In the school here I have been saying: If you behave properly there is no 
authority. The behaviour we have all agreed to—punctuality, cleanliness, this or 
that: if you really see it you have no authority. 
 
S: Yes, I see that. That I think is a key point. That the disorder itself creates the 
need for authority. 
 
B: It doesn’t actually create a need for it. It creates among people the impression 
that they need authority to correct the disorder. That would be more exact. 
 
K: So let’s start from there. In the rejection of authority I am beginning to 
become sane. I say that now I know I am neurotic what shall I do? What is 
correct action in my life? Can I ever find it—being neurotic? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: I can’t. So I won’t ask what is the right action—I will now say: Can I free my 
mind from being neurotic? Is it possible? I won’t go to Jerusalem, I won’t go to 
Rome, I won’t go to any doctors. Because I am very serious now. I am deadly 
serious because this is my life. 

B: You have to be so serious because of the immense pressure to escape... 
 
K: I won’t. 
 
B: ...you won’t, but I am saying that one will feel at this juncture that there will 
probably be an intense pressure towards escape, saying this is too much. 
 
K: No. No, sir. You see what happens... 
 
S: What happens? 
 
K: ...when I reject authority I have much more energy. 
 
B: Yes, if you reject authority. 
 
K: Because I am now concentrated to find out for myself. I am not looking to 
anybody. 
 
S: That’s right. In other words, I then have to be really open to “what is”, that is 
all I have got. 
 
K: So what shall I do? 
 
S: When I am really open to “what is”? 
 
K: Not open. Here I am, here is a human being, caught in all this, what shall he 
do?—rejecting all authority, knowing that social discipline is immoral... 
 
S: Then there is intense alertness... 
 
K: No. Tell me. Tell me—you are a doctor, tell me what I am to do. I reject you. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Because you are not my doctor, you are not my authority. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You can’t tell me what to do, because you are confused yourself. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So you have no right to tell me what to do. So I come to you as a friend, and 
say let’s find out. Because you are serious and I am serious. Let’s see how... 
 
S: ...we can work together. 

K: No, no, be careful. I am not working together. 
 
S: You are not going to work together? 
 
K: No. We are investigating together. Working together means cooperation. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: I am not cooperating. I say you are like me. What are we going to cooperate 
with? 
 
S: In order to cooperatively investigate. 
 
K: No. Because you are like me, confused, miserable, unhappy, neurotic. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: So I say, how can we cooperate? We can only cooperate in neuroticism. 
 
S: That’s right. So what are we going to do? 
 
K: So can we investigate together? 
 
S: How can we investigate together if we are both neurotic? 
 
K: I say look, I am going first to see in what ways I am neurotic. 
 
S: OK. Let’s look at it. 
 
K: Yes, look at it. In what way am I neurotic—a human being, who comes from 
New York, or Tokyo, or Delhi, or Moscow, or wherever it is? He says, I know I 
am neurotic, the leaders of the world are neurotic and I am part of it—I am the 
world and the world is me—so I can’t look to anybody. Do you see what that 
does? 
 
S: It puts you straight up there in front. 
 
K: It gives you a tremendous sense of integrity. 
 
S: Right. You have to fall on your hands and run with it. 
 
K: Now can I—I being a human being—can I look at my neuroticism? Is it 
possible to see my neuroticism? What is neuroticism? What makes me neurotic? 
All the things that have been put into me, which make the me. Can my 
consciousness empty all that? 
 

S: Your consciousness is that thought. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: Is it only that? 
 
K: For the moment I am limiting it to that. 
 
B: That is my consciousness. That proliferation of my fragmentation, my 
thought, is my neuroticism. Isn’t that right? 
 
K: Of course. It is a tremendous question, you follow? Can I, can the 
consciousness of man, which began five, ten million years ago, with all the 
things that have been put into it, generation after generation, generation after 
generation, from the beginning until now—can you take the whole of it and look 
at it? 
 
S: Can you take the whole of it—that’s not clear. How can you take the whole of 
it and look at it? 
 
B: It seems there’s a language problem there: You say you are that, how can you 
look at it? 
 
K: I’ll show you in a minute. We’ll go into it. 
 
B: I mean there is a difficulty in stating it. 
 
K: I know, stating it. The words are wrong. 
 
B: Yes, the words are wrong. So we shouldn’t take these words too literally. 
 
K: Not too literally, of course. 
 
B: Could we say that the words can be used flexibly? 
 
K: No, the word is not the thing. 
 
B: But we are using words and the question is how are we to understand them? 
You see they are in some way an... 
 
K: ...an impediment and... 
 
B: ...in some way a clue to what we are talking about. It seems to me that one 
trouble with words is the way we take them. We take them to mean something 
very fixed. 
 

K: Now, can you look at it without the word? Is that possible? The word is not 
the thing. The word is a thought. And as a human being I realize I am neurotic—
neurotic in the sense that I believe, I live in conclusions, in memories, which are 
neurotic processes. 
 
S: In words. 
 
K: In words. Words, pictures and reality. I believe in something. My belief is 
very real; it may be illusory—all beliefs are illusory but because I believe so 
strongly they are real to me. 
 
B: Right. 
 
K: So can I look at the nature of the belief, how it arose—look at it? Can you 
look at that fact that you have a belief? Whatever it is, god, the State, or 
whatever. 
 
S: But I believe it is true. 
 
K: No, no. Can you look at that belief? 
 
S: There is a belief and not a fact. 
 
K: Ah, no. It is a reality to you when you believe in it. 
 
S: Right, but how am I going to look at it if I really believe it? I say there is a 
god. Now you are telling me to look at my belief in the god. 
 
K: Why do you believe? Who asked you to believe? What is the necessity of 
god? Not that I am an atheist, but I am asking you. 
 
S: God is there for me, if I believe. 
 
K: Then there is no investigation, it has stopped, you have blocked yourself; you 
have shut the door. 
 
S: That’s right. But you see we have got such beliefs. How can we get at this? 
Because I think we have loads of these unconscious beliefs that we don’t really 
shake. Like the belief in the me. 
 
B: I think a deeper question is how the mind sets up reality. I mean, if I look at 
things I may think they are real. That may be an illusion but when it comes it 
seems real. Even with objects, you can say a word and it becomes real when you 
describe it that way. And therefore in some way the word sets up in the brain a 
construction of reality. Then everything is referred to that construction of reality. 
 

S: How are we to investigate that? 
 
K: What created that reality? Would you say that everything thought has created 
is a reality—except nature? 
 
B: Thought didn’t create nature. 
 
K: No, of course not. 
 
B: Can’t we put it that thought can describe nature. 
 
K: Yes, thought can describe nature—in poetry... 
 
B: And also in imagination. 
 
K: Imagination. Can we say that whatever thought has put together is reality? 
The chair, the table, all these electric lights, nature—thought hasn’t created 
nature but it can describe it. 
 
B: And also make theories about it. 
 
K: Make theories, yes. And also the illusion thought has created is the reality. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But doesn’t this construction of reality have its place, because... 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: ...this table is real although the brain has constructed it. But at some stage we 
construct realities that are not there. We can see this sometimes in the shadows 
on a dark night constructing realities that are not there. 
 
K: That there is a man there. 
 
B: Yes. And also tricks and illusions are possible by conjurers. But then it goes 
further and we say that mentally we construct a logical reality, which seems 
intensely real, very strong. But it seems to me the question is: What is it that 
thought does to give that sense of reality, to construct reality? Can we watch 
that? 
 
K: What does thought do to bring about, to create, that reality? 
 
S: You mean like if you talk to someone who believes in God, he says to you that 
is real. And if you talk to somebody who really believes in the self. I talk to many 
people, to many psychotherapists—they say the self is real, that it exists, it is a 

thing. You heard a psychotherapist once say to Krishnaji, “We know the ego 
exists.” 
 
B: Well, it is not only that. I think what happens is that the illusion builds up very 
fast once you construct the reality. It builds up a tremendous structure, a cloud of 
support around it. 
 
K: So let’s come to it. What are we doing now? 
 
S: We are moving. 
 
K: We are trying to find out what is the correct action in life. I can only find that 
out if there is order in me—right? Me is the disorder. 
 
S: Right. That’s right. 
 
K: However real that me is, that is the source of disorder. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Because that separates, that divides—me and you, we and they, my nation, my 
god—me. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Me with its consciousness. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Can that consciousness be aware of itself? Aware, like thought thinking. 
 
B: Thinking about itself? 
 
K: Put it very simply: can thought be aware of its own movement? 
 
B: Yes. 
 
S: That’s the question. 
 
B: That’s the question. It could be thought understanding its own structure. 
 
S: And its own movement. But is it thought that is aware of itself? Or is it 
something else? 
 
K: Try it. Try it. Do it now. 
 

S: Right. 
 
K: Do it now. Can your thought be aware of itself? Of its movement? 
 
B: It stops. 
 
K: What does that mean? 
 
S: It means what it says: it stops. The observation of thought, stops thought. 
 
K: No, don’t put it that way. 
 
S: How would you put it? 
 
K: It is undergoing a radical change. 
 
B: So the word “thought” is not a fixed thing. 
 
K: No. 
 
B: The word “thought” does not mean a fixed thing. It can change—eh? 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
B: In perception. 
 
K: You have told me, and other scientists have told me, that in the observation of 
an object through a microscope, the object undergoes a change. 
 
B: In the quantum theory the object cannot be fixed apart from the fact of 
observation. 
 
S: This is true with patients during psychoanalysis. They change automatically. 
 
K: Forget the patient, you are the patient! 
 
S: I am the patient, right. 
 
K: What takes place when thought is aware of itself? You know, sir, this is an 
extraordinarily important thing. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: That is, can the doer be aware of his doing? I can move this vase from here to 
there and be aware of that moving. That is very simple. I stretch out my arm... 

But can thought be aware of itself, its movement, its activity, its structure, its 
nature, what it has created, what it has done in the world? 
 
S: I want to save that question for tomorrow. 

DIALOGUE IV 
 
May 19—morning 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: I don’t think that yesterday we answered the question: Why do 
human beings live the way they are living? I don’t think we went into it 
sufficiently deeply. Did we answer it? 
 
Dr Shainberg: We got the point—but we never answered that question. 
 
K: I was thinking about it this morning and it struck me that we hadn’t answered 
it fully. We went into the question: Can thought observe itself? 
 
S: Right. 
 
Dr Bohm: Right. Yes. 
 
K: But I think we ought to answer that other question. 
 
B: But I think that what we said was on the way to answering it. I mean it was 
relevant to the answer. 
 
K: Yes, relevant. But it is not complete. 
 
S: No, it’s not complete, it doesn’t really get hold of that issue: Why do people 
live the way they do, and why don’t they change? 
 
K: Yes. Could we go into that a little bit before we go on? 
 
S: Well, you know my immediate answer to that question was that they like it. 
We came up against that and then pulled away. 
 
K: I think it is much deeper than that, don’t you? Because if one actually 
transformed one’s conditioning, the way one lives, one might find oneself 
economically in a very difficult position. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: It would be going against the current, completely against the current. 
 
B: Are you saying that it might lead to a certain objective insecurity? 
 
K: Objective insecurity. 
 
B: It is not merely a matter of the imagination. 
 

K: No, no, actual insecurity. 
 
B: Yes, because a lot of the things we are discussing are to do with some illusion 
of security or insecurity. In addition there is some genuine... 
 
K: ...genuine insecurity. And also doesn’t it imply that you have to stand alone? 
 
S: Definitely you would be in a totally different position. 
 
K: Because it is being completely out of the stream. And that means you have to 
be alone, psychologically alone. And we ask whether human beings can stand 
that. 
 
S: Well, certainly this other is to be completely together. 
 
K: It is the herd instinct. Be together, with people, don’t be alone. 
 
S: Be like them, be with them—it is all based on competition in some way. I am 
better than you... 
 
K: Of course, of course. It is all that. 
 
B: Well, it is unclear because in some sense we should be together, but society, it 
seems to me, is giving us some false sense of togetherness which is really 
fragmentation. 
 
K: Quite right. So would you say that one of the main reasons why human beings 
don’t want to transform themselves radically, is that they are frightened of not 
belonging to a group, to a herd, to something definite—of standing completely 
alone? I think you can only cooperate from that aloneness, not the other way 
round. 
 
S: People don’t like to be different, that we know. 
 
K: I once talked to an FBI man—he came to see me and he said, “Why is it that 
you walk alone all the time? Why are you so much alone? I see you among the 
hills walking alone. Why?” He thought it was very disturbing. 
 
B: Well, I think anthropologists find that in primitive peoples the sense of 
belonging to the tribe is even stronger; their entire psychological structure 
depends on being in a tribe. 
 
K: You would rather cling to the misery you already know than come into 
another kind of misery you don’t know. 
 
S: That’s right. Being with others... 

K: ...you are safe. 
 
B: You will be taken care of, as your mother may have taken care of you; you are 
gently supported. You feel that fundamentally everything will be all right 
because the group is large, it is wise, it knows what to do. I think there is a 
feeling like that, rather deep. The Church may give that feeling. 
 
K: Yes. You have seen those animal pictures? They are always in herds. 
 
B: Aren’t people seeking from the group a sense that they have some support 
from the whole? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: Now isn’t it possible that you are discussing an aloneness in which you have a 
certain security? People are seeking in the group a kind of security; well, it seems 
to me, that that can arise actually in aloneness. 
 
K: Yes, that is right. In aloneness you can be completely secure. 
 
B: I wonder if we could discuss that because it seems there is an illusion there: 
people feel they should have a sense of security. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
B: And they are looking for it in a group, the group being representative of 
something universal. 
 
K: The group is not the universal. 
 
B: It isn’t, but it is the way we think of it. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: The little child thinks the tribe is the whole world. 
 
K: A human being, if he transforms himself, becomes alone, but that aloneness is 
not isolation—it is a form of supreme intelligence. 
 
B: Yes, but could you go into that a little further about it not being isolation, 
because at first when you say alone—the feeling that I am entirely apart... 
 
K: It is not apart. 
 

S: All people seem to gravitate together; they have to be like other people. What 
would change that? Why should anybody change from that? What would such 
people experience when they are alone? They experience isolation. 
 
K: I thought we had already dealt with that fairly thoroughly. When one realizes 
the appalling state of the world, and of oneself, the disorder, the confusion and 
the misery, and when one says there must be a total change, a total 
transformation, one has already begun to move away from all that. 
 
S: Right. But here one is, being together... 
 
K: Being together, what does it really mean? 
 
S: I mean being in this group... 
 
K: Yes, what does it really mean? Identifying oneself with the group, remaining 
with the group—what does it mean? What is involved in it? The group is me. I 
am the group. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Therefore it is like cooperating with myself. 
 
B: Perhaps you could say as Descartes said, “I think, therefore I am”—meaning 
that I think implies that I am there. One says, “I am in the group, therefore I am”. 
You see, if I am not in a group where am I? In other words I have no being at all. 
That is really the condition of the primitive tribe, for most of the members 
anyway. And there is something deep there because I feel that my very existence, 
my being, psychologically, is implied in being in the group. The group has made 
me, everything about me has come from the group. I am nothing without the 
group. 
 
K: Yes, quite right. I am the group in fact. 
 
B: And therefore if I am out of the group I feel everything is collapsing. I don’t 
know where I am. I have no orientation, to life or to anything. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: And therefore, you see, that might be the greatest punishment the group could 
inflict, to banish me. 
 
K: Yes, look what is happening in Russia: when there is a dissenter he is 
banished. 
 
B: Such banishment sort of robs him of his being. It is almost like killing him. 

K: Quite. I think that is what it is, the fear of being alone. Alone is translated as 
being isolated from all this. 
 
B: Could we say from the universal? 
 
K: Yes, from the universal. 
 
B: It seems to me you are implying that if you are really alone, genuinely alone, 
then you are not isolated from the universe. 
 
K: Absolutely. On the contrary. 
 
B: Therefore we first have to be free of this false universal. 
 
S: This false identification with the group. 
 
B: Identification with the group as the universal. Treating the group as if it were 
the universal support of my being. 
 
S: Right, right. Now there is something more to that. What is being said is that 
when that localized identification with the group, that false security, is dropped, 
one is opened up to the participation in... 
 
K: No, there is no question of participation—you are the universe. 
 
S: You are that. 
 
B: As a child I felt that the town I was in was the whole universe; then I found 
another town further away which felt almost beyond the universe, which must be 
the ultimate limits of all reality. So the idea of going beyond that would not have 
occurred to me. And I think that is how the group is treated. We know abstractly 
that it is not so, but the feeling you have is like that of a little child. 
 
K: Is it then that human beings love, or hold on to, their own misery and 
confusion because they don’t know anything else? 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: The known is so far, then the unknown. 
 
S: Right. Yes. 
 
K: Now to be alone implies, doesn’t it, to step out of the stream? 
 
S: Of the known. 
 

K: Step out of the stream of this utter confusion, disorder, sorrow, despair, hope 
and travail—to step out of all that. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And if you want to go much deeper into this, to be alone implies, doesn’t it, 
not to carry the burden of tradition with you at all? 
 
B: Tradition being the group, then. 
 
K: The group. Tradition also being knowledge. 
 
B: Knowledge, but it comes basically from the group. Knowledge is basically 
collective. It is collected by everybody. 
 
K: So to be alone implies total freedom. And when there is that great freedom it 
is the universe. 
 
B: Could we go into that further because to a person who hasn’t seen this, it 
doesn’t look obvious? 
 
S: I think David is right there. To a person, to most people, I think—and I have 
tested this out recently—the idea, or even the deep feeling, that you are the 
universe, seems to be so... 
 
K: Ah, sir, that is a most dangerous thing to say. How can you say you are the 
universe when you are in total confusion? When you are unhappy, miserable, 
anxious, jealous, envious how can you say you are the universe? Universe 
implies total order. 
 
B: Yes, the cosmos in Greek meant order. 
 
K: Order, of course. 
 
B: And chaos was the opposite. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: But I... 
 
K: No, listen. Universe, cosmos, means order. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And chaos is what we live with. 
 

S: That’s right. 
 
K: How can I think I have universal order in me? That is the good old trick of the 
mind which says disorder is there, but inside you there is perfect order. That is an 
illusion. It is a concept which thought has put there and it gives me a certain 
hope, but it is an illusion, it has no reality. What has actual reality is the 
confusion. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: My chaos. And I can imagine, I can project a cosmos but that is equally 
illusory. So I must start with the fact of what I am, which is that I am in chaos. 
 
S: I belong to a group. 
 
K: Chaos, chaos is the group. So to move away from that into cosmos, which is 
total order, means that I am alone. There is a total order which is not associated 
with disorder, chaos. That is alone. 
 
B: Yes, can we go into that? Suppose several people are in that state, moving into 
cosmos, into order out of the chaos of society—are they all alone? 
 
K: No, they don’t feel alone there. There is only order. 
 
B: Are they different people? 
 
K: Sir, would you say—suppose—no, I can’t suppose—we three are in cosmos, 
there is only cosmos, not you, Dr Bohm, Dr Shainberg and me. 
 
B: Therefore we are still alone. 
 
K: That is, order is alone. 
 
B: I looked up the word “alone” in the dictionary; basically it is all one. 
 
K: All one. Yes. 
 
B: In other words there is no fragmentation. 
 
K: Therefore there is no three—we three. And that is marvellous, sir. 
 
S: But you jumped away there. We have got chaos and confusion. That is what 
we have got. 
 

K: So as we said, to move away from that, which is to have total order, most 
people are afraid. Alone, as he pointed out, is all one. Therefore there is no 
fragmentation, then there is cosmos. 
 
S: Right. But most people are in confusion and chaos. That is all they know. 
 
K: So how do you move away from that? That is the whole question. 
 
S: That is the question. Here we are in chaos and confusion, we are not over 
there. 
 
K: No, because you may be frightened of that. Frightened of an idea of being 
alone. 
 
S: How can you be frightened of an idea? 
 
B: That is easy. 
 
K: Aren’t you frightened of tomorrow? Which is an idea. 
 
S: OK. That is an idea. 
 
K: So they are frightened of an idea which they have projected, which says, “My 
God, I am alone”, which means I have nobody to rely on. 
 
S: Right, but that is an idea. 
 
B: Well, let’s go slowly. We have said that to a certain extent it is genuinely so. 
You are not being supported by society. You do have a certain genuine danger 
because you have withdrawn from the hub of society. 
 
S: I think we are confused here. I really do because I think if we have got 
confusion, if we have got chaos... 
 
K: Not if—it is so. 
 
S: It is so, OK I go with you. We have got chaos and confusion, that is what we 
have got. Now if you have an idea about being alone while in chaos and 
confusion, that is just another idea, another thought, another part of the chaos. Is 
that right? 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: OK. Now that is all we have got, chaos and confusion. 
 
K: And in moving away from that we have the feeling we will be alone. 

B: In the sense of isolated. 
 
K: Isolated. 
 
S: Right. That’s what I am getting at. 
 
K: We will be lonely. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: Of that we are frightened. 
 
S: Not frightened, in terror. 
 
K: Yes. Therefore we say, “I would rather stay where I am in my little pond than 
face isolation.” And that may be one of the reasons why human beings don’t 
radically change. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: That’s like this primitive tribe—the worst punishment is to be banished. 
 
S: You don’t have to go to a primitive tribe. I see people and talk to people all the 
time; patients come to me and say, “Look, Saturday came, I couldn’t stand being 
alone, I called up 50 people looking for somebody to be with.” 
 
B: Yes, that is much the same. 
 
K: So that may be one of the reasons why human beings don’t change. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: The other is that we are so heavily conditioned to accept things as they are. 
We don’t say to ourselves, “Why should I live this way?” 
 
S: That is certainly true. We don’t. 
 
B: We have to get away from this conviction, that the way things are is all that 
can be. 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. You see, the religions have pointed this out by saying there 
is another world, aspire to that. This is a transient world, it doesn’t matter, live as 
best as you can in your sorrow, and then you will be perfectly happy in the next 
world. 
 
S: Right. 

K: And the Communists say there is no next world, so make the best of this 
world. 
 
B: I think they would say that there is happiness in the future in this world. 
 
K: Yes, yes. Sacrifice your children for the future, which is exactly the same 
thing. 
 
B: But it seems it is a sort of transformation of the same thing: we say we want to 
give up this society as it is, but we invent something similar. 
 
K: Yes, quite. 
 
S: It has to be similar if we are inventing it. 
 
B: Yes, but it seems it is an important point, that there is a subtle way of not 
being alone. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
S: You mean we go ahead and make it out of the old ideas? 
 
B: Yes. To make heaven for the future. 
 
K: So what will make human beings change? Radically. 
 
S: I don’t know. Even the idea you are suggesting here is that it can’t be 
different, or that it is all the same: that is part of the system itself. 
 
K: Agreed. Now wait a minute. May I ask you a question? Why don’t you 
change? What is preventing you? 
 
S: I would say that it is—oh, it’s a tough question. I suppose the answer would be 
that—I don’t have any answer. 
 
K: Because you have never asked yourself that question. Right? 
 
S: Not radically. 
 
K: We are asking basic questions. 
 
S: Right. I don’t really know the answer to the question. 
 
K: Now, sir, move away from that, sir. Is it that our structure, our whole society, 
all religions, all culture is based on thought, and thought says, “I can’t do this. 
Therefore an outside agency is necessary to change me.” 

S: Right. 
 
K: Whether the outside agency is the environment, the leader, or God. God is 
your own projection of yourself, obviously. And you believe in God, you believe 
in some leader; you believe, but you are still the same. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: You may identify with the State and so on, but the good old me is still 
operating. So is it that thought doesn’t see its own limit? Doesn’t know, realize, 
that it cannot change itself? 
 
B: Well, I think thought loses track of something; it doesn’t see that it itself is 
behind all this. 
 
K: Of course. We said that. Thought has produced all this chaos. 
 
B: But thought doesn’t really see this exactly. 
 
S: What thought does in fact is to communicate through gradual change. 
 
K: That is all the invention of thought. 
 
S: Yes, but that is where I think the hook is. 
 
K: No, sir, please, sir, just listen. 
 
S: Sure. 
 
K: Thought has put this world together. Technologically as well as 
psychologically. The technological world is all right, leave it all alone, we won’t 
even discuss that. It would be too absurd. But psychologically, thought has built 
all this world in me and outside me. And does thought realize that it has made 
this mess, this chaos? 
 
B: I would say that it doesn’t. It tends to look on this chaos as independently 
existent. 
 
K: But it is its baby! 
 
B: It is, but it is very hard for thought to see that. That is really what we were 
discussing yesterday. 
 
K: Yes, we are coming back to that. 
 

B: To this question of how thought gives a sense of reality. We were saying that 
technology deals with something that thought made, but it is actually an 
independent reality once it is made. 
 
K: Like the table, like those cameras. 
 
B: But you could say that thought also creates a reality which it calls 
independent, but isn’t. 
 
K: Yes, yes. So, does thought realize, is it aware, that it has created this chaos? 
 
S: No. 
 
K: Why not? But you, sir. Do you realize it? 
 
S: I realize that... 
 
K: Not you—does thought—you see! I have asked you a different question: Does 
thought, which is you, your thinking—does your thinking realize the chaos it has 
created? 
 
B: Thought tends to attribute that chaos to something else, either to something 
outside, or to me who is inside. 
 
K: Thought has created me. 
 
B: But also thought has said that me is not thought, although in reality it is. 
Thought is treating me as a different reality. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: And thought is saying that it is coming from me and therefore it doesn’t take 
credit for what it does. 
 
K: To me thought has created the me. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: And so “me” is not separate from thought. It is the structure of thought, the 
nature of thought that has made me. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Now: Does your thinking, or does your thought realize this? 
 
S: In flashes it does. 

K: No, not in flashes. You don’t see that table in flashes; it is always there. We 
asked a question yesterday, and we stopped there: Does thought see itself in 
movement? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: The movement has created the me, created the chaos, created the division, 
created the conflict, jealousy, anxiety, fear... 
 
S: Right. Now what I am asking is another question. Yesterday we came to a 
moment where we said thought stops. 
 
K: No. That is much later. Please just stick to one thing. 
 
S: OK. What I am trying to get at is what is the actuality of thought seeing itself? 
 
K: You want me to describe it? 
 
S: No, no, I don’t want you to describe it—what I am trying to get at is what is 
the actuality that thought sees? We get into the problem of language here—but it 
seems that thought sees and forgets. 
 
K: No, no, please. I am asking a very simple question. Don’t complicate it. Does 
thought see the chaos it has created? That’s all. Which means: Is thought aware 
of itself as a movement? Not I am aware of thought as a movement—the I has 
been created by thought. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: I think a question that is relevant is: Why does thought keep on going? How 
does it sustain itself? Because as long as it sustains itself it produces something 
like an independent reality, an illusion of reality. 
 
S: What is my relationship to thought? 
 
K: You are thought. There is no you related to thought. 
 
S: Right. But look, look. The question is: I say to you, “What is my relationship 
to thought?”—and you say to me “You are thought”. In some way what you say 
is clear, but that is still the way thought is moving for me, to say it is my 
relationship to thought. 
 
B: Well, that’s the point. Can this very thought stop right now? 
 
K: Yes. 
 

B: What is sustaining this whole thing?—at this very moment?—was the 
question I was trying to get at. 
 
S: Yes, that’s the question. 
 
B: In other words, say we have a certain insight but nevertheless something 
happens to sustain the old process right now. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: Right now thought keeps moving. 
 
K: No, Dr Bohm asked a very good question which we haven’t answered. He 
said, Why does thought move? 
 
B: When it is irrelevant to move. 
 
K: Why is it always moving? What is movement? Movement is time—right? 
 
S: That’s too quick. Movement is time. 
 
K: Obviously, of course. Physically, from here to London, from here to New 
York. And also psychologically from here to there. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: I am this, I must be that. 
 
S: Right. But if a thought is not necessarily all that... 
 
K: Thought is the new movement. We are examining movement, which is 
thought. Look: if thought stopped there is no movement. 
 
S: Yes, I know. I am trying—this has to be made very clear. 
 
B: I think there is a step that might help: to ask myself what it is that makes me 
go on thinking or talking. I can often watch people and see they are in a hole just 
because they keep on talking. If they would stop talking the whole problem 
would vanish. I mean it is just this flow of words that comes out as if it were 
reality, and then they say that is my problem, it is real and I have got to think 
some more. There is a kind of a feedback saying, “I have got a problem, I am 
suffering.” 
 
S: You have got an ‘I’ thought. 
 

B: Yes, I think that; therefore I have a sense that I am real. I am thinking of my 
suffering, and in that it is implicit that it is I who am there, that the suffering is 
real because I am real. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: And then comes the next thought, which is: Since that is real I must think 
some more. 
 
S: It feeds on itself. 
 
B: Yes. And one of the things I must think is that I am suffering. And I am 
compelled to keep on thinking that thought all the time. Maintaining myself in 
existence. Do you see what I am driving at? That there is a feedback. 
 
K: Which means that if thought is movement, which is time, and there is no 
movement I am dead! I am dead. 
 
B: Yes, if that movement stops, then the sense that I am there being real must go, 
because the sense that I am real is the result of thinking. 
 
K: Do you see this is extraordinary? 
 
S: Of course it is. 
 
K: No, no, actually. In actuality, not in theory. One realizes thought is 
movement—right? 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: And in this movement it creates an image of... 
 
K: ...of me... 
 
B: ...that is supposed to be moving. 
 
K: Yes, yes. Now, when that movement stops there is no me. The me is time, put 
together by time, which is thought. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So do you, listening to this, realize the truth of it? Not the verbal, logical 
statement, but the truth of such an amazing thing? Therefore there is an entirely 
different action. The action of thought as movement brings about a fragmentary 
action, a contradictory action. When the movement as thought comes to an end 
there is total action. 

B: Can you say then that whatever technical thought brings about has an order? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: In other words it doesn’t mean that thought is permanently gone. 
 
K: No, no. 
 
S: It can still be a movement in its proper place, in its fitting order? 
 
K: Of course. So is a human being afraid of all this? Unconsciously, deeply, he 
must realize the ending of me. Do you understand? And that is really a most 
frightening thing. My knowledge, my books, my wife—the whole thing which 
thought has put together. And you are asking me to end all that. 
 
B: Can’t you say it is the ending of everything? Because everything that I know 
is there. 
 
K: Absolutely. So you see, really I am frightened; a human being is frightened of 
death. Not the biological death... 
 
S: To die now. 
 
K: This coming to an end. And therefore he believes in God, reincarnation, and a 
dozen other comforting things, but in actuality, when thought realizes itself as 
movement and sees that movement has created the me, the divisions, the 
quarrels, the whole structure of this chaotic world—when thought realizes this, 
sees the truth of it, it ends. Then there is cosmos. You listen to this: how do you 
receive it? 
 
S: Do you want me to answer? 
 
K: I offer you something. How do you receive it? This is very important. 
 
S: Yes. Thought sees its movement... 
 
K: No, no. How do you receive it? How does the public, who listens to all this, 
receive it? They ask, “What is he trying to tell me?” 
 
S: What? 
 
K: He says I am not telling you anything. He says listen to what I am saying and 
find out for yourself whether thought as movement has created all this, both the 
technological world which is useful, which is necessary, and this chaotic world. 
 
S: Right. 

K: How do you receive it, listen to it? What takes place in you when you listen to 
it? 
 
S: Panic. 
 
K: No. Is it? 
 
S: Yes. There is a panic about the death. There is a sense of seeing, and then 
there is a fear of that death. 
 
K: Which means you have listened to the words; the words have awakened the 
fear. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: But not the actuality of the fact. 
 
S: I wouldn’t say that. I think that is a little unfair. They awaken the... 
 
K: I am asking you. 
 
S: ...they awaken the actuality of the fact and then there seems to be a silence, a 
moment of great clarity that gives way to a kind of feeling in the pit of the 
stomach where things are dropping out, and then there is a kind of... 
 
K: Withholding. 
 
S: ...withholding, right. I think there is a whole movement there. 
 
K: So you are describing humanity? 
 
S: No, I am describing me. 
 
K: You are humanity. 
 
B: You are the same. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You are the viewer, the people who are listening. 
 
S: That’s right. So there is a sense of what will happen tomorrow? 
 
K: No, no. That is not the point. No. When thought realizes itself as a movement, 
and realizes that that movement has created all this chaos, total chaos, complete 
disorder—when it realizes that, what takes place? Actually? You are not 

frightened, there is no fear. Listen to it carefully. There is no fear. Fear is the idea 
brought about by an abstraction. You understand? You have made a picture of 
ending and are frightened of that ending. 
 
S: You are right. You are right. 
 
K: There is no fear. 
 
S: No fear and then there is... 
 
K: There is no fear when the actuality takes place. 
 
S: That’s right. When the actuality takes place there is silence. 
 
K: With the fact there is no fear. 
 
B: But as soon as thought comes in... 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: That’s right. Now wait a minute; no, don’t go away. When thought comes in... 
 
K: Then it is no longer a fact. You haven’t remained with the fact. 
 
B: Well, that is the same as saying you keep on thinking. 
 
K: Keep on moving. 
 
B: Yes. Well, as soon as you bring thought in, it is not a fact; it is an imagination 
or a fantasy which is thought to be real, but it is not so. Therefore you are not 
with the fact any longer. 
 
K: We have discovered something extraordinary, that with fact there is no fear. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: So all fear is thought, is that it? 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: We have got a big mouthful here. 
 
K: No. All thought is fear, all thought is sorrow. 
 
B: That goes both ways, that all fear is thought, and all thought is fear. 
 

K: Of course. 
 
B: Except the kind of thought that arises with the fact alone. 
 
S: I want to interject something right here: it seems to me we have discovered 
something quite important right here, which is that at the actual seeing, the 
instant of attention is at its peak. 
 
K: No. Something new takes place, sir. Something totally new that you have 
never looked at. It has never been understood or experienced, whatever it is. A 
totally different thing happens. 
 
B: But isn’t it important that we acknowledge this in our thought, I mean in our 
language? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: As we are doing now. In other words, if it happened and we didn’t 
acknowledge it, then we are liable to fall back. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
S: I don’t get you. 
 
B: Well, we have to see it not only when it happens but we have to say that it 
happens. 
 
S: Then are we creating a place to localize this, or not? 
 
K: No, no. What he is saying is very simple. He is saying, does this fact, this 
actuality take place? And can you remain with it, can thought not move but 
remain only with that fact? Sir, it is like saying: Remain totally with sorrow. Do 
not move away, do not say it should be or shouldn’t be, or how am I to get over 
it—just totally remain with that thing. With the fact. Then you have an energy 
which is extraordinary. 

DIALOGUE V 
 
May 19—afternoon 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: We have talked about the necessity for human beings to change, 
and about why they don’t change, why they accept this intolerable condition of 
the human psyche. I think we ought to approach the same thing from a different 
angle. Who has invented the unconscious? 
 
Dr Shainberg: Who has invented it? I think there is a difference between what 
we call the unconscious and what is the unconscious. The word is not the thing. 
 
K: Yes, the word is not the thing. Who has thought it up? 
 
S: Well, I think the history of thinking about the unconscious is a long and 
involved process. 
 
K: May we ask: Have you an unconscious? Are you aware of your unconscious? 
Do you know if you have an unconscious that is operating differently, trying to 
give you hints—are you aware of all that? 
 
S: Yes. I am aware of an aspect of myself that is incompletely aware. That is 
what I call the unconscious. It is aware of my experience, aware of events in an 
incomplete way. That’s what I call the unconscious. It uses symbols and different 
modes of telling, of understanding a dream, say, in which I discover jealousy that 
I wasn’t aware of. 
 
K: Do you also give importance, Dr Bohm, to a feeling that there is such a thing? 
 
Dr Bohm: Well, I don’t know what you mean by that. I think there are some 
things we do that we are not aware of. We react, we use words in an habitual 
way... 
 
S: We have dreams. 
 
B: We have dreams, yes... 
 
K: I am going to question all that because I am not sure... 
 
S: You are not questioning that we have dreams? 
 
K: No. But I want to question, I want to ask the experts if there is such a thing as 
the unconscious, because I don’t think it has played any important part in my life 
at all. 
 
S: Well, it depends on what you mean. 

K: I will tell you what I mean. Something hidden, something incomplete, 
something that I have to go after consciously or unconsciously—discover, 
unearth, explore and expose. See the motives, see the hidden intentions. 
 
B: Well, could we make it clear that there are some things people do which you 
can see they are not aware of doing? 
 
K: I don’t quite follow. 
 
B: Well, for example, this Freudian slip of the tongue—somebody makes a slip 
of the tongue which expresses his will. 
 
K: Yes, yes, I didn’t mean that quite. 
 
S: That is what most people think of as the unconscious. You see, I think there 
are two problems here, if I can just put in a technical statement. There has arisen 
in the history of thinking about the unconscious, a belief that there are things in it 
which must be lifted out. Then there are a large group of people now who think 
of the unconscious as areas of behaviour, areas of response, areas of experience 
that they are not fully aware of, so that in the daytime they might have, let’s say, 
an experience of stress which they didn’t finish with, and at night they go 
through reworking it in a new way. 
 
K: I understand all that. 
 
S: So that would be the unconscious in operation. You get it also from the past or 
from previous programmes of action. 
 
K: I mean—the collective unconscious, the racial unconscious. 
 
B: Let’s say somebody has been deeply hurt in the past; you can see that his 
whole behaviour is governed by that. But he doesn’t know it; he may not know it. 
 
K: Yes, that I understand. 
 
S: But his response is always from the past. 
 
K: Yes, quite. What I am trying to find out is why we have divided the conscious 
and the unconscious. Or is it one unitary total process—one movement? Not 
hidden, not concealed, but moving as a whole current. These clever brainy birds 
come along and split it up and say there is the conscious and the unconscious, the 
hidden, the incomplete, the storehouse of racial memories, family memories... 
 
S: The reason that that has happened, I think, is partially explained by the fact 
that Freud and Jung and others were seeing patients who had fragmented off this 

movement which you are talking about. So much knowledge of the unconscious 
grew out of that. 
 
K: That’s what I want to get at. 
 
S: There’s the whole history of hysteria, where patients couldn’t move their arms, 
you know? 
 
K: I know. 
 
S: Then you open up their memories and eventually they can move their arms. Or 
there were people who had dual personalities... 
 
K: Is it an insanity—not insanity—is it a state of mind that divides everything, 
that says there is the unconscious and the conscious? Is it also a process of 
fragmentation? 
 
B: Well, wouldn’t you say, as Freud has said, that certain material is made 
unconscious by the brain because it is too disturbing? 
 
K: That is what I want to get at. 
 
B: It is fragmented. That is well known in all schools of psychology. 
 
S: That’s right. That is what I am saying. It is fragmented off and is then called 
the unconscious. What is fragmented is the unconscious. 
 
K: I understand that. 
 
B: But would you say that the brain itself is in some sense holding it separate on 
purpose in order to avoid it? 
 
K: Yes, avoiding facing the fact. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: Yes. So that it is not really separate from consciousness. 
 
K: That is what I want to get at. 
 
S: It isn’t separate from consciousness but the brain has organized it in a 
fragmented way. 
 
B: Yes, but then it is a wrong terminology to call it that. The word unconscious 
already implies a separation. 
 

K: That’s right, separation. 
 
B: To say there are two layers, the unconscious and the surface consciousness, a 
structure is implied. But this other notion is to say that that structure is not 
implied, but that certain material wherever it may be is simply avoided. 
 
K: I don’t want to think about somebody because he has hurt me. That is not the 
unconscious, it’s just that I don’t want to think about him. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: I am conscious he has hurt me and I don’t want to think about it. 
 
B: But a kind of paradoxical situation arises there because eventually you would 
become so good at it that you wouldn’t realize you were doing it. That seems to 
happen, you see. 
 
K: Yes, yes. 
 
B: People become so proficient at avoiding these things that they cease to realize 
they are doing it. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: It becomes habitual. 
 
S: That is right. I think this is what happens. These hurts... 
 
K: The wound remains. 
 
S: The wound remains and we forget that we have forgotten. 
 
K: The wound remains. 
 
B: We remember to forget, you see! 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: We remember to forget and then the process of therapy is to help the 
remembering and the recall—to remember you have forgotten, and then to 
understand the connections of why you forgot; then the thing can move in a more 
holistic way, rather than being fragmented. 
 
K: Do you consider, or feel that you have been hurt? 
 
S: Yes. 

K: And want to avoid it? Resist, withdraw, isolate—the whole picture being the 
image of yourself being hurt and withdrawing—do you feel that when you are 
hurt? 
 
S: Yes. I feel—how to put it? 
 
K: Let’s go into this. 
 
S: Yes, I feel there is definitely a move not to be hurt, not to have that image, not 
to have that whole thing changed because if it is changed it seems to catapult into 
the same experience that was the hurt. This has a resonation with that 
unconscious which reminds me... you see I am reminded of being hurt deeply by 
this more superficial hurt. 
 
K: I understand that. 
 
S: So I avoid hurt—period. 
 
K: If the brain has a shock—a biological, physical shock—must the 
psychological brain, if we can call it that, be hurt also? Is that inevitable? 
 
S: No, I don’t think so. It is only hurt with reference to something. 
 
K: No. I am asking you: Can such a psychological brain, if I can use those two 
words, never be hurt?—in any circumstances, given family life, husband, wife, 
bad friends, so-called enemies, all that is going on around you—never get hurt? 
Because apparently this is one of the major wounds of human existence. The 
more sensitive you are, the more aware, the more hurt you get, the more 
withdrawn. Is this inevitable? 
 
S: I don’t think it is inevitable but I think it happens frequently, more often than 
not. And it seems to happen when an attachment is formed and then the loss of 
that attachment. You become important to me, I like you, or I am involved with 
you, then it becomes important to me that you don’t do anything that disturbs that 
image. 
 
K: That is, the relationship between two people, the picture we have of each 
other, the image—that is the cause of hurt. 
 
B: Well, it also goes the other way: we hold those images because of hurt. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: Where does it start? 
 
K: That is what I want to get at. 

S: That is what I want to get at too. 
 
K: He pointed out something. 
 
S: I know he did, yes. 
 
B: Because the past hurt gives tremendous strength to the image, the image 
which helps us to forget it. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: Now is this wound in the “unconscious”—we use the word unconscious in 
quotes for the time being—is it hidden? 
 
S: Well, I think you are being a little simplistic about that because what is hidden 
is the fact that I have had this happen many times—it happened with my mother, 
it happened with my friend, it happened in school, when I cared about 
somebody... You form the attachment and then comes the hurt. 
 
K: I am not at all sure that it comes through attachment. 
 
S: Maybe it is not attachment, that is the wrong word. What happens is that I 
form a relationship with you where an image becomes important—what you do 
to me becomes important. 
 
K: You have an image about yourself. 
 
S: That’s right. And you are saying that I like you because you are conforming 
with the image. 
 
K: No, apart from like and dislike, you have an image about yourself. Then I 
come along and put a pin in that image. 
 
S: No, first you come along and confirm it. 
 
B: The hurt will be greater if you first come along and are very friendly to me 
and confirm the image, and then suddenly put a pin in me. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
B: But even somebody who didn’t confirm it can hurt if he puts the pin in 
properly. 
 
S: That’s right. That’s not unconscious. But why did I have the image to begin 
with? That is unconscious. 
 

K: Is it unconscious? That is what I want to get at. Or it is so obvious that we 
don’t look. You follow what I am saying? 
 
S: I follow, yes. 
 
K: We put it away. We say it is hidden. I question whether it is hidden at all, it is 
so blatantly obvious. 
 
S: I don’t feel all parts of it are obvious. 
 
B: I think we hide it in one sense. Shall we say that this hurt means that 
everything is wrong with the image, but we hide it by saying everything is all 
right? In other words the thing that is obvious may be hidden by saying it is 
unimportant, that we don’t notice it. 
 
S: Yes we don’t notice it but I ask myself what is it that generates this image, 
what is that hurt? 
 
K: Ah, we will come to that. We are enquiring, aren’t we, into the whole 
structure of consciousness? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Into the nature of consciousness. We have broken it up into the hidden and the 
open. It may be the fragmented mind that is doing this. And therefore 
strengthening both. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: The division grows greater and greater and greater... 
 
S: The fragmented mind is... 
 
K: ...doing this. Now most people have an image about themselves, practically 
everybody. It is that image that gets hurt. And that image is you, and you say, “I 
am hurt”. 
 
B: It is the same as what we were discussing this morning. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: You see, if I have a pleasant self-image, I attribute the pleasure to me and say 
that it is real. When somebody hurts me then the pain is attributed to me and I 
say that’s real too. It seems that if you have an image that can give you pleasure, 
then it must also be able to give you pain. There is no way out of that. 
 

K: Absolutely. 
 
S: Well, the image seems to be self-perpetuating, as you were saying. 
 
B: I think people hope that the image will give them pleasure. 
 
K: Pleasure only. 
 
B: Only pleasure, but the very mechanism that makes pleasure possible makes 
pain possible, because the pleasure comes if I say “I think I am good”, and this is 
sensed to be real, which makes that goodness real, but if somebody comes along 
and says, “You are no good, you are stupid”, that too is real and therefore very 
significant. 
 
K: The image brings both pleasure and pain. 
 
B: I think people would hope for an image that would bring only pleasure. 
 
S: People do hope that, there is no question. But people not only hope for the 
image, they invest all their interest in their image. 
 
B: The value of everything depends on this self-image being right. So if 
somebody shows it’s wrong, everything is wrong. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: But we are always giving new shape to the image. 
 
B: But I think this image means everything, and that gives it tremendous power. 
 
S: The entire personality is directed to the achievement of this image. Everything 
else takes second place. 
 
K: Are you aware of this? 
 
S: Yes. I am aware of it. 
 
K: What is the beginning of this? 
 
S: Well... 
 
K: Please, just let me summarize first. Every human being practically has an 
image of himself, of which he is unconscious or not aware. 
 
S: That’s right. Usually it’s sort of idealized. 
 

K: Idealized, or not idealized, it is an image. 
 
S: That’s right. They must have it. 
 
K: They have it. 
 
B: They have it. 
 
S: But they must direct all their actions towards getting it. 
 
B: I think one feels one’s whole life depends on the image. 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. 
 
S: Depression is when I don’t have it. 
 
K: We will come to that. The next question is: How does it come into being? 
 
S: Well, I think it comes into being in the family in some way. You are my father 
and I understand through watching you that if I am smart you will like me, right? 
 
K: Quite. We agree. 
 
S: I learn that very quickly. So I am going to make sure I get that love... 
 
K: It is all very simple. But I am asking: What is the origin of making images 
about oneself? 
 
B: If I had no image at all I would never get into that, would I? 
 
S: If I never made images...? 
 
B: Yes. Never made any image at all no matter what my father did. 
 
K: I think this is very important. 
 
S: That is the question. 
 
B: Maybe the child can’t do it, but suppose he can... 
 
K: I am not at all sure... 
 
B: Perhaps he can, but I am saying under ordinary conditions he doesn’t manage 
to do it. 
 
S: You are suggesting that the child already has an image that he has been hurt. 

K: Ah, no, no. I don’t know. We are asking. 
 
B: But suppose there was a child who made no image of himself. 
 
S: OK. Let’s assume he has no image. 
 
B: Then he cannot get hurt. 
 
K: He can’t be hurt. 
 
S: There I think you are in very hot water psychologically because a child... 
 
K: No, we said “suppose”. 
 
B: Not the actual child—but suppose there was a child who didn’t make an image 
of himself so he didn’t depend on that image for everything. The child you talked 
about depended on the image that his father loves him. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: And therefore when his father doesn’t love him, everything has gone, right? 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Therefore he is hurt. But if he has no image that he must have his father love 
him, then he will just watch his father. 
 
S: But let’s look at it a little more pragmatically. Here is the child and he is 
actually hurt. 
 
B: He can’t be hurt without the image. Who is going to get hurt? 
 
K: It is like putting a pin into the air. 
 
S: Now wait a minute, I am not going to let you guys get away with this! Here 
you have got this child vulnerable in the sense that needs psychological support. 
He has enormous tensions. 
 
K: Sir, agreed to all that. Such a child has an image. 
 
S: No, no image. He is simply not being biologically supported. 
 
K: No. No. 
 
B: Well, he may make an image of the fact that he is not biologically supported. 
You have to get the difference between the actual fact of what happens 

biologically and what he thinks of it. Right? Now I have seen a child sometimes 
drop suddenly, he really goes to pieces, not because he was dropped very far but 
because that sense of... 
 
K: Loss, insecurity. 
 
B: ...insecurity, because his mother was gone. It seemed as if everything had 
gone, right? And he was totally disorganized and screaming, but he dropped only 
about this far, you see. But the point is he had an image of the kind of security he 
was going to get from his mother. Right? 
 
S: That is the way the nervous system works. 
 
B: Well, that is the question—Is it necessary to work that way? Or is this the 
result of conditioning? 
 
K: This is an important question. 
 
S: Oh, terribly important. 
 
K: Because whether in America or in this country, children are running away 
from their parents. The parents seem to have no control over them. They don’t 
obey, they don’t listen. They are wild. And the parents feel terribly hurt. I saw on 
TV what is happening in America. One woman was in tears. She said, “I am his 
mother, he doesn’t treat me as a mother, he just orders me about.” He had run 
away half a dozen times. And this separation between parents and children is 
growing all over the world. They have no relationship between themselves, 
between each other. So what is the cause of all this, apart from sociological, 
economic pressures which make the mother go out to work and leave the child 
alone—we take that for granted—but much deeper than that? Is it that the parents 
have an image about themselves and insist on creating an image in the children? 
 
S: I see what you are saying. 
 
K: And the child refuses to have that image—he has his own image. So the battle 
is on. 
 
S: That is very much what I was saying when I said that initially the hurt of the 
child... 
 
K: We haven’t come to the hurt yet. 
 
S: Well, what is in that initial relationship between child... 
 
K: I doubt if they have any relationship. That is what I am trying to get at. 
 

S: I agree with you. There is something wrong with the relationship. 
 
K: Have they a relationship at all? Look, young people get married, or they don’t 
get married. They have a child by mistake, or intentionally, but young people are 
children themselves; they haven’t understood the universe, cosmos or chaos—
they just have this child. 
 
S: That’s right. That is what happens. 
 
K: And they play with it for a year or two and then say, “For God’s sake, I am 
fed up with this child”, and look elsewhere. And the child feels left, lost. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: And he needs security, from the beginning he needs security. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Which the parents do not give, or are incapable of giving—psychological 
security, the sense of “You are my child, I love you, I’ll look after you, I’ll see 
that throughout life you will behave properly”. They haven’t got that feeling. 
They are bored with it after a couple of years. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: Is it that they have no relationship right from the beginning, neither the 
husband, nor the wife, boy or girl? Is it only a sexual relationship, the pleasure 
relationship? Is it that they won’t accept the pain principle involved with the 
pleasure principle? 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: What I am trying to see is if there is actually any relationship at all, except a 
biological, sexual, sensual relationship. 
 
S: Well... 
 
K: I am questioning it, I am not saying it is so, I am questioning it. 
 
S: I don’t think it is so. I think they have a relationship but it is a wrong 
relationship. 
 
K: There is no wrong relationship. It is a relationship or no relationship. 
 
S: Well, then we will have to say they have a relationship. I think most parents 
have a relationship with their children. 

B: Suppose the parent and child have images of each other, and the relationship is 
governed by those images—the question is whether that is actually a relationship 
or not, or whether it is some sort of fantasy of relationship. 
 
K: A fanciful relationship. Sir, you have children—forgive me if I come back to 
you—you have children. Have you any relationship with them? In the real sense 
of that word. 
 
S: Yes. In the real sense, yes. 
 
K: That means you have no image about yourself. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And you are not imposing an image on them? 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: And the society is not imposing an image on them? 
 
S: There are moments like that... 
 
K: Ah, no. That is not good enough. It is like a rotten egg. 
 
S: This is an important point. 
 
B: If it is moments it is not so. It is like saying a person who is hurt has moments 
when he is not hurt, but he is sitting there waiting to explode when something 
happens. So he can’t go very far. It is like somebody who is tied to a rope, and as 
soon as he reaches the limits of that rope he is stuck. 
 
S: That is right. 
 
B: So you could say I am related as long as certain things are all right, but 
beyond that point it just sort of blows up. You see what I am driving at? That 
mechanism is inside there, buried, so it dominates me potentially. It is like the 
man who is tied to a rope and says there are moments when I can move wherever 
I like, but I can’t really because if I keep on moving I am bound to come to the 
end. 
 
S: That does seem to be what happens, in fact. There is a reverberation in which 
there is a yank-back. 
 
B: Either I come to the end of the cord, or else something yanks the cord. The 
person who is on the end of a cord is really not free ever. 
 

S: Well, that’s true, I mean I think that is true. 
 
B: You see in the same sense the person who has the image is not really related 
ever. 
 
K: Yes, that is just the whole point. You can play with it verbally, but the 
actuality is that you have no relationship. 
 
S: You have no relationship as long as it is the image. 
 
K: As long as you have an image about yourself you have no relationship with 
another. This is a tremendous revelation—you follow? It is not just an 
intellectual statement. 
 
S: I have the memory of times when I do have what I think is a relationship, yet 
one must be honest with you, and say that after such relationship there inevitably 
seems to be this yank-back. 
 
B: The end of the cord. 
 
S: Yes, a yank-back. You have a relationship with somebody but you will go just 
so far. 
 
K: Of course. That is understood. 
 
B: But then really the image controls it all the time because the image is the 
dominant factor. If you once pass that point, no matter what happens, the image 
takes over. 
 
K: So the image gets hurt, and the child, because you impose the image on the 
child. You are bound to because you have an image. Because you have an image 
about yourself you are bound to create an image in the child. 
 
S: That is right. 
 
K: You follow, you have discovered? And society is doing this to all of us. 
 
B: So you say the child is picking up an image just naturally, as it were, quietly, 
and then suddenly it is hurt? 
 
K: Hurt. That’s right. 
 
B: So the hurt has been prepared and preceded by this steady process of building 
an image? 
 

S: That’s right. There is evidence, for instance, that we treat boys differently 
from girls... 
 
K: No. Look at it: don’t verbalize it too quickly. 
 
B: You see, if the steady process of building an image didn’t occur there would 
be no basis, no structure, to get hurt. In other words the pain is due entirely to 
some psychological fact. Whereas I was previously enjoying the pleasure of 
saying, “My father loves me, I am doing what he wants”—now comes the pain—
“I am not doing what he wants, he doesn’t love me”. 
 
S: I don’t think we touched on the biological situation of the child feeling 
neglected. 
 
B: Well, if the child is neglected, he must pick up an image in that very process. 
 
K: Of course. If you admit, see it as a reality, that as long as the parents have an 
image about themselves they are bound to give that image to the child... 
 
S: Right. There is no question, as long as the parent is the image-maker and has 
an image, he can’t see the child. 
 
K: And therefore gives an image to the child. 
 
S: Right. He will condition the child to be something. 
 
K: You see, society is doing this to every human being. Religions, every culture 
around us is creating this image. And that image gets hurt. Now the next question 
is: Is one aware of all this? Which is part of our consciousness. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: The content of consciousness makes up consciousness. That is clear. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So one of the contents is the image-making, or maybe the major machinery 
that is operating, the major dynamo, the major movement. Being hurt, which 
every human being is—can that hurt be healed and never be hurt again? That is, 
can a human mind which has created the image, which has accepted the image, 
can that mind put away the image completely and never be hurt?—which means 
that a great part of consciousness is empty—it has no content. I wonder. 
 
S: Can it? I really don’t know the answer to that. 
 

K: Why? Who is the image-maker? What is the machinery or the process that is 
making images? I may get rid of one image and take on another. I am a Catholic, 
I am a Protestant, I am a Hindu, I am a Zen monk, I am this, I am that—you 
follow?—they are all images. 
 
S: Who is the image-maker? 
 
K: You see, after all, if there is an image of that kind how can you have love in 
all this? 
 
S: We don’t have an abundance of it. 
 
K: We don’t have it. 
 
S: That’s right. We have got a lot of images. That is why I say I don’t know. 
 
K: It is terrible, sir, to have these images—you follow? 
 
S: Right. I know about image-making, I see it. I see it even when you are talking 
about it. I can see that if I don’t make one image I will make another. 
 
K: Of course, sir. We are saying, Is it possible to stop the machinery that is 
producing images? And what is the machinery? Is it wanting to be somebody? 
 
S: Yes. It is wanting to be somebody, it is wanting to know—wanting to have. 
Somehow or other it seems to be wanting to handle the feeling that if I don’t 
have it I don’t know where I am. 
 
K: Being at a loss? 
 
S: Yes. The feeling that you are at a loss. Not to be able to rely on anything, not 
to have any support, breeds more disorder—you follow? 
 
B: That is one of the images... 
 
K: The image is the product of thought—right? 
 
S: It is organized. 
 
K: Yes, a product of thought. It may go through various forms of pressure, a 
great deal of conveyor belt, and at the end it produces an image. 
 
S: Right. No question. I agree with you there, yes. 
 
K: Can the machinery stop? Can thought which produces these images, which 
destroys all relationship so that there is no love—not verbally but actually no 

love—can it stop? When a man who has got an image about himself says, “I love 
my wife, or my children”, it is just sentiment, romantic, fanciful emotionalism. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: As it is now, there is no love in the world. There is no sense of real caring for 
somebody. 
 
S: That is true. 
 
K: The more affluent the worse it becomes. Not that the poor have this. I don’t 
mean that. Poor people haven’t got this either—they are concerned with filling 
their stomachs, and work, work, work. 
 
B: But still they have got lots of images. 
 
K: Of course. All these are the people who are correcting the world—right? Who 
are ordering the universe. So I ask myself, can this image-making stop? Stop, not 
occasionally, but stop. Because unless it does I don’t know what love means. I 
don’t know how to care for somebody. And I think that is what is happening in 
the world because children are really lost souls, lost human beings. I have met so 
many, hundreds of them now, all over the world. They are really a lost 
generation. As the older people are a lost generation. So what is a human being to 
do? What is the right action in relationship? Can there be right action in 
relationship as long as you have an image? 
 
S: No. 
 
K: Ah! Sir, this is something tremendous. 
 
S: That is why I was wondering. It seemed to me you made a jump there. You 
said all we know is images, and image-making. That is all we know. 
 
K: But we never said can it stop? 
 
S: We have never said can it stop—that is right. 
 
K: We have never said, for God’s sake if it doesn’t stop we are going to destroy 
each other. 
 
B: You could say that the notion we might stop is something more we know that 
we didn’t know before... 
 
K: It becomes another piece of knowledge. 
 
B: I was trying to say that when you say “all we know”, a block comes in. 

S: Right. 
 
B: You see, it is not much use to say “all we know”. If you say it is all we know 
then it can never stop. 
 
K: He is objecting to your use of “all”. 
 
S: I am grateful to you. 
 
B: That is one of the factors blocking it. 
 
S: Well, if we come down to it, what do we do with that question: Can it stop? 
 
K: I put that question to you. Do you listen to it? 
 
S: I listen to it—right. 
 
K: Ah, do you? 
 
S: It stops. 
 
K: No, no. I am not interested in whether it stops. Do you listen to the question, 
Can it stop? We now examine, analyse, this whole process of image-making—
the result of it, the misery, the confusion, the appalling things that are going on. 
The Arab has his image, the Jew, the Hindu, the Muslim, the Christian, the 
Communist. There is this tremendous division of images, of symbols. If that 
doesn’t stop, you are going to have such a chaotic world—you follow?—I see 
this, not as an abstraction, but as an actuality, as I see that flower. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And as a human being, what am I to do? Because I personally have no image 
about this. I really mean I have no image about myself, no conclusion, no 
concept, no ideal—none of these images. I have none. And I say to myself what 
can I do?—when everybody around me is building images and so destroying this 
lovely earth where we are meant to live happily in human relationship and look 
at the heavens and be happy about it. So what is the right action for a man who 
has an image? Or is there no right action? 
 
S: Let me turn it back. What happens with you when I say to you: Can it stop? 
 
K: I say, of course. It is very simple to me. Of course it can stop. You don’t ask 
me the next question: How do you do it? How does it come about? 
 

S: No, I just want to listen for a minute to when you say, “Yes, of course”. OK. 
Now how do you think it can stop? Let me put it to you straight—I have 
absolutely no evidence that it can, no experience that it can. 
 
K: I don’t want evidence. 
 
S: You don’t want any evidence? 
 
K: I don’t want somebody’s explanation. 
 
S: Or experience? 
 
K: Because they are based on images. Future image, or past image or living 
image. So I say: Can it stop? I say it can. Definitely. It is not just a verbal 
statement to amuse you. To me this is tremendously important. 
 
S: Well, I think we agree that it is tremendously important, but how? 
 
K: Not how. Then you enter into the question of systems, mechanical processes, 
which are part of our image-making. If I tell you how, you will say tell me the 
system, the method and I’ll do it every day and I’ll get the new image. 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: Now I see the fact of what is going on in the world. 
 
S: I am with you, yes. 
 
K: Fact. Not my reaction to it. Not romantic, fanciful theories of what it should 
not be. It is a fact that as long as there are images there is not going to be peace in 
the world, or love in the world—whether it be the Christ image, or the Buddha 
image or the Muslim image—you follow? There won’t be peace in the world. 
Right. I see it as a fact. Right? I remain with that fact. Finished. This morning we 
said that if one remains with the fact there is a transformation. That is, not let 
thought interfere with the fact. 
 
B: For then more images come in. 
 
K: More images come in. So our consciousness is filled with these images. 
 
S: Yes, that is true. 
 
K: I am a Hindu, a Brahmin, I am by tradition better than anybody else, I am the 
chosen people, I am the Aryan—you follow? I am an Englishman—all that is 
crowding my consciousness. 
 

B: When you say remain with the fact, one of the images that may come in is that 
it is impossible, that it can never be done. 
 
K: Yes, that is another image. 
 
B: In other words, if the mind could stay with that fact with no comment 
whatsoever... 
 
S: The thing that comes through to me when you say remain with the fact is that 
you are really calling for an action right there. 
 
K: Sir, it is up to you. You are involved in it. 
 
S: But that is different from remaining with it. 
 
K: Remain with that. 
 
S: To really see it. You know how that feels? It feels like we are always running 
away. 
 
K: So our consciousness, sir, is these images—conclusions, ideas... 
 
S: We are always running away. 
 
K: Filling, filling, and that is the essence of the image. If there is no image-
making what is consciousness? That is quite a different thing. 
 
B: Do you think we could discuss that next time? 
 
K: Yes. Tomorrow. 

DIALOGUE VI 
 
May 20—morning 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: Dr Bohm, as you are a well-known physicist, I would like to ask 
you, after these five dialogues we have had, what will change man? What will 
bring about a radical transformation in the total consciousness of human beings? 
 
Dr Bohm: Well, I don’t know that the scientific background is very relevant to 
that question. 
 
K: No, probably not, but after having talked together at length, not only now but 
in previous years, what is the energy—I am using energy not in any scientific 
sense but in the just ordinary sense—the vitality, the energy, the drive—which 
seems to be lacking? If I were listening to the three of us, if I were a viewer, I 
would say, “Yes, it is all very well for these philosophers, these scientists, these 
experts, but it is outside my field. It is too far away. Bring it nearer. Bring it 
much closer so that I can deal with my life.” 
 
B: Well, I think at the end of the last discussion we were touching on one point of 
that nature, because we were discussing images. 
 
K: Images, yes. 
 
B: And the self-image. And questioning whether we have to have images at all. 
 
K: Of course, we went into that. But, you see, as a viewer, totally outside, 
listening to you for the first time, the three of you, I would say, “How does it 
touch my life? It is all so vague and uncertain and it needs a great deal of 
thinking, which I am unwilling to do. So please tell me in a few words, or at 
length, what am I to do with my life. Where am I to touch it? Where am I to 
break it down? From where am I to look at it? I have hardly any time. I go to the 
office. I go to the factory. I have got so many things to do—children, a nagging 
wife, poverty—the whole structure of misery, and you sit there, you three, and 
talk about something which doesn’t touch me in the least. So could we bring it 
down to brass tacks, as it were, where I can grapple with it as an ordinary being? 
 
B: Well, could we consider problems arising in daily relationship as the starting 
point? 
 
K: That is the essence, isn’t it? I was going to begin with that. You see, my 
relationship with human beings is in the office, in the factory, on a golf course. 
 
B: Or at home. 
 

K: Or at home. And at home there is routine, sex, children (if I have children, if I 
want children), and the constant battle, battle, battle all my life. Insulted, 
wounded, hurt—everything is going on in me and around me. 
 
B: Yes, there is continual disappointment. 
 
K: Continual disappointment, continual hope, desire to be more successful, to 
have more money—more, more, more of everything. Now how am I to change 
my relationship? What is the raison d’être, the source of my relationship? If we 
could tackle that a little bit this morning, and then go on to what we were 
discussing, which was really much more—which is really very important—
which is not to have an image at all. 
 
B: Yes. But it seems, as we were discussing yesterday, that we tend to be related 
almost always through the image. 
 
K: Through the image. That’s right. 
 
B: You see I have an image of myself and of you as you should be in relation to 
me. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: And then that gets disappointed and hurt and so on. 
 
K: But how am I to change that image? How am I to break it down? I see very 
well that I have got an image and that it has been put together, constructed, 
through generations. I am fairly intelligent, I am fairly aware of myself, and I see 
I have got it. But how am I to break it down? 
 
B: Well, as I see it, I have got to be aware of that image, watch it as it moves. 
 
K: So I am to watch it? Am I to watch it in the office? 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: In the factory, at home, on the golf course?—because my relationships are in 
all these areas. 
 
B: Yes, I would say I have to watch it in all those places. 
 
K: I have to watch it all the time in fact. 
 
B: Yes. 
 

K: Now am I capable of it? Have I got the energy? I go through all kinds of 
miseries, and at the end of the day I crawl into bed. And you say I must have 
energy. So I must realize that relationship is of the greatest importance. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Therefore I am willing to give up certain wastages of energy. 
 
B: What kind of wastage? 
 
K: Drinking, smoking, useless chatter. Endless crawling from pub to pub. 
 
B: That would be the beginning, anyway. 
 
K: That would be the beginning. But you see I want all those, plus more—you 
follow? 
 
B: But if I can see that everything depends on this... 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: ...then I won’t go to the pub, if I see it interferes. 
 
K: So I must, as an ordinary human being, realize that the greatest importance is 
to have right relationship. 
 
B: Yes. It would be good if we could say what happens when we don’t have it. 
 
K: Oh, when I don’t have it, of course... 
 
B: Everything goes to pieces. 
 
K: Not only everything goes to pieces but I create such havoc around me. So can 
I, by putting aside smoke, drink, and endless chatter about this or that—can I 
gather that energy? Will I gather that energy which will help me to face the 
picture which I have, the image which I have? 
 
B: That means going into ambition also and many other things. 
 
K: Of course. You see I begin by obvious things, like smoking, drinking, the 
pub... 
 
Dr Shainberg: Let me just stop you here. Suppose my real image is that you are 
going to do it for me, that I can’t do it for myself. 
 

K: That is one of our favourite conditionings—that I can’t do it myself, therefore 
I must go to somebody to help me. 
 
S: Or I go to the pub because I am in despair because I can’t do it for myself and 
want to obliterate myself through drink, so that I no longer feel the pain of it. 
 
B: At least for the moment. 
 
S: That’s right. And also I am proving to myself that my image that I can’t do it 
for myself is right. By treating myself in such a way I am going to prove to you 
that I can’t do it for myself, so maybe you will do it for me. 
 
K: No, no. I think we don’t realize, any of us, the utter and absolute importance 
of right relationship. I don’t think we realize it. 
 
S: I agree with you. We don’t. 
 
K: With my wife, with my neighbour, with the office, wherever I am—and also 
with nature—I don’t think we realize a relationship which is easy, quiet, full, 
rich, happy—the beauty of it, the harmony of it. Now can we tell the ordinary 
viewer, the listener, the great importance of that? 
 
S: Let’s try. How can we communicate to somebody the value of a right 
relationship? You are my wife. You are whining, nagging me—right? You think 
I should be doing something for you when I am tired and don’t feel like doing 
anything for you. 
 
K: I know. Go to a party. 
 
S: That’s right. “Let’s go to a party. You never take me out. You never take me 
anywhere.” 
 
K: So how are you, who realize the importance of relationship, to deal with me? 
How? We have got this problem in life. 
 
B: I think it should be very clear that nobody can do it for me. Whatever 
somebody else does won’t affect my relationship. 
 
S: How are you going to make that clear? 
 
B: But isn’t it clear? 
 
S: It is not obvious. I, as the viewer, feel very strongly that you ought to be doing 
it for me. My mother never did it for me, somebody has got to do it for me. 
 

B: But isn’t it obvious that it can’t be done? It is just a delusion because whatever 
you do I will be in the same relationship as before. Suppose you live a perfect 
life. I can’t imitate it, so I’ll just go on as before, won’t I? So I have to do 
something for myself. Isn’t that clear? 
 
S: But I don’t feel able to do anything for myself. 
 
B: But can’t you see that if you don’t do anything for yourself it is inevitable that 
it must go on? Any idea that it will ever get better is a delusion. 
 
S: Can we say then that right relationship begins with the realization that I have 
to do something for myself? 
 
K: And the utter importance of it. 
 
S: Right. The utter importance. The responsibility I have for myself. 
 
K: Because you are the world. And the world is you. You can’t shirk that. 
 
B: Perhaps we could discuss that a bit because it may seem strange to the viewer 
to hear someone say “You are the world”. 
 
K: After all, you are the result of the culture, the climate, the food, the 
environment, the economic conditions, your grandparents—you are the result of 
all that—all your thinking is the result of that. 
 
S: I think you can see that. 
 
B: That’s right. That’s what you mean by saying you are the world. 
 
K: Of course, of course. 
 
S: Well I think you can see that in what I have been saying about the person who 
feels he is entitled to be taken care of by the world—the world is in fact moving 
in that direction... 
 
K: No, sir. This is a fact. You go to India, you see the same suffering, the same 
anxiety—and you come to Europe, to America, and in essence it is the same. 
 
B: Each person has the same basic structure of suffering and confusion and 
deception. Therefore if I say I am the world, I mean that there is a universal 
structure and it is part of me and I am part of that. 
 
K: Part of that, quite. So now let’s proceed from there. The first thing you have to 
tell me as an ordinary human being, living in this mad rat race, is, “Look, realize 
that the greatest, most important thing in life is relationship. You cannot have 

relationship if you have an image about yourself. Any form of image you have 
about another, or about yourself, prevents the beauty of relationship.” 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Yes. The image that I am secure in such and such a relation, for example, and 
not secure in a different situation, prevents relationship. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
B: Because I will demand of the other person that he put me in the situation that I 
think is secure, you see? 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But he may not want to. 
 
S: Right. So that if I have the image of a pleasurable relationship, I have what I 
call claims on the other person; in other words I expect him to act in such a way 
that he acknowledges that image. 
 
B: Yes. Or I may say that I have the image of what is just and right. 
 
S: In order to complete my image? 
 
B: Yes. For example, the wife says, “Husbands should take their wives out to 
parties frequently”—that is part of the image. Husbands have corresponding 
images and then those images get hurt. 
 
S: I think we have to be very specific about this. Each little piece of this is with 
fury. 
 
B: With energy. 
 
S: Energy and fury and the necessity to complete this image in relationship; 
therefore relationship gets forced into a mould. 
 
K: Sir, I understand all that. But you see most of us are not serious. We want an 
easy life. You come along and tell me: relationship is the greatest thing. I say, of 
course, quite right. And I carry on in the old way. What I am trying to get at is 
this: What will make a human being listen to this seriously even for two minutes? 
He won’t listen to it. If you went to one of the great experts on psychology, or 
whatever it is, he wouldn’t take time to listen to it. The experts have all got their 
own plans, their pictures, their images—they are surrounded by all this. So to 
whom are we talking? 
 

B: To whoever can listen. 
 
S: We are talking to ourselves. 
 
K: No. Not only that. To whom are we talking? 
 
B: Well, whoever is able to listen. 
 
K: That means somebody who is somewhat serious. 
 
B: Yes. And I think we may even form an image of ourselves as not capable of 
being serious. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
B: In other words that it is too hard. 
 
K: Too hard, yes. 
 
B: There is an image to say I want it easy, which comes from the image that this 
is beyond my capacity. 
 
K: Quite. So let’s move from there. We say that as long as you have an image, 
pleasant or unpleasant, created, put together by thought, there is no right 
relationship. That is an obvious fact. Right? 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Yes, and life ceases to have any value without right relationship. 
 
K: Yes, life ceases to have any value without right relationship. Now my 
consciousness is filled with these images. Right? And the images make my 
consciousness. 
 
S: That is right. 
 
K: Now you are asking me to have no images at all. That means no 
consciousness, as I know it now. Right, sir? 
 
B: Yes, well could we say that the major part of consciousness is the self-image? 
There may be some other parts but... 
 
K: We will come to that. 
 
B: We come to that later. But for now, we are mostly occupied with the self-
image. 

K: Yes. That is right. 
 
S: What about the self-image? And the whole way it generates itself? 
 
B: We discussed that before. It gets caught on thinking of the self as real. That is 
always implicit. Say, for example, the image may be that I am suffering in a 
certain way, and I must get rid of this suffering. There is always the implicit 
meaning in that that I am real, and therefore I must keep on thinking about this 
reality. And it gets caught in that feedback we were talking about—the thought 
feeds back and builds up. 
 
S: Builds up more images. 
 
B: More images, yes. 
 
S: So that is the consciousness... 
 
K: Wait. The content of my consciousness is a vast series of images, 
interrelated—not separated, but interrelated. 
 
B: But they are all centred on the self. 
 
K: On the self, of course. The self is the centre. 
 
B: The self is regarded as all important. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: That gives it tremendous energy. 
 
K: Now what I am getting at is this: you are asking me, who am fairly serious, 
fairly intelligent, asking me as an ordinary human being to empty that 
consciousness. 
 
S: Right. I am asking you to stop this image-making. 
 
K: Not only the image-making. You are asking me to be free of the self, which is 
the maker of images. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: And I say please tell me how to do it. And you tell me that the moment you 
ask me how to do it, you are already building an image, a system, a method. 
 
B: Yes, when you ask how am I to do it—you have already put ‘I’ in the middle. 
The same image as before with a slightly different content. 

K: So you tell me, never to ask how to do it because the “how” involves the me 
doing it. Therefore I am creating another picture. 
 
B: That shows the way you slip into it. When you ask how to do it, the word 
“me” is not there but it is there implicitly. 
 
K: Implicitly, yes. 
 
B: And therefore you slip in. 
 
K: So now you stop me and say proceed from there. What is the action that will 
free consciousness, even a corner of it, a limited part of it? I want to discuss it 
with you. Don’t tell me how to do it. I have understood that and I will never 
again ask how to do it. The how, as Dr Bohm explained, conveys implicitly the 
me wanting to do it, and the me is the factor of the image-maker. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: I have understood that very clearly. So then I say to you, I realize this—what 
am I to do? 
 
S: Do you realize it? 
 
K: Yes, sir. I know it. I know I am making images all the time. I am very well 
aware of it. Because I have discussed with you. I have gone into it. I have 
realized right from the beginning during these talks that relationship is the most 
important thing in life. Without that life is chaos. 
 
S: Got it. 
 
K: That has been driven into me. I see that every flattery and every insult is 
registered in the brain, and that thought then takes it over as memory and creates 
an image, and the image gets hurt. 
 
B: So the image is the hurt... 
 
K: ...is the hurt. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: So, Dr Bohm, what is one to do? What am I to do? There are two things 
involved in it—one is to prevent further hurts and the other is to be free of all the 
hurts that I have had. 
 
B: But they are both the same principle. 
 

K: I think there are two principles involved. 
 
B: Are there? 
 
K: One to prevent it, the other to wipe away the hurts I have. 
 
S: It is not just that I want to prevent the further hurt. It seems to me that you 
must first say how I am to be aware of how in fact I take flattery. I want you to 
see that if I flatter you, you get a big inner gush; then you get a fantasy about 
yourself. So now you have got an image of yourself as this wonderful person 
who fits the flattery. 
 
K: No, you have told me very clearly that it is two sides of the same coin. 
Pleasure and pain are the same. 
 
S: The same, exactly the same. 
 
K: You have told me that. 
 
S: That’s right. I am telling you that. 
 
K: I have understood it. 
 
B: They are both images. 
 
K: Both images, right. So please—you are not answering my question. How am 
I, realizing all this, I am a fairly intelligent man, I have read a great deal, an 
ordinary man—I personally don’t read so it is an ordinary man I am talking 
about—I have discussed this and I see how extraordinarily important all this is—
and I ask, how am I to end it? Not the method. Don’t tell me what to do. I won’t 
accept it because it means nothing to me—right, sirs? 
 
B: Well, we were discussing whether there is a difference between the stored-up 
hurts and the ones which are to come. 
 
K: That’s right. It is the first thing I have to understand. Tell me. 
 
B: Well, it seems to me that fundamentally they work on the same principle. 
 
K: How? 
 
B: Well, if you take the hurt that is to come my brain is already disposed to 
respond with an image. 
 
K: I don’t understand it. Make it much simpler. 
 

B: Well, there is no distinction really between the past hurts and the present one 
because they all come from the past, I mean come from the reaction of the past. 
 
K: So you are telling me, don’t divide the past hurt from the future hurt because 
the image is the same. 
 
B: Yes. The process is the same. I may just be reminded of the past hurt, and that 
is the same as somebody else insulting me. 
 
K: Yes, yes. So you are saying to me, don’t divide the past from the future hurt. 
There is only hurt. Therefore look at the image, not in terms of past hurts or 
future hurts but just look at that image which is both the past and the future. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Right? 
 
B: But we are saying look at the image, not at its particular content but its general 
structure. 
 
K: Yes, yes, that’s right. Now then my next question is: How am I to look at it? 
Because I have already an image with which I am going to look. You promise me 
by your words, not promise exactly, but give me hope that if I have right 
relationship I will live a life that will be extraordinarily beautiful, I will know 
what love is—therefore I am already excited by this idea. 
 
B: Then I have to be aware of an image of that kind too. 
 
K: Yes, yes. Therefore, how am I—that is my point—how am I to look at this 
image? I know I have an image, not only one image but several images, but the 
centre of that image is me, the I—I know all that. Now how am I to look at it? 
May we proceed now? Right. Is the observer different from that which he is 
observing? That is the real question. 
 
B: That is the question, yes. You could say that that is the root of the power of 
the image. 
 
K: Yes, yes. You see, sir, what happens? If there is a difference between the 
observer and the observed there is that interval of time in which other activities 
go on. 
 
B: Well, yes, in which the brain eases itself into something more pleasant. 
 
K: Yes. And where there is a division there is conflict. So you are telling me to 
learn the art of observing, which is: that the observer is the observed. 
 

B: Yes, but I think we could look first at our whole conditioning, which tells us 
that the observer is different from the observed. 
 
K: Different. Of course. 
 
B: We should perhaps look at that, because that is what everybody feels. 
 
K: That the observer is different. 
 
B: Ordinarily, when I am thinking of myself, that self is a reality, which is 
independent of thought, do you see? 
 
K: Yes, we think that it is independent of thought. 
 
B: And that the self is the observer who is a reality. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
B: Who is independent of thought and who is thinking, who is producing thought. 
 
K: But it is the product of thought. 
 
B: Yes. That is the confusion. 
 
K: Are you telling me, sir, that the observer is the result of the past? 
 
B: Yes. One can see that. 
 
K: My memories, my experiences—it is all the past. 
 
B: Yes, but I think the viewer may find it a little hard to follow that, if he hasn’t 
gone into it. 
 
S: Very hard, I think. 
 
K: Be fairly simple. 
 
S: What do you mean? 
 
K: Don’t you live in the past? Your life is the past. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You are living in the past. Right? 
 
S: That’s right, yes. 

K: Past memories, past experiences. 
 
S: Yes, past memories, past becomings. 
 
K: And from the past you project the future. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You hope that you will be good, that you will be different in future. It’s 
always from the past to the future. 
 
S: That’s right. That’s how it is lived. 
 
K: Now that past is the me, of course. 
 
B: But it does look as if it is something independent... 
 
K: Is it independent? 
 
B: It isn’t, but... 
 
K: I know, that is what we are asking. Is the me independent of the past? 
 
B: It looks as if the me is here looking at the past. 
 
K: The me is the product of the past. 
 
S: Right. I can see that. 
 
K: How do you see it? 
 
B: Intellectually. 
 
S: I see it intellectually. 
 
K: Then you don’t see it. 
 
S: Right. That is what I am coming to. 
 
K: You are playing tricks. 
 
S: I see it as an intellectual—that’s right, that’s right. I see it intellectually. 
 
K: Do you see this table intellectually? 
 
S: No. 

K: Why? 
 
S: There is an immediacy of perception there. 
 
K: Why isn’t there an immediacy of perception of a truth, which is that you are 
the past? 
 
S: Because time comes in. I imagine that I have gone through time. 
 
K: What do you mean imagine? 
 
S: I have an image of myself at three, I have an image of myself at ten and I have 
an image of myself at seventeen, and I say that they followed in sequence in 
time. I see myself having developed over that time. I am different now from what 
I was five years ago. 
 
K: Are you? 
 
S: I am telling you that that is how I have got that image. That image of a 
developmental sequence. 
 
K: I understand all that, sir. 
 
S: And I exist as a storehouse of memories, of accumulated incidents. 
 
K: That is, time has produced that. 
 
S: Right. I see that, right. 
 
K: What is time? 
 
S: I have just described it to you. Time is a movement... I have moved from the 
time I was three. 
 
K: From the past, it is a movement. 
 
S: That’s right. From three to ten, to seventeen. 
 
K: Yes, I understand. Now, is that movement an actuality? 
 
S: What do you mean by actuality? 
 
B: Or is it an image? Is it an image, or is it an actuality? I mean, if I have an 
image of myself as saying “I need this”, it may not be an actual fact—right? It is 
just... 
 

K: An image is not a fact. 
 
S: Right. But I feel... 
 
K: No, what you feel is like saying “my experience”. 
 
S: No, I am describing an actual... 
 
B: But that is the whole point about the image, that it imitates an actual fact, you 
get the feeling that it is real. In other words I feel that I am really there—an 
actual fact looking at the past, at how I have developed. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: But is it a fact that I am doing that? 
 
S: What do you mean? It is an actual fact that I get the feeling that I am looking. 
 
B: Yes, but is it an actual fact that that is the way it all is and was? 
 
S: No, it is not. I can see the incorrectness of my memory which constructs me in 
time. I mean, obviously I was much more at three than I can remember; I was 
more at ten than I can remember, and obviously there was much more going on 
at seventeen than I have in my memory. 
 
B: Yes, but the me who is here now is looking at all that. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: But is he really there and is he looking? That is the question. 
 
S: Is the me that is looking...? 
 
K: ...an actuality. As this table is. 
 
S: Well, let’s... 
 
K: Stick to it, stick to it. 
 
S: That is what I am going to do. What is an actuality is this development, this 
image of a developmental sequence. 
 
B: And the me who is looking at it? 
 
S: And the me who is looking at it, that’s right. 
 

B: But it may be, in fact it is, that the me who is looking at it is also an image as 
is the developmental sequence. 
 
S: You are saying then that this image of me is... 
 
K: ...is not reality. 
 
B: It is not a reality independent of thinking. 
 
K: So we must go back to find out what is reality. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Reality, we said, is everything that thought has put together. The table, the 
illusion, the churches, the nations—everything that thought has contrived is 
reality. But nature is not this sort of reality. It is not put together by thought, 
though it is nevertheless a reality. 
 
B: It is a reality independent of thought. But is the me who is looking, a reality 
independent of thought, like nature? 
 
K: That is the whole point. Have you understood? 
 
S: Yes. I am beginning to see. 
 
K: Sir, just let’s be simple. We said we have images; I know I have images and 
you tell me to look at them, to be aware of them, to perceive the image. Is the 
perceiver different from the perceived? That is all my question is. 
 
S: I know. I know. 
 
K: Because if he is different then the whole process will go on indefinitely—
right? But if there is no division, if the observer is the observed, then the whole 
problem changes. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Right? So is the observer different from the observed? Obviously not. So can I 
look at that image without the observer? And is there an image when there is no 
observer? Because the observer makes the image, the observer is the movement 
of thought. 
 
B: We shouldn’t call it the observer then because it is not looking. I think the 
language is confusing. 
 
K: The language is, yes. 

B: Because if you say it is an observer that implies that something is looking. 
 
K: Yes, quite. 
 
B: What you really mean is that thought is moving and creating an image as if it 
were looking, but nothing is being seen. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Therefore there is no observer. 
 
K: That is right. But put it round the other way: Is there a thinker without 
thought? 
 
B: No. 
 
K: Exactly. There you are. If there is no experiencer is there an experience? So 
you have asked me to look at my images, which is a very serious and very 
penetrating demand. You say look at them without the observer, because the 
observer is the image-maker, and if there is no observer, if there is no thinker, 
there is no thought—right? So there is no image. You have shown me something 
enormously significant. 
 
S: As you said the question changes completely. 
 
K: Completely. I have no image. 
 
S: It feels completely different. It’s as if there is a silence. 
 
K: So I am saying, my consciousness is the consciousness of the world, because, 
in essence, it is filled with the things of thought—sorrow, fear, pleasure, despair, 
anxiety, attachment, hope—it is a turmoil of confusion; a sense of deep agony is 
involved in it all. And in that state I cannot have any relationship with any human 
being. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So you say to me: To have the greatest and most responsible relationship is to 
have no image. You have pointed out to me that to be free of images, the maker 
of the image must be absent. The maker of the image is the past, is the observer 
who says “I like this”, “I don’t like this”, who says “my wife, my husband, my 
house”—the me who is in essence the image. I have understood this. Now the 
next question is: Are the images hidden so that I can’t grapple with them, can’t 
get hold of them? All you experts have told me that there are dozens of 
underground images—and I say, “By Jove, they must know, they know much 
more than I do, so I must accept what they say.” But how am I to unearth them, 

expose them? You see, you have put me, the ordinary man, into a terrible 
position. 
 
S: You don’t have to unearth them once it is clear to you that the observer is the 
observed. 
 
K: Therefore you are saying there is no unconscious. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: You, the expert! You, who talk endlessly about the unconscious with your 
patients. 
 
S: I don’t. 
 
K: You say there is no unconscious. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: I agree with you. I say it is so. The moment you see that the observer is the 
observed, that the observer is the maker of images, it is finished. 
 
S: Finished. Right. 
 
K: Right through. 
 
S: If you really see that. 
 
K: That’s it. So the consciousness which I know, in which I have lived, has 
undergone a tremendous transformation. Has it? Has it for you? And if I may ask 
Dr Bohm also—both of you, all of us—realizing that the observer is the 
observed, and that therefore the image-maker is no longer in existence, and so the 
content of consciousness, which makes up consciousness, is not as we know it—
what then? 
 
S: I don’t know how you say it... 
 
K: I am asking this question because it involves meditation. I am asking this 
question because all religious people, the really serious ones who have gone into 
this question, see that as long as we live our daily lives within the area of this 
consciousness—with all its images, and the image-maker—whatever we do will 
still be in that area. Right? One year I may become a Zen-Buddhist, and another 
year I may follow some guru, and so on and so on, but it is always within that 
area. 
 
S: Right. 

K: So what happens when there is no movement of thought, which is the image-
making—what then takes place? You understand my question? When time, 
which is the movement of thought, ends, what is there? Because you have led me 
up to this point. I understand it very well. I have tried Zen meditation, I have 
tried Hindu meditation, I have tried all the kinds of other miserable practices and 
then I hear you, and I say, “By Jove, this is something extraordinary these people 
are saying. They say that the moment there is no image-maker, the content of 
consciousness undergoes a radical transformation and thought comes to an end, 
except in its right place.” Thought comes to an end, time has a stop. What then? 
Is that death? 
 
S: It is the death of the self. 
 
K: No, no. 
 
S: It is self-destruction. 
 
K: No, no, sir. It is much more than that. 
 
S: It is the end of something. 
 
K: No, no. Just listen to it. When thought stops, when there is no image-maker, 
there is a complete transformation in consciousness because there is no anxiety, 
there is no fear, there is no pursuit of pleasure, there are none of the things that 
create turmoil and division. Then what comes into being, what happens? Not as 
an experience because that is out. What takes place? I have to find out, for you 
may be leading me up the wrong path! 

DIALOGUE VII 
 
May 20—afternoon 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: After this morning, as an outsider, you have left me completely 
empty, without any future, without any past, without any image. 
 
Dr Shainberg: That’s right. Somebody who was watching us this morning said, 
“How am I going to get out of bed in the morning?” 
 
K: I think that question of getting out of bed in the morning is fairly simple, 
because life demands that I act, not just stay in bed for the rest of my life. You 
see, I have been left, as an outsider who is viewing all this, who is listening to all 
this, with a sense of a blank wall. I understand what you have said very clearly. I 
have, at one glance, rejected all the systems, all the gurus, this meditation and 
that meditation. I have discarded all that because I have understood the meditator 
is the meditation. But have I solved my problem of sorrow, do I know what it 
means to love, do I understand what compassion is?—not just understand 
intellectually. At the end of these dialogues, after discussing with you all, 
listening to you all, have I this sense of astonishing energy which is compassion? 
Have I ended my sorrow? Do I know what it means to love somebody, to love 
human beings...? 
 
S: Actually. 
 
K: Actually. 
 
S: ...not just talk about it. 
 
K: No, no, I have gone beyond all that. And you haven’t shown me what death is. 
 
Dr Bohm: No. 
 
K: I haven’t understood a thing about death. You haven’t talked to me about 
death. So we will cover these things before we finish this evening. 
 
B: Could we begin with the question of death? 
 
K: Yes. Let’s begin with death. 
 
B: One point occurred to me about what we discussed this morning: We had 
come to the point of saying that when we see that the observer is the observed, 
that is death. Essentially that is what you said. Now this raises a question: If the 
self is nothing but an image what is it that dies? If the image dies that is nothing, 
it is not death—right? 
 

K: That’s right. 
 
B: So is there something real that dies? 
 
K: There is biological death. 
 
B: We are not discussing that at the moment. You were discussing some other 
kind of death. 
 
K: We were saying this morning, that if there are no images at all in my 
consciousness, there is death. 
 
B: That is the point. It is not clear. What is it that has died? 
 
K: The images have died. ‘Me’ is dead. 
 
B: But is that a genuine death? 
 
K: Ah, that is what I want to find out. Is it a verbal comprehension? 
 
B: Or, more deeply, is there something that has to die? Something real. In other 
words if an organism dies something real has died. But when the self dies... 
 
K: Ah, but I have accepted so far that the self has been an astonishingly real 
thing. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Then you three come along and tell me that that image is fictitious. I 
understand that, and I am a little frightened that when that dies, when there is no 
image, there is an ending to something. 
 
B: Yes, well what is it that ends? 
 
K: Ah, quite. What is it that ends? 
 
B: Is it something real that ends? You could say that an ending of an image is no 
ending at all—right? 
 
K: At all... 
 
B: If it is only an image that ends it is only an image of ending. What I am trying 
to say is that nothing much ends if it is only an image. 
 
K: Yes. That is what I want to get at. 
 

B: Is it? You know what I mean? 
 
K: If it is merely an ending of an image... 
 
S: ...then that is nothing much. 
 
B: It is like turning off the television. Is that what death is? Or is there something 
deeper that dies? 
 
K: Oh, very much deeper. 
 
B: Something deeper dies? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: How about the image-making process? 
 
K: No, no. I would say it is not the end of the image which is death, but 
something much deeper. 
 
B: But it is still not the death of the organism. 
 
K: Still not the death of the organism, of course. The organism will more or 
less... 
 
B: ...go on, up to a point. 
 
K: Up to a point, yes. There is disease, accident, old age. But death. The ending 
of the image is fairly simple, and fairly acceptable. But that is a very shallow 
pool. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: You have taken away the little water there is in the pool and there is nothing 
but mud left behind. That is nothing. So is there something much more? 
 
S: That dies? 
 
K: No. Not that dies, but to the meaning of death. 
 
S: Is there something more than the image that dies, or does death have a 
meaning beyond the death of the image? 
 
K: That is what we are asking. 
 
S: Is there something about death that is bigger than the death of the image? 

K: Obviously, it must be. 
 
B: Will this include the death of the organism, this meaning? 
 
K: The organism might go on, but eventually it comes to an end. 
 
B: Yes, but if we were to see what death means as a whole, universally, then we 
would also see what the death of the organism means. But is there some meaning 
also in the death of the self-image? The same meaning? 
 
K: That is only, I should say, a very small part. 
 
B: That is very small. 
 
K: That is a very, very small part. 
 
B: But there might be a process or a structure beyond the self-image that might 
die, that creates the self-image. 
 
K: Yes, that is thought. 
 
B: That is thought. Now are you discussing the death of thought? 
 
K: That again is only superficial. 
 
B: That is very small. 
 
K: Very small. 
 
B: Is there something beyond thought in this that...? 
 
K: That is what I want to get at. 
 
S: We are trying to get at the meaning of death... 
 
B: We are not quite there. 
 
S: ...which is beyond the death of the self, thought or the image. 
 
K: No, just look: the image dies, that is fairly simple. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: It is a very shallow affair. Then there is the ending of thought, which is dying 
to thought. 
 

B: You said thought is deeper than the image but still not very deep. 
 
K: Not very deep. Now is there something more? 
 
B: In what sense “more”? Something more that exists? Or something more that 
has to die? 
 
S: Is it something creative that happens? 
 
K: No, no. We are going to find out. 
 
B: But I mean your question is not clear when you say, “Is there something 
more?” 
 
K: Death must have something enormously significant. 
 
B: But are you saying that death has a meaning, a significance, for everything? 
For the whole of life? 
 
K: For the whole of life. 
 
B: It is not generally accepted, if we are thinking of the viewer, that death has 
that significance. As we live now death is... 
 
K: ...is at the end. 
 
B: ...is at the end and we try to forget about it. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Try to make it unobtrusive. 
 
K: But as you three have pointed out, my life has been in a turmoil, my life has 
been a constant conflict... 
 
B: Right. 
 
K: That has been my life. I have clung to the known and therefore death is the 
unknown, so I am afraid of it. And you come along and say, “Look, death is 
partly the ending of the image and the maker of the image, but death has much 
greater significance than merely this empty saucer.” 
 
B: Well, if you could make it more clear why it must have. 
 
S: Why must it? 
 

K: Is life just a shallow, empty pool? Empty mud at the end of it? 
 
S: Why would you assume it is anything else? 
 
K: I want to know. 
 
B: But even if it is something else we have to ask why is it that death is the key to 
understanding. 
 
K: Because it is the ending of everything. The end of reality and all my concepts, 
my images—the end of all the memories. 
 
B: But that is in the ending of thought, right? 
 
K: The ending of thought. It also means the ending of time. 
 
B: Ending of time. 
 
K: Time coming to a stop totally. There is no future in the sense of the past 
meeting the present and carrying on. 
 
B: Psychologically speaking. 
 
K: Yes, psychologically speaking, of course; we are speaking psychologically. 
Psychological ending to everything. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: That’s what death is. 
 
B: And when your organism dies then everything ends for that organism. 
 
K: Of course. When the organism dies it is finished. But wait a minute. If I don’t 
end the image, the stream of image-making goes on. 
 
B: It is not too clear where it goes on. In other people? 
 
K: It manifests itself in other people. That is, I die; the organism dies and at the 
last minute I am still with the image that I have. 
 
B: Yes, well then what happens to that? 
 
K: That image has its continuity with the rest of the images, your image, my 
image. 
 
S: Right. 

K: Your image is not different from mine. 
 
S: Right. We share that. 
 
K: No, no. Not share it. It is not different. It may be a little more frail, or have a 
little more colour, but essentially my image is your image. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: So there is this constant flow of image-making. 
 
B: Well, where does it take place? In people? 
 
K: It is there. It manifests itself in people. 
 
B: You feel it is in some ways more general, more universal? 
 
K: Yes, much more universal. 
 
B: That is rather strange. 
 
K: Eh? 
 
B: I say it is rather strange to think of that. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
S: It is there. Like a river, it is there. 
 
K: Yes, it is there. 
 
S: And it manifests itself in streams. 
 
B: In people. 
 
S: Which we call people. 
 
K: No, that stream is the maker of images and imagery. 
 
B: In other words you are saying that the image does not originate only in one 
brain, but is in some sense universal? 
 
K: Universal. Quite right. 
 
B: You are not only saying that it is just the sum of all the brains; you are 
implying something more? 

K: It is the effect of all the brains and it manifests itself in people as they are 
born. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Now is that all? Let’s say, yes. Does death bring about this sense of 
enormous, endless energy which has no beginning and no end? Life must have 
infinite depth. 
 
B: Yes, and it is death which opens that out. 
 
K: Death opens that up. 
 
B: But we say it is more than the death of the image-making. You see, this is not 
clear. Is it something real which is blocking that from realizing itself? 
 
K: Yes. It is blocking itself through images and the thought-maker. 
 
S: The image-making and thought-making are blocking this greater... 
 
K: Wait a minute. There are still other blocks, deeper blocks. 
 
B: That is what I was trying to get at. That there are deeper blocks that are real. 
 
K: That are real. 
 
B: And they really have to die. 
 
K: That is just it. 
 
S: Would that be like this stream that you were talking about...? 
 
K: There is a stream of sorrow, isn’t there? 
 
B: Is sorrow deeper than the image? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: That is important. 
 
K: It is. 
 
S: You think so? 
 
K: Don’t you? 
 

S: I do. 
 
K: Be careful, sir, this is very serious. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
B: Would you say sorrow and suffering are the same, just different words? 
 
K: Different words. 
 
S: Deeper than this image-making is sorrow. 
 
K: Isn’t it? Man has lived with sorrow a million years. 
 
B: Well, could we say a little more about sorrow? It is more than pain. 
 
K: Much more than pain. Much more than loss. Much more than losing someone. 
 
S: It is deeper than that. 
 
K: Much deeper than that. 
 
B: It goes beyond the image, beyond thought. 
 
K: Of course. It goes beyond thought. 
 
B: Beyond thought, and what we ordinarily call feeling. 
 
K: Of course. Feeling, thought. Now can that end? 
 
S: Before you go on—are you saying that the stream of sorrow is a different 
stream from the stream of image-making? 
 
K: No, it is part of the stream. 
 
S: Part of the same stream? 
 
K: The same stream but much deeper. 
 
B: Then are you saying that there is a very deep stream, and that image-making is 
on the surface of this stream? 
 
K: That’s all. 
 
B: Right. The waves on the surface, right? Could you say we have understood the 
waves on the surface of this stream, which we call image-making? 

K: Yes, that’s right. Image-making. 
 
B: And the disturbances in sorrow come out on the surface as image-making. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: So now we have got to go deep-sea diving! 
 
K: You know, sir, there is universal sorrow. 
 
B: Yes, but let’s try to make it clear. It is not merely that there is the sum of all 
the sorrow of different people... 
 
K: No, no. Could we put it this way? The waves on the river don’t bring 
compassion or love—compassion, love, we have said, are synonymous, so we 
will keep to the word “compassion”. The waves don’t bring this. What will? 
Without compassion human beings are destroying themselves. So does 
compassion come with the ending of sorrow, which is not the sorrow created by 
thought? 
 
B: In thought you have sorrow for the self—right? 
 
K: Yes. Sorrow for the self. 
 
B: Which is self-pity. 
 
K: Self-pity. 
 
B: And now you say there is another sorrow, a deeper sorrow. 
 
K: There is a deeper sorrow. 
 
B: Which is not merely the total sum but something universal. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: Can we spell that out? Go into it? 
 
K: Don’t you know it? I am just asking. Don’t you know, aren’t you aware of a 
much deeper sorrow than the sorrow of thought, of self-pity, the sorrow of the 
image? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
B: Is it sorrow for the fact that man is in this state which he can’t get out of? 
 

K: That is partly it. That means partly the sorrow of ignorance. 
 
B: Yes. Man is ignorant and cannot get out of it. 
 
K: Cannot get out of it. And the perception of that sorrow is compassion. 
 
B: All right. Then the non-perception is sorrow? 
 
K: Yes, yes, yes. Are we seeing the same thing? 
 
S: No, I don’t think so. 
 
K: Say, for instance, you see me in ignorance. 
 
B: Or I see the whole of mankind in ignorance. 
 
K: Mankind in ignorance. Ignorant in the sense we are talking about—that is, the 
maker of the image... 
 
B: Let’s say that if my mind is really right, good, clear, that should have a deep 
effect on me. 
 
S: What would have a deep effect on me? 
 
B: To see this tremendous ignorance, this tremendous destruction. 
 
K: We are getting at it. We are getting at it. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: We are getting at it. 
 
B: But then if I don’t fully perceive, if I start to escape the perception of it, I am 
in it too. 
 
K: Yes, in it too. 
 
B: The feeling is that universal sorrow is still something I can feel, is that what 
you mean to say? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Although I am not very perceptive as to what it means. 
 
K: No, no. You can feel the sorrow of thought. 
 

B: The sorrow of thought. But I can sense, or somehow be aware of the universal 
sorrow. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Right. 
 
S: You say universal sorrow is there whether you feel it... 
 
K: You can feel it. 
 
B: Feel it or sense it. 
 
K: Sorrow of man living like this. 
 
B: Is that the essence of it? 
 
K: I am just moving into it. Let’s go. 
 
B: Is there more to it than that? 
 
K: Much more to it. 
 
B: Then perhaps we should try to bring that out. 
 
K: I am trying to. You see me: I live the ordinary life, image, sorrow, fear, 
anxiety; I have the sorrow of self-pity. And you, who are “enlightened” (in 
quotes), look at me, and I say, “Aren’t you full of sorrow for me?”—which is 
compassion. 
 
B: I would say that is a kind of energy which is tremendously aroused because of 
this situation. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: But would you call it sorrow? Or compassion? 
 
K: Compassion, which is the outcome of sorrow. 
 
B: But have you felt sorrow first? I mean, does the enlightened person feel 
sorrow and then compassion? 
 
K: No. 
 
S: The other way? 
 

K: No, no. Go very carefully. You see, sir, you are saying that one must have 
sorrow first to have compassion. 
 
B: I am not. I am just exploring. 
 
K: Yes, you are exploring. Through sorrow you come to compassion. 
 
B: That is what you seem to be saying. 
 
K: Which implies that I must go through all the horrors of mankind... 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: Well, let’s say that the enlightened man sees this sorrow, sees this destruction, 
and he feels some tremendous energy—we will call it compassion. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Now does he understand that the people are in sorrow...? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: ...but he himself is not in sorrow. 
 
K: That’s right. That’s right. 
 
B: But he feels a tremendous energy to do something. 
 
K: Yes. Tremendous energy of compassion. 
 
S: Would you say then that the enlightened man perceives, or is aware of, the 
conflict, the awkwardness, the blundering, the loss of life, but that he is not 
aware of sorrow? 
 
K: No, sir. Dr Shainberg just listen. Suppose you have been through all this—
image, thought, the sorrow of thought, fears, anxieties, and you say, “I have 
understood all that”. But you have very little left. You have energy, but it is a 
very shallow business. And is life as shallow as all that? Or has it an immense 
depth? Depth is the wrong word. 
 
B: Well, yes, inwardness? 
 
K: Inwardness, yes. And to find that out don’t you have to die to everything 
known? 
 
B: But how does this relate to sorrow at the same time? 

K: I am coming to that. You might feel that I am ignorant, that I have my 
anxieties and fears. You are beyond it, you are on the other side of the stream as 
it were. Don’t you have compassion for me? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Compassion. Is that the result of the ending of sorrow, universal sorrow? 
 
B: Universal sorrow? You say the ending of sorrow. Now you are talking about 
the person who is in sorrow to begin with. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: And in him this universal sorrow ends? Is that what you are saying? 
 
K: No. More than that. 
 
B: More than that? Well, we have to go slowly because if you say the ending of 
universal sorrow, the thing that is puzzling is to say that it still exists, do you see? 
 
K: Eh? 
 
B: You say if the universal sorrow ends then it has all gone. 
 
K: Ah, it is still there. 
 
B: Still there. There is a certain puzzle in language. 
 
K: Yes, yes. 
 
B: So in some sense the universal sorrow ends, but in another sense it persists. 
 
K: Yes, that is right. 
 
B: Could we say that if you have an insight into the essence of sorrow, universal 
sorrow, then sorrow ends in that insight? Is that what you mean? 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. 
 
B: Although... 
 
K: Although it still goes on. 
 
S: I have got a deeper question. The question is... 

K: I don’t think you have understood. 
 
S: Oh, I think I have understood that one, but my question comes before, which is 
that the image-making has died—right? That is, the waves. Now I come into the 
sorrow. 
 
K: You have lost the sorrow of thought. 
 
S: Right. The sorrow of thought has gone but there is a deeper sorrow. 
 
K: Is there? Or are you assuming there is a deeper sorrow? 
 
S: I am trying to see what you are saying. 
 
K: No, no. I am saying: Is there compassion which is not related to thought? Or 
is that compassion born of sorrow? 
 
S: Born of sorrow? 
 
K: Born in the sense that when the sorrow ends there is compassion. 
 
S: OK. That makes it a little clearer. When the sorrow of thought... 
 
K: Not personal sorrow. 
 
S: No. When the sorrow... 
 
K: Not the sorrow of thought. 
 
B: Not the sorrow of thought, something deeper. 
 
S: Something deeper. When that sorrow ends then there is a birth of compassion. 
 
B: Of compassion, of energy. 
 
K: Now is there not a deeper sorrow than the sorrow of thought? 
 
S: There is. As you were saying, there is sorrow for ignorance which is deeper 
than thought—the sorrow for the universal calamity of mankind trapped in this 
sorrow, the sorrow for a continual repetition of wars and poverty and people 
mistreating each other, that’s a deeper sorrow. 
 
K: I understand all that. 
 
S: That is deeper than the sorrow of thought. 
 

K: Can we ask this question: What is compassion? Which is love. We are using 
that one word to cover a wide field. What is compassion? Can a man who is in 
sorrow, in thought, in the image—can he have that? He cannot. Actually he 
cannot—right? 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: Now when does that compassion come into being? Without that life has no 
meaning. You have left me without that. All you have taken away from me is 
superficial sorrow, thought and image-making. And I feel there is something 
much more. 
 
B: Just doing that leaves something empty. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: Meaningless. 
 
K: There is something much greater than this shallow little business. 
 
B: When we have thought which produces sorrow, self-pity, and when we also 
have the realization of the sorrow of mankind, could you say that the energy 
which is deeper is in some ways being...? 
 
K: ...moved. 
 
B: ...moved. Well, first of all in this sorrow this energy is... 
 
K: ...caught. 
 
B: ...is caught up in whirlpools or something. It is deeper than thought but there is 
some sort of very deep disturbance of the energy. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
B: Which we call deep sorrow. 
 
K: Deep sorrow. 
 
B: Ultimately its origin is the blockage in thought, isn’t it? 
 
K: Yes, that is deep sorrow of mankind. For centuries upon centuries it has been 
like that—you know, like a vast reservoir of sorrow. 
 
B: It is sort of moving around in some way that is disorderly. 
 

K: Yes. 
 
B: And preventing clarity. I mean perpetuating ignorance. 
 
K: Yes, perpetuating ignorance, right. 
 
B: Because if it were not for that then man’s natural capacity to learn would solve 
all these problems. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
S: Right, right. 
 
K: Unless you three give me, or help me, or show me, an insight into something 
much greater, I say, “Yes, this is very nice”, and off I go—you follow? What we 
are trying to do, as far as I can see, is to penetrate into something beyond death. 
 
B: Beyond death? 
 
K: Death we say is not only the ending of the organism, but the ending of the 
content of the consciousness—consciousness as we know it now. 
 
B: Is it also the ending of sorrow? 
 
K: The ending of sorrow of the superficial kind. That is clear. 
 
B: Yes. 
 
K: And a man who has gone through all that says, “That isn’t good enough. You 
haven’t given me the flower, the perfume. You have just given me the ashes of 
it.” And now we three are trying to find out that which is beyond the ashes. 
 
S: Right. 
 
B: There is that which is beyond death? 
 
K: Ah, absolutely. 
 
B: Would you say that is eternal, or... 
 
K: I don’t want to use that word. 
 
B: I mean is it in some sense beyond time? 
 
K: Beyond time. 
 

B: Therefore eternal is not the best word. 
 
K: There is something beyond the superficial death, a movement that has no 
beginning and no ending. 
 
B: But it is a movement? 
 
K: It is a movement. Movement, not in time. 
 
S: What is the difference between a movement in time, and a movement out of 
time? 
 
K: Sir, that which is constantly renewing, constantly—new isn’t the word—
constantly fresh, endlessly flowering, that is timeless. But this word flowering 
implies time. 
 
B: I think we can see the point. 
 
S: I think we get that, the feel of renewal in creation, and coming and going 
without transition, without duration, without linearity. 
 
K: Let me come back to it in a different way. Being a fairly intelligent man, 
having read various books, tried various meditations, at one glance I have an 
insight into all that, at one glance—which is the end of image-making. It is 
finished. I won’t touch it. Then a meditation must take place to delve, to have an 
insight, into something which the mind has never touched before. 
 
B: But even if you do touch, it doesn’t mean that the next time it will be known. 
 
K: Ah, it can never be known in a sense. 
 
B: It can never be known. It’s always new in some sense. 
 
K: Yes, it is always new. It is not a memory stored up, altered, changed, and 
called new. It has never been old. I don’t know if I can put it that way. 
 
B: Yes. I think I understand that. But could you say it is like a mind that has 
never known sorrow? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
B: It might seem puzzling at first. You move out of this state which has known 
sorrow into a state which has not known sorrow. 
 
K: Quite right, sir. 
 

B: In other words there is no you. 
 
K: That’s right, that’s right. 
 
S: Can we say it in this way too—that it is an action which is moving where there 
is no you? 
 
K: You see when you use the word “action”, it means not in the future, nor in the 
past; action is doing. 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: And most of our actions are the result of the past, or according to a future 
ideal. That’s not action, that is just conformity. 
 
S: Right. I am talking about a different kind of action. 
 
K: To penetrate into this, the mind must be completely silent. Otherwise you are 
projecting something into it. 
 
S: Right. It is not projecting into anything. 
 
K: Absolute silence. And that silence is not the product of control—wished for, 
premeditated, predetermined. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Therefore that silence is not brought about through will. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Now in that silence there is this sense of something beyond all time, all death, 
all thought—you follow? Nothing. Not a thing, you understand, nothing. And 
therefore empty and therefore tremendous energy. 
 
B: Is this also the source of compassion? 
 
K: That’s it. 
 
S: What do you mean by source? 
 
B: Well, in this energy is compassion... 
 
K: Yes, that is right. 
 
S: In this energy is... 

K: This energy is. 
 
B: Compassion. 
 
S: That’s different. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
S: This energy is compassion. You see that is different from saying the source. 
 
K: You see, beyond that there is something more. 
 
S: Beyond that? 
 
K: Of course. 
 
B: Why do you say of course? What could it be that is more? 
 
K: Sir, let us put it, approach it, differently. Everything thought has created is not 
sacred, is not holy. 
 
B: Because it is fragmented. 
 
K: It is fragmented. We know that putting up an image and worshipping it is a 
creation of thought. 
 
S: That’s right. 
 
K: Made by the hand, or by the mind, it is still an image. So in that there is 
nothing sacred. Because, as Dr Bohm pointed out, thought is fragmented, limited, 
finite; it is the product of memory and so on. 
 
B: Is the sacred, therefore, that which is without limit? 
 
K: That’s it. There is something beyond compassion. 
 
B: Beyond compassion. 
 
K: Which is sacred. 
 
B: Is it beyond movement? 
 
K: Sacred. You can’t say movement, or non-movement. A living thing—you can 
only examine a dead thing. 
 
S: Right. 

K: A living thing you can’t examine. What we are trying to do is to examine that 
living thing which we call sacred, which is beyond compassion. 
 
B: What is our relation to the sacred then? 
 
K: To the man who is ignorant there is no relationship—right? Which is true. To 
the man who is free of the image and the image-maker, it has no meaning yet—
right? It has meaning only when he goes beyond everything, dies to everything. 
Dying means never for a single second accumulating anything psychologically. 
 
S: But he asked the question: What is the relationship to the sacred? Is there ever 
a relationship to the sacred? 
 
K: No, no. He is asking what is the relationship between that which is sacred, 
holy, and reality. 
 
B: Well, that is implicit anyway. I mean that is implied. 
 
K: Of course. We have talked about this question some time ago. Reality, which 
is the product of thought, has no relationship to that because thought is an empty 
little affair. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Relationship comes through insight, intelligence and compassion. 
 
S: What is intelligence, I suppose we are asking. I mean, how does intelligence 
act? 
 
K: Wait, wait. You have had an insight into the image. You have had an insight 
into the movement of thought—the movement of thought which is self-pity, 
which creates sorrow. You have had a real insight into that. Haven’t you? It is 
not a verbal agreement or disagreement or a logical conclusion. You have had a 
real insight into that, into the waves of the river. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Now isn’t that insight intelligence? 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Which is not the intelligence of a clever man, we are not talking about that. 
Now work with that intelligence, which is not yours or mine, not Dr Shainberg’s 
or Dr Bohm’s, or somebody’s. That insight is universal intelligence, global or 
cosmic intelligence. Now move further into it. Have an insight into sorrow, 
which is not the sorrow of thought. Then out of that insight compassion. Now 

have insight into compassion. Is compassion the end of all life? End of all death? 
It seems so because the mind throws out all the burdens which man has imposed 
upon himself—right? So you have that tremendous feeling, that tremendous thing 
inside. Now that compassion, delve into it. And there is something sacred, 
untouched by man—in the sense of being untouched by his mind, by his 
cravings, by his demands, by his prayers, by his everlasting chicanery. And that 
may be the origin of everything, which man has misused—you follow? 
 
B: If you say it is the origin of all matter, all nature... 
 
K: Everything, all matter, all nature. 
 
B: All of mankind. 
 
K: Yes. That’s right, sir. So at the end of these dialogues, what have you, what 
has the viewer got, what has he captured? 
 
S: What would we hope he has got? Would you say what we hope he has 
captured, or what he has actually captured? 
 
K: What he has actually, not hope. What has he actually captured? Has his bowl 
filled? 
 
S: Filled with the sacred. 
 
K: Or does he say, “Well I have got a lot of ashes left, very kind of you, but I can 
get that anywhere”. Any logical, rational, human being would say, “They are 
discussing my part in all this and I am left with nothing”. 
 
S: What has he got? 
 
K: He has come to you—I have come to you three wanting to find out, wanting 
to transform my life, because I feel that is absolutely necessary, not just to get rid 
of my ambitions and all the silly stuff mankind has collected—I have emptied 
myself of all that—the I has died to all that. Now have I got anything out of all 
this? Have you given me the perfume of that thing? 
 
S: Can I give you the perfume? 
 
K: Or share it with me. 
 
S: Has the viewer shared with us the experience we have had being together? 
 
K: Have you two shared this thing with this man? 
 
S: Have we shared this with this man? 

K: If not, then what? A clever discussion—oh, we are fed up with that. You can 
only share when you are really hungry—burning with hunger. Otherwise you 
share words. So I have come to the point, we have come to the point, when we 
see that life has an extraordinary meaning. 
 
B: Yes, it has a meaning far beyond what we usually think. 
 
K: Yes, that is so shallow and empty. 
 
B: So would you say this sacred is also life? 
 
K: Yes, that’s what I was getting at. Life is sacred. 
 
B: And the sacred is life. 
 
S: Have we shared that? 
 
K: Have you shared that? So we mustn’t misuse life. We mustn’t waste it 
because our life is so short. 
 
B: You feel that each of our lives has a part to play in this sacred which you 
talked about? It is a part of the whole, and to use it rightly has a tremendous 
significance? 
 
K: Yes, quite right. But to accept it as a theory is as good as any other theory. 
 
S: Right. But somehow I feel troubled. Have we shared it? That burns, that 
question burns. Have we shared the sacred? 
 
K: Which really means that all these discussions, dialogues, have been a process 
of meditation. Not a clever argument, but a real penetrating meditation which 
brings insight into everything that is being said. 
 
B: Well, I should say we have been doing that. 
 
K: I think we have been doing that. 
 
S: And have we shared that? 
 
B: With whom? 
 
S: With the viewer? 
 
K: Ah, are you considering the viewer? Or is there no viewer at all? Are you 
speaking to the viewer, or only to that thing in which the viewer, you and I, and 
everything is? You understand what I am saying? 

S: You said we have been in a meditation, and I say we have been in a 
meditation—but how far have we shared our meditation? 
 
K: No. I mean has it been a meditation? 
 
S: Yes. 
 
K: Meditation is not just argument. 
 
S: No, we have shared in that. 
 
K: Seeing the truth of every statement. 
 
S: Right. 
 
K: Or the falseness of every statement. Or seeing in the false the truth. 
 
S: Right. Then being aware of the false in each of us as it comes out and is 
clarified. 
 
K: Seeing it all, and therefore we are in a state of meditation. And whatever we 
say must then lead to that ultimate thing. Then you are not sharing. 
 
S: Where are you? 
 
K: There is no sharing. It is only that. 
 
S: The act of meditation is that. 
 
K: There is only that. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II 
 
 
The substance of the public talks given in Ojai, 
California; Saanen, Switzerland; and Brockwood 
Park, England, during 1977. 

I 
 
Meditation is the emptying of 
the content of consciousness 
 
Meditation is one of the most important things in life; not how to meditate; not 
meditation according to a system; not the practice of meditation; but rather that 
which meditation is. If one can find out, very deeply, the significance, the 
necessity and the importance of it for oneself, then one puts aside all systems, 
methods, gurus, together with all the peculiar things that are involved in the 
Eastern type of meditation. 
It is very important to uncover for oneself what one actually is; not according 
to the theories and the assertions and experiences of psychologists, philosophers 
and the gurus, but rather by investigating the whole nature and movement of 
oneself; by seeing what one actually is. 
One does not seem to be able to understand how extraordinarily important it 
is to see what one is, actually, as though one is looking at oneself in a mirror, 
psychologically; thereby bringing about a transformation in the very structure of 
oneself. When one fundamentally, deeply, brings about such a transformation, or 
mutation, then that mutation affects the whole consciousness of man. This is an 
absolute fact, a reality. To bring about a fundamental transformation becomes 
very important, if one is at all serious, if one is concerned with the world as it is, 
with all its appalling misery, confusion and uncertainty, with all the divisions of 
religions and nationalities, with their wars, with their accumulation of 
armaments, spending enormous sums to prepare for war, to kill people, in the 
name of nationality and so on and so on. 
To see what one actually is, it is vital that there be freedom, freedom from the 
whole content of one’s consciousness; the content of consciousness being all the 
things put together by thought. Freedom from the content of one’s consciousness, 
from one’s angers and brutalities, from one’s vanities and arrogance, from all the 
things that one is caught up in, is meditation. The very seeing of what one is, is 
the beginning of the transformation. Meditation implies the ending of all strife, of 
all conflict, inwardly and therefore outwardly. Actually, there is no inward or 
outward, it is like the sea, there is the ebb and flow. 
In uncovering what one actually is, one asks: Is the observer, oneself, 
different from that which one observes?—psychologically that is. I am angry, I 
am greedy, I am violent; is that I different from the thing observed, which is 
anger, greed, violence? Is one different? Obviously not. When I am angry there is 
no I that is angry, there is only anger. So anger is me; the observer is the 
observed. The division is eliminated altogether. The observer is the observed and 
therefore conflict ends. 
Part of meditation is to eliminate totally all conflict, inwardly and therefore 
outwardly. To eliminate conflict one has to understand this basic principle; the 
observer is not different from the observed, psychologically. When there is 
anger, there is no I, but a second later thought creates the I and says: “I have been 

angry” and brings in the idea that I should not be angry. So there is anger and 
then the I who should not be angry; the division brings conflict. When there is no 
division between the observer and the observed, and therefore only the thing that 
is, which is anger, then what takes place? Does anger go on? Or is there a total 
ending of anger? When anger occurs and there is no observer, no division, it 
blossoms and then ends—like a flower, it blooms, withers and dies away. But as 
long as one is fighting it, as long as one is resisting it, or rationalizing it, one is 
giving life to it. When the observer is the observed, then anger blossoms, grows 
and naturally dies—therefore there is no psychological conflict in it. 
One lives by action; action according to a motive, according to an ideal, 
according to a pattern, or habitual and traditional action, all without any 
investigation. A mind that is in meditation must find out what action is. One of 
the major problems in one’s life is conflict and from conflict all kinds of neurotic 
activities arise. To end conflict and therefore to end neurotic action, is very 
important, so that one has a sane mind, a mind that is healthy, a mind that is not 
neurotically caught in beliefs and fears and so on. 
How does one act, according to what principle, according to what quality or 
state of mind does one act? Generally one acts from memory, the memory which 
is set in a pattern, which has become habit, routine. One acts according to that 
which is remembered as pleasant; or one acts according to an ideal one has 
determined to carry out in daily life; or one has an ambition which one tries to 
fulfil. There are various types of action and each of them is incomplete, 
fragmented; none is holistic—“I’m a businessman and I come home and I love 
my children, but when I’m at business, there, I do not love anybody, I want 
profit, etc. etc.; I may be a scholar, a painter, but my life—though I am an 
excellent painter—is shoddy, I’m vicious, greedy, wanting money, position, 
recognition, fame.” 
One’s actions are divided, fragmentary and when there is fragmentary action 
it must inevitably bring conflict, psychologically. Is there an action which is 
without conflict in which there are no regrets, no failures, no sense of frustration; 
is there an action which is whole, harmonious, complete, an action not in a 
particular field contrary to another field? One has to see what one is actually 
doing, how one is actually living a contradictory life, acting contradictorily and 
therefore in conflict. One must become aware of it. And if one is completely 
aware, then what takes place? 
Suppose I live in contradictory actions and you tell me, “Be aware of it”. 
What do you mean by being aware of it?—I ask. Awareness is not possible when 
you choose, when you say: “I like that particular action, I would like to keep that; 
please help me to avoid all other action.” That is not awareness; that is choosing 
a particular action which appears most satisfactory, most comforting, most 
gratifying, rewarding and so on. Where there is choice there is no complete 
awareness. If one is completely aware, there is no problem. There is then an 
action which is continuous, without any break and therefore holistic. It is to have 
a mind that is sane, which implies not being committed to any particular form of 
belief, dogma, or ideal, nothing. It is to have a mind able to think clearly, 
directly, objectively. In the process of meditation one comes to find that action. 

To find out what meditation is, all previous knowledge of what meditation is 
thought to be blocks the exploration. Freedom from psychological authority is 
absolutely necessary. What is necessary in the investigation? Is it concentration; 
is it attention or is it awareness? When one concentrates, one’s whole energy is 
focused on something particular, one resists and puts aside all interfering 
thoughts. In concentration one is resisting. But to be aware of one’s thought there 
is no concentration; one does not choose in awareness which thought one would 
like; one is just aware. From that awareness comes attention. In attention there is 
no centre from which one is attending. This is really important to understand, it is 
the essence of meditation. In concentration there is a centre from which one is 
concentrating, on a picture or on an idea or on some image, etc.; one is exercising 
energy in concentration, in resisting, building a wall, so that no other thought 
comes in and there must be conflict. To totally eliminate that conflict become 
choicelessly aware of thought; then there is no contradiction, no resistance about 
any thought. From that arises awareness; awareness of all the movement of one’s 
thought. Out of that awareness comes attention. When one is attending to 
something, really deeply, there is no centre; there is no me. 
In attention—if one has gone that far—one is free from all the travails of 
thought, its fears, agonies and despairs; that is the foundation. The content of 
one’s consciousness is being emptied; it is being freed. Meditation is the 
emptying of the content of consciousness. That is the meaning and the depth of 
meditation, the emptying of all the content—thought coming to an end. 
Meditation is the attention in which there is no registration. Normally the 
brain is registering almost everything, the noise, the words which are being 
used—it is registering like a tape. Now is it possible for the brain not to register 
except that which is absolutely necessary? Why should I register an insult? Why? 
Why should I register flattery? It is unnecessary. Why should I register any 
hurts? Unnecessary. Therefore, register only that which is necessary in order to 
operate in daily life—as a technician, a writer and so on—but psychologically, 
do not register anything. In meditation there is no registration psychologically, no 
registration except the practical facts of living, going to the office, working in a 
factory and so on—nothing else. Out of that comes complete silence, because 
thought has come to an end—except to function only where it is absolutely 
necessary. Time has come to an end and there is a totally different kind of 
movement, in silence. 
Religion then has a totally different meaning, whereas before it was a matter 
of thought. Thought made the various religions and therefore each religion is 
fragmented and in each fragment there are multiple subdivisions. All that is 
called religion, including the beliefs, the hopes, the fears and the desire to be 
secure in another world and so on, is the result of thought. It is not religion, it is 
merely the movement of thought, in fear, in hope, in trying to find security—a 
material process. 
Then what is religion? It is the investigation, with all one’s attention, with the 
summation of all one’s energy, to find that which is sacred, to come upon that 
which is holy. That can only take place when there is freedom from the noise of 
thought—the ending of thought and time, psychologically, inwardly—but not the 

ending of knowledge in the world where you have to function with knowledge. 
That which is holy, that which is sacred, which is truth, can only be when there is 
complete silence, when the brain itself has put thought in its right place. Out of 
that immense silence there is that which is sacred. 
Silence demands space, space in the whole structure of consciousness. There 
is no space in the structure of one’s consciousness as it is, because it is crowded 
with fears—crowded, chattering, chattering. When there is silence, there is 
immense, timeless space; then only is there a possibility of coming upon that 
which is the eternal, sacred. 

II 
 
The ending of conflict is the 
gathering of supreme energy which 
is a form of intelligence 
 
There is the theory of old, that god, divinity, descends on man and helps him to 
grow, to evolve and to live nobly. That is the old tradition of the countries in the 
East and also in a different way, in the West. In belief in such theories there is 
great comfort; a feeling that one is at least secure in something; that there is 
somebody that is looking after you and the world. That is a very old theory and it 
has no meaning whatsoever. That theory and teaching gives some kind of hope in 
a Utopia in the future as made by the present; a hope arising from the limits of 
what one is now. Unless there is a radical transformation, such a future is the 
modified continuity of “what is”. 
One realizes that there is no security whatsoever in the things that thought has 
put together if one has gone into it sufficiently intelligently, rationally and sanely 
to find out; one sees that there is really no structure, either in the future, or in the 
past, or in the present, philosophical, religious, or ideological, which can give 
any kind of security whatsoever. 
One accepts very easily the path that is the most satisfying, the most 
convenient, the most pleasurable. It is very easy to move into that groove. And 
authority dictates, lays down, in a religious or a psychological system, a method 
by which, or through which, you are told you will find security. But if one sees 
that there is no security in any such authority, then one can find out whether it is 
possible to live without any guidance, without any control, without any effort 
psychologically. So, one is going to investigate, to see, whether the mind can be 
free to find the truth of this matter, so that one will never, under any 
circumstance, conform to any pattern of authority, psychologically. 
When one is conforming to a pattern, religious, psychological, or the pattern 
which one has set for oneself, there is always a contradiction between what one 
actually is and the pattern. There is always a conflict and this conflict is endless. 
If one has finished with one pattern one goes to another. One is educated to live 
in this field of conflict because of these ideals, patterns, conclusions, beliefs and 
so on. Conforming to a pattern one is never free; one does not know what 
compassion is and one is always battling and therefore giving importance to 
oneself; the self becomes extraordinarily important with the idea of self-
improvement. 
So, is it possible to live without a pattern? Now, how is one, as a human 
being, the total representative of all mankind, how is one going to find out the 
truth of this matter? Because if one’s consciousness is changed radically, 
profoundly—no, revolutionized rather than changed—then one affects the 
consciousness of the whole of mankind. 
How is one going to go into this problem; with what capacity does one 
investigate? To investigate there must be freedom from motive. If one wants to 

investigate the question of authority, one’s background says: I must obey, I must 
follow; and in the process one’s background is always projecting, is always 
distorting one’s investigation. Can one be free of one’s background so that it 
does not interfere in any way with one’s investigation? One’s urgency to find the 
truth, one’s immediacy, one’s demand, puts the background in abeyance; one’s 
intensity to find out is so strong that the background ceases to interfere. Although 
the background, one’s education, one’s conditioning, is so strong—it has 
accumulated for centuries; consciously one cannot fight it, one cannot push it 
aside; one cannot battle with it and one sees that to fight the background only 
intensifies the background—yet one’s very intensity to find out the truth of 
authority puts that background much further away; it is no longer impinging on 
one’s mind. 
One needs to have tremendous energy to find out the truth of this matter. 
Mostly, this energy is dissipated in the conflict between “what is” and “what 
should be”. One sees that “what should be” is an escape from, or an avoidance 
of, the fact of “what is”. Or thought, incapable of meeting “what is”, projects 
“what should be” and uses that as a lever to try to remove “what is”. So is it 
possible to look at, to observe, “what is”, without any motive to change or to 
transform it, or to make it conform to a particular pattern that you or another has 
established—whatever may happen at the end of it? If one does, the background 
fades away. If one is very intense to understand, one forgets oneself, forgets one 
is a Hindu, a Christian, a Buddhist, one forgets all one’s background; therefore 
the whole thing disappears, the background, the motive, everything, because 
there is the present necessity and the urgency to find out. 
The intensity that is necessary can only come into being when there is no 
cause and no effect and therefore no reaction. It implies that one must be 
completely alone in one’s investigation. Aloneness does not mean isolation, it 
does not mean one is withdrawn and has built a wall around oneself. Alone 
means that one is all one. Then one is a total human being representing all 
humanity, one’s consciousness has undergone a change through perception, 
which is the awakening of intelligence. That intelligence finishes forever with 
psychological authority; it profoundly affects one’s consciousness. 
Is it possible to live a life without any pattern, without any goal, without any 
idea of the future, a life without conflict? It is only possible when one lives 
completely with “what is”. With “what is” means with that which is actually 
taking place. Live with it; do not try to transform it, do not try to go beyond it, do 
not try to control it, do not try to escape from it, just look at it, live with it. If you 
are envious, or greedy, jealous, or you have problems, sex, fear, whatever they 
are, live with them without any movement of thought that wants to move away 
from them. Which means what? One is not wasting one’s energy in control, in 
suppression, in conflict, in resistance, in escape. All that energy was being 
wasted; now one has gathered it up. Because one sees the absurdity of it, the 
falseness of it, the unreality of it, one has now the energy to live with “what is”; 
one has that energy to observe without any movement of thought. It is the 
thought that has created jealousy and thought that says: “I must run away from it, 
I must escape from it, I must suppress it.” If one sees that falseness of escape, 

resistance, suppression, then that energy which has gone into escape, resistance 
and suppression is gathered to observe. Then what takes place? 
One is not escaping, not resisting and then one is envious, the envy being the 
result of the movement of thought. The envy arises from comparison, 
measurement—I have not, you have. And thought, because it has been educated 
to run away, runs away from this thing. Now because one sees the falseness of it 
one stops and one has the energy to observe this envy. That very word “envy” is 
its own condemnation. When one says “I am envious”, there is already a sense of 
pushing it away. So, one must be free of the influence of the word to observe. 
And this demands tremendous alertness, tremendous watchfulness, awareness, so 
as not to escape and so as to see that the word envy has created the feeling; for 
without the word, is there the feeling? If there is no word and therefore no 
movement of thought, then is there envy? 
The word has created the feeling because the word is associated with the 
feeling, it is dictating the feeling. Can one observe without the word? Now, 
words are the movement of thought used to communicate—communicate with 
oneself, or with another—when there are no words there is no communication 
between the fact and the observer. Therefore the movement of thought as envy 
has come to an end; come to an end completely, not temporarily—one can look 
at a beautiful car and observe the beauty of its lines and that is the end of it. 
To live with “what is” completely, implies no conflict whatsoever. Therefore 
there is no future as transforming it into something else. The very ending of it is 
the gathering of supreme energy which is a form of intelligence. 

III 
 
Out of negation comes the 
positive called love 
 
Throughout the world human beings are always seeking security, both 
physiological and psychological. Physical security is denied when psychological 
security—which does not really exist—is sought in various forms of illusion and 
in divisive beliefs, dogmas, religious sanctions and so on. Where there are these 
psychological divisions, there must inevitably be physiological division with all 
its conflicts, wars and the suffering and the tragedy and the inhumanity of man to 
man. Wherever one goes in the world, it does not matter whether it is in India, 
Europe, Russia, China or America, human beings, psychologically, are more or 
less the same; they suffer, they are anxious, uncertain, confused, often in great 
pain, ambitious, fighting each other everlastingly. 
Basically, psychologically, as all human beings are the same one can with 
reason say that the world is oneself and one is the world. That is an absolute fact, 
as one can see when one goes into it very deeply. And the content of human 
consciousness is the whole movement of thought and the desire for power, 
position, security and the pursuit of pleasure in which there is fear. Fear and 
pleasure are the two sides of the same coin. Without understanding the whole 
structure and nature of pleasure, based on desire, one will never understand and 
live a life in which there is love. 
Fear and the pursuit of pleasure are part of consciousness. But is love also a 
part of consciousness? When there is fear, is there love? When there is the mere 
pursuit of pleasure, is there love? Is love pleasure and desire, or has it nothing 
whatsoever to do with pleasure and desire? 
One’s brain, through the constant habit of seeking security has become 
mechanical; mechanical in the sense of following certain definite patterns, 
repeating these patterns over and over again in the routine of daily life. There is 
the repetition of pleasure and the burden of fear and the inability to resolve it. So, 
gradually, the brain, or part of the brain, has become mechanical, repetitive, 
biologically as well as psychologically; one is caught in certain patterns of belief, 
dogma, ideology—the American ideology, the Russian ideology, the ideology of 
India and so on. There is the direction, the pursuit, and the mind and the brain 
deteriorate. 
However pleasant, the life one lives is a life that is repetitive; however 
desirable, however complex, it is a repetitive life—the same belief from 
childhood to death, the same rituals, whether it is church or temple, there is the 
tradition of it, over and over again. There is the repetition of pleasure, sexual 
pleasure or the pleasure of achievement, the pleasure of possession, the pleasure 
of attachment, all these cause the brain to deteriorate because they are repetitive. 
So long as there is the pursuit of pleasure as a repetitive process and the burden 
of fear which it brings and which man has not resolved—he has run away from 
it, escaped from it, rationalized it, but still it remains—the brain deteriorates. 

What is love? Is it pleasure—pleasure in the repetitive sexual act, which is 
generally called love? The love of one’s neighbour, the love of one’s wife, in 
which there is great pleasure, possession and comfort, based on desire—is that 
love? Where there is possessive attachment to another, there must be jealousy, 
there must be fear and antagonism. These are obvious facts—nothing 
extraordinary or ideological—they are facts, “what is”. So is attachment love? 
And what is the basis of attachment? Why is one attached to something, to 
property, to an idea, to an ideology, to a person, to a symbol, to a concept which 
is called God? If one does not fully understand the significance of attachment, 
then one will never be able to find the truth of love. Is not the basis of attachment 
the fear of being alone, the fear of being isolated, the emptiness, the sense of 
insufficiency in oneself? 
We are attached to people, to ideas, to symbols, or to concepts, because in 
them we think there is security. Is there security in any relationship? Is there 
security—which is really the essence of attachment—in one’s wife, or husband? 
And if one seeks security in the wife or the husband and so on, then what takes 
place? One possesses, legally or not legally. And where there is possession there 
must be fear of losing—therefore jealousy, hatred, divorce and all the rest of it. 
Is love attachment? Can there be love when there is attachment; with all the 
implications of that word which include fear, jealousy, guilt, irritation leading to 
hatred?—all that is implied when one uses the word “attachment”. Where there is 
attachment can there be love? These are factual, not theoretical, questions. One is 
dealing with daily life, not with some extraordinary life. One can only go very 
deeply and very far if one begins very near, which is oneself. If one does not 
understand oneself one cannot move far. One is delving into problems which are 
tremendously important in one’s daily life. 
Although one has to go into this question logically, rationally, sanely, one has 
to go beyond it; because logic is not love, reason is not love. The desire to be 
loved and to love is not love. Out of the negation of what is not love, every 
moment of one’s life, out of the putting aside of what is not love, comes the 
positive thing called love. 
Thought is fragmentary, limited; thought cannot solve the problem of what 
love is and thought cannot cultivate love. When one makes an abstraction in 
thought, one moves away from “what is”. That movement of abstraction becomes 
a condition according to which one lives, therefore one no longer lives according 
to facts. This is what one has done all one’s life; but one will never know what 
love is through abstraction, will not know the enormous beauty, depth and 
significance of love. 
Why does man put up with this suffering? Why worship suffering, which the 
Christians do, apparently? What is the meaning of suffering? What is it that 
suffers? When one says “I suffer,” who is it that suffers? What is the centre that 
says “I am in an agony of jealousy, of fear, of loss”? What is that centre, that 
“essence”, of a human being who says “I suffer”? Is it the movement of thought, 
as time, which creates the centre? How does that I come into being, which, 
having come into being says, “I suffer, I am anxious, I am frightened, I am 
jealous, I am lonely”. That I is never stationary, it is always moving: “I desire 

this, I desire that and then I desire something else”, it is in constant movement. 
That movement is time, that movement is thought. 
There is a concept in the Asiatic world that the I is something which is 
beyond time; and further, the concept that there is a higher I still. In the Western 
world the I has never been thoroughly examined. Qualities have been attributed 
to it, Freud and Jung and other psychologists have given attributes to it but have 
never gone into this question of the nature and the structure of the I which says “I 
suffer”. 
The I, as one observes, says “I must have that”, a few days later it wants 
something else. There is the constant movement of desire; the constant 
movement of pleasure; the constant movement of what one wants to be and so 
on. This movement is thought as psychological time. The I who says “I suffer” is 
put together by thought. Thought says, “I am John, I am this, I am that”. Thought 
identifies itself with the name and with the form and is the I in all the content of 
consciousness; it is the essence of fear, hurt, despair, anxiety, guilt, the pursuit of 
pleasure, the sense of loneliness, all the content of consciousness. When one says 
“I suffer”, it is the image that thought has built about itself, the form, the name, 
that is in sorrow. 
The more intense the challenge is, the greater is the energy demanded to meet 
it. Sorrow is this challenge. To that challenge one has to respond. But if one 
responds to it by escaping from it, by seeking comfort from it, then one is 
dissipating the energy that one needs to meet this thing. 
There is no escape—there is no escape because if one tries to escape, sorrow 
is always there, like one’s shadow, like one’s face, it is always with one—so 
remain with it, without any movement of thought. If one runs away from it, one 
has not solved it; but if one remains with it, not identifying oneself with it—
because one is that suffering—then all your energy is present to meet this 
extraordinary thing that happens. Out of that suffering comes passion. 
There is a solution, there is an ending to sorrow—as there is an ending to 
fear—completely. Then only is there a possibility to know what love is. One 
thinks that one will learn something from suffering, that there is a lesson to be 
learnt from suffering. But when one observes suffering in oneself, not escaping 
from it, but remaining with it totally, completely, without any movement of 
thought, without any alleviation, comfort, but just completely holding to it, then 
one will see a strange psychological transformation take place. 
Love is passion, which is compassion. Without that passion and compassion, 
with its intelligence, one acts in a very limited sense; all one’s actions are 
limited. Where there is compassion that action is total, complete, irrevocable. 

IV 
 
Death—a great act of purgation 
 
Death is something not only mysterious but a great act of purgation. That which 
continues in a repetitive pattern is degeneration. The pattern may vary according 
to country, according to climate, according to circumstance, but it is a pattern. 
Moving in any pattern brings about a continuity and that continuity is part of the 
degenerating process of man. When there is an ending of continuity, something 
new can take place. One can understand it instantly if one has understood the 
whole movement of thought, of fear, hate, love—then one can grasp the 
significance, instantly, of what death is. 
What is death? When one asks that question, thought has many answers. 
Thought says: “I do not want to go into all the miserable explanations of death.” 
Every human being has an answer to it, according to his conditioning, according 
to his desire, his hope. Thought always has an answer. The answer will 
invariably be intellectual, verbally put together by thought. But one is examining, 
without having an answer, something totally unknown, totally mysterious—death 
is a tremendous thing. 
One realizes that the organism, the body, dies and the brain—having in life 
been misused in various forms of self-indulgence, contradiction, effort, constant 
struggle, wearing itself out mechanically, for it is a mechanism—also dies. The 
brain is the repository of memory; memory as experience, as knowledge. From 
that experience and knowledge, stored up in the cells of the brain, as memory, 
thought arises. When the organism comes to an end, the brain also comes to an 
end, and so thought comes to an end. Thought is a material process—thought is 
nothing spiritual—it is a material process based on memory held in the cells of 
the brain; when the organism dies, thought dies. Thought creates the whole 
structure of the me—the me that wants this, the me that does not want that, the 
me that is fearful, anxious, despairing, longing, lonely—fearful of dying. And 
thought says: “What is the value, what is the significance of life for a human 
being who has struggled, experienced, acquired, lived in such an ugly, stupid, 
miserable way and then for it to end?” So, thought then says: “No, this is not the 
end, there is another world.” But that other world is still merely the movement of 
thought. 
One asks what happens after death. Now ask quite a different question: What 
is before death?—not what is after death. What is before death, which is one’s 
life. What is one’s life? Go to school, to college, university, get a job, man and 
woman live together, he goes off to the office for 50 years, she goes off earning 
more money, they have children, pain, anxiety, each fighting. Living such a 
miserable life one wants to know what is after death—about which volumes have 
been written, all produced by thought, all saying, “Believe”. So, if one puts all 
that aside, literally, actually, puts it all aside, then what is one faced with?—the 
actual fact that oneself who is put together by thought, comes to an end—all 
one’s anxieties, all one’s longings come to an end. When one is living, as one is 
living now, with vigour, with energy, with all the travail of life, can one live 

meeting death now? I am living in all vigour, energy and capacity, and death 
means an ending to that living. Now, can I live with death all the time? That is: I 
am attached to you; end that attachment, which is death—is it not? One is greedy 
and when one dies, one cannot carry greed with one; so end the greed, not in a 
week’s time, or ten days’ time—end it, now. So one is living a life full of vigour, 
energy, capacity, observation, seeing the beauty of the earth and also the ending 
of that instantly, which is death. So to live before death is to live with death; 
which means that one is living in a timeless world. One is living a life in which 
everything that one acquires is constantly ending, so that there is always a 
tremendous movement, one is not fixed in a certain place. This is not a concept. 
When one invites death, which means the ending of everything that one holds, 
dying to it, each day, each minute, then one will find—not “one”, there is then no 
oneself finding it, because one has gone—then there is that state of a timeless 
dimension in which the movement we know as time, is not. It means the 
emptying of the content of one’s consciousness so that there is no time; time 
comes to an end, which is death. 

V 
 
Action which is skilful and which 
does not perpetuate the self 
 
We have become very skilful in dealing with our daily life; skilful, in the sense 
of being clever in applying a great deal of knowledge which we have acquired 
through education and through experience. We act skilfully, either in a factory, or 
in a business and so on. That skill becomes, through repetitive action, routine. 
Skill, when it is highly developed—as it should be—leads to self-importance and 
self-aggrandizement. Skill has brought us to our present state, not only 
technologically but in our relationships, in the way we deal with each other—not 
clearly, not with compassion, but with skill. Is there an action, in our daily life, 
which is skilful yet which does not perpetuate the self, the me, which does not 
give importance to oneself and to one’s self-centred existence? Is it possible to 
act skilfully without strengthening the self? To answer that one has to enquire 
into what clarity is; when there is clarity there is action which is skilful and 
which does not perpetuate the self. 
Clarity exists only when there is freedom to observe. One is only capable of 
observing, looking, watching, when there is complete and total freedom; 
otherwise there is always distortion in the observation. Is it possible to be free of 
all the distorting factors in one’s outlook? When one observes oneself, or 
another, or society, the environment, the whole cultural, political and religious 
movements that are going on in the world—the so-called religious movements—
can one do so without any prejudice, without taking any side, without projecting 
one’s own personal conclusions, one’s beliefs and dogmas, one’s experience and 
knowledge and be totally free to observe clearly? 
One may describe what compassion is in the most eloquent and poetic 
manner but in whatever words it is expressed, those words are not the thing. 
Without compassion there is no clarity; without clarity there is no selfless skill—
they are interrelated. Can one have this extraordinary sense of compassion in 
one’s daily life, not as a theory, not as an ideal, not something to be achieved, to 
be practised and so on, but to have it totally, completely, at the very root of one’s 
being? 
Can there be clarity? One can be very clear in one’s thinking, in its 
objectivity, rationality, sanity; but such thinking, however logical, however 
objective, is very limited. And one sees that such logical, objective thinking has 
not solved our problems; the philosophers, the scientists, the so-called religious 
people, have thought very clearly about certain things, but in daily life, clear 
thinking has not resolved our most important issues. One may think very clearly 
about one’s envy or violence, but that does not bring about the ending of envy or 
violence. Clear thinking is limited because it is thought and thought itself is 
limited, conditioned. Thought itself has its own boundary; it may try to go 
beyond that boundary by inventing a logos, a deity or a Utopian State and so on, 
but these inventions are still limited because thought is the product of memory, 

experience and knowledge and it is always from the past and therefore time-
bound. Is it possible to see the limitations of thought and give it its right place? 
Giving the right place to thought brings clarity. 
To understand the whole meaning and the depth of compassion one has to 
investigate the movement of one’s consciousness. Wherever one goes in the 
world, east or west, north or south, human beings have great anxiety and live in 
uncertainty, always seeking security in some form or another—physiologically or 
psychologically. And they are full of violence, right through the world; this is an 
extraordinary phenomenon—violence, greed, envy, hatred. In consciousness 
there is the good and the bad; the bad is increasing; it is increasing because the 
good has become static, the good is not flowering. One has accepted certain 
patterns of what is thought to be good and one lives according to those patterns. 
So, the good, instead of flowering, is withering and thereby giving strength to the 
bad. There is more violence, more hatred, there are more national and religious 
divisions, there is every form of antagonism, right through the world. It is on the 
increase because the good is not flowering. Now, be aware of this fact without 
any effort; the moment one makes effort one gives importance to the self, which 
is the bad. Just observe the actual fact of the bad without any effort, observe it 
without any choice—because choice is a distorting factor. When one observes so 
openly, so freely, then the good begins to flower. It is not that one pursues the 
good and thereby gives it strength to flower but when the bad, the evil, the ugly, 
is understood, completely, the other naturally flowers. 
We have strengthened in our consciousness, through great development of 
skill, the structure and the nature of the self. The self is violence, the self is 
greed, envy and so on. They are of the very essence of the self. As long as there 
is the centre as the me, every action must be distorted. Acting from a centre you 
are giving a direction, and that direction is distortion. You may develop a great 
skill in this way but it is always unbalanced, inharmonious. Now, can 
consciousness with its movement undergo a radical transformation, a 
transformation not brought about by will? Will is desire, desire for something 
and when there is desire there is a motive, which is again a distorting factor in 
observation. In our consciousness there is this duality, the good and the bad. We 
are always looking with the eyes of the good and also with the eyes of the bad, so 
there is a conflict. Now to eliminate conflict altogether is only possible when you 
observe without any choice. Just observe yourself. In that way you eliminate the 
conflict between the good and the bad. 

VI 
 
Reason and logic alone 
will not discover truth 
 
Reason and logic have not solved our human problems, and we are going to find 
out if there is quite a different approach to all the problems and travails of life. 
We shall come upon something that is beyond reason; for reason has not solved 
any of our political, economic or social problems; nor has it solved the intimate 
human problems between two people. It becomes more and more obvious that we 
live in a world that is going to pieces, that has become quite insane, quite 
disorderly and a dangerous place to live in. Up to a point we must reason 
together, logically, sanely, holistically; then, perhaps, beyond that point, we shall 
be able to find a different state, a different quality of mind, not bound by any 
dogma, by any belief, by any experience and therefore a mind that is free to 
observe and through that observation see exactly “what is” and also find that 
there is energy to transform it. 
One must not start from any conclusion, from any belief, from any dogma 
which conditions the mind, but from a mind that is free to observe, to learn, to 
move and act. Such a mind is a compassionate mind for compassion has no 
cause; it is not a result. Compassion comes when the mind is free and it brings 
about a fundamental psychological revolution. That psychological revolution is 
what we are concerned with from the beginning to the end. 
So we will begin by asking ourselves: What is it that we are seeking? 
Physical comfort? Physical security? Deep down, is there the demand or desire to 
be totally secure in all our activities; in all our relationships to be stable, certain, 
permanent? We cling to experience that gives us a certain quality of stability, or 
to a certain identification which gives us a sense of permanency, well-being. In a 
belief there is security; in identification with a particular dogma, political or 
religious, there is security. If we are aged, we find security or happiness in the 
remembrance of things past, in the experiences that we have known, in the love 
that we have had, and we cling to the past. And if we are young and cheerful we 
are satisfied for the moment, not thinking about the future or the past. But 
gradually youth slips into old age with the desire to be secure, with the anxiety of 
uncertainty, of not being able to depend on anything or anybody, yet desiring 
deeply to have something secure to cling to. 
We have to examine closely whether there is psychological security at all. 
And if there is no psychological security will a human being go insane; will he 
become totally neurotic, because he has no security? Probably the majority of 
human beings are somewhat neurotic. A Communist, a Catholic, Protestant or 
Hindu, each is secure in his belief; he has no fear because he clings to it. And 
when you begin to investigate, or question, or reason with him he stops at a 
certain point and will not examine further, it is too dangerous, he feels his 
security is being threatened; then communication ceases. He may reason, think 
logically up to a certain point but is incapable of breaking through to a different 

dimension altogether; he is stuck in a groove and will not investigate anything 
else. Does that really give security? Does thought, which has created all these 
beliefs, dogmas, experiences, divisions, give security? We function with thought; 
all our activity is based on thought, horizontal or vertical; whether you are 
aspiring to great heights it is the movement of thought vertically; or whether you 
are merely satisfied to bring about a social revolution and so on it is the 
horizontal movement of thought. So does thought fundamentally, basically, give 
security, psychologically? Thought has its place; but when thought assumes that 
it can bring about psychological security then it is living in illusion. Thought 
wanting ultimate security has created a thing called god; and humanity clings to 
that idea. Thought can create every kind of romantic illusion. And when the 
mind, psychologically, seeks security in the dogma of the Church, or some other 
dogmatic assertion, or whatever it is, it is seeking security in the structure of 
thought. 
Thought is the response of experience and knowledge, stored up in the brain 
as memory; that response is therefore always moving from the past. Now, is there 
security in the past? Please use your reason, logic, all your energy to find out. 
Can any activity of thought, which is essentially of the past, give security? 
Follow the sequence of it; in that which it has created it seeks security and that 
security is of the past. Thought, though it may project the future, says: “I am 
going to attain godhood”, yet that movement of thought is essentially from the 
past. Or, recognizing there is no security in the past, thought then projects an 
idea, an idealistic state of mind and finds security in the hope of that in the 
future. 
A human being, throughout life, depends on thought and the things that 
thought has put together as being most essential, holiness, unholiness, morality, 
immorality and so on. Someone comes along and says: “Now look, all that is the 
movement of the past.” Having reasoned with him, logically, the other says: 
“Why not, what is wrong with holding on to thought even though it is of the 
past?”; he acknowledges it, and says: “I’ll hold to it, what is wrong?” Yet when 
the human mind lives in the past and when it holds to the past, then it is 
incapable of living, or perceiving truth. 
We come to a certain point and we say: “Yes, I see and I recognize logically, 
that in those things there is no security and when they are questioned there is 
fear.” And when we say we see that, what do we mean by that word “see”? Is it 
merely a logical understanding, a verbal understanding, a linear understanding, or 
is it an understanding which is so profound that that very understanding breaks 
down, without any effort, the whole movement of thought? When you say: “I 
understand what you are saying”, what do you mean by that word “understand”? 
Do you mean you understand the English words? Is it an understanding of the 
words, the meaning of the words, the explanation of the words and therefore an 
understanding only at a very superficial level? Or, is it that, when you say “I 
understand”, you mean you actually “see”, or observe the truth as to what 
thought is; you actually feel, taste, observe in your blood as it were, that thought, 
whatever it creates, has no security? You “see” the truth of it and therefore you 
are free of it. Seeing the truth of it is intelligence. Such intelligence is not reason, 

logic, or the very careful dialectical explanation; the latter is merely the 
exposition of thought in various forms; and thought is never intelligent. The 
perception of the truth is intelligence; and in that intelligence there is complete 
security. That intelligence is not yours or mine; that intelligence is not 
conditioned—we have finished with all that. We have seen that thought in its 
very movement creates conditioning and when you understand that movement, 
that very understanding is intelligence. In that intelligence there is security, from 
that there is action. 
We may talk about this question in different ways, in different fields, such as 
fear, pleasure, sorrow, death, meditation, but the essence of it is this: thought is 
the movement from the past, therefore of time and therefore measurable. That 
which is measurable can never find the immeasurable, which is truth. That can 
only take place when the mind actually sees the truth that whatever thought has 
created, in that there is no security; the very observation of that is intelligence. 
When there is that intelligence then it is all finished. Then you are out of this 
world, though you are living in it; though trying to do something in it, you are 
completely an outsider. 

VII 
 
Intelligence, in which there is 
complete security 
 
Wherever one goes in the world, India, Europe and America, one sees great 
sorrow, violence, wars, terrorism, killing, drugs—every kind of stupidity. One 
accepts these as though inevitable and easily puts up with them, or one revolts 
against them; but revolt is a reaction, as Communism is a reaction to Capitalism 
or Fascism. 
So, without revolting, without going against everything and forming one’s 
own little group, or without following a guru from India or from elsewhere, 
without accepting any kind of authority—because in spiritual matters there is no 
authority—can we investigate these problems that human beings have had, 
centuries upon centuries, generation after generation, these conflicts, 
uncertainties, travails, all the things that human beings go through during life 
only to end in death, without understanding what it is all about? 
Psychologically, inwardly, every human being, whoever he is, is the world. 
The world is represented in oneself and oneself is the world. That is a 
psychological, absolute fact; though one may have a white skin and another a 
brown or black skin, be affluent or very poor, yet inwardly, deep down, we are 
all the same; we suffer loneliness, sorrow, conflict, misery, confusion; we depend 
on someone to tell us what to do, how to think, what to think; we are slaves to 
propaganda from the various political parties and religions, and so on. That is 
what is happening all over the world inwardly; deep down, we are slaves to the 
propaganda of the experts, of the governments and so on, we are conditioned 
human beings, whether we live in India, Europe or America. 
So, one is actually, psychologically, the world and the world is oneself. Once 
one realizes this fact, not verbally, not ideologically or as an escape from fact, 
but actually, deeply feel the fact, realize the fact, that one is not different from the 
other—however far away he is—inwardly he suffers greatly and is terribly 
frightened, uncertain, insecure, then one is not concerned with one’s little self, 
one is concerned with the total human being. One is concerned with the total 
human being—not with Mr X or Y or somebody else—but with the total 
psychological entity as a human being, wherever he lives. He is conditioned in a 
particular way; he may be a Catholic, a Protestant, or he may be conditioned by 
thousands of years of certain kinds of beliefs, superstitions, ideas and gods, as in 
India, but below that conditioning, in the depth of his mind, when alone, he is 
facing the same life of sorrow, pain, grief and anxiety. When one sees this as an 
actual, irrevocable fact, then one begins to think entirely differently and one 
begins to observe, not as an individual person having troubles and anxieties, but 
whole, entire. It gives one an extraordinary strength and vitality; one is not alone, 
one is the entire history of mankind—if one knows how to read that history 
which is enshrined in one. This is not rhetoric but a serious factor one is deeply 
concerned with, a fact which one denies, because one thinks one is so 

individualistic. One is so concerned with oneself, with one’s petty problems, with 
one’s little guru, with one’s little beliefs; but when one realizes this extraordinary 
fact, then it gives one tremendous strength and a great urgency to investigate and 
transform oneself, because one is mankind. When there is such transformation, 
one affects the whole consciousness of man because one is the entire humanity; 
when one changes fundamentally, deeply, when there is this psychological 
revolution in one, then naturally, as one is part of the total consciousness of the 
human being, which is the rest of humanity, its consciousness is affected. So, one 
is concerned to penetrate the layers of one’s consciousness and to investigate 
whether it is possible to transform the content of that consciousness so that out of 
that transformation a different dimension of energy and clarity may come into 
being. 
A human being, who is representative of the world, who is the world, 
psychologically, what is his innermost demand? In one part of his consciousness 
it is to find both biological and psychological security; he must have food, 
clothes and shelter—that is an absolute necessity. But also he demands, craves, 
and searches for psychological security—to have psychological certainty about 
everything. The whole struggle in the world, both physiologically and 
psychologically, is to find security. 
Security means physical permanency, physically to be well, to continue, 
advance, grow, and also it means psychological permanency. Everything, 
psychologically, if one observes very carefully, is very impermanent; one’s 
relationships, psychologically, are most uncertain. One may be temporarily 
secure in one’s relationship with another, man or woman, but it is only 
temporary. That very temporary security is the ground of complete insecurity. 
So one asks: is there any security, psychologically, at all? One seeks 
psychological security in the family—the family being the wife, the children. 
There one tries to find a relationship that will be secure, lasting, permanent—all 
relative, because there is always death. And, not always finding it—there are 
divorces, quarrels and all the misery, jealousies, anger, hatred that goes on—one 
tries to find security in a community, with a group of people, large or small. One 
tries to find security in the nation—I’m an American, I’m a Hindu—that gives a 
tremendous sense of apparent security. But when one tries to find security, 
psychologically, in a nation, that nation is divided from another nation. Where 
there is division between nations—in one of which one has invested 
psychologically one’s security—there are wars, there are economic pressures. 
That is what is actually going on in the world. 
If one seeks security in an ideology—the Communist ideology, the Capitalist 
ideology, the religious ideologies, with their dogmas, images—there is division; 
one believes in one set of ideals which one likes, which give one comfort, in 
which one seeks security with a group of people who believe the same thing, yet 
another group believes another thing and from them one is divided. Religions 
have divided people. The Christians, the Buddhists, the Hindus, the Muslims, 
divide; they are at each other, each believing something extraordinary, romantic, 
unrealistic, unreal, not factual. 

Seeing all this—not as something to be avoided or to become supercilious or 
intellectual about—seeing all this very clearly, one asks, is there psychological 
security at all? And, if there is no psychological security, then does it become 
chaos? One loses one’s identity—one has been identified with a nation, America, 
or with Jesus, with Buddha and so on—when reason, logic, makes it clear how 
absurd all this is. Does one despair because one has observed the fallacy of these 
divisive processes, the unreality of these fictions, myths, fantasies which have no 
basis? The very perception of all this is intelligence—not the intelligence of a 
clever, cunning mind, not the intelligence of book knowledge, but the 
intelligence which comes out of clear observation. In that intelligence, brought 
about by this clear observation, there is security; that very intelligence is secure. 
But one will not let go, one is too afraid to let go lest one does not find 
security. One can let go of being a Catholic, Protestant, Communist, and so on, 
fairly easily. But when one does let go, when one cleanses oneself of all this, 
either one does it as a reaction, or one does it because one has observed 
intelligently, holistically, with great clarity, the absurdity of the fantasies and the 
make-belief. Because one observes without any distortion, because one is not out 
to get something from it, because one is not thinking in terms of punishment and 
reward, because one observes very clearly, then that very clarity of perception is 
intelligence. In that there is extraordinary security—not that you become secure, 
but intelligence is secure. 
One has come to the absolute fact—not relative fact—the absolute fact that 
there is no psychological security in anything that man has invented; one sees 
that all our religions are inventions, put together by thought. When one sees that 
all our divisive endeavours, which come about when there are beliefs, dogmas, 
rituals, which are the whole substance of religion, when one sees all that very 
clearly, not as an idea, but as a fact, then that very fact reveals the extraordinary 
quality of intelligence in which there is complete, whole security. 

VIII 
 
In negation the positive is born 
 
We are dealing with the facts of daily life, our way of living. Most of us abstract 
from those facts ideas and conclusions which become our prisons. We may 
ventilate those prisons but still we live there and go on making further 
abstractions of facts there. We are not dealing with ideas, exotic philosophies, or 
with abstract conclusions. We are going into problems that require a great deal of 
care and about which we must be very serious—because the house is burning. 
The Communist world is pressing in all the time, constraining us to believe in 
certain ideologies and if we do not we can be sent either to a concentration camp 
or a mental hospital. That is gradually closing in. If you are aware of the world 
situation, of what is happening in the world economically, socially, politically, of 
the preparation for wars, you become extremely serious; it is not a thing to play 
around with, you have to act. 
Most of us are mediocre—we just go half way up the hill. Excellence means 
going to the very top of it and we are asking for excellence. Otherwise we shall 
be smothered, destroyed, as human beings, by the politicians, by the ideologists, 
whether they are Communists, Socialists and so on. We are demanding of 
ourselves the highest form of excellence. That excellence can only come into 
being when there is clarity and compassion without which the human mind will 
destroy human beings, destroy the world. 
We are exercising reason, clear objective thinking, and logic, but they 
themselves do not bring about compassion. We must exercise the qualities that 
we have, which are reason, careful observation and from those the excellency of 
clear sight to examine the various contents of consciousness, in which 
compassion does not exist; there may be pity in them, sympathy and tolerance, 
there may be the desire to help, there may be a form of love, but all these are not 
compassion. 
Is compassion or love, pleasure? What is the significance and the meaning of 
pleasure, which every human being is seeking and pursuing at any cost? What is 
pleasure? There is the pleasure derived from possessions; the pleasure derived 
from a capacity or talent; the pleasure when you dominate another; the pleasure 
of having tremendous power, politically, religiously or economically; the 
pleasure of sex; the pleasure of the great sense of freedom that money gives. 
There are multiple forms of pleasure. In pleasure there is enjoyment, and further 
on there is ecstasy, the taking delight in something and the sense of ecstasy. 
“Ecstasy” is to be beyond yourself. There is no self to enjoy. The self—that is the 
me, the ego, the personality—has all totally disappeared, there is only that sense 
of being outside. That is ecstasy. But that ecstasy has nothing whatsoever to do 
with pleasure. 
You take a delight in something; the delight that comes naturally when you 
look at something very beautiful. At that moment, at that second, there is neither 
pleasure, nor joy, there is only that sense of observation. In that observation the 
self is not. When you look at a mountain with its snow cap, with its valleys, its 

grandeur and magnificence, all thought is driven away. There it is, that greatness 
in front of you and there is delight. Then thought comes along registering as 
memory what a marvellous and lovely experience it was. Then that registration, 
that memory, is cultivated and that cultivation becomes pleasure. Whenever 
thought interferes with the sense of beauty, the sense of the greatness of 
anything, a piece of poetry, a sheet of water, or a lonely tree in a field, it is 
registration. But, to see it and not register it—that is important. The moment you 
register it, the beauty of it, then that very registration sets thought into action; 
then the desire to pursue that beauty, which becomes the pursuit of pleasure. One 
sees a beautiful woman, or man; instantly it is registered in the brain; then that 
very registration sets thought into motion and you want to be in her or his 
company and all that follows. Pleasure is the continuation and the cultivation in 
thought of a perception. You have had sexual experience last night, or two weeks 
ago, you remember it and desire the repetition of it, which is the demand for 
pleasure. 
It is the function of the brain to register; in registration it is secure, it knows 
what to do and from that there is the development of skill. That skill in its turn 
becomes a great pleasure as a talent, a gift; it is the movement, the continuation 
of thought through desire and pleasure. 
Is it possible to register only that which is absolutely necessary and not 
register anything else? Take a very simple thing: most of us have had physical 
pain of some sort or another; that pain is registered and the brain says, tomorrow, 
or a week later, I must be very careful not to have that pain again. Physical pain 
is distorting; you cannot think clearly when there is great pain. It is the function 
of the brain to register that pain so as to safeguard itself from doing things that 
will bring about pain. It must register and then there is the fear of that pain 
happening again later—that registration has caused fear. Is it possible, having 
had that pain, to end it, not carry it on, not carry it over? If so, then the brain has 
the security of being free and intelligent; but the moment the pain is carried over 
it is never free. 
Is it possible to register only the things that are absolutely necessary? The 
necessary things are the knowledge of how to drive a car, how to speak a 
language, technological knowledge, the knowledge of reading, writing and so on. 
But in our human relationships, those between man and woman for example, 
every incident in that relationship is registered. What takes place? The woman is 
irritated, nags, or is friendly, kindly, or says something just before the man goes 
off to the office, which is ugly; so from this there is built up, through registration, 
an image about her and she builds an image about him—this is factual. In human 
relationships, between man and woman, or between neighbours and so on, there 
is registration and the process of image-making. But when the husband says 
something ugly listen to it carefully, end it, do not carry it on; then you will find 
that there is no image-making at all. If there is no image-making between a man 
and a woman the relationship is entirely different; there is no longer the 
relationship of one thought opposed to another thought—which is called 
relationship, which actually it is not; it is just ideas. 

Pleasure follows registration of an incident in the continuation given by 
thought. Thought is the root of pleasure. If you had no thought and you saw a 
beautiful thing it would rest at that. But thought says: “No I must have that”; 
from this flows the whole movement of thought. 
What is the relationship of pleasure to joy? Joy comes to you uninvited, it 
happens. You are walking along in a street, or sitting in a bus, or wandering in 
the woods, seeing the flowers, the hills, and the clouds and the blue sky and 
suddenly there is the extraordinary feeling of great joy; then comes the 
registration, thought says: “What a marvellous thing that was, I must have more 
of it.” So, again, joy is made into pleasure by thought. This is seeing things as 
they are, not as you want them to be; it is seeing them exactly, without any 
distortion, seeing what is taking place. 
What is love? Is it pleasure; which is the continuation of an incident through 
the movement of thought? Is the movement of thought love? Is love 
remembrance? A thing has happened and living in its remembrance, feeling that 
remembrance of something which is over, resuscitating it and saying, “What a 
marvellous thing that was when we were together under that tree; that was 
love”—all that is the remembrance of a thing that is gone. Is that love? Is love 
the pleasure of sex?—in which there is tenderness, kindliness and so on—is that 
love? That is not to say that it is, or that it is not. 
We are questioning everything that man has put together of which he says: 
“This is love.” If love is pleasure then it gives emphasis to the remembrance of 
past things and therefore brings about the importance of the me—my pleasure, 
my excitement, my remembrances. Is that love? And is love desire? What is 
desire? One desires a car; one desires a house; one desires prominence, power, 
position. There are infinite things one desires; to be as beautiful as you are; to be 
as intelligent, as clever, as smart as you are. Does desire bring clarity? 
The thing that is called love is based on desire—desire to sleep with a 
woman, or sleep with a man, desire to possess her, dominate her, control her, 
“she is mine, not yours.” Is love in the pleasure derived in that possession, in that 
dominance? Man dominates the world and now there is woman fighting the 
domination. 
What is desire? Does desire bring about clarity? In its field does compassion 
flower? If it does not bring clarity and if desire is not the field in which the 
beauty and the greatness of compassion flower, then what place has desire? How 
does desire arise? One sees a beautiful woman, or a beautiful man—one sees. 
There is the perception, the seeing, then the contact, then the sensation, then that 
sensation is taken over by thought, which becomes the image with its desire. You 
see a beautiful vase, a beautiful sculpture—ancient Egyptian, or Greek—and you 
look at it and you touch it; you see the depth of sculpture of the figure sitting 
cross-legged. From that there is a sensation. What a marvellous thing and from 
that sensation desire; “I wish I had that in my room; to look at it every day, touch 
it every day”—the pride of possession, to have such a marvellous thing as that. 
That is desire: seeing, contact, sensation, then thought using that sensation to 
cultivate the desire to possess—or not to possess. 

Now comes the difficulty: realizing this the religious people have said: “Take 
vows of celibacy; do not look at a woman; if you do look treat her as your sister, 
mother, whatever you like; because you are in the service of God you need all 
your energy to serve Him; in the service of God you are going to have great 
tribulations, therefore be prepared, but do not waste your energy.” But the thing 
is boiling and we are trying to understand that desire which is constantly boiling, 
wanting to fulfil, wanting to complete itself. 
Desire arises from the movement—seeing—contact—sensation—thought 
with its image—desire. Now we are saying: seeing—touching—sensation, that is 
normal, healthy—end it there, do not let thought take it over and make it into a 
desire. Understand this and then you will also understand that there will be no 
suppression of desire. You see a beautiful house, well proportioned with lovely 
windows, a roof that melts into the sky, walls that are thick and part of the earth, 
a beautiful garden, well kept. You look at it, there is sensation; you touch it—you 
may not actually touch it but you touch it with your eyes—you smell the air, the 
herbs, the newly-cut grass. Can you not end it there? End it there, say: “It is a 
beautiful house”; but there is no registration and no thought which says: “I wish I 
had that house”—which is desire and the continuation of desire. You can do this 
so easily; and I mean easily, if you understand the nature of thought and desire. 
Is thought love? Does thought cultivate love? It is not pleasure, it is not 
desire, it is not remembrance, although they have their places. Then what is love? 
Is love jealousy? Is love a sense of possession, my wife, my husband, my girl—
possession? Has love within it fear? It is none of these things, entirely wipe them 
all away, end them, putting them all in their right place—then love is. 
Through negation the positive is—through negation; that is: is pleasure 
love?—you examine pleasure and see it is not that—though pleasure has its place 
it is not that—so you negate that. You see it is not remembrance though 
remembrance is necessary; so put remembrance in its right place, therefore you 
have negated remembrance as not being love. You have negated desire, though 
desire has a certain place. Therefore through negation the positive is. But we, on 
the contrary, posit the positive and then get caught in the negative. One must 
begin with doubt—completely doubting—then you end up with certainty. But if 
you start with certainty, then you end up in uncertainty and chaos. 
So in negation the positive is born. 

IX 
 
Because there is space, there is 
emptiness and total silence 
 
Time, for us, is very important, both chronologically and psychologically. We 
depend so much on psychological time. Time is related to movement—from here 
to there takes time. A distance to be covered, to arrive at a goal, to fulfil a 
purpose, requires time. To learn a language requires time. That has been carried 
over into the psychological field: “We need time to be perfect; we need time to 
get over something; we need time to be free of our anxieties; to be free of our 
sorrow; to be free of our fears and so on.” Time is needed in practical matters, in 
the field of technology and so on and that need for time has been introduced into 
our psychological life and we have accepted it. To wipe away our nationalities, to 
become brotherly we think we need time. Psychological time implies hope; the 
world is mad, let us hope in the future there will be a sane world. We are 
questioning whether there is such a thing as psychological time at all. We ask: Is 
there an action in which time is not involved at all? Action arising from a cause, 
a motive, needs time. Action based on a pattern of memory needs time to put into 
action. If you have an ideal, however noble, however beautiful and romantic, 
however nonsensical even, you need time to arrive at that idealistic state. And to 
arrive at that you destroy the present. It does not matter what happens to you 
now; what is important is the future. For the sake of the future sacrifice yourself 
now—some marvellous future established by the ideologists, the religious 
teachers and so on throughout the world. We question that and ask whether there 
is any psychological time at all and therefore no hope. “What shall I do if I have 
no hope?” Hope is so important because it gives you satisfaction, energy, drive to 
achieve something. 
When one looks closely, non-sentimentally, logically, is there psychological 
time at all? There is psychological time only when one moves away from “what 
is”. There is psychological time when one realizes that one is violent and then 
proceeds to enquire how to be free of it; that movement away from “what is” is 
time. But if one is totally and completely aware of “what is”, then there is no 
such time. 
Most of us are violent. Violence is not only hitting somebody physically, but 
anger, jealousy, acceptance of authority, conformity, imitation, accepting the 
edicts of another. Human beings are violent; that is the fact—violence. The very 
word “violence” condemns it. By the very usage of the word “violence” you have 
already condemned violence. See the intricacies of this. Being violent and being 
negligent, or lazy, we move away from it and invent ideological non-violence. 
That is time—the movement from “what is” to “what should be”. That time 
comes to an end, completely, when there is only “what is”—which is non-verbal 
identification with “what is”. Anger is a form of violence, or hatred, jealousy. 
The words “anger”, “hatred” or “jealousy” in themselves are condemnatory; they 
are verbalizations which strengthen by reaction. When I say “I am angry,” I have 

recognized from past angers the present anger, so I am using the word “anger” 
which is of the past and identifying that word with the present. The word has 
become extraordinarily important; yet if there is no usage of the word so that 
there is only the fact, the reaction, then there is no strengthening of that feeling. 
Is it possible to live, psychologically, without tomorrow? To say: “I love you, 
I will meet you tomorrow”, that affection is in memory projected towards 
tomorrow. Is there an activity without time at all? Love is not time; it is not a 
remembrance. If it is, it is not love, obviously. “I love you because you gave me 
sex; or you gave me food, or flattered me; or you said you needed a companion; I 
am lonely therefore I need you”—all that is not love, surely? When there is 
jealousy, when there is anxiety or hatred, that is not love. So then what is love? 
Love is obviously a state of mind in which there is no verbalization, no 
remembrance, but something immediate. 
There is a way of living, in daily life, where time as movement from this state 
to that, has gone. What happens when you do that? You have an extraordinary 
vitality, an extraordinary sense of clarity. You are then only dealing with facts, 
not with ideas. But as most of us are imprisoned in ideas and have accepted that 
way of life, it is very difficult to break away. But, have an insight into it, then it 
is finished. 
Our minds are so cluttered up, with knowledge, with worries, with problems, 
with money, with position and prestige; they are so burdened that there is no 
space at all; yet without space there is no order. 
When I look at this valley from a height and there is a direction because I 
want to see where I live, then I lose the vastness of space. Where there is 
direction space is limited. Where there is a purpose, a goal, something to be 
achieved, there is no space. If you have a purpose in life for which you are living, 
concentrating, where is there space? Whereas if there is no concentration there is 
vast space. 
When there is a centre from which we look, then space is very limited. When 
there is no centre, that is to say, no structure of the me which has been put 
together by thought, there is vast space. Without space there is no order, there is 
no clarity, there is no compassion. 
Living where there is no effort, where there is no action of will, where there is 
tremendous space, is part of meditation. 
So far we have only dealt with the waves on the surface of the ocean. You 
have only dealt with the superficiality of it. Now, if you have gone so far you can 
go into the depth of the ocean—of course you must understand how to dive 
deeply; not you dive—it comes about. 
There is concentration, choiceless awareness and attention. Concentration 
implies resistance. Concentration on a particular thing, on the page you are 
reading, or on the phrase you are trying to understand: to concentrate is to put all 
your energy in a particular direction. In concentration there is resistance and 
therefore effort and division. You want to concentrate, thought goes off on 
something else, you bring it back—the fight. If you are interested in something 
you concentrate very easily. Implied in the word concentrate is putting your mind 
on a particular object, a particular picture, a particular action. 

Choiceless awareness is to be aware both externally and inwardly, without 
any choice. Just to be aware of the trees, the mountains, nature—just to be aware. 
Not choose, saying, “I like this”, “I don’t like that”, or “I want this”, “I don’t 
want that”. It is to observe without the observer. The observer is the past, which 
is conditioned, always looking from that conditioned point of view, therefore 
there is like and dislike and so on. To be choicelessly aware implies observing 
the whole environment around you, the mountains, the trees, also the ugly world 
and the towns; just to be aware, observe and in that observation there is no 
decision, no will, no choice. 
In attention there is no centre, there is no me attending. When there is no me 
which limits attention then attention is limitless; attention has limitless space. 
After understanding all the waves on the surface—fear, authority, all the petty 
affairs compared to that which we are going into—the mind has then emptied 
consciousness of the whole of its content. It is empty; not through action of will, 
not through desire, not through choice. Consciousness, then, is totally different, 
is of a totally different dimension. 
Because there is space there is emptiness and total silence—not induced 
silence, not practised silence; which are all just the movement of thought and 
therefore absolutely worthless. When you have gone through all this—and there 
is great delight in going through all this, it is like playing a tremendous game—
then in that total silence there is a movement which is timeless, which is not 
measured by thought—thought has no place in it whatsoever—then there is 
something totally sacred, timeless. 

X 
 
The state of the mind that has 
insight is completely empty 
 
An awakened intelligence has a deep, true, insight into all our psychological 
problems, crises, blockages and so on; not intellectual comprehension, not the 
resolving of problems through conflict. Having an insight into a human issue is 
to awaken this intelligence; or, having this intelligence, there is the insight—both 
ways. In such insight there is no conflict; when you see something very clearly, 
when you see the truth of the matter, there is the end of it, you do not fight 
against it, you do not try to control, you do not make all manner of calculated, 
motivated, efforts. From that insight, which is intelligence, there is action—not 
postponed action but immediate action. 
We are educated from childhood to exercise, as deeply as possible, every 
form of effort. If you observe yourself you will see what tremendous efforts we 
make to control ourselves, to suppress, adjust and modify ourselves to certain 
patterns or objectives that you or another have established; so there is constant 
struggle. We live with it and we die with it. And we ask: Is it possible to live our 
daily life without a single conflict? 
Most of us are awakened to all the problems, political, religious, economic, 
social, ideological and so on, in which we live. Being somewhat aware of all that 
most of us are discontent. When you are young, this dissatisfaction becomes like 
a flame and you have a passion to do something. So you join some political 
party, the extreme Left, the extreme revolutionary, the extreme forms of “Jesus 
freaks” and so on and so on. By joining these things, by adopting certain 
attitudes, certain ideologies, that flame of discontent fades away and you then 
appear to be satisfied. You say: “This is what I want to do” and you pour your 
heart into it. But gradually you find, if you are at all awake to the problems 
involved, that you are not satisfied. It is too late; you have already given half 
your life to something which you thought would be completely worthwhile and 
you have found later on that it is not so; then your energy, capacity and drive has 
withered away. Gradually the real flame of discontent has withered away. You 
must have noticed the pattern that has been followed all the time, generation after 
generation, in yourself, in your children, in the young and the old. 
But if you are alive to all these things and are discontented and if you do not 
allow this discontent to be squashed by the desire to be satisfied, by the desire to 
adjust oneself to the environment, to the “establishment”, or to an ideal, to a 
Utopia, if you allow this flame to keep on burning, not being satisfied with 
anything, then the superficial satisfactions have no place; then this very 
dissatisfaction is demanding something much greater and the ideals, the gurus, 
the religions, the “establishment”, become totally superficial. This flame of 
discontent, because it has no outlet, because it has no object in which it can fulfil 
itself, that flame becomes a great passion. That passion is intelligence. If you are 
not caught in these superficial, essentially reactionary things, then that 

extraordinary flame is intensified. That intensity brings about a quality of mind 
having a deep insight instantly into things, and from that there is action. 
Such dissatisfaction does not make you neurotic or bring about imbalance. 
There is imbalance only when this dissatisfaction is translated, or caught in a trap 
of some kind or another; then there is distortion, then there are all kinds of fights, 
inwardly. 
If you have been caught in these various traps, can you put them aside, wipe 
them out, destroy them?—do what you like, but have this tremendous flame of 
discontent now. It does not mean that you throw bombs at people, destroy, 
indulge in physical revolution and riots. When you put aside all the traps that 
man has created around you and that you have created for yourself, then this 
flame becomes a supreme intelligence. And that intelligence gives you insight. 
And when you have insight, from that there is immediate action. 
Action is not tomorrow. There is an action without cause; it has been a 
problem for many great thinkers; action without cause, action without motive, 
action not dependent on some ideology. One of the demands of serious people is 
to find out if there is an action which is per se, for itself; which is without cause 
and motive. See what is implied in it: no regrets, no retention of those regrets and 
all the sequence that follows from those regrets, such action does not depend on 
some past or future ideology; it is an action which is always free. It is an action 
that is only possible when there is insight born of intelligence. 
Most people would say that there must be conflict otherwise there is no 
growth; that conflict is part of life. A tree in a forest struggles to reach the sun; 
that is a form of conflict. Every animal is in conflict. And we human beings, 
supposed to be intelligent, are yet constantly in conflict. Now discontent says: 
“Why should I be in conflict?” Conflict implies comparison, imitation, 
conformity, adjustment to a pattern, the modified continuity of what has been, 
through the present, to the future—all a process of conflict. The deeper the 
conflict the more neurotic you become. And so, in order to have respite from 
conflict you believe most deeply in God, saying: “His will be done”—and we 
create this monstrous world. 
Conflict implies comparison. Can one live without comparison?—which 
means no ideal, no authority of a pattern, no conformity to a particular ideology. 
It implies freedom from the prison of ideas so that there is no comparison, no 
imitation, no conformity; therefore you are stuck with “what is”—actually what 
is. Comparison comes only when you compare “what is” with “what should be”, 
or “what might be”, or try to transform “what is” into something which it is not 
and all this implies conflict. 
To live without comparison is to remove a tremendous burden. If you remove 
the burden of comparison, imitation, conformity, adjustment, modification, then 
you are left with “what is”. Conflict arises only when you try to do something 
with “what is”, try to transform it, to modify it, to change it, or to suppress it, run 
away from it. But if you have an insight into “what is” then conflict ceases; you 
are left with “what is”. And what happens to “what is”? What is the state of your 
mind when you are looking at “what is”? What is the state of your mind when 
you are not escaping, not trying to transform, or deform “what is”? What is the 

state of that mind that is looking and has insight? The state of the mind that has 
insight is completely empty. It is free from escapes, free from suppression, 
analysis and so on. When all these burdens are taken away—because you see the 
absurdity of them, it is like taking away a heavy burden—there is freedom. 
Freedom implies an emptiness to observe. That emptiness gives you insight into 
violence—not the various forms of violence, but the whole nature of violence 
and the structure of violence; therefore there is immediate action about violence, 
which is to be free, completely, from all violence. 

XI 
 
Where there is suffering you cannot 
possibly love 
 
We say that love is part of suffering. When you love somebody it brings about 
suffering. We are going to question whether it is possible to be free of all 
suffering. When there is freedom from suffering in the consciousness of the 
human being then that freedom brings about a transformation in consciousness 
and that transformation affects the whole of mankind’s suffering. That is part of 
compassion. 
Where there is suffering you cannot possibly love. That is a truth, a law. 
When you love somebody and he or she does something of which you totally 
disapprove and you suffer, it shows that you do not love. See the truth of it. How 
can you suffer when your wife throws you away and goes after somebody else? 
Yet we suffer from that. We get angry, jealous, envious, hateful; at the same time 
we say, “I love my wife”! Such love is not love. So, is it possible not to suffer 
and yet have the flowering of immense love? 
What is the nature and the essence of suffering—the essence of it, not the 
various forms of it? What is the essence of suffering? Is it not the total 
expression, at that moment, of complete self-centred existence? It is the essence 
of the me—the essence of the ego, the person, the limited, enclosed, resisting 
existence, which is called the “me”. When there is an incident that demands 
understanding and insight, that is denied by the awakening of the me, the essence 
which is the cause of suffering. If there were no me, would there be suffering? 
One would help, one would do all kinds of things, but one would not suffer. 
Suffering is the expression of the me; it includes self-pity, loneliness, trying 
to escape, trying to be with the other who is gone—and all else that is implied. 
Suffering is the very me, which is the image, the knowledge, the remembrance of 
the past. So, what relationship has suffering, the essence of the me, to love? Is 
there any relationship between love and suffering? The me is put together by 
thought: but is love put together by thought? 
Is love put together by thought?—the memories of the pains, the delights, and 
the pursuit of pleasure, sexual or otherwise, of the pleasure of possessing 
somebody and somebody liking to be possessed; all that is the structure of 
thought. The me with its name, with its form, its memory, is put together by 
thought—obviously. But if love is not put together by thought, then suffering has 
no relationship to love. Therefore action from love is different from action from 
suffering. 
What place has thought in relation to love and in relation to suffering? To 
have an insight into it means you are neither escaping, wanting comfort, 
frightened to be lonely, isolated; it means therefore your mind is free and that 
which is free is empty. If you have that emptiness you have an insight into 
suffering. Then suffering as the me disappears. There is immediate action 
because that is so; action then is from love, not from suffering. 

One discovers that action from suffering is the action of the me and that 
therefore there is constant conflict. One can see the logic of it all, the reason for 
it. Only so is it possible to love without a shadow of suffering. Thought is not 
love; thought is not compassion. Compassion is intelligence—which is not the 
outcome of thought. What is the action of intelligence? If one has intelligence it 
is operating, it is functioning, it is acting. But if one asks: What is the action of 
intelligence?—one merely wants thought to be satisfied. When one asks: What is 
the action of compassion?—is it not thought that is asking? Is it not the me that is 
saying: If I could have this compassion I would act differently? Therefore when 
one puts such questions one is still caught in terms of thought. But with an 
insight into thought then thought has its right place and intelligence then acts. 

XII 
 
Sorrow is the outcome of time 
and thought 
 
We are concerned with the whole existence of man and whether a human being 
can ever be free from his travail, his efforts, his anxieties, violence and brutality, 
and whether there is an end to sorrow. 
Why have human beings, throughout the ages, sustained and put up with 
suffering? Can there be an ending to it all? 
One must be free of all ideologies. Ideologies are dangerous illusions, 
whether they are political, social, religious, or personal. Every form of ideology 
either ends up in totalitarianism, or in religious conditioning—as the Catholic, 
the Protestant, the Hindu, the Buddhist and so on; and ideologies become such 
great burdens. So, to go into the enormous question of suffering, one must be free 
from all ideologies. One may have experienced a great deal of suffering which 
may have brought about certain definite conclusions. But to enquire into this 
question one must be utterly free of all conclusions. 
Obviously there is biological, physical, suffering, and that suffering may 
distort the mind if one is not very careful. But we are concerned with the 
psychological suffering of man. In investigating suffering we are investigating 
the suffering of all mankind, because each one of us is of the essence of all 
humanity; each one of us is, psychologically, inwardly, deeply, like the rest of 
mankind. They suffer, they go through great anxiety, uncertainty, confusion, 
violence, through great sense of grief, loss, loneliness, as each one of us does. 
There is no division, psychologically, between us all. We are the world, 
psychologically, and the world is us. That is not a conviction, that is not a 
conclusion, that is not an intellectual theory, but an actuality, to be felt, to be 
realized and to be lived. Investigating this question of sorrow one is investigating 
not only one’s own personal limited sorrow but also the sorrow of mankind. Do 
not reduce it to a personal thing, because when one sees the enormous suffering 
of mankind, in the understanding of the enormity of it, the wholeness of it, then 
one’s own part has a role in it. It is not a selfish enquiry concerned with how I am 
to be free of sorrow. If one makes it personal, limited, then one will not 
understand the full significance of the enormity of sorrow. 
In opposition to sorrow there is happiness, as in one’s consciousness there is 
the bad and the good. In one’s consciousness there is sorrow and a sense of 
happiness. In enquiring one is not concerned with sorrow as an opposite to 
happiness, gladness, enjoyment but with sorrow itself. The opposites contain 
each other. If the good is the outcome of the bad, then the good contains the bad. 
And if sorrow is the opposite of happiness, then the enquiry into sorrow has its 
root in happiness. We are enquiring into sorrow per se, not as an opposite to 
something else. 
It is important to understand how one observes the nature and the movement 
of sorrow. How does one look at one’s sorrow? If one looks at it as though it was 

different from oneself then there is a division between oneself and that which one 
calls sorrow. But is that sorrow different from oneself? Is the observer of sorrow 
different from sorrow itself? Or is it that the observer is sorrow? It is not that he 
is free from sorrow and then looks at sorrow, or identifies with sorrow. Sorrow is 
not just in the field of the observer; he is sorrow. The observer is the observed. 
The experiencer is the experienced; just as the thinker is the thought. There is no 
division as when the observer says “I am in sorrow”, and who then divides 
himself off and tries to do something about sorrow—run away from it; seek 
comfort; suppress it; and all the various means of attempting to transcend sorrow. 
Whereas, if one sees that the observer is the observed, which is a fact, then one 
eliminates altogether the division that brings about conflict. One has been 
brought up, educated, to think that the observer is something totally different 
from the observed; as for example: one is the analyser therefore one can 
analyse—but the analyser is the analysed. So in this perception there is no 
division between the observer and the observed, between the thinker and the 
thought—there is no thought without the thinker—if there is no thinker there is 
no thought—they are one. 
So if one sees that the observer is the observed, then one is not dictating what 
sorrow is, one is not telling sorrow what it should be, or not be, one is just 
observing without any choice, without any movement of thought. 
There are various kinds of sorrow; the man who has no work; the man who 
will always remain poor, the man who will never enjoy clean clothes or a fresh 
bath—as happens among the poor. There is the sorrow of ignorance, the sorrow 
when children are maltreated, the sorrow when animals are killed—vivisection 
and so on. There is the sorrow of war, which affects the whole of mankind. There 
is the sorrow when someone whom you love, dies. There is the sorrow of the 
desire to fulfil and the ensuing failure and frustration. So, there are multiple kinds 
of sorrow. Does one deal with all the multiple expressions of sorrow piecemeal? 
Or does one deal with the root of sorrow as a whole? Does one take each 
expression of the hundreds of varieties of sorrow? Or go to the very root of 
sorrow? If one takes all the multiple expressions of sorrow there will be no end. 
One may trim them individually, diminish them, but more will always remain. 
Can one look at the multiple branches of sorrow and through that observation go 
into the very root of sorrow, from the outside go inside and examine what is at 
the root, the cause? If one does not end sorrow there is no love in one’s heart—
although one may pity others and be troubled by the slaughter that is going on. 
What is sorrow? Why does one suffer? Is it that one has lost something that 
one had? Or is there suffering because one has been promised a reward and that 
reward has not been given?—because we are educated through reward and 
punishment. Does one suffer because of self-pity? Because one has not the things 
that another has? Does one suffer through comparison, measurement? Does one 
suffer because, through limitation, one has not been able to achieve that which 
one is trying to imitate—trying to conform to a pattern and never reaching that 
pattern fully, completely? So one asks very deeply: What is suffering and why 
does one suffer? 

One must be very careful in examination to see whether the word “sorrow” 
itself weighs down on man. Sorrow has been praised, romanticized. It has been 
made into something that is essential in order to find reality—one must go 
through suffering to find love, pity, compassion. We seek through suffering a 
reward. Does not the word “sorrow” bring about the feeling of sorrow? Or, 
independent of that word and the stimulation of that word, the reaction of that 
word, is there sorrow by itself? 
If this examination is a matter of tremendous crisis in one’s life, as it must be, 
then, when there is sorrow, it is a challenge and all one’s energy is brought into 
being—otherwise one dissipates that energy by running away, seeking comfort, 
inventing explanations such as karma and so on. It is a challenge: What is 
sorrow? Is there an ending to sorrow? One can only respond completely to it 
when one has no fear, when one is not caught up in the machinery of pleasure, 
when one is not escaping from it, seeking comfort, but responding to it with all 
one’s energy—a response that is the expression of the totality of one’s energy. 
In the understanding of the cause of sorrow does sorrow disappear? I may say 
to myself: “I am full of self-pity, if I can end self-pity there will be no sorrow.” 
So I work at getting rid of it because I see how silly it is; I try to suppress it; I 
worry about it like a dog with a bone. And I may, intellectually, think I am free 
from sorrow. But the uncovering of the cause of sorrow is not the ending of 
sorrow. The searching for the cause of sorrow is a wastage of energy; sorrow is 
there, demanding one’s tremendous attention. It is a challenge asking one to act. 
But instead of that one says: “Let me look to the cause; let me find out; is it this, 
that, or the other? I may be mistaken; let me talk it over with others; or is there 
some book that will tell me what the real cause is?” But all this is moving away 
from the actual fact, the actual response to that challenge. 
If one’s mind, the movement of its thought, is looking through its memory 
and responding according to that memory, according to previous knowledge, 
then one is acting not directly to the challenge, but merely responding from 
memory, from the past. I am in sorrow, my son, my wife, or the social 
conditions—the poverty, the brutality of man—bring about a great sorrow in me. 
It wants a response, a complete response, from me as a human being who 
represents the totality of humanity. If thought responds to the challenge saying: 
“I must find out how to respond to it; I have had sorrow before and I know all the 
meaning of the suffering and the pain, the anxiety and the loneliness of sorrow,” 
then it is responding according to remembrance, therefore it is not an actual 
response; it is not actually seeing the fact that any response to that challenge 
from memory is no response at all, it is mere reaction. It is not action, it is 
reaction. If you once see that, then the question is: What is the root of it all—not 
the cause? When there is a cause there is an effect and the effect in turn becomes 
a cause and the action from that becomes the cause for the next action. There is a 
chain effect. When the mind is caught in this limited chain, and it is always 
limited, then any response to the challenge will be very limited and time-bound. 
But can one act to that challenge without a time interval? One may not actually 
have had any immediate sorrow, but one sees the enormity of the sorrow of 
mankind—the global sorrow of mankind. If one responds to that according to 

one’s conditioning, according to one’s past memory, then one is caught in action 
that is always time-binding. The challenge and its response demand no time 
interval. Therefore there is instant action. 
Fear is the movement of thought—thought as measure. Fear is time. Thought 
is the response of memory, knowledge, experience; it is limited; it is a movement 
in time. If there is no time there is no fear. I am living now but I am afraid I 
might die—I might in the future. There is a time interval produced by thought. 
But if there is no time interval at all, there is no fear. So, in the same way: is the 
root of sorrow time?—time being the movement of thought. And if there is no 
thought at all, when one responds to that challenge, is there suffering? 
Can one put away, for the time being, all one’s habitual ideas about time, 
sorrow and fear? Put away all one’s conclusions, all that one has read about 
sorrow and begin again as though one knew nothing about sorrow. Though one 
suffers one has no answer to it. But one has been so conditioned: put the burden 
of sorrow on to somebody else, as Christianity has done so beautifully; go to 
church and one sees all the suffering in that figure. The Christians have given all 
that suffering over to somebody and think by that they have understood the 
whole vast field of sorrow. In India, in the Asiatic countries, they have also 
another form of evasion—karma. But face the actual movement at the moment of 
sorrow and be completely choicelessly aware of that thing and one asks: Is time, 
which is thought, the fundamental issue that makes sorrow flower? Is thought 
responsible for suffering?—not only the suffering of others, the brutality of 
others, but for the total ignorance of this whole earth. 
There is no new thought; there is no free thought. There is only thought and 
that is the response of knowledge and experience, stored up in the brain as 
memory. Now if that is fact, if one sees that it is true that sorrow is the outcome 
of time and thought—if that is not a supposition—then one is responding to 
sorrow without the me for the me is put together by thought. My name, my form, 
how I look, my qualities, my reactions, all the things that are acquired, are all put 
together by thought. Thought is ‘me’. Time is ‘me’, the self, the ego, the 
personality, all that is the movement of time as me. When there is no time, when 
one responds to this challenge of suffering and there is no me, then, is there 
suffering? 
Is not all sorrow based on me, the individual, the personality, the ego? It is 
the self that says, “I suffer”, “I am lonely”, “I am anxious”, this whole 
movement, this whole structure, is me in thought. And thought posits not only 
me but also that I am a superior me—something far superior to thought; yet it is 
still the movement of thought. So, there is an ending to sorrow when there is no 
me. 

XIII 
 
What is death? 
 
One has known of thousands of deaths—the death of someone very close or the 
death of masses through the atomic bomb—Hiroshima and all the horrors that 
man has perpetrated on other human beings in the name of peace and in the 
pursuit of ideologies. So, without any ideology, without any conclusion, one 
asks: What is death? What is the thing that dies—that terminates? One sees that 
if there is something that is continuous it becomes mechanical. If there is an 
ending to everything there is a new beginning. If one is afraid then one cannot 
possibly find out what this immense thing called death is. It must be the most 
extraordinary thing. To find out what death is one must also enquire into what 
life is before death. One never does that. One never enquires what living is. 
Death is inevitable; but what is living? Is this living, this enormous suffering, 
fear, anxiety, sorrow, and all the rest of it—is this living? Clinging to that one is 
afraid of death. If one does not know what living is one cannot know what death 
is—they go together. If one can find out what the full meaning of living is, the 
totality of living, the wholeness of living, then one is capable of understanding 
the wholeness of death. But one usually enquires into the meaning of death 
without enquiring into the meaning of life. 
When one asks: What is the meaning of life?—one immediately has 
conclusions. One says it is this; one gives it a significance according to one’s 
conditioning. If one is an idealist, one gives life an ideological significance; 
again, according to one’s conditioning, according to what one has read and so on. 
But if one is not giving a particular significance to life, if one is not saying life is 
this or something else, then one is free, free of ideologies, of systems, political, 
religious or social. So, before one enquires into the meaning of death one is 
asking what living is. Is the life one is living, living? The constant struggle with 
each other? Trying to understand each other? Is living according to a book, 
according to some psychologists, according to some orthodoxy, living? 
If one banishes all that, totally, then one will begin with “what is”. “What is” 
is that our living has become a tremendous torture, a tremendous battle between 
human beings, man, woman, neighbour—whether close or far. It is a conflict in 
which there is occasional freedom to look at the blue sky, to see something 
lovely and enjoy it and be happy for a while; but the cloud of struggle soon 
returns. All this we call living; going to church with all the traditional repetition, 
or the new English repetition, accepting certain ideologies. This is what one calls 
living and one is so committed to it one accepts it. But discontentment has its 
significance—real discontent. Discontent is a flame and one suppresses it by 
childish acts, by momentary satisfactions; but discontent when you let it flower, 
arise, it burns away everything that is not true. 
Can one live a life that is whole, not fragmented?—a life in which thought 
does not divide as the family, the office, the church, this and that and death so 
divided off that when it comes one is appalled by it, one is shocked by it so that 
one’s mind is incapable of meeting it because one has not lived a total life. 

Death comes and with that one cannot argue; one cannot say: “Wait a few 
minutes more”—it is there. When it comes, can the mind meet the end of 
everything while one is living, while one has vitality and energy, while one is full 
of life? When one’s life is not wasted in conflicts and worries one is full of 
energy, clarity. Death means the ending of all that one knows, of all one’s 
attachments, of one’s bank accounts, of all one’s attainments—there is a 
complete ending. Can the mind, while living, meet such a state? Then one will 
understand the full meaning of what death is. If one clings to the idea of ‘me’, 
that me which one believes must continue, the me that is put together by thought, 
including the me in which one believes there is the higher consciousness, the 
supreme consciousness, then one will not understand what death is in life. 
Thought lives in the known; it is the outcome of the known; if there is not 
freedom from the known one cannot possibly find out what death is, which is the 
ending of everything, the physical organism with all its ingrained habits, the 
identification with the body, with the name, with all the memories it has 
acquired. One cannot carry it all over when one goes to death. One cannot carry 
there all one’s money; so, in the same way one has to end in life everything that 
one knows. That means there is absolute aloneness; not loneliness but aloneness, 
in the sense there is nothing else but that state of mind that is completely whole. 
Aloneness means all one. 

XIV 
 
That emptiness is the 
summation of all energy 
 
One’s consciousness, which is oneself, is filled with one’s own concepts and 
conclusions and with other people’s ideas; it is filled with one’s fears, anxieties 
and pleasures and with occasional flashes of joy and with one’s sorrow. That is 
one’s consciousness. That is the pattern of one’s existence. 
Is it at all possible to bring about a radical change in one’s consciousness? 
For if it is not possible then one is everlastingly living in a prison of one’s own 
ideas, one’s own concepts—living in a field where there is every kind of 
confusion, uncertainty, instability. And one seems to think that if one moves 
from one corner of that field to another one has greatly changed, but still one is in 
the same field. As long as one lives within the field that one calls one’s 
consciousness, however little or however great it may change, yet in that field 
there is no fundamental human transformation. 
Ideologies, however clever, however carefully thought out, ultimately bring 
about dangerous illusions—whether they are the ideologies of the Right, Centre, 
or the extreme Left, they all end up either in great bureaucracies controlling man, 
or in concentration camps, or the destructive moulding of man according to a 
particular concept. This is what is happening throughout the world; the 
intellectuals have led us to this point. 
We have been prisoners of religious ideologies and dogmas—the Catholic, 
the Hindu, the Buddhist and so on, and the gurus, with their modern 
modifications of the ancient traditions and ideologies, are also the prisoners of 
those ideologies. 
If one observes all this, carefully, impersonally, objectively, one realizes that 
one must put away all ideologies and ask oneself whether consciousness with its 
content—which is what one is, with all one’s conflicts, struggles, confusions, 
misery and occasional happiness—can become aware of itself and empty itself. 
That is one problem in meditation. 
Meditation is not seeking an end; it is not groping purposefully after a goal. 
Out of meditation comes immense silence; not cultivated silence, not the silence 
between two thoughts, between two noises, but a silence that is unimaginable. 
The brain becomes extraordinarily quiet when in this process of enquiry; when 
there is silence there is great perception. In this silence there is emptiness, an 
emptiness that is the summation of all energy. 
In examining the question of consciousness and its content it is very 
important to find out whether one, oneself, is observing it, or if in observing, 
consciousness becomes aware of itself. There is a difference. Either, one 
observes the movement of one’s consciousness—one’s desires, hurts, ambitions, 
greeds and all the rest of the content of our consciousness—as if from the 
outside; or consciousness becomes aware of itself. This is only possible when 
thought realizes that it is only observing what it has created, which is the content 

of its consciousness; then thought realizes that it is only observing itself, not ‘me’ 
which thought has put together observing consciousness. There is only 
observation; then consciousness begins to reveal its content, not only the 
superficial consciousness but the deeper layers of consciousness, the whole 
content of consciousness. If one sees the importance of sheer absolute motionless 
observation, then the thing flowers; consciousness opens up its doors. 
One learns the art of observing without any distortion, without any motive, 
without any purpose—just to observe. In that there is tremendous beauty because 
then there is no distortion. One sees things clearly as they are. But if one makes 
an abstraction of them into ideas and then through the ideas observes, then it is a 
distortion. 
One freely, without any distorting factor, enters into the observation of 
consciousness. There is nothing hidden and consciousness begins to reveal its 
own totality, its content, one’s hurts, greed, envy, happiness, beliefs, ideologies, 
past traditions, the present scientific or factual traditions and so on and so on—all 
that is our consciousness. One observes it without any movement of thought; 
because it is thought that has put together all the content of our consciousness—
thought has built it. When thought comes and says: “This is right, this is wrong, 
this shouldn’t be, that should”, one is still within the field of consciousness; one 
is not going beyond it. One has to understand very clearly the place of thought; it 
has its own place, in the field of knowledge, technology and so on. But thought 
has no place whatsoever in the psychological structure of man. So, can one 
observe one’s consciousness and does it reveal its content?—not bit by bit, but 
the totality of its movement. Then only is it possible to go beyond it. 
In enquiring, can one observe without any movement of the eye? Because the 
eye has an effect on the brain. When one keeps the eyeballs completely still 
observation becomes very clear because the brain is quietened. So, can one 
observe without any movement of thought interfering with one’s observation? It 
is only possible when the observer realizes that he and that which he is observing 
are one—the observer is the observed. Anger is not different from me—I am 
anger, I am jealousy. There is no division between the observer and the observed; 
that is the basic reality one must capture. Then the whole of consciousness begins 
to reveal itself without the making of any effort. In that total observation there is 
the emptying of, or the going beyond, all the things that thought has put 
together—which is one’s consciousness. 
Then there is the problem of time—time psychologically, as a movement 
towards the fulfilment of an idea, an ideology. One is greedy, or violent: one says 
to oneself: “I will take time to get over it, or to modify it, or change it, or to get 
rid of it, or to go beyond it.” That time is psychological time, not chronological 
time, by the watch or by the sun. There is this whole conditioning of one’s mind 
which says: “I will take time to achieve that which I consider to be essential, to 
be beautiful, to be good.” One questions that time, and asks: Is there 
psychological time at all? Is it not that thought has invented that time? 
This is a very important thing to understand because it shatters altogether the 
idea of tomorrow—psychologically. It is a tremendous fact. If one understands 
that, psychologically, there is no tomorrow, then what will one do with that 

“which is”? If there is no time, then how is violence to end? One is conditioned 
to use time as a means of getting rid, slowly or quickly, of—say—violence. But 
if there is no time at all then what takes place when there is violence? Will there 
be violence? If it is one’s whole outlook that, psychologically, there is no time at 
all, then is there a me who is violent? The me is put together through time. The 
me as violence, is time. But if there is no time at all as me, then there is nothing, 
there is no violence. 
If there is no time at all, there is no past or future, but only something else, 
totally different. One is so conditioned to time and one says psychologically, that 
there must be time for me to evolve, for me to become something other than that 
which I am. When one sees the truth of the fact that thought itself is the cause of 
this time, then there is an ending of the past and the future; there is only the sense 
of timeless movement now. It is really extraordinary if one understands this. 
And, after all, love is that. Love is at the same level, at the same time, at the same 
intensity; at that moment that is love—not the remembrance of it, or the future 
hope for it. That state of mind, which is love, is really completely without time. 
Then see what happens in one’s relationship with another. One perhaps has that 
extraordinary sense of love which is not of time, which is not of thought, which 
is not a remembrance of pleasure or pain; then what is the relationship between 
one who has that and another who has not? One has no image about another 
because the image is the movement of time, thought has built images step by step 
about another and that is no longer happening; but the other has made images 
about oneself step by step; for the other is in a movement of time and oneself has 
no time at all. One has this extraordinary sense of love which is not of time. 
What then is one’s relationship with another? When one has that extraordinary 
quality of love then in that quality there is supreme intelligence. That intelligence 
is going to act in that relationship, it is not oneself who will act in that 
relationship. It is really a marvellous thing to go into because it totally alters all 
relationship; and if there is no such fundamental alteration in relationship there is 
no alteration in this monstrous society which we have built. 
What is space? Can there be space without order? Just take an outward 
physical example: is there space when there is disorder in a room? When one 
throws one’s clothes all over the place and everything is in disorder, is there 
space? There is only space when everything is in its right place. So, outwardly. 
Now inwardly: our minds are so confused, our whole life is self-contradiction, 
disorder, caught in various habits, drugs, smoke, drink, sex and so on. Obviously 
habits are mechanical and where there are habits there is disorder. What is order 
inwardly? Is order something dictated by thought? Thought itself is a movement 
of disorder. One thinks one can bring about social order by very careful thought, 
by ideological thought. Society, whether in the West or the East, is in disorder, is 
confused, is contradictory and the world is so totally mad. Wherever there is the 
movement of thought, time-binding, fragmentary and limited in itself, there must 
be total disorder. 
Is there an action which is not the result of the movement of thought; an 
action not conditioned by ideologies which have been put together by thought? Is 
there an action totally free from thought? Such action, then, would be complete, 

whole, total—not fragmentary, not contradictory. Such action would be whole 
action in which there is no regret, no sense of “I wish I hadn’t done that”, or “I 
will try to do that”. Disorder comes about when there is the movement of thought 
and thought itself is fragmentary and when it acts everything must be 
fragmentary. If one sees that very clearly, then one asks: “What is action without 
thought?” Action means the doing now, not doing tomorrow, or having done in 
the past. It is as love, it is not of time. Love and compassion are beyond intellect, 
beyond memory; they are a state of mind that acts because love and compassion 
are supremely intelligent—intelligence acts. Where there is space, there is order, 
which is the action of intelligence; it is neither yours nor mine, it is intelligence 
born out of love and compassion. Space implies a mind that is not occupied; yet 
our minds are occupied all day long about something or other and so there is no 
space, not even an interval between two thoughts, every thought is associated 
with another thought so that there is no gap—the whole mind is crowded, 
chattering, with opinions and judgements. 
True order brings enormous space; space means silence; out of silence comes 
this extraordinary sense of emptiness. Do not be frightened by that word 
“empty”; when there is emptiness then things can happen. 
What is beauty? Does it lie in a picture, in a museum, in a poem? Does it lie 
in the line of the mountains against the sky; or in a sheet of water reflecting the 
beauty of the clouds, or in the line an architect gives a building; or in a home that 
has a certain beauty? What is beauty?—not the imagination that creates beauty; 
not the word that creates beauty; not a beautiful idea. When one sees something 
extraordinarily alive and beautiful, a mountain, a clear sky, a view, at that 
moment when seeing it totally one is absent, is one not? Because of the 
immensity of the mountain, its extraordinary stability, its sense of firmness and 
the line of it, its magnificence drives away the me—for the moment. The outer 
glory has driven away the petty little me—like a boy given a toy, he is absorbed 
by it, he will play with it for an hour and break it up and when you take the toy 
away he is back to himself, naughty, crying and mischievous. The same thing has 
happened; the great mountain has driven away the petty little me, and one sees it 
for the moment. When the me is absent, totally, there is beauty. Then one’s 
relationship to nature changes completely; the earth becomes precious, every 
tree, every leaf, everything is part of that beauty—but man is destroying 
everything. 
Is there anything sacred, holy? Obviously the things that thought has put 
together in the religious sense—investing sacredness in images, in ideas—are not 
sacred at all. That which is sacred has no division, not one a Christian, another a 
Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim and all the rest of the divisions. That which thought has 
put together is of time, is fragmentary, is not whole, therefore it is not holy, 
though you worship the image on a cross that is not holy, that is invested with 
sacredness by thought; the same with the images that the Hindus have put 
together, or the Buddhists and so on. What then is sacred? One can only find out 
when thought has discovered itself, its right place, without effort, without will 
and there is this immense sense of silence; the silence of the mind without any 
movement of thought. It is only when the mind is absolutely free and silent that 

one discovers that which is beyond all words, which is timeless. Then out of that 
comes the vastness of true meditation. 

XV 
 
When the me is not, then 
compassion comes into being 
 
No guru and no system can help one to understand oneself. Without 
understanding oneself there is no raison d’être to find out that which is right 
action, that which is truth. In investigating one’s consciousness one is 
investigating the whole human consciousness—not only one’s own—because 
one is the world and when one observes one’s own consciousness one is 
observing the consciousness of mankind—it is not something personal and self-
centred. 
One of the factors in consciousness is desire. From perception, contact and 
sensation, thought creates the image and the pursuit of that image is the desire to 
fulfil, with all the frustration and the bitterness following from that. Now, can 
there be an observation of sensation not ending in desire? Just to observe. Which 
means one has to understand the nature of thought, because it is thought that 
gives continuity to desire; it is thought that creates the image out of sensation 
followed by the pursuit of that image. 
Thought is the response of memory, experience and knowledge, stored up in 
the brain. Thought is never new, it is always from the past. Thought, therefore, is 
limited. Although it has created innumerable problems yet it has also created the 
extraordinary world of technology—marvellous things it has done. But thought is 
limited because it is the outcome of the past, therefore it is time-binding. Thought 
pretends to conceive the immeasurable, the timeless, something beyond itself; it 
projects all kinds of illusory images. Can one observe the whole movement of 
desire without images and the pursuit of those images; without thereby becoming 
involved in frustration, in the hope of fulfilment and so on? Just to observe the 
whole movement of desire; to become aware of it. 
Can one psychologically be free yet not be caught up in the illusion that one 
is free? That illusion comes about when one says to oneself: “I must be free from 
fear”—which is the movement of desire. Having understood the nature of desire 
and its movement, its images, its conflicts, then one can look at fear in oneself 
and not deceive oneself that one is psychologically free from fear. Then one can 
go into the whole question of fear; not a particular form of fear, but go to the 
very root of fear, which is much simpler and quicker than taking the various 
branches of fear and trimming them. By observing the totality of fear then come 
to the root of it. One can only go to the root of it when one observes the totality 
of the various forms of fears—observe, become aware of them, but not try to do 
something about them. By observing the whole tree of fear, with all the branches, 
with all its various qualities, all its divisions, go to the very root of it. 
What is the root of fear, psychologically? Is not the root of fear, time?—what 
might happen tomorrow, or in the future; what might happen if one does not do 
certain things. Time as the past, time as what might happen now or in the future; 
is not the root of fear and time the movement of thought? 

The root of fear is the movement of time; which is thought as measure. Can 
one observe, can one be aware of this movement, not controlling it, suppressing 
it, or escaping from it, but just observing it, being aware of its total movement? 
One is aware of this total movement of thought as time and measure—I have 
been, I shall be, I hope to be—one is choicelessly aware of this fact and 
remaining with it, not moving away from what actually is. What actually is, is the 
movement of thought, which says: “I have been hurt in the past and I hope I shall 
not be hurt in the future.” That very process of thinking is fear—taking that as an 
example. Where there is fear, obviously there is no affection, there is no love. 
A great part of consciousness is the enormous desire for and the pursuit of 
pleasure. All religions have said do not pursue pleasure, sexual or any kind of 
pleasure because you have given your life over to Jesus, or Krishna; they 
advocate suppressing desire, suppressing fear, suppressing any form of pleasure. 
Every religion has talked about it endlessly. We are saying: on the contrary do 
not suppress anything, do not avoid anything. Do not analyse one’s fear—just 
observe. All human beings are caught in this pursuit of pleasure and when that 
pleasure is not given there is hatred, violence, anger and bitterness. So one must 
understand this pursuit, this enormous urge for pleasure which human beings 
have throughout the world. 
The function of the brain is to register, as a computer registers. It registers 
pleasure, and thought gives the energy and the drive to pursue pleasure. One has 
had pleasure of various kinds yesterday: they are registered. Then thought says 
there must be more and thought then pursues the more. The more then becomes 
pleasure; the desire for continuity of pleasure is given vitality and driven by 
thought—thinking about it, today or tomorrow, later on. That is the movement of 
pleasure. Now: is it possible to register only that which is absolutely necessary 
and nothing else? We are continually registering so many things unnecessarily 
and so building up the self, the me—“I am hurt; I am not what I should be; I must 
achieve what I think should be”, and so on. The whole of this registration is an 
action of giving importance to the self. Now we are asking: Is it possible to 
register only that which is absolutely necessary? What is absolutely necessary?—
not all the things the psyche builds up, which are memories. 
What is necessary to register and what is not necessary to register? The brain 
is occupied all the time with registering, therefore there is no tranquillity, no 
quietness, whereas if there is a clarity as to what is to be registered and what is 
not to be registered then the brain is quieter—and that is part of meditation. 
Are the things that one registers psychologically necessary at all? Anything 
that you hold psychologically is unnecessary. By holding those things, 
registering those things, by the brain holding on to them, it attains a certain 
security; but that security is merely the me that has gathered all the psychological 
hurts and imprints. So we are saying: to register anything psychologically and 
hold it is absolutely unnecessary—one’s beliefs, one’s dogmas, one’s 
experiences, one’s wishes and desires, they are all totally unnecessary. So, what 
is it that is necessary? Food, clothes and shelter—nothing else. This is a 
tremendous thing to understand in oneself; it means that the brain is no longer the 
accumulating factor of the me. The brain is rested, tranquil and it needs 

considerable tranquillity; but it has always sought that tranquillity, that security, 
in the me which is the accumulation of all the past registrations, which are just 
memories, therefore worthless—like collecting a lot of dead ash and giving 
tremendous importance to it. 
To register only that which is absolutely necessary; it is a marvellous thing if 
one can go into it and do it because then there is real freedom—freedom from all 
the accumulated knowledge, tradition, superstition and experience, which have 
all built up this enormous structure to which thought clings as the me. When the 
me is not, then compassion comes into being and that compassion brings clarity. 
With that clarity there is skill. 
Where there is unnecessary registration there is no love. If one wants to 
understand the nature of compassion one has to go into this question of what love 
is and whether there is such a thing as love without any form of attachment with 
all its complications, with all its pleasures and fears. 

XVI 
 
The division between the 
observer and the observed 
is the source of conflict 
 
There are two types of learning: one, memorizing what is being taught and then 
observing through memory—which is what most of us call learning—the other, 
learning through observation and not storing it as memory. Put another way: one 
is to learn something by heart, so that it is stored up in the brain as knowledge 
and subsequently acting according to that knowledge, skilfully or unskilfully; 
when one goes to school and university, one stores up a great deal of information 
as knowledge and according to that knowledge one acts, beneficially for oneself 
or for society; but incapable of acting simply, directly. The other kind of 
learning—to which one is not quite so accustomed because one is such a slave to 
habits, to tradition, to every form of conformity—is to observe without the 
accompaniment of previous knowledge, to look at something as though for the 
first time, afresh. If one observes things afresh, then there is not the cultivation of 
memory; it is not as when one observes and through that observation stores up 
memory so that the next time one observes it is through that pattern of memory, 
therefore not anymore observing afresh. 
It is important to have a mind that is not constantly occupied, constantly 
chattering. To an unoccupied mind a new seed of learning can germinate—
something entirely different from the cultivation of knowledge and acting from 
that knowledge. 
Observe the skies, the beauty of the mountains, the trees, the light among the 
leaves. That observation, if stored up as memory, will prevent the next 
observation being fresh. When one observes one’s wife or friend, can one 
observe without the interference of the recording of previous incidents in that 
particular relationship? If one can observe or watch the other without the 
interference of previous knowledge, one learns much more. 
The most important thing is to observe; to observe and not to have a division 
between the observer and the observed. Mostly there is a division as between the 
observer who is the total summation of past experience as memory and the 
observed, that which is—so the past observes. The division between the observer 
and the observed is the source of conflict. 
Is it possible for there to be no conflict at all, right through one’s life? 
Traditionally, one accepts that there must be this conflict, this struggle, this 
everlasting fight, not only physiologically in order to survive, but 
psychologically in desire and fear, like and dislike, and so on. To live without 
conflict is to live a life without any effort, a life in which there is peace. Man has 
lived, centuries upon centuries, a life of battle, conflict, both outwardly and 
inwardly; a constant struggle to achieve and fear of losing, dropping back. One 
may talk endlessly about peace, but there will be no peace as long as one is 
conditioned to the acceptance of conflict. If one says it is possible to live in 

peace, then it is just an idea and therefore valueless. And if one says it is not 
possible, then one blocks any investigation. 
Go into it psychologically first; it is more important than physiologically. If 
one understands very deeply the nature and the structure of conflict 
psychologically and perhaps ends it there, then one may be able to deal with the 
physiological factor. But if one is only concerned with the physiological, 
biological factor, to survive, then one probably will not be able to do it at all. 
Why is there this conflict, psychologically? From ancient times, both socially 
and religiously, there has been a division between the good and the bad. Is there 
really this division at all—or is there only “what is”, without its opposite? 
Suppose there is anger; that is the fact, that is “what is”, but “I will not be angry” 
is an idea, not a fact. 
One never questions this division, one accepts it because one is traditional by 
habit, not wanting anything new. But there is a further factor; there is a division 
between the observer and the observed. When one looks at a mountain, one looks 
at it as an observer and one calls it a mountain. The word is not the thing. The 
word “mountain” is not the mountain, but to oneself the word is very important; 
when one looks, instantly there is the response, “that is a mountain”. Now, can 
one look at the thing called “mountain”, without the word, because the word is a 
factor of division? When one says “My wife,” the word “my” creates division. 
The word, the name, is part of thought. When one looks at a man or a woman, a 
mountain or a tree, whatever it is, division takes place when thought, the name, 
the memory, comes into being. 
Can one observe without the observer, who is the essence of all the memories, 
experiences, reactions and so on, which are from the past? If one looks at 
something without the word and the past memories, then one looks without the 
observer. When one does that, there is only the observed and there is no division 
and no conflict, psychologically. Can one look at one’s wife or one’s nearest 
intimate friend without the name, the word and all the experiences that one has 
gathered in that relationship? When one so looks one is looking at her or him for 
the first time. 
Is it possible to live a life that is completely free from all psychological 
conflict? One has observed the fact, it will do everything if one lets the fact 
alone. As long as there is division between the image-making observer, and the 
fact—which is no image but only fact—there must be everlasting conflict. That is 
a law. That conflict can be ended. 
When there is an ending of psychological conflict—which is part of 
suffering—then how does that apply to one’s livelihood, how does that apply in 
one’s relationship with others? How does that ending of psychological struggle, 
with all its conflicts, pain, anxiety, fear, how does that apply to one’s daily 
living—one’s daily going to the office etc. etc.? If it is a fact that one has ended 
psychological conflict, then how will one live a life without conflict outwardly? 
When there is no conflict inside, there is no conflict outside, because there is no 
division between the inner and the outer. It is like the ebb and flow of the sea. It 
is an absolute, irrevocable fact, which nobody can touch, it is inviolate. So, if that 
is so, then what shall one do to earn a livelihood? Because there is no conflict, 

therefore there is no ambition. Because there is no conflict, there is no desire to 
be something. Because inwardly there is something absolute which is inviolate, 
which cannot be touched, which cannot be damaged, then one does not depend 
psychologically on another; therefore there is no conformity, no imitation. So, 
not having all that, one is no longer heavily conditioned to success and failure in 
the world of money, position, prestige, which implies the denial of “what is” and 
the acceptance of “what should be”. 
Because one denies “what is” and creates the ideal of “what should be” there 
is conflict. But to observe what actually is, means one has no opposite, only 
“what is”. If you observe violence and use the word “violence” there is already 
conflict, the very word is already warped: there are people who approve of 
violence and people who do not. The whole philosophy of non-violence is 
warped, both politically and religiously. There is violence and its opposite, non-
violence. The opposite exists because you know violence. The opposite has its 
root in violence. One thinks that by having an opposite, by some extraordinary 
method or means, one will get rid of “what is”. 
Now, can one put away the opposite and just look at violence, the fact? The 
non-violence is not a fact. Non-violence is an idea, a concept, a conclusion. The 
fact is violence—that one is angry; that one hates somebody; that one wants to 
hurt people; that one is jealous; all that is the implication of violence, that is the 
fact. Now, can one observe that fact without introducing its opposite? For then 
one has the energy—which was being wasted in trying to achieve the opposite—
to observe “what is”. In that observation there is no conflict. 
So, what will a man do who has understood this extraordinary complex 
existence based on violence, conflict, struggle, a man who is actually free of it, 
not theoretically, but actually free? Which means, no conflict. What shall he do 
in the world? Will one ask this question if one is inwardly, psychologically, 
completely free from conflict? Obviously not. It is only the man in conflict who 
says: “If there is no conflict, I will be at an end, I will be destroyed by society 
because society is based on conflict.” 
If one is aware of one’s consciousness, what is one? If one is aware, one will 
see that one’s consciousness is—in its absolute sense—in total disorder. It is 
contradictory, saying one thing, doing something else, always wanting 
something. The total movement is within an area which is confined and without 
space and in that little space there is disorder. 
Is one different from one’s consciousness? Or is one that consciousness? One 
is that consciousness. Then is one aware that one is in total disorder? Ultimately 
that disorder leads to neurosis, obviously—and all the specialists in modern 
society such as psychoanalysts, psychotherapists and so on. But inwardly, is one 
in order? Or is there disorder? Can one observe this fact? And what takes place 
when one observes choicelessly—which means without any distortion? Where 
there is disorder, there must be conflict. Where there is absolute order there is no 
conflict. And there is an absolute order, not relative order. That can only come 
about naturally, easily, without any conflict, when one is aware of oneself as a 
consciousness, aware of the confusion, the turmoil, the contradiction, outwardly 

and inwardly observing without any distortion. Then out of that comes naturally, 
sweetly, easily, an order which is irrevocable. 

XVII 
 
When there is an ending 
to consciousness with its content 
there is something entirely different 
 
To observe holistically is to observe—or to listen to—the whole content of 
something. Normally, we look at things partially, according to our pleasure, or 
according to our conditioning, or according to some idealistic point of view; we 
always look at things fragmentarily. The politician is mostly concerned with 
politics; the economist, the scientist, the businessman, each has his own concern, 
generally throughout life. It seems that we never take, or observe, the whole 
movement of life—like a full river with a great volume of water behind it; water 
right from beginning to end. It may become polluted but, given sufficient extent, 
it can cleanse itself. So, in the same way, we can treat life holistically, moving 
totally from the beginning to the end without any fragmentation, without any 
deviation, without any illusion. It is important to understand how the mind 
creates illusions of self-importance and all the various types of illusions which 
are comforting and safe—at least for the time being. We look at something with a 
preconceived idea or belief, so that we never really actually see it. 
Illusions are created by seeking satisfaction in desire. Satisfaction is entirely 
different from ecstasy. Ecstasy is a state of being, or not being, which is outside 
of oneself. That is ecstasy in which there is no experiencing. The moment there is 
experiencing, then it is the self with its past memories, its recollections, which is 
translating, creating illusions. Ecstasy never creates illusions. You cannot hold on 
to ecstasy because it is outside of oneself; there is no question of remembering it; 
there is no question of wanting it; wanting it is the desire to satisfy and that 
creates illusion. 
Most of us are caught in some kind of illusion—the illusion of being, or not 
being, the illusion of power, position and so on: whole categories projected from 
the centre, which is the me. Illusion means to see sensuously through a definite 
conclusion, prejudice, or idea. 
A mind that is caught in illusions has no order. Order can only come about 
holistically. We need order; even in a very small room one puts things in their 
right place otherwise it becomes disorderly, ugly, and lacking repose. We think 
order, psychologically, is in the following of a certain pattern or a certain routine 
which we have already established in the past. Order is, psychologically, 
something entirely different; it can only come about when there is clarity. Clarity 
brings order, not the other way round; try to seek order then that becomes 
mechanistic, a conformity to a pattern in which there can be no clarity. 
Order implies harmony in daily life. Harmony is not an idea. We are caught 
in the prison of ideas and there is no harmony in that. Harmony and clarity imply 
seeing things holistically, observing life as a total unitary movement—not, I am a 
businessman at the office and a different person at home; not, I am an artist and 
can do the most absurd and eccentric things; not this breaking up, or fragmenting, 

of life into various categories, the élite and the non-élite, the worker and the non-
worker, the intellectual and the romantic, which is the way we normally live. See 
how important it is to treat life as a total movement in which everything is 
included, in which there is no breaking down, as the good and the bad and 
heaven and hell. See holistically so that when you observe your friend, or your 
wife or your husband, you see holistically in that relationship. 
We think of freedom as freedom from something—freedom from sorrow, 
from anxiety, from work—which is really reaction and therefore not freedom at 
all. When someone says “I am free from smoking”, that is a response from what 
has been, a moving away from what has been. But we are talking of freedom 
which is not from something, which implies observing holistically. 
In observing holistically there is no fragmentation, or direction in that 
observation; for when there is direction there is distortion. Only when there is 
complete freedom can you observe holistically and in that observation there is no 
satisfaction and therefore there is no illusion. 
So, observe life as a total movement, non-fragmented, holistic, flowing 
continuously—“continuously” but not in the sense of time. Usually the word 
“continuous” implies time; but there is a continuity which is not of time. We 
think of the relationship between the past and the future as a continuity, without 
breaking up. That is what we generally understand by the word “continuity”, 
which is of time. Time is movement, a time-span to be covered through days, 
months, or years, with an ideal to be achieved at the end of it. Time implies 
thought; thought is a movement of measure; the movement of time. But, is there 
a continuity—if we can use that word, which is not perhaps quite right—is there 
a continuity which is not a series of incidents related to the past as cause 
becoming effect now and the effect in turn becoming future cause? Is there a 
state of being in which there is an ending, a coming to an end, of everything? 
We think of life as a measured movement in time; a movement which ends in 
death. Up to that point that is what we call continuity. Yet one observes a 
movement which is not of time, which is not a remembrance of something of the 
past going through the present and modifying the future and so continuing. There 
is a state of mind which is dying to everything that is happening; all that happens 
is coming in and flowing out—there is no retaining, but always a flowing out. 
That state of mind has its own sense of beauty and “continuity” which is not of 
time. 
Every religion, from ancient times, has tried to find out if there is something 
beyond death. The Ancient Egyptians thought that, in a way, living is part of 
death, so you carried over your slaves, your cattle, as you died. To go over to the 
other side was to live as you have lived this side, in the past. That was a 
continuity. The ancient people of India said life must have a continuity; for 
otherwise what is the point of achieving moral character, having so much 
experience in life, having suffered so much, if it merely ends in death—what is 
the point of it? Therefore, they said, there must be a future and in that future the 
content of consciousness is modified life after life; its content went on. The 
Christians have a different kind of fulfilment, such as the resurrection and so on. 
But, we want to find the truth of it; not what you think, not what the 

professionals, the priests and the psychologists think. There have appeared 
certain articles in the press in America and Europe affirming that people have 
“died” and come back to daily life remembering having experienced 
extraordinary “after death” states, light, beauty—whatever. One questions 
whether they really died, because if one is really dead it means that oxygen is not 
going to the brain and after several minutes the brain deteriorates; when there is 
real death there is no coming back and therefore no recollection of something 
after you die. Death may be a most extraordinary experience, much greater than 
so-called love, much greater than any desire, any idea, any conclusion; or it may 
be the end of everything, of every form of relationship, every form of 
recollection, remembrance, accumulation. It may be total annihilation; the 
complete ending of everything. One must find out what is the truth of the matter. 
To come upon the truth, every form of identification must end, every form of 
fear, every desire for comfort. One must not be caught in that illusion which 
says: “Yes, there is a marvellous state after death.” The mind must have no 
identification with the name, with the form, or with any person, idea, conclusion. 
Is that possible? That does not deny love; on the contrary, when one is attached 
to a person there is no love; there is dependence; there is the fear of being left 
alone in a world where everything is so insecure, both psychologically and 
outwardly. To find out what is the truth of death, what is the meaning, the real 
depth, of that extraordinary thing that must happen, there must be freedom. And 
there is no freedom when there is attachment, when there is fear, when there is a 
desire for comfort. Can one put all that aside? To find the truth of this 
extraordinary thing called death one must also find the truth of what is before 
death; not the truth after death, but also the truth before death. What is the truth 
before death? If that is not clear the other cannot be clear. One must look very 
closely, carefully and freely, at what is before death, which we call living. What 
is the truth of one’s living?—which means what is one, or who is one—which 
one calls living? A heavily conditioned mind brought about through education, 
environment, culture, through religious sanctions, beliefs and dogmas, rituals, 
“my country”, “your country”, the constant battle, wanting to be happy and being 
unhappy, depressed and elated, going through anxiety, uncertainty, hate, envy 
and the pursuit of pleasure; afraid to be alone, fear of loneliness, old age, 
disease—this is the truth of our life, our daily life. Can such a mind, which has 
not put order in this life—order in the sense of that which comes through clarity 
and compassion—can such a mind which is so utterly fragmented, disorderly, 
frightened, find out the truth about something outside of all that? 
So what is the truth of death—that is, complete ending? There may be 
annihilation, or there may be something; but that is a hope creating distortion and 
illusion; so one is cutting that out. 
One can only find out the truth of it when there is an ending—an ending to 
everything that you have; the ending to attachment, not giving it a day, ending it 
completely, now. That is what death means—ending, complete ending; and when 
there is complete ending something new is born. 
Fear is a burden, a terrible burden and when one removes that burden 
completely there is something new that takes place. But one is afraid of ending—

either ending at the end of one’s life, or ending now. End your vanity, because 
without ending there is no beginning. We are caught in this continuity of never 
ending. When there is total, complete, holistic, ending there is something totally 
new beginning, which you cannot possibly imagine; it is a totally different 
dimension. 
To find out the truth of death, there must be the ending of the content of one’s 
consciousness. Then one will never ask “Who am I?” or “What am I?” One is 
one’s consciousness with its content. When there is an ending to that 
consciousness with its content there is something entirely different, which is not 
imagined. Human beings have sought immortality in their actions; one writes a 
book and in that book there is one’s immortality as a writer; a great painter 
makes a painting and that painting becomes the immortality of that human being. 
All that must end—which no artist is willing to do. 
Each human being is a representative of the whole of humanity and when 
there is that change in consciousness one brings about a change in the human 
consciousness. Death is the ending of this consciousness as one knows it. 

XVIII 
 
Without clarity, skill becomes a most 
dangerous thing 
 
When one has developed a skill it gives a certain sense of well-being, security. 
And that skill, born of knowledge, must invariably, in its action, become 
mechanical. Skill in action is what one has sought because it gives a certain 
position in society, a certain prestige. Living in that field all the time, as one does 
in modern society, with all its economic demands, that knowledge and skill 
become, not only additive but also invariably a repetitive mechanical process that 
gradually gathers its own stimulation, its own arrogance, and power. In that 
power one has security. 
Society, at the present time, is demanding more and more skill—whether one 
is an engineer, a technological expert, a scientist, a psychotherapist, etc. etc.—but 
there is great danger—is there not?—in seeking all this skill resulting from 
accumulated knowledge, for in this increase there is no clarity. When skill 
becomes all-important in life, not only because it is the means of livelihood, but 
because one is totally educated for that purpose—all our schools, colleges and 
universities are directed for that purpose—then that skill invariably brings about 
a certain sense of power, of arrogance and self-importance. 
The art of learning is not only in the accumulation of the knowledge 
necessary for skilful action, but also in that learning which is without 
accumulation. There are two types of learning: acquiring and accumulating a 
great deal of knowledge through experience, through books, through education 
which may be used in skilful action; and another form in which one never 
accumulates and in which one never registers anything other than that which is 
absolutely necessary. In the first form, the brain is registering and accumulating 
knowledge, storing it up and acting from that store skilfully, or unskilfully. In the 
second form, one becomes so totally aware that one only registers that which is 
absolutely necessary and nothing else; then the mind is not cluttered and 
influenced with the movement of accumulated knowledge. 
In this art of learning, accumulating knowledge, by registering only the things 
that are necessary for skilful action, there is the non-registering of any 
psychological reactions; the brain is employing knowledge where function and 
skill are necessary and yet the brain is free not to register in the psychological 
area. It is very arduous this, to be so totally aware that one only registers that 
which is necessary and not, absolutely does not, register anything which is 
unnecessary. Someone insults you, someone flatters you, someone calls you this 
or that—no registration. This gives tremendous clarity. To register and yet not to 
register so that there is no psychological building up of the me, the structure of 
the self. The structure of the self arises only when there is the registration of 
everything that is not necessary; that is: giving importance to one’s name, one’s 
experience, one’s opinions and conclusions, all that is the intensifying of the 
energy in the self—which is always distorting. 

The art of learning gives this extraordinary clarity and if there is great skill in 
action without that clarity then it breeds self-importance, whether the self-
importance is identified with oneself or with a group, or with a nation. Self-
importance denies clarity. There cannot be compassion without clarity and 
because there is no compassion skill has become so important. If there is no 
clarity there is no awakening of intelligence, that intelligence which is neither 
yours nor mine, it is intelligence. That intelligence has its own action, which is 
non-mechanistic and therefore without cause. 
As in the art of seeing and of listening, in the art of learning there is no 
movement of thought. Thought is necessary to accumulate knowledge to function 
skilfully, otherwise thought has no place whatsoever. This brings tremendous 
clarity. In such clarity there is no centre from which one is functioning; no centre 
which has been put together by thought, as the me, mine; for where there is that 
centre there must be a circumference, where there is a circumference there is 
resistance, there is the division which is one of the fundamental causes of fear. 
Without clarity skill becomes a most destructive thing in life—which is what is 
happening in the world; men can go to the moon and put the flag of their country 
there, but that is not from clarity; they can kill each other through wars as a result 
of the extraordinary development of technology, all from the movement of 
thought, which is not clarity. Thought can never understand that which is whole, 
that which is immeasurable, which is timeless. 

XIX 
 
How is one to know oneself? 
 
What is the nature of thought that it ceases when there is complete attention and 
when there is no attention it arises? One has to understand what it is to be aware 
otherwise one will not be able to understand completely the full significance of 
attention. 
Is there an idea of awareness or is one aware? There is a difference. The idea 
of being aware, or being aware. “Aware” means to be sensitive, to be alive, to the 
things about one, to nature, to people, to colour, to the trees, to the environment, 
to the social structure, the whole thing, to be aware outwardly of all that is 
happening and to be aware to what is happening inside. To be aware is to be 
sensitive, to know, to observe, what is happening inside psychologically and also 
what is happening outside, environmentally, economically, socially and so on. If 
one is not aware of what is happening outwardly and one begins to be aware 
inwardly then one becomes rather neurotic. But if one begins to be aware of what 
is exactly happening in the world, as much as possible, and then from there 
moves inwardly, then one has a balance. Then there is a possibility of not 
deceiving oneself. One begins by being aware of what is happening outwardly 
and then one moves inward—like the ebb and flow of the tide, there is constant 
movement—so that there is no deception. If one knows what is happening 
outside and from there moves inward one then has criteria. 
How is one to know oneself? Oneself is a very complex structure, a very 
complex movement; how is one to know oneself so that one does not deceive 
oneself? One can only know oneself in one’s relationship to others. In one’s 
relationship to others one may withdraw from them because one does not want to 
be hurt and in relationship one may discover that one is very jealous, dependent, 
attached and really quite callous. So relationship acts as a mirror in which one 
knows oneself. It is the same thing outwardly; the outer is a reflection of oneself, 
because society, governments, all these things, are created by human beings 
fundamentally the same as oneself. 
To find out what awareness is one must go into the question of order and 
disorder. One sees outwardly that there is a great deal of disorder, confusion and 
uncertainty. What has brought about this uncertainty, this disorder; who is 
responsible? Are we? Be quite clear as to whether we are responsible for the 
disorder outwardly; or is it some divine disorder out of which divine order will 
come? So, if one feels responsible for the outward disorder then is not that 
disorder an expression of one’s own disorder? 
One observes that disorder outwardly is created by our disorder inwardly. As 
long as human beings have no order in themselves there will be disorder, always. 
Governments may try to control that disorder, outwardly; the extreme form is the 
totalitarianism of Marxism—saying it knows what order is, you do not, it is 
going to tell you what it is and suppress you, or confine you in concentration 
camps and psychiatric hospitals and all that follows. 

The world is in disorder because we are in disorder, each one of us. Is one 
aware of one’s disorder or has one but a concept of disorder? Is one aware that 
one is in disorder or is it merely an idea which has been suggested that one 
accepts? The acceptance of an idea is an abstraction, an abstraction from “what 
is”. The abstraction is to move away from “what is”—and one mostly lives in 
ideas and moves away from facts. Is one accepting a concept of disorder or is one 
aware that one is oneself in disorder? Does one understand the difference 
between the two? Does one become aware, per se, for itself? 
What does one mean by disorder? There is contradiction; one thinks one 
thing, and does another. There is the contradiction of opposing desires, opposing 
demands, opposing movements in oneself—duality. How does this duality arise? 
Is it not that one is incapable of looking at “what is”? One would rather run away 
from “what is” into “what should be”, hoping somehow, by some miracle, by 
some effort of will, to change “what is” into “what should be”. That is: one is 
angry and one “should not” be angry. If one knew what to do with anger, how to 
deal with anger and go beyond it, there would be no need for “what should be”, 
which is “do not be angry”. If one can understand what to do with “what is”, then 
one will not escape to “what should be”. Because one does not know what to do 
with “what is”, one hopes that by inventing an ideal that one can somehow 
through the ideal change “what is”. Or, because one is incapable and does not 
know what to do, one’s brain becomes conditioned to living always in the 
future—the “what one hopes to be”. One is essentially living in the past but one 
hopes by living for an ideal in the future to alter the present. If one were to see 
what to do with “what is” then the future does not matter. It is not a question of 
accepting “what is”, but remaining with “what is”. 
One can only understand something if one looks at “what is” and does not run 
away from it—not try to change it into something else. Can one remain with, 
observe, see, “what is”—nothing else? I want to look at “what is”. I realize that I 
am greedy but it does not do anything. Greed is a feeling and I have looked at 
that feeling named greed. The word is not the thing; but I may be mistaking the 
word for the thing. I may be caught in words but not with the fact—the fact that I 
am greedy. It is very complex; the word may incite that feeling. Can the mind be 
free of the word and look? The word has become so important to me in my life. 
Am I a slave to words?—knowing that the word is not the thing. Has the word 
become so important that the fact is not real, actual, to me? I would rather look at 
a picture of a mountain than go and look at a mountain; to look at a mountain I 
have to go a great distance, climb, look, feel. Looking at a picture of a mountain 
is looking at a symbol, it is not reality. Am I caught in words, which are symbols, 
thereby moving away from reality? Does the word create the feeling of greed?—
or is there greed without the word? This requires tremendous discipline, not 
suppression. The very pursuit of the enquiry has its own discipline. So I have to 
find out, very carefully, whether the word has created the feeling, or if the feeling 
exists without the word. The word is greed, I named it when I had that feeling 
before therefore I am registering the present feeling by a past incident of the 
same kind. So the present has been absorbed into the past. 

So I realize what I am doing. I am aware that the word has become 
extraordinarily important to me. So then, is there a freedom from the word greed, 
envy or nationality, Communist, Socialist and so on—is there a freedom from the 
word? The word is of the past. The feeling is the present recognized by the word 
from the past, so I am living all the time in the past. The past is me. The past is 
time; so time is me. The me says: “I must not be angry because my conditioning 
has said: do not be greedy, do not be angry.” The past is telling the present what 
it should do. So there is a contradiction because fundamentally, very deeply, the 
past is dictating the present, what it should do. The me, which is the past with all 
its memories, experiences, knowledge, a thing put together by thought, the me, is 
dictating what should happen. 
Now, can I observe the fact of greed without the past? Can there be 
observation of greed without naming, without getting caught in the word, having 
understood that the word can create the feeling and that if the word creates the 
feeling then the word is ‘me’, which is of the past, telling me “do not be greedy”? 
Is it possible to look at “what is” without the me—which is the observer? Can I 
observe greed, the feeling, its fulfilment and action, without the observer which 
is the past? 
The “what is” can only be observed when there is no me. Can one observe the 
colours and forms around one? How does one observe them? One observes 
through the eye. Observe without moving the eye; because if one moves the eye 
the whole operation of the thinking brain comes into being. The moment the 
brain is in operation there is distortion. Look at something without moving one’s 
eyes; how still the brain becomes. Observe not only with one’s eyes but with all 
one’s care, with affection. There is then an observation of the fact, not the idea, 
but the fact, with care and with affection. One approaches “what is” with care, 
with affection; therefore there is no judgement, no condemnation; therefore one 
is free of the opposite. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III 
 
 
TWO DIALOGUES 
 
Krishnamurti talks with a small group at Ojai drawn 
from the Krishnamurti schools and Foundations in 
Canada, England, India and USA 

I 
 
Questioner (1): Can we discuss the relation between Krishnamurti’s teaching and 
truth? 
 
Questioner (2): Is there such a thing as a teaching at all, or is there only truth? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: Is it the expression of truth? There are two things involved. The 
speaker is either talking out of the silence of truth, or he is talking out of the 
noise of an illusion which he considers to be the truth. 
 
Q: That is what most people do. 
 
K: So which is it that he is doing? 
 
Q: There could be a confusion between the word and truth. 
 
K: No, the word is not the truth. That’s why we said: either he is talking out of 
the silence of truth or out of the noise of illusion. 
 
Q: But because one feels that he is speaking out of the silence of truth there is a 
greater possibility for the word to be taken as truth. 
 
K: No, let’s go slowly for this is interesting. Who is going to judge, who is going 
to see the truth of the matter? The listener, the reader? You who know Indian 
scriptures, Buddhism, The Upanishads, etc.—you are familiar with them and 
know most of the contents of all that. Are you capable of judging? How shall we 
find out? You hear him talking about these things and you wonder if he is really 
speaking out of this extraordinary silence of truth, or as a reaction and from a 
conditioned childhood and so on. That is to say, either he is talking out of his 
conditioning or out of the other. How will you find out? How will you approach 
this problem? 
 
Q: Is it possible for me to find out if what is meeting that teaching is the noise 
within myself? 
 
K: That’s why I am asking you. What is the criterion, the measure that you apply 
so you can say: “Yes, that is it.” Or do you say: “I don’t know”? I am asking 
what you do. Or don’t you know but are examining, investigating; not whether he 
is speaking out of silence or conditioning, but you are watching the truth of what 
he is saying. I would want to know whether he was speaking out of this, or out of 
that. But as I don’t know, I am going to listen to what he is saying and see if it is 
true. 
 
Q: But what sees it as true? 
 

K: Say one is fairly alive to things. One listens to this man and one wants to find 
out whether what he says is mere words or the truth. 
 
Q: When I have come to the conclusion that it is the truth, then I am already not 
listening. 
 
K: No, I don’t know. My life is concerned with this problem—not just for a few 
years or a few days. I want to know the truth of this matter. Is he speaking out of 
experience or from knowledge, or not out of any of these things? Most people 
speak out of knowledge, so we are asking that question. 
I don’t know how you would find out. I’ll tell you what I would do. I would 
put his personality, his influence, all that, completely aside. Because I don’t want 
to be influenced, I am sceptical, doubtful, so I am very careful. I listen to him and 
I don’t say “I know” or “I don’t know”, but I am sceptical. I want to find out. 
 
Q: Sceptical means you are inclined to doubt it, which is already a bias... 
 
K: Oh, no! I am sceptical in the sense that I don’t accept everything that is being 
said. 
 
Q: But you lean towards doubting. It’s negation. 
 
K: Oh, no. I would rather use the word doubt, in the sense of questioning. Let’s 
put it that way. I say to myself: Am I questioning out of my prejudice? This 
question has never been put to me before, I am exploring it. I would put 
everything aside—all the personal reputation, charm, looks, this and that—I am 
not going to accept or reject, I am going to listen to find out. Am I prejudiced? 
Am I listening to him with all the knowledge I have gathered about religion, of 
what the books have said, what other people have said, or what my own 
experience tells me? 
 
Q: No. I may be listening to him precisely because I have rejected all that. 
 
K: Have I rejected it? Or am I listening to him with all that? If I have rejected 
that then I am listening. Then I am listening very carefully to what he has to say. 
 
Q: Or I am listening with everything that I already know of him? 
 
K: I have said: I have put away his reputation. Am I listening to him with the 
knowledge that I have acquired through books, through experience, and therefore 
I am comparing, judging, evaluating? Then I can’t find out whether what he is 
saying is the truth. But is it possible for me to put aside all that? I am 
passionately interested to find out. So for the time being—while I am listening at 
least—I will put aside everything I have known. Then I proceed. I want to know, 
but I am not going to be easily persuaded, pulled into something by argument, 
cleverness, logic. Now am I capable of listening to what he is saying with 

complete abandonment of the past? It comes to that. Are you? Then my 
relationship to him is entirely different. Then I am listening out of silence. 
This is really a very interesting question. I have answered for myself. There 
are a dozen of us here, how would you answer it? How do you know that what he 
is talking about is the truth? 
 
Q: I wouldn’t be concerned with that word truth. When you use the word truth 
you indicate you have the ability to judge what is true, or you already have a 
definition of truth, or you know what truth is. Which means you will not be 
listening to what somebody is saying. 
 
K: Don’t you want to know whether he is speaking falsehood, out of a 
conditioned mind, from a rejection and therefore out of a reaction? 
 
Q (1): I realize that in order to listen to this man I can’t listen with a conditioned 
mind—not to anybody. 
 
Q (2): Another question which arises is: I reject all this knowledge and listen in 
silence. Is truth in that silence? 
 
K: I don’t know. That is one of the things I have got to find out. 
 
Q (1): If there is no rejection there is no silence. 
 
Q (2): As this well is an endless source, is the teaching the same as truth? 
 
K: How would you answer this question? 
 
Q: I think first of all you can be sensitive to what is false. In other words, to see if 
there is something false, something incoherent. 
 
K: Logic can be very false. 
 
Q (1): Yes, I don’t mean just logic, but you can be sensitive to the whole 
communication to see if there is some deception. I think one of the questions 
implied here is: Are you deceiving yourself? 
 
Q (2): But doesn’t that sensitivity imply the absence of one’s own projections—
the silence after having moved through all your own colouring of it. Only then 
can you be that sensitive. 
 
Q (3): You have to be free of deceiving yourself to see that. 
 
K: Again, forgive me for asking: How do you know he is speaking the truth? Or 
is he deceiving himself and is caught in an illusion which gives him a feeling that 
he is telling the truth? What do you answer? 

Q: One goes into it oneself. One cannot accept it without going deeply into it. 
 
K: But one can deceive oneself so appallingly. 
 
Q: You go through the layers of all those deceptions and beyond them. 
 
K: If I were a stranger I might say: You have listened to this man for a long time, 
how do you know he is telling the truth? How do you know anything about it? 
 
Q: I could say that I have looked at what you have said, and each time I was able 
to test it to see if it was right. I have not found anything which was contradictory. 
 
K: No. The question was: How do you find out the truth?—Not about 
contradiction, logic, all that. One’s own sensitivity, one’s own investigation, 
one’s own delving—is that enough? 
 
Q (1): If one goes all the way, if one goes through all the possible self-
deceptions. 
 
Q (2): And then goes so far as to say that in the moments when one is listening—
I do not know how deeply, but listening at all—one feels there is a change in 
oneself. It may not be a total revolution, but there is a change. 
 
K: That can happen when you go for a walk and look at the mountains and are 
quiet, and when you come back to your home certain things have taken place. 
You follow what I am saying? 
 
Q (1): Yes. 
 
Q (2): We listen to people who speak from knowledge, and we listen to you, and 
there is something totally different. The non-verbal... 
 
K: Have you answered the question? 
 
Q (1): To myself I have. I have listened to scores of people and I listen to K. I 
don’t know what it is, but it is totally different. 
 
Q (2): That means there is a ring of truth in it. 
 
Q (3): There are people who imply that in some way you are deceiving yourself. 
They do not see it that way. 
 
Q (4): There was a man who wrote to me and asked if I agreed with everything 
Krishnamurti said. “Didn’t he tell you that you should doubt everything he said?” 
The only way I could answer was to say: “Look, to me it is self-evident.” 
 

K: It may be self-evident to you and yet an illusion. It is such a dangerous, 
delicate thing. 
 
Q (1): It can be that there is a scale on which we weigh it. 
 
Q (2): I think that for thought it is not at all possible to be sure about this matter. 
It is typical of thought that it wants to be sure that it is not deceiving itself, that it 
is listening to truth. Thought will never give up that question, and it is right for 
thought never to give up questioning, but thought cannot touch it, cannot know 
about it. 
 
K: Dr Bohm and I had a discussion of this kind in a different way. If I remember 
rightly we said: Is there such a silence which is not the word, which is not 
imagined or induced? Is there such a silence, and is it possible to speak out of 
that silence? 
 
Q: The question was whether the words are coming from perception, from the 
silence, or from the memory. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: The question is whether the words that are used are communicating directly 
and are coming out of the emptiness, out of the silence, or not. 
 
K: That is the real question. 
 
Q: As we used to say: like the drum which vibrates to the emptiness within. 
 
K: Yes. Are you satisfied by this answer?—by what the others have said? 
 
Q: No, Krishnaji. 
 
K: Then how do you find out? 
 
Q: The very words you are using deny the possibility of being satisfied and to 
work at it intellectually. It is something that has nothing to do with those things. 
 
K: Look, suppose I love you and trust you. Because I trust you and you trust me 
whatever you say won’t be a lie and I know you won’t deceive me under any 
circumstances, you won’t tell me something which is not actual to you. 
 
Q: I might do something out of ignorance. 
 
K: But say you trust me and I trust you. There is a relationship of trust, 
confidence, affection, love; like a man and a woman when they are married, they 
trust each other. Now is that possible here? Because—as she points out—I can 

deceive myself with logic, with reason, with all these things: millions of people 
have done it. I can also see the danger of, “I love the priest”; and he can play 
havoc with me. 
 
Q (1): If one has affection for someone, one projects all kinds of illusions on to 
him. 
 
Q (2): I think the trust, the investigation, logic and all that goes together with 
love. 
 
K: That is a very dangerous thing too. 
 
Q (1): Of course it is. 
 
Q (2): Isn’t there any way to avoid danger? 
 
K: I don’t want to be caught in an illusion. 
 
Q: So can we say that truth is in the silence out of which the teaching comes? 
 
K: But I want to know how the silence comes! I might invent it. I might have 
worked to have a silent mind for years, conditioned it, kept it in a cage, and then 
say, “Marvellous, I am silent”. There is that danger. Logic is a danger. Thought is 
a danger. So I see all the dangers around me. I am caught in all these dangers and 
I want to find out if what that man is saying is the truth. 
 
Q (1): I think there is no way or procedure to find that out. There is no 
prescription. I cannot tell anybody how to find out. I can say that I feel it with all 
my being, that something is true and maybe I can convey it through my life, but I 
cannot convince anybody through words or reason or by any method. And in the 
same way I cannot convince myself. 
 
Q (2): Are we saying that perception has to be pure and in the realm of silence—
the real realm of silence, not a fantasy—in order to be able to even come close to 
this question? 
 
K: Dr Bohm is a scientist, a physicist, he is clear-thinking, logical; suppose 
someone goes to him and asks, “Is what Krishnamurti says the truth?” How is he 
going to answer? 
 
Q: Doesn’t Dr Bohm, or anybody, have to go beyond the limitations of logic? 
 
K: Somebody comes to him and asks: “Tell me, I really want to know from you, 
please tell me if that man is speaking the truth.” 
 
Q: But you are then saying, use the instrument of logic to find out? 

K: No. I am very interested because I have heard so many people who are 
illogical and careless say he is speaking the truth. But I go to a serious thinker, 
careful with the use of words, and ask: “Please tell me if he is telling the truth, 
not some crooked thing covered up.” How is he going to answer me? 
 
Q: The other day when that man said you may be caught in a groove,* and you 
looked at it first, what happened then? 
 
K: I looked at it in several different ways and I don’t think I am caught in a 
groove, but yet I might be. So after examining it very carefully, I left it. 
Something takes place when you leave it alone after an examination, something 
new comes into it. 
Now I am asking you: Please tell me if that man is speaking the truth. 
 
Q: For me it is a reality. I can’t communicate it to you. This is what I have found 
out and you have to find it out for yourself. You have to test it in your own mind. 
 
K: But you may be leading me up the garden path. 
 
Q: That is all I can say. I can’t really communicate it. 
 
K: You may be up the garden path yourself. 
 
Q (1): But then why should I go to Dr Bohm, much as I respect him? 
 
Q (2): One thing I can say is that I have questioned it and I have said it may be 
so, it may not be so, and I have looked carefully into the question of self-
deception. 
 
Q (3): It seems to me I would want to know what he is bringing to bear on the 
answer to this question. Is it science? Is it logic? Is it his own intelligence? I 
would want to know out of what he was going to answer me. 
 
K: How do you in your heart of hearts, as a human being, know that he is 
speaking the truth? I want to feel it. I object to logic and all that. I have been 
through that before. Therefore if all that is not the way, then what is? 
 
Q: There are people who are very clever, who speak of things which are very 
similar, who have grasped this intellectually very well and say they are speaking 
from truth. 
 
K: Yes, they are repeating in India now: “You are the world.” That is the latest 
catchword! 
 
                                                 
* See Dialogue II. 

Q: In order to communicate that, I have to speak out of the silence you were 
referring to. 
 
K: No, please be simple with me. I want to know if Krishnamurti is speaking the 
truth. Dr Bohm has known Krishnamurti for several years. He has a good, trained 
mind so I go to him and ask him. 
 
Q: All he can say is, “I know this man, this is how he affects me. He has changed 
my life.” And suddenly a note may be struck in the other one. 
 
K: No. I want it straight from the horse’s mouth! 
 
Q (1): Dr Bohm is here. Let him tell us. 
 
Q (2): But you said you wanted proof. 
 
K: I don’t. It is a very serious question, it isn’t just a dramatic or intellectual 
question. This is a tremendous question. 
 
Q: Can one ever get an answer? Or is that person asking a false question to begin 
with? 
 
K: Is he? 
 
Q (1): Of course. How can a person know? 
 
Q (2): I think I could say to him that when we did discuss these things it was 
from the emptiness, and that I felt it was a direct perception. 
 
K: Yes. Is direct perception unrelated to logic? 
 
Q: It doesn’t come from logic. 
 
K: But you are logical all the same. 
 
Q: That may come later, not at that moment. 
 
K: So you are telling me: I have found out that man is telling the truth because I 
had a direct perception, an insight into what he is saying. 
 
Q: Yes. 
 
K: Now be careful, because I have heard a disciple of some guru saying exactly 
the same thing. 
 

Q: I have also heard a guru say this but a little later by looking at it logically I 
saw the thing was nonsense. When I was looking at the fact and the logic I saw 
that it did not fit. So I would say that in addition to direct perception I have 
constantly examined this logically. 
 
K: So you are saying that perception has not blinded you and with that perception 
goes logic also. 
 
Q: Yes, logic and fact. 
 
K: So perception first, then logic. Not first logic, then perception. 
 
Q: Yes. That is what it always has to be. 
 
K: So through perception and then with logic, you see that it is the truth. Hasn’t 
this been done by the devout Christians? 
 
Q: Logic is not enough, because we have to see how people actually behave as 
well. I see that Christians say certain things, but when we look at the whole of 
what they do it doesn’t fit. 
 
K: Isn’t there a terrible danger in this? 
 
Q: I am sure there is a danger. 
 
K: So you are now saying that one has to walk in danger. 
 
Q: Yes. 
 
K: Now I begin to understand what you are saying. One has to move in a field 
which is full of danger, full of snakes and pitfalls. 
 
Q: Which means one has to be tremendously awake. 
 
K: So I have learned from talking to him that this is a very dangerous thing. He 
has said you can only understand whether Krishnamurti is speaking the truth if 
you are really prepared to walk in a field which is full of pitfalls. Is that right? 
 
Q: Yes. 
 
K: It is a field which is full of mines, the razor’s edge path. Are you prepared to 
do that? One’s whole being says “Be secure”. 
 
Q: That is the only way to do anything. 
 

K: I have learnt to be aware of the dangers around me and also to face danger all 
the time and therefore to have no security. The enquirer might say, “This is too 
much” and go away! 
So this is what I want to get at. Can the mind—which has been conditioned 
for centuries to be secure—abandon that, and say, “I will walk into danger”? 
That is what we are saying. It is logical, but in a sense it is illogical. 
 
Q: In principle that is the way all science works. 
 
K: Yes, that is right. So it also means I don’t trust anybody—any guru, any 
prophet. I trust my wife because she loves me and I love her, but that is 
irrelevant. 
 
Q: The word danger has to be explained too. From one point it is dangerous, and 
from another it isn’t. I have to investigate. My conditioning is very dangerous. 
 
K: So we’re saying: “I have walked in danger and I have found the logic of this 
danger. Through the perception of the danger I have found the truth of what 
Krishnamurti is saying. And there is no security, no safety in this. Whereas all 
the others give me safety.” 
 
Q: Security becomes the ultimate danger. 
 
K: Of course. 
 
Q: What you have described is actually the scientific approach. They say every 
statement must be in danger of being false; it has been put that way. 
 
K: That is perfectly right. I have learnt a lot—have you? A man comes from 
Seattle or Sheffield or Birmingham and is told: “I have found that what he says is 
the truth because I have had a perception and that perception stands logically”. It 
is not outside of reason. And in that perception I see that where I walk is full of 
pitfalls, of danger. Therefore I have to be tremendously aware. Danger exists 
when there is no security. And the gurus, the priests, all offer security. Seeing the 
illogic of it I accept this illogic too. 
 
Q: I am not sure that you should call it illogical; it is not illogical but it is the way 
logic has to work. 
 
K: Of course. Are we saying that direct perception, insight and the working out 
of it demand great logic, a great capacity to think clearly? But the capacity to 
think clearly will not bring about insight. 
 
Q: But if the logic does not bring about perception, what does it do exactly? 
 
K: It trains, it sharpens the mind. But that certainly won’t bring about an insight. 

Q: It is not through the mind that the perception comes. 
 
K: That all depends on what you mean by the mind. Logic makes the mind sharp, 
clear, objective and sane. But that won’t give you the other. Your question is: 
How does the other come about? 
 
Q (1): No. That was not my question. Logic clears the mind, but is the mind the 
instrument of perception? 
 
Q (2): You see, you must have the perception. If you have a perception, for 
example, about the ending of sorrow, or fear, it may be that the whole thing is a 
deception. Logic is something which provides the clarity in what you are doing 
from there on. 
 
Q (3): Yes, that is what we said, that it clears the mind of confusion, of the 
debris. 
 
Q (4): The debris may come if you don’t have logic. 
 
K: You might remain in the debris if you don’t have logic. 
 
Q: If the perception is a real perception and so the truth, why does it then need 
the discipline of logic to examine it? 
 
K: We said perception works out logically. It does not need logic. Whatever it 
does is reasonable, logical, sane, objective. 
 
Q: It is logical without an intent to make it so. 
 
K: That’s it. 
 
Q: It is like saying that if you see what is in this room correctly, you will not find 
anything illogical in what you see. 
 
K: All right. Will the perception keep the confusion, the debris away all the time 
so that the mind never accumulates it and doesn’t have to keep clearing it away? 
That was your question, wasn’t it? 
 
Q: I think perception can reach the stage at which it is continually keeping the 
field clear. I say that it can reach that stage for a certain moment. 
 
K: At a certain moment I have perception. But during the interval between the 
perceptions there is a lot of debris being gathered. Our question is: Is perception 
continuous so that there is no collection of the debris? Put it round the other way: 
Does one perception keep the field clear? 
 

Q: Can one make a difference between insight and perception? 
 
K: Don’t break it up yet. Take those two words as synonymous. We are asking: 
Is perception from time to time, with intervals? During those intervals a lot of 
debris collects and therefore the field has to be swept again. Or does perception 
in itself bring about tremendous clarity in which there is no debris? 
 
Q: Are you saying that once it happens it will be there for ever? 
 
K: That is what I am trying to get at. Don’t use the words “continuous,” “never 
again”. Keep to the question: Once perception has taken place can the mind 
collect further debris, confusion? It is only when that perception becomes 
darkened by the debris, that the process of getting rid of it begins. But if there is 
perception why should there be a collecting, gathering? 
 
Q: There are a lot of difficult points in this. 

II 
 
KRISHNAMURTI: We were discussing how one can know that what Krishnamurti 
is saying is true. He might be caught in his own conditioning, illusions and 
knowing them, and not being able to free himself from them, have put together a 
series of observations, words, and call them truth. How do you know whether 
what he is saying is actual, truthful and lasting? 
Dr Bohm said that when one has an insight, a direct perception into what is 
being said, then there is no doubt that it is the truth. Having that insight you can 
work it out logically to show that the perception is true. But is that perception 
brief, only to be had at intervals and therefore gathering a lot of debris—those 
things that block perception—or is one perception enough? Does it open the door 
so that there is insight all the time? 
 
Q: Does that mean that you would never have any confusion? 
 
K: Yes, we came to that point. One has a perception, an insight, and that insight 
has its own capacity for reason, logic and action. That action is complete, 
because the perception is complete for the moment. Will further action confuse 
perception? Or, having perception is there no further confusion? 
 
Q: I think we were saying that there is danger in this. If you say: My action is 
always right... 
 
K: Oh, that is dangerous! 
 
Q: We also said that logic has its danger. One could think one has an insight 
when one has not. 
 
K: Suppose I have the capacity to reason it out and act and then say: That is a 
perfect, complete action. Some people who read the Gita act according to it and 
they call that insight. Their action is patterned after their reading. They say this 
action is complete. I have heard many of them say this; also Catholics and 
Protestants who are completely immersed in the Bible. So we are treading on 
very dangerous ground and therefore are greatly aware of it. 
 
Q: You also said that the mind tries to find security in all this. 
 
K: The mind has always been seeking security and when that security is 
threatened it tries to find security in insight, in direct perception. 
 
Q: In the illusion of insight. 
 
K: Yes, but it makes the insight into security. The next question is: Must there be 
a constant breaking of perception? That is, one day one sees very clearly, one has 
direct perception, then that fades away and there is confusion. Then again there is 

a perception and an action, followed by confusion and so on. Is that so? Or is 
there no further confusion after these deep insights? 
 
Q: Are we saying this perception is whole? 
 
K: Yes, if the perception is complete, whole, then there is no confusion at any 
time. Or, one may deceive oneself that it is whole and act upon it, which brings 
confusion. 
 
Q: There is also a possible danger that one has a genuine perception, an insight, 
and is not fooling oneself and that out of that comes a certain action. But then 
one could fall into making whatever that action was into a formula and stop 
having the insight. Let’s say that out of an insight which was real a certain action 
came. One then thinks that is the way things should be. 
 
K: That is what generally happens. 
 
Q: But isn’t that a corruption of the perception, just making a pattern out of the 
action instead of continuing to look? It is like being able to really look at 
something, for instance looking out of the window and something is seen. But 
then you don’t look out again and think everything is the way it was. It may have 
totally changed. The perception starts out being genuine, but you don’t continue 
to look, have insight. 
 
K: Yes. Scientists may have an insight in some specialized field and that insight 
is put into a category of science unrelated to their life. But we are talking of a 
perception that is not only in the field of action but also in daily life. 
 
Q: As a whole and so there is a continuity. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: But I still don’t think we have gone into the question of danger. You said that 
one day a man came to you and said maybe you were stuck in a groove. 
 
K: Yes, caught in a rut. 
 
Q: You didn’t say immediately, “I know I am not because I have had a perfect 
insight.” 
 
K: Ah, that would be deadly! 
 
Q: But rather, you said you looked at it for several days. 
 
K: Of course. 
 

Q: I am trying to find out what we are driving at. Perhaps we are saying that 
there may be an insight which never goes back into confusion. But we are not 
saying there is one. 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. Now would you say, when there is complete perception—not 
an illusory perception—there is no further confusion? 
 
Q: It seems reasonable to say that. 
 
K: That means from day to day there is no confusion at all. 
 
Q: Then why did you feel it necessary to look into it? 
 
K: Because I may deceive myself. Therefore it is dangerous ground and I must be 
alert, I must watch it. 
 
Q: Are we seeing this as an insight now?—that when there is an insight of that 
kind there is no further confusion? But we may deceive ourselves nevertheless. 
 
K: Yes. Therefore we must be watchful. 
 
Q: Do you mean after the real insight you could then deceive yourself? 
 
K: No. You have a deep insight, complete, whole. Someone comes along and 
says: “Look, you are deceiving yourself.” Do you instantly say, “No, I am not 
deceiving myself because my perception was complete”? Or do you listen and 
look at it all afresh? It doesn’t mean that you are denying the complete 
perception, you are again watching if it is real or illusory. 
 
Q: That is not necessarily an intellectual process? 
 
K: No, no. I would say both. It is intellectual as well as non-verbal. 
 
Q: Is perception something that is always there and it is only that we... 
 
K: That leads to dangerous ground. The Hindus say that God is always there 
inside you—the abiding deep divinity, or soul, or Atman, and it is covered up. 
Remove the confusion, the debris and it is found inside. Most people believe that. 
I think that is a conclusion. You conclude that there is something divine inside, a 
soul, the Atman or whatever you like to call it. And from a conclusion you can 
never have a total, complete perception. 
 
Q: But this leads to another problem, because if you deny that, then what makes 
one step out of the stream? Does it mean that the stepping out is for certain 
individuals only? 
 

K: When you say “certain individuals” I think you are putting the wrong 
question, aren’t you? 
 
Q: No. If the possibility exists for everyone... 
 
K: Yes, the possibility exists for human beings. 
 
Q: For the totality? 
 
K: For human beings. 
 
Q: Then there is some energy which... 
 
K: Which is outside of them or which is in them. 
 
Q: Yes. We don’t know. 
 
K: Therefore don’t come to any conclusion. If from a conclusion you think you 
perceive, then that perception is conditioned, therefore it is not whole. 
 
Q: Does that mean that there would not be the possibility of a deepening of 
perception? 
 
K: You can’t deepen insight. You can’t deepen perception. You perceive the 
whole—that’s all. 
 
Q: What do you mean then by saying there was this mind into which you could 
continually go more deeply? 
 
K: That is something else. 
 
Q: Are you saying that perception, if it is partial, is not perception? 
 
K: Of course, obviously not. 
 
Q (1): So the deepening of perception would only be a partial step. That wouldn’t 
be perception. 
 
Q (2): You mentioned watchfulness after perception. 
 
K: What happened was: A man came up to me and said, “You are getting old, 
you are stuck in a groove.” And I listened to it. For a couple of days I thought 
about it. I looked at it and said to myself, “He may be right.” 
 
Q: You are almost suggesting that it could be possible. 
 

K: No, I wanted to examine it. Don’t say it could, or could not. 
 
Q: I was going to ask: to be caught in habit after a perception, could that not ever 
happen again, at certain levels? 
 
K: There is partial perception and total perception—let’s divide it into those two. 
When there is total perception there is no further confusion. 
 
Q: You don’t get caught in habit? 
 
K: There is no further confusion. Because it is so. 
 
Q: What if something happens to the brain physically? 
 
K: Then of course it is gone. 
 
Q: So there seems to be a limitation to what you say, because one assumes that 
the brain remains healthy. 
 
K: Of course, assuming that the whole organism is healthy. If there is an 
accident, your brain suffers concussion and something is injured, then it is 
finished. 
 
Q (1): The major danger is that we would mistake a partial perception for the 
total. 
 
Q (2): But it still means that it is “here”. You are not tapping it from “out there”. 
That energy is within you, isn’t it? 
 
K: One has to go into this question of what is perception. How do you come to 
it? That is very important, isn’t it? You cannot have perception if your daily life 
is in disorder, confused, contradictory. That is obvious. 
 
Q: Doesn’t this perception mean that there is constant renewal? 
 
K: No. Is that energy outside, or inside? She is asking that question all the time. 
 
Q: Isn’t that an artificial division: Outside and inside? Is that a real thing, or is it 
just an illusion? 
 
K: She said that this perception needs energy. That energy may be an external 
energy, a mechanical energy, or a non-mechanistic energy which may exist 
deeply inside you. Both are mental concepts. Would you agree to that? Both are 
conclusions which one has either accepted because tradition has said so, or one 
has come to that conclusion by oneself. Any form of conclusion is detrimental to 

perception. So what does perception mean? Can I have perception if I am 
attached to my position, to my wife, to my property? 
 
Q: It colours the act of perceiving. 
 
K: Yes, but take the scientists, they have their family, their attachments, they 
want a position, money and all the rest of it, but they have an insight. 
 
Q: It is not total. 
 
K: So we are saying that total perception can only take place when in your daily 
life there is no confusion. 
 
Q: May we look more closely into that, because couldn’t it be that a total 
perception can take place in spite of that and wipe it away? 
 
K: I can see if the windows are not clean my view is confused. 
 
Q: Would that mean that there is a conditioned insight? 
 
K: If I am in fear my perception will be very partial. That is a fact. 
 
Q: But don’t you need perception to end fear? 
 
K: Ah, but in investigating fear I have a total perception of fear. 
 
Q: Surely if there is fear, or attachment, even one’s logic would be distorted. 
 
K: One is frightened—as we said, that distorts perception. But in investigating, 
observing, going into fear, understanding it profoundly, in delving into it I have 
perception. 
 
Q: Are you implying that there are certain things you can do which will make for 
perceptions? Which means although you have fear and it distorts, the distortion is 
not so total that you cannot investigate it. There is still that possibility, although 
you are distorting through fear? 
 
K: I realize I am distorting perception through fear. 
 
Q: That’s right, then I begin to look at fear. 
 
K: Investigate it, look into it. 
 
Q: In the beginning I am also distorting it. 
 

K: Therefore I am watching every distortion. I am aware of every distortion that 
is going on. 
 
Q: But you see, I think the difficulty lies there. How can I investigate when I am 
distorting? 
 
K: Wait, just listen. I am afraid and I see fear has made me do something which 
is a distortion. 
 
Q: But before I can see that, the fear has to fade away. 
 
K: No, I am observing fear. 
 
Q (1): But I cannot observe fear if I am afraid. 
 
Q (2): How can you observe it if you are not afraid? 
 
Q (3): What is it that is observing? 
 
K: Take a fact: you are afraid. You are conscious of it. That means that you 
become aware of the fact that there is fear. And you observe also what that fear 
has done. Is that clear? 
 
Q: Yes. 
 
K: And you look more and more into it. In looking very deeply into it you have 
an insight. 
 
Q: I may have an insight. 
 
K: No, you will have insight, which is quite different. 
 
Q: What you are saying is that this confusion due to fear is not complete, that it is 
always open to mankind to have insight. 
 
K: To one who is investigating, who is observing. 
 
Q: If you try to investigate something else while you are afraid you get lost in 
fear. But it is still open to you to investigate fear. 
 
K: Yes, quite right. One suffers and you see what it does. In observing it, 
investigating it, opening it up, in the very unrolling of it you have a certain 
insight. That is all we are saying. That insight may be partial. Therefore one has 
to be aware that it is partial. Its action is partial and it may appear complete, so 
watch it. 
 

Q: Very often it looks as if it is totally impossible to have an insight, since you 
say: “If you are distorting how will you look?” But you are also saying, that as a 
matter of fact, when you have a distortion, the one thing you can look at is the 
distortion. 
 
K: That’s right. 
 
Q: That factually you have that capacity. 
 
K: One has that capacity. 
 
Q (1): So when you are distorting something through fear or suffering, most 
things you look at will be distorted. But it is actually possible to look at that 
distortion itself. 
 
Q (2): You can look at that. The fear which creates the distortion can be looked 
at; so you can’t say that no perception whatsoever is possible. 
 
K: That’s just it. Then you have locked the door. 
 
Q: Could one say that the fear can look at itself? 
 
K: No, no. One is afraid: in looking at that fear—not having an insight, just 
watching it—you see what it does, what its action is. 
 
Q: You mean by looking, being aware of it. 
 
K: Without any choosing—being aware. And you see what fear does. In looking 
at it more extensively, deeply, widely, suddenly you have an insight into the 
whole structure of fear. 
 
Q: But there is still the question: in that moment of fear, I am fear. 
 
K: How you observe fear matters—whether you observe it as an observer, or the 
observer is that. You perceive the observer is the observed and in this action 
there is distortion, confusion. And you examine that confusion, which is born of 
fear and in the very process of examination you have an insight. Do it, you will 
see it—if you don’t limit yourself. In saying, “I am too frightened, I can’t look”, 
you run away from it. 
 
Q: To simplify it perhaps too much: when we said one can’t see through the 
window because it is dirty, it distorts, the action of examining the fear, the 
distorting factor, is the cleansing of the window. 
 
K: How you observe, how you investigate, that is the real thing. That is, 
perception can only take place when there is no division between the observer 

and the observed. Perception can only take place in the very act of exploring: to 
explore implies there is no division between the observer and the observed. 
Therefore you are watching the movement of fear and in the very watching of it 
there is an insight. I think that is clear. And yet you see, Krishnamurti says: “I 
have never done this.” 
 
Q: Never gone through all this? Then how do you know somebody else can? 
 
K: That’s just it. Let’s discuss it. Suppose you have not gone through all this, but 
you see it instantly. Because you see it instantly your capacity to reason explains 
all this. Another listens and says, “I’d like to get that, I don’t have to go through 
that whole process.” 
 
Q: Are you saying that all we have been discussing just now is merely a pointer 
to something else? We don’t have to go through all that. 
 
K: Yes. I want to get at that. 
 
Q: In other words, that helps to clear the ground in some way? 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: It is not really the main point. 
 
K: No. 
 
Q: Are you saying there is a short cut? 
 
K: No, no short cut. Must you go through fear, jealousy, anxiety, attachment? Or 
can you clear the whole thing instantly? Must one go through all this process? 
 
Q: You previously said that you have never done this. And by having that 
immediate total perception you are able to see what those with the dirty windows 
can do to clean them. But that isn’t necessary, there is perhaps a direct, an 
immediate way for those who haven’t... 
 
K: No. First put the question, see what comes out of it. 
Dr Bohm says to Krishnamurti: “You have probably not gone through all this. 
Because you have a direct, a total insight you can argue with reason, with logic; 
you can act. You are always talking from that total perception, therefore what 
you say can never be distorted.” And another listens to all this and says: “I am 
frightened, I am jealous, I am this, I am that, and therefore I can’t have total 
perception.” So I observe attachment, or fear, or jealousy and I have an insight. 
Is it possible through investigating, through awareness and discovering that 
the observer is the observed and that there is no division, in the very process of 

investigation—in which we are observing without the observer and see the 
totality of it—to free all the rest? I think that is the only way. 
 
Q: Is it possible not to have certain fears, jealousy, attachment? Could that be 
part of one’s conditioning if one were raised in a certain way, or went to a certain 
school? 
 
K: But there may be deeper layers. You may not be totally conscious of them, 
you may not be totally aware of the deeper fears, etc. You may say, superficially 
I am all right, I have none of these things. 
 
Q: But if one went to a certain school, the kind of learning and investigation that 
would take place in such a school, would that clear the way towards the 
possibility? 
 
K: Obviously. What we are talking about is: Must one go through all this 
process? 
 
Q: Couldn’t we remove from the problem the personal aspect? We are discussing 
what is open to man rather than to any individual. 
 
K: Yes. Is it open to any human being without going through all this process? 
 
Q: By “this process” do you mean involvement with the fear? 
 
K: With fear, sorrow, jealousy, attachment, you go through all that, step by step. 
Or can a human being see the whole thing at a glance? And that very glance is 
the investigation and the complete, total perception. 
 
Q: Which is what you mean when you say the first step is the last. 
 
K: Yes, total perception. 
 
Q: Then what would one’s responsibility be towards someone who is in sorrow? 
 
K: The response to that human being is the response of compassion. That’s all. 
Nothing else. 
 
Q: For instance, if you see an injured bird it is very easy to deal with that because 
it really doesn’t require very much of you. But when you come in contact with a 
human being, he has a much more complex set of needs. 
 
K: What can you do actually? Somebody comes to you and says, “I am in deep 
sorrow”. Do you talk to him out of compassion, or from a conclusion, or out of 
your own particular experience of sorrow which has conditioned you, and you 
answer him according to your conditioning? A Hindu, who is conditioned in a 

certain way says: “My dear friend, I am so sorry, but in the next life you will live 
better. You suffered because you did this and that”—and so on. Or a Christian 
would respond from some other conclusion. And he takes comfort in it. Because 
a man who is suffering wants some sort of solace, someone on whose lap he can 
put his head. So what he is seeking is comfort and avoidance of this terrible pain. 
Will you offer him any of those escapes? Whatever comes out of compassion 
will help him. 
 
Q: Are you saying that as far as sorrow is concerned you can’t directly help 
anyone, but the energy of compassion itself may be of help? 
 
K: That’s right; that’s all. 
 
Q: But many such wounded spirits will come to the Centre here and I think it is 
going to be a problem to know how to deal with them. 
 
K: There is no problem if you are compassionate. Compassion doesn’t create 
problems. It has no problems, therefore it is compassionate. 
 
Q: You are saying that total compassion is the highest intelligence? 
 
K: Of course. If there is compassion, that compassion has its own intelligence 
and that intelligence acts. But if you have no compassion and no intelligence, 
then your conditioning makes you reply whatever he wants. I think that is fairly 
simple. 
To go back to the other question: Must a human being go through the whole 
process? Has no human being said, “I won’t go through all this. I absolutely 
refuse to go through all this”? 
 
Q: But on what basis does one refuse? It wouldn’t make sense to refuse to do 
what is necessary. 
 
K: Of course. You see, we are such creatures of habit. Because my father is 
conditioned, generations after generations are conditioned and I am conditioned. 
And I accept it, I work in it and I operate with it. But if I say, I won’t ever 
operate in my conditioned responses, something else may take place. Then, if I 
realize I am a bourgeois, I don’t want to become an aristocrat or a militant, I 
refuse to be a bourgeois. Which doesn’t mean I become a revolutionary, or join 
Lenin or Marx—those are all bourgeois to me. So something does take place. I 
reject the whole thing. You see, a human being never says, “I will reject the 
whole thing”. I want to investigate that. 
 
Q: Do you mean that even to say: “I am going to get rid of the whole thing” is 
not necessary? 
 
K: Of course. I mean saying, “I won’t be a bourgeois” is just words. 

Q: But isn’t the key to this somewhere in desire? There is some sort of desire for 
continuity, for security. 
 
K: That’s right. Bourgeois implies continuity, security, it implies belonging to 
something, a lack of taste, vulgarity—all that. 
 
Q: But Krishnaji, if you are saying that Krishnamurti never said this, never had 
the need to say it, we can only conclude that you are some kind of freak. 
 
K: No, no. You can say he is a freak but it doesn’t answer the question. 
Krishnamurti says, “I have not touched all this”. Somebody asks, “Why should I 
go through all this?” Don’t say Krishnamurti is a freak, but ask: “How does it 
happen?” 
 
Q: In saying, “I won’t be a bourgeois” you are discovering it in yourself. 
 
K: No, no. That is a different matter. If somebody says to you, “I have never 
been through all this”, what do you do? Do you say he is a freak? Or would you 
say: “How extraordinary, is he telling the truth? Has he deceived himself?” You 
discuss with him. Then your question is: “How does it happen?” You are a 
human being, he is a human being: you want to find out. 
 
Q: You ask: “In what way are we different?” He is a human being that has never 
been through all that, and yet he points out. 
 
K: No, he has never been through it. Don’t say he points out. Don’t you ask that 
question: “How does it happen, must I go through all this?” Do you ask that? 
 
Q (1): I have assumed I must. 
 
Q (2): Krishnaji, you are taking two widely separate things. One is the 
uncontaminated person, who never had to go through the process because he was 
never in the soup. 
 
K: Leave out why he didn’t go through it. 
 
Q: But most other people, apparently, are in some form of... 
 
K: ...conditioning... 
 
Q (1): ...in some form of contamination, it may be fear, or something else. 
Therefore the person who has already got this sickness—let’s call it that—says, 
“This man has never been sick for a day in his life.” What good is it to examine 
that, because one is already sick in some form. 
 

Q (2): That is an assumption. I think we are saying that if any one human being 
never went through all this, that says something about the essence of mankind, 
which is a truth for everybody. 
 
Q (3): But one is already sick. 
 
Q (4): That may be a conclusion. 
 
Q (5): It is also an ascertainable fact. 
 
Q (6): I think one is assuming that whatever this sickness is, it is in the essence, it 
is essentially inevitable. 
 
Q (7): I didn’t say that. But I am saying it is a fact—at least it is to me—that 
there is the sickness in some form or another. I don’t think that is an assumption. 
I think that is a fact. 
 
Q (8): But the question is: What does the fact depend upon? You see, the fact 
may depend upon an assumption which people make about themselves that it will 
take time to overcome that sickness. 
 
Q (9): Is it part of the sickness to ask only about small things and not the greater 
things? 
 
Q (10): Aside from all that the question is: How can a human being who is sick 
in some way, how can he get out of it directly without going through endless 
self-exploration? 
 
K: Can we put the whole thing differently? Do you seek excellence, not 
excellence for instance in a building, but the essence of excellence? Then 
everything falls away, doesn’t it? Or do you seek excellence in a certain direction 
and never the essence of excellence? As an artist I seek excellence in my painting 
and get caught in that. A scientist gets caught in something else. But an ordinary 
human being, not a specialist, just an average intelligent human being who does 
not take drugs, does not smoke, is fairly intelligent and decent, if he sought the 
essence of excellence, would this happen? The essence would meet all this. I 
wonder if I am conveying something? 
 
Q: Does it exist apart from this manifestation? 
 
K: Listen carefully first. Don’t object, or reject and say “if” and “but”. That very 
demand for excellence—how you demand it—brings the essence of it. You 
demand it passionately. You demand the highest intelligence, the highest 
excellence, the essence of it, and when fear arises, then you... 
 
Q: Where does the demand come from? 

K: Demand it! Don’t say: “Where does it come from?” There may be a motive, 
but the very demand washes it all away. I wonder if I am conveying anything? 
 
Q: You are saying: Demand this excellence—which we don’t know. 
 
K: I don’t know what is beyond it, but I want to be morally excellent. 
 
Q: Does that mean goodness? 
 
K: I demand the excellence of goodness, I demand the excellent flower of 
goodness. In that very demand there is a demand for the essence. 
 
Q: Does perception come from this demand? 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. 
 
Q: Could you go into what you call this demand? 
 
K: It is not a demand which means asking, a demand that means imploring, 
wanting—cut out all those. 
 
Q: It doesn’t mean those? 
 
K: No, no. 
 
Q: But then you are back with prayer. 
 
K: Oh, no. Leave out all that. 
 
Q: You are really saying that the impossible is possible to the average intelligent 
human being? 
 
K: We are saying that, yes. Which is not a conclusion, which is not a hope. I say 
it is possible for the average human being, who is fairly clean, who is fairly 
decent, fairly kind, who is not a bourgeois. 
 
Q: Traditionally we are conditioned to believe that there are special people with 
no conscious content of consciousness, so it is very difficult for someone like me 
to feel that one could really be completely free of it. 
 
K: You see, you have not listened. X says to you: “Please listen first, don’t bring 
in all these objections. Just listen to what he is saying. That is, what is important 
in life is the supreme excellence which has its own essence.” That’s all. And to 
demand does not mean begging or praying, getting something from somebody. 
 
Q: The point is, we find we confuse demand with desire. 

K: Of course. 
 
Q: There must be no beliefs. 
 
K: No beliefs, no desire. 
 
Q: You see, when people feel that they want to give up desire then there is a 
danger of giving up this demand as well. 
 
K: How can we put this? Let’s find a good word for it. Would the word “passion” 
be suitable? There is passion for this, passion for excellence. 
 
Q: Does it imply that this passion has no object? 
 
K: You see how you immediately form a conclusion. Burning passion—not for 
something. The Communists are passionate about their ideas. That passion is 
very, very petty and limited. The Christians have passion for missionary work—
that passion is born of the love of Jesus. That again is not passion, it is very 
narrow. Putting all that aside, I say: “Passion”. 
 
Q: As you were just saying, people have had some vision, or a dream of 
something and that has developed a great energy. But you are saying it is not a 
dream, it is not a vision; but it is nevertheless some perception of this excellence. 
 
K: All those passions feed the ego, feed the me, make me important, consciously 
or unconsciously. We are cutting out all that. 
There is a young boy who has a passion to grow up into an extraordinary 
human being, into something original. 
 
Q: He sees that it is possible. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: And therefore he has the passion. 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. It is possible. Is that what is missing in most human beings? 
Not passion, but the welling up of... I don’t know how to put it. There is this 
passion in a human being who demands the supreme excellence, not in what he 
writes in his books, but the feeling of it. You know this, don’t you?—that may 
shatter everything else. Again, that human being didn’t demand it. He says: “I 
never even asked for it.” 
 
Q: Perhaps that is due to conditioning. We are conditioned to mediocrity, not to 
make this demand. That is what you mean by mediocrity. 
 

K: Yes, of course. Mediocrity is lack of great passion—not for Jesus, or for Marx 
or whatever it is. 
 
Q: We are not only conditioned to mediocrity but to direction, so the demand is 
always to have some direction. 
 
K: The demand is a direction, quite right. 
 
Q: To have a demand without any direction... 
 
K: That’s right. I like the word “demand”, because it is a challenge. 
 
Q: Doesn’t a demand without direction imply that it is not in time? 
 
K: Of course. It demands no direction, no time, no person. So does total insight 
bring this passion? Total insight is the passion. 
 
Q: They can’t be separate. 
 
K: Total insight is the flame of passion which wipes away all confusion. It burns 
away everything else. Don’t you then act as a magnet? The bees go towards the 
nectar. In the same way don’t you act as a magnet when you are passionate to 
create? Is it that there is this lack of fire? That may be the thing that is missing. If 
there is something missing I would ask for it. 
 
 
 
Q (1): Could we talk about the relationship between the conditioned and the 
unconditioned mind, and whether it is only possible to ask for small things, or 
can we somehow leap beyond that into something bigger? 
 
Q (2): Whatever the me asks for, the asking in a direction is the small thing. 
 
K: Quite right. 
 
Q: We have to ask for the unlimited, for the unconditioned. 
 
K: She is really asking: What is the relationship between the conditioned and the 
unconditioned? Also, what is the relationship between two human beings, when 
one is unconditioned and the other is not? There is no relationship. 
 
Q: How can you say that there is no relationship between the unconditioned and 
the conditioned human being? 
 
K: There is no relationship from the conditioned to the unconditioned. But the 
unconditioned has a relationship to the other. 

Q: But logically one could ask: Is there an essential difference between the 
unconditioned and the conditioned? Because if you say there is, then there is 
duality. 
 
K: What do you mean by essential difference? 
 
Q: Let’s say difference in kind. If there is an essential difference between the 
conditioned and the unconditioned there is duality. 
 
K: I see what you mean. X is conditioned, Y is not conditioned. X thinks in terms 
of duality, his very conditioning is duality. But duality has no relationship with 
Y, yet Y has a relationship to X. 
 
Q: Because there is no duality. 
 
K: Yes. Y has no duality therefore there is a relationship. 
You also asked some other question: Essentially, deeply, is there a 
difference? Are not both the same? 
 
Q: Could one ask the question in another way? Is the conditioning only 
superficial? 
 
K: No. Then we are lost. 
 
Q (1): Could we put it like this? When you say, “You are the world, the world is 
you”—does that statement include the conditioned as well as the unconditioned? 
 
Q (2): I am not sure about that. It seems that if the unconditioned mind can be 
related to the conditioned, can understand the conditioned, comprehend it, then 
there is not really a duality, that is fundamentally, in essence. The unconditioned 
mind comprehends the conditioned mind and goes beyond it. 
 
Q (3): The world couldn’t be unconditioned, could it? 
 
K: The world is ‘me’ and ‘me’ is the world. 
 
Q: That is an absolute fact only to the unconditioned. 
 
K: Oh, not at all. Be careful, it is so. It is an obvious fact. 
 
Q: You mean that only the unconditioned can perceive that? 
 
K: That is what she says. I am refuting it. I say it isn’t quite like that. 
 

Q: I mean it in the sense that I may say, “I am the world, the world is me”, but I 
revert to an action which is a contradiction to that. Therefore it is not an absolute 
fact for me. There may be moments when the fact of it is seen by me. 
 
K: Yes. Do you mean: “I say to myself very clearly, ‘I am the world and the 
world is me’”? 
 
Q: I see it. 
 
K: I feel it. 
 
Q: I feel it, yes. 
 
K: And I act contrary to that. Which is, I act personally, selfishly—my, me. That 
is a contradiction to the fact that the world is me and I am the world. A person 
can say this merely as an intellectual conclusion, or a momentary feeling. 
 
Q: It is not an intellectual conclusion, because I am stating my position, but I 
accept that for you the position is totally different. 
 
K: No, you don’t even have to accept that. See the fact, which is, when one says, 
“I am the world and the world is me” there is no me. But one’s house has to be 
insured. I may have children, I have to earn a living—but there is no me. See the 
importance of it. There is no me all the time. I function, but there is no me which 
is seeking a higher position and all that. Though I am married I am not attached, I 
don’t depend on a wife or husband. The appearances may give you the 
impression that the me is operating, but actually to a man who feels, “The world 
is me and I am the world”, to him there is no me. To you, looking at him, there 
is. That human being lives in this world, he must have food, clothes and shelter, a 
job, transportation, all that, yet there is no me. 
So when the world is me and I am the world, there is no me. Can that state, 
that quality operate in all directions? It must operate in all directions. When you 
say, “I am the world and the world is me”, and there is no me, there is no 
conditioning. I don’t put the question: In that unconditioned state does the 
conditioned exist? When a human being says, “I am the world and the world is 
me”, there is no I. 
 
Q: Therefore the other person also is not there. There is no you. 
 
K: There is no me, there is no you. When you ask if the conditioned exists in this 
state you are asking a wrong question. That is what I was getting at. Because 
when there is no I there is no you. 
 
Q: The question is: How does that person see the kind of confusion that arises 
around I and you? He sees what is going on in the world, that people are 
generally confused about this. 

K: I exist: there is you and me. And you also think the same thing. So we keep 
this division everlastingly. But when you and I really realize, have profound 
insight that, “The world is me and I am the world”, there is no me. 
 
Q: There is no me and no you. “No” means “everything”. 
 
K: The world of living—everything. 
 
Q: Then the question, “Is there an essential difference between this and that, the 
unconditioned and the conditioned”, doesn’t arise, because there is no “between”. 
 
K: Yes, that’s right. There is no you, there is no I in that state, which doesn’t 
include the conditioned state. Is this too abstract? 
 
Q: Why do you have to say, “I am the world” first, and then deny this? 
 
K: Because it is an actuality. 
 
Q: But then you imply that the I is still there if I say, “I am the world”. 
 
K: That is merely a statement. It is an actual fact that I am the world. 
 
Q: Whatever I mean by the word “I”, I also mean by the word “world”. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: So we don’t need those two words. 
 
K: Yes. You and I—remove that. 
 
Q: There is just everything. 
 
K: No, this is very dangerous. If you say I am everything... 
 
Q: I am trying to find out what you mean by “the world”. 
 
K: If you say, “I am everything”, then the murderer, the assassin is part of me. 
 
Q: Suppose I say, “I am the world” instead, does that change it? 
 
K: (laughing) All right. I see the actual fact that I am the result of the world. The 
world means killing, wars, the whole of society—I am the result of that. 
 
Q: And I see everybody is the result of that. 
 
K: Yes. I am saying the result is I and you. 

Q: And that separation. 
 
K: When I say I am the world, I am saying all that. 
 
Q: You mean to say I am generated by the world, I am identified with everything. 
 
K: Yes. I am the product of the world. 
 
Q: The world is the essence of what I am. 
 
K: Yes. I am the essence of the world. It is the same thing. When there is a deep 
perception of that, not verbal, not intellectual, not emotional, not romantic, but 
profound, there is no you or me. I think that holds logically. But there is a 
danger. If I say the world is me, I am everything, I’ll accept everything. 
 
Q: You are really saying that one is the product of the whole of society. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: But I am also of the essence of the whole of society. 
 
K: Yes. I am really the essential result of all this. 
 
Q: Does it help to use the word “ego”? 
 
K: It is the same thing, it doesn’t matter. You see, when you say me, or ego, there 
is a possibility of deception that ‘I’ is the very essence of God. You know about 
that superstition. 
 
Q: The Atman. 
 
K: Yes. 
 
Q: But there is still another question. Is the unconditioned mind also a product of 
all this? Then we come to a contradiction. 
 
K: No, there is no contradiction. Without using the word “I” it can be said: the 
result of the world is this. The result of the world is that also. We are two human 
beings, which means the result has created the I and the you. When there is an 
insight into the result there is no “result”. 
 
Q: The result changes and vanishes when we see it. 
 
K: That means there is no result. Therefore ‘you’ and ‘I’ don’t exist. That is an 
actual fact for a man who says, “I am not the result”. You see what it means? 

There is no causation in the mind and therefore there is no effect. Therefore it is 
whole, and any action born of it is causeless and without effect. 
 
Q: You have to make that clear, in the sense that you still use cause and effect 
concerning ordinary, mechanical things. 
 
K: Quite. This human being, X, is a result. And Y is a result. X says I, and Y says 
I; therefore there is you and I. X says I see this and investigates, goes into it and 
he has an insight. In that insight the two results cease. Therefore in that state 
there is no cause. 
 
Q: There is no cause and no effect although it may leave a residue in the mind. 
 
K: Let’s go into it. In that state there is no result, no cause, no effect. That mind 
acts out of compassion. Therefore there is no result. 
 
Q: But in some sense it would look as if there were a result. 
 
K: But compassion has no result. A is suffering, he says to X, “Please help me to 
get out of my suffering.” If X really has compassion his words have no result. 
 
Q: Something happens, but there is no result. 
 
K: That’s it. 
 
Q: But I think people generally are seeking a result. 
 
K: Yes. Let’s put it another way. Does compassion have a result? When there is 
result there is cause. When compassion has a cause then you are no longer 
compassionate. 
 
Q (1): It is an extremely subtle thing, because something happens which seems 
final and yet it is not. 
 
Q (2): But compassion also acts. 
 
K: Compassion is compassion, it doesn’t act. If it acts because there is a cause 
and an effect, then it is not compassion: it wants a result. 
 
Q: It acts purely. 
 
K: It wants a result. 
 
Q: What makes it want a result is the idea of separation. Somebody says, “There 
is a person suffering, I would like to produce the result that he is not suffering.” 
But that is based on the idea that there is me and he. 

K: That’s it. 
 
Q: There is no he and no I. There is no room, no place to have this result. 
 
K: It is a tremendous thing! One has to look at it very, very carefully. Look, “The 
world is me and I am the world”. When I say me, you exist: both of us are there. 
The you and the I are the results of man’s misery, of selfishness, and so on—it is 
a result. When one looks into the result, goes into it very, very deeply, the insight 
brings about a quality in which you and I—who are the result—don’t exist. This 
is easy to agree to verbally, but when you see it deeply there is no you and no 
me. Therefore there is no result—which means compassion. The person upon 
whom that compassion acts wants a result. We say, “Sorry, there is no result.” 
But the man who suffers says, “Help me to get out of this”, or, “Help me to bring 
back my son, my wife”, or whatever it is. He is demanding a result. This thing 
has no result. The result is the world. 
 
Q: Does compassion affect the consciousness of man? 
 
K: Yes. It affects the deep layers of consciousness. 
The I is the result of the world, the you is the result of the world. And to the 
man who sees this deeply with a profound insight, there is no you or I. Therefore 
that profound insight is compassion—which is intelligence. And the intelligence 
says: If you want a result I can’t give it to you, I am not the product of a result. 
Compassion says: This state is not a result, therefore there is no cause. 
 
Q: Does that mean there is no time either? 
 
K: No cause, no result, no time. 

 

