[version history]
TURNING THE STORM
 
She  is  called  musician,  rebel,  soldier,  legend.  After  months  of  leading  an  uprising
against the treacherous religious order of the Fedeli and the ruling Circle of Mages, young
Eliana is known throughout the land. Striking from the blighted wastelands, her  army  of
reformers  has  grown  in  number—adding  liberated  slaves  to  its  ranks.  Driven  by  their
beliefs in the Old Way, Eliana and the soldiers of the Lupi stand on faith alone.
But faith won't save the Lupi from traitors in their midst—or from the magical fires of
the  mages.  Seeing  her  soldiers  reduced  to  ashes  around  her,  Eliana  takes  a  desperate
gamble: she steps down from command. Then, armed with stolen orders to attend one of
the musical ensembles within the Imperial enclave, she disguises  herself  as  a  boy,  takes
up her violin, and heads straight into enemy territory. And now the girl-turned-generale
adds another title to her rank: spy.
 
Visit Bantam's website at www.bantamdell.com.
The Fires of the Faithless
 
"We have to retreat," Giovanni said. "Get back to the wasteland now, Eliana. Trust me
on this one!"
And I would have, but that was when the fires came down.
I grabbed for my whistle, blew retreat, retreat, retreat. The first wave had not hit the
area  nearest  me,  but  I  could  see  flames  rising  farther  in  the  woods.  White  sparks
streamed toward the sky like fleeing stars, and I heard screams of agony. "Oh, my God,"
I said. "Lucia. Lucia.'"
Giovanni took off at a run; I didn't see to where. I turned,  and  in the  twilight  I  could
see  a  handful  of  figures  on  the  hill  behind  us,  clasping  hands,  silhouetted  against  the
darkening sky and the bright burning forest.
I counted. Five mages—that was all it took. Five of them.

As I watched, they turned toward us, scanning the field we'd camped in. Over my head
I saw the fire spring into life like a billowing gold cloud. The color darkened to red, and the
cloud slowly unrolled. As the edge of the cloud touched the  tops  of  the  trees,  they  burst
into bright white flames.
The  cloud  of  fire  paused  for  a  moment,  and  I  could  almost  feel  the  mages  taking  a
collective  deep  breath.  Then  the  flames  flashed  down  toward  me  and  I  closed  my  eyes
tightly, knowing that in an instant I would feel my flesh burning around me.
And there was nothing I could do about it...
Also by Naomi Kritzer 
Fires of the Faithful
Turning the Storm 
Naomi Kritzer
BANTAM BOOKS
TURNING THE STORM
A Bantam Book/January 2003
Published by Bantam Dell
A Division of Random House, Inc. New York, New York
All rights reserved.
Copyright © 2003 by Naomi Kritzer
Cover illustration © 2003 by Franco Accornero
Map by Hadel Studio, Inc.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without the written permission of the Publisher, except where
permitted by law. For information address: Bantam Books, New York, New York.
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this book is
stolen property. It was reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the publisher, and neither
the author nor the publisher has received any payment for this "stripped book."
Bantam Books, the rooster colophon, Spectra, and the portrayal of a boxed "s" are

registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
ISBN 0-553-58550-9
Manufactured in the United States of America Published simultaneously in Canada
OPM 10 987654321
Contents
 
MAP
 
PART ONE
1 2
PART TWO
3 4 5 6 7 8 9
PART THREE
10 11 12 13
PART FOUR
14 15
To Ed Burke, with love and gratitude for all your support
Acknowledgments
First I'd like to thank my superb editor, Anne Groell, for helping me make this the best
book it could be. I'd also like to thank my agent, James Frenkel, and his assistant, Tracy
Berg, for their support and enthusiasm.
I'd  like  to  thank  the  members  of  the  Wyrdsmiths,  past  and  present,  for  critique,
encouragement,  and  friendship:  Bill  Henry,  Doug  Hulick,  Ralph  A.  N.  Krantz,  Harry
LeBlanc, Kate Leith, Kelly McCullough, Lyda Morehouse, and Rosalind Nelson.

Quite a few people answered questions, helped me  with  research,  and  let  me  borrow
ideas.  Thanks  to  all  of  them,  but  special  thanks  to  Michelle  Herder  for  historical
information;  Jennifer  Horn  for  dance  steps;  Geriann  Brower  for  Italian  language
consultation;  and  Sharon  Albert  and  Louis  Newman  for  Aramaic  language  consultation.
Any mistakes, of course, are because I failed to take the advice of my consultants.
Thank you to all of my beta readers, who read and commented on earlier  versions  of
this book: Ed Burke, Jason Goodman, Rick Gore, Michelle Herder,  Jennifer  Horn,  Curtis
Mitchell, Rudy Moore, Rebecca Murray, and John Savage.
My most heartfelt thanks go to my family: Bert, Amy, Abi,  and  Nate  Kritzer,  and  Ed
and Molly Burke. Molly is  eighteen  months  old  as  of  this  writing,  and  helped  mostly  by
napping  at  appropriate  times.  Ed,  on the  other  hand—well,  when  people  ask  me  about
writing with a toddler in the  house,  I  have  to  say  that  step  one  is  to  have  a  supportive
spouse or partner. More than just being  a  wonderful  partner  and  fellow  parent,  though,
Ed has  always  taken  my  writing  seriously—  well  before  I  ever  sold  a  word  of  it.  It  is  a
great gift to have someone close to you who believes in your dreams, and I am grateful for
it.
PART ONE
The Life of the Land
CHAPTER ONE
The doom of the leader is to lead.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 4, verse 10.
"Eliana?  Eliana!"  Giovanni  stared  down  at  me,  flushed  in  the  late  summer  heat.  I
squinted up at him and he sat back, looking relieved. "That was one hell of a fall."
I  groaned  and  lay  still  for  a  moment.  Two  months  of  leading  an  army—two  more
successful battles, even— and I still couldn't stay on my  horse  and  reload  a  crossbow  at
the  same  time.  I  pushed  myself  up  with  my  elbows.  "Nothing  hurts,"  I  said.  That  was
blatantly false, but nothing especially hurt. "I must have just had the wind knocked out of
me."  I  turned  to  glare  at  Forza,  my  horse.  She  had  skidded  to  a  stop  shortly  after
throwing me, and was staring at me with wary sheepishness from farther down the hill.
"It's getting late, anyway," he said. "Let's just make a quick circuit around the hill and

head in."
"Where'd the bow land?"
"Got it," Giovanni said. I stood up and Giovanni handed it  back  to  me.  "Let's  go."  He
whistled  for  Stivali,  the  horse  he'd  claimed  from  the  Ravenessi  stables,  and  we
remounted, turning to head back to the army encampment.
"Hold on," I said, reining in Forza. "Who the hell is that?"
Giovanni turned to look north and  squinted  at  the  figure  walking  toward  us.  "I  don't
know." He unslung his own crossbow and cocked it. "But whoever it is, he's alone."
The  man  headed  straight  toward  us.  He  seemed  to  be  carrying  weapons,  but  they
weren't  drawn.  I  loaded  my  crossbow—easy  enough  now  that  Forza  was  standing
still—and  checked  behind  us,  in case  the  man  was  supposed  to  be  a  distraction.  I  saw
nobody, but stayed on my guard. We had an outer ring of sentries, but this man, at least,
had gotten past them unchallenged.
"Hello there!" the man said, saluting us  as  he  approached.  "I  come  in peace,  to  meet
with your leaders. I assume you are soldiers of the Lupi?"
Giovanni's eyes narrowed and he squinted down the sights of his crossbow. "Maybe."
I  decided  to  let  Giovanni  go  ahead  and  intimidate  the  stranger.  He  wouldn't  fire
without cause, and I  found  the  stranger's  breezy  manner  irritating.  "What  do  you  want
with the Lupi?" I demanded.
The stranger bowed low, showing off a freshly sunburned neck. "My name is Felice. I
have come from Cuore as the delegate of the reformers."
Giovanni  lowered  his  crossbow  just  a  hair.  "Fire  falls  from  the  sky,"  he  said
challengingly.
"And the land weeps," Felice said.
Giovanni lowered his bow completely. "I guess you are who you say you are. We're—"
"—pleased  to  make  your  acquaintance,"  I  said,  cutting  Giovanni  off.  "We'll  take  you
back  to  the  camp."  I  swung  down  from  my  horse  and  confiscated  Felice's  visible
weapons—a decorative sword and an ornately  carved  crossbow.  I  was  not  so  impressed
by  a  two-year-old  password  that  I  was  going  to  tell  this  man  that  he'd  just  met  both
generali of the Lupi army, alone. For all we knew, he was a spy on a suicide mission to kill
us both. "You can ride double with me."
Felice mounted Forza effortlessly and I climbed up awkwardly behind him. I regretted
not making him ride with Giovanni, but said nothing, not wanting to look foolish. We rode
back toward camp.
Felice  even  smelled  like  an  aristocrat:  clean,  despite  his  long  walk,  with  a  very  faint
whiff of perfume. His tunic was made out of a delicate fabric that  caught  the  light  oddly,
covered with a well-tooled padded leather vest.  His hands  carried  the  light  calluses  of  a
gentleman-fencer, like Giovanni—except Giovanni did some real work these days.
Back in camp,  I  dismounted  and  passed  the  horses  off  to  Vitale,  the  youngest  of  the
Lupi. He'd joined us when we'd liberated that first slave camp after Ravenna. I'd tried to
send him off to Doratura or one of the other resettled towns, but he'd stubbornly followed
us across the wasteland until I shrugged and said that anyone so determined was clearly
old enough  to  make  himself  useful.  "Take  Forza  and  Stivali,"  I  said  to  Vitale.  "And  tell
Michel we need him right away."
Vitale  vanished  into  the  camp,  and  Giovanni  and  I  stood  awkwardly,  facing  Felice.  I

wanted a private moment with Giovanni, to ask him the significance of the password and
how secret it really was, but I needed Michel to take custody of Felice first. Fortunately,
Michel arrived almost immediately, still tying his sash. He was rumpled, and I suspected
he'd been napping.  "Michel,"  I  said.  "This  is  Felice,  allegedly  one  of  the  reformers  from
Cuore. Take him to the generale's tent; they'll be with him shortly."
Michel picked up his cue, and saluted without addressing either of us as "Generale." 
"Please follow me," he said, and led Felice off toward my tent.
I turned to Giovanni. "What was it he said to you?"
"It's a password—"
"I guessed that. How secure is it? Couldn't he have found it out some other way?"
"We  can  trust  him,"  Giovanni  said  confidently.  "He's  been  sent  by  Beneto's
commanders. I'm just surprised it took them this long. We  ought  to  have  a  contact  with
the main Reform organization."
"Really." I stared off past Giovanni's shoulder. An argument was brewing between two
of my men over whose turn it was to dig latrine trenches. "Hey!" I shouted, and they both
jumped to give me a guilty stare. "It's both your turns. Fight  over  it  and  you'll  be  filling
them in, too." I turned back to Giovanni. "Well, let's go see what he wants, then." I caught
Vitale  as  he  passed  by.  "Send  Lucia  to  my  tent  when  you  get  a  chance.  I  don't  want
Isabella, not yet. Try to get Lucia alone."
Giovanni  beamed  as  we  entered  the  tent.  My  tent  was  larger  than  Rafi's  tent  in
Ravenna had been, but not a whole lot higher; we didn't have much in the way of real tent
poles.  Felice  sat  cross-legged  on  a  cushion,  looking  around  dubiously  at  the  rough
accommodations.
"Welcome to the Lupi encampment," Giovanni said. "I am Generale Giovanni, and this
is Generale Eliana."
I nodded to Felice, returning his aghast look with a predatory smile. "Charmed," I said.
Felice closed his mouth with a snap, but his eyes were still wide. "Really? I'd pictured
you—" he studied me, his lips parted—"differently."
"Were  you  expecting  me  to  be  taller?"  I  asked.  I  glanced  toward  the  tent  flap,
wondering how long it would take Lucia to arrive. "Male?"
"No, no, no. Of course we knew your, ah, basic description. Older,  I'd  say.  I  guess  I'd
assumed you'd be older."
"Hmm." I decided to let him stop flailing. "I suppose you're expecting us to bring  you
up to date."
"That would be helpful, yes."
Lucia came in and sat next to me. "This is Felice," I said. "He claims to be a reformer
from Cuore."
"Do you know him, Giovanni?" Lucia asked.
"No," Giovanni said.
"I joined the Cause after you departed for Ravenna," Felice said. "I am originally from
Parma."
Lucia gave Felice a long, careful stare. I looked at her; she shrugged.
"Well,"  I  said.  "You  probably  know  that  we  led  the  uprising  at  Ravenna."  Felice
nodded. "That was about a month and a half ago. We've liberated three more slave labor

camps since our escape, adding former slaves to our army when possible." Our army had
doubled in size from the original group, but then the other camps had been smaller  than
Ravenna.
"At the last camp, reinforcements had been  sent  down,"  Giovanni  said.  "Fortunately,
they had not been well integrated. The new troops and the old  did  not  trust  each  other,
and fought together poorly. Still, we can't count on that being true everywhere." 
"What sorts of training have you done with your men?" Felice asked.
"Tactics," I said. "Some sword training, and bow."
"Three victories," Felice said. "That's quite something."
"Minimal losses," I said. "That's something we hope to keep up."
"Any problems?" Felice asked.
"Well, you know, we're fighting a war,"  I  said.  "People  get  injured  sometimes,  or  die.
That's a problem."
"But other than that?" Felice asked.
There were the constant petty squabbles, the rivalries between the  original  Lupi  and
the mutineer soldiers from Ravenna, the constant shortage of supplies, and the  fact  that
half of the people I'd impulsively  made  leaders  couldn't  lead  their  way  out  of  a  stable  if
you drew  them  a  map,  but  I  wasn't  about  to  share  those  problems  with  Felice.  "That's
pretty much it."
"Well,"  Felice  said,  his  face  lighting  up.  "Sounds  like  you're  in  good  shape,  then."  I
nodded. "So anyway, I'm here to take over."
I froze, not entirely sure I'd heard quite right. Lucia's jaw dropped, then she closed her
mouth and sat back quietly, her eyes flickering from me to Giovanni and back. The slight
quirk of her lips made it clear she was waiting for the show.
"You're  here  to  what?"  Giovanni  demanded,  just  barely  restraining  himself  from
attacking Felice. "I am doing just fine myself, thank you very much."
"Oh, er, yes, of course," Felice said, glancing from Giovanni's face to  mine.  "Of  course
you're doing fine. We really appreciate what  an  excellent  job  you've  done  since  Beneto's
execution. The reformer leaders in Cuore have voted to give both of you a commendation,
in  fact.  But  you  have  to  understand,  a  position  like  this  requires  someone  with
experience—"
I cut him off with a raised hand. "So how many armies have you led into battle?"
"Oh,  I'm  very  good  at  strategy,"  Felice  said  confidently.  "I  won  nineteen  out  of
twenty-five mock battles with my tutor—"
I laughed. "You're not taking my army away from me."
"Excuse me?"
"You  heard  me.  Signore  Felice,  you  can  try  to  command  here  if  you  enjoy  being
laughed at, but this is my army. If you think we're putting our men into your manicured
hands, think again. You don't command here—I do."
Felice was putting on a patient expression, and that did it. "Michel!" I said.
Michel was waiting outside the tent and poked his head in. "Yes, Generale?"
"Take this man to the stockade and place him under guard. He is not to be left alone at
any time."

Michel took Felice's arm. "If you'll come with me, signore," he said.
"But—but—wait—" Felice said as Michel started to haul him off.
"Oh, one more thing, Michel," I said. "He's a guest. Treat him with courtesy."
"He won't have anything to complain about, Generale."
The tent was quiet for a moment after Felice was gone.
"I don't know if that was quite appropriate—" Giovanni started.
"If  he's  going  to  stay  here,"  I  said,  "I  want  him  to  be  absolutely  clear  on  who's  in
charge. Besides," and I relaxed slightly, "what an ass."
Lucia laughed. "I agree. Let him cool his  heels  in the  stockade,  for  an  hour  or  two  at
least..."
Giovanni was opening his  mouth  to  say  something  else  when  Isabella  came  in to  the
tent. At least Michel was gone by the time she arrived. "Who's the fop?" she demanded.
"An old friend of Giovanni's," Lucia said. "The reformers sent him to take over."
Isabella looked at me with a single raised eyebrow.
"I declined his generous offer," I said.
"Just what is it you hope to accomplish by locking him up?" Giovanni demanded. "Fine,
you get to gloat, but is there really any point to this, or is it just to humiliate him?"
I leaned forward. "I've seen no reason that I should trust him. There's nowhere else in
this encampment designed to keep people under guard.  So  until  I'm  convinced  that  he's
not a threat, he stays in the stockade."
Giovanni  snorted.  "A  threat?  That  pretty  boy  probably  had  a  servant  to  reload  his
crossbow, back in Cuore. You're actually afraid of him?"
"I've  got  enough  things  to  worry  about  without  Felice,"  I  said.  "I  promise,  I'll  have
Michel let him out soon. Do you want to go see about the scout reports?"
Giovanni  left,  still  grumbling,  leaving  Lucia  and  Isabella  in  the  tent  with  me.
Unfortunately, Isabella showed no inclination to  leave.  She  pulled  up  a  cushion  to  sit  on
and poured herself a  cup  of  tea.  "Generale,"  she  said.  "I  wonder  if  I  could  have  a  word
with you."
I  suppressed  a  groan;  when  Isabella  called  me  generale,  it  usually  meant  that  she
wanted something. She was going to have her word with me sooner or later, so I poured
my own cup of tea and sat back to listen, gesturing for her to go ahead.
"Yesterday you ordered one of my people to scrub pots for insubordination."
"Which?" I asked, trying to remember who'd gotten in trouble recently.
"Gemino."
"Ah,  right."  Gemino  was  a  short,  stocky  boy  who'd  come  with  us  from  Ravenna.
Isabella  led  a  unit  within  my  army,  but  it  was  made  up  mostly  of  "her  people,"  the
old-time malcontents who'd followed her in Ravenna. "Isabella,  you  aren't  going  to  have
me reduce his punishment, are you?  It's  not  like  scrubbing  pots  is  that  dreadful  a  task,
and someone has to—"
"It's not this instance so much as it is a general pattern. The problem was not Gemino,
it was Michel. You should realize that by now."
"I  thought  I  told  Gemino  he  didn't  have  to  take  weaponry  lessons  from  Michel
anymore."

"You did. This wasn't a weaponry lesson. Michel was trying to give my people orders,
and Gemino refused—"
Now I remembered. "Isabella, Michel was trying to tell Gemino he needed to move the
horses. It was a perfectly reasonable request—"
"—and coming from anyone else, it might have sounded reasonable.  Michel  can  make
the most reasonable request sound like an insult."
"So what do you want me to do?"
"Michel needs to be taken down a peg." Isabella's large eyes glared at me from behind
a stray lock of gray hair. "He's unsuited to a position of authority."
This was true. Michel was unsuited to a position of authority. But so was Isabella, and
most of my unit commanders. "I need him where he is," I said.
"But Gemino—"
"I'll  tell  Michel  again  to  stay  away  from  your  soldiers."  We'd  be  fine  if  I  could  find
enough  other  things  for  Michel  to  do.  Or  if  I  could  somehow  keep  him  and  Isabella
permanently separated. The trouble was, I really did need  him  where  he  was.  I  needed
his loyalty, his skills as a bodyguard, and his ability to get things done for me. He wasn't a
bad soldier, but the power had gone to his head. I just wished I knew what to do about it.
Isabella's suggestion had merit, except that if I hurt his pride, I might lose his loyalty—or
he might  simply  leave.  And  I  needed  him  too  badly.  Besides,  if  I  disciplined  Michel,  I'd
have  to  do  something  about  all  the  lousy  unit  commanders,  including  Isabella.  I  bad
removed the really atrocious ones—the lecher, and the coward,  and  the  one  who  turned
out to be dumb as a donkey—but if I set about trying to ensure that only the best were in
positions of authority, we'd be left with me, the woman who led the scouts, and Giovanni
on his good days.
"Well, thank you, Generale," Isabella said stiffly, and took her leave.
Alone with Lucia, I sighed. "Are you sure you don't want to command a unit, Lucia?"
"And  have  Isabella  on  my  back,  as  well  as  yours  and  Michel's?"  Lucia  raised  an
eyebrow. "Positive."
"So." I wiped out my teacup and put it away. "What's on my list?"
Lucia considered for a moment. "The scouts  are  due  back  this  evening,  but  probably
won't get in until late tonight. If they're not back by  morning,  we'll  have  to  assume  that
they were captured. That's the most significant news."
I nodded.
"Other than that... We're in pretty good shape for grain, but we're low on horse feed. If
we  absolutely  have  to,  we  can  feed  some  of  our  wheat  to  the  horses,  but  for  obvious
reasons that's not the best option. In any case, it's critical that we capture food at the next
camp. And if they have horses, we should send them north with the refugees, rather than
keeping them ourselves. Cavalry is nice, but we just don't have the food stocks."
I  nodded;  she  was  right,  although  this  would  only  increase  resentment  among  the
people who didn't have horses  but  thought  they  should.  Never  mind  that  most  of  these
people could barely ride, let alone fight from horseback; a horse was a symbol of status, so
everyone wanted one.
"Other than that—Nerio and Viola split and have made quite a fuss about it."
"Move  them  into  separate  units.  I  don't  care  if  they  reconcile  and  miss  each  other;
we're keeping them separate from now on. This is, what, the fourth time?"

"Fifth. Let's see. Ulpio and Bruttio were fighting."
"Latrine duty."
"Paulo and Severo are rumored to be spoiling for a fight."
"Paulo and Severo?" They were two more of the men I'd put in charge of units ... and
now regretted putting in charge. "What's their problem?"
"Paulo's  convinced  you're  favoring  Severo's  men.  He  wants  a  horse,  and  he  thinks
you're sending his men to dig latrines and scrub pots a bit too often. He blames Severo for
turning you against him."
I sighed. "Remind me to ease up on Paulo's men. He's wrong, but it's not worth losing
his loyalty over. Maybe I should give him a horse." I looked up; Lucia gazed at me levelly,
a glint of humor in her eyes. I sighed again. "Once we're out of the wasteland, the horses
can graze..."
"According to Giovanni's calculations, that won't be until the end of the summer."
I shook  my  head.  "No  horse  for  Paulo,  then.  Maybe  I'll  arrange  to  outfit  all  his  men
with swords and crossbows."
"Think  you  can  get  Giovanni  to  train  them?"  Lucia  asked.  "If  you  give  them  the
swords without training they'll only trip over them in battle."
"I could try making Felice do it," I said.
"Think he'll be any better than Michel? Or Giovanni?"
"Could he be any worse?" I said. "Don't answer that. I suppose I should go spring him
from the stockade. What else do I still need to take care of?"
Lucia considered. "Five more people who want you to mediate disputes."
"Oh, for— Can't you do it?"
She  shook  her  head.  "They  specifically  requested  you.  Look,  at  least  they  aren't
fighting."
"Right, I know. Fine. Later, before the scouts get back. Was that it?"
"That's all," Lucia said.
"In that case ..." I stretched. "I'm going to visit Felice."
The stockade was really just a fenced area with two guards standing over it. The fence
was a flimsy, makeshift affair; any determined prisoner could escape by uprooting a fence
stake and running. Most of the time, when I tossed someone in the stockade it was more
for the symbolic humiliation than actual confinement.
I expected Felice to greet me with a glare, but he merely looked sad and hurt. "I had
no idea you'd take it like this," he said when I arrived.
"Then you were poorly briefed."
"Is this really necessary?" He gestured at the fence and the guards. "I promise not to
try to take away your army."
"I don't think you'd be able to," I said. "I had you locked up because you're a stranger
and you might be here to cause trouble. Why should I trust you? I was never one of the
official  reformers  of  Cuore;  I  don't  know  the  passwords  and  countersigns  that  so
thoroughly  impressed  Giovanni."  I  stepped  close  to  the  fence,  noticing  that  Felice  was
sweating. "Why should I trust you?"
Felice placed his hands flat against the fence posts. "Signora Generale," he said. "I may

be soft and I may be weak compared to you and your  men.  The  orders  I  was  sent  with
may betray a terrible arrogance on the part of my leaders. But the fire that burns in my
heart springs from the same flame  as  the  fire  in yours.  My  brothers  were  among  those
murdered by the Circle to keep secret the devastation caused by magefire. And I will do
whatever it takes to bring them down." He met my eyes  with  urgent  sincerity.  "Let  me
fight with you, Generale. You won't regret it."
"Well," I said. I uprooted a fence post and gestured that he could step out of the prison.
"Welcome to my army." I fitted the post back into the ground and started to walk away.
"Wait," Felice said. I turned back. "What do I do now?"
"That's for you to figure out, isn't it?" His look was so pitiful I relented. "Fine.  Report
to—oh, you can be in Paulo's unit." I flagged down Vitale. "Escort Felice here to Paulo. Do
you know how to use a sword for anything other than jewelry, Felice?"
"Of course," he said.
"Tell Paulo that Felice  will  be  helping  him  with  arms  training."  With  any  luck,  Felice
would be better at it than Michel. Vitale saluted and marched Felice off.
* * *
"Martido won't return my bracelet."
I stared at Fiora, baffled. "Why does he have it?"
"I gave it to him when we were—you  know.  And  now  we're  not.  But  he  won't  give  it
back to me."
I glanced at Lucia, who sat beside me. She gave me her  faintest  wicked  grin,  and  my
spirits  lifted  slightly.  I  didn't  understand  why  I  was  the  one  who  had  to  mediate  these
stupid arguments. Lucia would have been better at it.
"Where did you get the bracelet?"
"From Teleso's keep." Fiora glared at me stubbornly now. "It's mine. I want it back."
"You  only  had  it  because  I  said  you  could  have  it,  you  stupid  cow,"  Martido  said,
speaking up for the first time since they'd come in. He  sat  as  far  away  from  Fiora  as  he
could and still be in the tent. "I saw it first."
"Why do you want it?"
They answered in unison: "Because it's mine."
How did I get involved in this sort of thing? And this was only the first dispute of  the
five Lucia had mentioned. "Give it here," I said to Martido, and he reluctantly  handed  it
over. I studied the bracelet. Teleso must have kept  it  to  adorn  his  mistresses,  or  else  it
had belonged to his sister. It was a woman's jeweled bracelet, ornate and fairly delicate. It
would look silly on Martido's wrist.
"Generale!" The voice came from outside the tent, and  then  Vitale  poked  his  head  in
through the door. "Generale, the scouts have returned."
I slipped the bracelet onto my own wrist. "We'll finish this later," I said to Martido and
Fiora. "I'll hold the bracelet for now." Martido started to protest, then thought the better
of it and followed Fiora out of the tent.

Vitale  held  the  tent  flap  open  for  the  scouts  as  they  came  in—six  haggard  and
exhausted men and women. "Vitale," I said. "Get Giovanni, then fetch food and  wine  for
the scouts. Then tell all unit commanders I want them here in an  hour."  He  saluted  and
slipped back out. "Report, Camilla," I said to the scout leader.
Camilla was a farm girl who had entertained herself as a child by testing how close she
could get to  wild  birds  before  they  saw  her  and  flew  away.  Now  she  used  her  noiseless
step and her ability to disappear into the dusty ground of the wasteland to scout out the
slave  camps  before  we  attacked.  She  was  slightly  built,  with  tiny  hands  and  feet  and  a
dark cap of short-cropped hair.
She  pulled  up  a  cushion  and  sat  down,  tucking  her  feet  neatly  under  her.  "Chira  is
about the same size as Ravenna," she said, "but more heavily guarded. They've received
reinforcements, and Demetrio—their commander—has taken the trouble  to  train  them."
She  sketched  the  camp's  layout  in the  dust.  "Like  the  other  camps,  Chira  is  set  into  a
valley.  They've  done  a  better  job  with  the  perimeter,  though;  they  built  the  camp  up
against a section of the wall they're building, and used that for some of the defenses."
"The wall could work to our advantage," I said. "If we could get some of our people on
to it, to fire down—the valley location makes  it  easier  to  keep  your  prisoners  contained,
but it's hard to defend."
Camilla looked up. "In addition to the keep, they have five other buildings, also solidly
built. And they must know that we start with  a  cavalry  charge,  but  they  haven't  set  up
lances to impale the horses;  I  think  they  want  to  draw  us  in,  then  use  those  subsidiary
watchtowers to shoot us down."
"Sounds plausible," Lucia  said  as  Giovanni  joined  us.  I  briefly  repeated  what  Camilla
had told me, then gestured for Camilla to continue.
"The thing that worries me the most," Camilla said, "is that Demetrio runs drills. I saw
them practicing, and it looked like they were rehearsing exactly what to do if there was an
uprising, or if we attacked."
"You saw the drill?" Then we knew his strategy. One of them, at least.
"Yes."  Camilla  described  the  procedures  the  soldiers  ran  through.  "He  even  had  a
soldier whose job was to go torch the grain. They're onto us."
"That's  what  they  think,  anyway,"  I  said.  "Which  building  holds  the  grain?"  Camilla
pointed  to  one  of  the  scuffs  she'd  drawn  in  the  dust.  "Then  we  know  what  to  protect.
What are the people like?"
"Scared. Beaten down. Demetrio keeps a tight grip; we saw two executions during the
time we were watching. Both were escape attempts who got caught."
"The soldiers?"
"Brutal. And loyal to Demetrio."
Vitale  arrived  then  with  food  and  wine  for  the  scouts,  and  they  paused  to  have
something to eat and drink. We finished the briefing  before  the  rest  of  the  commanders
arrived, but I  already  had  a  pretty  good  idea  of  what  I  was  going  to  do.  Camilla  seeing
those drills had been a stroke of luck.
It was very late when we finished; I sent the scouts off to sleep and slipped out of my
tent.  Michel  trailed  me  as  I  headed  past  the  edge  of  the  camp  and  into  the  wasteland,
keeping a respectful distance.
The hills of the wasteland were silvery in the  moonlight.  Even  on the  darkest  nights,
you could tell that the land here was dead. I sat down at the crest of one hill and opened

my  violin  case.  Learning  to  fight  with  a  sword  had  callused  my  right  hand,  despite  the
gloves  I  always  wore.  It  felt  a  little  strange  now  to  take  my  bow  in hand  and  tuck  my
violin under my chin, but I could still make my violin sing. I tuned up  and  played  for  an
hour, just for myself. I played the songs I'd learned with Mira, and the violin part of some
of the  ensemble  pieces  from  the  conservatory.  Finally  I  played  the  Mass.  I  glanced  at
Michel, standing watch a short distance away. I always  wondered  if  he  wanted  to  dance
when I played the Mass, but tonight  he  probably  just  wished  I'd  stop  playing  and  go  to
bed so that he could get some sleep as well. I had to admit that I was tired. I put my violin
away and headed back for the camp. As  I  reached  my  tent,  I  turned  to  Michel.  He  was
still trailing me sleepily.
"Martido and Fiora," I said. "Whose unit are they in, anyway?"
"Severo's," he said.
I nodded. "Good." I took the bracelet off my wrist and handed it to Michel. "Take this
to Severo and tell him that he can deal with it. I have an army to lead." Michel blinked at
me, puzzled, as I went inside to bed.
* * *
We attacked Chira at dawn a few days  later,  sweeping  down  from  the  black  hills  like
the monstrous Heralds of the Lady's Vengeance that Her book promised on the last days.
(Lucia insisted that Gaius had lifted this image  directly  from  something  in the  stories  of
Gèsu, but she wasn't sure quite what.) We had split off the  cavalry  from  the  infantry  as
we traveled, and the cavalry circled around to strike from the far side of Chira. When we
were in position, I blew three piercing blasts on the whistle I carried  into  battle,  and  we
urged our horses to a full gallop as we fell upon the camp.
Sentries from the fence shouted an alarm, but we broke through and rode them down.
From the corner of my eye, I could see Severo leading a squadron of  Lupi  archers  along
the top of the wall. One of the Chirani  soldiers  had  been  on guard;  Severo  took  him  out
with a blow of his staff. I found myself smiling. My commanders had their problems, but
they knew how to fight.
Giovanni  had  been  training  me  to  fight  from  horseback  with  a  sword,  but  my
enthusiastic swings were as likely to pull me off the horse as to do any damage, so today I
settled for my crossbow and the whistle. Chirani prisoners scattered in every direction as
we rode in, adding to the general confusion. A few had the presence of mind to escape the
enclosure, but most just panicked. Demetrio's troops tried to regroup, retreating to their
fortresses to fire on us from relative safety. This was where Camilla's skill would pay off,
assuming  that  she  and  the  other  members  of  her  team  had  been  successful  in  their
mission.
A few of the soldiers  had  reached  their  forts  now—  but  they  were  making  their  first
mistake. The  first  soldiers  to  make  it  in panicked,  slamming  the  door  behind  them  and
trapping their fellow soldiers outside. Our cavalry closed in for the kill; a few of us fell to
arrows fired from the towers, but only a few. Holding back a  bit,  I  whispered  my  secret
selfish  prayer:  don't  let  anyone  I  know  get  hurt.  These  days,  I  knew  everyone  in  my
army,  but  when  I  whispered  that  prayer,  I  meant  Lucia,  Michel,  and  Giovanni.  I  felt
ashamed  to  make  such  a  selfish  request  of  God,  so  I  said  this  prayer  to  the  Lord;  the
Lady's consort was known for taking care of the little things.
Each  of  the  extra  guard  towers  Demetrio  had  built  had  been  equipped  with  a  large

stash  of  extra  crossbow  bolts,  enough  to  take  out  most  of  the  Lupi  if  need  be.  As  the
soldiers'  quivers  ran  low,  they  looked  to  those  stocks—and  the  rain  of  crossbow  bolts
slowed  abruptly.  Camilla  and  her  scouts  had  removed  them  in  the  night.  The  soldiers
would have to make every shot count now; we could all move in. I blew a long blast on my
whistle, then a  short  blast,  then  a  long  blast.  Of  course,  Camilla  couldn't  remove  all  the
arrows from the main keep. But just before dawn she'd slipped inside it and hidden; when
we reached the back door, she would open it. As the  Lupi  infantry  charged,  some  of  the
Chirani prisoners came out of hiding, cheering for us or even  picking  up  tools  from  their
work on the wall and joining the charge.
Paulo and his unit had been assigned to secure the granary;  since  I  saw  no smoke  or
flame, they'd probably succeeded. I led the way to the door of the keep, and we burst in,
flooding through the hallways, killing the soldiers who didn't surrender.
Chira was ours by the time the sun had risen over the hills.
The Lupi had the routine down by now. Secure the grain, horses, weapons, and papers.
Capture  the  keep  commander  if  possible,  and  his  lieutenants,  and  place  them  under
guard. Tell the prisoners that they were free to go or to join our army, and let them loot
the rest of  the  keep  to  their  heart's  content—although  the  Lupi  generally  joined  in that
part of the fun as well.
We found Demetrio in his study, dead by his own hand. I was secretly relieved; I didn't
like  executing  people  and  I  liked  extracting  information  from  them  even  less.  Giovanni
and I covered the body and Giovanni started on the desk. "How are Lucia and Michel?" I
asked.
"Fine," Giovanni said, pulling out the first desk drawer. "Lucia is off ministering to the
injured."
"Where's Felice?"
Giovanni snorted. "He fell behind last night. I wasn't optimistic about his usefulness in
a battle, so I told  him  to  follow  our  track  and  get  here  when  he  got  here.  He  pouted  at
me."
"Figures." I poked at the papers on the desk, then decided to let Giovanni handle  the
job. "I'll be back in a few hours."
"Have fun." Giovanni didn't look up from the desk.
I went out for what Giovanni called my personal victory parade, visiting each unit and
congratulating everyone who'd fought with us, including the Chirani who'd picked up tools
as improvised weapons. The Chirani were a grim  lot,  even  more  haggard  and  desperate
than most of the prisoners we'd freed. I was passing the granary when I heard a hesitant
voice say, "Eliana?"
The voice was familiar, and I turned. My mouth dropped open. Of all the people to find
here—"Lia."
Lia  had  been  my  roommate  at  the  conservatory  before  Mira.  She'd  left  the
conservatory  a  year  ago,  when  her  family  announced  plans  to  move  north.  Her  high
cheekbones  were  prominent  to  the  point  of  being  ghoulish-looking,  and  her  green  eyes
were sunken, but even starving she was beautiful in her own strange way. Lia had always
been an odd one at the conservatory—she played lute, and had stubbornly refused to take
up an ensemble instrument,  saying  that  she  wanted  to  be  a  minstrel  when  she  finished
her education. "Lia," I said again. "What are you doing here?"
Lia gave me a ghostlike smile. "I could ask the same of you. I think it's pretty obvious
what  I'm  doing  here—  building  a  bloody  wall.  But  the  Eliana  I  heard  about  was  you?  I

can't believe it."
I  glanced  around.  I'd  finished  my  parade,  and  my  time  was  my  own—as  much  as  it
ever was these days. "Come on, I'll get you something to eat. Do you have family here?"
Lia shook her head. "Let's go talk for a while."
I  led  the  way  down  into  the  larder.  "All  these  keeps  are  laid  out  the  same,"  I  said.
"This set of stairs always leads to the larder, and there's a hidden cabinet of food that the
first looters to come through always miss." I pulled out the loaves of bread and bricks of
cheese. "Don't eat too much, too fast,"  I  warned  her.  "Especially  not  the  cheese."  There
was a flask of wine in the cabinet as well, and I poured us each a glass.
"So tell me," Lia said. "What have you been up to?"
"You first," I said.
"My story's not that unusual. We tried to  go  north;  they  stopped  us.  We  tried  again;
they  stopped  us.  We  tried  again;  they  sent  us  here.  My  parents  died  here,  as  did  the
sister and brother who came with us. I do have another brother and sister, with families,
but who knows what's happened to them." She pushed a lock of dark hair behind her ear
and took a sip of wine.
"Your lute?"
"Stolen." She said it quickly, but I saw a look of pain cross her face, almost worse than
when she said her parents had died. "I still have my voice, at least." She looked up. "Your
turn."
"I don't really know where to start," I said.
"That  doesn't  sound  like  the  Eliana  I  used  to  go  to  for  all  the  best  gossip,"  Lia  said.
"You could start  by  telling  me  about  everyone  else  at  the  conservatory,  if  you're  really
stuck. How is Bella?"
"She's dead," I said.
"Dead!" Lia set her wine down, her face white but resigned. "Bella? How?"
"It was the Fedeli ..." I put down my bread and cheese, and picked up my own wine. "I
suppose the story really starts with Mira. After you left the conservatory, I had the room
to myself for a couple of  months—and  then  a  new  student  arrived,  a  girl  our  age,  Mira.
She said she'd come from a seminary in Cuore, but I realized almost right away that she
was lying." I felt my cheeks flush and my hands warm, just a little, at the thought of Mira.
"You  remember  how  people  would  play  Redentori  songs,  Old  Way  songs,  back  at  the
conservatory? Secretly?"
Lia  nodded.  "Of  course.  You  seemed  to  be  very  good  at  picking  them  up;  I
eavesdropped on you to learn the ones I know."
"Mira got a group together to play the songs—me, Bella, Giula, Flavia, and Celia."
Lia's  face  brightened.  "I  wish  I'd  been  there  for  that!  But—Giula?  What  was  she
thinking?"
"It  was  Celia  who  nearly  got  us  into  trouble.  A  few  weeks  after  Viaggio,  Bella  got  a
letter saying that one of her sisters had died. We met to play the funeral  song,  but  Celia
walked out right afterward, saying that we had crossed the line into worship of false gods.
And then Giorgi, the cook's  assistant,  came  in and  told  us  all  we  were  playing  with  fire.
That kind of shut down our secret ensemble." I sighed and swirled my wine in my glass.
"Bella wasn't ready to give up on the Old  Way,  though;  she  went  to  Giorgi  and  said  she
wanted him to teach her more about it. I overheard them talking." Lia shot me a look and
I suppressed a smile. "I guess I was eavesdropping."

"That's the Eliana I remember," Lia said.
"Then the Fedeli came." I poured myself more wine; my hand trembled slightly. "Just
before Mascherata. Celia tried to convince us all to turn ourselves in. But Mira would have
had to flee, and Bella was ready to die for her newfound faith rather than forswear it. So
we decided to brazen it out, though Celia nearly turned us all in anyway."
"But she didn't."
"No. On the night of Mascherata, they sent us all to dance in the courtyard—girls and
boys  together.  Bella  was  playing.  Very  late  that  night,  one  of  the  Fedeli  suddenly  tore
Bella's trumpet out of her hands and told her to swear loyalty to the Lady. When she said
she  was  a  Redentore,  they  cut  her  throat."  I  knew  that  Lia  would  look  horrified,  that
however many awful things she'd seen here at Chira, the murder of her old friend would
be no less dreadful. So I didn't look up. I fished Bella's cross out from under my shirt and
held it out. "This was Bella's. I found it in the courtyard the next day and pocketed it."
"Bella was wearing a cross while the Fedeli were at the conservatory?" Lia raised her
wine cup in salute. "That's our Bella."
"In  the  spring,  I  came  back  to  our  room  one  day,  and  there  were  a  half  dozen  men
lying in wait for Mira. They made me wait with them. One of them was a mage." The wine
tasted  like  ashes;  I  forced  myself  to  take  another  sip.  "It  turned  out  that  Mira  was  a
mage,  too,  from  the  Circle.  She'd  run  away  and  hidden  at  the  Verdiano  Rural
Conservatory  because  she'd  found  out  that  it  was  the  Circle's  magic—"  I  set  down  my
wine  very  carefully.  "It  was  the  Circle's  magic  that  drained  the  Verdiani  lands,  that
created the wasteland."
Lia  had  not  known  this.  She  went  white,  and  then  carefully  raised  one  eyebrow.  "I
should have guessed. We can't use witchlight here."
"Nor  anywhere  else  in  the  wasteland."  I  sighed.  "Liemo—that  was  the  mage  who'd
come for her—tried to persuade Mira  to  go  back  to  Cuore  with  him.  She  refused.  So  he
had his guardsmen take me hostage. They were going to shoot me in the hand." My hand
curled tightly now around the wine cup. "Mira used her magic to destroy the bolt before it
hit  me.  And  then  she  just  crumbled.  She  started  to  weep,  and  she  followed  him  like  a
tethered animal. He'd brought an extra horse for her, and she rode away with him."
The  room  was  quiet.  We  could  hear  noise  from  beyond  the  building  walls,  but  it
seemed a long way away.
"Did Mira say anything? Did you say anything to her?"
"I begged her not to go," I said. "I followed her to the  courtyard  and  shouted  for  her
not to listen to him. And when I knew she was leaving, no matter  what  I  said,  I  sang  to
her—we all did. Giula, Flavia, Celia, and I. We sang her one of the  Redentori  songs  she'd
taught us. But she just rode away."
Lia had eaten the last of the food from the cupboard. I got up, stretched my arms. "Did
you want more cheese?"
"I wouldn't refuse it."
I poked  my  head  out  the  door  and  spotted  Michel.  "Go  find  me  some  cheese,  would
you?" I said. "I'm with an old friend."
Back downstairs, Lia said, "There must be more to your story. Were you expelled from
the conservatory for singing to Mira?"
"Oh, goodness," I said. "No. But I didn't want to stay any longer. The Circle sponsored
me, and I didn't want to take anything from them. And I wanted to tell my parents what

had caused the famine. So I left, and  so  did  Giula.  We  walked  together  as  far  as  Pluma,
and then went our separate ways. My home village, Doratura, was  just  a  few  days  from
Pluma."
"Was?"
"When I got there, it had been destroyed. There were refugees that had come up from
the wasteland, and soldiers that came down from Cuore to push them back. Doratura was
caught between them. My whole family was dead."
"I'm so sorry," Lia whispered.
"I didn't know that for certain, though, when I first reached my village; there had been
a few  survivors,  and  I  was  told  they'd  all  been  taken  to  a  place  called  Ravenna,  in  the
wasteland.  So  I  went  to  Ravenna.  That  was  a  place  like  Chira—refugees  held  prisoner,
building the wall. Starving." Lia nodded. "Within a day or two I fell in with this group that
was supposed to be planning a breakout. The person who approached me was Lucia. Her
cousin  Giovanni  was  there  as  well—  though  he  was  rude,  petulant,  and  useless.  Then
there was a man named Beneto and a woman named Jesca. Giovanni, Beneto, and  Jesca
were all from the university in Cuore, and were officers in the  Reform  movement.  They
kind  of  adopted  me—well,  except  for  Giovanni,  who'd  hated  me  on sight.  It  turned  out
that  Giovanni  was  supposed  to  be  doing  arms  training  for  young  men  in  Ravenna,
secretly, so he was trying to make them all learn how to  fight  with  swords.  Gentlemen's
weapons." I shook my head. "I'd barely met Beneto and Jesca before Teleso, the military
commander, had them both hanged for causing trouble. This was a catastrophe,  because
the next person in line to command was Giovanni. And then Teleso had me brought into
the keep."
"Why?"
"He said he wanted to hear me play." My ears and cheeks started to burn. "He  acted
like he wanted something else, though."
"I think I can guess," Lia said.
"Well,  he  didn't  want  it  enough  to  force  the  point.  He  said  he  wasn't  interested  in
unwilling  women—though  I  think  he  was  ready  to  stretch  the  definition  of  willing.
Anyway. He also wanted me to play for the funeral of Beneto and Jesca. Both Teleso and
the  Ravenna  reformers  wanted  the  same  thing—a  riot.  The  reformers  who  were  left
thought that they could use the riot to break out. Teleso thought he could use the riot to
kill a whole lot of Ravenessi and ease pressure on the food supplies. And  he  had  soldiers
assigned to shoot people he particularly didn't like, such as Lucia."
"He needed a riot for that? Why?"
"That  is an  interesting  story  in itself.  There  was  a  soldier  named  Mario  who  had  a
strong  influence  over  the  other  soldiers.  Mario  was  a  good  man,  and  he  thought  it  was
wrong  to  shoot  without  provocation.  So  if  Teleso  wanted  the  soldiers  to  shoot  down  a
prisoner, he needed to make sure that the prisoner provoked them."
Lia looked down at the table, a bit ruefully. "There wasn't anyone like that here."
"We were lucky."
"Was Mario Redentore?"
"No,  definitely  not,"  I  said.  "He  believed  devoutly  in  the  Lady.  His  faith  inspired
him—a lot." Michel arrived with a basket of cheese, bread, and wine. I poured more wine
for both of us and carved off a wedge of cheese. "Where was I?"
"I think you  were  telling  me  how  you  became  the  Head  Troublemaker  in Ravenna,"

Lia said.
"That's  right.  The  funeral.  Teleso  had  me  play  the  Redentore  funeral  music,  so  that
people  could  dance.  Well,  I  knew  the  riot  was  coming,  and  when  I  saw  the  soldiers
surrounding the  dancers,  I  was  able  to  defuse  things  so  there  wasn't  a  riot.  Teleso  was
furious. He had me thrown into the dungeon, and the next morning,  he  had  me  dragged
outside again. I defied him publicly,  and  he  had  me  flogged.  It  sounds  strange,  but  that
gave  me  what  I  needed  to  take  over  as  'generale'  of  the  Ravenessi  army.  Because  I'd
defied him, and because I didn't cry under the lash."
"What did Giovanni think of that?"
"He was furious. But he got used to the idea eventually.  To  train  people  to  get  ready
for  the  breakout,  we  used  a  game,  Shepherd-and-Wolves,  so  that  they  learned  to  fight
together. And then the morning after Dono alia Magia, I led the uprising."
"And you won—that's pretty obvious."
"We  did,  though  a  lot  of  people  died,  including  Mario.  Teleso  caught  me  alone,  and
nearly killed me. I beat him thanks to Giovanni's weaponry lessons." I  gave  Lia  a  rueful
grin. "We've learned to get along. Officially we're both generali of the Lupi."
"And unofficially?"
"We're  both  addressed  as  'Generale,'  and  people  do  what  I  tell  them  to  do."  Mostly.
"After the breakout, we sent the children and  the  people  who  didn't  want  to  fight  up  to
Doratura, my old village. It's not in the  wasteland,  and  it  could  be  rebuilt.  That's  where
Giula  went;  she  ended  up  in  Ravenna  for  a  bit,  too."  I  left  out  the  part  about  Giula
becoming Teleso's mistress. Lia's opinion of Giula was low enough already. "The rest of us
freed two more of the slave labor camps, and now Chira. And that's it. That's my story."
Lia raised her wine cup to salute me.
"You  looked  surprised  when  I  said  that  the  famine  was  caused  by  magery,"  I  said.
"You didn't know that?"
"No," Lia said. "I did know it couldn't be just salt; that couldn't do this, no matter what
the  Circle  said.  But  magery  ..."  She  considered.  "It  makes  sense."  She  poured  herself
more wine. "So do I get sent off to Doratura? Or can I stay with you and be a soldier?"
"You can do whatever you want. It's only the children we send away. Would you want
to join the army?"
"I don't know," she said. "I'll have to think about it."
"You'll  have  until  tomorrow  morning.  That's  when  we'll  be  moving  on."  Something
occurred to me. "What exactly had you heard about us? The Lupi, I mean?"
"They  started  bringing  in more  soldiers  about  a  month  ago—just  a  few  at  first,  but
more and more lately. Of course, we all wondered  why.  We'd  never  caused  any  trouble.
But  rumors  came  with  the  soldiers."  Lia  stretched,  gathering  her  thoughts.  "First  we
heard there'd been a breakout at another camp, and they were here to make sure nothing
like  that  happened  in  Chira.  Of  course,  that  gave  people  ideas;  if  someone  else  could
manage it, maybe we could, too. There was talk for a while, but then Demetrio hanged all
the talkers he could find, and  then  some."  She  shook  her  head,  rubbing  the  back  of  her
neck with her hand. "The next set of soldiers brought word of a rebel army. They  called
you the Cani, dogs, but we could tell they were afraid. You'd had some success; that was
all we heard.
"The last group of soldiers knew some names.  Eliana,  Giovanni,  Lucia.  We  whispered
your names back and forth as we worked on the wall. The initial story was that you were

in charge, and Giovanni your lover."
I choked on my wine. "Giovanni is not my lover."
"Well, it made a good story." Lia half grinned at my expression. "Lucia was said to be
Giovanni's sister—"
"Cousin."
Lia  raised  an  eyebrow  from  behind  her  wine  cup.  "And  the  story  said  you  were  all
apostates—Redentori."
"Some  of  us  are,  but  not  all.  Mario  would  be  here  now  if  he  hadn't  died  freeing
Ravenna—and he was not Redentore."
"Somehow they missed the violinist part, though, or I'd have  wondered  if  it  was  you.
I'd assumed it was  someone  older  ...  Anyway.  About  five  days  ago,  Callista  thought  she
saw someone watching us from the crest of one of the hills nearby. There was a great deal
of whispering  about  that,  but  it  was  kept  very  quiet.  If  it  was  the  first  advance  of  the
Cani—the  Lupi—  as  we  hoped,  the  last  thing  we  wanted  to  do  was  tip  off  any  of  the
guards."
We had been fortunate. "I'm glad you kept your mouths shut."
"So am I." Lia smiled. "Most of  the  victims  of  Demetrio's  purges  were  men,  so  there
are more women here. I think women are better at keeping secrets."
That reminded me of Giovanni. "I should go back up to Demetrio's study and see how
Giovanni's work is going." I finished the last of my wine. "Want to come?"
Lia shrugged. "I certainly don't have anything else to do with myself."
We went up the short stair from the kitchen to the main floor, and down the hall to the
study.  Lupi  saluted  as  I  passed;  Chirani  refugees  stared  after  me,  wide-eyed.  Some  of
them also saluted; a few of them knelt to brush the fabric of my trousers as I passed, as if
I were a high-ranking priestess. The Lupi guarding the study stood aside to let us in.
Giovanni sat at the desk, papers piled around him. "Found anything?" I asked.
Giovanni looked up and  glared  at  me  bitterly.  "I  think  Demetrio  burned  most  of  the
important papers before he killed himself.  But  it's  difficult  to  tell,  as  he  kept  the  rest  in
some sort of code. Either that or his handwriting was really atrocious."
Lia  slid  unobtrusively  into  one  of  the  chairs  near  the  fireplace  to  watch  us.  "Let  me
see,"  I  said,  and  picked  up  one  of  the  papers.  "How  are  you  sorting,  if  you  don't  know
what anything says?"
"Based on where I found it. Those were in the second drawer."
The paper was covered in scrawled symbols. "Do you think there's a symbol that goes
with each letter?" I asked.
"How would I know?" Giovanni said.
"You went to the university, didn't you?"
"Give it a rest, Eliana," he said. "No, we didn't cover secret codes at the university. If
you don't have any ideas, put it back where you found it; I want to keep stuff in some sort
of order."
"May I see?" Lia asked.
Giovanni looked up. "Sorry," I said to Lia.  "I  should  have  introduced  you.  Lia,  this  is
Generale Giovanni. Giovanni, this is Lia, my roommate from the conservatory."

His eyes flew wide. "The mage?"
"No, don't be ridiculous. Lia was my roommate before Mira."
"Oh," he said, losing interest. I  handed  Lia  one  of  the  papers.  She  pursed  her  lips  as
she studied it. "Do you think you can figure it out?" Giovanni asked her.
"Maybe," she said with a shrug. "Can I look at the other papers?"
"Help yourself," Giovanni said. Lia started sorting through the piles, pulling out a clean
sheet of paper to take notes.
There wasn't really room for me at the desk, so I went to poke through the cabinets. I
found an almost-empty bottle of potent wine  and  a  bundle  of  letters  tied  with  a  ribbon.
The letters weren't in code. The handwriting  was  feminine,  and  after  a  few  moments  of
reading I concluded they were from Demetrio's sweetheart.
I nearly tossed them aside; I didn't like thinking of my enemies as the sorts of people
who  had  sweethearts.  Besides,  the  family  letters  we'd  found  at  other  camps  had  been
uniformly useless. But there was so little here that we were even able to read, I sat down
with them anyway, just for a moment.
Demetrio's  lover  was  named  Clara,  and  she  was  a  lover  but  not  a  wife,  because  the
Lady had failed to bless their assignations with a child. It was not a common situation, but
it did happen; Clara had come under quite a bit of pressure from her mother and the local
priestess to end things with Demetrio and seek a husband that the Lady might show more
approval of. It wasn't until the third letter that I realized the priestess she referred to so
casually  was  one  of  the  most  high  ranking  in Cuore—a  name  even  I  was  familiar  with,
though  admittedly  I'd  heard  it  from  Lucia.  Clara  was  a  lady  of  quite  a  significant  rank,
who  lived  within  the  enclave  of  the  Circle  and  the  Emperor,  and  her  letters  detailed
extensive gossip regarding court politics.
"Giovanni," I said, hesitantly, "do you know of  a  lady  named  Clara,  a  noblewoman  at
the Imperial Court?"
Giovanni looked up. "Maybe."
"She was Demetrio's lover."
"You're  joking,"  he  said,  and  jumped  up,  scattering  papers  everywhere.  "Well,  that
explains why she refuses all the men her mother tries to set her up with." He grabbed the
bundle of letters from me. "Incredible."
Lia looked up. "I think I've figured out the code," she said.
After all that, the papers Demetrio had encoded really  were  largely  worthless.  Either
he was an exceptionally suspicious man, or  he  took  malicious  delight  in the  image  of  his
enemies frantically trying to decode grain allocations, duty rosters, and other fascinatingly
useless information.
There were a  few  items  of  note.  All  the  intelligence  he'd  received  on the  rebel  army
was tucked away at the bottom of one of the drawers. It was not in code, since he hadn't
written it; I was relieved to discover how little they  knew  about  our  tactics.  They  knew
my  name  and  a  bit  of  my  background;  a  disgusted  footnote  added  that  my  family  was
dead,  and  thus  couldn't  be  used  against  me.  They  knew  that  we  primarily  relied  on
crossbows, firing down from the hill, rather than using swords or lances,  and  that  few  of
us  were  mounted.  They  knew  that  we  were  inexplicably  winning,  again  and  again  and
again (this was hinted at, but never stated directly), but not why; they didn't know about
the scouting party that infiltrated the camps and threw the doors wide open. Or at least,
they  didn't  know  yet.  Unfortunately,  the  information  revealed  little  about  how  they
planned to deal with us  other  than  reinforcing  the  remaining  camps  (that  was  obvious),

and trying to keep us bottled up in the wasteland.
"Hey," Giovanni said. "Look at this." He pushed one of Clara's letters across the desk.
You must believe me, my darling, I am doing the best I can. The Fedeli have come to
agree with me that it is vitally necessary to reinforce the troops in the wasteland now.
However, the Circle has opposed me at every turn.
Because  magic  can't  be  used  in the  wasteland,  the  Circle  can't  fight  there;  I  can't
overstate how frightening this is to them. In addition, my sources tell me that the Circle
has begun to fear the army: the army is loyal first to the Emperor, and because of the
wasteland, the army is no longer as dependent on the Circle as they were in the past. I
believe  that  the  Circle  wishes  to  see  the  army  fail  without  magical  support,  and
obviously, magical support can't be provided until the Cani leave the wasteland.
The sacrifice of the keep commanders seems an appalling betrayal to me. I am doing
my best to convince the Emperor to send additional troops, even if it means raising an
entirely new army. Wish me luck, darling. I pray to the Lady for your safety ...
I  looked  up.  "It's  fascinating  information,"  I  admitted.  "And  certainly  explains  a  lot.
But I'm not sure how we can use it."
Giovanni's eyes glinted. "There's got to be a way." He checked the date  on the  letter.
"This  is  months  old.  If  only  we  had  more  recent  information.  For  all  we  know,  Clara
convinced the Emperor and fresh troops are on their  way.  I'll  keep  the  letters.  I  almost
feel sorry for the lady."
Lia had been wandering  the  study  and  looked  up  suddenly.  "You  said  that  Demetrio
killed himself?"
"Yes," Giovanni said.
"Where is the body?"
"Right  there."  I  pointed  to  the  corner,  and  suddenly  felt  apologetic.  We'd  gotten
awfully cavalier about bodies lately.
Lia carefully lifted the corner of the blanket and stared down at the  face  impassively,
then covered it again, standing back up. "I hate to tell you this," she said, "but that's not
him."
"What?" Giovanni dropped everything he was holding. "Are you sure?"
"Positive. This  is  his  second.  But  I  wonder  if  the  second  took  his  commander's  place
willingly, or if Demetrio killed him and put the knife in his hand?"
"Lady's tits," Giovanni said, "I don't believe it. I can't believe I was taken in by such a
stupid trick. Michel!" He stomped out the door.
Lia still stood by the body, her green eyes wide and very  slightly amused. "I should've
known Demetrio wouldn't just give up like that. It's not his style."
Giovanni was back within minutes. "One horse is gone," he said.
"From the stables?"
"No,"  Giovanni  said.  "We  secured  those,  remember?  The  bastard  stole  my  horse."  I
tried—and failed—to cover my laughter with my sleeve. "I'm glad you find this amusing,
Eliana. Doesn't it worry you that he might, just possibly, have realized that we had a scout

slip into his keep to open the door?"
"I don't find it amusing," I said. Well, I did, but only because  it  was  Giovanni's  horse.
"Figures he took the best horse he could find, doesn't it? You can take his horse from the
stables; that seems only fair. You've sent Michel after him, of course?"
"Of course."
"But Stivali was the fastest horse, wasn't he? That's why you wanted him." Giovanni's
vicious  glare  was  confirmation  of  this.  We  weren't  going  to  catch  Demetrio;  he  had  too
much of a head start. Giovanni went back to sorting through the desk, still disgusted with
himself and our army; I started on the cabinets along the  wall.  "Hey,"  I  said.  "Lia!"  She
looked up. "Demetrio was a man of many talents."
There was a lute in the cabinet; I pulled it out to examine it. Demetrio's lute was more
decorative than Lia's had been; it was adorned with carved designs of birds and flowers. I
doubted  that  the  carvings  would  improve  the  sound,  but  after  the  months  without  her
lute, I think Lia would have snatched at the chance to play gut strung over a large mixing
bowl. The sheet music stored behind it only added to her delight. "It's yours," I said, and
she tucked the music under her arm and took her leave to go play.
* * *
Lia came briefly to see me the following morning, to say good-bye. "I won't be coming
with you," she said, "but I'll be serving your army. You'll see."
"Are you going to Doratura?" I asked.
"Maybe," she said. "For a while."
Lia had no sash to go with her ragged dress, but she had found a red hat somewhere in
the keep; it was a bit large for her, and she pushed it back to keep it from slipping into her
eyes. "Take care of yourself," I said.
"You too," she said, and gave me a tight hug.
A few  minutes  later  it  was  time  to  go  rally  the  troops.  The  Chirani  gathered  by  the
keep to stare at me from hollow faces with eyes that scorched mine with hope and anger.
There were many more women than men in Chira, and there were almost no children.
"We came here to free you," I said. "And we have. Your lives are your own; you serve
the  Circle's  cruelty  no longer."  At  the  very  back  of  the  crowd  I  saw  Lia,  watching  my
speech with a tiny smile. "You have a choice. We've freed many other camps now, and the
prisoners  have  resettled  abandoned  villages  that  are  not  in  the  wasteland.  They  are
rebuilding; it will mean  work,  but  not  at  the  threat  of  the  lash  or  the  noose.  That's  one
option.  Or  you  can  go  wherever  you  want;  return  home,  head  north,  head  south.  You
belong only to yourselves."
The women stared at me, their faces rigid, their eyes hungry.
"Or," I said,  and  a  ripple  went  through  the  crowd  at  my  tone,  "you  can  join us.  You
have the strength in your arms to  fight;  you  have  the  will  in your  hearts  to  free  others
just as we have freed you. There are three more camps in the wasteland, all enslaved, all
building the wall. Three more camps, just like this one." Lia's eyes were closed, listening; I
remembered her doing that, listening to me practice my violin, a lifetime ago.
"We are the Lupi, the wolves, because we hunt as a pack; because we fell on the sheep

who  called  themselves  our  captors  and  tore  them  to  pieces.  We  will  fall  on  those  other
camps, one by one. We will march in like the tide, and no one will stop us. We will sweep in
like fire,  and  nothing  will  be  left  in our  path."  I  was  breathless,  pacing,  as  the  crowd  of
half-starved women watched me in total silence.
"Are you with me?" I demanded.
"Yes," the women whispered, the hiss rippling through the crowd.
"You  are  wolves.  Find  your  voices.  You  don't  need  to  whisper  now  because  you  are
free," I shouted. "Are you with me?"
"Yes. Yes. YES!"
"We march at noon," I said. "Meet on the north hill in two hours."
The crowd started to disperse, and I turned to regroup my own people. I should have
asked Lia who to put in charge of the Chirani; I had no doubt that most of them would be
coming  with  us.  I  saw  Felice  watching  me  quietly  from  the  shadows  by  the  keep.  "The
young lady with the lute said she wanted me to give this to you," he said, looking slightly
puzzled. "It's sealed."
Lia must have lifted the heavy parchment from Demetrio's office, along with a pen and
the  seal.  I  broke  the  seal  and  read  the  page  quickly.  It  was  not  a  letter;  it  took  me  a
moment to realize it was musical notation. One of the songs we'd found in the cabinet? No.
 Lady's tits, I thought, reading it over.
The tune was fairly close to one of the folk songs I'd played with Mira, but  the  words
were different—and very  catchy, I had to admit,  humming  it  over  to  myself.  It  was  the
ballad of one Eliana, who had discovered the Circle's deadly secret and now sought to keep
them from destroying all of Verdia, whatever the cost.
In the name of the Mother, Her Son, and the Light, 
We are fire and water and God's open hand.
I have freed you and now I will lead you to glory.
I'll trade my own blood for the life of the land.
At the bottom of the last page, Lia had written neatly, more to come.
Lady's tits, I thought, how embarrassing, and went looking for Giovanni. I found him
saddling Demetrio's horse, and held out the sheet with a bit of trepidation.
"What's this?" Giovanni stepped away from the horse and took the parchment, looking
it over.  I  saw  a  glint  of  annoyance  cross  over  his  face,  and  then  he  shook  himself  and
laughed mockingly. "The heroine of ballads! I hope you'll still stoop to sharing a tent with
the rest of us."
"What do you think of it?" I asked, not willing to ask the real question: Does it bother
you that this is about me, and not about you?
"It's not bad. It's better than 'The Wicked Stepmother.' " I must have looked  puzzled
because he laughed again and said, "You know. 'I've brought a gift of honey, bright as sun
and sweet as wine.' The reformers wrote that."
"That was you? One of my friends spent hours in the library looking up references to
honey in old ballads, trying to figure out what that damn song meant."

"Yeah, I'm not surprised. I'd  tell  you  that  I  argued  for  a  more  transparent  meaning,
but  I  don't  want  you  thinking  I'm  just  trying  to  get  in  good  with  the  heroine  of  the
ballads." He gave me back the parchment with a little mocking flourish, and mounted his
horse. "See you back at camp."
CHAPTER TWO
To some I bring a sword; to some I bring a lamp. 
There are many ways to face me darkness.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 12, verse 25.
"You're wrong," Giovanni said. "Dangerously wrong."
I threw down the map Felice had carefully drawn out. "Dangerously wrong would be
dividing our forces!"
"Isabella agrees with me."
"Isabella  also  thinks  she  could  run  the  Lupi  better  than  I  could.  It's  no  wonder  she
likes the idea of her own little army."
"Look." Giovanni nearly grabbed my shoulders, then thought better of it. "If you don't
trust  Isabella  to  get  her  men  up  to  Cuore  without  you,  why  did  you  make  her  a
commander?"
I ignored the question. "It's a stupid strategy."
"What would you know about it? You know nothing about strategy. You know nothing
about  tactics.  I  do.  So  why  won't  you  listen  to  me?"  He  glanced  past  me.  "Lucia.  Talk
some sense into her. Maybe she'll listen to you."
Lucia shook her head. "I am not a strategist."
"Neither is she," he said.
"We're not dividing the Lupi," I said. "Discussion ended."
Giovanni looked past Lucia at Felice, who was sitting quietly in the corner of the tent.
"You. You're supposed to know something about strategy. If this were a mock battle with
your tutor, what would you do?"
"I'd  keep  the  Lupi  together  when  we  left  the  wasteland,"  Felice  said.  "Like  Eliana  is
doing."
I  nodded,  satisfied,  and  Giovanni  shot  Felice  a  venomous  look.  "Remember,"  he
muttered as he stomped out. "He only won nineteen out of twenty-five."
He returned moments later. "The scouts are back," he said, and held the tent flap open
for Camilla.
It  was  far  too  soon  for  the  scouts  to  have  returned—  had  something  gone  terribly
wrong?—but Camilla was grinning broadly. "They're gone," she said. "The soldiers pulled
out of the camp; it's just the prisoners."

"Are you sure?"
"Positive.  We  ended  up  going  into  camp  and  talking  to  some  of  the  prisoners.  The
soldiers packed up the day before yesterday and headed out of the wasteland."
"Then let's head in,"  I  said.  If  we  waited  much  longer,  the  prisoners  would  disperse.
Camilla saluted, and I sent Vitale to get my horse.
This was the last camp. Though we'd feared it would get harder and harder to liberate
them,  after  Chira  it  had  gotten  easier:  the  camp  commanders  were  demoralized  and
understaffed.  Apparently  Clara's  attempts  to  arrange  for  reinforcements  were  having
little effect.
We had no need to be covert, so in the last light of the afternoon, we massed on the hill
overlooking the camp. Below us, people were pointing and shouting;
some were waving red banners. I looked at Giovanni and nodded, and we rode in slow
procession down to the camp, the rest of the Lupi following.
The refugees surrounded us as we entered the camp. Men and women reached  up  to
clasp our hands, pressing  in so  tightly  that  Forza  began  to  sidle  nervously.  A  small  girl,
maybe six years old, saluted us from her father's shoulders; other children had scrambled
onto the roof of the vacant stables to get a better view.
Someone shouted a welcome, and this cheer was taken up, raggedly, by the refugees. I
shouted  a  greeting  back,  then  wheeled  my  horse  to  speak.  "We  came  here  expecting  a
fight,"  I  said.  "I  guess  we  can't  complain  too  much  that  the  soldiers  didn't  have  the
stomach to face us."
The Lupi cheered that; the refugees joined in, but feebly. Their eyes  were  desperate,
hungry, like the eyes of the refugees at Chira, like the eyes of everyone I'd seen in every
camp we'd liberated. "From here, we ride north," I said. "The soldiers were our keepers,
but  it  was  the  Circle  who  enslaved  us—who  created  the  wasteland,  killed  our  families,
imprisoned us here. We are going to sweep in on the Circle as we swept into the wasteland
camps—like fire, like the tide, like the incoming storm. If you  would  join us,  be  ready  to
march at dawn tomorrow!"
Smoke  still  rose  from  the  stone  hulk  of  the  keep.  The  retreating  camp  soldiers  had
loaded up what they could carry, and torched everything else. Including all the food. The
refugees  had  stayed  where  they  were  in  part  because  they  were  too  weak  to  flee  the
wasteland  and  they  hoped  that  the  Lupi  would  bring  them  something  to  eat.  After
inspecting the ruins of the keep, I sent for Rafi to arrange for a meal for both the Lupi and
the refugees.
Giovanni rode up next to me. "No grain," he said. "That's not good."
"It means that wintering in the wasteland is definitely not an option," I said.
Giovanni opened his mouth, as if he were going to restart the argument over our next
course of action, but he thought the better  of  it.  "We  can't  leave  before  tomorrow.  Let's
talk about it after we eat."
Felice was helping to serve the food when I arrived for my portion. He  almost  looked
like  one  of  the  Lupi  now—he  was  dirty,  at  least.  He  saluted  and  then  served  me  some
porridge.  "Council  meeting  later,"  I  said.  "Be  there.  I  want  someone  on  my  side."  He
smiled and nodded.
Giovanni also spent his time before the meeting marshalling allies. When I stepped into
the tent, not only Felice but Isabella, Giovanni, and Rafi waited  for  me.  Lucia  followed  a
moment later. I sent for tea for all of us and sat down, waiting for the onslaught.

It started with Rafi. "I think you should disband the Lupi," he said.
This  wasn't  what  Giovanni  had  expected  him  to  say,  either—that  was  obvious.
"What?" Giovanni said. "What would be the point of that, exactly?"
"You don't know how to fight magefire," Rafi said. "Neither do I. Neither  does  Eliana.
That's why you've been arguing for the last month over what to do next."
"So you think we should just give up?" I said.
"What would be the purpose in riding out of the wasteland, just so that we could all be
killed?"
During  the  war  with  Vesuvia,  opposing  mages  stood  at  either  end  of  the  battlefield,
hurling lethal fire back and forth. The armies were mainly there to keep the other  side's
swordsmen from walking up and skewering the mages. Of course, some skirmishes were
fought without magical support, but on those occasions when one side had mages and the
other side did not, the battles were typically over very quickly. We had no mages  in our
army—and for obvious reasons, we were not likely to get any. But just giving up and going
home— not that most of us had homes—was absurd. "We're not disbanding, Rafi."
"So how do you plan to face the Circle?" Rafi asked.
"Use  the  land  for  protection,"  I  said.  "Strike  from  under  shelter,  preferably  from
behind. The Circle won't move against us all at once. If we draw them out a handful at  a
time, I think we'll have a chance."
"How many mages destroyed your village?" Rafi asked.
I felt a flush rise to my cheeks, and a lump rise to my throat. "I don't know."
"It wasn't many, though."
"Probably not. But Doratura was not an army; they were not prepared."
Rafi spread his hands. "Granted. So how do you propose to draw out the Circle?"
"I  think  we  should  take  some  tempting  targets,"  I  said.  "Pluma,  for  one.  We  could
fortify the town ..."
"Pluma is a stupid target," Giovanni said.
"It's walled," I said.
"Walls don't stop magefire! If we're going to draw out the Circle, which I still think is a
stupid idea, we should send one of the units to fortify a hilltop. An uninhabited hilltop."
"In other words, you want to set up some of our people as decoys?"
"Why is this a problem? All armies do this. What kind of generale are you?"
"The  kind  who  stands  by  her  people,"  I  said,  "and  doesn't  set  them  up  to  get
slaughtered."
"You could make it a small unit," he said. "You could even ask for volunteers."
"No," I said, "and that's the end of it."
Isabella leaned forward. "Giovanni may be an arrogant twit, but that doesn't mean you
shouldn't take advantage of his strategic ability. And in this case he happens to be right."
"What if it was your unit I sent to be the decoy?" I asked.
"That would be stupid," Isabella said. "One of the less-experienced units would  make
more sense." I opened my mouth in fury and she cut me off. "But, if you did send us, we
would go because that's a strategy that makes sense."

"I won't use my people that way," I said.
Vitale arrived with the tea and we all paused to sip and glower at each other.
"We should split up the army," Giovanni said. "Divide it up into its units and have each
one make  its  own  way  to  Cuore.  If  we  keep  the  Lupi  together,  one  bad  skirmish  could
wipe out the entire army."
"The whole purpose of this,"  I  said  through  clenched  teeth,  "is  to  get  them  to  divide
their forces. You want us to make the same mistake?"
"Our strength is in numbers?" Giovanni taunted.
"Don't compare me to Beneto," I said. "If anyone here is acting like Beneto, it's you. He
viewed our lives as worthless, and you're acting as if you see them the same way."
"That's not true and you know  it,"  Giovanni  said.  "You  act  as  if  you  don't  trust  your
own seconds."
I  ducked  my  head  to  take  a  sip  of  tea,  and  Giovanni  slammed  his  own  tea  down.
"That's  it,  isn't  it?  You  don't  trust  your  seconds  to  lead  the  units  up  to  Cuore  without
you."
My  face  was  hot;  I  wished  Isabella,  at  least,  were  somewhere  else.  "Half  of  the
commanders can't even divide up the undesirable chores without a brawl erupting."
"But most of their fights are with other units," Giovanni said. "They get on well within
each unit."
I glanced toward Felice, who hurriedly set down his tea. "I agree with Eliana," he said.
"About what, exactly?" Giovanni said.
"I think we should keep the Lupi together," Felice said. "As for Pluma—maybe it would
help if we had some additional intelligence. The best information we've gotten in months
was  in those  letters  Demetrio  had  in his  study.  We  need  to  know  where  the  winds  are
blowing now—whether the residents of Pluma will support us or fight against us, whether
people view our cause as just or cursed." Felice picked his tea back up. "Send Camilla, me,
and maybe Tomas up to Pluma. I can talk to the reformers there and we can bring back
some current information. If we ride, we could be there and back in less than two weeks;
the food will hold out that long. Meanwhile, you can move the Lupi toward  the  center  of
Verdia, where you can strike out toward Pluma if you decide that's best."
I looked around the tent. Giovanni reluctantly nodded. "More information  might  help
us."
Isabella was still glaring at me. "It won't change the fact that it's a bad idea to keep the
Lupi together."
"We'll send Felice, Camilla, and Tomas," I said. "We can discuss  this  again  when  they
get back." I turned to Felice. "You'll leave at dawn."
* * *
We moved the Lupi, along with our newest recruits from that last camp, to the edge of
the wasteland while our  scouts  were  gone.  They  returned  well  fed  but  not  terribly  well
rested. Camilla brought back a small sack of apples, which I shared out among all of us as
she gave her report. They were crisp and sweet; I savored my portion and licked the last

of the juice from my fingers.
"They're singing your songs," Camilla said with a wry grin. "Tomas and I went around
to  different  taverns,  trying  to  get  a  sense  of  how  people  felt  about  the  Lupi.  They're
singing Lia's ballads everywhere."
"During the war with Vesuvia, there was a battle outside Pluma," Tomas said. "Things
don't  grow  well  there;  in a  sense,  they're  in  their  own  little  wasteland.  They  definitely
know about the Circle's secret now, and they're angry."
"And they like you," Camilla said.
"That's good news," I said. At least it was good news for me; Giovanni didn't look quite
so pleased.
"What did you learn from the reformers?" Giovanni asked Felice.
"Apparently  the  Circle  has  almost  entirely  withdrawn  to  Cuore,"  Felice  said.  "The
reformers believe that the Circle is planning to sit tight and wait to see just what the Lupi
do. If you want to strike at a large target like Pluma, there's no better time."
Giovanni scowled. "What did Cilo think?"
"Cilo agrees that the timing is right for the Lupi to strike out of the wasteland."
"I don't believe it," Giovanni said. "Cilo never thinks it's the right time to act."
Felice  gave  him  a  sheepish  grin.  "Well,  I  was  doing  a  little  interpretation,  because
you're right, of course. But he  sounded  more  positive  about  action  than  I've  ever  heard
before—and coming from Cilo, that's really something."
Giovanni sighed deeply, out of arguments.
"What about those letters?" Isabella asked. "Last we heard, the Circle was planning to
pounce  on us  as  soon  as  we  left  the  wasteland,  because  they  couldn't  hit  us  while  we
stayed down here. What happened to that plan?"
"I  couldn't  tell  you,"  Felice  said.  "I  don't  think  the  reformers  know.  But  for  now  at
least, they've pulled back to Cuore."
"We leave the day after tomorrow," I said.
* * *
It  didn't  quite  happen  that  way.  The  next  morning,  there  was  an  outbreak  of
dysentery  among  the  Lupi.  It  had  started  with  the  weakened  refugees  from  that  last
camp.  Many  of  them  were  already  ill  when  we  freed  them.  The  morning  after  Felice,
Camilla,  and  Tomas  returned,  scores  more  fell  sick,  and  by  morning  on  the  day  we'd
planned  to  ride  out,  half  my  army  was  seriously  ill.  There  isn't  much  you  can  do  for
dysentery but wait it out. Most  of  the  Lupi  were  reasonably  healthy  after  a  summer  of
constant travel and reasonable rations, so I expected most to pull  through,  but  an  army
that's up  to  its  knees  in runny  shit  is  not  exactly  a  fit  fighting  force.  We'd  have  to  wait
until the worst of the illness was past.
I was not among the ones taken  ill;  I've  always  had  a  stomach  of  cast  iron.  Giovanni
apparently did too, as he also stayed healthy. Lucia was struck down, though, and I spent
a few days nursing her, giving her sips of cooled tea in between bullying the healthy Lupi
into digging fresh latrines and covering over the filthy ones. We lost  about  two  weeks  to

the illness. I'd have  waited  longer,  but  I'd  seen  our  food  stores  and  knew  that  we  were
almost out of time.
Still, as a concession to Giovanni's fears, as well as to the weakness of some of the Lupi
who  were  only  just  beginning  to  recover,  I  left  a  detachment  behind  in  the  wasteland,
under Tomas's leadership. This made an excellent excuse to keep Vitale, the youngest of
the Lupi, out of danger. I decided that Felice could stay there, too. Though he had been a
surprisingly  patient  teacher,  and  useful  in  councils,  he  had  yet  to  make  himself  useful
during an actual battle. And he'd had a particularly bad case of dysentery. The wasteland
detachment  could  join  us  in  Pluma  once  we'd  secured  the  town,  and  at  Giovanni's
insistence, I agreed that we'd discuss dividing our army at that point. I wanted my troops
to have a real victory under their belt, a real accomplishment. After two weeks shitting in
the mud, we needed something to lift morale.
As  we  rode  north,  the  land  came  back  to  life  even  as  the  plants  were  dying  for  the
winter. The weeds were brown, the flowers gone to seed; we could  let  the  horses  forage
now,  which  eased  the  burden  on  our  food  stores  a  great  deal.  The  Lupi  stared
open-mouthed at the climbing  weeds,  the  thistles,  the  last  of  the  autumn  wildflowers.  I
told  myself  that  I  remembered  what  grass  and  flowers  looked  like,  but  I  couldn't  help
staring at the creeping bug that startled me, crawling up my leg during dinner.
The first night we slept in a meadow again, Lucia celebrated a special Mass, leading us
all in the dance to celebrate the fertility of the land. It was danced in the spring  planting
season, she said, and at the harvest.  It  seemed  appropriate.  I  thought  about  asking  her
for a dance to ask God to hold off the coming of real winter; I desperately hoped we could
be done with what we were doing by the time winter came, although I was doubtful about
our chances. Camping in our flimsy tents on bitter winter nights could easily kill half  our
army without the Circle Guard ever taking a shot at us.  If  we  needed  to,  we  could  send
people off to the resettled towns, but I feared that the Circle would hunt us down over the
winter  months—and  if  they  didn't,  people  would  grow  comfortable,  reluctant  to  leave
their new homes and families in the spring.
We moved a little slowly the first full day back in green Verdia, staring at the trees and
the bugs and the sparrows. We let our horses forage, and cut some real tent poles. I called
a halt early in the day to let people relax a little, and sat down under a tree to practice my
violin, with Michel standing watch nearby. Just as I started to unlace the ties of my violin
case, I heard hooves crashing through the brush. I looked up to see Vitale throw himself
off the horse.
"Generale Eliana," Vitale gasped. "Tomas sent me." He struggled for breath to speak.
I put my hand on his shoulder, glancing past him. "Get Giovanni and Lucia," I ordered
one of my soldiers, but only Giovanni appeared in time to hear Vitale's message.
"Felice. Is he here? Have you seen him?"
I shook my head. "No. I haven't seen him. He was supposed to stay with Tomas."
"He's gone. He took a horse and disappeared."
It  took  a  moment  for  this  to  sink  in.  "Why?  Did  he  have  a  fight  with  someone?"  I
asked, but that was ridiculous. Except for that first day, Felice got along with pretty much
everybody.
"No. No one. He spoke to no one—took the fastest horse—" Vitale was white, staring at
our faces. "Don't you get it? Tomas said—he said—he's gone to the Circle. He  must  have
gone to the Circle. Once he knew our plans—"
"Impossible,"  Giovanni  said,  but  his  face  had  gone  pale.  "Felice  knew  the  password;
he'd met Cilo—"

"Your bloody password! Giovanni, if he was a spy, what could he know, what could he
tell them ..."
"We have to retreat," he  said.  "Get  back  to  the  wasteland  now.  Eliana.  Trust  me  on
this one—"
And I would have, but that was when the fires came down.
I grabbed for my whistle, blew retreat, retreat, retreat. The first wave had not hit the
area nearest me,  but  I  could  see  flames  rising  from  farther  in the  woods.  White  sparks
streamed toward the sky like fleeing stars and I heard screams of agony. "Oh my God," I
said. "Lucia. Lucia."
Giovanni took off at a run—I didn't see to where, but I stood frozen for a moment next
to the still-gasping Vitale, looking around uselessly. I turned, and  in the  twilight,  I  could
see  a  handful  of  figures  on  the  hill  behind  us,  clasping  hands,  silhouetted  against  the
darkening sky and the bright burning forest. I counted. Five mages—that was all it took.
Five  of  them.  As  I  watched,  they  turned  toward  us,  scanning  the  field  we'd  camped  in.
Michel  grabbed  me,  whirling  me  so  that  he  stood  between  me  and  the  mages,  as  if  he
meant to shelter me with his own body if he could.
Over  my  head,  I  saw  the  fire  spring  into  life  like  a  billowing  gold  cloud.  The  color
darkened to red, and the cloud slowly unrolled. As the edge of the cloud touched the tops
of the trees, they burst into bright white flames. The cloud of fire paused  for  a  moment,
and I could almost feel the mages taking a collective deep breath. Then the flames flashed
down toward me and I closed my eyes tightly, knowing that in an instant I would feel my
flesh burning around me, and there was nothing I could do about it.
I heard a child's cry of agony and  opened  my  eyes  to  see  Vitale  consumed  in flames.
"No," I screamed, and tried to move toward  him,  but  Michel  was  still  holding  me,  more
out of fear  than  protection.  I  stared  down  at  his  hands  and  mine,  whole  and  unburned.
Vitale's scream ended as his body crumbled into ash.
The  woods  were  flaming  around  me;  the  very  air  seemed  to  have  turned  to  pulsing
fire. Yet even the grass I stood on was untouched. I turned, dragging Michel around after
me,  and  stared  at  the  hill.  At  first  I  could  see  nothing  but  the  fire,  but  as  it  burned
everything there was to consume, I saw that one mage stood  with  arms  outstretched  to
the sky—in summoning, not in supplication. Even with the flames to provide light, the face
was shadowed, but I knew with cold certainty who it was. She was protecting me. Even as
she  killed  everyone  around  me.  Killed  Vitale.  Killed  Lucia.  My  hands  moved  to  cross
myself. Oh, God, spare Lucia.
Michel still stood with his arms around me, protected by my nearness. At least I could
save  Michel.  As  the  flames  died  down  to  rolling  waves  at  our  feet  and  then  faded  to
nothing, I dragged him through the blackened field with me. Remembering my whistle, I
blew retreat again and again, though the Lupi in the outer ring that had not been blasted
in the first attack were already fleeing as fast as they could.
Five mages. How many mages sat in the Circle? Nearly  two  hundred?  Yet  our  entire
army fell to five. Yes, it was an ambush, but five mages. What were we thinking? What
was I thinking? I knew what mages could do. Of all the people here, I should have known
what mages could do. How could I possibly have thought we could face them?
God wants us to win, so we will. Somehow. Lucia's words rang in my ears. I had held
on to  those  words  through  all  these  months,  letting  the  easy  victories  against  isolated,
demoralized soldiers fool me into thinking we could win  this  war.  All those  people  dead.
Vitale, dead. And it was my fault; I had led them here, and because of me, they had died.
I should have never trusted Felice, or the information he brought back from Pluma. I

should  have  taken  Giovanni's  advice  and  split  up  the  army.  It  was  my  fault.  Michel
sobbed into my shoulder as we walked. If I'd reached for Vitale, if I'd tried to protect him
as Michel had tried to protect me, he would have lived as well.
It wasn't until we had almost reached the wasteland that I realized the one other thing
I had brought with me, still slung over my shoulder: my violin.
And so we returned to the wasteland, defeated, to take stock of who was left.
Giovanni, of course, had survived. Somehow I had expected to see him greet me at the
edge  of  the  campsite,  grim  and  bitter  and  still  pale  with  fear.  He  blamed  himself  for
trusting Felice, and he blamed me  for  refusing  to  divide  the  army.  Michel  had  survived
with  me  shielding  his  body.  Isabella  had  come  through  untouched  as  well,  and  had
brought two of her own out with her.
Rafi, who had urged me to disband the  Lupi  because  I  had  no way  to  fight  magefire,
was  dead.  Camilla  the  scout  leader—dead.  Martido  and  Fiora,  the  irritating  couple  that
had quarreled over the bracelet—both  dead.  Perhaps  half  of  those  who  had  been  in the
woods that night survived, and I was amazed that it was that many.
My  grief  over  the  people  we'd  lost,  and  my  fear  for  Lucia  who  was  still  missing,
alternated with bitter, gut-twisting anger. How could she, I thought, again and again, as I
sat alone at the north end of our makeshift camp, watching the road to see who returned.
All these months, though I knew Mira was with the Circle, I had  thought  of  her  as  their
slave,  as  the  Lupi  had  been  their  slaves.  They  had  forced  her  to  do  magery;  they  had
dragged her back to Cuore. Surely—I had thought— surely, she would never truly  serve
them again. But I knew that Mira had been the focus that night. She was the only reason I
was still alive.
Lucia. Please, God, I prayed. Bring Lucia back to me.
It  took  two  days  for  the  survivors  to  straggle  back  to  our  makeshift  camp.  Some  of
them greeted me as they arrived; others wouldn't look me in the eye. I hardly cared. I'll
do anything you want, God, I prayed, again and again. I knelt and whispered the words
out loud, when no one was nearby. Anything. Just let  Lucia  return  alive.  She's  the  only
one I have left.
At the very end of the second day, I saw one person straggling down the road, limping
and alone. I shaded my eyes, then started walking toward her, then running.
Lucia caught me in a tight hug. "You're alive," I said into her hair as I pressed my face
against her shoulder.
"Yes," she said, and embraced me for a long moment. Finally she whispered, "Eliana, I
have a message for you. I think  it's  God's  will  that  you  relinquish  control  of  the  Lupi  to
Giovanni."
I went from relief to anger. "Because I was wrong about dividing the Lupi?"
"No,"  Lucia  said.  "Because  what  you  want,  more  than  anything,  is  to  protect  your
people. But we can't fight this war that way. Giovanni understands that. You do, too, but
you  can't  do  it  without  destroying  yourself."  She  stared  into  my  face,  her  eyes  bearing
into mine. "Eliana. You have to give the army to Giovanni."
"What am I going to do if I'm not leading?" Not that I really knew what to do now; how
could  I  rally  the  troops,  tell  them  we  could  fight  and  win,  when  I  no  longer  believed  it
myself?
"There  will  be  something,"  Lucia  said.  "Please,  believe  me.  I  know.  There  will  be
something. Trust in God."

I had made a promise. I'll do anything, God, just let Lucia  return  alive.  Was  this  the
price? "All right," I said. "I'll go tell Giovanni that he's in charge."
* * *
Giovanni didn't gloat; in fact, he looked almost shattered, but he quickly agreed that I
was probably right. I went to tell each of the surviving seconds that they would report to
Giovanni  now.  We  had  always  theoretically  been  equals,  but  everyone  knew  who  was
really  in charge.  I  didn't  find  Isabella  right  away;  Michel  had  seen  her  leave  the  camp,
walking into the wasteland. I followed in the direction he pointed, and saw her as I came
around the edge of a hill. She didn't see me; her eyes were closed as she knelt, her arms
upraised.  I  had  never  been  quite  sure  of  Isabella's  beliefs,  but  this  was  the  posture  to
pray to the Lady. I held back a moment and watched.
Isabella  was  speaking,  but  too  quietly  for  me  to  hear.  I  could  see  tears  glint  on  her
cheeks. Then she pulled a small sachet from a string around  her  neck.  My  mother  wore
one of those; it held a  lock  of  hair  cut  from  each  of  her  children,  even  the  two  who  had
died. All mothers kept them, to bless and pray for their children when they were distant.
It was one of the oldest traditions given by the Lady to Gaius.
As I watched, Isabella unlaced the pouch, took out a lock of dark, soft hair, and laid it
on a rock. With a flint and steel and a bit of tinder, she set fire to the hair. I  smelled  the
acrid  smoke  from  where  I  stood,  and  choked  back  a  cough.  Isabella  watched  the
smoldering ash for a moment.
"Now,"  she  said.  "Now  you  are  truly  dead  to  me."  She  closed  her  eyes  for  a  long
moment. Then she crossed herself, and I heard her mutter, "God forgive me."
I should not have seen this. I would talk to her later, I decided, and slipped away.
A  few  nights  later,  Lia  arrived  without  warning.  She  found  me  with  Giovanni  and
Lucia; I was still included in war councils, still addressed as Generale, just as Giovanni had
been. "I've got something you might be interested in," she said to me without  preamble.
"Here."
The letter she handed me was sealed. "Don't open it," she said.
"Lia, what is this?"
"It's  the  letter  of  introduction  for  one  Daniele,  a  premier  violinist  of  the  Pluma
conservatory,"  she  said.  "He  was  just  accepted  into  one  of  the  ensembles  in  Cuore—
playing within the Imperial enclave, in fact." She handed  me  another  paper.  "Here's  the
paper offering him the position."
I read it over quickly. I recognized the name of the ensemble; it was one of the many
small  ensembles  that  provided  chamber  music  at  court.  "So  where  is  this  Daniele?"  I
asked.
"Dead,"  Lia  said.  "He  died  of  a  fever.  But  the  Circle  doesn't  know  that.  Nor  do  they
have  any  particular  idea  of  what  he  looks  like.  Come  on,  Eliana,  you  know  what  I'm
thinking!  Don't  you  think  there's  anything  you  could  accomplish  if  you  were  within  the
enclave of the Emperor? The enclave of the Circle?'"
Giovanni's eyes lit up as mine went wide with alarm. "Oh no," I said. "Lia, I'm not that
good. I'm out of practice. And anyway I'm a woman. Daniele was not."
"Cut your hair short again. No one looking at you ever knows you're a girl."

"My voice—"
"Is  deep  enough  to  pass,"  Lia  said.  "There  are  boys  your  age  with  voices  squeakier
than mine." She clasped my hand and looked at me eagerly. "You'll pass, Eliana. Maybe if
you stayed there five  years  they  might  suspect  your  lack  of  a  beard,  but  not  now.  And
you won't be staying there for five years, will you?"
"Eliana, you've got to do it," Giovanni said. "We're never going to get this sort of chance
again."
"What am I supposed to do?" I demanded. "Spy on them?"
"Well, yeah," Giovanni said. "And maybe more. Look, we know that the Circle is afraid
of the army. Well, maybe they have reason to be afraid. Or maybe you could  give  them
reason.  You  could  gather  information,  win  allies,  you  could  even  assassinate  people  in
their beds! Well, maybe not that. But—"
"Giovanni, you're talking about court intrigue. What do I know about intrigue?"
"What  did  you  know  about  leading  an  army?  What  did  you  know  about  training
fighters? What did you know about strategy?  When  has  not  knowing  what  you're  doing
stopped you from doing anything?"
"You're just trying to get rid of me. To get me out of your way."
"Why would I bother? You've been staying out of the way. Eliana, no one else  can  do
this!"
"I can't either," I said. "Giovanni, there are members of the Circle who know me, two
of them. They will know that I don't belong there. There are Fedeli  who  could  recognize
me—"
"Eliana,  I've  spent  most  of  my  life  with  people  like  this.  Trust  me,  they  will  never
recognize you because they will never look at you. People like the men of the High Circle
never  look  in  the  faces  of  their  inferiors,  and  that's  what  they'll  consider  you.  For  all
intents and purposes you will be invisible. Can't you see how useful that is?"
"What about Felice? We never caught Felice, and we know he was working for them."
"Court is  huge,  Eliana.  And  why  would  they  be  keeping  a  spy  like  Felice  there?  The
chances are miniscule."
"If I go, how long do you expect me to stay there? What am I supposed to come back
with?"
"The secret that  will  win  the  war,"  he  said,  then  laughed.  "I  don't  know,  Eliana.  Use
your own judgment. Something will tell you it's time."
"Yeah,"  I  said,  "like  I'll  find  out  I've  been  recognized.  Or  it  will  finally  sink  in  that
palace politics are just not my cup of tea."
"Eliana, you'll be good at it. I mean that. Don't tell yourself you can't do it, because you
can. You'll win this for us, because you know what? I'll lead the Lupi as far as they'll follow
me, but I think this is the best chance we've got."
I thought about it.
"I'll need a haircut," I said softly. "And a different violin. The sound—violins  are  very
distinctive. A musician could identify me from that alone."
Lia had brought the dead boy's violin, and I spent some time that afternoon practicing
with it, getting used to the new sound. It was a better violin than mine, with a fine  tone,
but I decided to bring my own bow.

In the evening, Lucia cut my hair short and used a less-ragged blanket to make me a
new tunic. "You make an attractive boy," she said, inspecting her handiwork.
We had a spare leather belt, and I folded my red  sash  and  put  it  away.  My  neck  felt
chilled when she'd finished cutting my hair, and I pulled Bella's cross off and tucked  it  in
with the sash. "I suppose I'd better leave this behind," I said.
"Yes,"  Lucia  said.  "It's  what's  in  your  heart  that  matters,  anyway."  She  turned  me
around  to  face  her.  "I  think  God  wants  you  to  go,"  she  said.  "And  I  really  think  this  is
important. Take heart, Eliana. Gèsu will  always  give  you  the  strength  you  need,  to  face
anything. He's with you, Eliana. Always."  She  kissed  me.  "I  will  pray  for  you  every  day
that you're gone."
"Thank  you,"  I  said,  and  I  knew,  this  is  the  price.  And  I  knew,  as  I  kissed  Lucia
good-bye, it was worth it.
PART TWO
 
Are You As I Am
CHAPTER THREE
In my Mother's house there are many rooms. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 4, verse 13.8
"What's your name?" 
"Daniele."
"Where were you born?"
"Mirago."
"Don't look so stricken." Lia punched me gently in the arm. "No one will question your
story if you look like you believe what you're saying. Let's try again. What's your name?"
"Daniele."  This  will  never  work,  I  thought.  It's  crazy  to  think  it  could.  "I  am  from
Mirago. I just graduated from the conservatory in Pluma."
"Good. Say it again."

"My name is Daniele." Even though I was telling myself that no one would believe me,
my voice was getting steadier, more confident. "I was born in Mirago, but I've been living
in Pluma and going to the conservatory there."
"Again."
I repeated my name, my hometown, and my most recent history until Michel returned
to  our  camp  with  the  paints  he'd  gone  to  buy  at  the  apothecary's  shop.  "Now  pay
attention," Michel said. He dabbed paint first on my face, then on Lia's so that I could see
how it was done. "Your skin needs to look a little rougher, and you can use these to add a
little shadow to your throat, like this."
Lia peered at me. "Michel, you did an excellent job. She really looks like a boy."
"You don't," I said, blinking at Lia.
"I  have  a  girl's  haircut  and  girl's  clothing.  You're  dressed  as  a  boy."  With  Michel
peering over my shoulder and advising me, I practiced putting the paints on myself until
both Lia and Michel pronounced my efforts adequate.
"Where did you get so good at this, anyway?" I asked Michel as we rolled the paints up
in a cloth and shoved them deep into my pack.
"Mascherata is my favorite festival," Michel said. "I love disguises."
I  bound  my  breasts,  and  Michel  helped  me  add  a  little  padding  to  my  shoulders  to
make  my  build  look  more  masculine.  "Don't  worry  too  much  about  the  shoulders,"  he
said. "Lots of boys your age are skinny. Just make sure  your  breasts  don't  stick  out  too
much."
Lia hunted down a calm pool of water where I could  see  my  reflection,  but  I  couldn't
see myself well enough to be reassured. So the next time we passed through a village, she
made me go in with Michel to ask for a meal. "Good practice."
We approached one of the larger  outlying  farms;  we  could  smell  fava  beans  and  root
vegetables cooking as we approached. I let Michel knock on the back door.
"Good  morning,  signora,"  he  said  to  the  woman  who  answered  his  knock.  "We  are
traveling to Cuore. Would it be possible for us to purchase lunch from you?"
The woman waved aside Michel's purse. "It may have been a hard year, but we're not
so poor yet that we'll take money for hospitality. Come in and have a seat."
The  woman's  name  was  Celsa.  I  mumbled  my  alias  as  I  sat  down  next  to  Michel,
feeling deeply uncomfortable in my false identity.
"Why are you going to Cuore?" Celsa asked as she started frying up wheat cakes.
Michel poked me. "I've been attending  the  conservatory  in Pluma,"  I  said,  indicating
my violin case. What if she knows someone at the conservatory! This is a mad idea; we
should head back to the wasteland now. "I won a position in one of the ensembles at the
Imperial Court."
"Good for you!" Celsa turned away from her cooking briefly to give me a friendly smile.
"But you don't look like a musician," she said to Michel. "Why are you traveling?"
"To take care of my brother here," Michel said, giving me a punch in the arm. "We're
twins—hard to believe, isn't it? He got all the talent. I got the muscles."
A young woman about my age came in with a bucket of water, and poured some  of  it
into  a  kettle  to  make  tea.  "This  is  Partena,  my  eldest  daughter,"  Celsa  said.  Partena
brought us tea when it was ready, and sat down across from me.
"So you're going to play at court?" she asked. "That must be exciting!"

"I  suppose  it  is,"  I  said.  Something  about  the  intensity  of  her  smile  was  making  me
nervous.
"I've always wanted just to see Cuore. Have you been there before?"
"No," I said. "I'm from Verdia. I was born in Mirago, and  I  went  to  the  conservatory
when I was twelve—and I graduated last week."
Partena laughed a little as if I was very amusing, and tossed her head so that her dark
hair caught the sun that slanted through the open door. Her hair was very  long, and  she
wore it unbraided. She had a very pretty face, I noticed.
"They kept you separated from the girls there, didn't they?" Partena asked.
I nodded. Michel leaned forward and said, "This is why I'm glad that I'm the one who
got the muscles, instead of the talent!"
Partena  laughed  again,  but  turned  back  to  me  a  moment  later.  "Didn't  you  ever  ...
break the rules?"
"Partena," Celsa said. "Set out bowls for the meal, please."
Partena  stood  up  reluctantly  and  turned  with  a  flounce  that  made  her  skirt  swirl  a
little around her hips. She set the table and rang a bell to call in the rest of the family from
the fields. Everyone came in a few minutes later, setting down baskets of harvested beans
and  freshly  dug  turnips.  It  was  a  large  family,  with  several  hired  hands;  the  table  was
crowded. Partena took the seat next to me.
The  oldest  man—Celsa's  husband,  I  assumed—made  the  ritual  offering  to  the  Lady,
and everyone ate. The stew was thick and tasty, and I took a second  helping  but  had  to
refuse a third. "Thank you very  much," I said when the meal was done and Michel and I
stood up to go.
"You don't have to go on today, do you?" Partena asked. "You could stay here for the
night. We have plenty of extra space."
"We  really  need  to  keep  going,"  I  said.  "But  thank  you  for  your  offer."  Michel  tried
again to give Celsa payment, and after refusing again, she agreed to have Michel and I do
a quick repair to a broken door-hinge, which her family was too busy with the harvest to
see to. Michel lifted the door into place ("I'm so glad you're the one with  the  muscles,"  I
said) while I drove in a fresh peg to hold it at the right angle. Partena expressed copious
admiration for our skill and tried again to convince us to stay the night, then we were on
our way.
"There," Michel said, as soon as the farm was behind us. "Did that convince you?"
"Convince me of what?"
"That you can pass as a boy?" I must have looked at him blankly, because he slapped
his forehead and said, "I can't believe it."
"What?"
"I can't believe you didn't notice! Partena was flirting with you."
"She was not!"
Michel put on a dopey expression and batted his eyes in a poor imitation of  Partena's
manner. "Did you ever ... break the rules?" he asked in a squeaky voice. "Why don't you
... stay the night? It must have been a very, very long time since you've had the chance to
really spend ... time ... with a girl."
"Oh, come on, Michel. She ..." I paused. "Just because Partena ..." I paused again.

"She was flirting. Come on, El— Daniele. Admit it."
"All right," I said. "She was flirting with me."
"See?"  Michel  said.  "You  look  like  a  boy.  And  no  one  at  court  is  going  to  have  any
reason to suspect otherwise."
* * *
Michel  would  not  be  my  bodyguard  in  Cuore,  of  course.  Giovanni  had  told  him  the
passwords to gain the trust of the university reformers. He'd serve as a liaison, and more
important, as a messenger between me and the Lupi. Michel knew where the Lupi would
be  spending  the  winter.  To  provide  some  margin  of  safety,  if  I  were  recognized  and
arrested, I did not. It gave me an odd feeling, as if I were shut in a room with no windows.
What if  I  wanted  to  leave,  and  Michel  refused?  Not  that  I  thought  he  would,  but  still...
Worse, what if something happened to Michel?
As  we  traveled  toward  Cuore,  we  camped  out  most  evenings—we  were  used  to  the
cold, and wanted to savor the last of our privacy. Lia wanted to teach me the  songs  that
she'd written about me, since she swore I would have  learned  them  if  I'd  been  living  in
Pluma that summer. There were other new  songs,  as  well,  some  political  and  some  not,
and she taught me those as well. Michel lay on his blanket, his head propped on his hand,
listening drowsily as we sang.
"How popular are your songs, really?" I asked, late one night as Lia packed away  her
lute.
"Very  popular,"  Lia  said.  "I  haven't  been  out  of  Verdia,  but  I  think  the  songs  have
ranged a lot farther than that. You're becoming a folk hero."
"Folk heroes don't lose their armies."
"I'm  working  on  a  song  right  now  that  emphasizes  the  fact  that  you  survived  that
night," Lia said. "Folk heroes don't win every battle."
Michel had been  lying  on his  back—I'd  thought  he'd  fallen  asleep—but  now  he  rolled
over and propped himself up on his arm. "Hey, Daniele," he said. "Do you suppose Felice
really met with  the  reformers  in Pluma?  I  remember  when  he  came  back  with  Camilla
and Tomas, they  brought  news  of  how  popular  those  songs  were,  and  he  said  that  he'd
met with the reformers in Cuore. And that the Circle had withdrawn to Cuore."
I thought back to the conversation  with  Felice.  "I  don't  know  if  he  actually  met  with
the reformers, or if he was bluffing us. Do you remember what exactly he said?"
Michel  paused  for  a  moment,  trying  to  remember.  "He  said  that  the  Circle  had
withdrawn to Cuore, and that the reformers thought they were going to sit tight and wait
to see what the Lupi did. And he said, 'If you want to strike at a large target like Pluma,
there's no better time.' "
"That's right," I said.
"And Giovanni asked about someone named Cilo. Felice said that Cilo agreed with the
plan, and Giovanni said he couldn't believe it, because Cilo never thought it was the right
time to act. And Felice said—I remember this line, because I thought it was funny—'I was
doing a little interpretation.' "
I tucked wool in around  Daniele's  violin,  to  cushion  and  protect  it.  "I  remember  that

now. I bet Felice never met with the reformers."
"If we'd thought of it, we could have had Giovanni ask him about someone who didn't
exist,"  Michel  said.  "'What  does  Daniele  think,'  if  there  wasn't  anyone  up  there  named
Daniele."
"If  Felice  had  fallen  for  it,  he'd  have  just  claimed  that  someone  named  Daniele  had
joined,"  I  said.  I  mimicked  Felice's  voice:  "  'But  there  is  a  young  man  named
Daniele—perhaps he joined after your most recent trip. He's quite young, just sixteen, and
he  stands  about  as  tall  as  Generale  Eliana.'  "  I  buckled  the  violin  case.  "We'd  probably
have believed him."
"Yeah." Michel rolled back onto his back.
I wrapped up in my blanket and stared up at the sky. It was a clear night, with a thin
crescent moon; I could see almost as many stars as I could back at Ravenna. I closed my
eyes, remembering the rolling flames that had filled the evening skies a few weeks earlier.
"Don't blame yourself." It was Michel's voice. "I never suspected Felice, either. Neither
did Giovanni."
I sat up. Michel was still on his  back,  looking  up  at  the  sky.  "You  know  what's  really
sad?" I said. "If he'd walked into our camp and said, 'I've come to join you,' I might have
suspected. But no. He came saying, 'I've come to take over from you.' That's why I never
suspected he was a spy."
"Remember that," Lia said, curled up on the other side of the fire.  "Felice  fooled  you,
and you'll fool the people in the enclave. If you run into trouble, brazen it out, like Felice
did."
How would someone like Felice handle it, if he were a girl pretending to be a boy, and
someone suspected the truth? If it were a woman who was suspicious, he'd probably offer
to prove his sex by bedding her. Despite my bitterness, I found myself smiling a little. I'll
have  to  keep  that  strategy  in mind.  I  pulled  my  blanket  over  my  face  and  fell  into  an
uneasy sleep.
* * *
After a week of walking, I knew the songs Lia thought I  should  know,  so  she  insisted
that  Michel  and  I  take  a  riverboat  the  rest  of  the  way.  We  would  be  in  Cuore  much
sooner. I agreed with some reluctance; my false  identity  was  still  as  uncomfortable  as  a
new  pair  of  boots.  Still,  I  couldn't  believe  it  would  be  significantly  easier  even  after
another  month,  so  Michel  and  I  boarded  the  boat  and  said  good-bye  to  Lia,  who  was
staying in Verdia.
We  arrived  in  Cuore  on  a  damp,  cold  day  a  month  and  a  half  after  the  Autumn
Equinox.  The  boat  docked  a  mile  outside  the  city,  and  Michel  and  I  disembarked  and
joined the other travelers jostling their way along the muddy road. There were merchants
with  wagons  loaded  high  with  bolts  of  cloth,  and  finely  dressed  men  and  women  on
horseback, and filthy beggars in rags.
Unlike Pluma, Cuore had no walls. When we got off the boat, I'd have said the city had
already started. There were houses and  shops  clustered  along  the  road.  Old  women  sat
outside with apples spread on a blanket, selling them to the travelers. The houses became
more closely packed as we drew closer, and then, when we stepped into the city itself, the

dirt road ended. The streets of the city itself were paved with brick and rock.
"I should go by myself from here," I said. It wouldn't be a good idea for Michel and I to
arrive together at the Imperial enclave. "Can you find your way?" Michel was heading to
the university district.
Michel nodded shortly. "Can you find yours?"
"I'll ask for directions if I need them."
Michel  reached  out  and  clasped  my  arm.  "Take  care  of  yourself,  brother.  Stay  in
touch." Then he was gone, hidden in the press of the crowd.
The  Imperial  Enclave  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  center  of  Cuore,  but  the  city  had
grown  unevenly,  and  now  it  was  actually  in  the  northwest  quarter.  I  figured  that  the
widest, busiest streets would eventually take me there. It took me several hours to walk
the whole way, mainly because the streets were so crowded. It is not an exaggeration to
say  that  I  had  never  seen  so  many  people  in  my  life;  Cuore  made  Pluma  look  like  a
backwater village. I passed through a district of cloth merchants, where I could smell dye,
dirty wool, and greasy smoke. There were shops that had bolts of bright cloth piled under
their awnings; I also caught glimpses through open doors of shadowy warehouses, where
business was done only between merchants.
From the district of cloth merchants I passed through a district of rug merchants, and
then  spice  merchants.  The  wares  of  the  spice  merchants  were  too  precious  to  be  kept
anywhere but under lock and key; I could see locked chests and tiny brass scales, and the
customers  here  seemed  very  wealthy.  Still,  they  couldn't  lock  up  the  smells.  I  smelled
something like a cross between garlic and freshly cut wood, lilies and wood smoke, honey
and fresh-turned earth. This was  also  the  district  of  the  perfumeries;  next  to  the  brass
scales  in some  shops,  I  could  see  rows  of  tiny  bottles  of  colored  glass.  From  the  spice
merchants' district, I crossed a bridge over a narrow canal; the stench  of  sewage  was  so
thick I could taste it. Around me, people pulled their cloaks over their faces, so I did  the
same, but it didn't help.
Then the road passed through a neighborhood where every building seemed to house a
tavern,  and  then  suddenly  high  walls  rose  up  in  front  of  me.  Walls  surrounded  the
enclave, with a vast gilded gate at the front, and smaller, simpler doors along the sides, all
heavily guarded. The wall was there to keep out riffraff,  and  even  though  I  had  a  letter
that  would  grant  me  entrance,  I  found  myself  bristling  quietly  as  I  walked  along  the
perimeter  to  the  shining  front  gate.  "Good  day,"  I  said  to  the  guard,  and  presented
my—Daniele's—letter of introduction, still sealed. God, I thought. Please don't let anyone
look at me too closely.
The guard glanced at the seal and at me, and let  me  step  through  to  wait  just  within
the walls. He sent a boy running off with a message; there was  an  entire  corps  of  young
servants who did nothing but carry messages within the enclave. "You'll be waiting a bit,"
the guard said, and gestured for me to take a seat on a bench near the gate.
As the guard predicted, I was waiting for nearly an hour. Few people used  this  grand
entrance; I found out later that most of the enclave inhabitants found it easier to use one
of the smaller gates along the edge. There were a few well-dressed nobles  who  used  the
front  gate,  and  I  watched  them  come  and  go.  None  glanced  in  my  direction,  nor  even
really  looked  at  the  guards.  I  began  to  feel  slightly  more  hopeful.  Maybe  Giovanni  was
right, and no one really would look at me.
The boy came hurrying back, finally, with an older man. "Daniele?" he said. I nodded.
"I'm  glad  to  see  you're  finally  here.  I  am  the  Master  Conductor."  He  took  the  letter  of
introduction  from  the  guard,  broke  the  seal,  and  looked  over  the  letter  quickly.
"Everything seems to be in order. Follow me and I'll get you settled in."

The Master Conductor's office was a congenial mess. The room was cozy, with a fire on
the hearth, and worn rugs covering the floor; bookshelves lined the walls, but he seemed
to be in the  habit  of  taking  books  down  to  read  and  never  putting  them  away,  because
there were stacks of books on the floor by his chair, and the shelves seemed half empty.
His desk was piled high with precariously balanced papers; one drifted to the floor as we
came in.
"Have a seat," he said, and gestured to a chair by the fire. I sat down, and he unlocked
a small, heavy chest and took out a silver medallion stamped with an eagle and strung on
a leather thong. "You can feel free to replace the thong with a chain, but you should wear
this medallion at all times," he said, and gave it to me. He pulled his own out to show me;
his was on a long silver chain. "This proves you belong here, and will get you in when you
come to one of the gates."
I nodded and slipped it over my neck. It settled against my chest  where  Bella's  cross
had lain.
"You'll be in Fabia's quartet; I'll send her a message that you've arrived. I'll have a boy
guide  you  to  your  room;  you'll  have  some  time  to  get  settled,  as  Fabia  won't  have  you
rehearsing for another day or two." The Master Conductor looked me over and gave me a
fatherly smile. "In the meantime, you should  buy  yourself  some  new  clothes.  Here."  He
unlocked his strongbox again and took out a small bag of coins. "I keep some coin on hand
for  young  musicians  from  the  provinces,"  he  said.  "Don't  worry  about  paying  me  back.
Once you've settled in, you'll earn money by playing engagements; food and  housing  are
provided, but you should save some of your money for clothes. It's important to present a
good appearance here. The guard at the gate can direct you toward the tailors; I'd suggest
tunic and hose in dark blue, or gray."
"Thank you," I said.
"We're glad to have you, Daniele." The  Master  Conductor  rang  a  bell,  and  one  of  the
messenger  boys  came  to  guide  me  to  my  room.  "I  know  it  all  seems  very  strange,  but
you'll settle in quickly, don't worry, and you'll fit in just fine."
You have no idea how much I hope you're right, I thought as the boy  led  me  to  my
room. It had started to rain, and I pulled up the hood of my cloak, shivering.
My  room  seemed  very  cold  and  dark  after  the  warmth  of  the  Master  Conductor's
office.  "You  can  have  a  servant  build  you  a  fire,  signore,"  the  messenger  boy  said.
Apparently he'd dealt with provincials like me before.
"How do I send for one?" I asked.
"You ring." The boy pointed to a rope beside the door. I rang and shyly requested that
a fire be built. "Would you like me to show you how to get to the tailor?"
"I look that bad, huh?"
The boy flushed. "The Master Conductor always sends new musicians to buy clothes,"
he said.
I wasn't terribly enthusiastic about going out in the rain, but it was clear that without
new clothes, I would stick out like a farm  crow  in an  exotic  aviary,  which  was  definitely
not a good idea. "Yes," I said. "Tell me where to find a tailor."
With some reservations, I left my violin in my room; it would be suspicious to carry it
around with me, but I couldn't shake the fear that it would be stolen if I turned my back.
Besides,  as  long  as  I  carried  all  of  my  possessions  with  me,  I  could  leave  Cuore  at  a
moment's notice. I shook myself—I wasn't leaving anytime soon, and I might as well get
used to that fact—and carefully laid my violin across my bed. I wrapped up well and went

out to the tailors' district.
It wasn't until I was walking  past  the  first  tailor's  shop  that  it  occurred  to  me  that  I
would have to be measured.
At  Michel's  suggestion,  I  had  padded  the  crotch  of  my  trousers,  but  I  didn't  think
they'd fool anyone who actually put their  hand  there.  Just  how  personal  did  a  tailor  get
with a young man being measured, anyway? I was going to have to buy hose, so my guess
was pretty personal. I wandered the tailors' district anxiously for a while,  finally  settling
on a tailor named Acilo, who looked old enough to be my great-great-grandfather. I hoped
his eyesight  was  failing.  And  sure  enough,  to  my  immense  relief,  he  did  a  poor  job  of
measuring  me;  in fact,  I  was  afraid  that  the  clothes  would  fit  so  poorly  I'd  be  out  the
money and still need to have new clothing made. Well. It couldn't be helped.
Back  in the  enclave,  the  fire  had  warmed  my  room,  and  the  servants  had  made  my
bed, setting the violin carefully back on top of the covers when they'd finished. I rang the
bell  and  sent  for  food;  I  would  stay  in as  much  as  possible,  I  decided,  until  my  clothes
were ready. There was no sense in attracting more attention than necessary.
* * *
My clothes arrived two days later, while I was practicing the violin. Acilo's apprentice
brought them to  my  room.  I  laid  the  bundle  on my  bed  and  left  the  boy  waiting  in the
doorway as I fetched my purse, counted out five coins, then another for the boy. "Aren't
you going to try the clothes on, signore?" he asked as I gave him the coins  and  gestured
for him to leave. "Alterations are free."
"I don't have time now," I said. "I'll send for you again if I try them on and they don't
fit." I shooed him out the door and closed it.
I  had  taken  the  Master  Conductor's  advice  and  bought  several  tunics  in  gray  and
blue—velvet, with matching hose. I laid them  out  on my  bed,  then  barred  my  door  and
tried them on. Despite Acilo's sloppy measuring, they fit perfectly, or at least as well as I
wanted them to. I padded the crotch of the hose carefully,  wishing  I  had  Michel  here  to
advise  me.  I  hoped  if  anyone  put  their  hand  there  they'd  snatch  it  away  in
embarrassment before they noticed anything amiss.
My chambers had a mirror—everyone's chambers did here—and I studied the effect of
the  new  clothes.  I  looked  like  a  peasant  in gentry's  clothing,  but  this  was  probably  not
unusual for a new arrival. And I did look like a boy, I told myself. I did. A  pretty  boy—I
made a much prettier boy than I had ever made a girl—but a boy. No one had questioned
that yet. Not the guard, not the Master Conductor, not the tailor.
With my new clothes, I no longer had any excuse to hide in my room. I  looked  in the
mirror  one  more  time  and  straightened  my  shoulders,  then  unbarred  my  door  and  left
my room.
The walls and door of my chambers were thick enough to block out most sound, but I
was greeted with a musical cacophony when I stepped out into the corridor. It was rather
like  wandering  through  the  practice  hall  back  at  the  conservatory.  I  closed  my  door
behind me, swung my cloak over my shoulders, and headed out into the afternoon drizzle.
The  interior  of  the  Imperial  Enclave  was  almost  its  own  little  city.  The  big  Imperial
Gate at the south end opened onto a walkway that led past the Imperial Palace and  into
the central gardens. The area west of the gardens belonged to the Circle;  they  had  their

own building, larger than the Imperial Palace, and the western gate into the enclave was
used only by mages. The Imperial Chapel, which was almost as large as the Cathedral of
the Lady that stood just outside the enclave, was at the north end of the central gardens,
and  the  Fedeli's  citadel  occupied  the  north  section  of  the  enclave.  The  citadel  opened
directly onto Cuore, and was  possibly  the  most  well  guarded  of  the  buildings  within  the
enclave, as they kept prisoners in their dungeons.
The southeast corner housed the East Court—the overflow palace, for the nobles  who
weren't quite noble enough to rate quarters in the Imperial Palace itself. North of the East
Court  were  a  whole  series  of  smaller  buildings.  These  housed  the  guards,  the  imperial
advisors,  the  servants,  and  the  musicians.  There  were  three  more  gates  along  the  east
wall, unassuming doorways used for errands and other  mundane  tasks.  The  streets  and
paths  that  led  through  the  enclave  (and  through  the  huge  central  garden)  were  paved
with rocks. The buildings were  well  built  out  of  brick,  and  even  the  musicians'  quarters
had glass panes in the windows.
Musicians couldn't go into the Imperial Palace, the Circle's palace, or the Fedeli citadel
without  an  invitation  or  an  engagement  to  play.  But  this  was  also  true  for  most  of  the
people staying at the overflow court, so on my first day with proper clothes, there were a
lot  of  people  out  walking  in the  gardens,  despite  the  damp  chill.  I  walked  around  for  a
while, then sat down by one of the fountains to watch the world go by.
Despite  my  self-imposed  isolation,  I  could  already  identify  people's  places  by  their
clothing  and  other  adornments.  The  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Imperial  Court  wore
dresses and tunics in bright, striking colors, adorned with jewelry and gems. No one wore
red. There were a few dressed in blue or purple, but most of the nobles seemed to dress
in either green or a dark golden yellow. People generally seemed to wear the same colors
as their friends; I wondered if it was simply a matter  of  taste,  or  if  the  colors  had  some
other  significance.  All  the  nobles  wore  one  of  the  eagle  medallions,  although  some  wore
eagles made of gold, and many wore additional jewelry with eagles stamped onto it.
The Circle mages and the Fedeli also  used  the  gardens.  The  mages  wore  robes;  they
were easily identified,  but  in part  it  was  simply  their  air  of  utter  assurance.  The  Fedeli
wore  black  robes,  always  silk  or  velvet,  with  a  small  gold  or  silver  pin  on  the  left
shoulder—two linked circles, the symbol of the Lord and the Lady. The Fedeli who  wore
silk made a rustling noise as they walked, as if they shuffled through dead leaves.
Nearly everyone at court with wealth and power— or who wanted to present an image
of wealth  and  power—wore  perfume  of  some  kind.  Passing  by  a  cluster  of  well-dressed
ladies and gentlemen was like passing through the spice-merchants' district again: I could
smell  honey,  lilies,  cedar  smoke.  The  noble  ladies  favored  floral  perfumes;  the  men
preferred spicy ones. The Fedeli chose from a wide range of scents, but seemed to prefer
cloyingly  sweet  ones;  Circle  mages  tended  to  select  smoky  scents.  Remembering  what
Lucia had told me once—that the war with Vesuvia had been over the  perfume  trade—I
wondered which scent was considered important enough to fight a war over.
In  my  classes  on  court  etiquette,  last  year  at  the  conservatory,  Domenico  had
mentioned  that  people  at  court  often  carried  flowers  to  mask  unpleasant  odors.  It  was
hard  for  me  to  see  how  a  flower  could  stand  up  even  to  just  the  perfumes  people
wore—let  alone  the  stinking  canal  I'd  crossed.  Still,  even  in the  chill  damp  of  late  fall,  I
could see that he was right. Both men and  women  carried  flowers;  some  women  wore  a
little bracelet of tiny blossoms around one wrist. Others carried elaborately embroidered
sachets, presumably with dried flower petals inside. One forgotten flower was crushed on
the edge of the fountain, as if someone had sat on it.
I could hear music from my seat by the fountain— several groups, in other parts of the
garden. I could identify at least one string quartet, plus a small ensemble of flutes. Music

was  everywhere  here.  Back  when  I  was  a  student  at  the  conservatory,  some  of  the
teachers  who'd  played  at  court  would  sigh  nostalgically  and  tell  us  that  the  nobility  at
court really appreciated beautiful music. My old teacher Domenico had hinted at the real
purpose of this once, and Giovanni had spelled it out: cover.
"If  you're  having  a  conversation  at  court,"  Giovanni  had  explained,  "and  you  don't
want anyone overhearing, you can hire one of the  ensembles  to  play  for  you.  That  way,
anyone  who  tries  to  hear  your  conversation  will  just  hear  the  music."  Giovanni  had
thought this would give me an excellent opportunity to spy, but unfortunately, I'd suffer
the  same  problem  as  any  would-be  eavesdroppers.  I  wouldn't  be  able  to  hear
conversation over my violin.
"Learn  to  lip-read,"  he  suggested  then,  ever-helpful.  Damn  Giovanni,  anyway.  If
anyone belonged here, it was him.
Beyond the hedge, I could hear two people talking. "I really don't think he'll  try  it,"  a
woman's voice said. I edged closer to the hedge, straining to  hear.  "I  mean,  really.  She's
above him. Don't you think, Clara?"
"You never know." Clara? I wondered if it was the same Clara who was the sweetheart
of Demetrio, the commander at Chira. I leaned closer to the hedge. Her voice  was  a  cool
alto; she spoke in the tones of a woman of rank. "I have better things to worry about, in
any case. We'll deal with it if it happens." They moved off. If this was the best I was going
to do, I'd really wasted my time coming here.
One  of  the  noblemen  glanced  at  me  incuriously  as  he  passed  by,  and  my  nerve
wavered: surely he knew I  was  a  girl.  But  he  glanced  away  without  pausing  for  a  more
careful look.  I  wished  I  could  see  Michel,  just  for  a  few  moments  of  reassurance,  but  it
would be risky to go to the university during the day. Still, I was too jumpy to stay out in
the gardens anymore that afternoon, so I headed back to my room.
I  heard  the  dinner  bell  ringing  a  short  while  later,  and  movement  outside  in  the
hallway as people headed toward the dining room. For a moment I was tempted to send
for  a  servant  to  bring  my  meal  to  me  privately  again—surely  my  trip  out  around  the
gardens was enough for one day—but then I shook myself and went out to join the other
musicians.
The dining room was rather like a very  grand conservatory dining room, but with the
men and women sitting together, and much better food. I arrived slightly late and took a
seat where there seemed to be space, across from two young men who looked about  my
age, one fair-haired and one dark.
"You're Daniele, aren't you?" the fair-haired boy said. "I'd heard another violinist had
arrived." He clasped my hand briefly across the table. "I'm Valentino, and this is Quirino.
You'll be playing in the  same  quartet  as  me.  Not  Quirino,  though,  he  plays  clarinet,  not
strings."
"Nice to meet you," I said. "Yes, I'm Daniele."
"Don't try to change the subject," Quirino  said,  and  it  took  me  a  second  to  realize  he
wasn't speaking to me. "Valentino! Are you listening to me? You're going to get yourself in
trouble again."
"Oh,  Quirino.  You  take  everything  so  seriously!  I  won't  get  in  trouble.  I  wasn't  in
trouble the last time you thought I was in trouble. Or the time before that."
"Or the time with Clara?"
"So she threw wine in my face. She wasted a cup  of  an  excellent  vintage."  He  turned
back to me with a shrug. "Did I mention that this is Quirino?"

This time Quirino turned to me. "It's a pleasure to meet you, Daniele," he said. He had
a deep voice and the beginnings of a beard; he looked like he'd be taller than me once he
stood  up.  Valentino,  on  the  other  hand,  was  short  and  awkward,  with  the  persistent
charm of an overfriendly terrier. I stopped worrying about my lack of a beard or a  deep
voice; Valentino didn't have them either.
"Where are you from?" Valentino asked.
"Verdia," I said. "The conservatory at Pluma."
"Oh!" Valentino said, obviously intrigued. "Hey, if you've been down there, maybe you
can tell us—ow." He broke off. "Quirino, why—"
"Eat your dinner, Valentino," Quirino hissed, "and shut up. You can ask later."
Valentino  gave  me  a  baffled,  hurt  look  across  the  table.  I  could  only  assume  that
Quirino had kicked him.
I  glanced  at  Quirino.  "Would  it  be  best  if  I  refrained  from  mentioning  my  home
province here?"
"Most Verdiani simply say they are from the south," Quirino said.
"Ah," I said, and we left it at that.
We went back out walking after dinner. Despite the chill, most of the enclave was  out
for an evening stroll, wearing richly colored wool cloaks. Each person cupped witchlight to
light the path; hundreds of globes of light shimmered like stars in the  moist  veil  of  mist.
I'd forgotten how beautiful those tiny lights could  be.  The  damp  paving-stones  reflected
the lights, and the fountains flickered with stray gleams.
"There she is," Valentino breathed.
"Just don't, Valentino. Don't even think about it," Quirino said.
They were staring at a young lady who loitered idly by one of the fountains. She was a
pretty enough girl, in a giggly Giula sort of way—high cheekbones and a turned-up nose.
Her long, satin-dark hair was held in place with a jeweled band, and she wore  a  dress  of
buttercup  velvet.  Valentino  sauntered  over  to  her,  Quirino  and  I  trailing  in  his  wake.
From under his cloak, Valentino produced a fresh flower, which he held out to the lady as
he approached. "Excuse me, signora, but did you perhaps drop this?"
"Oh!"  The  young  lady  looked  up,  feigning  surprise.  "Lady  bright,  I  suppose  I  did.
Thank  you,  Valentino,  for  getting  it  for  me."  She  tucked  the  flower  into  her  sleeve  and
took Valentino's arm; he led her to the edge of the fountain, sitting down there to use the
sound of the falling water to cover their conversation.
"That's Sura," Quirino said in my ear. "Cute little thing, isn't she?"
"Adorable," I said.
"Valentino certainly thinks so. Never mind the brilliant yellow dress ..."
"Is there some significance to the yellow dress?"
"There are two factions  at  court—one  wears  yellow,  one  green.  And  Valentino's  dear
friend Ulisse favors green."
"What are the factions?" I whispered.
Quirino shook his head. "Does it matter? I'll tell you later. The important thing is that
Sura is of great interest to Signora Clara, and Signora Clara can't stand Valentino."
"She threw wine in his face," I said.

"Yes. I'm not actually sure if it's that incident  or  the  friendship  with  Ulisse  that's  the
problem.  But  either  way,  Sura  is  trouble,  whether  she  knows  it  or  not.  And  whether
Valentino wants to admit it or not."
"Isn't it supposed to be up to Sura?" I said. "And the Lady?"
"Well, yeah, but who's going to press that point? Other than the Fedeli—and  bringing
them into it would just open up a whole new crate of trouble."
Valentino and Sura  were  just  talking,  cheerfully  oblivious  to  us—and  to  a  grim-faced
older woman in a yellow  dress  who  glared  at  them  from  across  the  garden.  "Sura!"  she
called after a few minutes. "It's time to go in."
"Is that Signora Clara?" I asked.
"Her?" Quirino snorted and shook his head. "I don't think Valentino would have  tried
to flirt with her! No. Clara is younger, and very  beautiful. Watch out for the pretty ones,"
he said. "They're all trouble." Sura slipped the flower out of her sleeve as she jumped up
to  trail  obediently  after  the  older  woman,  and  dropped  it  discreetly  into  the  fountain.
Valentino did not try to return it to her.
The  following  morning,  I  rehearsed  with  the  quartet  for  the  first  time.  Fabia,  the
leader of the quartet, played viola. Valentino was the other violinist, and the cellist was a
man in his forties named Naldo. Valentino was brusque and professional at the rehearsal,
all his flirtatious manner  gone.  Fabia  clearly  ran  the  quartet.  I  was  surprised  at  what  a
pleasure it was to play in a group again. To my relief, I slipped easily back into the habit of
following someone's lead to play in harmony. We finished up our rehearsal close to noon;
Fabia seemed pleased. She drew me aside briefly to tell me that generally  we  rehearsed
together in the mornings and did our own practicing in the  afternoon.  Solo  engagements
were  at  my  own  option,  so  long  as  they  didn't  conflict  with  ensemble  rehearsals  or
performances. She'd held off scheduling any performances for a  bit  to  let  me  get  settled
in, and was pleased with how well I blended. With a  warning  against  spending  too  much
time  chasing  after  the  ladies—I  assumed,  correctly,  that  she  had  seen  me  eating  with
Valentino the previous evening— she let me go to the noon meal.
Valentino pulled me aside after lunch. "I want to talk to you," he said. "Come  back  to
my room."
I had never seen the inside of a boy's room at the conservatory, and I was shocked at
the  mess  in Valentino's.  He  didn't  appear  to  actually  use  the  wardrobe  that  stood  in  a
corner  of  the  room,  but  just  draped  any  clothes  he  wasn't  presently  wearing  over  the
furniture. I wondered briefly if I should go mess my room up once Valentino let me leave,
but decided I wouldn't be able to stand living like this. Besides, Giula would have created
just as much of a mess if she'd had the opportunity; it probably wasn't just boys.
Valentino  wanted  to  know  about  the  war.  I  started  to  talk  about  the  Vesuviani
advance, but he shook his head and cut me  off;  he  wanted  to  know  about  the  new  war.
The Lupi. "You know," he said. "Are they a threat? Pluma is so close to the wasteland."
My  breath  caught  and  I  hoped  that  my  face  hadn't  just  blanched.  But  this  was
ridiculous; I'd planned what to say  if  the  subject  came  up.  "The  soldiers  in Pluma  insist
that they'll be able to protect us," I said. "At  any  rate,  the  Lupi  suffered  a  major  defeat
last  month.  I  was  never  worried.  Besides—"  I  lowered  my  voice  further.  "We  weren't
their targets."
"What do you know about them?" Valentino asked. "We  don't  hear  much  here,  other
than those songs—"
Valentino's  door  banged  open  and  Valentino  jumped  up  off  his  bed.  It  was  Quirino,
glaring across the room with an expression that could sour wine. "You are  such  an  idiot,

Valentino," he said. "Come on. We're going into town."
We walked out of the  enclave,  Valentino  furtively  protesting  that  no one  would  have
overheard. "I did," Quirino said. "Lucky for you."
We  walked  through  Cuore  for  a  long  time.  I  realized  we  were  heading  for  the
university district. Quirino led the way to a loud, smoky tavern. "Here?" Valentino said.
"Here," Quirino said. We went in and found our way to a vacant table near the back. I
thought I glimpsed Michel as we made our way through the tavern, but  he  looked  away
without a flicker of recognition on his face.
Quirino pulled his chair in and leaned across the table. "So," he said. "Keep your voice
down. What do you know?"
"I had noticed  that  no one  here  talks  about  the  trouble  in Verdia,"  I  said,  "or  wears
red. But I hadn't realized that it was quite this secret—"
Quirino  shrugged.  "It's  not  so  much  talking  about  Verdia,"  he  said,  "although  that's
easy enough to get yourself in trouble with. But Valentino was going to bring up the songs
—"
"Which songs?" I asked. "The ones about the Lupi? I have freed  you  and  now  I  will
lead you to glory! I'll trade my own blood for the life of the land?"
Just the lyrics made Quirino nervous. "A month ago, a man named Protego played that
song where he could be overheard—I'm not sure if he was mad or stupid— and three days
later he was dead."
"Executed?"
"No, of course not. Probably poisoned. We got the message. Of course the song's been
passed around anyway ... I think we  all  know  the  words,  whether  we  believe  it  or  not."
Quirino shook his head.
"Hey, Valentino," a strange voice said. "I heard you were here." The boy joining us was
tall, a little older, and dressed as a noble—in a green tunic.
"Ulisse,"  Quirino  said,  and  introduced  me,  noting  that  I  was  from  Verdia  and  they'd
brought  me  here  so  that  we  could  talk  about  the  troubles  without  attracting  attention.
We'd attracted it here, obviously, but apparently Ulisse was all right. He pulled up a chair,
obviously interested.
"So what exactly do you already know about what's going on?" I asked.
"They're peasants," Valentino  said,  ticking  off  on his  fingers.  "Their  emblem  is  a  red
belt and they call themselves the Wolves. They've been terrorizing towns along the edge
of the wasteland—or something—and their main grudge is against the Circle."
"And there are the songs," Ulisse said. He looked at me. "Daniele? How much in those
songs is true?"
I shook my head. "Pluma isn't in the wasteland," I said. "I don't know that much ..."
"If  you  think  about  it,"  Valentino  said,  "magery  has  been  used  for  centuries,  for
thousands  of  years.  Why  would  it  cause  a  famine  now?  And  if  it  was  going  to  cause
trouble anywhere, why wouldn't Cuore be affected?"
"Only one thousand years, and it wasn't until recently that  the  strongest  magery  has
been  used,"  Ulisse  said.  "The  last  war  was  particularly  intense.  And  no  one  makes
anything like magefire in the skies over Cuore."
"Are you saying you believe the songs?" Valentino asked.

"No," Ulisse  said,  in perfectly  even  tones.  "Of  course  I  don't  believe  them;  of  course
none of us believe them. So, Daniele. You were going to tell us what you know."
"Some  time  back  the  Circle  sent  soldiers  to  keep  the  displaced  farmers  in  the
wasteland  from  migrating  north,"  I  said.  This  was  common  knowledge  in  Verdia,  but
Valentino looked surprised.
"Are  you  sure  that  was  why  they  were  sent?"  Valentino  asked.  "Maybe  there  was
another threat from Vesuvia ..."
Ulisse snorted. "Vesuvia is in no position to threaten us anymore—if they ever were."
I wondered if he knew something about conditions in Vesuvia that I didn't. "What are
you saying?"
Ulisse  shrugged.  "I'm  just  saying  that  maybe  the  war  wasn't  fought  for  the  reasons
we're all supposed to believe." I knew that was true; Lucia had told me that the war was
fought  over  a  perfume  ingredient,  and  they'd  told  us  otherwise  at  the  time.  "Anyway,
Daniele, go on. The Circle sent soldiers."
"Right. We actually knew it couldn't be  for  a  new  war,  because  there  were  no mages
with them; they couldn't have been planning to challenge the Vesuviano Circle. Refugees
who tried to go north past the soldiers—well, some were killed. Others were rounded  up
and taken somewhere, no one was quite sure where. According to what  I've  heard,  they
were taken to camps near the border with Vesuvia and enslaved."
"That's illegal," Valentino said. "Who was enslaving them?"
"The soldiers," I said, "on the orders of the Circle. The Circle wanted the prisoners to
build  a  wall  along  the  entire  border  with  Vesuvia,  since  the  border  can't  be  defended
magically anymore. You know—and this is something I've heard on very  good authority—
magery doesn't work in the wasteland."
"We'd heard that," Ulisse said, "though the Fedeli still deny it."
"Well,  it's  true."  I  paused  for  a  moment,  then  went  on.  "That's  where  the  uprising
started, those camps. And that's what the Lupi did for most of the summer— they  freed
the  camps.  Then  just  as  the  summer  was  ending,  we  heard  they  were  heading  north.
Then almost immediately after that, we heard that mages had destroyed their army and
they'd retreated to the wasteland. Then I came north; that's all I know."
"Well,  it  sounds  like  we  don't  have  anything  to  worry  about,  in any  case,"  Valentino
said. "It made me more nervous that no one was talking about it, you know? Like, there
must be something we should be worrying about."
"Worry about Sura," Quirino said. "Or Signora Clara."
"Do you know any more of those songs?" Ulisse said.
"I know them all," I said. "If you want to know the truth, I kind of liked them."
Ulisse hummed the tunes quietly, and it turned out he knew them all, as well. He even
had  them  memorized.  I  was  impressed,  as  he  wasn't  a  musician.  "Ulisse's  got  a  crush,"
Quirino explained.
Ulisse turned bright red. "That's not true."
"Oh really? When was the last time you flirted with a lady and didn't  compare  her  to
the  mythical  Eliana?  Could  it  be,  say,  a  couple  of  months  ago?  Maybe  before  you  ever
heard the songs? Give it up, Ulisse; she's probably dead."
"No," I said. "She's alive—or so the rumors said." I glanced at Ulisse and bit my lip to
conceal my amusement. "I don't think you'd like her, though. You know, she used to be a

musician, at the Verdiano rural conservatory."
"That's right," Ulisse said. "Did you ever meet her?"
"No," I said, "but I met somebody who knew her, and trust me, she's not what you're
picturing."
We  finished  our  drinks  not  long  after  that  and  headed  back  toward  the  enclave.
Valentino, flushed with wine and irritated with Quirino for harping on Sura, started in on
Silvia, some ex-lover of Quirino's.
"Why shouldn't I sleep with a mage?" Quirino said.
"Maybe if you slept with mages you'd get into less trouble."
"Excuse me," Valentino said, "but maybe I'd like to have children someday."
"I'd  like  to  have  children  someday,  too,"  Quirino  said.  "Just  not  nine  months  from
when I was sleeping with Silvia."
"You had a mage as a lover?" I asked, trying to  clarify  the  situation.  "What  was  that
like?"
Quirino snorted, looking me over—probably wondering if I'd slept with any of the girls
back  at  the  conservatory.  I  blushed,  against  my  will,  and  he  relented.  "About  like  any
other girl, I guess. Silvia's very beautiful."
"So what happened? You decided you wanted to have children?"
Quirino shook  his  head.  "You  know  how  they  take  mages  young,  even  younger  than
musicians? They teach them to think a certain way, you know, and if  you  don't  go  along
with them, they make you sorry. Silvia used to talk about that, a bit." He paused.
"So what happened?" I asked.
"Well, one of the things they teach mages to think  is  that  they're  better  than  anyone
else. And that lesson she'd learned." Quirino gave me a rueful smile. "But," and he turned
back to Valentino, "she was not someone who was going to get me into trouble."
Once  we  were  back  at  the  enclave,  Valentino  wandered  off—to  look  for  Sura,  no
doubt—and Quirino drew me into one of the smaller gardens. "I  don't  trust  Valentino  to
keep his mouth shut," he said, "and I don't trust Ulisse not to share things with Valentino.
But you can trust me, and the fountain should cover our conversation."  We  sat  down  on
the marble edge. "You know a lot about the rebels," he said, "and a lot about their leader.
Have you met them? Her?"
"No."
"You can trust me," Quirino said. "I don't  know  how  to  convince  you,  but—I  want  to
know more. Anything you can tell me."
Well, I couldn't play it safe forever.
"Not their leader," I said, "but a party of scouts—at  least,  that's  what  I  thought  they
were."  I'd  thought  this  story  out,  on  my  trip  up  the  river.  "The  roads  in  Verdia  are
dangerous right now.  I  was  traveling  alone,  which  was  stupid.  I  don't  know  what  I  was
thinking  except  that  when  I  first  started  at  the  conservatory,  before  the  war  with
Vesuvia, it would have been safe. I was set upon by bandits, and a group of four men and
one woman came to my rescue."
"Lupi," Quirino said.
I nodded. "I thought so, though I'm not absolutely sure. It wasn't like they had writing
on their foreheads saying 'hey there, folks, we're rebel soldiers,' or anything."

Quirino laughed hesitantly. "No sashes?"
"No,  of  course  not.  This  was  just  a  handful—but  they  carried  crossbows,  and  they
looked like they'd been armed from the bodies of fallen soldiers ..."
"They must have been Lupi," Quirino said. "What did you think of them?"
"They were courteous," I said. "They took care of me until I could join a larger group
to travel with. When they realized I was a musician,  of  course,  they  taught  me  all  those
songs; that's why I knew them."
Quirino nodded. "Do you know any of the other, you know, secret music?"
"Old  Way  music?"  I  whispered,  despite  the  cover  of  the  fountain.  "Don't  all
musicians?" I smiled at him wryly. "I knew without being told not to play those here."
Quirino shook his head. "It wasn't always such a serious crime. Is it true that the Lupi
are also Redentori?"
"Most of them."
"The Fedeli—well, it's not like they were ever very  happy about Old Way superstition,
but since the trouble in Verdia started—" He shook his head. "Maybe we can take  a  trip
sometime, out of Cuore, and you can teach me a few of those songs, you know?"
"I'd trade," I said. "But I gather I shouldn't teach Valentino?"
Quirino looked exasperated. "Valentino thinks that his naivete will protect him. So he's
friends with Ulisse, and he thinks Sura is cute. Why should this be a problem?"
"Why should it? I still don't understand. You said you'd explain the factions to me—"
"—later, I know. I'm sorry to keep putting you off, but my ensemble's performing soon
and I need to get back to my room to get my clarinet. I'll explain later, I promise."
Quirino  headed  off,  turning  back  to  make  a  final  request—"Find  Valentino!  Get  him
away from Sura. This is ridiculous—he really is going to get into trouble."
* * *
I went out to meet Michel that evening, at another smoky tavern near the university.
I was afraid Ulisse would spot me and demand to know why I was there, but this  crowd
seemed to be older. Michel joined me at my table a few minutes after I arrived.
"Was that you I saw today?" I said.
"Yeah," he said with a broad grin. "I did a good job  at  looking  like  I  didn't  know  you,
didn't I?"
"You  did  fine,"  I  said.  "Do  you  have  any  messages  for  me?  I  don't  have  anything  to
report yet."
Michel sighed. "I met with the guy who runs stuff, Placido."
"And?"
"Placido wants to know why Eliana didn't come up to meet with them,  or  Giovanni.  I
told him that we've got a spy at court—not who, of course—and he wants to meet you."
"Out of the question," I said.
"That's what I said. He didn't like that answer. They're putting  me  up  and  giving  me

cover,  but  they're  not  letting  me  into  their  counsels.  I'm  not  noble  enough  for  them."
Michel glared at his wine cup.
"Tell them I'm not up to their standards, either."
"I don't think it matters. I think they just want to prove that we're at  their  beck  and
call, and not the other way around."
"Well,"  I  said.  "We're  not.  Michel,  stand  straight  and  look  them  in  the  eye!  You're
better than they are. You've led soldiers in battle,  you've  faced  the  Circle,  while  they've
slunk around Cuore holding meetings and appointing generali." I punched his arm gently.
"But don't worry about it too much. All we really needed from them was a way for you to
stay safely in Cuore, so that you could carry messages if needed.  They're  giving  us  that,
right?"
Michel nodded.
"So, if Placido takes his head out of his asshole, great.  If  not,  he's  the  one  who  has  to
live with the smell."
Michel laughed, and poured me more wine. "You're right."
Neither of us had anything else to report, so I bid Michel good-bye and got up to leave.
As I slipped through the door, I came face-to-face with a tall young man with beady eyes
and a round, piglike face. Pig-boy gave me a poisonous glare, then  shouldered  me  out  of
the way to enter the inn.  He  was  greeted  by  several  people  who  raised  their  wine  cups
enthusiastically and shouted, "Placido!" I turned around briefly to take a better look, but
he'd  already  turned  his  back  on me,  moving  into  the  tavern  with  a  bright  smile  and  a
handclasp for all. If pig-boy was the leader of the university reformers,  I  decided,  I  was
glad that Giovanni was the worst I ever had to deal with.
CHAPTER FOUR
Take heart: I am with you in the night as in
the day, in your weakness as in your strength.
Wherever you are, look for my face, and it
will shine on you from the smile of a stranger.
Reach for my hand, and I will touch you with
the lost feather of a bird. I am ever with you.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 31, verse 2.
A  page  wearing  the  Emperor's  sigil  delivered  a  small  scroll  to  my  room  the  next
morning. I took it to breakfast to show Valentino and Quirino. "Is this for real?"  I  asked
them.
"Oh, the banquet?" Valentino peered at the scroll briefly. "Yeah, everyone gets invited
to  one  of  those  when  they  first  arrive.  Don't  get  too  impressed.  It's  nothing  all  that
special."
"But with the Emperor—"
"Hey, what do you suppose he does all day? He goes to  banquets."  Valentino  winked,

then  shrugged.  "He  might  be  there,  he  might  not.  At  my  banquet,  he  showed  up  long
enough for us to raise our wineglasses and toast his health, and then he left."
"So how many people will be there? Are they all musicians?"
"Hundreds,"  Quirino  said,  "and  no,  they  won't  all  be  musicians.  These  banquets  get
held every week or two, and all the new arrivals with some status are invited— musicians,
counselors,  petty  aristocrats,  scholars,  priests,  Circle  apprentices.  It's  quite  a  mix.  You
could  end  up  sitting  next  to  some  noble  from  the  northern  border,  or  a
fresh-from-university physician, or anything."
"I sat next to a young lady from Marino," Valentino said. "Lovely girl."
Quirino snorted. "Didn't she slap you?"
"No,  of  course  not,"  Valentino  said.  "Or—wait,  no,  maybe  she  did.  I  forget.  It  was
either her or that flute player I tried to get to know my first week."
"In  any  case,"  Quirino  said,  "you're  expected  to  go,  but  fortunately  there's  a  decent
chance it will be entertaining. When is it?"
I  checked  my  scroll.  "Tomorrow  afternoon.  Do I—"  I  hesitated;  would  a  boy  ask  his
friends what to wear? I decided I'd better risk it, and hunted for a boylike phrasing. "Do I
have to dress up for it?"
Quirino looked me  over.  "What  you  have  on should  be  fine.  You're  supposed  to  look
like  a  musician.  Don't  bring  your  violin,  though,  or  someone  might  make  you  play  and
you'll never get to eat your dinner."
The  morning  rehearsal  went  well;  after  the  noon meal,  I  walked  back  to  Valentino's
room so that he could put away his violin and get his cloak. It was draped over a chair, on
top of several sets of hose and what looked like a Midwinter mask; he picked up the cloak,
then froze.
"What is it?" I asked.
"It's not mine," Valentino said. "I swear by the Lady! It's not mine! I don't know how it
got here!"
I strode over to the chair and looked. Under the cloak,  someone  had  tucked  a  simple
wooden cross on a green ribbon. Valentino threw his cloak down over it and backed away.
Quirino  appeared  in  the  doorway,  his  own  cloak  draped  over  one  arm.  "What's
wrong?" I gestured toward the chair; Quirino closed the door behind him and came over
to  look.  He  grabbed  up  the  cross  in one  hand  and  turned  in fury  on Valentino.  "This  is
Clara's doing," he said. "I told you Sura was trouble!"
"It's not Sura's fault," Valentino said. "She wouldn't do anything to hurt me."
"Maybe  Sura  wouldn't,  but  Clara  would,"  Quirino  said.  "Now  will  you  believe  me?
Now will you stay away from her? This is just  a  warning,  you  idiot;  she  left  this  where
you would find it. Do you have any idea what the Fedeli would—"
"Yes," Valentino said.
"Then  stay  away  from  her."  Quirino  pocketed  the  cross.  "I'll  take  care  of  this.  Why
don't you stay in and practice this afternoon? It'll do your playing some good."
Valentino flung himself onto his bed,  still  upset.  Quirino  left  him  to  his  misery,  and  I
decided to follow Quirino. Back in Quirino's room, he built up his fire, barred the door, and
slipped the cross into the flames.
"You promised me an explanation," I said.

"Right." Quirino poked at the fire a bit; the  cross  was  already  almost  unrecognizable.
"The  big  dispute  at  court  these  days  is  what  the  army  should  do  about  the  trouble  in
Verdia."
"You mean what tactics they should use?"
"Not  exactly."  Quirino  went  over  to  peer  out  the  window,  then  came  back  and  sat
down.  "The  Circle  prevented  the  army  from  crushing  the  rebellion  this  summer.  The
general suspicion is that  the  Circle  is  afraid  that  the  army  has  gotten  ideas  about  being
able  to  defeat  an  enemy  without  the  Circle's  help.  The  Circle  told  everyone  that  they'd
crush  the  Lupi  in  their  own  good  time—of  course,  no  matter  what  the  Fedeli  said,
everyone knew that meant, 'once those dogs leave the wasteland, where they're safe from
us.' And sure enough, the Lupi came out of the wasteland and the Circle destroyed half of
them.  But  not  all,  and  not  their  leaders,  and  now  they're  back  in  the  safety  of  the
wasteland. The Circle seems to think this was good enough, that after that blow, they'll go
limping back home. But the Fedeli don't want to take any chances.  They  want  the  army
sent in right  now.  And  if  the  army  isn't  strong  enough  to  do  it,  they  want  a  new  army
raised. The army answers to the Emperor, and nobody knows for certain what he wants.
For now, though, he hasn't sent the army down."
I nodded, thinking about Giovanni's plans to move what was left of the Lupi to one  of
the ruined villages. I hoped that he was able to keep their movements secret.
"So.  There  are  two  factions  of  the  nobility—the  ones  who  want  to  send  in  the  army
immediately,  or  the  'golds.'  And  the  ones  who  want  to  wait,  or  the  'greens.'  Ulisse  is  a
member  of  the  green  nobles;  Clara  is  a  ringleader  of  the  golds.  Since  Valentino  is  good
friends with Ulisse, he's assumed to be a member of the green faction."
"Oh," I said. "What does Sura have to do with it?"
"Not much, except that her father is also a gold, and Clara has plans for her. There are
a lot of alliances sealed at court through  the  Lady's  coerced  blessing.  You  tell  the  young
lady in question who to sleep with, and if you're lucky the Lady also thinks it's a good idea.
The Fedeli don't exactly approve, but they wink at it. It's part of life at court. Clara does
not want Valentino going and spoiling that."
"What about you?" I asked.
"I'm just a musician," Quirino said, "and unlike Valentino, I manage to look neutral."
"Is this something I'll need to worry about at the banquet tomorrow?" I asked.
"Depends," Quirino said. "If your table companions are wearing blue, you don't have to
worry. Much."
The following afternoon, I dressed in one of my new tunics, arranging the high collar to
hide my girl's throat. Tucking the scroll under my arm, I walked through the gardens  to
the  Imperial  Palace  and  showed  the  scroll  to  the  gatekeeper.  He  glanced  at  it  without
much interest, then summoned a page to lead me to the banquet hall. Another page met
us at the door of the hall and showed me to a seat at the table. I felt rather  like  a  sheep
being herded to shearing; it was clear that this was a daily routine for the palace staff.
Waiting for the other guests to arrive, I took a look around the room. The banquet hall
was huge and brilliantly lit. I realized that  servants  lined  the  walls,  holding  witchlight  in
hands cupped at their waists, so that the guests didn't have to go to the trouble of making
their own light. Only the ceilings fell into shadow; the room was windowless.
The man to my left was clearly an aristocrat, and was also  clearly  more  interested  in
the young lady to his left. I listened in on their conversation for a few moments, but they
quickly  became  so  overwhelmingly  boring  I  started  passing  time  by  checking  out  the

fashion choices of the people on the other side of the banquet hall. A lot of the newcomers
had  already  picked  sides,  although  I  saw  one  puzzled  figure  wearing  a  green  tunic  and
gold hose.
I  heard  a  rustle  of  silk  and  smelled  cinnamon  and  rose  petals,  and  glanced  over  my
shoulder to see the page seating another guest to my right.  It  was  a  young  woman  with
dark hair and piercing eyes, gleaming white teeth like a cat, and black robes with a silver
sigil on her left shoulder. She sat as the page  held  her  chair  for  her,  adjusted  her  robes,
and turned slowly to smile at me. A chill ran down my spine. "My name is Daniele," I said.
"I play with one of the string quartets."
"What a pleasure to meet you," she said in a voice like cream and velvet. "My name is
Rosalba; I am a priestess with the Fedeli."
"You are also new here?" I asked, reaching for my wine and almost knocking it over.
"Yes. I have been out of seminary for three years, but I have been working in Varena.
Is this your first placement as a musician?"
"Yes. I've been attending the conservatory in Pluma."
"How lovely," she said and smiled again. I kept expecting to see pointed teeth. "I used
to play the flute, before I heard the Lady's calling."
"Where are you from originally?"
"A village near Varena," she said. I glanced at her hands; they were smooth, but with
the echo of calluses, a harder skin on her palms.
I smiled at her. "Like me, then, you're—" I gestured. "A farm sparrow that's stumbled
into the aristocrat's aviary."
"Indeed," she said with a laugh,  and  at  my  urging  spent  most  of  the  meal  describing
her farm and her family. Family was possibly the one safe topic; the last time I'd seen my
family, I was not a reformer and I was not Redentore, and while I was not a boy, either,
most of the details could stay the same.
Rosalba's life was strikingly like mine in some ways, although she did have one  sister,
much older than she was. "I think my family hoped one of  us  would  have  a  calling,"  she
said. "More for the money than anything else, alas." She smiled into her wineglass. "But,
the Lady forgives the baser motives for the correct desires."
I nodded knowingly, and looked down at my own wine. "My parents had to settle for a
musician,  but  I  know  what  you  mean.  They  won't  be  displeased  with  the  money  I'll  be
sending home." A lump rose in my throat and I choked it back with a swallow of wine.
We  concluded  the  meal  by  toasting  the  farmers.  "The  Lord  and  Lady  bless  your
family," Rosalba said.
"And yours, Mother Rosalba."
The aristocrat to my left had still not said one word  to  me.  Rosalba  clasped  my  hand
and we went our separate ways.
* * *
Valentino and Quirino were loitering by my door when  I  returned,  and  they  followed
me into my room as I hung up my cloak and pulled off my boots. "How was  it?"  Quirino

asked, and Valentino added, "Did you sit next to anyone pretty?"
"It was  an  interesting  evening,  and  yes,  I  suppose  the  young  lady  next  to  me  had  a
nice face." I gave Valentino a dubious look. "I think even  you  would  have  had  the  sense
not to flirt with her, though."
"Why?"
"The young lady next to me was a Fedele priestess."
Valentino blanched at the thought, and Quirino smothered a laugh. "Don't count on it,"
Quirino said. "He probably would've noticed the face and not the sigil."
"So what did you talk about?" Valentino asked.
"Our  families,"  I  said.  "She's  also  originally  from  a  farm."  Now  that  the  ordeal  of
making conversation with a Fedele priestess was over, I felt relaxed and almost giddy.  I
sat down on the edge of my bed. "What an evening. The  gentleman  on the  other  side  of
me ignored me for the whole meal."
"Was the Emperor there?" Quirino asked.
I tried to remember. "I don't know," I said. "I honestly didn't notice."
"I can see why," Valentino said. "Was she nice, at least?"
"She seemed like someone who would be very nice, so long as you stayed on the Lady's
good side," I said.
"Did you—" Quirino started, but he was cut off by a knock at the door. I got up to open
it.
There was a messenger boy outside; he handed me a  sealed  scroll.  "I'm  to  wait  for  a
reply," he said.
I broke the seal and opened it. Daniele, a flowing cursive script read, I greatly enjoyed
our conversation at dinner and am most anxious to engage your professional services. I
am particularly  fond  of  solo  violin  music.  If  you  have  no  other  engagement,  I  would
appreciate it greatly if you would attend me at my office tomorrow; I would like you to
play  for  me  for  an  hour  or  so.  Please  come  at  an  hour  past  dinner;  the  guard  at  the
Citadel will show you the way to my office.
"What is it?" Valentino asked.
"It's an invitation to a solo engagement," I said. "Does the quartet have any  plans  for
tomorrow afternoon?"
"No," Valentino said. Then, "A solo engagement? Already?"
I  decided  I'd  better  get  rid  of  the  messenger  before  explaining  to  Valentino  exactly
why his jealousy was misplaced.  "This  is  my  reply,"  I  said.  "I  know  relatively  little  solo
music,  but  if  she  doesn't  mind  my  limited  repertoire,  I  would  be  happy  to  play  for  her
tomorrow." The messenger nodded and I closed the door.
Valentino was still gawking at me. "Who wants you to play?" he demanded.
"Mother Rosalba," I said.  "The  Fedele  priestess,"  and  if  my  blood  hadn't  just  turned
cold I would have laughed at Valentino's look of panic. "I guess she liked me."
* * *

There has to be a way to turn this to my advantage, I told myself as I walked up the
steps  into  the  Citadel  of  the  Fedeli,  showing  the  invitation  from  Rosalba  to  the  guards.
They  summoned  an  escort  who  would  take  me  to  her  office.  Some  way.  I'll  think  of
something.
"Daniele!" Rosalba said as I came  in.  "I'm  so  glad  you  were  able  to  come.  I  certainly
don't mind a limited repertoire. The truth is—" she lowered her voice, "I rejoice in serving
the Lady in whatever  way  She  can  make  use  of  me,  but  this  is  a  rather  boring  job  and
doesn't  require  that  much  concentration.  The  hard  part's  been  done  by  the  time  I'm
brought in. The music will be a lovely diversion."
"Isn't it your first week?" I asked. "How can it be boring you already?"
Rosalba  sighed.  "I  had  the  same  job  in  Varena.  I  write  quickly—that's  my  curse.
Excuse me. I mean, of course, that this is the way that the Lady has blessed me to serve
Her."  She  sat  down  at  a  large  desk.  "Sit  or  stand,  as  you  like.  I  had  them  bring  in  a
comfortable chair for you, if you want it. You'll have to play a little quietly, since I have to
be  able  to  hear  the  confessions,  but...  well,  you  understand.  Just  remember,"  and  she
smiled, "for me you  aren't  playing  for  cover.  I'm  not  doing  anything  secret,  I  just  want
music while I work and thought you might do me the favor."
I sat down in the chair and tuned up my violin. We were in a small, narrow room with
two doors but no windows. One chair faced us, at the opposite end of the room.
The  door  opened  and  two  guards  came  in with  a  thin,  fearful  woman.  "Sit,"  Rosalba
ordered her, and took out a piece of parchment. "What do you have to confess?"
The  woman  spoke  in  a  quavering  voice.  "I,  Faustina,  do  confess  to  the  crime  of
heresy." Rosalba's hand flew across the parchment, writing as the  woman  spoke.  "I  said
to friends that I did not believe the  Lady  could  have  possibly  meant  to  bless  the  match
between my daughter and her sweetheart, because I don't like him." She paused. "I don't
like him because he beats her, because he leaves her with bruises all over her body, but
of course  the  Lady  knows  best."  Her  voice  dropped  to  dullness  again.  "I  renounce  my
heresy. I make my confession."
Rosalba finished writing and looked up at the guard.
"Is this certified as sincere?" He nodded. "Stand up and come over here," Rosalba said
to the woman. "Make your sign," she said, and handed the woman her quill. The woman
drew a circle where Rosalba pointed. Rosalba signed her own name, then the guard who'd
certified Faustina's sincerity signed. Rosalba blew on the ink to dry it,  then  dripped  wax
onto the paper and pressed the seal of the Fedeli into the wax. "Very good," she said, and
gave the paper to the guard. "Take her to Penitence."
For two long hours, I played through my solo repertoire and listened to the confessions
that Rosalba diligently wrote down. The heresies were largely trivial, the heretics mostly
terrified  but  not  injured.  Arrest  by  the  Fedeli  was  usually  enough  to  persuade
run-of-the-mill malefactors to  confess  and  accept  whatever  penance  the  Fedeli  decreed
necessary—fines,  most  often;  public  flogging  or  some  other  corporal  punishment,  less
frequently.
After the second hour, Rosalba took a break, and stood up to stretch and ring for some
tea.  "It's  dull  work,"  she  said  again.  "But  the  music  has  made  this  afternoon  go  much
faster."
"What would you rather be doing?" I asked.
"Oh—you know. Rooting out heresy at the source, perhaps, or bringing apostates back
to the mercy of the Lady. Transcribing confessions is—well, it's boring. But  someone  has
to,  and  I'm  very  good  at  it."  The  servant  arrived  with  two  cups  of  tea,  and  Rosalba

handed one to me. We sat back down; I blew across the tea and sipped carefully.
Through the wall to the next office, we could hear voices, muffled  but  loud  enough  to
be  clear.  "—have  enough  now  to  try  him  and  burn  him  for  apostasy,  if  we  want  to.  I
think—"
"Are you mad?"
"We've tried blackmail. It hasn't worked."
"He's no use to us dead."
"He's no use to us alive, if he won't do as we ask."
There was a muffled obscenity from behind the wall, and then one of the men laughed.
Rosalba set down her tea. "They'll be bringing the next one in a moment," she said. "I'll
let you go  now—  I  understand  most  musicians  must  practice  in the  afternoons—but  I'd
greatly  appreciate  it  if  we  could  make  this  a  regular  assignment.  I  could  afford—oh,
perhaps three afternoons each week? When you don't have anything else scheduled?"
There has to  be  a  way  I  can  turn  this  to  my  advantage.  And  no violinist  would  be
likely  to  turn  down  a  solo  engagement.  "Certainly,"  I  said.  "I  play  at  your  pleasure,
Mother Rosalba."
That night, after the evening  meal,  I  retired  alone  to  my  room  and  barred  the  door,
then drew the window shutters closed. I had never  prayed  much,  back  with  the  Lupi;  I
generally figured Lucia  prayed  enough  for  both  of  us.  I  had  asked  God  to  spare  Lucia's
life, but that was pretty much the extent of it. But here, surrounded by the Fedeli and the
faithful,  watching  people  around  me  making  the  offering  to  the  Lady  at  meals  because
they feared the Fedeli if they didn't, I suddenly wished I could celebrate Mass. I wanted
to taste the wine-sweetened  water  we  shared;  I  wanted  to  see  the  light  in Lucia's  eyes
when she spoke of her God. Most of all, I wanted to play  the  forbidden  music,  and  even
alone in my  room  I  didn't  dare.  It  was  ironic  because,  as  Teleso  had  said,  all musicians
learned the music, sooner or later. And played it, quietly and secretly. But not here.
Once I was certain that no one could spy on me,  I  pulled  my  dagger  from  its  sheath.
The cross-piece formed a strangely proportioned cross, but a cross all the same. I laid the
dagger on my  bed  in front  of  me,  knelt,  crossed  myself,  and  folded  my  hands.  B'shaem
Arkah,  v'Bar  Shelah,  v'Nihor  Kadosh.  Except  for  my  urgent  requests  before  battles,  I
never  knew  what  I  was  supposed  to  say  to  God.  So  I  closed  my  eyes,  and  thought  of
Lucia. I hoped God would know what I meant.
* * *
"Gèsu went into the house of his enemy," Lucia recited. "Do you think he wanted  to
do that? Don't you think he was afraid?"
"But he had God's Light in his heart," I said.
"Yes," she said. "But he was still one of us. So  he  was  afraid.  Just  as  we  would  be.
Just as you will be. Just as you are. Just as I am."
I realized suddenly that I stood in Rosalba's office, Rosalba writing furiously next to
me.
"I  am  afraid,"  Lucia  said.  "But  I  have  my  faith,  and  that  sustains  me.  I  have  the
Light,  and  that  strengthens  me.  I  have  all  that  I  need.  Knock,  and  the  door  shall  be

opened. Ask, and you shall receive. I will never serve you again. I will never serve you
again."
Rosalba looked up. "Take her away," she said. "Take her back to interrogation. We
will lead her back to the mercy of the Lady if we have to break every bone in her body,
if we have to burn away the last of her reluctant flesh. Take her away."
* * *
I woke up and for a moment I didn't remember where I was,  and  reached  out  in the
darkness, not even certain who I was reaching toward. "Lucia?"  I  whispered,  but  it  was
Mira my half-sleeping self had hoped to find by my side.
I will never serve you again. I will never serve you again. My dream had been about
Lucia, but the  words  were  Mira's—spoken  in the  darkness  of  her  own  dream  when  she
first  came  to  the  conservatory.  "Fine  words,  my  friend,"  I  whispered.  "But  you  served
them well enough when you rained fire onto the Lupi."
I  closed  my  eyes,  but  I  could  see  Mira's  gray  gaze;  against  my  will,  I  found  myself
thinking of the cold softness of her hand when I'd held it the evening after she arrived, in
the darkness of the practice hall. I clenched my  hands  into  fists,  trying  to  will  myself  to
think of Lucia instead, but I knew that I had trusted Lucia so quickly  and  so  willingly  in
part because the light in her eyes had reminded me of Mira.
I turned over and pulled the blankets  over  my  head,  trying  to  dispel  my  thoughts.  I
didn't want to think about Mira. Mira had saved me only to leave me; she had saved me
again only to destroy the Lupi. I never wanted to see her again, I told myself. I prayed to
God that I not see her—it would be terribly dangerous, as she could recognize me. I had
changed a great deal, but I didn't think that I had changed so much that Mira would not
recognize me if she saw my face. Miriamne, I thought. Her name is Miriamne here. And
she is not the woman I knew.
I dozed fitfully for a while, but it was a relief when a soft rap roused me.  I  scrambled
out of bed, pulling on my robe and tying it securely, checking in my mirror to be sure that
nothing about my appearance would betray me. It was just dawn. "Who is it?" I called.
"It's Ulisse," he said. "Let me in, I need to talk with you."
I checked the mirror one more time, then lifted the bar on the  door  and  let  him  in.  I
was afraid he was going to start asking for details  about  the  Lupi  or,  God  forbid,  Eliana,
but  he  had  more  prosaic  things  on his  mind.  "Valentino  told  me  about  the—you  know.
Heretical icon in his room," he said. "Quirino is afraid that Valentino hasn't broken things
off with Sura."
I shrugged sleepily. "I wouldn't know."
"His  room's  right  near  yours,"  Ulisse  said,  and  his  voice  took  on  a  wheedling  tone.
"Daniele, do you think you could follow Valentino? Watch to see if he slips out? We really
need to know if he's trying to still see Sura secretly."
"Look," I said. "Isn't this Valentino's business? If you're so worried, why are you trying
to get me to follow him?"
"He'd  notice  if  I  followed  him,"  Ulisse  said.  "But  he's  my  best  friend,  Daniele.  If  he
came to grief because of his friendship with me, I could never forgive myself."
"So what is it you want me to do?" I decided to go along with it; if nothing else, it would

give  me  a  chance  to  practice  my  eavesdropping  skills  on  an  escapade  that  didn't  seem
likely to get me into that much trouble.
"Watch for him, tonight," Ulisse said. "After dark. If you see him leaving, follow to see
where he goes. And tell me if he goes to meet Sura."
"Fine," I said. "But only once." I could always let Ulisse talk me into doing more spying
if I decided it was to my advantage.
It was one of my days to play for Rosalba; when I was done with breakfast, I made my
way  to  her  office  and  slipped  in  unobtrusively.  Rosalba  glanced  up  to  give  me  a  quick
smile as I took my spot, then turned back to an old man who sat rigid in the chair in front
of her. "What do you have to confess?" she asked him.
"I, Lecto, do confess to the crime of blasphemy," he said in a hoarse voice. "I took the
Lady's name in vain. I would not afflict your ears with  my  blasphemy,  but  I  repent  and
regret  my  words,  and  will  never  speak  them  again.  I  renounce  my  sin.  I  make  my
confession."  He  looked  up  at  Rosalba  anxiously.  "Is  that  all  right?  Did  I  say  the  right
thing?"
Rosalba  finished  writing  and  looked  up.  "Is  this  certified  as  sincere?"  The  guard
nodded. "You did fine," she reassured the old man. "So long as you repent your sin; that's
the important part. Come here and make your sign."
The  old  man  could  write  his  name,  and  did,  at  the  bottom  of  the  parchment,  then
hobbled off, escorted by the guards.
Rosalba sat back and cracked her knuckles. "I don't know how we get involved in that
sort of thing," she muttered.
I  finished  the  piece  I  was  playing  and  lowered  my  violin  for  a  moment.  "Mother
Rosalba?  I  have  a  suspicion  that  I  know  which  phrase  he  used,  and—uh—I've  heard  it
used  a  lot  over  the  years.  And  I'm  just  wondering,  is  that  the  sort  of  crime  you  hunt
down? I mean, not that I ever take the Lady's name in vain—"
Rosalba turned to give me an amused look. "You can go ahead and confess your sin to
me, Daniele. I promise, saying 'Lady's tits' is not exactly a capital offense."
"I'm  just  wondering  how  careful  I  should  be  should  I,  say,  trip  over  a  rock  in  the
garden or something ..."
"Don't stay awake at night worrying," Rosalba said. She shook her head. "I suppose, as
the Lady's Servants, we must guard the way to wrong on her behalf, and one sin leads to
another. But really, I don't know how the Fedeli get involved in that sort of thing. It's the
major sins that are really our domain."
"Like heresy," I said.
"Or apostasy," she said. "That man ... Lecto?... probably swore at his priest; that's how
he  wound  up  here.  Now—"  she  dropped  her  voice.  "The  Redentori,  they're  actually
dangerous."
I tried to decide whether I ought to be familiar with the term, and ended up giving her
a blank look. "Who?"
"You know. The Old Way apostates. A few years ago, no one  had  ever  even  heard  of
them. Then—" She dropped her voice  again.  "Would  you  believe  there  was  an  Old  Way
apostate at my seminary?"
I  could  believe  it,  actually.  Rosalba's  home  city  was  Varena,  and  suddenly  I  had  a
strong suspicion that I knew exactly who she meant.

"There was this girl," Rosalba said, confirming my suspicions, "Lucia. She was a friend
of  mine,  actually,  when  I  could  stand  to  be  around  her.  She  was  one  of  those  really
morose people. You know, sad all the time and if you spent any time talking to her you'd
be just as depressed. I tried, though, I really tried. I think—" she sighed. "I hate to judge
this  sort  of  thing,  but  I  think  the  biggest  problem  was  that  she  didn't  really  have  a
vocation.  Maybe  her  parents  pressured  her  into  the  seminary,  for  whatever  reason;  it
happens. And seminary is a lot of work. You wouldn't necessarily know that, but it's a lot
of work, and  some  of  it's  hard  and  dirty  and  unpleasant.  If  you  don't  know  that  you're
serving  the  Lady,  I  can  see  where  someone  might  hate  it."  She  paused  and  glanced
toward the door, but there was no sign yet of guards or a new prisoner, so she shrugged
and went on with her story.
"Eventually  the  priestesses  in charge  of  the  seminary  must  have  reached  the  same
conclusion,  because  they  sent  Lucia  to  do  a  solitary  vigil.  That  was  their  first  mistake.
Lucia came out convinced she'd heard  the  Old  Way  deity  speaking  to  her.  Their  second
mistake  was  that  they  decided  all  she  really  needed  was  a  nap—"  Her  voice  dripped
baffled  scorn,  "—and  left  her  alone,  if  you  can  believe  it.  She  escaped,  but  not  before
trying to convince a half dozen of us that worship of the Lady was a stupid idea and we all
needed to go learn the Old Way."
"Was she mad?" I asked.
"I actually think she was possessed," Rosalba said. "Their first step should have  been
to  restrain  her,  and  bring  someone  from  the  Fedeli  skilled  in  casting  out  the  Maledori
when they have taken over someone's heart and mind." We could hear footsteps outside,
and she hastily got out another sheet of paper. "In any case," she added, "that was when I
realized that the Lady wanted me to join the Fedeli.  Because  when  Lucia  told  me  that  I
was  worshipping  a  false  god,  I  could  sense  the  darkness  within  her.  And  I  knew—"
Rosalba's eyes showed deep regret, "I knew that if only I had  the  right  words,  the  right
ritual, the right prayer, I could cast out the  Maledori  and  return  her  to  the  Lady.  But  I
didn't;  I  wasn't  one  of  the  Fedeli  yet."  She  sighed.  "And  now,  of  course,  I  record
confessions. Thanks be to the Lady."
The door opened and a guard came in.  Then  two  more  guards,  because  this  prisoner
had to be carried. I realized with horror that this was because there was very  little left of
his feet. The guards set him in the chair.
The prisoner wore a shapeless gray shift, and filled the room with the stench of blood
and excrement. His cheeks were hollow and much of his hair was missing. His eyes were
mostly closed. One of the guards nudged the prisoner and he began to speak. "I, Octavio,
do confess to the crime of apostasy," he said. He spoke almost inaudibly.
Rosalba glanced over at me, and I quickly set my violin on my shoulder and started to
play.  At  the  sound  of  the  violin,  the  prisoner  looked  up.  His eyes  were  glazed  and  dull.
After a moment he continued.
"I  confess  to  the  crime  of  apostasy.  I  have  secretly  been  a  Redentore,  worshipping
false gods and subscribing to superstition." His voice faded again.
"Your companions in apostasy," Rosalba prompted when he paused.
"Also practicing this crime with me," he said, and paused again, closing his eyes.
"Go on," Rosalba said.
Octavio was silent for a long  moment.  I  realized  that  he  was  listening  to  my  playing,
and a slight smile came to his face. He opened his  eyes  again  and  looked  straight  at  me.
Where before his eyes had been dull, they were now lit with a dark fire. "No," he said.
"Go on," Rosalba said. "You have agreed to make a full confession. Do you want to  be

taken back to the torture?"
"I  will  not  speak  more,"  he  said.  "You  have  my  confession.  You  may  content
yourselves with it. I have no one to accuse. I practiced alone; I worshipped alone. I know
of no other Redentori."
"Octavio," Rosalba said, and set down her pen. She rose and strode across the room to
face him. Her back was to me, but I could imagine her face, rigid as steel,  her  dark  eyes
gleaming. "Don't be a fool, Octavio. We will bring you back to the Lady's mercy sooner or
later, one way or another. What have they done to  you?"  She  jabbed  a  hand  against  his
side and I could see his face contort in pain. "How long have you been  here?  One  week?
You might hold out another minute, another hour, but you will return to Her in the  end.
Why not return now?"
"No,"  Octavio  said.  "I  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  you.  In  Gèsu  is  my  strength.  I
recant my confession. I worship the true God."
"Fool," Rosalba said, and slapped him. I saw a trickle of blood run from his mouth; he
had already been beaten, many times, and she had reopened an old wound. "Do you think
you can stand against us? Against the Lady?"
"We  must  be  a  threat  to  you,"  Octavio  said.  "Or  you  would  not  come  for  us;  you
wouldn't  care  so  much  that  you'd  wrest  the  spirit  from  my  body  just  for  a  handful  of
names."
"You are no threat," Rosalba spat. "It is only out of mercy that we seek to return you
to Her. It's to save your soul."
"My soul knows  its  true  home,"  Octavio  said.  "You  can  tear  my  body  apart,  but  my
soul knows its true home."
"You will be put to the torture again," Rosalba said. "Is that what you want?"
"No," Octavio said, his hoarse voice breaking. "But I will not give you names."
Rosalba  turned  and  went  back  to  her  desk.  "Take  him  away,  then,"  she  said  to  the
guards, and tore up the paper on which she'd started writing his confession.
My hands were  shaking;  I  could  barely  hold  my  bow  steady.  I  let  the  last  note  fade
away and then carefully lowered my violin. Rosalba said nothing, crumpling the shreds of
paper  on  her  desk.  Finally  she  spoke.  "They  will  drive  the  Maledori  from  his  heart
eventually," she said, "but there may be very little left by then."
"And then?" I asked, lowering my violin.
"He'll  be  executed,  of  course,  to  prevent  the  evil  from  spreading,  and  the  Lady  will
take him to Her." She sighed. "I'm sorry,  Daniele;  I  know  that  was  hard  for  you  to  see.
Why don't you go to the chapel and say a prayer for Octavio before you go back  to  your
room?"
Since arriving at Court, I had not set foot in the Imperial Chapel of the Lady—in  fact,
the last time I had been in a church was during my trip to Doratura, when Giula and I had
taken shelter from the rain. The church by the roadside had been a simple building, wood
and brick with a linen cloth on the altar. I found myself trembling slightly as I walked up
the white marble steps into the Imperial Chapel, opening the heavy door to slip inside.
The chapel interior was shadowed and dark, even with the faded autumn  sun  shining
through the windows of colored glass. The building was chill, almost as cold inside as out,
and I tucked my hands inside my cloak, trying to warm them. I had no particular desire
to pray, but I decided to walk Gaius's Circuit anyway, because I was afraid  that  Rosalba
might have followed me or sent someone to watch me. I paused to meditate  by  the  first

altar, the Lady's Appearance to Gaius in a Vision, raising my hands and bowing my head
in a prayerful attitude.
Gèsu forgive me,  I  thought,  not  willing  to  risk  praying  under  my  breath.  You  know
why  I  am  truly  here.  The  icon  of  the  Lady  smiled  benignly  at  me;  this  was  one  of  the
more  insipid  icons  I'd  seen,  clearly  designed  by  someone  who  strongly  approved  of  the
Lady as the Ever-Doting Mother of us all. Either that or a secret Redentore painted it to
make trouble, but that seemed a little unlikely.
After an appropriate interval, I moved on to the next altar, Gaius's Return to the Old
Imperial City. I wished Giovanni were here, so I could yell at him. What am I supposed to
do here? How much longer do I have to take this? How am I supposed to use what I know
to  do  anything  useful?  "You'll  figure  out  a  way,"  Giovanni  would  have  said.  "You're
supposed to be so clever, aren't you? Uncorrupted by a university education."
I moved on toward the next altar on the Circuit— Gaius's Founding of the Circle—and
then the next, the Lady's Victory Over Foolish Superstition. Still insipid, the smiling Lady
rested her dainty foot on a broken cross. I closed my eyes. Gèsu, I whispered aloud, but
very softly, give your servant Octavio strength. Help him to know that he is not alone. I
knew I could never endure what Octavio had. And I wasn't sure whether to be happy or
horrified  that  my  music  had  given  him  strength  to  refuse  them  again.  "There  must  be
some way to turn this to my advantage," I whispered. "Help me find a way."
"How can the Lady help you, my daughter?"
I jumped in startled fear, but the priest was not speaking to me. Of course not; I was
already engaged in walking Gaius's Circuit. The priest—I sneaked a look at him from the
corner  of  my  eye—was  addressing  a  young  woman  in  robes  who  had  just  entered  the
cathedral. A young woman who now followed him down toward the great altar,  her  eyes
downcast. I moved on to the next altar, taking a look at the young woman as I did so.
It was Mira.
I stumbled on the stones under my feet and nearly fell. The priest turned  to  stare  at
me as  I  recovered  myself,  but  fortunately  Mira  did  not.  She  continued  on to  the  Great
Altar without looking up.
"I am here only to pray," she said in a clear, even voice. "I don't need your assistance,
Father."
He moved off as she knelt and closed her eyes.
The  fourth  altar  of  Gaius's  Circuit  is  traditionally  placed  directly  behind  the  Great
Altar,  and  by  a  quirk  of  the  furniture  arrangements,  when  I  turned  around  I  had  a
perfectly clear view of  Mira's  face.  Which  meant,  of  course,  that  if  she  opened  her  eyes
right now she would have a perfectly clear  view  of  my  face,  as  well,  but  for  at  least  the
next moment or two, I didn't care.
Mira.  Miriamne.  Her  face  was  pale  and  thin,  her  eyes  and  cheeks  sunken,  as  if  she
were living in Ravenna instead of the Circle's cradle of luxury within the capital city. Was
she praying to the  Lady  with  sincerity?  Or  did  she  secretly  whisper  prayers  in the  Old
Tongue, like I did? I wondered if the  Fedeli  would  dare  to  accuse  a  member  of  the  Full
Circle of apostasy. As Mira straightened her back, I flipped my cloak hood over my face to
conceal  myself,  but  she  did  not  see  me.  Her  right  hand  flicked  in  a  tiny,  almost
undetectable  gesture,  drawing  a  tiny  cross  over  her  heart.  Then  she  rose  and  strode
quickly out of the chapel.
I decided I didn't care anymore whether I  had  been  followed;  I  couldn't  stay  in here
any longer. Abandoning Gaius's circuit halfway through, I fled back to my room.

CHAPTER FIVE
If you open your eyes, you shall see the truth. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 7,verse 12.
Ulisse  had  asked  me  to  follow  Valentino,  so  as  night  fell,  I  watched  quietly  from  my
window. I could readily imagine that Valentino might be visiting Sura in secret,  although
in truth I sympathized with him. Why shouldn't  he  flirt  with  any  girl  who  would  put  up
with him, and be friends with anyone he chose? That just goes  to  show  your  naiveté,  I
could almost hear Giovanni saying; yet another thing you know nothing about.
It was a long, boring wait. The last of the stragglers slipped inside from  their  evening
strolls, and the enclave became quiet. I could hear the gentle splash of a fountain near the
edge of the garden; then, farther away, I heard the sound of a single trumpet.
There!  Someone  was  leaving  the  building.  I  slipped  out  of  my  seat  by  the  window,
tossed my cloak around my shoulders, and went out into the night.
I caught up with the shadowy figure quickly enough, but I couldn't tell whether or not
I  was  following  Valentino.  Whoever  it  was  headed  for  the  nearest  exit,  and  I  quickly
checked to make sure I had my badge around my neck. I did. It made sense, I supposed,
to have a secret meeting outside the enclave; it wasn't as if we  were  prisoners  here.  We
wound our way through the city streets. I realized, too late, that I was never going to be
able  to  find  my  way  back.  Well,  if  necessary,  I  could  hole  up  somewhere  and  then  ask
directions in the morning. Everyone else in Cuore doubtless knew the way to the Imperial
enclave.
I  was  expecting  to  arrive  at  a  seedy  tavern,  but  instead  the  person  I  was  pursuing
made his way to a quiet street of dark buildings—warehouses, I thought. I could smell the
earthy smell of unwashed wool, and the acrid smell of dye; I thought we were probably in
the  textile  merchants'  district.  The  man  I  was  following  stopped,  and  I  ducked  back
behind the edge of the building as he tapped lightly on a  door  several  times.  I  could  see
the faintest flicker of candlelight from the doorway as he went inside, and I moved around
to peer through a crack at the bottom of the shuttered window.
I had not been following Valentino—looking at him in the candlelight, I was quite sure
of  that.  I  wasn't  sure  who  it  was,  though,  because  he—like  everyone  else  in  the
room—was masked. There were eleven people in the room, and every one  wore  a  white
veil that covered the lower half of their faces, obscuring  their  features.  My  first  thought
was that they were preparing a performance for Mascherata, which was only a few weeks
away,  but  they  seemed  much  too  nervous  to  be  involved  in  something  that  innocent.
Then one of them lifted the candle from  the  table,  and  I  saw  a  small  plate  with  a  white
cloth over it, and a chalice of wine. Redentori.
I knew I shouldn't be watching this. If they had any sense, they'd check for observers
before they started their ritual, and I doubted a spy would be  treated  politely.  I  slipped
back out into the street, and collided with a tall  man  in a  black  cloak.  His hood  fell  back
and I saw that he, too was masked.
"Sorry,"  I  said,  and  started  to  dodge  aside,  but  his  hand  closed  on  my  arm  and  he

jerked me in to the room through the open door.
"Weren't you watching the alley?" he said sharply to the woman with the candle. The
cloth over his face muffled his voice slightly. "Look  what  I  found."  He  shoved  me  to  the
floor. "Spying on us."
My mouth went dry. "I've seen nothing," I said. "I don't know who you are."
The  woman  with  the  candle  slammed  the  door  and  barred  it.  "What  are  you  doing
here?" she asked.
"I have a friend who's in trouble with a lady, that's who I thought I was following—"
"You followed someone here?" The man who'd caught me looked around the shadowed
room, his eyes narrowing.
"We have to kill  him."  It  was  the  man  I'd  followed  who  spoke.  I  stared  up  at  him;  I
didn't recognize his eyes or his voice, but presumably he was one of the musicians. For all
I knew, he was a spy. Revealing myself as Redentore—let alone  as  Eliana—could  get  me
killed even if they believed me and let me go.
The man I'd followed drew his knife. "I think he followed me. It's only just. I'll do it."
"Wait!" I said. "Don't hurt me. I swear I won't tell anyone what I saw."
"What good is the vow of a Delia Chiesa?" said the man who'd dragged me in, speaking
more to his comrades than to me.
There was a hush, then the man I'd followed lunged at me with his knife. I rolled aside,
drawing my own knife and throwing myself back into the corner. They'd be  able  to  take
me  if  they  wanted  to,  but  maybe  I  could  bluff  my  way  out  of  this  somehow.  I  pushed
myself to my feet, my back against the wall. The man who'd tried to kill me was keeping
his distance with a glare. If he was a musician, which seemed likely, he wouldn't know any
more about knife-fighting than I'd known before I started lessons with Giovanni.
"Just let me leave," I said. "If  you  try,  you'll  be  able  to  take  this  knife  from  me,  but
blood will be shed, and it won't all be mine. I don't want to hurt any of you. I'm no danger
to you—I don't know who I followed, nor who any of you are. And I wouldn't turn you in
even if I could."
The man who'd caught me moved toward me slowly, his hands empty, palms up. "Our
brother drew steel quickly," he said. "We don't want to hurt you."
I relaxed slightly—and with a jerk and a flash of reflected candlelight, his sword was at
my throat, pinning me to the wall.
"Drop your knife," he said.
I dropped it.
"It's clear you know what we are, and why we're here," he said. "Why did you come?"
"I told you the truth," I said. "My friend Ulisse asked me to trail his friend Valentino,
to make sure he  wasn't  meeting  a  certain  girl  secretly.  Stupid  enclave  political  goatshit.
I'm just a musician. Valentino's just a musician. Why would—"
"Shut up," the man said, pressing the sword a little harder against my throat. "You're
'just a musician' like this sword is just an eating-knife. Where did you learn to fight?"
"From my brothers," I said. "Growing up."
The man made a sound of disgust and I saw his grip on the sword tighten.
"Wait!" I said and my voice cracked. "Don't kill me. I'm one of you. I'm Redentore."

"Nice try," the man said, "but I think we've heard enough of your lies."
"Stop,"  I  shouted,  and  to  my  surprise,  he  did.  "If  I  were  Fedele—as  you  obviously
think I am—why would I be  sneaking  around  in an  alley?  I  would  have  infiltrated  your
group. I would  have  arrived  on your  doorstep  with  something  to  make  you  trust  me.  I
would be pretending to be one of you right now and you would not be holding a sword at
my  throat,  you'd  be  celebrating  Mass  and  you  wouldn't  even  know  that  the  knife  was
already in your back."
"If you are one of us," the woman with the candle said, "why  did  you  wait  till  now  to
tell us?"
My gaze swept around the room. "Every one of you is masked," I said. "I am not. For
all I know, you know who I am—and one of you probably is Fedele, sent to spy. And you
know  that,  or  why  the  masks?  I  had  hoped  I  could  persuade  you  to  free  me,  and  I
wouldn't have to reveal my own secret."
The man with the sword shook his head. "It's too late to make claims like this." I saw
his  hand  tighten  again,  and  I  looked  around  the  room  desperately,  searching  for
sympathetic eyes.
"Wait."  One  of  the  men  spoke—a  short,  stout  man  with  a  gentle  tenor  voice.  "You
judge  hastily,  brother.  The  boy's  story  sounds  plausible  enough  to  me."  He  stepped
forward into the circle of candlelight and laid  a  restraining  hand  on the  other  man,  then
turned to me. "If you are what you say, sing the opening prayer for the Mass."
The sword eased back, and I took a deep—shaky— breath. For a petrifying instant, my
mind went blank, but I formed the violin fingering with my left hand and could remember
again. "B'shaem Arkah, v'Bar  Shelah,  v'Nihor  Kadosh,"  I  sang.  I  started  the  melody  too
high, and had to switch to the lower register, and my voice broke three times, but I made
it through the opening prayer. I remembered just as I finished that I was supposed to be
a boy. I hoped I hadn't sung too high.
There was a long, uncertain silence when I finished.
"Let him go," said my defender. "He's telling the truth."
"The Fedeli could learn our prayers," said the man with the sword.
"The Fedeli, yes," said my defender. "But not a random passerby who hoped to betray
us  for  a  rich  reward.  And  he's  right.  The  Fedeli  would  be  in  our  midst,  not  peering  in
through a crack in the shutter." He laid his hand on the other man's sword-arm. "Let him
go."
Reluctantly, the man lowered his sword and put it away.
My defender turned to me. "You are welcome to stay and celebrate with us, brother,"
he said.
My  knees  were  shaking  too  badly  to  dance.  "I  will  stay  if  I  must,  but  normally  I
provide God's music; my dancing is clumsy."
"Go in peace, then," he said.
I  clasped  his  hand.  "Thank  you,  brother,"  I  said,  and  fled  the  house  as  fast  as  my
shaking legs would let me.
* * *

"Gèsu went into the house of his enemy."
I turned, expecting Lucia, but it was Mira. She looked at me with her gray eyes, and
she  did  not  smile.  "Do  you  think  he  wanted  to  do  that?  Don't  you  think  that  some
mornings, he woke with every bone in his body screaming for him to run?"
"The  only  place  you  ran  was  back  here,"  I  said,  and  I  realized  suddenly  that  we
were in Rosalba's office. I looked around for Rosalba, only to realize that I was sitting
at Rosalba's desk, her pen in my own hand.
"Do you condemn me?" Mira asked.
"Yes," I said, and my voice was shaking.
"I  am  unrepentant,"  Mira  said.  "A  confirmed  heretic  and  apostate.  Do  your  duty,
then."
I  stood  up,  hearing  Rosalba's  robes  rustling  around  me,  and  smelling  her  scent.
"Take  her  away,"  I  said.  I  remembered  most  of  what  Rosalba  would  say,  but  the
words stuck on my tongue like ashes, and my voice fell to a whisper. "Take her away."
* * *
I woke with a start, my hands shaking. I made a witchlight, and put a kettle on my fire
to make tea. It would take some time to dispel the dream, and I didn't think I wanted to
go back to sleep right away, even if I could. My window was shuttered for the night, but I
suspected it was nearly dawn in any case.
Trying to think about anything other than my dream, I made sure my appearance was
in order in case I had any unexpected visitors, and  made  my  tea.  My  room  had  a  small
table, and I sat down to drink tea and think about the events of the previous evening.
Redentori in Cuore, and at least one from the enclave. No, wait. I thought back to the
room of masked people: they  were  all  wearing  medallions,  all  stamped  in silver  or  gold.
They were all from the enclave.
It wasn't surprising, really, when I thought about it. The Old Way had been making a
resurgence  throughout  Verdia,  not  just  among  the  Lupi;  of  course  there  would  be
Redentori here as well, and of course they'd be far more cautious. I wondered how many
were  spies—  I  could  almost  imagine  repeated  infiltration  creating  a  secret  Redentore
cadre made up entirely of Fedeli spies. But, no. If they were  all  spies,  they'd  have  killed
me. I wondered if I were in danger, since any spies at that meeting had seen my face and
knew I was a musician. I hoped they'd consider me too small a bird to  bother  hunting.  I
couldn't imagine leaving already; I hadn't learned, or done, anything useful yet.
Redentori  in the  enclave—some  musicians,  but  some  important  enough  to  rate  gold
medallions. I ought to be able to find a way to use that. The Emperor controlled the army,
and the Circle feared a strong army; the army without the Circle  was  nothing,  except  in
the  areas  drained  of  magic,  where  the  Circle  was  less  than  nothing.  Perhaps  one  of  the
nobles I'd seen last night was close to the Emperor.
Outside  my  window,  I  could  hear  the  cacophony  of  birds  that  meant  that  dawn  was
well  and  truly  breaking,  and  I  padded  over  to  open  the  shutters.  I  leaned  out  to  latch
them open, and noticed something bright on my windowsill.
A spray of pink rosebuds. I picked it up, puzzled. Was this a token of love from a secret
admirer?  I  sincerely  hoped  not;  someone's  romantic  interest  in me  could  make  my  life

much  more  complicated.  But  it  seemed  more  likely  that  someone  had  mistaken  my
window for someone else's, or that the flower had been set aside briefly during a flirtation
and forgotten, my windowsill only a convenient shelf.  I  left  the  flowers  on my  table  and
went to find some breakfast.
Ulisse knocked on my door while I was practicing that afternoon. "Can I come in?" he
asked. "I don't want Valentino to see me."
I stood back and gestured Ulisse in. "I don't have anything to tell you."
"He didn't go out?"
"I  don't  know.  I  saw  someone  leave,  and  I  followed.  But  it  turned  out  not  to  be
Valentino."  Ulisse  started  to  say  something  in a  wheedling  tone,  and  I  shook  my  head.
"The man I followed almost killed me, Ulisse; I am not trying this again."
Ulisse fell silent, abashed. "I'm sorry, Daniele. I didn't mean  to  send  you  into  danger.
Valentino  would  have  been  annoyed  if  he'd  seen  someone  follow  him,  but  he  wouldn't
have tried—well, of course not. I'm sorry."
This seemed to be a good time to ask Ulisse some questions of my own, while  he  was
off-balance  and  feeling  guilty.  "Quirino  tried  to  explain  the  'gold'  and  'green'  factions  to
me,  but  I'm  not  sure  I  really  understood.  You  oppose  sending  the  army  into  the
wasteland against the Lupi because you're on the side of the Circle?"
Ulisse  flashed  me  a  grin.  "I  think  Quirino  made  it  sound  simpler  than  it  is.  All  the
greens  oppose  raising  a  new  army  to  crush  the  Lupi.  Some  of  the  greens  are  Circle
loyalists,  and  want  the  Emperor  to  keep  the  army  out  of  the  wasteland  because  that's
what the  Circle  wants.  And  others  want  the  Emperor  to  keep  the  army  out  of  the  way
because they are perfectly willing to hand the Circle a shovel and let them dig  their  own
grave. You can probably guess which group I'm in."
"And the golds?"
"The golds want the Emperor to raise a new army right away to crush the Lupi. Some
are  Fedeli  supporters.  Some  are  Circle  supporters  who  don't  want  to  take  any  chances
and don't  think  the  Circle  knows  what's  in its  own  best  interests.  And  some  are  hoping
that the Circle is right to fear a powerful, confident army."
"Which group is the dreaded Signora Clara in?"
"You know, I have no idea," Ulisse said. "She keeps her dice well hidden. I suppose if I
had to guess, I'd say she's a friend to the Fedeli; she threatened Valentino with a heresy
accusation, after all."
"If it was Clara who left the heretical icon in his room."
"If  it  wasn't,  it  was  someone  acting  on  her  orders,"  Ulisse  said.  "I  wish  I  knew  if
Valentino was behaving himself."
"I did my best," I said, and sighed, a bit theatrically.
"I know, I know. And I appreciate it."
"I  had  another  question  about  the  factions,"  I  said.  "What  does  the  Emperor  think?
Does anyone know?"
"Well,  so  far  he  hasn't  sent  the  army  down  to  the  wasteland,  so  he's  siding  with  the
green faction," Ulisse said. "Of course, no one knows why. Is he on the side of the Circle?
Is he secretly wearing the colors of the Lupi? Is he just more afraid of the Circle than he is
of the Fedeli? No one knows."
"What does the Emperor have to fear from the Circle or the Fedeli?" I asked.

Ulisse looked startled. "You don't know? Well, of course. You were at the conservatory.
Emperor  Iago  died  last  year—you  heard  that  at  least."  I  nodded.  "He  died  of  a  very
sudden illness, and he was not a weak man, or an old one. It is commonly believed that he
was poisoned by a political enemy. Of course, no one knows who. I think the Fedeli did it,
personally,  but  I've  heard  it  argued  persuasively  that  it  was  the  Circle.  At  any  rate,
Emperor Travan has plenty to fear, and no way  of  knowing  whom  to  fear.  I  don't  envy
the Emperor."
"Have you ever met him?"
"Me?" Ulisse gave me a broad  grin.  "I've  seen  him  from  a  distance,  but  we've  never
been introduced." Ulisse shrugged. "Mostly, the Emperor tries to  stay  out  of  the  way  of
both  the  Fedeli  and  the  Circle.  I've  heard  some  rumors  implying  odd  things  about  the
Emperor's sexual appetites, but I think those are just someone's idea of a good dirty joke.
He's a very  quiet man, very  reclusive. Even when his father was alive, when I'd see  him
at a court event, he'd be avoiding the other people there as assiduously as possible. So  if
he  does  have  unusual  sexual  tastes,  they  probably  tend  more  toward  the  solitary
pleasures,  eh?"  Ulisse  chortled  at  the  look  on  my  face,  then  elbowed  me  and  nodded
toward the flowers on my table. "Nice roses. I hope you aren't planning on offering them
to a pretty girl in a yellow dress."
"Oh  ...  no."  I  actually  found  myself  blushing.  "I  found  these  on  my  windowsill  this
morning."
"Really?"  Ulisse  arched  his  eyebrow.  "You've  certainly  become  a  heartbreaker
quickly."
"It was probably intended for Valentino."
"Maybe it was that Fedele priestess you play for. Isn't her name Rosa?"
"Rosalba," I said. "And I very much doubt these are from her."
Ulisse shook his head. "Well, thank you for your efforts, and I'm sorry again  that  you
nearly got into trouble. I'll leave you to your practicing."
I stepped out later that afternoon to play in the garden: I stood beside a fountain and
chose the tune of a romantic ballad, which attracted a number of sweet young  couples.  I
didn't  see  Sura  anywhere;  with  any  luck,  Clara  was  keeping  her  mewed  up  inside  East
Court, where she couldn't get Valentino into trouble. I did catch a glimpse of Rosalba, who
gave me a friendly wave; I dipped my head in response.
When evening came, I sat down to put away my violin, and noticed that a yellow flower
like  a  lily  had  been  left  on  the  edge  of  the  fountain,  close  to  where  I  was  playing.  I
dismissed  it  as  a  flirtation  device  that  had  been  accidentally  mislaid,  and  left  it  behind
when I headed to dinner.
* * *
I had intended to go down to the university district after dinner, just to give Michel a
quick report. I didn't have that much to tell him, but I wanted to see a face I could trust.
But  as  I  was  taking  a  second  piece  of  bread,  Fabia  came  looking  for  me  and  Valentino.
"Egidio's  quartet  was  supposed  to  play  for  the  Emperor's  banquet  tonight,  but  Egidio
sprained his wrist today, so we're filling in. Go get your instruments and meet me by the
fountain."  Valentino  crammed  the  slice  of  meat  he  was  eating  into  his  mouth,  and  I

resisted  the  urge  to  do  the  same  with  my  bread;  if  I  was  hungry  later,  I  could  send  a
servant for a snack.
Fabia led us to the Imperial Palace. I had been impressed by the welcoming banquet I
had attended, but this party made that one look shabby and informal.
Everyone in attendance here was among the nobility, high-ranked enough to live in the
East  Court  if  not  the  Imperial  Palace  itself,  and  people  were  dressed  in  their  best
clothing—dark green velvet with a pattern woven in with red thread; heavy yellow fabric
that  reflected  the  light  like  glass.  The  nobles  had  separated  out  by  color,  moving  to
opposite sides of the banquet hall, and very few seemed to have chosen neutrality tonight.
"That's Clara," Valentino whispered as we took our places in the gallery. I peered down
at the lady he had indicated. It's difficult to judge appearance from above and I could not
see her face from where we were, but even from above I could see the straightness of her
back  and  the  set  of  her  jaw  and  shoulders.  This  was  a  lady  who  knew  and  appreciated
power.
I turned back to Valentino after a moment. "You flirted with her?"
Valentino shrugged. "I was new here."
I shook my head. Only Valentino.
Fabia  tapped  lightly  on the  rail  and  Valentino  and  I  took  our  places  and  tuned  our
instruments.
The Emperor's entrance was announced with a blast of trumpets. I rose with everyone
else  as  he  came  in,  studying  him  curiously.  He  had  not  in  fact  attended  my  welcome
banquet; this was the first I'd seen  him.  He  wasn't  as  tall  as  I'd  expected;  of  course,  no
one described  Emperor  Travan  as  "short,"  but  he  was.  He  was  richly  dressed  in  dark
blue, with a golden eagle clasp holding his cape at the shoulder. He flicked the cape neatly
out of his way as he sat down. I took my seat on Fabia's signal, then struck up some lively
dinner music.
From  where  I  sat,  I  had  an  excellent  view  of  Emperor  Travan,  and  I  studied  him
throughout the meal, paying just enough attention to  Fabia  to  stay  on the  beat.  Various
nobles  attempted  to  attract  the  Emperor's  attention  throughout  the  meal,  and  he  gave
each the barest attention, shrugging  off  the  servile  smiles  everyone  seemed  to  have  for
him. My first thought  was  that  he  was  cold  and  unfriendly,  but  as  the  meal  wore  on,  it
became clear that he was simply miserable, going through the motions because that  was
what was expected of a monarch.
I  could  hear  the  general  murmur  of  conversation  and  the  occasional  high-pitched
giggle, but I could make out no conversation from the musicians' gallery, even during our
breaks. I suspected nothing of  consequence  would  be  discussed  at  such  a  meal  anyway,
but it would have been nice to have that confirmed.
Toward  the  end  of  the  meal  I  moved  my  attention  from  the  Emperor  to  his  guests.
They had seated themselves along color lines, with the gold-clad nobles to the Emperor's
left and the green-clad to his right. I recognized some of the  faces  from  my  visits  to  the
gardens. Valentino's erstwhile lover Sura did not appear to be in attendance. However, as
I scanned the gold-clad nobles, my eyes met those of one of  the  ladies.  Her  eyes  glinted
slightly as she looked at me and I realized that I was looking into the face of Signora Clara.
My own eyes widened involuntarily as I waited for her gaze to move on, but she held my
eyes—she had been watching me, and was not displeased to have been discovered. I had
rehearsed the piece we were playing enough times that my hands  and  fingers  continued
to play, even as my face went hot and cold and I almost panicked. Then Clara  dismissed
me, turning away to talk quietly with the man next to her at the table, and my arms went

watery with relief.
The rest of our performance  passed  without  incident.  We  had  only  been  engaged  for
half  the  banquet,  to  provide  the  guests  with  some  variety.  As  we  packed  up  our
instruments  to  move  out  of  the  gallery  and  let  in  a  small  ensemble  of  woodwinds,  I
noticed one other person looking at me—the Emperor. He looked away quickly when our
eyes met, so quickly that I almost thought I had been mistaken. I looked up hesitantly as
I tightened the last of the buckles of my violin case, and caught him looking at me again.
"Did you see Signora Clara staring  at  you?"  Valentino  asked  as  the  servants  brought
our cloaks to us and escorted us to the palace door.
"No," I said. "Was she?"  Why  was  Clara  staring  at  me?  Did she  suspect?  Why  was
Travan staring at me? What on earth did they want?
"I bet Signora Clara was trying to decide if you'd warm her bed nicely," Valentino said.
"You know, she isn't married."
"I  can't  believe  I'm  her  type,"  I  said.  Could  I  use  the  Emperor's  interest  in  me,
somehow? If I hadn't been imagining things?
"You should give it a try," Valentino said. "You'll never know if you don't."
"I  don't  think  I  want  wine  tossed  in  my  face,"  I  said.  "I  don't  have  many  sets  of
clothes."
"Nothing worthwhile is ever accomplished without risk," Valentino said grandly. "Just
think—Signora Clara as your lover!"
You know what you have to do, Giovanni's voice echoed Valentino's in my mind. You
just need the courage.
It was too late to go to the university district. I bid Valentino good night, and went into
my own room. I went to drop my cloak onto my bed, and smelled something unexpected:
a scent  both  delicate  and  heady.  I  looked  down  to  see  a  sprig  of  winter  jasmine  on  my
pillow. And next to it, a carved wooden whistle, no bigger than my finger.
No, I thought. Not possible.
"I had to come see you," a voice said behind me, and I turned.
It was Mira.
CHAPTER SIX
A teacher of ethics who works as a carpenter?
A King who herds sheep? 
Who has ever heard of something so absurd? 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 4, verse 36.
Discovered. I was discovered. My first impulse was  to  bolt  back  out  the  door,  but  if
Mira intended to have me arrested, she would undoubtedly have guards outside. Drawing
my knife would do me no good, either; I vividly remembered what Mira had done to the
crossbow bolt shot at me, and I was certain she could annihilate a knife, or a person, just

as easily.
Shaking, I turned away from her, and dropped the bar into  place  on my  door.  "What
are you doing here?" I whispered.
"You think I've betrayed you," she said. She summoned  witchlight  with  a  flick  of  her
wrist, illuminating her face with the white glow like moonlight. "You think I've set guards
on you. I have not, Daniele." She spoke my alias with a slight emphasis. "Had I wanted to
betray you, I would have done it last night, instead of leaving roses on your windowsill. Or
this afternoon, when I left the flower beside you at the fountain."
That was you? I was silent.
"I should have stayed away. But when I knew you were so close—I had to see you."
I could not meet her eyes. I couldn't approach her. I turned my face to the wall and let
myself sink to the floor by the door. "How  did  you  get  in?"  I  asked,  finally.  "Our  rooms
are supposed to be private."
"I bribed one of the servants."
"So all the servants will know that a musician had a visit from a mage."
"They'll think I'm your lover. It's not as uncommon as you'd think."
"Quirino had a lover who was a mage," I said.
"Silvia. I know her. She's close to my age."
I still couldn't look at Mira's face, so I studied the witchlight in her hand. It gave off a
soft glow, dimmer than  my  own  witchlight.  Mira  was  doubtless  skilled  enough  to  adjust
the illumination, to provide  a  moonlight  glow  or  the  sharp  brightness  of  the  sun,  as  she
wished. After those many months seeing her avoid magery like poison,  it  seemed  wrong
to see her with witchlight—even knowing the truth. Even having the truth staring  me  in
the face.
She knelt beside me on the floor. "Please talk to me," she begged.
"I don't know what to say to you." Mira tried to touch my hand and I pulled back, still
unwilling to look her in the face. "You—" My throat closed, and I had to stop for a moment
and fight for steady breath.  "When  you  destroyed  the  Lupi,  you  killed  the  ten-year-old
boy who had brought the message that Felice had betrayed us. He was standing in front
of me. I saw him burn to death in the magefire."
"Eliana." Mira whispered my name so softly I could barely hear her. "I volunteered for
the mission to destroy the Lupi. I called in favors, I pulled strings. Because the Lupi were
going down  in flames,  whether  I  was  there  or  not.  And  if  I  were  the  focus,  the  mage
directing the power, I could protect you and as many of the other Lupi as I could."
I said nothing, and after a moment Mira went on.
"How  many  survived  that  night?  I  heard  a  rumor  that  said  about  half,  is  that
accurate?"
I bent my head in a grudging nod.
"Had I not been there that night, please believe that I am not exaggerating when I say
that  at  least  nine  in  every  ten  Lupi  would  have  died.  I  couldn't  protect  all  of  you.  I
protected as  many  as  I  could—and  the  people  I  knew  were  especially  close  to  you,  like
Lucia  and  Giovanni."  Her  hand  closed  over  mine  too  fast  for  me  to  draw  away.  "I  love
you. I spared you as much as I dared."
"If you love me," I whispered, "then why did you leave me?"

Mira pulled her hand back. "You couldn't understand."
I jerked away from her, leaping to my feet and whirling to face her. "To hell with you. I
may not be a mage, but that does not make me your inferior in the eyes of— in the eyes of
anyone  who  counts."  The  words  spilled  out  of  me  like  wine  from  a  cut  wineskin;  with
effort, I forced my voice back to a whisper. "Do you know what I understand? The Circle
killed my family, destroyed Verdia, enslaved me and thousands of others while mouthing
loyalty to the Lady, and slaughtered my army. And you are one of them."
Mira had bowed her head at my onslaught. When I had finished, she said, "You're here
to spy, aren't you?"
"Do you really think I'm going to discuss that with you?"
"No."
"I think you should leave now," I  whispered.  "You  shouldn't  have  come."  I  unbarred
my door and stepped back.
Mira's head was still bowed, and she kept her face turned away from me as she picked
up her cloak and threw it around her shoulders. She didn't say good-bye.
My head was spinning. It was far too late for a casual visit to Michel, but I needed his
counsel.  Should  I  run  now?  It  was  true  that  Mira  could  have  turned  me  in  if  she'd
intended to. But would she turn me in now, after I threw all my anger and hatred into her
face? I shook my head as I picked up my own cloak. She wouldn't. Mira wouldn't betray
me. I needed to talk to Michel. I pulled up my hood and went back out into the night.
As I made my way through the silent midnight streets, I was reminded of the previous
night,  when  I'd  trailed  the  Redentore  to  his  clandestine  meeting.  What  if  Mira  were
following me now? Perhaps she had betrayed me. Maybe the Circle Council had told  her
to come to me and see if I'd be willing to resume our friendship, with the idea of winning
information  from  me  willingly.  I  was  fool  enough  to  fall  for  Felice,  after  all.  What  if
someone  was  following  me  now  to  see  who  I  met  with,  to  catch  Michel  with  me  in  the
same snare?
I paused for a moment to listen for  a  footfall.  And  heard  one,  softly,  a  short  distance
behind me; then no more, as if the follower had frozen when I stopped.
I was being followed. I whirled and ran back  the  way  I'd  come,  drawing  my  knife.  A
cloaked figure had pressed itself into a doorway, hiding in the shadow. I grabbed the cloak
and threw back the hood, and found myself face-to-face with Mira again.
"You followed me," I said.
"It's not safe to talk in the enclave. I wanted to find you outside."
"Then why did you approach me in the enclave in the first place?"
"I was hoping that you'd agree to leave with me once you saw who was there." Mira's
gray eyes were rimmed with red, but her voice was steady now. "But even if you do hate
me—I had to hear you say my name one more time. My true name." She swallowed. "Say
my name, Eliana, that's all I  ask.  I  swear  on all  that's  holy,  I'll  kiss  crossed  twigs  if  you
like, I won't bother you again."
I licked my lips and looked down. "Mir—" My throat closed. I thought of Vitale, dying
before my eyes—of Rafi and Camilla and all the others who'd died. But Mira stood before
me, and when I looked into her face, though I could not forgive her, I couldn't sustain my
rage, either.
"Let's go for a walk," I said.

Cuore was never completely quiet; even late at night, there were people coming home
from taverns,  or  out  on other  errands.  Mira  steered  us  through  streets  of  closed  shops
and  warehouses;  the  homes  of  the  merchants,  above  the  stores,  were  mostly  dark  and
quiet, though we could see the glow of witchlight or the flicker of a candle in a few of them.
I  found  myself  thinking  of  the  conservatory,  in the  hours  before  dawn,  the  night  after
Bella's  murder.  When  Mira  was  ill  the  second  time.  My  hand  strayed  to  the  eagle
medallion,  which  hung  where  Bella's  cross  should  have  been.  At  any  rate,  no  footsteps
followed us; for all practical purposes, we were alone. We could talk freely.
"What  do  you  think  would  have  happened  if  we'd  jumped  the  wall  that  day?"  Mira
asked.
I didn't need to ask which day she meant. "Well, I'd probably have wanted to go home
to visit my family," I said. My throat tightened. I let out my breath; when I spoke again,
my voice was calm, flat. "That's where I went after you left."
"I heard a song about that."
I forced out a sharp little laugh. "Lia makes it sound more heroic than it was—swearing
vengeance on their graves and all that. Really, I gathered up what I could find, and buried
it.  I  played  the  funeral  song.  That's  all.  No  vows,  no  vengeance.  Not  then,  anyway."  I
turned my head to look at Mira's face. "Do you happen to know which mages did it?"
She stopped in the street and turned to face me. "No."
"You say that with a lot of certainty."
"I could have found out.  When  I  first  heard  the  songs,  and  realized  they  were  about
you,  it  would  have  been  easy  enough  to  ask  around.  I  didn't.  Because  I  didn't  want  to
know. I have to see these people every day. And once I knew—" Her  face  was  pale;  her
gray eyes, hard. "I'd have killed them. All of them. As comforting as it would have been to
take vengeance on your family's killers, I guess I thought I was more use to  you  alive.  I
guess my willful ignorance is another thing you can hate me for."
I shrugged and we started walking again. I wanted to hate her for it, but my anger had
spilled and spent itself, at least for now. I tried to  imagine  waking  every  morning  at  the
conservatory knowing that some of the other girl musicians had done unspeakable things,
and fearing to ask who, lest I find out it was Bella, Celia, Flavia, or Giula.  I'd  have  left,  I
thought.
"If we'd jumped the wall that day, I suppose that after we buried my family we'd have
gone down to Ravenna together," I said. "The survivors of the fight were all taken there;
I went because I hoped someone in my family might still be  alive."  I  shook  my  head.  "I
didn't find anyone I knew, but I found some of the reformers  from  the  university.  They
were trying to lead a breakout, but they weren't going about it very well, so I took over."
"Good for you," Mira said. "I've encountered Placido, and I don't much like him."
I bit my lip and looked at her. She arched an eyebrow and for an instant I saw a flash
of  the  smile  I  remembered  from  the  conservatory.  "Oh  yes,  I  know  who  leads  the
reformers. It's not a very well-kept secret. I think the Circle and Fedeli leave him in place
because he's more damaging to his cause than helpful. If they had him executed, someone
competent might take over."
"Teleso  made  that  mistake,"  I  said.  "The  commander  of  the  refugee  camp.  He
executed  the  two  leaders,  and  that  gave  me  the  opening  I  needed.  If  you'd  been  there
with me, it's hard to say what would have happened. Teleso underestimated me; then he
decided  to  court  Guila,  and  she  kept  him  distracted.  If  you  and  I  had  both  gone  to
Ravenna, we might have died together, like Jesca and Beneto."

"Maybe."
"Don't think your magery could have gotten us out of it, either. You can't do magery in
the wasteland."
"I know."
"A friend of mine at Ravenna told me the real cause of the war with  Vesuvia,"  I  said.
"She told me that all it was really over was the perfume trade."
Mira's hands clenched. "Be careful of phrases like 'all it was really over,' " she said. "I,
myself, fought because my family's village could have been the next victim of a raid from
Vesuvia.  Those  raids  really  happened,  and  if  they  meant  nothing  to  the  mages  of  the
Council— well, they meant something to many of the mages. And the soldiers."
I bit  my  lip,  suddenly  outraged  by  her  flash  of  anger.  "Thank  you  so  much  for  your
protection, Miriamne. The Circle protected us  from  the  Vesuviani  like  the  Fedeli  at  the
conservatory protected us from the Maledori."
"We didn't know." Mira's eyes were wide and angry. "How could we have known what
would happen? No one knew until it was too late."
"And then you covered it up."
"Not me."
"The Circle did it, and you're one of them."
Mira's eyes were bright with fury, but she bit down on whatever she had meant to say,
and fell silent. I suddenly found myself remembering our fight  at  the  conservatory,  that
day that I'd reminisced about the kind mage who'd tested my aptitude for magery,  then
given me apples even though I'd failed. Today, here, Mira and I were separated by a rift
that couldn't be bridged by a sprig of winter jasmine.
We reached the river  after  a  few  more  minutes  of  silent  walking,  and  sat  down  on a
slab of stone at the water's edge. The winter rains had raised the river's level; dark water
lapped against the wall built to keep it from flooding Cuore. There was debris in the river,
but  thanks  to  the  rainwater,  the  smell  was  tolerable.  "What  are  you  thinking  about?"
Mira asked.
"I'm  thinking  about  the  nice  mage  with  the  apples,"  I  said,  knowing  that  she  would
know what I meant. "I suppose you had a test like that, too."
"Oh, yes," she said. "But I was older than you were, because my parents had not sent
for him. It was a neighbor who sent a message, and the mage came to our house with an
escort, two guardsmen, to ensure that my parents behaved themselves. He took me for a
walk, and he was kind—very kind! He knew that  my  parents  might  have  warned  me  to
fail the test on purpose.
"So first, he asked me about my family's farm. My parents were typical farmers, so of
course, there was always something we  needed  and  couldn't  afford,  or  couldn't  take  the
time for: a flock of goats, an apple orchard, new boots,  a  new  roof.  So  the  mage  told  me
how much money the parents of a mage-child were sent each month. It was a lot. Enough
to pay for everything I had ever heard my parents wish for.
"Then he spoke a little about Cuore. I was always a restless one. When I was ten, what
I most hoped for was the opportunity to go to  the  conservatory,  because  it  would  mean
leaving  my  home  village  and  perhaps  someday  traveling  a  lot  more.  I  think  he  sensed
that, so he told me about going to Cuore, about the adventures mages had. Then, and only
then, did he test me. He had me make a  witchlight  first,  and  of  course  I  did  that  easily.
Then he had me light a piece of wood. Then he gave me a stone, and asked if I could burn

that.
"You actually don't have to set the stone on fire to be accepted as a Circle initiate. Just
being able to make it hot to the touch is considered good enough, and being able to make
it glow is a fair accomplishment. But I was an older child, and I had at least a little sense of
my own abilities by then. So did the neighbors, for that matter; that's why they'd sent the
letter to Cuore. I laid my hand on the rock and left my palm print. Rock doesn't burn, of
course. It melts. I already knew that, because I'd experimented to find out what  I  could
set on fire."
"And so you became a member of the Circle."
"Yes. And my mother ..." Mira let out a deep breath. "Oh, she was angry. So, so angry.
Initiate mages usually  stay  with  their  parents  for  several  years,  while  a  tutor  comes  to
stay with them, but let's just say I was not a typical case."
"I read your letters," I said.
"Liemo  'forgot'  those,  damn  him.  I  suppose  I'm  lucky  he  remembered  to  bring  my
violin."
On the far bank of the river, I could see someone moving around, dim witchlight in his
hand. The figure picked through some of the debris that had washed out of the river, then
moved on, apparently not finding anything worth keeping.
"There were nights at the conservatory when I dreamed about the war," Mira said. "I
used to wish  I  could  sit  down  by  the  wall,  or  in the  north  practice  hall,  and  talk  to  you
about it." Her voice blurred a little, then steadied. "It was worst in the months after Bella
was killed. I wanted so badly to tell you everything—"
"Why didn't you?" Mira  didn't  answer  right  away,  and  I  heard  the  edge  in my  voice
when I asked, "Or wouldn't I understand?"
"Oh, I think you'd understand." Mira's eyes glinted. "I hate to admit that part of it was
that I didn't entirely trust you. Not—" she raised her hand to cut me off.
"Not  that  you'd  have  told  anyone  who  mattered.  But  few  secrets  were  kept  at  the
conservatory. You'd  have  told  Bella.  Bella  would  have  told  Flavia.  Someone  would  have
written  to  her  parents.  When  I  left  Cuore,  the  Circle  was  trying  to  suppress  the
knowledge of what caused the wasteland by killing as many people as they had to. I was
afraid that as the word began to leak out, they'd trace it back to the conservatory and kill
everyone  there."  She  shook  her  head.  "And  telling  you  just  part  of  the  truth—I  didn't
trust myself. Once I started talking, the whole story would have poured out."
I was silent.
"But those nights I dreamed of the war—of the mud, and the fire, and the fear—it was
hard."
"I had no idea."
"I know."
"And during the war—" Mira tossed a pebble into the river. "We thought of magery as
inexhaustible. Like the ocean, not like a well that could someday run dry. Even now, there
are  mages  who  sincerely  don't  believe  we  caused  it.  After  all,  the  Circle  lives  in  Cuore;
beyond the Circle, there are thousands upon thousands of people who use magery every
day. Why wouldn't Cuore have become a wasteland?"
That was a good question. "Well, why not, then?"
"I think that somehow  something  replenishes  the  energy,  as  rainwater  replenishes  a

well.  When  the  well  is  drawn  on  for  ordinary  things—witchlight,  fires,  even
fireworks—there's plenty to go around. It's only the great magery that drains it dry."
"If the Circle had known, would it have made a difference?"
"Of  course  it  would  have,"  Mira  said.  "The  mages  of  the  High  Circle  aren't  idiots.
They're terrified of the wasteland, of what it means. They'd have found a way to end the
war if they'd known."
"They  must  have  had  some  idea,  though.  The  wasteland  is  all  along  the  border.  It
couldn't have happened all at once—it must have  gotten  harder  and  harder  to  draw  out
the energy."
Mira was silent.
"They didn't know because they didn't want to know," I said.
" 'I can't help those who will themselves to blindness,' " Mira murmured. "That's a line
from the Redentore holy book. The Journey."
"The only other person I know who can quote that is Lucia."
Mira nodded. "There used to be a copy in the Circle library. In the restricted collection,
of course. That's where I read it. I don't know about Lucia."
"Is it still there?"
"I don't know. I've been afraid to look. I'm sure someone watches  to  see  who  goes  to
read it, these days, if it's even still there. Maybe they gave it to the Fedeli to burn it."
I nodded, but I was  thinking  about  Lucia,  not  about  the  book—her  hands,  her  smile,
the light in her eyes when she talked about God. I suddenly wished  more  than  anything
that I could talk to her about Mira. Would she be able to forgive what Mira had done?
"I wish I could meet Lucia," Mira said, as if she'd read my thoughts. "I suppose Giula
did meet her, if she was in Ravenna."
"Yes. She and Lucia didn't really hit it off. Giula hated Giovanni—well, at  the  time,  so
did I, but Giula really hated anyone associated with him, too. And Lucia didn't think much
of Giula."
"What is Lucia like?" Mira asked.
There was a fallen branch in the river,  with  water  swirling  around  it;  I  stared  at  the
swirl  of  white  water,  considering  my  answer.  "She'd  have  gotten  along  very  well  with
Bella," I said. I tried to decide what else to say. Lucia was a dancer, a believer,  a  former
initiate, a daughter of privilege who threw it away to chase  her  God.  But  when  I  turned
my head to glance at Mira, I said, "She's not like me."
Mira nodded, not asking what I meant.
"Are you Redentore?" I asked.
"Here in Cuore? Are you mad?"
"There are groups that meet secretly."
"Do you think they'd welcome a mage into their midst? It's not as if I can abstain from
magery."
"I don't think most Redentori here do. Too dangerous."
"I know you're Redentore," Mira said. "It's in the songs."
"Oh, yeah,"  I  said.  "And  after  all,  they're  accurate  in every  detail;  we've  established
that, haven't we?"

"Are you saying you're not?"
"No,  I'm  not  saying  I'm  not.  I'm  saying  that  you  think  you  know  me  now  because
you've  heard  the  songs.  But  you  don't,  because  those  songs  aren't  about  me.  They're
about someone who's never confused or afraid, and who never hesitates, and who's never
lost.  They're  about  someone  a  lot  more  heroic  and  a  lot  more  certain  than  I've  ever
been."
In the east, the sky was streaked with gray; the sun would be up soon. "I really need
to get back to the enclave," I said, standing up. I  summoned  witchlight  to  light  the  path
and was shocked to see a red stain on the ground where I had been sitting. "What the—" I
twisted around and realized that my clothes were wet with blood. No, soaked with blood.
I'm wounded, I thought. But I hadn't felt any pain. "Lady's tits," I said, my voice shaking.
"Where is this coming from?"
Then  I  realized:  my  courses.  They  hadn't  come  in  months  and  months—not  in
Ravenna, not in the wasteland. I'd heard people say that they'd stop if you weren't getting
enough to eat, so it wasn't surprising. Now  at  the  enclave  I  was  well  fed,  and  here  they
were,  back  for  a  visit.  I  groaned.  "Daniele"  would  hardly  suffer  from  this  problem.  It
would be day by the time I reached the enclave. Could I hide this? I took off my cloak and
looked—no, there  was  no way  to  hide  this.  They'd  returned  with  a  vengeance.  I'd  have
realized hours ago that I was bleeding except that the ground was so damp ...
"Let's get a room at an inn," Mira said. "I'll help you clean up."
There was an area of seedy taverns and inns close by; some never closed their doors,
no matter what time of day it was. Mira paid for a room and carried up a bucket of water.
I could hear someone snoring in the room next to ours; there were people close by, some
sleeping, others maybe not. We would need to watch what we said here.
"I'll  see  if  I  can  get  the  stain  out,"  Mira  said,  setting  the  bucket  on  the  table  in  the
corner. "You may have to walk home wet."
"I  don't  care,"  I  said.  "If  anyone  asks  I'll  say  I  slipped  and  fell  in  a  puddle.  I'll  act
embarrassed and let them assume I was drunk. It's a lot easier to explain than blood."
"Give  me  your  cloak,"  she  said.  "If  we  can  get  the  stain  out  of  this,  it  won't  really
matter about your tunic and hose."
"I should have bought a black one," I said. It was gray wool, and showed the blood like
spilled black ink.
Mira dunked the stained part in the bucket and rubbed the cloth together. I started to
sit down on the bed, then looked at my blood-soaked hose and sat on the floor instead.
"I'm sorry if I assumed too much, based on those songs," Mira said softly. "For so long,
they've been all I had of you."
I felt my face flush and I mumbled something dismissive.
"When I first realized—" Mira rested the edge of the cloak on the bucket for a moment,
thinking back. "I heard just a snatch of one song. Of course, they're forbidden, and no one
will  knowingly  sing  them  for  a  mage,  so  I  put  on  a  dress  and  went  to  the  university
district to hear them. It took me  weeks  of  visits  to  hear  them  all.  My  first  thought  was
that my prayers had been answered. I had wanted so badly to hear news—" Mira paused,
glanced at the door, and lowered her voice. "I'd wanted so badly  to  hear  news  of  Eliana,
and here it was. But then I was horrified when I heard everything she had gone through.
For those around me, Eliana was a folk hero—an abstraction, not someone they knew and
cared deeply about."
I swallowed hard and lowered my eyes.

"I suppose it's silly," Mira said, "but until I heard the songs, I had imagined her still at
the conservatory, with Giula, Celia, and Flavia."
"You really thought she'd stay?"
"The Eliana I knew was always—" Mira paused "— very practical."
There  wasn't  much  I  could  say  to  that.  So  I  asked  her  the  question  that  had  been
burning inside me since the day she rode away with Liemo. "Why did you leave?"
Mira wrung out my cloak and examined it in a flare of witchlight, then dumped it back
in the bucket and came over to sit beside me. She took my hand; her hand was very  cold,
like the water she'd been washing out my cloak in. "Make a witchlight," she said.
"Why?"
"You'll see in a moment why."
I cupped my free hand, willing a tiny glow into the palm.
Light exploded in my eyes as I felt a surge of raw power shoot through every limb  of
my  body;  my  fatigue  vanished  in a  blur  of  exhilaration.  The  witchlight  flared  up  like  a
torch, then went out as I gasped for breath. "What—" My vision was starting to clear, but
I still felt as if I had a thousand pinpricks of light across my body. "What was that?"
"That was magery," Mira said. "That's what it feels like to be a mage, to  channel  real
power."
My head was throbbing: more, I want more, tell her to do it again.
"To make matters worse," Mira said, her voice matter-of-fact, "if one of us stops doing
magery, we get sick. You saw that happen to me twice. Once when I first  arrived  at  the
conservatory, and once after the Fedeli forced me to summon witchlight to prove I wasn't
a Redentore."
I  thought  of  Mira  vomiting  and  convulsing  on  the  floor  of  the  practice  hall.  "I
remember," I said.
"That's why Liemo forced me to use magery. He knew that once I did, my need for it
would  drag  me  back  to  Cuore."  She  squeezed  my  hand,  then  released  it.  "Now  do  you
understand why I left?"
I did, but I didn't. After a moment, I shrugged, and she rose to go back to scrubbing at
the cloak.
"So what happened after that?" I asked. "After you left?"
"I followed Liemo back to Cuore  like  a  whipped  dog,"  Mira  said,  not  looking  up  from
her work. "It was a quiet trip. He didn't gloat; he was afraid that if he did, I'd kill him. My
rooms here in the enclave were exactly as I'd left them, and when I stepped out my door
the  next  morning,  Silvia  greeted  me  without  surprise—it  was  as  if  I'd  never  left.  I  was
expecting that my absence would at least have been a bit of a scandal. Perhaps it was, but
the gossip when I returned was all about a mage who'd adopted a baby." Mira laughed a
little.
"Why is that so scandalous?"
"Well, you know we're all barren. All mages. The priests  say  it's  because  our  sterility
increases the fertility of everyone else—this is goatshit,  of  course.  We  burn  out  our  own
seed just like we burn out the land. Anyway, this one mage  wanted  a  baby  really  badly,
and I guess she found one. She was the talk of the Circle, when I came back."
"Is she still?"

"Oh, no." Mira wrung out the cloak, and turned to look at me. "No, for quite some time
now, the Circle has had more pressing concerns."
"The Lupi."
"Or as most of the mages like to call them, the Cani. Dogs."
"Of course."
Mira laid the wet cloak on the bed and held up a light. "Come look and tell me what you
think."
I  stood  up  to  look.  The  stain  was  faded  but  still  visible.  "Maybe  we  should  ask  for
soap," I said.
Mira sighed. "I'll go  look  for  some.  Wait  here  a  moment."  She  returned  a  short  time
later with a cake of yellow soap. "You know, I think we might have more luck getting the
stain out of your hose."
I felt oddly self-conscious as I shed my clothes. It was ridiculous; I had shared a room
with  Mira  for  six  months.  The  bed  had  a  blanket,  and  I  wrapped  myself  up  in  it  for
warmth. It smelled like old spilled beer. Mira dunked the hose in the water.
"Most of Cuore believes that Eliana is all that sustains the Lupi," she said. "The Fedeli
would have her assassinated if they had the slightest idea where she was."
"Assassinated, hell,"  I  said.  "They'd  have  her  arrested."  I  shrugged.  "I  think  they're
wrong, anyway. Giovanni has his problems, but he could lead the Lupi. He is leading  the
Lupi. Eliana is expendable."
Mira shrugged. "Maybe." She held up the hose:  still  stained.  She  picked  up  the  cloak
again.  "In  any  case,  I  knew  that  the  Circle  would  strike  as  soon  as  the  Lupi  left  the
wasteland. I thought about trying to get a message to them, but I couldn't think of a way
to do it that wouldn't be too dangerous. Besides, I told myself, surely Eliana would know
that the Circle would wait for her and strike as soon as she led the Lupi out."
"Surely," I said, through clenched teeth.
"What happened?"
"There was a traitor, Felice. He brought false intelligence."
Mira nodded, her eyes on the stained cloak.
"Did you know about him?"
"No. At some point during the summer, the conflict between the Fedeli and the Circle
subsided  a  bit;  that  must  have  been  when  they  agreed  to  send  the  spy  down.  I  didn't
know about it. Only the Circle Council would have known." She wrung out the cloak again,
then shook her head. "You know, I think you should just take my cloak, and deal with the
clothes later."
I  pulled  the  sodden  hose  back  on and  then  draped  Mira's  cloak  over  my  shoulders.
Mira was shorter than me, but the cloak was generously cut and I thought the short hem
would be a  great  deal  less  noticeable  than  a  bloodstain.  Mira  shook  her  head.  "I  should
have  thought  of  that  immediately.  Now  you'll  have  to  walk  home  in  soaking  hose;  I'm
sorry."
I  laughed.  "Well,  if  I  get  sick  from  running  around  in  wet  clothes,  like  my  mother
always insisted would happen, I'll send you the physician's bill."
"Well, I'll pay it—though I was trying to be helpful." She fastened the cloak around my
shoulders. It was  made  of  a  much  finer  wool  than  mine,  black  instead  of  gray,  and  was
lined with indigo wool flannel.

"Do you want this back?"
"Not worth the risk of contact. I have extras."
I bundled up my own cloak and tucked it under my arm, and pulled my boots on over
the sodden hose.
"If I had sent a message," Mira said, and she was not talking about the cloak. "If I had
sent  a  message,  it  could  have  been  traced  back  to  me—and  then  I  could  not  have
volunteered to go with four other mages to destroy the Lupi. I wouldn't have been able to
protect my friend." She raised  her  eyes  to  meet  mine.  Her  face  was  very  pale,  and  her
hands were shaking. "I had to protect Eliana. If I hadn't, my sacrifice at the conservatory
would have been for nothing."
"I know," I whispered, but I couldn't erase the image of Mira raining fire on my army
from  my  mind.  I  hesitated  a  moment  longer,  then  said,  "We  can't  meet  again.  It's  too
risky."
"I want to help you," Mira said. "I want to help the Lupi."
"Then tell me a way to turn back magefire."
Mira was silent.
I touched her hand, and then left to return to the enclave.
CHAPTER SEVEN
But what will you find behind the mask?
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter5, verse 10.
Midwinter's Night was approaching: Mascherata, the festival of wild  revelry  honoring
the Lord's victory over  the  Maledori.  Of  course,  Cuore's  celebration  was  rumored  to  be
particularly  debauched,  but  I  was  sufficiently  distracted  that  Valentino  took  me  by
surprise when he asked, a week before the festival, if I had my mask yet.
"No," I said.
"You haven't celebrated Mascherata outside the conservatory, have you?" he asked.
"Well, I did as a child—"
Valentino waved a hand dismissively. "If you haven't celebrated Mascherata in Cuore,
you haven't celebrated Mascherata." He glanced at Quirino. "I'm right, aren't I?"
"Definitely," Quirino said. He looked at me speculatively. "Did  you  have  a  costume  in
mind?"
"Well,  you  know."  Something  discreet  and  inconspicuous,  but  nobody  wanted  to  be
discreet  and  inconspicuous  at  Mascherata.  I  tried  frantically  to  think  of  something
acceptable. "Um, something bright—velvet—with feathers. Why, what were you going  to
wear?"
"A red sash," Quirino said with a wicked smile. "We're both going to dress as Lupi."

My jaw must have sagged. Valentino said, "It's Mascherata! Lots of the nobles will be
dressing as Lupi, too. It'll be fun!"
"Are you going to dress as a woman?" Quirino asked me. Dressing as a member of the
opposite sex was always a popular costume theme at Mascherata.
"I hadn't been planning to," I said.
"Oh,  come  on,"  Valentino  urged.  "You've  got  so  little  beard,  you'd  make  a  great
woman. We could get you a wig when we get your mask—"
"You've got barely  more  beard  than  I  do,"  I  said,  trying  to  hide  my  panic.  "Are  you
going to dress as a woman?"
"I'm already dressing as a Lupo," Valentino said.
"There are women among the Lupi," I said. "Their leader, for one."
"There's  a  thought,"  Quirino  said  to  Valentino.  "Dress  as  Eliana.  A  Lupa  with  a
violin—don't you think that would work?"
Valentino looked at me. "Daniele would make a better Eliana."
This was a really, really bad idea, and I thought frantically for an idea,  any  idea,  that
they  might  like  better.  Or,  failing  that,  an  excuse.  "I'll  go  as  a  Lupo  or  a woman,  but  I
don't want to dress as Eliana. I'd have to carry my violin around all night, and that would
be a nuisance."
"I suppose that's true," Quirino said. "It could get stolen in the crowd."
"Exactly," I said. "Actually, you know, I'd been kind of thinking I'd like to dress up as a
noble. That stupid gray conservatory robe wasn't that long ago for me, you know?"
They laughed. "All right, Daniele," Quirino said. "Just so long  as  you  dress  as  a  noble
lady. You have to have some fun with your costume."
The  next  day,  they  took  me  out  to  one  of  the  shopping  districts  near  the  enclave.
Every  shop  had  turned  into  a  costume  shop,  with  masks,  face  paint,  and  flimsy  but
luxurious-looking  gowns,  tunics,  and  cloaks.  With  Quirino  and  Valentino  inspecting  the
dresses over my  shoulder,  I  picked  out  a  dark  red  one—the  color  of  the  Lupi  would  be
acceptable  on  Mascherata,  clearly—with  an  elaborate  fake  brocade  that  turned  out  to
have been painted on. Then it was on to the wig maker. Mascherata wigs were not made
from real hair, but from an assortment of materials including yarn, feathers, and—for the
extravagant—strands of glass beads. At Quirino's urging, I tried on the wig of glass beads.
"Glass from Varena,"  the  merchant  said,  frowning  because  he  suspected  I  wasn't  really
going to buy it. He held up a mirror.
The  glass  caught  the  light  from  the  late-afternoon  sun,  sparkling  red  and  blue  and
yellow.  The  beads  were  tiny,  threaded  on strands  of  silk  as  long  as  my  arm,  and  they
clicked against each other like pebbles spilling from a cup.
"You should buy it," Valentino said, but I handed  it  delicately  back  to  the  wig  maker
and bought a cheap wig made from black yarn instead.
Our  costumes  and  masks  tucked  under  our  arms,  we  went  down  to  the  university
district to have a drink with Ulisse. Valentino  waved  his  mask  at  Ulisse.  "We've  got  our
costumes. What are you wearing?"
"Guess," Ulisse said with a broad grin, pulling out a chair to sit beside us. We ordered a
round of drinks. Quirino and Valentino discussed the relative merits of two of the soprano
vocalists. I didn't really think either one was pretty enough to mention, and I watched the
crowd, not really listening, trying to decide whether I should come back to the university

district that night to see Michel even though I had nothing new to tell him. Valentino tried
to get me to take sides in the argument, and I demurred; Quirino took this opportunity to
ask  which  female  musician  I  thought  was  prettiest,  and  I  said  I  preferred  not  to  name
names until I'd had the opportunity to take a look at all the female musicians, and I was
fairly certain I'd missed a few in my scant months at the enclave.
When we were ready to go, Ulisse drew me aside, away from Valentino and Quirino. "A
lady asked me to pass this on to you," he said, and handed me a sprig of winter jasmine.
I froze, staring down at the flower. "Did she give you any other message?"
"No," Ulisse said. "She seemed to think you would know what this meant. Was  that  a
tease? Is this some secret admirer?"
"I know who it was," I said, and forced a grin to my lips. "I just need to figure out what
she meant by it." Meet me, presumably. Where? The inn we went to before, I supposed.
"You  have  interesting  taste  in ladies,  Daniele,"  Ulisse  said.  I  couldn't  quite  read  his
expression. I wondered if Mira's status as a member of the Circle had been obvious when
she  passed  her  "message"  to  Ulisse,  but  I  didn't  dare  ask,  and  Ulisse  volunteered  no
further comments.
Tucking the jasmine sprig out of sight, I stammered some thanks and followed Quirino
and Valentino out of the tavern.
I went out that evening to the inn where Mira and I had tried  to  wash  out  my  cloak.
The  downstairs  room  was  loud,  the  crowd  disreputable,  and  the  company—  so  to
speak—inexpensive. I waited uncomfortably, drink in hand, watching the door anxiously.
Mira arrived an hour after I did; she had shed her robes and was wearing a dress. It was
a  simple  dress  of  blue  linen,  but  obviously  well  made,  and  it  made  her  almost  as
conspicuous as the robes would have. She caught my eye, we paid  for  a  room,  and  went
upstairs to talk.
"I hope you aren't angry that I sent you a message," Mira said. "I wanted to warn you,
the Circle knows that the Lupi have left the wasteland."
My heart was suddenly very loud in my ears. "Do they know where they are?"
"No."
My panic eased a bit. "Good."
"They've sent out searchers, to the  areas  near  the  wasteland.  I  don't  know  precisely
where they're looking. But I wanted you to know that they are looking."
"Thank you," I said, although this information did me very  little good. Especially since
I didn't know where the Lupi were, either. I could pass it on to Michel, but it was unlikely
he'd feel he could do anything with it either. "Was there anything else?"
Mira hesitated and looked a little embarrassed. "It's a little thing, but—"  From  under
her cloak, she brought a pair of slender scissors. "You need a haircut," she said.
I touched the ends of my hair. "Why?"
"You don't have a beard. That implies that either you aren't growing facial hair yet, or
you're very  careful about shaving it off. If you were fastidious about shaving it off,  you'd
be getting your hair cut regularly."
I touched my cheek. "I've kind of been hoping to pass as a late bloomer."
"Oh, I think you do. But if you keep your hair trimmed, it's less likely that anyone will
stop to look and wonder."
"You're right."  I  dropped  my  cloak  on the  bed  and  sat  down.  "You've  got  scissors;  I

assume that means you're willing to take care of it."
The bed frame creaked as Mira sat down behind me. As she leaned forward, I smelled
Rosalba—cinnamon and rose petals—and startled so violently I almost fell off the bed.
"What is it?" Mira's hand held a comb with  tiny,  even  teeth,  carved  out  of  bone.  She
had frozen to stillness when I jumped. "Did you hear something?"
"Rosalba," I whispered. "The Fedeli priestess.  I  smell—"  I  looked  around,  realizing  it
was absurd. "For a moment, I thought I could smell her."
"Oh."  Mira  laughed  self-consciously.  "She  must  wear—you  know  the  perfume  that
caused the war with Vesuvia? I thought you might like to know what it smelled like, so I
put some on. Rosalba must wear the same perfume. Sorry, I didn't realize it would inspire
that sort of reaction."
I settled back down, laughing a little shakily.
"Does she frighten you?"
"I'd be an idiot if she didn't." I breathed in the scent again; knowing that it was Mira, I
realized that it smelled subtly different. More cinnamon, and less rose. "It's too bad. It's a
nice scent." I shook my head. "Not nice enough to fight a war over, but a nice scent."
Mira  dipped  the  comb  in  water  and  combed  my  hair  out  carefully.  I  found  myself
thinking about the morning of  the  Viaggio  festival  back  at  the  conservatory,  when  Mira
had  combed  my  hair  for  me,  patiently  easing  out  each  tangle.  My  cropped  hair  barely
gathered tangles now, but Mira's hands were as gentle  as  I  remembered.  Her  fingertips
brushed the back of my neck. The last time we'd touched her hands had been ice cold, but
today they were warm. I could feel the calluses on her fingertips catch in my hair, and she
smoothed my hair back down with her thumb. From the bed, she picked up the scissors.
We'd  had  a  pair  of  sheep-shearing  clippers  in  the  wasteland;  that's  what  Lucia  had
used  to  cut  my  hair.  Mira  must  have  bought  hers  from  a  toolmaker  who  normally
supplied  barbers;  they  were  perfectly  made  and  very  sharp,  and  snipped  through  the
ragged ends of my hair with a soft click. Mira stroked her fingers around the tops  of  my
ears and along the nape of my neck, tracing the line as she cut it.
"There," she said finally. "It's done."
"I  wish  I  had  a  mirror,"  I  said,  touching  my  hair  tentatively.  "I  could  admire  your
work."
"Take a look when you get back to the enclave. I think I did a good enough job, but if
you don't agree, you can always take yourself to a real barber." Mira tucked the scissors
away in a pouch.
Back in my room at the enclave, I examined my  appearance  in the  mirror;  Mira  had
done  an  excellent  job.  I  touched  the  ends  of  my  hair  where  it  curved  around  my  ears,
remembering  Mira's  deft  work,  then  barred  my  door  and  took  her  cloak  out  of  my
wardrobe.  When  I  pressed  my  face  to  the  lining,  I  could  smell  something  like  new-cut
wheat and faint wood smoke—
Mira's scent, without Rosalba's  perfume  covering  it  up.  Mira  had  smelled  like  this  at
the conservatory, too. It was her own scent, and not a perfume.
I  lay  down  on my  bed,  stroking  the  velvet-soft  lining  and  trying  not  to  think  about
anything at all.
* * *

I was sitting in a meadow with Giovanni and Lucia, the  other  Lupi  surrounding  us,
chatting with each other, rolling out blankets to sleep  on,  staring  at  the  birds  and  the
leaves and the creeping bugs.
Then  suddenly  I  heard  shouts,  and  I  looked  up:  the  sky  had  turned  to  rolling,
seething flames, churning over our heads like a red and orange sea.
I leaped to my feet. There, on the hilltop, I could see them: five mages, one with her
hands stretched to the sky.
"Don't do it," I screamed. "Mira, Mira, please, don't do it..."
* * *
I woke, breathing heavily, my face still pressed to the cloak. Had I shouted out loud? I
pressed my hands to my lips, wondering if anyone could have heard me. It was very  late,
and the building around me seemed silent; I pressed my ear to both walls, but  heard  no
one stirring.  Even  if  I  had  shouted  in my  sleep,  I  thought,  trying  to  calm  down,  "Mira,
please  don't  do  it"  wasn't  anything  all  that  incriminating.  If  anyone  asked,  I'd  say  that
Mira was a bully from my home village, someone who'd  hurt  me  as  a  child.  No  one  will
ask, I told myself. No one heard you.
I lay back down, unwilling even after the dream to put the cloak away, and closed my
eyes. I imagined Mira in her own room, in the Circle's citadel. Was she lying awake right
now,  too?  I  rubbed  the  lining,  thinking  of  the  touch  of  her  hands  against  my  neck,  the
calluses on her fingertips catching in my hair.
No— Damn you. I got up and yanked the cloak from my bed, balling it up and stuffing
it into my wardrobe. You destroyed the Lupi. You killed Vitale before my eyes. You—
I lay back down on my bed, breathing hard. It's Lucia I wish I could see, I told myself.
 Not Mira. But as I faded back into sleep, it was Mira's scent I thought of one more time,
and the feel of Mira's hair under my hands.
But then I dreamed of fire again, and woke with my pillow wet from tears.
* * *
On the afternoon of the Mascherata festival, Valentino and Quirino insisted on helping
me with the wig and the face paint. Before letting Valentino and Quirino into my room, I
bound  my  breasts,  then  put  on  the  dress  and  padded  the  chest  with  obviously  fake
material.
Quirino helped to arrange the wig on my head, and feathers in the yarn strands of the
wig. I tied on my mask; below the mask, Valentino painted my lips and cheeks. Finally, I
looked  into  the  mirror.  I  was  relieved;  I  would  never  recognize  myself  as  Eliana,  or  as
female,  or  even  as  human.  Fedeli  priests  traditionally  dressed  as  Maledori  for  the
Mascherata festivities; I could probably pass for one as well.
Valentino and Quirino had both dressed as Lupi.

Valentino was also dressed as a woman, sort of—he wore men's clothing, but with a wig
of long, dark hair. I decided not to ask if he was supposed to be dressed as Eliana. Quirino
wore a rough brown tunic with a sash of wine-red velvet. When they were done with me,
Valentino  and  Quirino  both  tied  on their  masks.  Quirino's  was  tinted  red,  to  match  his
sash; Valentino's was plain white, like mine.  "Come  on,  ladies,"  Quirino  said,  offering  his
left arm to Valentino and his right arm to me. I watched Valentino carefully to see how he
took Quirino's arm. This was ridiculous; I could give myself away by playing a woman too
convincingly.  Or,  I  could  give  myself  away  by  failing  to  play  a  woman  convincingly
enough,  and  raising  someone's  suspicions  enough  to  take  a  good  hard  look  at  me.  It
probably would have been best to get sick the week before Mascherata and stay sick until
after the festival was over, but it was too late now.
The Mascherata festival was celebrated in the streets of Cuore; we all tucked our eagle
medallions inside our costumes and left the enclave. The streets were brightly lit. Torches
leapt and witchlight gleamed, and bonfires burned in the center of every intersection.
"Do they really run wine in the fountains instead of water?" I asked Quirino, shouting
to be heard over the din in the street.
"No,"  he  shouted  back.  "There's  no shortage  of  wine,  though,"  and  he  handed  me  a
flask.
Yet another thing to worry about; drink myself to insensibility and get found out that
way. Or draw attention by staying sober. I took a careful swig and passed the flask back
to Quirino.
Back  during  Dono alia  Magia,  in Ravenna,  Giovanni  had  described  the  revelries  that
took place in Cuore. The Circle made colored lights in the sky, he said. As we rounded the
corner, I saw what he  meant;  vast  colored  flowers  bloomed  suddenly  in the  dark  night.
"Oooh!" Valentino said, and stopped to look.
Three  mages  stood  on  the  street  corner,  clasping  raised  hands.  Two  wore  ragged
tunics made of scraps of stitched-together velvet, carefully frayed at the edges. The third,
a woman, wore nothing but her mask. "Isn't she cold?" I whispered to Quirino.
"Mages doing magic don't get cold," he said. "My old lover Silvia told me that."
When the colors faded, the mages bowed, passed a wine flask, and stumbled off down
the street, already thoroughly drunk.
"Come on," Valentino said. "There's dancing in the market piazza. Ulisse said he'd look
for us there."
"How's he going to recognize us?" I asked. Valentino just laughed.
The market piazza was ringed with masked men and women beating drums, mostly on
a regular beat. Despite the masks, I thought I recognized some of them as musicians from
the enclave.
"Dance with me, signora!" commanded a strange woman dressed  as  a  man.  I  clasped
her  hands  as  she  pulled  me  away  from  Valentino  and  Quirino.  We  spun  back  into  the
crowd. I thought of the  time  I'd  danced  with  Mira,  in the  class  on courtly  graces  at  the
conservatory. This woman danced with far more skill than Mira, but less grace. At least it
was easy to follow her lead. She had drawn  a  moustache  onto  her  upper  lip,  and  played
the rude rogue throughout the dance, squeezing the padding I'd stuffed into the dress to
mimic  a  bosom.  I  slapped  the  hand  away  with  a  cry  of  mock  indignation.  We  tussled
briefly,  then  she  dropped  my  hand,  announcing  that  she  would  find  a  lady  who
appreciated a fine lusty gentleman.
I had lost track of  Valentino  and  Quirino,  which  was  just  fine  with  me,  since  without

them I could try to fade into the paving-stones. I started for the  edge  of  the  crowd,  but
someone else grasped my arm. This time, it looked like a genuine man. "Would you do me
the honor of dancing with me, signora?" he asked. His velvet tenor was oddly familiar, but
I couldn't place it. Perhaps he was a noble that I'd played for.
"But of course, signore," I said. "I am always happy to dance with a gentleman." I took
his arm as awkwardly as I could, and he spun me back toward the center of the dancers.
My  new  partner  was  an  excellent  dancer;  he  danced  rather  as  I  imagined  Michel
would,  if  I  had  ever  danced  with  him.  He  was  confident  enough  to  lead  me  in  a
complicated  series  of  twirls  and  flourishes,  and  skilled  enough  to  ensure  that  I  never
stepped on his feet. I worried, as  we  danced,  that  I  should  be  more  clumsy  than  I  was,
dancing  the  woman's  part—but  to  deliberately  misstep  in  the  hands  of  such  a  skilled
partner  seemed  like  it  would  be  more  suspicious  than  decently  competent  dancing.
Besides,  I  had  danced  both  a  girl's  part  and  a  boy's  part,  learning  to  dance  at  the
conservatory. Undoubtedly the boys had done the same in their classes.
My partner  wore  a  red  sash  with  a  black  tunic,  and  a  mask  that  covered  almost  his
entire  face.  He  was  short  and  a  little  stout,  with  boxy  shoulders.  But  he  was
unquestionably a nobleman; his hands were even softer than Mira's. I wondered suddenly
if he might be a mage. Well, if he were, I'd give him the slip as soon as I could.
"Would  you  care  to  rest  for  a  bit,  signora?"  he  asked  some  time  later.  I  nodded;  I
wasn't out of breath yet, but my legs were tired. He steered us through the crowd to one
of the less-crowded streets. "You play the violin, do you not?" he asked me.
"Yes, signore," I said.
He held up my hand and brushed my fingertips lightly with his own. "I could tell from
your calluses."
I gave him what I hoped was a boy's imitation of a girl's flirtatious smile. "You're very
observant, signore."
"Sit and drink with me," he said, so I followed him to a quiet spot off the main street,
and we sat down in the shadows. He gave me a flask of wine and I took a cautious sip. It
was excellent wine, some of the best I'd ever had. I took another swallow,  then  another,
then passed it back.
"I love Mascherata," he said. "It's my favorite night of the year."
"You love to hide, then?" I said.
"I hate to hide," he said. "It's only  with  the  mask  on that  I  can  be  my  true  self."  He
turned his head to look at me. With the mask that covered his whole face,  I  couldn't  see
whether or not he was smiling; it unnerved me.
"Strange,"  I  said.  The  wine  was  strong;  just  the  little  I  had  drunk  was  making  me
light-headed. "My mask makes me feel exposed. I'm afraid of what I might reveal."
"What does it matter?" he said. "With your mask on, no one will know who you are."
I smiled at him and shrugged.
He clasped my hand and bowed to me briefly. "Dance with me, signora."
I  stood  up  again  and  we  danced  slowly  in  the  alleyway,  moving  to  the  pulse  of  the
now-distant drums, as I had once danced with Mira. "Tell me who you are not," he said to
me.
"I am not a Fedele priest," I said. "Nor am I gentle-born. Who are you not?"
"I am not a mage," he said. "Nor am I a musician." He traced my face with one hand.

"Come with me," he said, and so I followed him again, as he led me through the alley, and
through another alley, and another. We were alone in the darkness. He stroked my arms,
running his hands along the velvet. "Tell me what you are," he said.
"I am a musician," I said. "Tell me what you are."
"I am a man who loves other men." He laid his hand on my face gently. "Are you as I
am?"
I froze. "I think," I said, and my voice squeaked, "that I am not as you think me."
He dropped his hand and turned away. "Refuse me without fear," he said. "I'm a fool."
"No—"  I  said.  The  sadness  in his  voice  was  heartbreaking.  "It  isn't  that.  I  find  you
very—" I paused. "I actually really am a woman."
The alley was dead silent for a long moment. Then witchlight flared in the man's hand,
as he turned to study me. I couldn't read his expression  behind  the  mask,  and  began  to
feel frightened. With the hand that wasn't holding the witchlight, he reached up and in one
smooth motion pulled my mask off. "Daniele," he said. "I was right, it is you."
Someone knows. Someone knows  my  secret.  My  mind  soared  into  panic,  and  I  did
the first thing that occurred  to  me.  Ripping  my  knife  from  its  concealed  spot  under  my
skirt,  I  launched  myself  toward  the  man.  He  was  drunk  and  unsteady  already,  and  I
knocked him flat on his back in the alley.
"Wait—" he said, his words garbled with fear. "Wait, Daniele—"
Holding my knife to his throat, I tore his mask off.
And stared into the face of the Emperor.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Knock and the door shall be opened. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 4, verse 26.
My  stomach  lurched.  "Oh  my  God,"  I  said.  My  words  came  back  to  me  a  heartbeat
later and my stomach lurched again. Now I  had  really  done  it.  My  knife  was  trembling,
and I couldn't tell if it was Travan or me that was shaking. I couldn't kill the Emperor; he
was  the  one  that  I  had  desperately  hoped  for  an  opportunity  to  get  on  my  side.  But  I
couldn't let him live. He knew everything.
I held the knife-edge at his throat, paralyzed by fear.
"Wait, Daniele," Travan said. "Don't you know me?"
"You're the Emperor," I said.
Travan stared up at me desperately, shaking his head, "I am one of you."
I stared at him in disbelief.
Travan licked his lips and his voice sank to an even fainter whisper. "I am Redentore.
You spied on the Mass when I was there. I kept the others from killing you."

I  dropped  the  knife.  Gathering  my  skirts  around  me,  I  climbed  off  of  the  Emperor.
"Your Imperial High—"
"Shhh,"  he  said.  "There  are  people  about,  and  anyone  might  overhear.  Call  me
Travan."
My mouth was dry. "I'm so sorry—"
Travan sat up wearily and leaned against the building. With one hand, he  clasped  my
skirt and tugged, urging me to sit again. I sat down beside him.
"I've been watching you since before you visited the Mass," Travan said. "I knew who
you were when I approached you in the piazza. I'd thought for some time that you might
be  like  me."  He  formed  a  light  and  studied  me  again,  then  flicked  the  light  away.  "You
make a rather attractive boy, you know."
I swallowed hard and tried to convince my head to stop spinning long enough to let me
speak.  "Travan,"  I  said.  "You  have  the  courage  to  defy  the  Fedeli,  to  follow  your
conscience and the true God. Do you  have  the  courage  to  defy  the  Circle?  If  it's  not  for
nothing?"
Travan turned toward me. "You're one of the Lupi," he said.
"Yes,"  I  said.  Travan  was  silent,  so  I  took  a  deep  breath,  then  another,  and  started
talking. "You know that your father was murdered by his political enemies. And you know
that could happen to you; both the Circle and the Fedeli are looking for ways to force your
hand. You're caught between them but you don't have to be. You could rule in truth, and
not just in name. You could take revenge on those who arranged the death of your father.
If you have the courage to join us. If you have the courage to defy the Circle."
Travan met my eyes, and I saw fear in them, but also trust. "Who are you?" he asked.
Please, God, let this be the right thing to do, I thought. "Eliana," I said. "I'm Eliana."
"If you're Eliana, what are you doing here?" he said. "Why aren't you with the Lupi?"
"The  opportunity  presented  itself  to  send  a  violinist,"  I  said.  "I  was  a  conservatory
student, once. And— before I left, the Circle had nearly destroyed my army."
"I  had  heard  that,"  Travan  said,  and  looked  away.  "So  why  should  I  join  a  losing
cause—even one that offers me a true throne?"
"With  you  on our  side,  everything  would  be  different,"  I  said.  "The  army  is  loyal  to
you. And the Circle fears them—for  good  reason.  Without  soldiers  for  protection,  mages
are vulnerable. We could make this work."
"If  I  take  your  side,"  Travan  said,  "the  Circle  and  the  Fedeli  will  cooperate  in  my
murder."
"You'll have to leave Cuore," I said. "Tonight, if you're willing. I have people here who
can slip you out."
Travan hesitated. "And if I'd like to think this over?"
"You are the Emperor," I said. "I will await your decision."
Travan was silent again for a few moments. Then, "Tell me this," he said. "Would the
Lupi truly support me against the Circle?"
"I swear in Gèsu's name," I said. "We would support you."
Travan nodded. "Then I'll do it."

* * *
The  tavern  where  I  normally  met  with  Michel  would  be  closed  for  the  evening's
revelries, but with luck Michel would not have gone far. Travan and I tied our masks back
on and made our way through town. My head was still reeling, and I knew that both my
wig and my false breasts were askew.
The streets seemed to be full of Lupi, but if my soldiers had ever gotten this drunk, I'd
have  tossed  the  lot  of  them  into  the  stockade.  I  kept  seeing  familiar  people  in  the
featureless crowds. Three times, I was certain I saw Lucia. Twice, I thought I saw Felice.
And once it was my mother I saw, dancing with a young man in the street that  ran  past
the tailor's shops. I nearly cried out, but then she turned and I realized that it was a man.
When we reached the streets near the university, I feared that Travan was losing his
nerve. "Just a little farther," I whispered. "Wait here while I find Michel."
Travan nodded and slipped into a shadowed doorway. I could drag Travan  out  of  the
city myself, but Michel and Placido could provide us with horses, which we'd need to have
Travan a safe distance away by morning. I realized with  dismay  that  my  violin  was  still
back  at  the  enclave.  Well,  if  I  didn't  have  a  chance  to  go  back  for  it,  I'd  leave  it.  The
Emperor was more important than any instrument, and besides,  my  old  violin  was  with
Lucia.
Michel was nowhere to be found, but I spotted—of all people—Ulisse. "Ulisse," I hissed.
He stumbled over, flask in hand, giggling at the sight of me. "Shh, this is serious," I said. "I
need to talk to Placido. Do you know where he is?" Michel would probably be close by.
"Yeah, maybe," Ulisse said, looking vaguely around  the  crowd.  "That's  right,  he's  the
next street over. Least he was a little while ago."
"Thank you," I said, and started to pull away.
"Hey," he said, pulling me back toward him. "Don't you have a kiss for the gentleman?"
I  gave  Ulisse  a  swift  kiss  on  the  cheek.  "I'll  see  you  later,  Ulisse."  Someday,  Ulisse
would find out who I really was. The thought made me smile.
The university reformers seemed to be celebrating Mascherata together. More than a
few had jumped at the opportunity to dress as Lupi, with red-tinted masks like Quirino's.
They  were  dancing  to  drum  music,  with  some  music  provided  by  a  violinist  who  was
having trouble keeping up with the beat. The dancers had formed a circle, as if they were
celebrating Mass, but they weren't dancing in unison.
Even masked, Michel was easy to recognize; no one danced like him. He had  gleefully
dressed  as  a  Lupa,  a  wig  of  long  dark  hair  held  in place  with  red  ribbons.  I  clasped  his
shoulder and he did a double-take. "El— Daniele?" he hissed.
"Yeah, it's me. Michel, you're not going to believe this, but I've got an ally who needs to
get out of Cuore tonight, on the fastest horse we can find."
"Why wouldn't I believe it?" Michel was much less drunk than his companions. I drew
him back toward where I'd left Travan.
I glanced past Michel's shoulder, then over mine, and leaned closer to him. "The ally is
Emperor Travan."
"Tr—you're not serious!"
"lam."

Michel's face lit. "This will change everything."
"Only if we can get him safely out of Cuore and hide him well enough that we can keep
him safe. I want to take him to the wasteland. We don't have to fear the Circle there, and
the Emperor commands the army, so—"
"I don't know how you do it, Daniele," Michel said. "A horse? That's what you said you
need?  For  this  kind  of  support,  I'd  get  you  horses  if  I  had  to  steal  them  from  my
grandmother."
"Can we just get some from Placido? We'll need six horses—two for each of us—or else
three horses and money to buy three more."
Michel nodded. "Yeah. Placido's an ass but I think I can get him to do  this.  Stay  here
for a minute."
I  leaned  against  the  rough  stone  wall  of  a  shop  as  Michel  vanished  back  into  the
dancing crowds. My legs were aching, I realized, from too much dancing. What  time  was
it? How many hours till dawn? Probably quite a few.
Michel was coming back with Placido at his side. Placido was dressed in a black velvet
tunic  with  a  flame-red  velvet  sash.  Instead  of  a  simple  white  mask,  he  wore  a  stylized
mask made to look like the face of a wolf. It was probably  the  most  impressive  costume
I'd seen all night, but I found myself suppressing a laugh. If this was how he imagined the
Lupi,  how  did  he  imagine  Eliana?  Michel  caught  my  eye  as  he  led  Placido  toward  me.
"Daniele, I've told him that you're our contact."
Placido's beady eyes glared at me from behind his mask.
"Have you told him what I need?" I asked Michel.
"Yes,"  Michel  said.  "He  says  he's  willing  to  provide  horses,  but  he  wanted  to  meet
you."
I turned back to Placido. "It's a pleasure to make your acquaintance, signore," I said.
"I'd like to see your face, if I may," Placido said.
I took off my mask. He stared at me a moment longer.
"And your face, signore?" I said.
Grudgingly, Placido untied his elaborate mask and took it off. His face was flushed red
from wine and dancing.
"Since  you're  leaving  so  soon,"  Placido  said,  "would  you  be  so  kind  as  to  inform  me
your real name? I may find myself needing to seek out your assistance myself, sooner or
later."
"Ask for Daniele, if you need our help," I said.
Placido gripped my arm, shaking his head. "That's not good enough." His face was close
to  mine,  and  I  could  smell  his  dank  breath,  and  feel  the  faint  spray  of  his  spit  on  my
forehead. "If you wish any  further  assistance  from  us,  you  will  tell  me  exactly  who  you
are."
Michel had reached for his knife, and I shook my head at him.  There  was  no point  in
alienating Placido, and my identity hardly mattered at this point; I was leaving Cuore  as
soon as we got horses. And I didn't think Placido was a spy. "I am Eliana," I said.
Placido's grasp sagged, then tightened again. "You expect me to believe that?"
"Believe  it  or  not;  your  choice,"  I  said.  "It's  true.  Now,"  I  jerked  my  arm  free  and
straightened up, "go get our damn horses before someone comes to investigate."

Placido flinched back slightly, and his eyes narrowed. With careful precision, he tied his
mask back on.  "Six  horses  will  be  waiting  for  you  at  the  southern  edge  of  Cuore  in one
hour," he said, and walked away.
"Can we trust that?" I asked Michel.
Michel hesitated, then nodded. "Whatever else you can say about Placido, he's on our
side. Even if he really doesn't believe you, he won't screw this up for us."
"Come on, then," I said. "Let's get Travan."
To my relief, Travan still waited where I'd left him.
He was masked, so it was hard to guess his expression, but his eyes seemed relieved to
see me again. "Is everything arranged?" he asked.
I nodded. "Horses will be waiting. We'll take you to where the Lupi are wintering, then
down to the wasteland, where  the  mages  can't  attack  us.  Let's  head  for  the  edge  of  the
city; it will take us close to an hour just to walk there."
"Your violin?" Michel asked me.
I shook my head. "Leave it. It's too risky to  go  back  in."  I  glanced  over  my  shoulder
and  lowered  my  voice,  so  that  just  Michel  and  Travan  could  hear  me.  "Where  are  the
Lupi wintering?"
"Lucia and Giovanni are in Montefalco," Michel said. "It was destroyed during the war,
but it's not actually in the wasteland. It'll be a little out of our way to go there, but not too
much."
"Maybe  we  should  just  go  straight  to  the  wasteland,  and  then  I  can  double  back,"  I
said.
"That might be a good idea," Michel said. "So long as one of us has coin enough to buy
food. There isn't going to be any down in the wasteland."
The  streets  were  less  crowded  now;  wine  and  exhaustion  had  claimed  many  of  the
dancers.  The  costumes  changed  as  we  made  our  way  through  town.  In  the  university
district,  we  were  surrounded  by  drunken,  velvet-clad  Lupi.  Beyond  that,  we  found
ourselves in a crowd of beggars clothed in scraps of red and purple. Then came a mass of
Maledori; there were masks of hook-beaked birds and strange hybrids of dog and cat.
"Daniele!"
Michel and Travan fell back a step; from the corner of my eye, I could see Michel draw
Travan into the shadows of a doorway, but I didn't dare look. The person who'd called to
me wore ragged red robes and a mask with swirls of color painted on it. I  wouldn't  have
known her by sight, but I recognized her voice: "Rosalba?"
"What are you doing here?"
There was only one answer to that. "Looking for a good party," I said.
Rosalba laughed, a light crystal tinkle. "You've found one!"
From behind the mask, I could see her eyes start to stray past my shoulder. Oh no, I
thought. If she recognized me, she could recognize the Emperor. I dodged in front of her
and clasped her shoulders to keep her still. "Actually—to tell the truth—I was looking for
you."
I  could  see  her  smile  even  from  behind  the  mask.  "Really?"  She  ducked  her  head  a
little shyly. "I was rather hoping you were."
"You know—" I could  hear  Michel's  breathing  behind  me,  quick  and  frightened.  "I'm

kind of tired. Were you thinking of heading back to the enclave anytime soon?"
Rosalba's  hand  found  mine.  "I'll  walk  back  with  you  now,  if  that's  where  you're
headed."
When  Rosalba  turned  away,  I  spared  one  quick  glance  back  at  Michel  and  Travan.
"Go," I mouthed at Michel.
Michel gave me the tiniest of salutes and nodded. Michel would make it work; I could
trust  him.  If  I  couldn't  catch  up  with  them,  I'd  come  up  with  something.  Besides,  this
would give me the opportunity to get the violin.
The enclave  was  dark  and  quiet.  Rosalba  held  my  arm  close  to  her  as  we  ducked  in
through  the  gate;  the  guard  gave  only  a  cursory  glance  at  our  medallions.  I'd  hoped
Rosalba might head off to her own quarters once we were back, but she followed me back
to  my  room.  "Could  you  give  me  just  a  moment?"  I  asked  when  we  reached  the  door.
"This is not the world's most comfortable costume."
"I'll wait out here," Rosalba said. "Just open the door when you're ready."
I closed the door and  hesitated  for  a  moment.  Barring  the  door  would  be  suspicious;
why  would  I  distrust  Rosalba?  But  if  she  opened  the  door  while  I  was  unclothed—I
slipped  the  bar  into  place,  but  very,  very  quietly.  The  bindings  over  my  breasts  were
secure,  so  I  pulled  on  a  tunic  and  hose,  quickly  splashed  the  paint  off  my  face,  and
checked my appearance in the mirror. Then I opened the door.
Rosalba had taken off her mask, and she held it by the string. The ragged red robe she
wore was luminous in the witchlight that glowed in her hand. She smiled, a little shyly, as
she came in and sat down.
I put the kettle over the fire and poked the fire up a bit. "I'll make us some tea," I said.
"Thank you," Rosalba said.
We waited silently for the water to heat. Rosalba tucked her legs up against her on the
chair, studying me gravely as I stared at the kettle. I glanced at her after a few minutes,
to see  if  she  was  still  staring  at  me.  She  was,  but  lowered  her  eyes  quickly.  Finally  the
water  was  ready.  I  made  the  tea  and  poured  a  cup  for  each  of  us,  sitting  down  on  the
other chair. "Did you have a good time tonight?" I asked.
"Oh, yes," Rosalba said. Then she shrugged. "Mascherata isn't my favorite holiday. I'm
not really one for crowds."
"Me either," I said. "It's probably because we grew up in the country."
"That could be it,"  Rosalba  said.  She  sipped  her  tea,  and  looked  at  me  over  the  rim.
"How did you celebrate Mascherata at the conservatory?"
Unbidden, the image of the Fedele priest cutting Bella's throat rose before my eyes. I
turned away from Rosalba to poke at the fire, hoping that she  hadn't  seen  my  face.  The
Fedeli  had  come  to  the  Verdiano  Rural  Conservatory  last  Midwinter—not  to  the
conservatory in Pluma, where Rosalba thought I was from. "It's different," I said, when I
thought  I  had  control  over  my  voice  again.  "We  had  a  chapel  service,  and  we  all  made
masks, but boys and girls were kept separate. There wasn't a lot of wine. They wanted us
to behave ourselves. "
Rosalba  nodded.  "At  the  seminary,  they  kept  a  pretty  tight  lid  on  us  even  at
Midwinter," she said.
Rosalba fell silent again, and I decided I was content to let the conversation lag. As long
as I wasn't talking, I wasn't going to make any stupid mistakes.

Rosalba spoke again after a few minutes. "I heard a rumor the other day that I might
get reassigned."
"To what sort of job?" I asked. "Can you talk about it?"
Rosalba shook her head. "No. But, it would mean leaving the enclave. And it would be
much more interesting than transcribing confessions."
"Great!" I said, flashing her a bright smile. "That's what you were hoping for, right?"
Rosalba nodded. "I'll finally be doing what I felt I was  called  to  do,"  she  said.  "But—"
She sighed. "I'll miss you, Daniele."
"Oh—I'll  miss  you,  too,  Mother  Rosalba.  But  I  know—well,  not  that  you  didn't  like
transcribing. But there are so many people who could do it. And you—"
Rosalba  smiled  into  my  eyes.  "Daniele,  you  know,  I  think  you're  the  only  person  in
Cuore who understands me."
"That can't be true," I said.
Rosalba  leaned  over  and  took  my  hand.  Her  fingers  were  surprisingly  cold,  as  if  she
was nervous about  something,  and  she  stroked  my  hand  gently.  "I'm  so  glad  you  came
looking for me tonight," she said. Then she leaned forward and kissed me.
Her  lips  were  warm  and  tentative,  and  as  soft  as  rose  petals.  I  could  smell  her
cinnamon-rose  perfume.  Her  hand  still  gripped  mine;  her  fingers  were  icy  cold.  For  a
moment I started to kiss her  back—then  panic  swept  through  me  and  I  pulled  away  so
sharply that I nearly fell out of my chair.
"M-mother Rosalba, I can't," I said. "It would be wrong. I'm not a priest."
Rosalba  pulled  back.  "No,  it's  all  right,  Daniele.  One  of  the  privileges  of  the  Fedeli
priesthood in Cuore is that we can sleep with who  we  please;  we  aren't  paired,  since  we
don't have churches. But if you don't want to, if you don't find me appealing—"
"Rosalba—"  I  tried  to  pick  myself  up  with  something  resembling  dignity.  "Mother
Rosalba, you're the most beautiful  woman  I've  ever  met.  But  I  hadn't  realized—  I  need
some time to think about it. To pray about it." I found the excuse I'd been fishing for, and
I  heard  my  voice  steady  with  relief.  "I  hadn't  realized  the  rules  were  different  here,  I
hadn't allowed myself to think about the possibility of—"
Rosalba was studying me carefully. "That's understandable, Daniele." To my relief, her
eyes  no  longer  showed  hurt,  although  I  couldn't  quite  read  what  they  did  show.  She
smiled tentatively. "I can always tell when a boy finds me beautiful," she said. "So I was a
little startled that you pulled away. But that makes sense."
I sat back and took a gulp of my tea.
Rosalba looked around my room. "I don't suppose you'd play something for  me?"  she
asked.
"I'd be happy to," I said. Playing would mean I wouldn't have to talk with her. Or kiss
her. I tuned my violin and set it on my shoulder. "Any requests?"
"Play me some dance music," she said. "Like in the streets."
I struck up one of the tunes I'd heard earlier in the evening, and Rosalba rose to dance
to my playing. She moved more slowly than the frenzied dancing I'd seen  in the  streets.
She  had  a  graceful,  deliberate  style,  and  she  covered  a  lot  of  ground,  using  the  whole
room.
When  I  finished  the  piece,  Rosalba  sighed.  "You  know,  I  really  am  quite  tired,"  she
said. "I'm going to go home and sleep for what's left of the  night.  Are  you  going  to  come

play for me tomorrow?"
I bowed deeply. "I play at your pleasure, signora."
"I'm  honored.  Well.  I'll  see  you  tomorrow,  then."  Rosalba  took  my  hand,  then  very
tentatively kissed my cheek. I smelled rose and cinnamon, then she paced quickly out of
the room.
I closed  the  door  quietly.  Thank  God,  thank  God.  If  I  hurried,  Michel  might  still  be
waiting. I buckled my violin into its case, barely slowing to loosen the strings, and threw in
all my sets of spare strings, since they were impossible to get in the  wasteland.  It  didn't
take me long to pack; almost everything was gathered together neatly, since I'd known I
might  have  to  leave  quickly.  My  money,  my  old  clothes,  my  violin—there  wasn't  much
else  I  needed.  I  bundled  everything  together,  waited  another  few  minutes  to  be  sure
Rosalba would be out of sight, wrapped my cloak around my shoulders, and headed out.
I  walked  to  the  gate  as  fast  as  I  could  without  drawing  attention.  The  gate  I  used
wasn't far from the musicians' quarters. I could see the metal of the gates glinting a little
in the last of the moonlight. The guard was even awake. "I'd like to leave, please," I said.
The  guard  stood.  "You'll  have  to  wait  a  moment,  signore,"  he  said,  not  unkindly.  He
looked past me into the shadows. "This who you meant, Mother?"
Rosalba stepped out. "Yes," she said.
I felt a cold wave of fear wash over me. "What's wrong, Mother Rosalba?"
She folded her arms and stepped forward. "Where are you going?"
"Back out to the party."
"Without a mask?" She poked at the bundle on my back. "That's more than just your
violin."
I met Rosalba's eyes challengingly. "I'm meeting a young lady," I said. "I promised her
I'd spend the night. I'm sorry. I didn't want to hurt your feelings."
Rosalba's  lips  tightened;  her  face  was  white.  She  addressed  the  guard.  "I  apologize,
signore. There's a servant of the Fedeli whose services I need. Would you be so kind as to
help me escort this man to the Citadel?"
"There's the gate—"
"There are other gates. Lock this one and come with me, on my authority."
I  had  a  terrible  feeling  I  knew  who  the  "servant  of  the  Fedeli"  would  be.  Rosalba
couldn't possibly have warned all the gatekeepers to watch for me, so as this guard turned
away to lock the gate, I dropped everything I was carrying and started to run. I had run
perhaps twenty paces when something solid and heavy hit my back, throwing me  to  the
ground. I'd been tackled, the wind knocked out  of  me.  The  guard  hauled  me  to  my  feet
and pinned my hands behind my back.
"Citadel, you said?" he asked Rosalba. She nodded.
It was a long, cold walk. Someone was leaving the Citadel as we approached it. Rosalba
quickened her step to intercept him—apparently, it was the "servant of the Fedeli" she'd
mentioned before.  He  followed  her  over  to  where  I  waited  with  the  guard—and,  with  a
muffled exclamation, flipped back his hood. I stared into a pretty, boyish face framed by
blonde curls. Felice.
Momentarily forgetting Rosalba, Felice stepped in closer. "Remember me?" he asked.
"You son of a bitch!" I shouted, and tried to tear my arms free. The guard jerked my
arms behind me and I cried out involuntarily.

Felice laughed. "Rosalba, you've caught a bigger  fish  than  I  think  you  ever  imagined.
This  is  Eliana—  Getter  ale  Eliana."  He  bowed  toward  me  mockingly,  then  stepped  in
closer. "You'd better talk nice to me now, Generale. You're under arrest."
I leaned back against the guard, trying to make it look like I was shrinking away from
Felice.  He  advanced  one  more  step.  That  was  all  I  needed.  Leaning  back  against  the
guardsman for balance, I kicked out with one foot as hard as I could. "Hope  you  weren't
planning on having babies, traitor!" I hissed, as Felice screamed in pain.
The guard yanked me backward so hard he almost dislocated my arm, then drew back
his fist  to  hit  me,  but  Rosalba  put  her  hand  on  his  arm.  "No,"  she  said,  and  her  voice
shook. "She's ours, and  we  want  her  in one  piece."  Rosalba  turned  to  me,  and  her  eyes
were bright with fire. "So that we can properly return her to the Lady."
CHAPTER NINE
Reach for me, and I will take your hand; 
I will give you all that you need. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 7, verse 22.
The Fedeli guards pulled a hood over my head; I wasn't sure if  it  was  to  disguise  my
identity as they took me into the Citadel, to keep me from seeing my route to the prison
below,  or  just  to  disorient  and  frighten  me.  I  didn't  know  when  Rosalba  left  me;  Felice
stayed back on the steps of the Citadel, still hobbled. I made a tentative effort to test the
guard's grip on my arms, and was rewarded with a blow so hard I thought for a moment
he'd cracked the back of one of my ribs.
We descended stairs, down  and  down  and  down.  The  air  was  cold,  and  I  could  smell
charred meat mixed with human wastes, acrid urine, and sour vomit. I heard the clang of
a door, the  rattle  of  a  chain,  and  they  snapped  something  cold  around  my  wrists.  They
were chaining me.
The hood was pulled off my head. I was in a cell, lit with witchlight that hurt my eyes.
"Hold still," the guard said, and took out a knife. I drew away, but he grasped the collar of
my shirt and cut my clothes away from my body, nicking me with the blade when he cut
away the cloth I'd used to bind my breasts.
"Lady's tits," the guard said, studying me. "It is a girl, after all."
"I'm going to tell Rosalba you swore," I said.
"You do that, girl," the guard said with a short laugh, and they turned away, closing the
door. I was naked, alone, in darkness.
Tethered to the wall, I could stand, but not sit. I hunched my arms as close to my body
as I could; the air was achingly cold, and standing naked I could feel every draft. Beyond
the door of my cell, I could hear activity— footsteps, murmurs of conversation, and then a
long scream of pain that made my legs shake so hard that I had to lean against the chains
for support.
What  had  raised  Rosalba's  suspicions?  Obviously,  seeing  me  leave  when  I  did  had
confirmed them. But she hadn't seemed suspicious when she left my room. Was it that  I

hadn't jumped at the chance to sleep with her?  Maybe  she'd  seen  it  in my  eyes.  Maybe
she'd realized I was a woman. There were a thousand ways to be caught. I'd told Giovanni
that.
From  a  cell  close  by,  I  heard  a  hoarse  moan.  I  closed  my  eyes,  wishing  that  I  could
cover my ears to blot out the sound. Pray for me, Lucia,  I  thought.  Now  that  the  worst
had happened, my fear had ebbed to a dull ache in my stomach.  They  knew  who  I  was;
they were going to kill me. I tried to hold that thought in my  mind,  to  summon  the  fear
that ought to be there, but I couldn't focus on it for more than an instant. I will never see
Verdia again, I thought, but I couldn't believe  it.  I  couldn't  imagine  myself  dead,  or  the
world without me in it. I started to wonder if they  would  burn  me,  or  if  someone  would
have  mercy  on  me  and  cut  my  throat  instead.  I  heard  the  hoarse  moan  again,  and
shuddered from the cold. My back itched and I couldn't reach it with my hands chained; I
rubbed it against the wall behind me.
I hoped Travan and Michel were well away. I trusted Michel to have enough sense to
have gone on by now. I told  myself  that  I  had  played  my  part;  the  others  could  take  it
from  here.  I  was  expendable.  For  some  reason  Giovanni's  voice  rang  in  my  ears.
Expendable? I could hear frustration and infuriation in his tone.
I  wondered  what  Valentino  and  Quirino  would  hear  in  the  morning.  The  Emperor
vanished,  Daniele  arrested.  Would  they  hear  somehow  that  I  was  Eliana  in  disguise?  I
imagined Ulisse's reaction at learning that his drinking buddy for the last few months was
actually  the  lady  of  his  dreams  in disguise.  Only  she'd  be  dead.  And  Mira—what  would
Mira think? It was too painful to think of Mira. I turned my face against the rough stone
wall and tried to think of someone else.
In the Book of the Lady there were stories of  villains  who  found  themselves  haunted
by the people they'd killed. Teleso should  come  haunt  me  in this  cell,  I  thought.  I  could
handle  that;  I  was  proud  to  be  able  to  say  I'd  killed  him.  I'd  spit  in  the  face  of  his
apparition. But if a ghost were sent to torment me, it would be Vitale, the youngest Lupo
who  died  in the  magefire  before  my  eyes.  Or  one  of  the  other  Lupi  who  had  died  that
night—all  the  people  who  I  had  failed  to  protect.  Who I  failed.  You  failed,  I  could  hear
Giovanni say. You were supposed to come back.
Mario;  he  could  haunt  me  too.  Coughing  up  blood  around  the  dagger  in  his  belly.  I
wondered  again  how  they'd  kill  me.  Well,  last  I  heard,  the  Fedeli  didn't  kill  people  by
gut-stabbing  them.  My  arms  had  gotten  stiff  in  their  chains,  and  I  tried  uselessly  to
stretch. My foot itched. I rubbed it along the floor.
I found myself thinking about my mother for the first  time  in months,  and  I  realized
that I wasn't certain I could picture her face. Had I  really  tried,  up  until  now?  Or  had  I
satisfied myself with hazy images that faded like cloth in the sun? When I tried to picture
my mother's face, all I could remember was the feeling of her arms around me as she held
me on her lap, showing me the hair she kept in her sachet, a lock from me, from each  of
my brothers, and from the two children who died. My mind jumped to Isabella, praying to
the Lady after the ambush. Burning one of the locks of hair from her sachet. Now you are
truly dead to me. Isabella's face sustained me. I knew that if I were  with  the  Lupi  right
now,  Isabella  would  probably  be  complaining  to  me  about  some  slight  to  one  of  her
soldiers. I could hear her querulous voice, could even guess the precise words she'd use. I
argued with my memory of Isabella for hours, passing time in the frigid darkness.
At  some  point  I  dozed,  and  was  woken  by  the  tearing  pain  in  my  shoulders  as  I
slumped against the chains. I tried locking my knees, but  I  couldn't  sleep  standing  up.  I
shook my head, trying to clear it, to wake myself up. I wondered how long I'd been down
there—I felt as if it were horribly late at night, but for all I knew the night was long over
and it was mid-morning.

Light flashed through the crack under the door. Witchlight—no, lantern light. The door
swung  open,  and  a  gray-haired  man  came  in.  He  wore  black  robes—  wool,  not  linen.  I
heard no rustle as he walked. He carried a small wooden box with a handle, like a toolbox.
"Hello, Eliana," he said.
"My name is Daria," I said, since claiming to be Daniele was pretty much a lost cause at
that point.
He shrugged. "We know you're Eliana," he said. "Felice  identified  you.  Claiming  to  be
someone  else  will  only  make  this  harder."  He  set  down  the  box  with  a  soft  clunk  and
approached me. My heart knocked in my ears as I looked at him. He was shorter than I
was. He stood just out of arm's reach, regarding me with a slight smile, for a long time. I
tried to meet his eyes in a threatening glare, but he  was  not  looking  at  my  face;  he  was
examining my body.
"This will be far more pleasant for you if you simply start by telling us everything you
know," he said.
My stomach lurched. Somehow, in the night, I had managed to keep myself from ever
thinking about what they would do with me before they killed me.
"Why you are here, for example. Where the Lupi are  spending  the  winter.  Who your
allies are here. Who leads the apostate 'reformers' of Cuore. Anything else that would be
of use to us. The more you can tell us now, the more pleasant this will be for you."
I locked my knees to keep from falling and raised myself as straight as I possibly could.
"I would die before telling you anything," I said. My voice shook and I clenched my teeth,
trying to force it steady.
"I'm sure you would," he said. "If you had the opportunity. You won't get one. You will
die when we decide it's time for you to die, and that  won't  be  until  we  know  everything
that you know." He regarded me again, still looking at my body. "And, as I said, this will
be much more pleasant for you if you tell us everything now."
He paused and waited. I didn't trust my voice, so I was silent.
For the first time, he met my eyes. "Believe me when I tell you that you're going to tell
us everything sooner or later. So why not just tell us now?"
I  glared  at  him,  forcing  myself  to  hold  his  gaze.  His eyes  were  a  faded  hazel-brown;
harmless eyes. I couldn't believe, yet, that this man intended to hurt me.
He moved  a  step  closer  to  me  and  took  my  hand,  which  I'd  clenched  into  a  fist.  My
hands were ice cold; his were very warm, and dry. He unwrapped my fist and spread my
hand flat, palm up, against his. He traced the lines of my palm, almost affectionately, then
each  finger.  "Musician's  hands,"  he  said.  "Of  course;  they  mentioned  that  you  were  a
musician.  Violin,  yes?"  I  didn't  answer.  "Of  course.  You  have  the  calluses."  He  brushed
each fingertip. "You have lovely hands, my dear, perfect for playing the violin." I started
to pull my hand away. Like a snake striking, he brought his other hand down to trap mine
in a grip like a vise.
"We'll break your hands, you know," he said. "There are twenty-seven  bones  in each
hand, and we'll break every one. First your left hand. Then your right, if it's necessary. I
hope it won't be. It would be a shame to break such lovely hands." Still gripping my hand,
he twisted; pain  shot  through  my  wrist.  I  cried  out  and  he  stepped  back  with  a  look  of
slight satisfaction on his face. "I don't think  it  will  be  necessary,"  he  said.  I  shrank  back
without meaning to and he smiled for the first time. His teeth were yellow. I spat at him
and he laughed out loud, then glanced over his shoulder. "Guard," he called.
The guards carried in a low stool, and set the man's lantern on it. Then they shortened

the tethers on my manacles, pulling  my  hands  up  over  my  head,  then  chained  my  feet,
pinning me to the wall like a bug caught in a spider's web. Gèsu will give you the strength
you need, I could hear Lucia saying. Knock, and the door will  be  opened.  Ask,  and  you
shall  receive.  But  all  the  fear  my  mind  had  held  off  until  now  flooded  me  like  burning
poison.
"Felice," the man in black called.
Felice appeared in the doorway.  I  could  smell  his  flowery  perfume  as  he  approached
me.  "Just  once,"  the  man  in black  said,  indulgently.  "And  not  her  hands.  Those  are  for
later." He gave Felice a short  stick,  and  in the  flickering  light  I  could  see  Felice  smile.  I
closed my eyes and braced myself.
Pain exploded, so bad that for a second I wasn't sure where he'd hit me. My shin—he'd
hit my shin. I wondered if he'd broken the bone. Was I going to be able to walk normally
now? It doesn't matter, I'm dead anyway. It doesn't matter if they  break  my  legs,  my
hands, anything; I'm dead. The pain had started to ebb when it exploded again. This time
I screamed.
When I opened my eyes, Felice  was  gone,  and  the  man  in black  stood  regarding  me.
"Remember," he said. "This can go on for as long as it has to."
He opened  his  toolbox  and  began  to  lay  out  implements  on the  low  stool,  explaining
some of them to me as he went. I couldn't bear to look, but I couldn't bring myself to turn
away.  I  was  shaking  so  hard  my  wrists  bruised  against  the  manacles,  and  I  felt  like  I
might vomit. The lamp gave off a dull red glow;  it  was  heating  some  of  the  implements.
The  man  in  black  held  one  up  dispassionately,  examining  it.  It  smoked  slightly  in  the
reddish light. He blew on it gently as if to cool it, then set it back into the flame.
"Rosalba," he called.
Witchlight  flickered  at  the  doorway,  and  I  heard  a  rustle  of  silk,  caught  the  scent  of
spices over the smell of blood and fear. "Daniele," Rosalba said.
I  looked  at  her,  blinking  past  the  witchlight.  "My  name  is  not  Daniele,"  I  said.
"Obviously." I jerked my chin toward my female body.
Rosalba  approached,  dimming  the  witchlight  slightly  so  that  I  could  see  her  face.
"Eliana, then," she said.
"Why are you here?" I said. I swallowed hard and turned my head to glare at  her.  "I
suppose this is what you always wanted, isn't it? Torturing prisoners instead of recording
their confessions? You said that's what you wished you were doing."
Rosalba's face was pale and uncertain; I  could  see  a  muffled  horror  in her  eyes.  "I'm
not here to torture you, Eliana. I'm here to pray for you, that you will be freed from  the
Maledori that possess you and see the error of your ways."
"How did you know who I was?" I asked.
Rosalba's  eyes  flickered.  "When  I  kissed  you,  I  could  tell  that  you  lacked  even  the
slightest trace of a beard. That made me wonder. So while you played the violin, I looked
around  your  room.  You  had  no razor.  And  I  noticed—you  had  never  truly  moved  in  to
your  room.  You  were  living  out  of  your  bags,  like  you  thought  you  might  leave  at  any
time." She lowered her eyes. "So I watched your room. You behaved  as  someone  guilty,
leaving as you did. Sending for Felice—that was just a hunch."
I  couldn't  look  at  her  face  anymore,  so  I  turned  my  eyes  away.  "You  know,  I  know
Lucia,"  I  said.  "Your  old  friend  from  the  seminary.  I  kissed  her  when  I  left  her  and  I
dream of her each night." It was Mira's face  that  rose  before  my  eyes  as  I  spoke,  but  I
couldn't  speak  her  name,  so  I  spoke  of  Lucia.  "She  will  never  renounce  her  faith,  and

neither will I."
"The Lady waits for you with open arms," Rosalba said.
"I am Redentore," I said. "I believe in God, and Her Son, and Her Holy Light." I turned
back and stared into Rosalba's eyes. "You can torture me until I say that I love the Lady;
you can force me to foreswear my God, Mother Rosalba. But  you  can't  change  what's  in
my heart."
"If you have a prayer to say for her, say it," the man in black said.
Rosalba  fell  back  a  step.  "Sweet  and  gentle  Lady,"  she  said.  Her  voice  was  shaking.
"Touch Eliana, even within the darkness she is shrouded in. Let her find her way  to  you
quickly. Bring her back to you without delay; may  her  pride  not  cause  her  to  suffer  too
much, before she returns to you. So may it be."
The man in black bowed his head for a moment, then took  a  long,  curved  blade  from
the lamp. It glowed as red as the sun. He looked at it for a moment, then glanced back at
Rosalba. "If you don't want to see this, you should leave now," he said.
Rosalba's eyes were still fixed on mine. "I'll stay," she said. Her voice was shaking.
I wanted to tell her to go away, that she didn't have to prove her devotion to the Lady
by watching me tortured, but the man in black was there, smiling gently into my face. "In
the name of the Lady," he said, and then I heard myself screaming, and  I  think  Rosalba
left sometime after that.
* * *
We had been dancing forever, in the darkness, around the fire. And then suddenly the
music stopped. "Bella," a voice said. "Your heart is dark, Bella. You do not belong to the
Lady."
I  pushed  my  way  to  the  front  of  the  crowd.  Bella  stood  alone,  in  her  gray
conservatory  robes,  facing  Felice  and  Rosalba.  "You  must  swear  your  loyalty  to  the
Lady," Rosalba said. "The Lady loves you, Bella. She wants to forgive you."
I  could  feel  the  rising  panic  in my  chest.  Bella  would  not  foreswear  her  faith.  She
would be tortured; Mira and I would be revealed. We would all be executed if we didn't
recant, and Mira would probably be executed  anyway.  We  should  have  run  when  we
had the chance.
And  sure  enough,  Bella  spat  on  linked  circles  that  Rosalba  held  out.  "I  belong  to
Gèsu," Bella said. "He will give me all the strength I need."
But  instead  of  chaining  her,  instead  of  dragging  her  away  to  torture  her,  Rosalba
shoved Bella to her knees, and Felice cut her throat.
* * *
Something stung my cheek, rousing me from darkness and delusions to a dim red glow,
and terrible pain. I shook my head, leave me alone, and I was slapped again. "Open your
eyes, Eliana."

My eyes were crusted over and I wanted to wipe them clean, but my hands  wouldn't
move.  I  managed  to  open  one,  and  I  saw  the  face  of  the  man  in  black.  "I  thought  you
might like to know how long I've been down here. It's been a little under an hour. I want
you to think about that, all right, Eliana? One  hour."  He  smiled  at  me.  "In  any  case,  it's
time for my dinner, so you'll have some time to think about this. One hour.  Pain  doesn't
get any easier to bear, Eliana, and it's going to get a great deal worse. If you talk now, if
you repent your sins now, if you return to the Lady now, I won't hurt you further."
I was silent.
"You  were  a  simple  musician  once.  You  trusted  the  Lady,  you  did  as  you  were  told.
There's  another  Eliana  in there,  someone  who  just  wants  to  play  her  violin  and  let  the
world do as it will. I know there is. Eventually, she won't want to take any more pain."
I said nothing.
"You know that you're going to talk sooner or later," he said. "Tell us everything now,
and save yourself the agony. You know it's what your mother would have wanted."
I  forced  my  other  eye  open  and  met  his  gaze.  "I—"  My  voice  came  out  as  a  hoarse
squeak. My throat was too raw to speak. I closed my mouth for a moment, and thanks be
to God, felt a morsel of spittle moisten my tongue. I licked my lips, and jerked my head as
if to say, All I can manage is a whisper, come closer to hear.  He leaned  forward,  and  I
spit in his face.
His expression never flicked. "Well," he said. "I'll see you when I return from dinner."
He took the light with him. I was too disoriented with pain to summon witchlight, and
my  bravado  was  swallowed  quickly  in the  whirlwind  of  fear  and  pain.  "B'shaem  Arkah,
v'Bar Shelah,  v'Nihor  Kadosh,"  I  said  silently;  it  was  too  difficult  to  voice  them  aloud.  I
repeated  the  words,  again  and  again.  Save  me,  please.  Somebody.  Anybody.  Even
Giovanni.
I can't take what Octavio did. I can't. I  knew  I  couldn't,  and  that  knowledge  buried
me in fear. Mira had warned me that the Circle most wanted to  know  where  to  find  the
Lupi, right now. The evening before,  I  wouldn't  have  been  able  to  tell  them—but  now  I
knew,  and  I  didn't  think  they'd  believe  me  if  I  said  I  didn't.  And  I  knew  plenty  more
they'd want to know— where Michel and Travan were going, and the likely  route  they'd
travel to get there; that Mira was as eager to destroy the Circle as I'd been. I knew who
led the Cuore reformers, although according to Mira that wasn't much of a secret anyway.
I  knew  that  Ulisse  was  involved  in  the  reform  movement,  and  that  Quirino  was  a
sympathizer. I knew too much. Far too much.
Hold out as long as  you  can,  I  thought.  You  bore  the  lash  without  crying  out.  You
can die for the Lupi. No matter how long it takes. I couldn't clasp my hands, so I knotted
my hands into fists and tried to pray. My mind was still whirling in fear, and I wet my lips
and  tried  to  focus.  If  only  I  had  the  faith  that  Lucia  had—or  Bella—or  even  Mira.  I've
never truly believed, I  realized,  I've  always  had  the  strength  I've  needed.  I  whispered
the words—"Gèsu, give me strength, please, give me strength," but my mind kept falling
back to the same plea. Save me. Somebody save me. Anybody. Please ...
Rosalba's face flashed into my mind, speaking to Octavio, silk and steel in her voice and
her eyes. "Don't be a fool, Octavio. We will bring you back to the Lady's mercy sooner or
later, one way or another. Fool. Do you think you can stand against us? Against the Lady?
It is only out of mercy that we seek to return you to Her. It's to save your soul. You will
be put to the torture. You will be put to the torture again. Is that what you want? Is that
what you want?"
I  shook  my  head,  to  try  to  chase  Rosalba  out  of  my  mind,  and  her  fiery  eyes  were

replaced by  Mira's.  But  it  was  not  Mira  in her  Circle  robes  I  saw,  but  in the  drab  wool
robes of the conservatory, held fast by the Circle Guards as  Liemo  ordered  them  to  fire
on me. Mira when she told me,  after  Bella's  execution,  "I  can't  do  this  again.  I  won't  be
able to let another friend die." The wild ecstasy on her face after her magic destroyed the
crossbow  bolt,  and  then  the  horror  when  she  felt  the  burning  need  for  magery  close
around her heart again.
Mira had sacrificed her life for me. She had sacrificed her dream of living free, on her
own terms,  instead  of  serving  the  cause  she  hated.  She  had  given  that  up  to  spare  me
pain.  And  then  to  spare  my  life,  she  had  shouldered  the  burden  of  my  hatred.  In  the
darkness, for the first time, I saw that clearly. I wished I could tell her, somehow, that I
understood.
I thought of the night I'd spent on the riverbank beside Mira, and the night  she'd  cut
my hair. I wished that I could retrace my steps, to take her thin, tense body into my arms
and press my lips to her hair.  Forgive  me,  I  wanted  to  whisper.  Forgive  me  for  hating
you.
I clenched my hands into fists. I couldn't speak to  her,  but  I  could  die  for  her.  And  I
would die for her, and for Lucia and Giovanni. I would hold out. I would not fail.
After a long time, I could see a light coming down the hallways and my mind spun with
terror. "Gèsu," I said. "For your glory. Give me strength, for your glory."
Through the crack under the door, I saw a flash of light so bright it almost blinded me.
The door swung open and I blinked, trying to see past the dark spots swimming in front
of my eyes.
"Eliana," a voice said.
It was Mira.
Mira opened the shackles on my hands and  feet.  I  collapsed  to  my  hands  and  knees,
my joints stiff as a rusted latch. Mira knelt  beside  me.  "It's  all  right,"  she  said.  "I'm  not
going to let anything else happen to you."
I'm  dreaming,  I  thought,  just  as  I  dreamed  I  was  back  at  the  conservatory.  Mira
held a wineskin to my lips, but the wine burned my raw throat and I coughed. She wet a
cloth and wiped my face. "I'm getting you out of here," she said. "But we have to hurry."
Mira  had  brought  clothing  with  her—trousers,  a  simple  tunic,  boots.  I  pulled  the
clothing  on as  fast  as  I  could,  choking  back  a  cry  as  the  rough  fabric  rubbed  over  the
burns on my body. When I was dressed, she wrapped a  cloak  around  my  shoulders  and
pulled up the hood. "Can you walk?" she asked.
I nodded. I can do whatever it takes to get out of here.
I  followed  her  without  question  through  a  maze  of  corridors.  No  one  stopped  us;  I
wasn't sure whether this meant Mira had incinerated everyone in her path on her way in,
or if she just knew the right path to take. I didn't really care. It took all my effort just to
keep putting one foot in front of the other. My wounds  burned  with  a  dizzying  pain,  the
bruises on my shins made each step hurt, and I  still  wasn't  entirely  sure  I  believed  this
was happening.
Finally, we emerged into the night. "It's almost dawn," Mira said.
"Dawn?" I said. "I thought it was dinnertime."
"They always leave prisoners alone for a while—it's to let you get scared, nothing to do
with meals. You were arrested shortly after midnight; now it's dawn."
Mira led me out of the enclave through the mage's gate. In the streets of Cuore, there

were a few last remnants of Mascherata—an old woman still beating a drum, and a lot of
drunk people slumped over in doorways. Mira led me to an inn with a light still burning in
the window—not the one we'd met at before, but an even smaller and seedier place,  and
one much closer to the edge of the city. She slipped in the door, latching it behind us, and
led me through the inn and out back to a stable, where a horse stood saddled and ready.
Mira began to check the straps and buckles on the horse's gear.
"The songs say you can ride, but I never asked you if that was true," Mira said.
"I can ride."
"That's good, because it won't take them long to realize that you're gone," she said. "I
wish I could  give  you  time  to  rest,  but  you  need  to  set  out  right  away.  Everything  you
should need  is  packed  on the  horse."  She  finished  tightening  the  straps  and  stood  for  a
moment, looking away.
"Mira," I whispered. "Come with me."
"I can't." She turned back to  face  me,  her  eyes  hard  with  resolve.  "Eliana,  the  Circle
sent me to free you. They deeply distrust the Fedeli's ability to drag information from you
by torture, and they really only want to know one thing: the winter hideout  of  the  Lupi.
They're going to follow you. They're hoping you'll lead them there. If you don't, they think
they can recapture you—or simply kill you."
"They won't take  me  alive,"  I  said,  and  my  voice  shook.  I  couldn't  go  to  Montefalco,
then—or to Doratura, where many of the refugees from the camps still lived.
"Eliana," Mira said, and took my hand. "I didn't want to tell you this unless I was sure.
And  I'm  not  sure;  I  don't  think  I  ever  will  be.  But  I  think  there's  a  way  to  turn  back
magefire."
I caught my breath. "How?"
"The  songs.  The  Old  Way  songs.  I  don't  know—"  She  bit  her  lip  and  looked  away.
"That's what I was trying to learn, at the conservatory, when I sent you to convince some
of your friends to play the music with me. I thought there was a way, but I  wasn't  sure,
and  I'm  still  not  sure.  But  I  think  Bella  knew.  I  think  that's  why  they  killed  her."  She
shook her head. "You need to go. The Circle wants you free—for now—but the  Fedeli  do
not. And you're running out of time."
"I still think you should come with me."
"If I do, the Circle will know I betrayed them. They'll know you won't lead them to the
Lupi; they'll ride us down and kill us both. Alone, you might escape."
I turned to mount the horse, and Mira caught my arm. "I think your magic is stronger
than ours," she said. "Yours is stronger." She clasped my face and gave me a long, gentle
kiss. Then she pushed me away. "Go."
I mounted the horse; Mira threw open the stable door, and I rode into the night.  Not
until hours later did I realize that I'd forgotten to tell her that I had forgiven her. I hoped
she knew.
* * *
Your magic is stronger than ours. Yours is stronger. Bella knew. Mira's words rang in
my  ears  as  I  rode  through  the  night.  I  didn't  know  yet  where  I  was  going—  south,  of

course,  but  whether  to  Montefalco  or  the  wasteland,  I  wasn't  sure.  At  dawn,  I  was
tempted to take a short rest, but I was afraid that if I got off the horse I wouldn't be able
to get back on. I slowed to a walk and dug through the most accessible saddlebag, finding
cheese and water. I drank the water—I realized suddenly that I was terribly thirsty—and
ate some of the cheese. There was a  knife  in the  saddlebag  as  well;  I  slipped  it  into  my
boot,  where  I  could  get  to  it  easily.  The  Circle  was  behind  me,  tracking  me  like  a  wolf
tracks  a  rabbit;  the  Fedeli  undoubtedly  were  looking  for  me,  too.  They  won't  take  me
alive, I thought. I'd cut my own throat, if it came to that.
That reminded me of Bella—Mira's statement, "Bella knew," and the dream I'd had in
my  cell.  Bella  had  been  murdered  by  the  Fedeli.  Not  tortured,  not  burned,  but  simply
murdered. I hadn't realized at the time just how strange this was, but now, after playing
for Rosalba as she painstakingly  transcribed  confessions—now,  I  realized,  the  Fedeli  did
not  normally  kill  people  so  quickly.  They  wanted  a  detailed  confession,  not  merely  a
declaration  of  heretical  faith.  They  wanted  names,  histories,  repentance.  Why,  then,
would they cut Bella's throat and let her choke to death on her blood in front of us? Bella
knew. What was it they'd killed her to hide?
I thought back to that night. We had been  dancing  and  dancing,  to  the  drums  and  to
Bella's  trumpet.  I'd  felt  a  strange  warmth,  and  then  suddenly  Cassio  snatched  the
trumpet out of Bella's hands. And then she declared her faith, and they killed her.
I'd felt a strange warmth—like drinking  hot  wine,  or  playing  the  Old  Way  music.  We
weren't playing Old Way music—but we were dancing. I'd caught a glimpse of the power
that night, just as I'd caught a glimpse of it while playing  the  Redentori  songs  with  Mira
and  the  others.  I  hadn't  really  known  that  power  until  the  night  that  I  played  for  the
funeral in Ravenna, but maybe Bella had. Bella knew. Bella  had  realized  something,  and
the Fedeli were willing to  sacrifice  the  information  they  could  drag  out  of  her  to  ensure
that whatever she had just found died with her, on the stones of the conservatory piazza.
Your magic is stronger than ours. Could I really do magic with the Redentore music?
The idea seemed ludicrous. I thought about the surge of power Mira sent through me at
our  first  meeting  here,  the  sensation  of  light  that  flared  the  witchlight  in  my  hand  like
tinder flaring into flame. More, I want more. I pushed the thought away, thinking about
the power that I touched in the Mass, that I sent into the earth,  that  I  used  to  stop  the
riot. That's what they killed Bella to hide. That's what we could use to defeat the Circle.
I  rode  through  the  day  without  stopping  except  to  buy  a  fresh  horse  with  the  coins
Mira had packed in my bag. Your magic is stronger than ours. I thought I had a way.  I
told myself that I knew I had a way, and prayed that I was right.
As  I  rode  into  the  village  encampment  at  high  noon  the  next  day,  I  heard  the
perimeter  guards  shout.  "Who  goes?"  Then—"Eliana?"  The  voice  was  incredulous,
delighted.
"It's  me,"  I  said.  "And  company's  coming.  Round  everyone  up  and  get  them  to  the
center of the village."
Lucia, Isabella, and Giovanni came running as I rode into the center of the village.
"Eliana!" Isabella shouted.
"What's wrong?" Lucia asked.
"I've been followed," I said.
"And you led them here?" Giovanni demanded.
"Listen to me," I said. "First of all, I need my violin. Then bring everyone to the village
piazza. Hurry. I'm an hour ahead of them, at most." I turned to Lucia. "Do they know the

Dance that Turned the Storm?"
"Yes," Lucia said. "But we haven't danced it recently."
"Teach it again. Isabella, gather all the children and the injured into the piazza. Shelter
won't  protect  them  from  magefire—they  need  to  be  close  to  us.  Giovanni,  I'll  need
something to stand on, and so will some archers—they'll be shooting from inside the dance
circle."
"You're mad," Giovanni said.
"No, I'm not," I said. "It's possible that I'm wrong, but I'm not mad."
"And if you are wrong?"
"Just hope I'm right," I said. "Because it's too late for anything else."
The preparations were completed in minutes. I stood at the  center  of  the  circle,  on a
kitchen table that had been dragged outside, my  violin  in my  hand.  The  village  children
sat under it, the older ones trying to reassure the younger ones. A dozen archers stood on
benches,  looking  a  little  confused.  Everyone  else  stood  in  a  circle  around  us,  hands
clasped. Giovanni glared at me from the bench  where  he  stood  with  a  crossbow;  Lucia's
eyes  were  closed,  her  face  peaceful.  Then  I  could  see  distant  dust  kicked  up  by  swift
horses; they were coming.
I played the opening notes to the dance on my violin.
"Rachamin Arkah," Lucia sang. "Rachamin Arkah. Rachamin  Gèsu.  Rachamin  Gèsu."
The  dance  began  to  move  around  me  like  a  vast  wheel.  Side-together-side  skip.
Front-together-front skip. Side-together-side skip. Back-together-back skip.
God, I thought. I'm trusting you. This had better work.
My  pursuers  rode  into  the  village.  There  were  a  dozen  of  them—eight  guards,  four
mages.  They  hadn't  brought  along  any  soldiers,  just  members  of  the  Circle  Guard.  The
mages dismounted almost casually, clasping their hands and closing their eyes.
"Keep dancing!" Lucia shouted. "Don't look at them. Look at Eliana. Keep dancing."
The mage in the center—the focus—raised his hands to the sky.
I  gathered  the  fear  and  faith  and  motion  of  the  dancers,  feeling  the  power  running
through my body like blood, like Mira's magery. Stronger  than  ours.  A calm  came  over
me as I saw the fires coming down on us. Back, I thought, and focused the dance-energy
out.
Red clouds of magefire rolled around us, breaking like water at a dam. The fire rippled
toward the houses around the piazza; the clay walls melted like butter as the houses were
consumed  by  the  flames.  One  of  the  houses  had  brilliant  red  flowers  out  front;  for  a
moment the flames and flowers merged, then only the fire was left.
But the magefire shimmered along the edge of our circle like a candle dancing along the
edge of a glass.
Lucia's eyes flew open and I realized that she hadn't really believed this would work.
The clouds dissipated, leaving the burning houses; I could see the faces of  the  mages,
eyes wide with disbelief. I took a step toward them. Perhaps I could extend the protection
beyond the edge of the circle. Out,
I thought. Go. Another cloud of magefire came down, but this one broke at the edge of
the piazza. The dancers moved faster and  faster,  their  realization  that  this  was  working
filling them with energy and flooding me with power.

The mages were frightened now. One started to break out of the  line  and  was  jerked
forward again by his fellows.
"Shoot  them!"  I  shouted.  The  archers  jumped;  they'd  been  staring  dumbfounded  at
the  magefire.  Giovanni  stood  beside  me  and  raised  his  crossbow.  As  the  focus-mage
raised his arms again, Giovanni loosed a bolt and the mage fell, clutching at the bolt in his
throat, crawling desperately away from us.
"No," I heard one of the other mages cry. "This can't be happening. This is impossible!"
"Come on!" Giovanni shouted to the other archers. "Don't just stand there gaping! You
are soldiers! You are wolves!"
The archers raised their  shaking  bows  and  fired  a  volley  of  bolts.  Another  mage  fell,
clutching at a bolt in his gut; one of their guardsmen cried out as he took a bolt in the arm.
The two remaining mages dropped to the ground, still clasping hands. "Kill the dancers,"
one of  them  shouted  to  their  guards.  "Break  their  circle,  and  we'll  take  them  out  with
fire."
The  eight  guardsmen  charged  toward  the  square.  Giovanni  rolled  under  Lucia  and
Isabella's clasped hands, drawing his sword as he rose.  He  kicked  one  guardsman  in the
gut as he caught the sword of another against his own. "Fire again!" he shouted. "Kill the
mages; we can deal with the guards when we're done!"
One of the guards stabbed a dancer in the back with his sword; as she fell, the people
on either  side  of  her  clasped  hands  to  continue.  That  was  too  much  for  the  rest  of  the
archers,  though,  and  they  dropped  their  crossbows  and  followed  Giovanni's  example
rather than his orders, ducking out of the circle and drawing swords. One archer fired one
more bolt toward the mages, but I saw the bolt sizzle and vanish in the  air,  like  the  bolt
that had been fired at me at the conservatory. Unfortunately for me, with the archers out
of the circle, I'd lost my bodyguards. I jumped down off the kitchen table, pretty sure that
I could work the Redentore magic without being able to see outside the circle.
The Circle guardsmen were excellent swordsmen,  but  they  were  outnumbered  three
to two, and  Giovanni  looked  like  he  thought  he  could  fight  two  of  the  guardsmen  all  by
himself.  Watching  from  inside  the  circle  of  dancers,  I  realized  that  the  guardsmen  had
trained much more with their crossbows than in close-quarters fighting; the Circle didn't
usually want them too close to their opponents as it made it impossible to  use  mage-fire
without killing the guardsmen as well. Normally when someone attacked at close range, it
was a single, desperate person; no real threat to eight guards.
Beyond  the  piazza,  I  saw  a  movement.  "The  mages,"  I  shouted.  "They're  running
away!"  Giovanni  kicked  away  the  guard  he  was  fighting  and  tore  after  them.  I  tried  to
extend  the  power  of  the  dance  to  where  the  mages  were,  but  it  hardly  mattered;  he
tackled one mage and threw him to the ground, cutting his throat, while one of the other
Lupi stabbed his sword through the other.
The piazza was suddenly very quiet, and I realized that we'd killed the mages and all of
their guards. Rachamin Arkah, the dancers sang. Rachamin Gèsu. I ended the dance and
looked around at the faces of the Lupi. Some people were too stunned to react; others had
smiles of wild delight. Lucia's eyes were bright and her cheeks were flushed. Beyond her,
Giovanni turned toward me, thumped his chest with his fist, and held it out in salute.
"The Emperor's army fights for us," I said. "And our faith is stronger than magefire."

PART THREE
 
Stronger Than Magefire
CHAPTER TEN
Trust not in the gratitude of the powerful.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 7, verse 33.
The wasteland hills were gray in the thin winter sunlight. "Are you sure you're leading
us in the right direction?" Giovanni asked again. "Everything looks the same."
"Not to me, and yes, I'm sure," I said. We crested the hill, and beyond could see a red
banner flapping in the wind. I turned to Giovanni. "See? I was right."
"Luck," he said.
Michel  had  taken  Travan  to  an  old  army  barracks  in  the  northern  part  of  the
wasteland. We had been in contact with him by messenger, but hadn't arrived  in person
until now. Giovanni and I had ordered the Lupi to regroup in the wasteland; the Emperor
was setting up  supply  lines,  and  we  could  use  the  wasteland's  protection  from  magefire
while we recruited additional musicians.
Travan  and  Michel  were  not  alone.  Already,  courtiers  and  minor  nobles  were
defecting. Clara had been among the first to join them; according to Michel's message, she
had embraced the Redentore faith with an apparent fervor that startled him. I found this
fact  oddly  reassuring;  surely,  Clara  would  only  join  a  side  she  thought  would  win.  By
joining us now, she positioned herself as one of the Emperor's most loyal advisors. Though
there was also the fact that she'd been unable to  marry  her  lover  because  of  the  Lady's
withheld  blessing.  Clara  had  been  joined  promptly  by  that  lover—husband,  now—
Demetrio,  the  army  commander  who  had  escaped  our  attack  in  the  wasteland  last
summer. Demetrio was acting as a liaison to the army,  and  helping  to  set  up  the  supply
lines.
The shifting winds of politics had created unexpected bedfellows. Placido had also come
south to join the Emperor's makeshift court, and despite their original affiliations, he and
Clara  had  discovered  that  they  had  a  great  deal  in common.  Starting,  no doubt,  with  a
keen sense of their own self-interest and a knack for discovering which way the wind was
blowing.
The Lupi army had made camp a day's ride away; I wanted to keep the nobles out of
our hair. Also, although I trusted most of my army, there was always the possibility that
we'd  brought  along  a  spy,  and  it  was  easier  to  protect  Travan  with  only  a  handful  of

people around.  Giovanni  and  I  had  ridden  to  the  Emperor's  court  by  ourselves,  leaving
quietly before dawn.
Michel  came  out  to  greet  us,  his  face  bright.  We  dismounted  from  our  horses  and  I
clasped his arms; Michel pulled me into a hug. "I thought you'd never  make  it,"  he  said.
"Are the Lupi close by?"
"Not far," I said. Beyond Michel, I could see others come out of the barracks. Placido,
Clara,  and  another  man—Demetrio,  probably.  Not  Travan;  presumably  he  was  waiting
inside.
"Hello, Generale Eliana," Placido said as I came up toward the door. "What a pleasure
to renew our acquaintance." His face showed anything but pleasure.
"I trust you are confident in my identity this time," I said.
Irritation  flashed  through  his  eyes,  but  he  laughed  as  if  I'd  made  a  particularly
amusing joke. "Of course," he said.
Clara regarded me with a faint speculative smile. "I believe we have also met before,"
Clara said, clasping my hand gently in greeting. "You were going by 'Daniele' at the time,
yes?"
"I  was,"  I  said.  "We  were  never  exactly  introduced,  but  I  played  for  a  banquet  you
attended."  I  remembered  Clara's  bright  eyes  studying  me.  She  was  studying  me  again,
but I had nothing to fear this time and looked readily back at her.
"Let  me  present  my  husband,"  Clara  said.  "First  Generale  Demetrio  of  the  New
Imperial Army."
Demetrio  bowed  formally,  offering  me  the  ritual  salute  between  military  equals.  I
returned the gesture, though I couldn't help remembering what Lia had told me about his
brutality. Well. Shifting winds could bring unexpected allies—for me, as  well  as  for  Clara
and Placido.
"Let  me  present  my  second-in-command,  Generale  Giovanni,"  I  said.  Demetrio  and
Clara nodded  as  Giovanni  bowed  formally.  Placido  looked  as  if  he  had  just  bitten  into  a
rotten fruit, and this clearly pleased Giovanni no end.
"I am honored by your welcome," Giovanni said. I had never heard him so polite, but
Placido's pudgy face tightened even more.  I'd  have  to  ask  Giovanni  later  what  that  was
about.
"Shall  we  go  in,  then?"  I  asked.  Placido  turned  away  with  a  final  venomous  glare
toward  Giovanni.  Clara  and  Demetrio  gestured  toward  the  door  and  we  went  into  the
barracks.
There were a lot of people living there. The air inside was close and damp; the smell of
horses mixed with incense and perfume. Tapestries and furniture had been brought from
Cuore,  far  grander  than  the  halls  they  adorned.  The  most  absurd  item  I  saw  was  a
delicately carved wood box used as an apple crate.
The  Emperor's  audience  chamber  was  in  part  of  the  old  meal  hall;  it  had  been
partitioned off. Travan was pacing the room impatiently when we came in. I studied him
from  the  doorway  as  the  servant  announced  our  arrival.  Travan  had  lost  weight;  he
hadn't been fat  when  I  saw  him  in Cuore,  but  there  had  been  a  softness  that  was  gone
after the long flight to the wasteland. His black velvet tunic was finely made but plain. He
wore no crown or sign of his office, but a carved wooden cross hung around his  neck.  He
turned eagerly at our arrival.
I  sank  to  one  knee  and  bowed  my  head;  Giovanni  did  the  same  a  pace  behind  me.

"Your highness," I said. "It's good to see you again."
Travan crossed the floor in three steps and  drew  me  to  my  feet.  "Daniele—Generate
Eliana." He kissed me on each cheek, and I could hear Placido's sharp intake of resentful
breath behind me. "I'm so glad you've come at last."  He  gripped  my  hands  tightly,  then
released them. "Still in boy's clothes, I see," he said.
" 'Still?' The last time you saw me I was in a dress." Placido coughed discreetly. "Your
highness," I added.
"On Mascherata, dresses  are  boy's  clothes,"  Travan  said.  "Well,  it's  good  to  see  you.
Whatever you're wearing. I'm glad you made it here safely."
"And how was your trip, your highness?" I asked.
Travan's  eyes  brightened.  "Most  exciting.  But  Michel  took  good  care  of  me."  At  a
rustle from Clara, Travan glanced past me and smiled resignedly. "I suppose we can save
the visiting for later. Demetrio, would you be so kind?"
Demetrio  showed  us  to  a  table  at  the  end  of  the  hall.  There  was  a  huge  piece  of
parchment spread out on the table, with an elaborate abstract drawing of thin black lines.
Circles  and  stars  had  been  drawn  all  over,  and  small  counters  had  been  placed
throughout—to hold the parchment down, I thought at first.
"This is Cuore," Demetrio said, pointing, and I realized that the parchment was in fact
a  detailed  map.  "Varena,  and  Pluma.  Here's  the  wasteland.  The  Imperial  army  has
divisions  camped  here,  here,  and  here."  Those  were  the  tokens.  "How  many  Lupi  are
there?"
"Several hundred right  now,  but  I  expect  our  numbers  to  increase  significantly  over
the next few weeks. I trust we will be supplied with the lines you've set up?"
"That  can  be  arranged,"  Demetrio  said.  He  placed  some  tokens  on  the  map  in  the
wasteland. "Now, explain to me exactly how your defense against magefire works."
"I  can  direct  the  energy  of  Redentori  dances  to  deflect  magefire,"  I  said.  "I  suspect
other musicians could learn to do the same thing."
"Redentori musicians," Clara said.
"Presumably."
"How large an area can you protect?" Demetrio asked.
"More than just the area with dancers," I said. "It extends out a fair distance, but I'm
not sure just how far."
"We'll need more musicians," Demetrio said. "And more dancers."
"We're going to try recruiting from the conservatories," I said. "I'm confident that the
ability isn't restricted to violinists."
"This will help a great deal," Demetrio said. "But the walls of the Imperial Enclave will
still pose an obstacle, unless we wish to recruit some mages of our own."
"Out of the question," Clara said.
"I thought as much. So." Demetrio looked around the table. "With only the Fedeli and
the  Circle  Guard  left  to  defend  them,  and  with  offensive  magic  rendered  useless,  the
Circle's only possible strategy is to withdraw into the enclave and wait for  us  to  come  to
them."
"If they have only one course of action, that should be an advantage for us," Giovanni
said.

Demetrio gave Giovanni a patient look. "Unfortunately,  they  can  predict  our  goals  as
easily as we can predict theirs. We must go to Cuore, sooner or later; they know that."
"We can't lay siege to them," I said. "Well, I suppose we could, if we had to. We'd need
thousands of dancers, though, to take shifts—"
"No, I agree," Demetrio said.  "We  should  avoid  a  siege  if  we  possibly  can.  With  your
cooperation, Generale, I'd like to besiege them indirectly."
"What do you mean?"
Clara spoke. "The famine in Verdia disrupted Cuore's usual food supply. They've been
supplementing  it  by  purchasing  grain  from  a  country  across  the  sea,  bringing  it  in  on
ships. If we attack those lines of supply, this will deprive the Circle and Fedeli of food, and
possibly augment our own supplies."
"Can we starve them out that way?" I asked.
"No," Demetrio said. "Many from  court  have  fled  or  will  soon,  so  there  will  be  fewer
people to feed from existing stores. But it will weaken them—and frighten them. Possibly
enough to force them out from behind their walls to confront us directly."
"We'll  be  happy  to  cooperate  with  that  effort,"  I  said.  "Tell  me  what  you'd  like  my
troops to do."
Demetrio outlined  the  precise  routes  where  the  grain  was  carried.  I  wasn't  certain  I
understood, but Giovanni nodded enthusiastically, so I was fairly sure he'd be able to help
me  out  with  this  later.  "In  addition,"  Demetrio  said,  "please  think  about  any  ways  that
you might draw the Circle out, or the Fedeli. You were a spy for several months, were you
not, Generale? If you know of anything that we can use toward that end, be sure to let me
know. If the Lupi don't have the manpower, we'll work with you."
"I'll try to think of something," I said.
"Very well," Demetrio said. "We'll be in touch. I'll go discuss the new information with
my adjutant." Demetrio clasped my hand, bowed to the Emperor, and left the room.
"You must be tired from your trip," Clara said to me. "I assume you'll be staying for a
few days?"
"For tonight at least," I said.
"We've made  up  some  guest  quarters  for  you.  Would  you  like  a  chance  to  wash  and
have something to eat?"
"Yes, I'd appreciate that," I said. I wanted a chance to talk alone with Giovanni.
"Michel can show you where your quarters are,"
Travan said.  "Generale  Eliana,  I'd  appreciate  it  if  you'd  join me  for  dinner.  I'd  like  a
chance to talk again."
"I'd be honored," I said. With any luck, Clara and Placido would not be invited.
Back in our room, I closed the door and turned toward Giovanni. "Why doesn't Placido
like you?"
Giovanni looked up, startled. "The Emperor greets you with a kiss, the First Generale
of the Imperial Army salutes you  as  an  equal,  and  your  first  question  is  about  Placido's
stupid grudge?"
I set my pack and violin case down on the cot. Our quarters were spare and we were
sharing a room, though a curtain had been provided for modesty. Michel had gone to get
some  water  for  us  to  wash  with.  "I  don't  have  any  questions  about  the  Emperor  or

Demetrio that I'd expect you to be able to answer."
Giovanni laughed and unlaced his own pack, taking out a slightly cleaner shirt. "Placido
never liked me."
"There's got to be more to it than that."
"Really? I'd expect you to be able to understand that sentiment, even sympathize. Oh,
all  right,"  he  said,  laughing  again  at  my  infuriated  expression.  "I'll  tell  you  the  story.
Placido's a few years older than me, and bigger than me, as you may have noticed. When I
started at the university, we met at one of the taverns and  he  took  an  instant  dislike  to
me—I  can't  imagine  why,  but  some  people  do.  Anyway,  he  pushed  me  around  a
bit—spilled my wine in my lap on purpose and insulted me. I challenged him to a duel, and
he disarmed and thoroughly embarrassed me. I found out later this was all to  impress  a
lady.
"So.  I  spent  every  waking  moment  for  the  next  three  months  working  on  my
swordplay. My best friend, Antonio, tutored me. We both did so poorly in our studies that
we were nearly sent home from the university in academic disgrace. After three months,
Antonio said I was ready, so I went to the tavern, picked up Placido's wine, and threw it in
his face." Giovanni had a faint wicked smile on his  face,  remembering.  "Placido  drew  his
sword, naturally. We  took  it  outside.  I  disarmed  him  before  he  landed  a  blow  and  gave
him the thrashing of his life." His smile faded to a look of resignation. "This  was  perhaps
not the best strategy to win his friendship. Which probably made things more difficult for
you  and  Michel  in Cuore.  I'm  sorry.  That  wasn't  a  consequence  I  exactly  had  in  mind
when I threw the wine in his face."
I raised my wineskin in salute. "There was another consequence you didn't foresee."
"What was that?"
"Having learned what you knew in three months, you were well prepared to teach me
to fight—quickly."
"True  enough!  I  hadn't  thought  of  that,"  Giovanni  said.  "Well.  You  know  that  it  was
university  scholars  who  made  the  connection  between  magery  and  what  happened  to
Verdia.  To  suppress  the  knowledge,  the  Circle  had  the  scholars  responsible,  along  with
their students, framed for heresy and executed by  the  Fedeli.  Antonio  was  one  of  those
students. And so I joined the reformers."
Giovanni's face was distant, but his eyes were soft. "Placido sent me down to Ravenna
to get rid of me; he knew the commander had a reputation for being brutal, and hoped I'd
open my mouth at the wrong moment and get myself killed."
"Some days I'm surprised you didn't," I said.
"Yeah,  well,  Placido  probably  figures  I  opened  my  mouth  and  got  Jesca  and  Beneto
killed.  You  know,  the  lady  Placido  was  trying  to  impress  the  night  he  bullied  me  was
Jesca, can you believe that? It didn't work. I think she may have gone to Ravenna to get
away from him."
"I could believe it," I said.
"Anyway, that's why Placido can't stand that I'm a generale of the Lupi. Even the fact
that I'm your second doesn't make up for it. I'm sure he hates you, too, but Travan likes
you so he has to work a little harder at hiding it."
Michel knocked on the door, and we let him in. He had heated the water slightly, so it
was  tepid  instead  of  freezing.  "How  on earth  are  Clara  and  Placido  surviving  hardships
like this?" I asked, dunking my face and hair and then rubbing them dry as  quickly  as  I
could.

"They each brought a  couple  of  servants,"  Michel  said.  "I'm  sorry.  I  could  go  heat  it
more—"
"No, don't be silly; we'll manage." I took out a comb and started working it through the
tangles in my hair. It was a good thing my hair was short. "So tell us everything, Michel.
Did you have any close calls getting down here?"
"A  few,"  Michel  said.  "But  we  got  through  all  right.  Travan  is  a  good  man,  and
courageous. He could be a good leader."
"That's a relief," Giovanni said. He had stripped to the waist and was splashing  water
on himself.
"We had about a week alone once we got  here,"  Michel  said.  "Then  Placido  found  us,
and Signora Clara."
"How many others are here?"
Michel shrugged. "At least thirty, I think. There will be more once a proper supply line
is set up. Right now the hardships down here deter all but the most... ambitious."
"Or those on a mission," I said. "Have there been any attempts on the Emperor's life?"
"One," Michel said. "We identified and executed the assassin."
"Is there anyone else here who could serve as a bodyguard?" I asked.
"Some of Demetrio's soldiers," Michel said. "I didn't take down that first assassin alone,
you know."
"Michel, I think you should stay here instead of returning with us to the Lupi," I said.
Michel's  face  fell,  and  he  started  to  protest.  "The  Emperor  needs  a  bodyguard  he  can
trust completely. I think at this point he knows he can trust you, yes?"
Michel nodded unhappily.
"But  also,  Michel,  we  need  someone  here  who  can  counteract  Placido's  and  Clara's
influence. You're doing that already, aren't you?"
"Maybe," Michel said. "Sort of. But—"
"The Lupi need a voice here, and it can't be me," I said.
"What about Giovanni? He's got more experience with this sort of thing."
Giovanni made a choking noise.
"I'd sooner send Isabella," I said.
"Hey!" Giovanni said. "I can be much more diplomatic than Isabella."
"Michel," I  said,  "you're  the  right  person  for  this.  The  Emperor  likes  you  and  trusts
you—and I like and trust you, and I know you'll do fine."
"But I'd rather serve you," Michel whispered.
"You will be serving me," I said. "By serving Travan."
Placido and  Clara—to  their  immense  consternation,  I  suspected—were  not  invited  to
dinner with the Emperor. Neither was  Giovanni.  Travan  and  I  dined  alone,  with  Michel
standing watch at the door. The food  was  very  simple,  just  soup  and  bread.  Travan  ate
distractedly, soaking his bread in his soup and telling me about his journey here.
"So  the  Fedele  says  to  Michel,  'Why  are  you  two  traveling  together?'  "  Travan  said,
imitating  the  priest's  squirrelly,  suspicious  voice.  "And  Michel  says,  'He's  my  elder
brother.' And the priest's eyes get narrow, and he says, 'I heard you say last night that he

was  your  friend.  And  now  he's  your  brother?'  And  Michel  slings  his  arm  around  the
priest's shoulder and kind of takes him aside and says, 'Look  at  him,  Father.  Would  you
want to admit to being this man's brother if you didn't have to?' "
I laughed.
"This story gets better every time," Michel said from the doorway. "I'm starting to feel
sorry for the priest. Are you going to tell her I ended up having to bribe him?"
"Granted, but you bribed him  to  overlook  horse  theft;  he  never  suspected  what  was
really going on."
"So how is life here?" I asked. "Not exactly as comfortable as the enclave."
"Oh,"  Travan  shrugged.  "My  bed  is  soft  enough  and  my  stomach  is  full.  This  is
exciting.  Frightening,  but  exciting.  It's  strange  to  have  people  currying  favor  with  me
instead of trying to threaten me. I think I like it."
"Have there been any serious threats?"
"One," Travan said, and told me about the assassin.
I nodded. "Your Highness, I was originally planning to take Michel back with me to the
Lupi,  but  it's  clear  you  need  an  experienced  bodyguard.  Would  you  be  interested  in
having him stay with you on a permanent basis?"
Travan's face lit. "Yes," he said simply. "I've been dreading losing Michel."
"You have to promise to listen to his advice," I said. "He's been my adjutant as well as
my bodyguard, and I don't want that going to waste. Even if Clara and Placido think he's
an ignorant peasant."
"Of course I will listen to him," Travan said. "He's been my first and best friend since I
left Cuore."
I gestured to Michel and he came over. His feet dragged, but his face was solemn and
resigned.  He  touched  his  heart  with  his  fist  and  held  his  fist  out,  saluting  me.  "On  my
honor, I swear I will serve the Emperor as I have served you," he said. He turned to face
the Emperor, and  offered  him  a  salute  as  well.  "On  my  honor,  I  swear  I  will  serve  you
with all my loyalty until you release me from my vow." He knelt and bowed his head.
Travan touched Michel's shoulder lightly. "Stand, Michel; you never have to be formal
with me. I accept your service, and I swear I will respect and value your loyalty."
Michel  stood,  meeting  my  eyes.  They  were  oddly  guarded  now,  and  a  little  hurt.  I
hated to lose Michel— but I'd hate even more to bury Travan before we could take Cuore.
Michel would understand someday.
When I returned to my room, I opened the door to find Clara sitting on my cot, talking
with Giovanni. "Giovanni and I were discussing the supply line," she said.
"Specifically, what  supplies  we  need  most  urgently,"  Giovanni  said.  "Food,  of  course.
For us and for the horses. What else would you say?"
"Proper  tents,"  I  said.  "With  tent  poles.  Weapons  for  the  volunteers  that  will  be
coming."
"You're quite certain that you will get additional recruits?"
"Our  faith  is  stronger  than  magefire,"  I  said.  "That's  a  pretty  strong  indication  of
whose side God is on, isn't it?"
"Indeed," Clara said.
"Also, it's midwinter—farmers can afford to join our army now. In fact, if  they  send  a

son to join us, it relieves the pressure on their winter food stores. But mainly—God is on
our side."
"Have you thought about how you will keep out spies?" Clara asked.
"We can't keep out every person who might be a spy," I said. "We assume that some of
the Lupi are spies and take steps to minimize the damage they could cause."
"New recruits are supposed to have someone vouch for  them,"  Giovanni  said.  "We're
more wary of people who've come from towns. Most of the Lupi are farmers."
"How can you tell whether someone comes from a town?" Clara asked.
I held up one hand, palm out. "Calluses."
"But that's not going to be a completely reliable test," Clara said.
"There is no completely reliable test," I said.
"Well," Clara said. "As you try to think of ruses to lure out the Circle, I'll try to think of
ruses to sort out the spies. I'll let you know if I think of anything."
"We'd appreciate that," I said.
Clara rose. "If you think of other urgent supplies, let me know in the morning. I'll see
what  we  can  do."  She  turned  back  at  the  doorway  to  look  at  me.  "I  was  a  little
disappointed that your friend didn't come with you, Eliana—the dancer. Lucia, is that her
name?"
"Yes," I  said.  "Lucia."  Her  name  still  felt  strange  on my  tongue,  after  the  months  in
Cuore where I couldn't speak it.
"I  heard  she  is  a  long-time  Redentore—perhaps  one  of  the  people  who  started  the
revival of the Old Way."
I nodded. "Yes."
"I'd very much like to meet her."
"I will relay your invitation when I return to the Lupi," I said.
"You  might  consider  sending  her  here,"  Clara  said.  "For  her  safety,  when  the  Lupi
leave the wasteland."
"Lucia is a soldier, like the rest of us," I said, bristling a little without meaning to.
"Very well, then," Clara said, a hint of a smile on her lips. "Good night."
When the door  closed  behind  her,  I  turned  to  Giovanni.  "Why  the  interest  in Lucia?
Did she mention Lucia earlier?"
Giovanni shook his head, his lips tight.
"You have a theory?"
"She wants to know, for future reference, who can be used against you. Who you care
about.  She'd  heard  Lucia's  name,  and  made  a  lucky  guess.  You  confirmed  her
suspicions—you care for Lucia."
I shuddered. "You think Clara would hurt Lucia to get to me?"
"Only if it's to her advantage," Giovanni said. He met my eyes reluctantly. "You know
Clara better than I do. What do you think?"
I thought about the cross Valentino found in his room. "I think you're right," I  said.  I
pulled off my boots and crawled under the blankets of my cot. "If she ever hurts Lucia," I
added as I arranged the blankets, "I'll have her head for a paperweight."

Giovanni smiled. "You'll have help getting it."
* * *
I was in the Great Cathedral in Cuore; it was a festival day, and  I  was  surrounded
by hundreds,  maybe  thousands  of  people.  But  instead  of  rose-petal  incense,  I  smelled
lamp oil and scorched metal. My stomach turned. "I have  to  go,"  I  said  quietly  to  the
people sitting near me, and they moved aside to let me out.
As I reached the center aisle, I saw  that  Bella  was  chained  to  the  Great  Altar,  her
robe ripped open to bare her skin; the man in black stood beside her, humming quietly
under his breath. "In Her name," he said, lifting a knife that glowed like an ember.
I  realized  suddenly  that  they  thought  Bella  was  me.  I  could  stop  this—if  I  turned
myself in, I could free Bella, but  I  would  have  to  take  her  place.  I  stood  frozen  in the
aisle,  unable  to  speak,  unable  to  run,  and  then  I  heard  Bella's  scream  of  agony,  and
smelled burned meat—
"Wake up, dammit."
Giovanni's  face  glared  down  at  me  by  candlelight,  and  I  realized  that  my  face  was
damp  with  sweat  and  tears.  "If  you're  going  to  have  nightmares,  can't  you  have  quiet
nightmares? Sit up."
Shaking,  I  let  Giovanni  help  me.  I  saw  a  red  glow  and  cried  out  involuntarily,  then
realized  that  all  I  saw  were  the  embers  of  the  fire.  I  covered  my  face  with  my  hands,
trying to control myself and hating my weakness. "I'm fine," I tried to say, but my voice
squeaked.
"I'll get you some tea," Giovanni said, but first he sat with me for a moment, his arms
around me, steadying me. "You really need Lucia here; she's better at this than I am." He
stroked my hair for a moment, then stood, still steadying me. "On second thought, I'll get
you some wine." He poured me a cup. "It's not hot— sorry—but trying to find tea just now
seems like more trouble than it's worth."
I sipped the wine. "It doesn't matter," I said. "I don't really want either."
"Do you want to talk about it?" Giovanni asked.
"No," I said.
When I was calm, I lay back down, and Giovanni went back to his own bed.
"I could never do it," Giovanni said. "I could never have endured what you endured."
"You could do whatever you had to do," I said.
Giovanni didn't answer. I blew out my candle and lay staring into the dark.
I got up at dawn  and  went  outside  to  practice  my  violin.  I  was  still  shaken  from  my
nightmare, as well as my reaction to it. I hated bad dreams—especially when they showed
my  weakness  to  anyone  sleeping  near  me.  Lucia  slept  beside  me  and  had  learned  to
recognize the signs and shake me awake early, so that I didn't disturb anyone else, but I
felt  bad  enough  about  waking  Lucia.  I  suspected  this  one  had  been  triggered  by  my
conversation with Clara—the feeling that I was being out-maneuvered in some way that I
couldn't even guess at. Or maybe it was just that seeing Clara reminded me of being in the
enclave.

I started by playing etudes, but I wasn't concentrating on them the way I felt I ought
to. I thought of Mira, and her focus as she played. Perhaps I could use my connection with
Mira to draw the Circle out somehow. But even if she had freed me on the orders  of  the
Circle Council, the other mages had to suspect that she had some responsibility for  what
happened after that. If now she suddenly announced to the other mages that she thought
it would be a good idea to attack Pluma, I couldn't imagine that she'd have a whole lot of
credibility.
"...Daniele?"
I turned and almost dropped my violin. "Quirino! What are you doing down here?"
"I followed the Emperor when I heard what happened. When I heard  who  you  really
were. Assuming what I heard was true. It seems way too far-fetched ..."
"That I'm really a woman?"
"No, that I could believe. That you're really Eliana."
"That's also true. How did Ulisse take it?"
Quirino groaned. "With wine. Lots of it. 'She must think I'm such a fool,' he said. Again
and again."
"I  have  to  admit  that  it  was  hard  not  to  laugh  when  Ulisse  got  misty-eyed  at  the
mention of my name, but how was he supposed to know? If Ulisse had been able to figure
it out, someone else would have, too. And I was trying pretty hard to avoid that."
Quirino nodded. "Still, I wish I'd known. I'd have helped you in any way I could."
"I couldn't put you in that sort of danger."
"Valentino's here, too," he said.
"Despite Clara?"
Quirino shrugged. "She seems to have dropped her grudge. Go figure. I'm sure it's just
a matter of time before Valentino  gets  himself  in trouble  again.  Ulisse's  gone  to  join the
Lupi. I think he's planning to disguise himself, to avoid humiliation."
"As a girl? Oh, don't tell me. I don't want to  know.  Quirino—"  I  gave  him  a  sideways
look. "There is a way you can help me now. We need musicians. Lots of musicians ..."
* * *
Giovanni  and  I  left  in late  morning.  More  dust-covered  and  saddle-sore  nobles  had
arrived, some accompanied by guards, others by servants. Clara and Michel were finding
room  for  them  in the  barracks;  another  building  would  be  needed  soon.  As  I  made  my
way  through  the  crowd,  a  bony  hand  gripped  my  arm.  A  chill  ran  up  my  spine,  and  I
turned. "Amedeo," I said.
"Watch yourself," the madman said distractedly, jabbing my arm with his long fingers.
"Clara, she's trouble. Placido, he's trouble too. Watch yourself."
"You think I need a prophet to figure that out?" I said. "Thanks, old man. I knew that
already."
Amedeo nodded vigorously. "You do know, you do. What did I tell you? You don't need
me—you can see clearly for yourself, if you open your eyes."  He  stepped  in close  to  me,

gripping his hands into fists. I started to draw back, but  he  laid  his  fists  gently  over  my
heart. "Two hearts beat here, Eliana. Two hearts beat in your breast: one for your cause,
one for  your  friends.  Sooner  or  later,  you'll  have  to  choose.  Be  ready."  He  dropped  his
hands and walked away.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Blessed are me music-makers, for they near me voice of God.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 2, verse 15.
Giovanni and I were spotted by one of the perimeter guards as we rode in toward the
Lupi camp. He had been lying just at the crest of one of the brown hills, his dirty tunic and
trousers barely visible against the dust. He  stood  up  and  came  running  down  the  hill to
meet us. It was one of the Lupi who had disappeared after the  defeat  near  Pluma  a  few
months earlier, returned now that victory seemed possible. Back in the heart of the camp,
Lupi were lining up for their evening meal. Lucia greeted me with a warm embrace,  and
Giovanni and I told her about our trip to court over tea in my tent.
As  I  stretched  out  that  night  under  my  blankets,  I  found  myself  thinking  about  the
conservatory.  Flavia  and  Celia  were  probably  still  there;  they'd  be  almost  ready  to
graduate.  Domenico,  my  teacher—undoubtedly  still  there.  I  wondered  if  they  ever
thought about me, if they had any inkling that the Eliana in the ballads (I was certain that
the ballads had found their way there) was me. As word started to circulate that the Lupi
needed musicians, it was possible that some of them would come join us. Flavia, at least; I
thought that Flavia might.
Lucia was already asleep; I heard her murmur something  in the  dark  and  turn  over.
But Giovanni, on the other side of Lucia, wasn't snoring yet. "Giovanni," I said softly.
"Yeah?" He rolled over to face me.
"What do you  think  the  Circle  and  the  Fedeli  will  do  when  they  get  word  that  we're
recruiting musicians?"
There was a pause, and then a long sigh. "They'll probably round up all the musicians
they  can  find  and  hold  them  in  Cuore  'for  their  own  protection.'  They  may  not  really
understand yet how we do what we do, but if we're looking for musicians, they'd be idiots
to assume that we were looking for after-dinner entertainment."
"We'd better send messengers tomorrow," I said.
"Good idea," Giovanni said, and settled back into his blankets.
I heard Giovanni begin to snore a few minutes later, but I still couldn't  sleep.  What  if
something happened to the messenger I sent to my old conservatory? Very well  then,  I
thought. I'll send two. Three. I tried to imagine my own reaction to the message. Would I
have grabbed my violin and headed for the wasteland? I liked to think that I would have.
Certainly Bella would have, and thinking it over, I decided that even without Bella there,
even  without  Mira,  I'd  have  gone  to  join the  ragtag  army  to  the  south.  Flavia,  too.  But
Celia?  How  would  Celia  respond  to  the  message  from  a  stranger?  And  Domenico?  I
desperately wanted my old teacher to join us, I realized. What if he didn't believe that the

Eliana behind the message was me?
Very quietly, I got up  and  dressed.  I  would  have  to  go  myself.  It  won't  take  long,  I
thought. A few days to ride there, a few more days to walk back. Celia and  Flavia  would
come if I asked, and Domenico; maybe a few others. I could handle this. The Lupi  might
be  gathering  to  my  banner,  but  I'd  returned  only  recently  from  Cuore  and  they  were
quite  capable  of  functioning  without  me.  But  I  didn't  think  Giovanni  would  see  it  that
way—or Lucia—so I dashed off a quick note and left them  sleeping  in their  beds.  Within
the hour, I was riding  east.  The  moon  was  waxing  and  nearly  full,  and  my  horse  cast  a
faint gray shadow in the moonlight.
Giovanni caught up with me an hour later, furious. I wheeled my horse around to face
him. "You must have woken up right after I left," I said.
"What in hell do you think you're doing?" he demanded.
"I'm riding to the Verdian Rural Conservatory," I said.
"You're needed with the Lupi."
"You all did just fine without me while I was in Cuore. This is only going to take me a
week or two. Giovanni, I need to carry the message.  The  musicians  at  the  conservatory
know me. They trust me."
"Actually, when you're carrying an unpopular message—and trust me, Generale, this is
going to be a highly unpopular message, 'join us or sit in prison in Cuore'—it's usually best
if they don't know you."
"They're my friends," I said. "I'll know what to say to convince them to come." And I
have to at least try to protect them.
"You couldn't have woken me up to discuss this with me before you took off?"
"I knew you'd make trouble."
"I should have brought your bodyguards to drag you back."
"You think they would?"
"I could ride back now and get them, and give it a try."
"You'll never catch up with me again if you do."
Giovanni met my eyes in an exasperated glare, then shrugged and looked away. "Then
I'm coming with you," he said. "You're not doing this without someone to protect you."
It  would  have  been  pleasant  to  retrace  my  steps  exactly—to  pass  through  Doratura
and visit Giula and Rafi, then through all the towns to revisit the families who had offered
me hospitality on my  way  home  from  the  conservatory,  but  it  would  have  been  far  too
risky.  We  would  ride  east  through  the  wasteland,  and  then  due  north,  or  close  to  it,  to
reach Bascio.
We spent that first day  riding  across  wasteland  hills,  stopping  occasionally  to  rest  on
the hard brown earth and to feed the horses  (we  had  three,  since  I  had  brought  a  pack
horse). I wished that I could  have  done  this  entirely  alone:  Giovanni  couldn't  always  be
trusted to make a good impression. And I so desperately wanted to convince everyone at
the conservatory to come with me.
The weather was dry, thank goodness, and my nightmares stayed away even after we
crossed out of the wasteland. We had to spend one night in fertile territory, and it was  a
part  of  Verdia  that  was  too  thickly  settled  for  us  to  camp  discreetly.  We  would  attract
curiosity and suspicion, riding north from the wasteland, but we would attract far more if
we skulked in the woods instead of asking for  hospitality.  We  asked  at  an  isolated  farm,

and were greeted with wide, nervous eyes; clearly, they knew we were Lupi, sashes or no
sashes.  Giovanni  went  out  of  his  way  to  be  charming  at  dinner,  but  the  entire  family
seemed to be afraid that if they said the wrong thing, we were going to pull out knives and
cut  all  their  throats.  There  was  an  awkward  pause  at  the  beginning  of  the  meal,  and  it
occurred to me afterward that this was  probably  a  family  that  made  the  offering  to  the
Lady, and that they were too afraid of us to do it. It made me sad to realize this. If they
wanted to make the offering, I certainly didn't mind waiting a few extra moments to eat,
but I was too nervous to think to say anything until it was too late. Giovanni and I slept in
the attic of the stable, with the sacks of apples, onions, and turnips the family had stored
for the winter, and traded off watches.
During the long, dark hours of my watch, I tried to plan what to say when  I  spoke  to
Flavia and Celia. Think of Bella. That would be the point to hammer on, unless Celia had
managed to justify Bella's murder to herself out of her own loyalty to the Lady, in which
case I wasn't sure I wanted to recruit her anyway. The famine was caused  by  magery;
everything the Fedeli did  here,  everything  the  Circle  has  done  since  then,  has  been  to
cover this up. They don't want us to know what magery does, and they don't care how
many people die to conceal their secret. Think of Bella—one more death was nothing to
them. Bella was on the verge of discovering how to do the old sort of magery. If it had
been  you,  it  wouldn't  have  mattered  if you'd  fallen  to  your  knees  and  sworn  eternal
fidelity to the Lady. They'd have found some excuse to cut your throat, just like they did
to Bella.
Flavia will come, I thought. Domenico will come. I was less certain about Celia.
It was still quite early when we reached Bascio the next day. "I remember this town,"
Giovanni said.
"What do you mean?"
"I  came  here  to  spread  that  song,  The  Wicked  Stepmother.  I  was  only  here  a  few
hours, though."
"That was you? My friend Bella saw you come in. And, it was my teacher you sang to. I
think I told you, though, we never did figure out what it was about."
Giovanni shrugged. "If we'd made it explicit, it wouldn't have  been  a  very  good  song,
would it? 'La la la,  don't  do  magery.  La  la  la,  that's  what  created  the  wasteland.'  Not  to
mention the fact that the Fedeli would have hanged everyone they heard singing it."
"How long did it take them to figure it out?"
Giovanni grinned with a great deal of satisfaction. "I set out in early autumn spreading
it. They figured it out... oh, sometime after Viaggio."
"We  thought  maybe  the  Fedeli  had  written  it,  and  the  poison  honey  referred  to  a
heresy."
"You actually thought the Fedeli would be that creative?"
"Hey, until they showed up at Mascherata, none of us had ever actually met a Fedele.
Except for Mira. And she didn't object to the theory."
"Mira must have known what the song was about. She just didn't want to tell you."
"I'm sure you're right."
Bascio was located on a hill, and the conservatory was at  the  very  top  of  the  hill;  the
road  wound  around  the  hill  like  gut  around  a  tuning  peg.  I  could  see  the  Bascio
townspeople coming out of their homes to check us out, but they were used to strangers
coming through because of the conservatory, and we attracted curiosity but not suspicion.

The  conservatory  gate  was  closed  when  we  reached  it;  on the  other  side,  I  saw  the
Dean  of  the  conservatory,  Biagio,  and  a  group  of  teachers,  including  my  old  teacher
Domenico,  and  Nolasco,  Bella's  teacher.  Domenico's  eyes  went  wide  when  I  threw  back
my  hood,  then  he  turned  to  Nolasco.  "I  told  you  we'd  see  Eliana  again  before  long,"  he
murmured  as  I  dismounted.  Beyond  them,  farther  up  the  hill,  I  could  see  clusters  of
gray-robed students. We had been watched; we were being watched now.
I handed the reins of my horse to Giovanni and walked up to the gate. "Can we come
in?"
"What  if  we  say  no?"  Dean  Biagio  said  sharply.  "Will  you  batter  down  our  gate  and
enter by force?"
"Does it look like we brought our army? Unless you've been building up your wall, we
could just walk around to the back and hop over it. That's what Bella and I did when we
went to Bascio on a dare."
The touch of humor worked. Dean Biagio smiled a little in spite of himself, and I hoped
he was thinking, well, so it is our old  Eliana,  and  not  some  strange  Maledore  with  her
face. He swung open the gate, and gestured for a servant to come take our horses. "Come,
both of you," he said. "Whatever it is you're here to say, we'll discuss it in my study."
I could see gray-robed students watching me from windows as I followed the Dean;  I
shaded  my  eyes  to  try  to  see  faces,  to  see  if  I  recognized  anyone,  but  I  couldn't  make
them  out.  Inside,  the  flagstone  floor  was  cold  under  my  boots.  As  we  turned  down  the
corridor that led to the Dean's study, I saw a student flatten herself against the wall to get
out of our way and realized it  was  Flavia.  But  no flicker  of  recognition  crossed  her  face;
she was looking at Giovanni, not at me, and he clearly made her nervous.
The  Dean's  study  was  warm  and  smelled  strongly  of  toasted  bread  and  fresh  tea;  I
could see a steaming cup on the edge of his desk, placed by one of the servants. His desk
was clean and neat, and his shelves were stacked with  musical  scores,  some  brown  with
age. Along the back wall, there were instruments held neatly on racks:  a  lute,  a  violin,  a
flute, a drum. His window was glassed in, and the winter  sunlight  caught  the  dust  flecks
that spun up in the air when he sat heavily down on the cushion on his chair.
"Sit," Dean Biagio said to Giovanni and me, gesturing at the two chairs facing his desk.
Domenico closed the door and took a seat off to the side. "We know you are the leaders of
the Lupi," he continued, his voice heavy. "Why have you come here?"
"We need musicians," I said.
"By 'we,' you mean the Lupi, of course."
"I mean all those in the service of Emperor Travan. Lupi and Imperial Army both."
Biagio glanced at Domenico, who raised one eyebrow silently.
"And you fight against the Circle," Biagio said.
"And the Fedeli."
"Of course." Biagio looked down, a faint smile on his face. "Where exactly is it that you
intend to lead my students, assuming any wish to follow you?"
"To  the  wasteland,  initially,"  I  said.  "Then—"  I  hesitated,  then  plunged  ahead.  "You
are familiar, I'm sure, with some of the Old Way music. You may also know that there are
dances that go with the songs. A musician playing for dancers can  channel  the  energy  of
the dance, and use it to turn back magefire. With that  power,  we  can  do  battle  with  the
Circle and win."
Biagio and Domenico  exchanged  glances.  "So  that's  what  they  meant  when  they  said

that  your  faith  was  stronger  than  magefire,"  Domenico  said.  "We'd  heard  some  odd
stories about what happened at Montefalco."
"And rumors that more musicians were wanted," Biagio said.
"Already?" I kept my face impassive as my stomach  lurched.  How  quickly  would  the
Circle respond to this rumor?
"So you don't believe that it's the Redentore God placing Her hand of  protection  over
Her followers?" Domenico said. "You just think it's a different sort of magic?"
I  turned  to  look  at  my  old  teacher.  His expression  was  as  impassive  as  mine,  and  I
wasn't sure whether his tone concealed hope, contempt, or fear. "I don't think you have to
be Redentore to make this work," I said. "And I think Mira came here to hide because she
suspected this was possible."
Domenico lowered his eyes.
"You realize, I'm sure, that  even  if  I  do  not  assemble  the  students  and  faculty  to  let
you  speak  to  them,  you  have  already  accomplished  your  mission,"  Biagio  said,  his  tone
bitter.  "I  have  no  doubt  that  the  nature  of  your  visit  has  already  spread  through  the
conservatory,  and  some  will  follow  you.  Perhaps  I  should  simply  ask  you  to  leave  now,
and let the eager ones go as they will."
"I'd prefer that you let me speak to a few people first," I said. "I'm sure the Emperor
would prefer that as well."
"I'm sure you're right," Biagio said.  "And  I'm  sure  that  our  old  friends  Father  Cassio
and Mother Galeria, of the Fedeli, would prefer otherwise. And the man who rode in last
spring, what was his name? Liemo?"
"He'd prefer otherwise as well," I said. "You're right. Actually, I'm  sure  that  all  three
would be most pleased if you took the initiative to offer both of us poisoned wine."
"Or  better  still,  took  you  both  prisoner,"  Domenico  said.  "They'd  probably  be
especially happy to get you alive."
I looked at Domenico, and realized that he was almost starting to smile. "Absolutely," I
said. "But they'd settle for our heads in a  sack.  I'm  sure  you'd  both  be  richly  rewarded.
For as long as the Circle and the Fedeli's rule lasted."
Biagio  rolled  his  eyes.  "I'm  not  going  to  give  you  poisoned  wine—as  if  you'd  drink
anything I offered, now that the suggestion's been made. Not that I keep poison on hand
to rid myself of uninvited guests in any case."
"If you did," I said, "you could have offered some to Cassio and Galeria."
"Quite right," he said. "At any rate, according to what you'd like us to believe, they'll be
in no position soon to reward my faithfulness to the Lady."
"The Lupi and the Emperor  stand  together,"  I  said.  "Everyone  in the  Empire  knows
the truth about mage-fire,  and  now  we  have  a  way  to  defend  ourselves  against  it.  How
long do you think they'll stand against us?"
"And in the meantime?"
"In the meantime, as soon as they hear that we're recruiting musicians, I imagine that
they'll send some guardsmen to escort anyone they find here to comfortable new quarters
in Cuore. If you bring our heads  in a  sack  to  offer  them,  they  may  trust  you  enough  to
allow you the liberty of the city."
"So we have the Lupi to thank for being in this position," Biagio said. "Is that correct?"
"I'd say  that  you  have  the  Circle  and  the  Fedeli  to  thank,  actually.  It  was  the  Circle

who  destroyed  much  of  Verdia;  it  was  the  Fedeli  who  spilled  Bella's  blood  in  the
conservatory's courtyard."
Biagio lowered  his  eyes,  and  I  saw  that  his  hand  shook  as  he  lifted  his  cup  of  tea.  I
leaned forward and lowered my voice.
"I believe that we will win this war—the Lupi and the Emperor together. It's  possible
that I'm wrong about this, though; I can't say I know what the spring will bring. The one
thing that is certain is that if you stand with us, you stand  against  the  Fedeli.  Since  you
can't  know  for  certain  which  is  the  preferable  side  to  be  on,  you  might  as  well  stand
against the people who cut Bella's throat."
Dean Biagio looked up at me, and I saw a glimmer I couldn't identify in his eye. "Thank
you," he said. "If you and your companion will step outside for a few moments, Domenico
and I would like to discuss this in private."
Nolasco, the trumpet teacher, had waited outside the Dean's study; he escorted us to a
small sitting room a short distance down the corridor. I wondered if he had listened in on
the conversation; he had been Bella's teacher, after all, and I rather thought that he would
not be a friend of the Fedeli. His face was rigid, though,  and  I  wasn't  sure.  I  also  caught
another glimpse of Flavia, loitering outside the Dean's study. This time, she met my eyes,
and  I  saw  her  face  light  up  with  recognition  just  as  Nolasco  ushered  us  into  the  sitting
room and closed the door.
"Do you think the Dean's going to let us recruit?" Giovanni asked as soon  as  we  were
alone.
"Yes,"  I  said.  "But  he  may  do  it  by  allowing  me  some  time  'alone'  to  'visit'  my  old
friends. I'll take whatever he offers, frankly. I just hope he hurries."
We didn't have to wait long. Dean Biagio swung open the door a few minutes later. "We
are the Emperor's loyal subjects," he  said,  inclining  his  head.  "In  what  way  can  we  best
serve him?"
"Assemble the students and staff," I said. "I'd like to speak to everyone at once."
* * *
The  chapel  bell  tolled,  summoning  students  and  teachers  to  an  unscheduled  service.
The chapel was perhaps not the best location to recruit people to rebel against the Lady,
but it was designed to accommodate all the students and teachers at once. As I faced my
strangest  audience  yet,  the  girl  students  were  on  my  right,  the  boys  on  my  left;  the
teachers lined the walls  and  sat  in the  back.  I  scanned  the  aisle  seats  for  Celia,  but  she
must not have arrived soon enough to  grab  one  of  the  "good  spots."  The  students  were
breathless and bewildered; some of the younger students looked as if they'd been crying.
"Don't be afraid," I said. "I am not your enemy." Great, I thought as soon as the words
were out of my mouth. That would sure have made me feel better, back when I was a
student. "I am Generale Eliana of the Lupi, servant of Emperor Travan, but many of you
probably remember me as simply Eliana, violin student, and friend of Bella."
I could hear someone's breath catch at the sound of Bella's name. I looked around the
room. "Yes, you remember Bella, don't you? Probably  better  than  you  remember  me.  I
heard once that she was one of the brightest students the conservatory had ever seen. On
festival  days  when  we  played  games  to  test  our  memory  for  obscure  tunes  and  bits  of

musical lore, Bella would win every game until Nolasco made her sit down to give others a
chance. She was kind, daring, fiercely loyal to her friends and what she believed to be the
truth.  And  the  Fedeli  murdered  her—cut  her  throat  before  our  eyes,  and  forced  us  to
continue dancing while she choked to death on her own blood."
In  the  front  row,  there  was  a  girl  I  didn't  know—she  looked  maybe  a  year  or  two
younger  than  me,  but  old  enough  to  have  been  in  the  courtyard  that  night.  She  had
wrapped her arms around herself as I spoke and was trying to hold back her tears.
"We couldn't allow ourselves to cry that night," I said. "We couldn't allow ourselves to
be angry, because we feared the Fedeli so much, and because we believed that they were
an undefeatable, all-powerful enemy. But they're not. The Emperor has  turned  his  back
on them  and  joined  the  Lupi  in the  wasteland.  We  have  joined  forces  against  the  Circle
and the Fedeli, and we have a way to win, even against magefire. But we need your help."
I  licked  my  lips  and  looked  cautiously  toward  the  teachers  at  the  back  of  the  room.
Nolasco, Bella's old teacher, stared at the floor, his face hidden. Domenico's eyes were on
me, his face solemn and half shadowed.
"You've all played Old Way music—songs from the Redentori rituals. After leaving the
conservatory,  I  learned  that  there  were  dances  that  went  with  the  songs.  And  when  I
faced mages from the Circle in Montefalco, I discovered that those songs have power." I
raised  my  voice.  "By  the  power  of  God,  and  the  power  of  the  music,  I  saw  magefire
extinguished  like  a  candle  plunged  into  cold  water.  Without  magefire,  the  Circle  is
powerless.  Without  the  Circle,  the  Fedeli  are  powerless.  If  you  join  with  me,  we  can
restore the Emperor to true power. If you join with me, we will see that the Fedeli never
murder another Bella."
"And if we don't?" someone called.
"I leave this afternoon," I said. "And  I  want  only  willing  volunteers.  If  you  choose  to
stay,  though,  you  should  probably  realize  that  word  is  getting  out  that  the  Lupi  are
recruiting musicians. The Circle and Fedeli don't yet know why, but they will act quickly
to round up musicians from  the  conservatories.  Your  prison,  should  they  find  you  here,
will be a reasonably comfortable one, but you will be their prisoners, nonetheless."
The girl in the front row was openly  sobbing  now,  and  other  students  had  gone  very
pale. The fear in the room was palpable as they realized that the one choice that most of
them probably wanted to make—stay here, and let the world do what it will—was not an
option. I leaned forward and spoke gently. "If you do not want to join me, but you do not
wish to be a prisoner, you can also simply leave and return to your home. Very soon, the
Circle  will  be  far  too  busy  to  seek  out  and  round  up  every  minstrel  and  former
conservatory student  in Verdia,  no matter  how  much  they'd  like  to."  I  raised  my  voice
again. "But I hope that you will choose to join us. On one side, the Circle and Fedeli stand
against  Verdia—for  it  was  the  Circle's  magery  that  drained  the  lands  and  caused  the
famine. On the other side, the Lupi and Emperor stand  together.  Join  us,  and  serve  the
Emperor. Join us, and find out how it feels to really play the music you've always played
in secret."
I straightened up. "We leave in two hours. If you wish to join us, meet us at the front
gate with your instruments." I gestured to Giovanni, and he followed me out of the hall.
"How many do you think will come?" Giovanni asked.
I  sighed.  "I  don't  honestly  know,"  I  said.  "It's  funny,  because  I  was  pretty  good  at
predicting how many of the prisoners at the camps we liberated would join the Lupi, but
here I have no idea. I like to think that if I were still a student, I'd be off packing my bag
right now, but I don't know that I would."

"You would," Giovanni said.
I sent Giovanni to the kitchen to negotiate for food— we'd need to feed our volunteers
on the trip through the wasteland and back to the Lupi camp. Then  I  went  to  the  north
practice hall, where I used to meet  with  Mira,  Bella,  Giula,  Flavia,  and  Celia  to  play  the
Old  Way  music.  It  was  even  colder  and  draftier  than  I  remembered.  In  the  slivers  of
daylight that came in through  the  cracks  in the  walls,  I  studied  the  one  fresco  that  still
remained. I had always thought it was Gaius with the Lady's Gift: it showed a frightened
man clasping a tiny gleam of light to his breast.  Looking  at  it  now,  I  realized  that  it  had
probably  been  left  intact  because  others  assumed  the  same  thing,  but  it  wasn't  Gaius.
Aral  Chedvah,  I  realized.  The  Archangel  Gabriele,  thief  of  God's  holy  Light.  "Gabriele
stole  a  fragment  of  God's  holy  Light,"  I  remember  Lucia  saying,  "and  placed  it  in  the
womb of a pure young woman. And so she conceived  a  child,  a  son,  and  she  named  him
Gèsu."
This  was  a  church,  I  realized.  A  Redentore  church.  I  had  never  even  seen  Mass
celebrated indoors, except for the secret Redentori in Cuore. It was hard  to  believe  that
Redentori once had actual churches, and I felt the need to do  something  to  acknowledge
that I was on holy  ground.  I  crossed  myself,  finally,  and  whispered  a  prayer  in the  Old
Tongue.  I  wondered  if  Mira  had  known,  if  that  was  the  real  reason  she'd  liked  coming
here.
"Eliana?"
The whisper came from the doorway. I turned: Flavia. She came inside hesitantly, as if
she  didn't  really  know  how  to  treat  me,  this  strange  firebrand  who  claimed  to  be  her
friend. I realized that I didn't really know what to do, either—would Flavia even want me
to hug her? I had been gone a long time ... I hadn't even said a proper  good-bye  when  I
left that day, nearly choking on my grief and anger.
"I'm so glad you came to see me," I started to say, but Flavia was speaking at the same
time. "—glad you came back," she  said,  and  then  laughed  awkwardly.  "Sorry,"  she  said.
"Finish what you were saying."
"I  just  said  that  I  was  glad  you  came  to  see  me,"  I  said.  "On  my  way  here,  I  was
picturing myself talking to you and Celia alone, not making a speech to the whole school."
"It was a good speech," Flavia said.
"I've had a lot  of  practice  giving  speeches,"  I  said,  and  then  immediately  felt  like  I'd
said the wrong thing.
Flavia turned a little red and said, "Yeah, we've heard rumors. Songs."
"They're probably all lies."
"Except for the parts about you giving speeches."
"Right," I said. I sounded like a pompous priest; I wished we could just start this whole
conversation over. "Those might be true."
"Eliana." Another voice from the door. I turned to see Celia coming in at a full run; she
threw  herself  into  my  arms  with  a  shriek  of  delight.  "You  came  back!  You  hadn't
forgotten  about  us.  You  came  back  to  ask  us  to  join you!"  She  clasped  my  arms  in her
hands.
"You can't even imagine how many times Flavia and I have wished we went with you
when you left, like Giula did.  We'd  have  left  a  hundred  times  if  we'd  thought  we'd  have
done you the slightest bit of good— and if we'd known where to find you."
Celia let go of me, and I took the opportunity to give Flavia a tight hug. "Is that true, or

is Celia making it all up to make me feel good?" I asked.
"It's worse than you think," Flavia said. "She wrote a song about you."
"Oh, horrors," I said. "At least Lia started out with the story straight when she wrote
her songs."
"This one's about your early life," Flavia said.
"It's  actually  more  about  Bella,"  Celia  said.  "Of  course  no one  sings  it  publicly,  but  I
think everyone knows it." She bit  her  lip.  "No  one  was  talking  about  Bella—or  Mira—or
you and Giula. It was as if none of you had existed. It made me angry to think that people
were forgetting already."
"You've changed," I said.
"Maybe  you  just  didn't  know  me  very  well  before,"  Celia  said,  and  tossed  her  curls.
"Anyway, I'm coming with you, of course."
"And so am I," Flavia said.
"And so are we," a voice said from the doorway. It was Domenico; Nolasco was a pace
behind him. "I should have looked for you here first; I remember this was where you had
your secret ensemble." Domenico looked around. "I can't imagine why you met here. It's
freezing."  He  clasped  my  hand  briefly.  "And  so  the  student  becomes  the  teacher.  I  am
yours to command, Generale."
"Thank you," I whispered. "I will try to be worthy of your loyalty."
"I think my students will choose to come as well," Nolasco said. "All of them. It is their
decision,  of  course,  but—"  his  eyes  glinted  with  a  hard  light.  "We  have  not  forgotten
Bella."
Over a hundred students and teachers waited by the gate to the school when Giovanni
and I were ready to leave, their instruments slung over their shoulders. I was stunned by
the size of the crowd, and I realized that the trip back to the wasteland was going to take
a lot longer than I'd expected. To my surprise, Giovanni seemed to have obtained enough
food to feed everyone for the trip. He must have had more faith in my rhetoric than I had.
Domenico and Nolasco were coming with us; Dean Biagio was not. Nearly everyone I'd
known personally was coming, but also many strangers—the percussion teacher, the flute
teacher, a number of boy students. I thought about giving them another speech to inspire
them  for  the  walk,  but  something  inside  me  was  saying,  hurry,  hurry,  hurry.  So  I
discarded the speech and instead said, "I'm so glad to see all of you. Grab some of the food
and let's get moving."
Giovanni  had  loaded  my  horse  and  his  with  food  and  supplies  bought  from  the
conservatory's kitchens, along  with  the  pack  horse,  but  they  couldn't  carry  all  of  it;  the
musicians had to help, and I heard a great deal of grumbling as people shouldered sacks of
food along with their instruments. Giovanni led all three horses, to free me up to wander
among our new recruits and encourage any who seemed to need encouragement.
An hour after we set out, I sought out Celia, and discovered that she'd attached herself
to  Giovanni.  "Are  you  Generate  Giovanni?"  she  was  asking.  I  fell  in  step  a  few  paces
behind them to listen.
"Yes," Giovanni said.
"I'm so excited to finally meet you! I've heard  50  much  about  you!"  Celia  tossed  her
curls, and set her hand tentatively on Giovanni's arm.
"Have you," Giovanni said, and looked at her nervously.

"Oh yes. You're in some of the songs. Those were always my favorite ones."
Celia was flirting with him. My jaw dropped, and then I grinned. Bizarrely, this seemed
to  make  Giovanni  nervous—more  and  more  nervous  as  she  persisted.  Finally,  when  he
was answering all her questions with monosyllables and grunts, she gave up and went to
pester someone else. I  smoothed  out  my  face  so  that  she  wouldn't  realize  that  I'd  been
eavesdropping, but I don't think she cared. She fell into step beside me and  leaned  close
to my ear to whisper, "I had no idea that Generale  Giovanni  was  so  handsome.  He isn't
your ... your..."
"He isn't my anything," I said. "Well, he's my friend and my fellow generale, but that's
obviously not what you're asking about." She blushed prettily and tossed her curls. "Have
at."
"I'm sure he'd be interested in you," she whispered.
"I'm  sure  he  would  not,"  I  said  firmly.  "And  if  he  were,  he  would  be  in  for  deep
disappointment and a great deal of frustration."
That made Celia quite cheerful, and she moved off with a smile on her face.
"Thanks  so  much,"  Giovanni  said  as  soon  as  she  was  gone.  "I  really  did  need  a  cute
little companion; it'll make the ballads about me so much more popular."
"Celia's a very nice girl," I said, jogging a few paces to walk beside Giovanni.
"If  you  haven't  noticed,  Eliana,  there  are  plenty  of  very  pretty,  very  nice  young
women in the Lupi right now. Yet I sleep alone every night. Did you ever stop to consider
that maybe this was because I think it would be bad for morale for either of us to take a
companion from among our soldiers?"
"I had always assumed it was because you were still in mourning for Jesca," I said.
"Jesca!" Giovanni said. "Wherever did you get the idea ... In Jesca's eyes, I was a boy.
No, Generale, I sleep alone for many reasons, but my deep affection for  Jesca's  memory
isn't one of them." He shook his head. "Well, if Celia doesn't give up soon enough, I'll have
her assigned somewhere far away from me. A woman can be more persistent than a wolf
on a scent."
I snorted. "And a man can't?"
"Most men  will  give  up  when  they  get  no encouragement,"  he  said,  and  gave  me  an
amused look through his lashes. "But lack of encouragement doesn't  always  deter  young
ladies like Celia. At any rate, she's taken herself off somewhere for now ... Do you suppose
we can get them to move any faster?"
"Maybe a little," I said.
"I  wish  you'd  taken  a  corps  of  dancers  and  a  squad  of  Imperial  guards  when  you
decided  to  sneak  off.  It  wouldn't  have  been  exactly  subtle,  but  since  they  mentioned
they'd heard rumors that the Lupi were looking for musicians ..."
"I'm worried, too. I've been pushing things as fast as I felt I could."
"I  know.  That's  why  I  wish  we  had  soldiers  to  defend  us."  Giovanni  handed  me  the
horses' reins. "I'm going to scout ahead."
I nodded and took the reins without breaking stride.
Giovanni pulled the hood of his cloak up and set out at a slow run, down the slope  we
were on and then up the next hill, and then down again, hidden from view.
Flavia sought  me  out  a  few  minutes  later.  "You  spoke  a  great  deal  about  Bella,"  she
said. "But there's another from our quartet you never mentioned. Does it not bother you

to lead a war against Mira?"
I  bit  my  lip  and  looked  away.  I  thought  I  could  trust  Flavia,  but  there  were  other
people close by, and I couldn't risk Mira's treason being discovered. "Miriamne made her
choice," I said.
Flavia nodded, her face troubled. "And Giula?"
I laughed. "Now that's a tale." I told her about our trip together as far as Pluma—then
her  reappearance  at  Ravenna,  and  her  association  with  Teleso.  "She  ended  up  going  to
Doratura. As far as I know, she's still there."
Flavia sighed. "I would have expected better of her." She meant  Giula,  but  I  thought
she  probably  expected  better  of  Mira,  too.  And  in the  case  of  Mira,  Flavia  was  right.  I
tasted bitterness in my mouth for a moment. Even though Mira had given me the key to
the  countermagery,  and  even  though  I  was  sure  that  she  had  cheered  the  news  of  our
victory at Montefalco, part of me hated the idea of making war against her. Not because I
had any hesitation about opposing the Circle, but because the idea of facing Mira across a
battlefield again made my stomach churn. Shaking my head, I pushed the  thought  away
and asked Flavia what she and Celia had been up to since I left.
"Off the road!"
Giovanni was running down the hill toward us. "Off the road!" he shouted. "Everyone,
off the road now! Hurry! We need to hide!"
Confused, everyone plunged off the road to the south.  The  winter  fields  were  muddy
and bare, but a grove of cedar trees stood not too far away, and a tangle of brush beyond.
Still,  there  were  a  hundred  of  us—and  the  musicians  were  not  accustomed  to  hiding.
"What's wrong?" I asked.
"There  are  twenty  horsemen  riding  toward  us,"  Giovanni  said.  "Fedeli  or  Circle
guardsmen, I'm not sure. I didn't see any mages—they all seemed to be soldiers. But I'm
guessing they're heading for the conservatory to take the musicians there  into  custody."
He raised his voice again. "Hurry! Run, all of you! Once you're off the road, keep going!"
"Did they see you?" I asked.
"Maybe,"  Giovanni  said.  "From  a  distance.  I  don't  think  I'll  have  aroused  their
suspicions, though."
Our  musical  army  moved  with  agonizing  slowness,  even  though  I  could  tell  that
everyone  was  trying  to  hurry.  People  were  picking  their  way  across  the  muddy  field,
trying not to slip. "Hurry!" I shouted.
We were crossing someone's farm, but if anyone could see us, they didn't come out to
say hello. It was possible that if we asked, the family who lived here would hide us. It was
also possible that if we asked, they'd promise us safe shelter and then trot off to find the
guardsmen riding toward Bascio. There was no way to know.
"Down!"  Giovanni  shouted  as  we  reached  the  stand  of  cedars.  "Everyone,  lie  on  the
ground!"
I  dropped  without  hesitation;  around  me,  the  musicians  carefully  set  down  their
instruments  and  then  huddled  on the  ground  beside  them.  The  horses,  of  course,  were
still standing, but I hoped the  cedars  would  screen  them  well  enough.  We  were  in thick
brown brush. I quietly blessed the drab gray robes, which would blend in reasonably well
with the mud and bracken.
Beside me, Giovanni was crouched, watching  the  road  from  the  screen  of  the  cedars.
"They're passing," he said. "They're going by. They didn't see us."

Around us, muddy musicians began to sit up.
"When they get to the conservatory, they'll  know  where  we've  gone,"  one  of  the  boy
students said. "Where we're going."
"We've got an hour or two," I  said.  "I  think  the  Dean  will  stall  them.  Maybe  mislead
them.  If  I  were  him,  I'd  tell  them  some  story  about  the  Lupi  riding  in  with  a  hundred
soldiers, to explain why he let us recruit."
"If they look for us, they'll find us," someone said.
"Keep moving," I said. "Head south. They're not going to find us." I wasn't sure I was
telling the truth, but for now, I wanted just to keep people moving,
"Do you  know  of  anywhere  we  can  hide?"  Giovanni  asked  me  quietly  as  we  walked.
"You've lived here, I haven't."
"I lived at the conservatory," I said. "I passed  through  this  area  twice—once  coming,
once going. They never let us leave the conservatory grounds." I picked a cluster of burrs
out of my hair.
There  was  a  delicate  soprano-pitched  cough,  and  Celia  fell  in  step  beside  me.  "I
couldn't help but overhear you just now," she said. "My family lives only an hour  or  two
from here. We can go to their farm."
"Are you sure they'll help us?" Giovanni asked.
Forgetting to flirt, Celia narrowed her eyes into a glare. "These are my parents. Do you
think they'll turn me away?"
"Can you get us there off the road?" I asked.
Celia  nodded.  "There's  a  path.  My  mother  comes  to  the  conservatory  to  visit
sometimes."
I gestured. "Lead, then."
Celia led us to a dirt footpath, and our  army  of  musicians  spread  out  into  a  long  line,
walking one or two abreast. I walked behind Celia, Flavia beside me; Giovanni brought up
the rear with the horses, so that no one would have to walk in their leavings. Despite the
danger,  everyone  still  seemed  to  be  in good  spirits.  Somewhere  behind  me,  one  of  the
boys started singing a marching song that I suspected he'd learned from a brother in the
army; it was dirty enough to make a cowherd blush, but nearly everyone joined in on the
refrain. I'll lie in my bed, I'll sleep like the dead, I'll call for the milkmaid to bring me my
bread. My heart will be fed, my lips will be red, my purse will be empty, my sweetheart
I'll wed.
Flavia didn't join in, nor did she pull  her  drum  out  to  beat  time.  "The  songs  say  that
your family died," she said.
I  nodded.  "They  got  caught  in the  middle  of  a  fight.  The  Circle  destroyed  the  whole
village."
"I've been worrying about my family. I didn't have a letter from them the last time the
messenger service came."
I remembered the name of Flavia's village, a small town just outside the wasteland. "I
haven't heard about anything bad happening there," I said. "But it's quite  far  south;  I'm
not surprised the messenger service didn't want to go there to pick up the mail."
"Yeah. I was supposed to be afraid that the Lupi were going to sack my village and kill
everyone there, but I never believed you would."
"Good," I said. "Because we wouldn't."

"I'm sorry about your family," she said.
I  clasped  Flavia's  hand.  "The  Lupi  are  getting  volunteers  now  from  all  over  Verdia.
Maybe there will be someone from your village who will have news for you."
The trip to Celia's farm took two full hours, but we were not overtaken on the  way.  I
had half expected Celia to lose confidence when she actually had to approach her family's
home with a hundred hangers-on, but she marched up to her front door while we all stood
in the front yard. The person who answered her knock looked like  a  younger  sister;  her
mother and father came  to  kiss  her  and  hear  her  explanation  for  why  she'd  abandoned
her studies so close to possibly winning a lucrative position. I couldn't hear most of  what
she said, but I saw her point to me, and I caught the words Fedeli and Emperor.
She came back to join us  a  few  minutes  later,  still  perfectly  composed.  "Some  of  you
will have to hide in the barn, some in the root cellar, and some in the house. There should
be room for everyone, though."
"We are at your parents' disposal," I said.
The bulk of the recruits would hide in the barn, so Giovanni and I elected to stay in the
barn  with  them.  Celia  insisted  on keeping  Flavia  with  her  in  the  house;  she  would  not
hide,  but  would  change  into  one  of  her  sister's  dresses  and  present  herself  simply  as  a
daughter of the  house.  As  Giovanni  and  I  closed  the  barn  door,  I  peered  out  through  a
crack in the wall and saw one of Celia's  brothers  taking  off  at  a  run;  for  a  moment,  fear
flashed through me that he was going to turn us all in. But Celia's parents were unlikely to
do anything that would get their own daughter into trouble, I thought, and I settled back
against the wall to wait out the afternoon.
"If  they  find  us  anyway,  you  know,  this  is  pretty  much  not  defensible,"  Giovanni
whispered as we settled down in the dirt and scattered straw. "They could burn this place
down around us."
"Thanks,"  I  said.  "I  really  needed  that  image  to  think  about.  Do  you  have  any
alternative suggestions?"
"Not really," he said.
It  was  almost  evening.  Giovanni  unpacked  apples  and  cheese  from  the  horse's
saddlebags to hand around, since we could hardly  expect  Celia's  family  to  cook  for  all  of
us. I kept watch through the crack in the door, though as Giovanni had pointed out, there
wasn't much we could do if the guardsmen came other  than  to  pray  that  Celia's  parents
were able to convince them there was nothing to look for.
We  dozed  as  the  sun  went  down.  A  few  hours  after  sunset,  we  heard  a  noise  that
brought Giovanni and me to instant alertness—hoofbeats. I bit my lip, hoping that none of
the musicians would instinctively summon witchlight when woken and give us away. The
barn was very dark around me, and although I could bear some people snoring, I had no
way of seeing who was awake and who was asleep.
Someone banged on the door of Celia's parents'  house.  The  silence  went  tight  around
me; all but the most determined sleepers were awake now. I peered out the crack in the
door.  The  moon  was  full  tonight,  and  the  rider  carried  a  globe  of  witchlight.  One  rider,
alone. He knocked again.
Celia  opened  the  door.  She  was  wearing  a  yellow  dress,  her  hair  combed  neatly;  I
hoped it didn't make him suspicious that she didn't look like he'd dragged her out of bed to
answer the door. She shook her head.
The rider dismounted. He was close enough that I could see  the  insignia  of  the  Circle
Guard on his  uniform.  Celia  said  something  over  her  shoulder,  and  a  moment  later  her

father joined her. She slipped her boots on and stepped out into the yard. Demurely and
with perfect calm, she strode toward the barn, the guardsman a step behind her.
I  caught  my  breath;  Giovanni's  hand  closed  on the  hilt  of  his  sword.  Giovanni  and  I
could almost certainly kill him, if he was alone.
When Celia was steps away from the barn door, I saw her father make a sudden move,
and  the  glint  of  metal  in  the  moonlight.  The  guard  cried  out  once,  very  loudly,  and  I
wondered  with  a  sick  feeling  if  the  other  guards  were  anywhere  in  earshot.  In  the
darkness  behind  me,  I  heard  someone  whimper.  Celia's  father  brought  the  knife  down
again, twice more, and the guard was still.
Celia  opened  the  door.  "It's  all  right,"  she  said.  "Don't  be  afraid,  we've  taken  care  of
him."
I stepped out into the moonlight, looking down at the guard's motionless body. "What
about the others? There were twenty—what if the other nineteen come looking?"
"Well, we'd have had to kill him regardless," Celia said. "He was planning to search. My
brother  ran  out  to  tell  the  neighboring  villages  about  the  guardsmen,  right  after  you
arrived. My father thinks you should wait here a day or two, to let the other villages take
care of the rest." She looked disdainfully down at the body. "They shouldn't have split up.
Father says the Fedeli would have known better."
I looked at Celia's father. He had the same  chestnut  hair,  though  it  framed  a  tanned,
hardened face. He knelt, as I watched, to wipe the knife clean on the man's clothing.
"Did the Fedeli come through here last winter?" I asked.
Celia's  father  looked  up,  and  his  eyes  were  cold.  "There  was  a  burning,"  he  said.  "A
foolish  boy  who  opened  his  mouth  at  the  wrong  time.  The  Lady,  and  the  Circle,  had
friends here once. No more." He sheathed his knife. "We are glad to help you, Generale."
"Would  you  like  us  to  take  care  of  the  body  for  you?"  Giovanni  asked,  stepping
noiselessly out of the barn.
Celia's father nodded shortly. "You can bury him in our west field. We were planning to
let it lie fallow this year, anyway."
Giovanni  wrapped  up  the  body  in  its  cloak,  and  we  carried  it  together  to  the  field
Celia's father had sent us to. We took turns digging; the  ground  was  cold  and  difficult  to
shovel.
The blood had soaked into the dirt of the barnyard when Giovanni and I returned. No
more guardsmen came, and after another day of waiting, Celia's father came to tell us that
messengers had returned from the neighboring villages. Twenty guardsmen lay buried in
shallow graves in the fields of Verdia.
"Let's move," I said.  Celia's  father  moved  the  horse  into  the  stable  as  we  vacated  it,
and  I  thanked  Celia's  parents  for  their  hospitality.  Celia  fell  into  step  beside  me,  still
wearing her sister's dress. For whatever reason, she didn't try to flirt with Giovanni again.
CHAPTER TWELVE
Is this the victory you seek? 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 7, verse 12.

From my tent, a few months later, I could hear the drums even when I couldn't  hear
the singing, like a distant heartbeat. When the wind shifted, I could hear the voices of the
dancers, the flutes, the other violins. With Giovanni, I hiked to the crest of the hill and sat
down  to  watch.  Flavia  stood  in the  center  of  the  circle,  and  Lucia  led  the  dance  to  the
drumbeat. Flavia had cut her hair short;  she  still  wore  her  conservatory  robes,  but  had
belted the robe with a red sash. "She's ready," Giovanni said.
It was hard to argue with that. I crumpled Demetrio's letter in my hand. "I don't  like
Demetrio thinking he can set our timetables for us."
"Granted, but he's right. We can't wait forever. The Lupi are getting restless."
Our army was camped on the shores of the Anira River. Thanks to the Imperial supply
lines, we had real tents now and were generously supplied with food, but we were growing
so quickly that  space  and  food  kept  running  short  anyway.  Demetrio's  letter  had  urged
me to send out musicians immediately to test their skills against magefire, to ensure that
the ability wasn't limited to me.
"I had an uncle who thought the best way to teach children to swim was to throw them
in the deepest part of a pond and let them figure out how to keep from drowning," I said.
"That is the best way to teach children to swim," Giovanni said.
I  had  sealed  each  of  the  musician  recruits  as  Redentori,  starting  with  Flavia,  Celia,
Quirino, and Valentino, but I knew that many still believed in the  Lady.  "We  don't  even
know if you have to believe in order for it to work," I said.
"Magery  was  supposed  to  be  a  gift  from  the  Lady,  right?"  Giovanni  said.  "But
Redentori can still summon witchlight. Even if it's a sin," he added as an afterthought.
"You know, on our trip back from the conservatory, I used magery to light the fire one
night,"  I  said.  "The  tinder  was  damp;  I  decided  the  sin  was  on  the  soul  of  whoever
gathered the tinder, which I think was you, Giovanni."
Giovanni laughed. "If you want to know the truth, when I'm not in the wasteland, I use
witchlight  whenever  I  have  to  get  up  to  relieve  myself  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  I'll
cheerfully  endure  whatever  punishment  God  inflicts  on sinners  if  it  means  I  can  avoid
tripping and  falling  on my  ass.  So  in other  words,  this  is  just  the  latest  in a  long  line  of
petty sins, and not likely to significantly increase my divine punishment."
"I'll have to remember that," I said. "There are all sorts of sins I could probably pin on
your soul."
"Consider it  available,"  Giovanni  said.  "Within  reason,  of  course.  If,  for  instance,  you
are ever provoked to murder Clara and Placido, that sin goes on your own head."
In the valley below, the dance finished, and Lucia climbed breathlessly up to join us at
the crest of the hill. "Flavia's ready," Lucia said. "As ready as she'll ever be."
"Take Demetrio's advice," Giovanni said. "Send them out."
We arrived back at the main encampment to  find  a  new  shipment  of  supplies.  A  half
dozen Imperial soldiers waited, along with a clerk; I signed for  the  supplies  and  some  of
the Lupi went to work unloading and storing them. Another twenty-five new recruits had
also  arrived  and  were  being  sorted  out  by  Severe  A  message  from  Michel  had  arrived
with  the  letter  from  Demetrio.  The  makeshift  Imperial  city  had  been  dubbed  Corte,
Court;  Michel's  latest  estimate  was  that  there  were  three  hundred  residents,  including
nobles, servants, and guards. Several musicians had arrived, but they'd been sent over to
join  the  Lupi.  The  original  army  barracks  had  been  added  onto  six  times;  the  new

buildings  wound  their  way  across  the  walled  hilltop  like  a  huge  misshapen  caterpillar.
"Everyone  but  the  Emperor  and  Placido  are  doubled  up,"  Michel's  letter  informed  me.
"Placido doesn't have to share with anyone because he farts all night, according to rumor.
There's talk of another building. They'd send the servants to sleep in tents, but the nobles
are too worried that the servants will get fed up and leave, and they'll be left with no one
to cook or clean the stables."
"We'd better finish this war fast," I said gravely  to  Giovanni  when  I  had  finished  the
letter. "Or the highest of our nobility might actually be forced to take up useful work."
* * *
There were several small groups of mages just across the border from the wasteland;
they'd  attacked  some  of  the  incoming  recruits.  We  sent  out  scout  teams  of  dancers,
soldiers,  and  musicians,  anticipating  little  trouble  in  finding  confrontations.  The  Circle
wanted to know the limits of our defensive abilities as much as we did.
"I hate doing this," I said as I watched the scouts leave.
"But look at them," Lucia said, pointing at Flavia. "They're eager to do  it.  They  know
it's a test and that they're the ones who will determine if it works, but they know they can
do it."
"Besides," Giovanni said. "It's the only way to find out."
We sent the musicians we were surest of, like Flavia, but  we  couldn't  be  certain.  If  it
didn't  work,  the  scout  teams  would  be  killed.  And  we'd  have  to  scramble  for  another
strategy—fast.
"It will work," Lucia said.
The  day  after  our  scout  teams  left,  two  Redentori  priests  showed  up.  I  didn't  know
them,  but  they  carried  a  letter  from  Clara.  "Generale  Eliana,"  the  letter  said.  "You
mentioned  concerns  about  spies.  I  have  formed  a  group  to  combat  the  Fedeli  and  to
identify their supporters; we call ourselves the Servi d'Arkah, the Servants of God. I have
sent these two  men  to  aid  you  in identifying  Fedeli  spies;  they  have  been  instructed  to
follow your orders. I urge you to take advantage  of  their  services.  You  of  anyone  would
realize how devastating even a single spy can be."
I looked up from the paper. One of the Servi was old, and had hunched shoulders that
made him look like a vulture; the other had beady  eyes  and  a  shrill  voice  like  a  screech
owl. "What is it you want from me?" I said.
"Just a few minutes of your time," the vulture said soothingly. "I beg you, think of us
as advisors, not intruders. Sit with us a few minutes."
I sent Viola, one of my aides, for tea, and waved the Servi into my tent, clearing some
of  my  papers  off  the  table  so  that  we  could  sit  comfortably.  "Are  those  papers  of  a
sensitive nature?" the screech owl asked.
I looked down at the papers in my hands. Sensitive enough. "Why do you ask?" I said.
"Do you always leave them in the open like that?"
"This isn't the open," I said. "It's my tent."
"Still, many people must  have  access,"  the  screech  owl  said.  "Would  anyone  notice  if
someone came in, just for a few minutes, while you weren't here?"

"There is a guard on the  tent  at  all  times,"  I  said.  "Even  when  I'm  not  here.  Do you
think I'm a fool?"
"But,"  Vulture  said,  putting  a  placating  hand  on my  wrist.  His fingers  were  cold  and
sticky. "Are you certain you can trust every guard?"
"Yes," I said. "My aides have been with us since the slave camps."
"Who cleans?" Screech Owl asked.
"What  do  you  mean,  who  cleans?  Why  would  I  need  someone  to  clean  my  tent  for
me?"
Screech  Owl  shrugged  and  dropped  the  subject.  We  sat  in  silence  for  a  few
uncomfortable  moments,  then  Viola  came  in  with  tea.  She  filled  three  teacups,  setting
them down in front of each of us. I picked up my cup and took a careful sip. Viola nodded
politely to the Servi and left.
Screech Owl waited until the tent flap had fallen shut before speaking again. "Does she
have access to your tent?"
"Obviously," I said. "And my tea, were she to want to poison me. Look, Viola escaped
with me from Ravenna. If I can't trust her, I can't trust anybody."
"Does  she  ever  use  witchlight?"  Screech  Owl  asked.  "When  you're  not  in  the
wasteland?"
"What does that have to do with anything?" I said.
"Does that answer mean the answer to my question is yes?" Screech Owl said.
"No,  it  doesn't  mean  the  answer  is  yes!"  I  said.  "My  answer  means  I'd  like  to  know
why  I  should  care  whether  my  aides  occasionally  commit  trivial  sins  in  the  name  of
convenience."
"No sin is trivial," Vulture said.
"Do you 'guard the way to wrong' on behalf of God?" I said.
The tent was very  quiet for a moment. "No," Vulture said. "We find spies.  And  we've
found that many spies retain loyalty to the Lady, and will honor Her when they can."
"Being a Redentore was never a requirement for joining my army," I said.
"Wasn't  it?"  Screech  Owl  said.  "That  surprises  me  a  great  deal,  Generale.  Does  that
mean that you don't believe?"
"Of course I believe," I said.
"Then why don't you wish for everyone to share in the true faith?" Vulture said. "Oh,
but  this  is  beside  the  point.  The  point  is,  any  spies  will  definitely  belong  to  the  Lady.
Identifying those who avoid Redentori practices will at least give us somewhere to start."
"I  would  expect  spies,  who  knew  their  own  treason,  to  be  among  the  most  fervent
Redentori," I said.
"Were you a fervent worshipper of the Lady when you spied in Cuore?" Vulture asked.
"I don't remember you from the chapel."
"No, I wasn't," I said. "But I was never a very good spy."
"You were good enough," Screech Owl said. "And you knelt in prayer when you could,
didn't  you?  You  quietly  avoided  church.  That's  the  sort  of  thing  we're  trying  to  find
here—but of the opposite variety."
I was silent for a moment.

"Never mind your aide," Vulture said. "We will trust in your trust in her. Do you have
other people who use witchlight, when you're not in the wasteland?"
"I haven't ever noticed."
"Do you know of couples in your army who have sought the blessing of the Lady rather
than marrying before engaging in—ah—affectionate relations?" Screech Owl asked.
"I don't keep track of those sorts of activities," I said.
"Well," Vulture said.  "This  is  very  unfortunate.  What  about  attending  Mass?  Do you
have people who don't attend Mass?"
"I don't take attendance," I said.
"That would be easy enough to change," Screech Owl said. "If you strongly encourage
everyone to attend  Mass  regularly,  and  have  the  priests  keep  track  of  who  comes,  you
could identify the weak Redentori—"
"Or those who have injuries that make it painful to dance," I said. "Or those who seek
God's presence on their own. Or those who believe in the Emperor, and in our cause, but
not in God! Are all these people assumed to be spies?"
"We're just trying to narrow things down," Vulture said. "That's all."
"I'm beginning to think you don't care about identifying infiltrators," Screech Owl said.
"That  surprises  me  a  great  deal,  Generale.  Especially  given  your  own  experiences  with
Felice. You trusted him on instinct, didn't you? He playacted a great deal of fervent belief
in your cause, and you swallowed his lies. Didn't you?"
I was silent, glaring at them across the table.
The tent flap was yanked back with so much force it nearly pulled the tent down on us,
and  Lucia  stood  in  the  doorway,  shaking  with  rage.  "How  dare  you!"  she  shouted  at
Vulture and Screech Owl.
"The Priestess  Lucia,  I  presume,"  Screech  Owl  said.  "We  have  a  letter  for  you  from
Clara." He handed her a sealed paper.
Lucia tore it in half without looking at it.
"Well, since you weren't interested in reading it, I'll tell you what it said," Vulture said.
"Clara bids you understand that the Emperor has named you the heart of the Redentore
faith, but  Clara  the  head.  And  just  as  the  heart  must  allow  the  head  to  decide  in many
matters, you must bow to Clara's will. And it is her will that the Servi exist."
"Get out of here," Lucia said.
"Isn't that for Generale Eliana to decide?" Screech Owl said.
Vulture and Screech Owl both looked at me. My  eyes  narrowed  and  I  pointed  to  the
door of the tent. "Get out of my camp."
"But—" Screech Owl looked as if he was thinking of attempting some further blackmail
or threat.
"Get out of my camp now."
"It's almost nightfall," Vulture said.
I relented slightly. "I will arrange a place for you to sleep, then, and  you  can  leave  at
dawn." I lifted the tent flap and summoned Viola. "Arrange a tent for these men, and an
escort," I said. "They are not to roam the camp."
"You would throw us into the stockade?" Screech Owl said.

"I will not have you upset my soldiers with your nosiness," I said.
"We'll leave now," Vulture said, his voice colder than a winter lake.
I turned back to Viola. "In that case, see them to the border of the encampment."
The  Servi  mounted  their  horses  and  left  without  looking  back.  I  stared  after  them,
hoping  that  Giovanni  would  agree  that  tossing  them  out  had  been  a  good  idea.  Then  I
shook  my  head,  half  laughing  at  myself.  Giovanni  would  have  wrung  their  necks—first
Screech Owl, then Vulture. I headed back to the tent.
Lucia was still there, alone, weeping. "They're gone," I said.
"They'll be back."
"We don't have to let them come back."
"Sooner or later," Lucia said, "we'll have to face them."
"Did you know about these people?" I asked.
"Yes. When I  visited  Corte,  Clara  told  me  about  them.  She  was  so  proud!  I  said  she
was just trying to create her own little Fedeli and she got angry. I went to the Emperor;
he'll  let  me  in to  speak  to  him  because  he  knows  I'm  a  friend  of  yours.  I  told  him  that
petty enforcement was not what the Redentore  faith  was  about—that  God  doesn't  want
people forced to kneel or dance or even to refrain from using witchlight. Our faith is about
serving God because we want to, not because someone says we're spies if we don't." She
paused. "The Emperor said he'd think about it. I guess he made his decision."
I squeezed her hand, saying nothing.
"I  guess  I  believed  things  would  really  be  different,"  Lucia  said,  her  voice  almost
inaudible. "I thought I could really change things."
"Things will be different," I said.
"No," Lucia said, her voice soft  and  dull.  "They  will  paint  Gèsu,  and  place  him  in the
Great Cathedral, and all that will change will be the decorations. Redentori will go to Mass
each week because  they  have  to,  and  will  dance  because  they  fear  the  Servi.  The  faces
may change, but the walls will be the same."
* * *
All but one of the scouting parties returned the next week, exuberant. The music had
worked; they had deflected the Circle's magefire and shot the guardsmen dead. The Lupi
hadn't been this excited in months. We mourned briefly for the lost scouts—perhaps their
musician had been unable to make the magic work, or perhaps they had been ambushed.
We'd  never  know.  The  next  day,  we  packed  up  our  tents  and  loaded  our  supplies  onto
wagons. It was time to advance.
Initial  resistance  was  minimal.  The  Circle  and  the  Fedeli  were  unwilling  to  commit
their forces to a futile battle; they sent small groups of soldiers drawn from the Fedeli and
the Circle Guard, but not enough to put up a serious fight or even  to  slow  us  down.  The
Lupi  were  encouraged  by  our  easy  victories,  but  I  knew  that  this  was  exactly  what
Demetrio had feared; we were moving toward a showdown at Cuore, where the Circle and
the Fedeli would be protected by the enclave walls. We couldn't simply secure the rest of
the country and ignore Cuore; they would wait for our forces to disintegrate as Lupi left to
plant their fields, then reemerge to attack us when  we  least  expected  it.  Besides,  taking

Cuore would have a tremendous emotional advantage; it was the Heart, the center of the
country,  the  seat  of  the  Imperial  throne.  If  we  could  take  Cuore,  we  would  have  won,
even if pockets of the Circle survived.
For a long time, I had continued to say my selfish prayers to the Lord, rather than to
God—except for when I prayed for Lucia, after the Lupi were destroyed. It  was  hard  to
imagine that the Redentore God would care if my particular friends got hurt in battle. But
toward  the  end  of  Mass  one  night  as  we  approached  the  heart  of  the  Empire,  I  found
myself whispering a  prayer  to  God:  let  the  Circle  keep  Mira  in Cuore  for  now.  Surely,
after all that's  happened,  they  don't  fully  trust  her;  let  them  distrust  her  too  much  to
send  her  out  to  face  us.  Of  course,  if  they  sent  her  out,  that  would  give  her  the
opportunity to escape, but if she was going to run, I was fairly certain she'd have done it
by now. God, keep Mira safe, I pleaded silently. Somehow, somehow, please keep Mira
safe.
The  last  major  city  before  Cuore  was  Manico.  We  were  perhaps  two  weeks  south  of
Manico  when  the  Lupi  perimeter  guards  came  to  tell  me  that  the  Circle  had  sent  an
emissary to negotiate a truce.
I shook my head. "They're here to spy."
"If  they're  under  a  flag  of  truce,  we  have  no choice  but  to  treat  them  courteously,"
Giovanni said. He added to the guard,  "Search  them  for  weapons  and  keep  them  at  the
perimeter. 'Courtesy' doesn't preclude certain precautions."
I walked out to the northern perimeter of the encampment  with  Lucia  and  Giovanni.
Three  men  had  been  sent.  One  wore  a  black  wool  robe  with  linked  circles  on  his
sleeve—Fedele.  The  second  wore  the  uniform  of  the  Circle  Guard.  The  third  wore  no
uniform, but a fine tunic of soft blue cloth. I felt my lips twist into a snarl when I saw his
face. "Felice."
Giovanni grabbed my sword-arm and I shook him loose. "I know what a flag  of  truce
means, Giovanni. I  won't  hurt  him."  I  approached  the  messengers;  in unison,  the  three
men swung down from their horses. "If the Circle had  any  intention  of  negotiating,  they
would have sent someone else," I said, biting my words off as I tried to suppress the fury
that rose inside my stomach. "What do you want here?"
Felice bowed low in courtly courtesy. "Generale Eliana, the Circle and the High Priest
of the Fedeli send their regards."
"We extend our greetings to them," Giovanni said.
Felice  straightened  and  looked  up  through  his  long  lashes.  "And  how  is  your  health,
Generale Eliana?"
"I'm fine," I said. "Thank you so much for your interest."
He gave me an ingratiating smile. "Quite recovered from your ... detention?"
I met his eyes coldly. "Yes."
"Good," Felice said with an earnest nod. "It's always best  when  a  whole  body  can  be
delivered to the Lady."
Beside me, I heard Giovanni's breath catch. I stepped forward, pushing my hood back
from my face. "Take your best shot, Felice."
Felice fell back a step and lowered his eyes. "I would never consider dishonoring a flag
of truce."
"Good," I said. "So why exactly are you here?"

He cleared his throat. "I am here with an offer of clemency for  you  and  for  the  other
Lupi, should you cease and desist all hostile actions from this point onward."
I laughed. "How generous."
"I advise you to consider it, Eliana," Felice said. "Do you really think you're going to be
able to  pull  this  off?  We  still  hold  Cuore.  You  wouldn't  want  your  friends  to  go  through
what you endured, would you? Think of your soldiers. Think of ..." His eyes flicked to the
side, then back to my face. "Think of Lucia."
I heard a growl from behind me, and before I could stop him, Giovanni had drawn his
sword and lunged toward Felice. Abject terror flashed across Felice's face; this was not an
eventuality he had planned for. "Giovanni!" I shouted. "Drop your sword!"
Giovanni didn't turn around, but held his sword-edge to Felice's throat. "You dishonor
the flag of truce with your insults," Giovanni hissed. He withdrew the sword and slapped
Felice hard on the cheek with the flat of it, a duel-challenge. "We'll finish this some other
time." He stepped back, shoving his sword into its sheath.
Felice rubbed his cheek, stunned. "I have a full offer from the Circle and the Fedeli in
writing,"  he  said,  his  voice  quavering  a  little.  "Do  you  wish  to  discuss  it  outside  in  the
wind, or would you care to read it over at your leisure and discuss it when you have had
some time to consider our offer? There are certain areas in which we are  empowered  to
compromise."
I took the proffered scroll and handed it to Lucia. "Take them to an empty tent on the
perimeter  and  keep  them  under  close  guard,"  I  said  to  the  Lupi.  "We'll  send  for  them
later, if necessary."
"Why would they send Felice?" Lucia asked  as  we  headed  back  toward  the  center  of
the encampment. "What could possibly be their purpose?"
"The only reason to send an envoy with that sort of offer would be to scout us out," I
said. "Count our numbers, maybe overhear  something  useful.  Felice  is  probably  here  to
provoke  us.  Perhaps  they  think  an  angry  opponent  is  to  their  advantage."  I  glanced  at
Giovanni involuntarily. Giovanni scowled darkly at the ground. "I don't think that worked
quite as Felice planned, though."
"Perhaps they hoped you'd kill Felice on sight  and  dishonor  the  Lupi,"  Giovanni  said.
"That could create a rift between you and Demetrio."
"Demetrio's not exactly a close friend as it is," I said.
"Still."
Back  in my  tent,  I  read  the  offer.  Rosalba  had  drafted  it;  I  recognized  the  beautiful
handwriting. It was a more detailed and poetically worded version of what Felice had said
at the perimeter: surrender, and we'll spare your miserable lives.
"There's no point in sending this," I said. "They must know we'll refuse."
"Perhaps it's a distraction," Giovanni said.
"Perhaps."  I  summoned  a  guard  to  order  additional  troops  sent  out  to  watch  the
perimeter,  as  well  as  a  half  dozen  more  to  stand  watch  outside  the  tent  of  the
"emissaries."
Lucia was pondering  their  offer.  "Can  we  use  this  somehow?"  she  asked.  I  looked  at
her, puzzled. "Demetrio said we should seize on any opportunity to draw the Circle out of
Cuore. Is there some way we could use this to do that?"
Giovanni's head snapped up. "If they came here to spy—"

"—Maybe we could feed them some useful intelligence," I finished. "Like they did with
us in Pluma. Like Felice did with us."
"If you think he'll fall for his own trick ... South of Manico is a good place for a battle,"
Giovanni said. "Maybe we could persuade them to meet us right where we want them."
"If we let them overhear—" I thought for a moment. "Perhaps that we're unconfident
in our power to  defend  against  a  great  many  mages  at  once.  I  could  say  that  I  feel  the
shield  weakening  sometimes—that  maybe  fifty  or  a  hundred  mages  working  in  concert
could break through the barrier."
"What if you turn out to be telling the truth?" Giovanni said. "We've never faced down
more than ten at once."
I sketched out a rough map on the dirt floor. "We'd bait the trap with some of the Lupi,
but nowhere near all. If it turns out they can incinerate us, there'd still  be  plenty  left  to
finish  this.  The  road  north  leads  through  a  large  valley  just  south  of  Manico.  We  could
send in the bait and wait for their 'ambush.' When they attack, more Lupi close in." I drew
arrows coming over the hills I'd  drawn.  "Honestly,  I  think  I  could  hold  off  any  number.
Especially  since  they  aren't  used  to  working  in  groups  that  large.  But  even  if  they  do
break through our defenses, they'll never be able to redirect their fire outward in time."
"I hope you're right," Giovanni said.
Lucia  bit  her  lip.  "This  is  the  kind  of  opportunity  we  can't  throw  away.  I  think  we
should try it."
I looked at Giovanni.
"You're  right,"  Giovanni  said  finally.  "It's  risky,  but  it's  the  best  shot  we  have  at
avoiding a siege."
I nodded. "We  need  a  'traitor,'  then.  Someone  Felice  doesn't  know—but  someone  we
can trust..."
* * *
"I have orders to take that one to Generale Eliana." Quirino held out the paper toward
the guards.
The guard looked it over by lantern-light and shrugged. "He's all yours."
Quirino took Felice courteously by the arm. "If you would come with me, signore." He
led Felice into the  shadows  of  one  of  the  larger  tents,  then  unfolded  an  extra  cloak  and
draped it around Felice's shoulders. "The generali intend to reject your offer, and to send
you away without speaking to you again," Quirino said in an urgent whisper. "Cover your
face with the cloak, signore."
Felice pulled up the deep hood. "Who are you?" he asked.
Quirino flashed a piece of hidden jewelry—two linked circles. "One who is  loyal  to  the
Lady, and would die for her."
Felice nodded slowly.
"Come," Quirino said.
Quirino led Felice through the maze of  tents.  ("Try  not  to  let  him  see  a  whole  lot,"  I
had requested. "But make sure he wouldn't be able to easily find his way  back.")  Finally

he stopped, and gestured for Felice to be absolutely silent. In an adjacent tent, Flavia was
watching from a hole in the  seam;  when  she  saw  that  they  were  in place,  she  gestured,
and Valentino abruptly stopped practicing his violin.
That was the signal. Inside the tent, I lit a fresh candle. Lucia and Giovanni looked  at
me expectantly. "At least the weather should be good," I said. We needed some  chitchat
first, to make this less suspicious.
"Only if you trust Severo's skills as a weather-caller," Giovanni said.
"He's right five days out of seven," I said.
"Yeah, well, predicting 'rain and a cold wind' every day in late winter will be right, five
days out of seven," Giovanni said.
"But he's not predicting rain and cold, he's predicting sun and warmth."
"Tea?" Lucia asked, pouring herself a new cup. She  spilled  some  on her  lap.  "Damn,"
she muttered, wringing out her skirt. I picked up a cup and took a sip.
"In any case," Giovanni said. "There are more important issues at stake here than the
weather."
"I don't see what you're so worried about," I said. "Everything's gone as planned so far.
The dances work."
"Against  five  mages,  yes.  Against  ten  mages,  yes.  But  what  if  they  send  the  whole
Circle?"
I rolled my eyes and slammed down the teacup. "That's not going to happen, Giovanni,
and you know it. They're going to stay safely penned up in their rabbit-hole until they run
out  of  food.  They're  certainly  not  going  to  send  more  than  a  dozen  mages  when  we've
killed every mage they've sent our way so far."
"Just for the sake of argument, Eliana, how many mages do you think it would take to
get through your defenses?"
"Mine?" I pursed my lips and picked up my teacup for another sip as I considered. "At
least fifty— probably a hundred."
"There are enough mages alive for the Circle to send more  than  that,"  Giovanni  said.
"This could happen, Eliana. I think we should split the Lupi. Are you going to listen to me
this time?"
"Giovanni,  Demetrio  has  asked  us  to  secure  Manico.  That  valley  is  the  only  logical
staging ground."
"That's exactly the problem! They know where to find us."
"Giovanni,  I  spent  two  months  spying  on the  Circle—  at  your  request,  as  you  might
recall.  Two  months!  I  know  these  people.  I  know  how  they  think.  And  they  are  not
coming out of their hiding place until their lives depend on it.  So  far  as  they've  seen,  we
can  wipe  the  floor  with  them  anytime  we  want."  I  took  a  demure  sip  of  tea.  "I  am
generale," I said. "Are you going to follow me, or not?"
Giovanni picked up a cup of tea, then slammed it down so hard the cup broke. "You're
a fool,"  he  said.  "But  you're  the  fool  the  Lupi  support.  Am  I  going  to  follow  you?  What
choice do I have? I'd follow you to hell—and I probably will." He stomped out of the tent.
I turned to Lucia, who was wiping up the tea. "Do you think Isabella is going to give me
this much trouble?" I asked.
Outside the tent, Quirino watched Giovanni leave. "Quick," he said to Felice. "We need
to get you back to your tent."

Felice followed Quirino without protest. As they neared where they had started, Felice
gripped Quirino's arm. "Signore, you haven't told me your name."
"I think it's best you don't know it," Quirino said.
"Do you wish to come with us when we leave? The Fedeli will provide you asylum. You
could meet us—"
Quirino shook his head. "You heard their plans. I am a musician, signore. I fully intend
to be on that battlefield. And if the Circle attacks, they may rest assured that at least part
of the field will be unshielded. My death will honor the Lady."
Felice fell back a step, stunned. "Your faith puts me to shame."
"You serve the Lady," Quirino  said.  "As  do  I.  That's  all  I  need  to  know."  They  were
silent the rest of the way back to the tent.
Quirino made certain that Felice was well guarded, then returned to my tent, a broad
smile on his face. "Felice didn't just take the bait," Quirino said. "He swallowed the fishing
pole."
"Now we just hope that we really were lying," I said.
Giovanni clasped my shoulder. "I would truly follow you to hell," he  said,  "if  it  meant
kicking Felice's ass."
"Let's hope it doesn't come to that," I said.
* * *
We kept just enough Lupi in the  valley  to  make  it  look  crowded.  I  was  in the  valley,
along with Lucia, but Giovanni would lead the reserve troops. We didn't tell the Lupi what
we  knew  was  coming  until  the  Circle  was  almost  there;  some  were  probably  spies,  and
could  spoil  the  ambush.  The  attack  came  an  hour  after  dawn.  My  scouts  had  returned
exhausted. Just over a hundred mages, with guards and Fedeli soldiers, were approaching
from the north. We formed dance-circles and prepared for battle.
The Fedeli crested the hill and held their position. I had ordered our perimeter guards
to fall back with only a token struggle; if the Circle and Fedeli took our bait, there would
be far more soldiers than our  perimeter  guards  could  fend  off.  I  couldn't  see  the  mages
beyond  the  Fedeli,  but  I  knew  they  were  there.  This  is  for  you,  Mira,  I  thought,  and
raised my violin.
The  dancers  knew  how  many  mages  had  come  for  us  today;  I  could  feel  their  fear
around  me  like  smoke.  Still,  they  clasped  hands  and  never  stumbled  in  their  dance.  I
closed my eyes and the power flowed into me; I breathed it in like a  vapor  and  drank  it
like  wine.  I  whirled  to  face  our  enemy,  feeling  the  spinning,  blinding  light  of  the  dance
soaring around me.
I opened my eyes; the sky had turned to fire. The morning had been brilliant blue and
white,  as  Severo  had  predicted;  now  the  sky  rolled  with  flames.  The  fire  seethed
overhead like a swollen river, and for a moment I felt nothing but fear.
"Ask," Lucia whispered from the circle. "Ask and you shall receive."
God, give me the power.
The  flames  arced  down  upon  us  like  hawks  diving  on  their  prey.  I  felt  the  power

explode upward from my feet, rising to meet the flames like a wall of water, like a blinding
storm of light. The curtain of flame shattered like glass, and ashes rained down softly over
us, but no fire.
That was when Giovanni's reserve troops rode in.
The  mages  never  had  a  chance.  The  reserve  troops  broke  their  line.  The  scattered
mages  tried  desperately  to  band  together,  but  most  were  too  panicked  to  summon
magefire.  The  handful  that  managed  created  only  the  small  fires  that  we'd  dealt  with
before. The Fedeli stood their ground, but the Circle Guard broke and ran; they were as
terrified as the mages at the idea of fighting without magefire.
Without their guards, at least half of the mages were cut down where they stood. The
rest turned and fled. The second set of reserve troops were waiting for that, and met the
fleeing mages and guards with a rain of crossbow  bolts.  Perhaps  in the  end,  twenty-five
mages got away, and a fair number of the  Circle's  guards.  The  Fedeli  held  their  ground,
refusing to flee or surrender. We killed them all. Felice was not among their number. No
surprise there.
We suspected that the Circle mages who'd escaped would fall back to Manico and make
another  stand  from  the  Fedeli's  fortress  there.  We  marched  to  Manico  the  next  day,
intending to attack the city before they could regroup, but we found the  city  empty,  the
gates to the fortress left open. We walked  in without  resistance.  Within  the  fortress,  we
could see the preparations for a battle—crossbow  bolts  heaped  in bales  like  straw,  oil in
cauldrons to heat and pour down. But the city was deserted.
"Maybe it's a trap?" I said.
Giovanni shook his head.  "They're  not  in any  position  to  set  a  trap—at  least  not  one
that starts with an open gate. They lost their nerve."
The  Fedeli  bastion  in Manico  was  one  of  the  most  substantial  in  the  Empire—larger
than their Citadel in Cuore, which was constrained by the enclave walls. Just beyond their
fortress  was  the  Cathedral  of  the  Lady,  which  was  even  more  impressive  than  Her
cathedral in Cuore, since it had been built later.
"Raise our standard," I said. "Secure the city and search the Fedeli keep."
Minutes after the Lupi headed in, Severo reappeared at the door, an exuberant smirk
on his face. "Look what we found," he said, and shoved a dirty, furious man out the door.
It took me a moment to recognize him. His hands were chained behind his back, and he
wore the robe of a penitent. Nothing  like  the  fine  clothes  I'd  always  seen  him  in before.
"Felice," I said.
Felice  stumbled  back  a  step,  only  to  run  into  Severo,  who  steadied  him  and  then
pushed him back toward me.
"Where's the key to the chains?" Giovanni asked. Severo tossed it to him.
"Where did you find him?" I asked.
"He was left chained in the first office," Severo said. He tipped his head, puzzled. "They
must have meant for us to find him. Why did they leave him for us?"
"They  were  probably  unimpressed  by  the  intelligence  he  brought  back,"  I  said.
"Weren't they, Felice?"
Felice looked like he'd like to spit at me, but his mouth was too dry.
Giovanni stepped forward and unlocked Felice's chains. "Severo, give me your sword,"
he said. Severo drew  his  sword  and  gave  it  to  Giovanni.  Felice  fell  back  a  step,  his  face

white as paper. "I said we'd finish this later," Giovanni said to Felice. "And it's better than
you  deserve.  You  deserve  to  die  kicking  at  the  end  of  a  rope.  But  I  am  no
executioner—and I am going to be the one to kill you. You are under no white flag today.
Defend yourself!" He threw Severo's sword to Felice.
Felice raised the sword and moved warily away from Severo and Giovanni.
"Lady's tits," I muttered, but backed up  to  let  them  fight.  In  the  unlikely  event  that
Felice won, I didn't think it would  violate  the  rules  of  honor  for  me  to  hang  him.  And  it
would serve Giovanni right to get skewered for doing something this stupid.
"Your treachery killed hundreds of Lupi," Giovanni said. "You  betrayed  Eliana  to  the
Fedeli. Do you have anything to say for yourself?"
Felice licked his lips, still circling. "Was not your beloved Eliana also a spy? We are the
same, she and I. She served her masters, and I served mine."
Giovanni spat. "Eliana spied on the Circle. She does not betray friendship."
"Just wait," Felice said. He  paused  to  smile  coldly.  "But  thank  you  for  reminding  me
that my quarrel is not with you." Without warning, Felice whirled and lunged toward me.
I saw Giovanni's eyes go  wide  with  alarm,  but  he  moved  quickly;  before  I  had  my  own
sword free from its sheath, he had drawn and flung his knife into Felice's back.
Felice  stumbled.  The  sword  dropped  from  his  hand,  but  he  fell  heavily  forward  and
into  my  arms.  I  could  smell  blood  mixed  with  the  lingering  scent  of  Felice's  perfume.
Gagging, I shoved him away, letting him collapse to the ground.
Giovanni jerked his knife out of Felice's back. "Forgive me, Eliana,"  he  said.  "I  took  a
foolish  risk  giving  him  a  sword."  He  rolled  Felice  onto  his  back,  but  Felice's  dying  eyes
were fixed on me.
"We'll meet again," Felice said.
"I don't think that's likely," Giovanni said, but Felice didn't hear him.
Lucia came looking for me as we returned to the keep. "This place is built like a maze,"
she said, clasping my hand. "We want to search the  dungeon,  in case  they  left  prisoners
behind, but we aren't sure how to get there. Do you know? Can you find it?"
"I'd be more use in the Fedeli Citadel in Cuore," I said, letting Lucia  lead  me  into  the
building. "If this is anything like that, there should be passages into the dungeon through
some of the offices. We'll need torches."
Giovanni rounded up some stray Lupi to help us search and to guard  us,  and  I  found
an  office  that  looked  roughly  like  Rosalba's.  The  second  door  opened  onto  a  narrow
passage with a low ceiling. I shivered. "I think this might lead to the dungeons," I said.
I  let  Giovanni  lead  the  way.  The  corridor  ended  with  a  spiral  staircase;  we  headed
down.  I  realized  suddenly  that  the  torch  in  my  hand  was  flickering  because  I  wasn't
holding it steady. I clasped it with both hands, but it trembled harder. Lucia saw and took
the torch from me. "We've found it," she said. "You don't have to come down." I shook my
head and continued down the steps. It was cold at the bottom, and damp, and it smelled
of blood and vomit. I found that I was having trouble taking deep breaths. Lucia put her
free hand on my back as if to steady me. Giovanni glanced back; I expected an insult, but
he gave me his most reassuring smile.
"Hello?" Lucia said. Her voice echoed off the stone walls, but  there  was  no answering
call.
"Maybe they took all the prisoners with them," I said.

The  corridor  opened  up  into  a  small  guard  room—  empty,  of  course.  Dice  were  still
scattered on the table, and a half-finished cup of wine. I could hear a steady drip of water
from somewhere down the hall, and the faint scrabble of vermin. We passed through the
guard room and found ourselves in a cell block. Scores of cells were arranged in rows. The
doors stood open.
I went to the first cell; Lucia held the torch up. In the flickering firelight, I could see a
woman  chained  to  the  wall,  but  her  head  hung  down  limp.  I  took  the  torch  back  from
Lucia  and  went  in to  kneel  beside  the  woman.  The  floor  was  cold,  and  wet.  I  took  the
woman's hand in mine; it was cold and stiff. She was dead; her throat had been cut.
I straightened. "She's dead," I said. Lucia reached out for me as  I  went  into  the  next
cell.  The  next  cell  held  the  body  of  a  man.  He  was  naked,  and  had  been  tortured.  The
implements were scattered on the floor beside him. His throat had been cut, as well. The
next cell held the body of a woman, chained down to a table; she had also been tortured.
My  stomach  rebelled.  Lucia  caught  me  as  I  fell  to  my  knees.  "Let's  get  you  out  of
here," she whispered.
"No," I said. "No! We have to be sure. Someone might still be alive." I spat to clear the
taste  from  my  mouth  and  stood  up.  The  Lupi  were  shaking  their  heads.  Lucia  was
weeping. "Giovanni," I said. "Help me look."
Giovanni took one of the torches and went with me as we made  a  rapid  circuit  of  the
cells. Most of the cells were occupied. Every prisoner was dead. In the last cell, there were
two bodies. Next to the body of the prisoner was the body of a Fedele priestess. She had
driven the knife into her own  throat,  when  she'd  finished  killing  the  prisoners—to  avoid
capture by us, presumably. Beside her body was a folded paper; I picked it up. FOR HER
GLORY, it said, in an elegant, ornate script.
I recognized that script. I knelt by the body and turned the priestess's face toward the
torchlight. It was Rosalba.
The anger rose around me like steam as we went up the stairs. "Why?" someone was
whispering between sobs. "I don't understand. Why?"
" 'For Her glory,' " Lucia muttered. "These weren't the everyday heretics, these were
the dangerous ones. These were the Redentori."
I still felt like I couldn't breathe; as soon as we were up the stairs, I went outside. The
news  of  what  we  had  found  in  the  dungeon  spilled  through  the  city,  and  furious  Lupi
returned, looking for me, wanting orders, wanting a target for their anger.
It was late afternoon, and the sun slanted down, glinting off the stained-glass windows
of the  Great  Cathedral.  Lucia  stirred  beside  me.  "For  the  glory  of  God,"  she  shouted.
"Destroy Her Chapel! For the lives of the Redentori slaughtered  in cold  blood—burn  the
Cathedral of the Lady!"
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The higher the flight, the farther the fall. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 30, verse 2.

We gathered outside Cuore like dusk before a storm. From the peak of the  hill to  the
south,  I  could  see  the  camps  of  the  Lupi  and  the  Imperial  Army,  tents  and  campfires
fading to the horizon. It was spring now, and the smell of wet dirt and new growth mixed
with  wood  smoke  and  horse  sweat  and  old  blood.  The  defeat  at  Manico  had  been
catastrophic  for  the  Circle  and  the  Fedeli.  As  Demetrio  had  predicted,  the  survivors  of
that battle retreated to the protection of the Imperial  enclave.  And  so  we'd  still  have  to
take Cuore, but at least it would be easier.
Back in the center  of  the  camp,  Placido  had  arrived.  "Good  afternoon,  Generate,"  he
said,  bowing  slightly.  He'd  brought  two  Servi  priests  with  him—not  the  vulture  or  the
screech owl, but Servi nonetheless.
Michel  had  also  come  with  him.  I  grabbed  Michel  in a  bear  hug,  which  he  returned
enthusiastically. "How'd you manage this?" I asked.
"The Emperor gave me permission to fight this battle at your side," he said. "He knew
I  wouldn't  want  to  miss  it.  Also—did  you  ever  wonder  how  the  Emperor  got  out  alone
during Mascherata? Demetrio and I finally got it out of him. There's a sewer tunnel  that
was  built  by  the  old  Empire;  it  hasn't  been  used  for  centuries,  apparently,  and  it  leads
under the wall. The Emperor told me how to find it, and I can lead people there  to  open
the gates to the enclave."
Placido had brought a letter from Clara, which I pushed aside to read later. "Keep the
Servi  out  of  my  way,"  I  said.  "I  don't  want  them  bothering  my  soldiers,  not  the  night
before a battle." Placido nodded a surly assent.
"I'm sure you want to speak with the Imperial Generali," I said. "So I won't keep you."
"Of course," Placido said, teeth clenched. He probably wanted a word with me, but he
wasn't going to get it if I could help it. I might get lucky and die in the battle, and then I'd
never have to listen to him.
"What does Clara's letter say?" Giovanni asked when Placido had gone.
"I don't know," I said, pulled it back out, and handed it to Giovanni. "You read it."
Michel  dined  that  evening  with  Lucia,  Giovanni,  and  me.  He  was  doing  well  in  the
Emperor's service,  although  he  missed  us.  The  Emperor  wanted  Michel  to  stay  on as  a
personal guard even after the war was won. "I'll probably do it,"  Michel  said.  "I  lost  my
family to the famine. My former home is in the wasteland. I don't  really  have  anywhere
else to go."
"That's going to be true for a lot of the Lupi," I said.
"Doesn't that make you nervous?" Giovanni asked.
"I hadn't really thought past the end of the war," I said.
"Maybe you should start thinking." Giovanni slid Clara's letter across the table to me.
"Clara talks at some length about the Emperor's hopes that the Lupi  will  find  something
to do with themselves outside of Cuore once the war is over. I  think  somebody's  getting
nervous."
Michel looked up from his soup. "Are you saying that the Emperor—"
"I'm not saying anything about the Emperor," Giovanni said.  "I  think  it's  Clara  that's
getting nervous, and probably Eliana  is  the  cause  as  much  as  the  Lupi.  They're  loyal  to
you,  Eliana,  not  to  Emperor  Travan.  Clara's  in a  very  nice  position  these  days,  and  it's
only  going  to  get  nicer  when  they  return  to  Cuore.  Anything  that  can  jeopardize  that
makes her nervous."
I picked up the letter and read it. "She's trying to imply a threat, but it's not clear what

she thinks she's going to do to us," I  said.  "Do  you  think  she  plans  to  send  the  Imperial
Army against the Lupi to get rid of us?"
"The Emperor would never stand for that," Michel said.
"Clara and Placido," I said. "What a pair."
"You know what they say," Giovanni muttered. "Even in the worst flood, offal floats."
"Generale Eliana?" someone called from outside the tent.  Placido.  I  clapped  my  hand
over  my  mouth;  Lucia  started  laughing  silently.  I  ran  through  the  last  few  minutes  of
conversation; damaging, but not damning. I was fairly certain he couldn't have been there
for long, as my guards would have announced his presence. In any case, he was here now.
"Come in, Placido," I said.
Placido  came  into  the  tent.  He  looked  annoyed,  but  I  had  no  idea  whether  it  was
because of Giovanni's insult or just because of Giovanni's presence. "I wanted to  bid  you
good night," he said. "And to wish you God's grace in the battle tomorrow."
"May God smile on you, as well," I said. "Have a seat. We were just discussing Clara's
letter."
"Indeed," he said. "What did she write? She didn't share the contents with me."
I was tempted to make up something shocking, to see from his reaction whether or not
he was lying, but decided against it. "She raises the question of where the Lupi are to go
once the battle tomorrow is won, assuming that God continues to stand with us."
"Have you ideas along those lines?" Placido asked.
"The Lupi who've joined us over the winter are  farmers,"  I  said.  "They  have  lives  to
return to, homes, fields to plant. The ones who we liberated from the slave labor  camps,
though, their farms were in the wasteland. They don't have anything to go back to. But if
the Emperor would set aside land for them, farms, they could go there."
"Where were you thinking?" Placido asked.
"My former village, Doratura, has  already  been  resettled  by  refugees  from  the  slave
camps," I said. "There are other villages like it; some have already been resettled, but  a
formal declaration would end any question."
"I'm sure the Emperor would be willing," Michel said. "That's certainly an easy enough
request to grant."
Placido gave Michel  a  look  that  could  curdle  cheese.  Michel  took  a  bite  of  bread,  not
appearing to notice.
"And you?" Placido asked.
"What about me?"
"Do you wish to return to a farm?" Placido said. "What do you intend to do next?"
"I wish to continue to serve the Emperor, in whatever capacity he can best use me," I
said.
"The Emperor wants you to join his staff as an advisor," Michel said. "He's said so."
Placido's glare could have lit Michel's vest on fire, except doing that sort of thing was a
sin and Placido was probably afraid we'd report him to the Send. "How delightful," Placido
muttered. "Don't you want to return to your home?"
"My family was killed when the Circle destroyed my village," I said. "I have no home
to return to."

Placido clucked his tongue with almost-genuine sympathy. "Clara worries about people
with no family," he said.
Probably  because  we  have  no  one  who  can  be  used  against  us,  I  thought.  "It  was
terrible  to  lose  my  family,"  I  said.  "But  I  have  found  consolation  in  my  service  to  the
Emperor."  I  mentally  blessed  Michel's  excellent  memory  for  conversation.  I'd  have  to
remember to hint to him later that if he wanted to repeat this entire conversation to the
Emperor, that wouldn't bother me at all.
"Have  you  ever  had  the  opportunity  to  attend  the  university,  Generale?"  Placido
asked.
That was a question I didn't see coming. "No," I said. "My education was musical."
"You  should  consider  attending,"  Placido  said.  "For  a  time,  to  round  out  your
education—if  you're  going  to  become  an  Imperial  Advisor.  I'm  confident  the  Emperor
wouldn't hinder such a plan."
"To learn what?" I asked.
"History," Placido said. "Philosophy."
"Why would the Emperor need me for such expertise when he has you?" I asked. "Not
to mention Giovanni?"
Giovanni  had  been  quietly  enjoying  the  conversation  from  the  corner;  his  head
snapped up and he glared at me. "Michel, does the Emperor want me as an advisor?"
"I don't know," Michel said. "He hasn't ever said so."
"Good," Giovanni said. "I'd like to become a worthless layabout at court. I'm assuming
that will be acceptable to him?"
Michel grinned. "I think he'll figure you've earned it, Generale."
"Did you have any other questions, Placido?" I asked.
"No," Placido said. "I just came to wish you good night, and God's blessing."
"Of course," I said. "Good night, then, Placido, and good luck to you tomorrow, as well."
Not that Placido was likely  to  need  it;  I  was  confident  he'd  stay  near  the  rear,  assuring
himself and us that he would only get in the way. University arms training prepared one
to be a gentleman, not a soldier.
We finished our meal after Placido was gone. I wanted more wine, but it would be too
easy  to  overindulge  tonight,  and  I  would  need  a  clear  head  tomorrow.  I  sent  for  tea
instead.
Isabella came to the door before the tea arrived. "Generale Eliana, may I have a word
with you?" she asked. "Alone?"
Giovanni, Lucia, and Michel started to get up, but I waved them back. "You stay here,"
I said. "Isabella and I will go for a walk." My bodyguard trailed us at a discreet distance;
Isabella and I headed out to the southern hills,  past  the  perimeter  of  the  camp,  and  sat
down.
The sun was setting. I stared at the twilight sky, thinking that I should have brought a
lantern for our walk back.
Something  glittered  at  the  edge  of  my  vision.  I  looked  up;  Isabella  had  tears  in  her
eyes.
"When you take Cuore," Isabella said. "I need you to protect my daughter."
"Daughter?" I said. "What daughter?"

"Miriamne is my daughter," she said. "The woman you call Mira."
Now you are truly dead to me. I remembered Isabella's ritual burning of the lock of a
child's hair ... and how she had come untouched through the mage-fire, just as I had.
"I told you I had a daughter who was a violinist," Isabella said. "When we first met."
I remembered that, barely. "You said she died during the war. That was Mira?"
"She's  still  my  daughter,"  Isabella  said,  and  her  voice  turned  salt  and  bitter  from
choked-back tears. "No matter how much I wish she were  not,  she's  still  my  daughter."
She turned to me. "She saved you. I heard you tell Lucia about that—how she saved you
and sent you back to us. She can't help what she does; I understand that. Please. You're
the only other person here who cares about what happens to her. If you can—"
"I don't know," I said. "Isabella, I can't make any promises."
"Please," she said. "If all the other mages are dead, there will be nothing more she can
do. They  need  the  power  of  many  to  create  the  magefire,  to  do  the  powerful  magery."
Remembering the incinerated guards outside my cell in the Fedeli Citadel, I was dubious,
but kept silent. "Miriamne can be spared," she said. "She saved your life. She told us how
to defeat them. She has been fighting for our side as hard as she can—"
"I know," I said.
"Save her, then!"
"I can't make promises."
"Promise to try."
"I will try," I whispered.
Isabella was silent. "I shouldn't have come to you," she said. "Not for this."
"It's all right."
"No. Go back to your tent. I know you'll do what you can." Tears glittered in her eyes
again, and she gave me a fierce, hard smile.  "Good  luck  tomorrow,  whatever  happens.  I
hope you come through alive."
* * *
Mir a clasped my hand by the conservatory wall. "We should go on a trip," she said.
"Right now."
I shook my head, though I couldn't bear to pull my hand  away.  "I  can't,"  I  said.  "I
have obligations ..."
"Dance  with  me,  then,"  she  said,  and  I  clasped  her  hands  and  leaned  my  head
against her shoulder, breathing in the scent of winter jasmine. When I raised my head,
she  was  gone;  I  stood  alone  by  the  fountain  near  the  musician's  quarters,  in  the
Imperial enclave. There was  no  one  else  there;  the  buildings  were  empty,  completely
dark. It was night.
Suddenly, I was struck with the conviction that  if I  didn't  find  Mir  a  then,  I  would
never see her again. I  kindled  witchlight  without  a  moment's  hesitation  and  began  to
run, calling her name. Though I'd known my way around the enclave fairly well by the
time  I  fled  it,  they  seemed  to  have  rearranged,  or  perhaps  expanded;  the  building  I

entered was a maze of hallways and dark doors. "Mira," I shouted. "Mira!"
* * *
I  woke  with  a  start;  for  a  moment,  I  thought  that  Lucia  had  shaken  me  awake,  or
Giovanni,  but  for  once  I  seemed  to  have  woken  myself  up  without  disturbing  my
companions. I wondered what time it was, knowing that I would not be able to sleep again
that night.
Was  there  any  chance  that  Mira  had  already  fled  the  enclave?  Alone,  a  mage  could
pretend  to  be  just  a  frightened  civilian,  could  slip  through  the  noose  and  escape.
Somehow,  though,  I  knew  that  Mira  wouldn't  have  done  that.  She  would  stay  till  the
end—probably hoping that from her place in the battle, she'd be able  to  wreak  havoc  on
the other mages' plans. Or perhaps just hoping that she could protect me.  There  was  no
guarantee that she'd be the  focus-mage  who  faced  me  at  the  gate,  but  if  she  fled,  she'd
know without any doubt that she would not be able to save me.
In her place, I'd have stayed. So I knew she would be there tomorrow.
I wanted with all my heart to protect her, as Isabella had requested.  But  it  was  hard
enough to protect someone in my own army, like Lucia or Giovanni. It was impossible to
protect someone on the other side of the battlefield. Mira was a focus, a mage who could
aim her magic  with  the  precision  of  a  hawk's  dive;  she  had  demonstrated  her  ability  to
choose her targets the night she spared me, Giovanni, Lucia, and Isabella while taking out
half  of  the  Lupi.  I  didn't  have  that  power;  I  couldn't  aim  the  tide  of  destruction  I  was
about to unleash.
I closed my eyes, wishing that I could  slip  back  into  my  dream.  Wishing  that  I  could
embrace Mira, and run away with her, as I'd failed to do when I'd had the chance. There
was no harm in spending my nighttime hours doing  what  I  couldn't  possibly  do  for  real.
God, I whispered when sleep didn't come. Please keep Mira safe tomorrow. Somehow.
* * *
We marched at the first gray light of dawn, Lupi followed by the Imperial Army.  The
sky was rose and gold as we knelt in the rocky hills just south of Cuore. "B'shaem Arkah,
v'Bar Shelah, v'Nihor Kadosh," Lucia sang, drawing a cross  and  raising  her  arms  as  if  to
embrace the two armies. "Our sins are forgiven; God stands with us in our battle. We are
the children of God's Holy Light. Amen."
"Amen." The word rolled through the army like water poured down a hill.
I stood and looked around. I couldn't see the ends of my army; soldiers knelt as far as I
could see. They looked at me, with loyalty and fear,  with  contempt  and  reluctance,  with
eagerness and innocence. I took a deep breath; there was no way that the soldiers on the
edges of the crowd would hear me, but I hoped my words would be relayed back and not
garbled too badly.
"In  the  Name  of  the  Mother,"  I  said.  "And  Her  son,  and  the  Holy  Light."  I  drew  a
cross, like Lucia. "God has shown us the way to victory. God has held out Her hand; it is
for us to grasp it." I looked up at the sky. This wasn't very  inspiring. I'd need to do better

than this before sending people down this hill to fight and die.
"Some of us fight for our  families,  slain  by  the  Fedeli  and  the  Circle  in the  service  of
their  power,"  I  said.  "Some  of  us  fight  for  the  Emperor,  and  the  vows  we've  spoken
binding ourselves to  his  service."  I  stepped  forward.  "Some  of  us  fight  for  ourselves,  to
avenge the pain we've endured in the name of the ones we fight. Some of us fight for God,
for Her grace and for Her glory.
"We fight for so many reasons that  sometimes  it's  hard  to  remember  that  we  are  all
fighting  for  the  same  thing—for  the  same  purpose.  Because  we  are  all  fighting  for  our
land.  We're  fighting  for  what  we  see  when  we  close  our  eyes  at  night—a  Cuore  ruled
honorably  for  the  sake  of  the  people,  not  brutally  for  the  sake  of  power.  We're  fighting
because we know there's a better way than what the Circle has shown us. We're fighting
because we know what magefire does,  what  it  will  do  if  the  Circle  is  not  stopped.  We're
fighting because we love honor, because we love justice, because we want to  wake  to  an
Empire that is ruled with honor and with justice. We are  fighting  for  tomorrow.  We are
fighting for the tomorrow that we want to wake to."
The armies cheered, despite the  fact  that  if  you'd  asked  me  an  hour  earlier,  I  would
have guessed that most of them didn't  actually  see  that  when  they  closed  their  eyes  at
night. Oh well; maybe they would now.
"God is with us because we fight for honor," I said. "God is with us because we fight for
justice. God is with us because we fight for the land." I drew  my  sword  and  held  it  over
my head so that even the soldiers in the very  back could see it catch the first sun  of  the
day. "God is with  us,  and  with  God,  we  will  fight  them.  With  God,  we  will  defeat  them.
With God, we will bring the dawn of honor and justice to the Empire. For the glory of God
we will march into Cuore. For the glory of God we will dance in the Light. No magery can
stand against us; no mage will stand against us. For  the  glory  of  God,  today  will  see  the
final defeat of the Circle!"
The cheer of the armies became a roar like approaching thunder, and I knew that the
Circle heard us in the city below. I sheathed my sword  and  mounted  my  horse,  and  the
signalers blew a blast on their trumpets. There was no turning back now. It was  time  to
take Cuore.
* * *
Giovanni claimed  that  walls  had  once  been  built  around  the  whole  city  of  Cuore,  not
just the Imperial enclave; they were used for defense, in the days before magefire. In the
years  after  the  fall  of  the  Old  Empire,  the  city  grew  and  spilled  past  the  crumbling
fortifications, and the walls were slowly dismantled for building materials. "Good thing for
us,"  Giovanni  said.  "It's  going  to  be  hard  enough  getting  into  the  enclave,  never  mind
breaching any extra walls."
We attacked the city from three sides,  closing  like  a  noose  around  the  Circle  and  the
Fedeli. Cuore rose  slowly  out  of  the  edges  of  the  valley,  farms  giving  way  to  huts,  then
small houses, then shops and old stone buildings. The civilians of Cuore had fled in earlier
weeks, leaving the city to the Fedeli and the Circle.
The enclave walls were not terribly high or thick. They had not been built to withstand
a real  attack;  they  had  been  built  to  keep  out  the  riffraff  of  Cuore.  Still,  even  with  the
Circle's magic neutralized, Fedeli crossbows  could  keep  us  from  scrambling  up  the  walls
more  or  less  indefinitely.  They  had  walled  up  all  but  the  main  gate,  which  was  strong

enough  to  stand  against  anything  we  could  throw  at  it.  And  an  extended  siege  was  not
practical;  the  dancers  would  drop  dead  from  exhaustion  trying  to  protect  us  day  and
night. We would have victory in a day, or we would retreat and try again another time.
Michel was leading some of our best scouts through the Emperor's secret sewer tunnel.
The rest of us, for now, were just creating a distraction—though if Michel and the others
failed in their mission, the distraction might become the backup plan.
A university education turned out to have its uses; Placido's backup plan was evidence
of that. In the days  before  magery,  everyone  had  used  walls  for  protection,  and  armies
had been forced to find ways to deal with them. In one of his old books, Placido had found
a  picture  and  building  instructions  for  a  device  called  a  catapult  said  to  be  good  for
breaking down walls when you hit your target, and killing a great many people when you
missed. Builders in the Emperor's service had constructed several duplicates for us, and it
seemed to work reasonably well in tests. I had watched a demonstration a month earlier.
"Back my first year at the conservatory, I had a teacher who kept poor order at meals,"
I'd said, watching the catapult. "I used to take a spoon and smack it to throw bits of food
at Bella."
"Yeah, I did that at the university, too," Giovanni said. "Same principle."
I accompanied  the  first  catapult  that  we  dragged  in through  the  streets;  its  purpose
was  distraction,  and  my  presence  could  only  serve  to  make  it  more  so.  Giovanni
accompanied us as well. Between the dancers and the catapult, our progress was slow but
inexorable.
Heavy  smoke  choked  me  as  we  worked  our  way  through  the  streets;  Cuore  was
burning. It was the smell of the ashes of my family's village, but now it was my side that
had set the fires, burning out pockets of enemy soldiers who had hidden in houses in the
city,  planning  to  attack  us  from  behind.  The  sun  was  incongruously  bright  through  the
smoke-haze,  casting  sharp  morning  shadows  on  the  paving-stones  and  glinting  off  the
window-glass in the better houses.
We reached the center of town. Flames leapt from the high roof of the Cathedral of the
Lady; the stained-glass windows were shattered from the heat of  the  fire.  Dead  soldiers
and  Lupi  lay  scattered  through  the  piazza,  including  some  dance-circles  that  had  been
incinerated with magefire when the musician had been shot. We moved the catapult into
position.  There  were  three  dance-circles  in  the  piazza  already,  giving  us  overlapping
circles of protection. Along the wall, I could see Fedeli bowmen gesturing wildly for others
to join them. Some seemed to be pointing at me. The catapult offered some shelter, and I
ducked  behind  it,  speeding  up  the  dance.  Giovanni  stood  beside  me,  watching  the  wall.
"Who taught those people to fight?" he said. "They're running around like scared ducks."
A rain of crossbow bolts came down. "Some ducks," said one of the soldiers.
The arm of the catapult had to be cranked back, which took time. Six soldiers working
together  lifted  a  boulder  into  the  cup  of  the  catapult,  then  one  blew  a  whistle  to  warn
everyone to get clear. When the catapult released the rock, the catapult would be thrown
backward. "Now!"
The  catapult  arm  snapped  forward,  launching  the  rock  high  over  the  wall.  "Damn,"
Giovanni said.
"It doesn't really matter if we hit the wall or not," I said.
At  the  edge  of  the  wall,  I  was  fairly  certain  I  could  see  a  mage.  Fire  suddenly
blossomed overhead like a swirling red flower. I  focused  the  power  of  the  dance  up  and
out, and the fire scattered like leaves in a wind, fading to yellow and gray.
"Rachamin Arkah," the dancers sang, breathless. "Rachamin Gèsu."

The soldiers had loaded a second boulder. This one missed the wall as well, flying just
over it. We were aiming high, not wanting to risk taking out our own troops. "We'll get it
next  time,"  the  soldier  said  to  me.  I  nodded.  Crossbow  bolts  fell  again;  some  of  the
dancers fell this time,  and  the  uninjured  dancers  scrambled  to  re-form  their  circle.  The
faces around me grew rigid and set, but no one broke  and  ran.  From  the  sheltered  area
behind the piazza, more dancers joined us.
Where's Michel, dammit?
"Come on," Giovanni urged the soldier cranking back the catapult arm.
"Shut up, Generale," the soldier said.
The  soldier  blew  on his  whistle  and  launched  the  third  rock.  The  aim  was  true,  and
Fedeli  bowmen  scrambled  frantically  out  of  the  way.  The  boulder  smashed  into  the
wall—but bounced off, leaving the wall still intact.
"This will work. It'll just take a few more," the soldier said.
But  that  was  when  we  heard  shouts,  and  the  triumphant  blast  of  a  trumpet.  Michel
had opened the gate.
"Go," I shouted.
I thrust my violin into its case and slung it across my back, drawing my sword.  I  had
yet to become more than barely competent at swordplay, but I felt better having it in my
hand during battles. Giovanni waited, his eyes flicking urgently along the wall. "With  the
dancing broken up, any mage who keeps his head will head straight for this wall," he said.
"You have to hurry."
"I'm done," I said, and we  started  to  run  around  the  edge  of  the  enclave  toward  the
open gate. I felt like I had after I started the uprising in Ravenna—swept along by a river
of anger  and  excitement,  no more  able  to  command  my  army  than  I  could  command  a
storm. I was not Eliana la Generale, I was wind, or lightning.
"Hey, Eliana," Giovanni called, and then whatever he was about to say was cut off in a
cry of pain. I whirled to see Giovanni collapse to the ground, his knees folding under him.
"Giovanni!" I shoved my sword back into its sheath and dropped to the ground beside
him.
Giovanni's  eyes  were  closed,  his  breath  coming  in  shaky  gasps,  but  he  was  saying
something, and as I leaned close, I could hear it: "Lady's tits, Lady's tits, Lady's tits—"
There was a crossbow bolt deep in the muscle of his left arm. "I've got good  news  for
you, Giovanni," I said. "You're going to get a chance to repent your blasphemy."
Giovanni swallowed hard. "It's minor?"
"I know it doesn't feel minor."
Giovanni forced his eyes open to squint up at me. "You're laughing at me."
"No. It hurts  like  hell  and  it  missed  your  heart  by  inches,  right?  I'm  not  laughing  at
you.  All my  injuries  have  been  minor  and  they  still  hurt  like  hell.  Grab  my  shoulder."
Giovanni obeyed, and I hauled  him  to  his  feet.  "Let's  get  you  over  to  that  corner."  The
edge  of  a  smoke-drenched  building  would  give  us  something  of  a  screen  from  the
bowmen. Giovanni let me drag him over, and I lowered him to the ground again as gently
as I could.
Giovanni still clasped my shoulder. "Hold still," I said, and snapped off the shaft of the
arrow.  Giovanni  screamed  and  his  hand  clenched  around  my  shoulder  hard  enough  to
leave a bruise.

"I'm going to have to push it through," I said.
"Can't someone else—"
"Don't you trust my healing?"
"I trust you," Giovanni said, managing to  meet  my  eye  with  a  faint  smile.  "But  don't
you want someone else to get bruised this time?"
"There's no one else handy," I said, and put my sword hilt in his hand. "Squeeze that, if
you'd rather."
"I'd rather make you suffer along with me," Giovanni said, but he kept his hand on the
sword hilt. "Do it, then."
It was a good thing he said that, because I was about to lose  my  nerve.  I  pushed  the
shaft  through  with  the  flat  of  my  palm,  as  fast  as  I  could.  Giovanni  screamed  again.  I
pulled the last of it out. The  arrow  had  broken  cleanly;  there  shouldn't  be  any  splinters
left in the wound. I ripped a piece off my tunic and bound up his arm.
"It's too bad you didn't get shot back when I still hated you," I said. "It would've been
a lot more fun to hurt you."
"Yeah,  I'm  sure,"  Giovanni  said.  "Does  that  mean  you  don't  hate  me  anymore?"  He
opened his eyes again; they glinted with tears of pain.
"I haven't hated you for ages," I said.
"Do you like me?" he asked.
"Don't push it. You need to move; we're still in the middle of a battle, you know."
Giovanni  stood  shakily  and  drew  his  sword.  "I  can  fight,"  he  said.  "It  wasn't  my
sword-arm that was hurt."
"Trying to prove your manliness?" I asked.
"Oh, shut up. Some of us have a battle to win."
We swarmed into  the  enclave  like  wasps,  terrified  Fedeli  priests  scattering  from  our
path. The trumpeter blasted a signal, to the Circle's  Citadel.  We made  our  way  through
the  smoke.  My  eyes  were  watering,  and  I  saw  the  gardens  through  a  blurred  haze.  I
hardly recognized where I was, but the Circle's enclave would be ahead and to my left. I
touched my violin once or twice to be sure that I hadn't lost it.
The  Circle  had  fortified  their  building  as  much  as  they  possibly  could,  and  laid  in
supplies  for  a  siege,  just  in  case  we  could  come  up  with  a  way  to  wage  one.  Placido's
machine was not going to work against these walls, but that was  all  right;  I  had  another
idea. I  ducked  into  one  of  the  circles  of  dancers  that  danced  by  the  edge  of  the  Circle's
fortress. The piazza was thick with dancers. We  spread  out  around  the  fortress,  making
room as more circles arrived. Frustrated mages occasionally threw magefire at us, but it
sparkled harmlessly off the edge of our circles.
"Now," I said, and raised my whistle to my lips, blowing a single long blast. Every circle
dropped  hands,  flattened  into  a  line,  and  reclasped  hands  to  form  a  single  vast  circle
around the entire building.
Flavia pounded out a drumbeat that echoed through the streets, even over the noise of
the battle, and I started  to  play.  Rachimin  Arkah—Rachimin  Gèsu.  This  was  the  dance
that turned the storm; this was the dance that turned  back  magefire.  Rachamin  Arkah.
The  power  surged  around  me  and  through  me,  like  a  river,  an  ocean,  a  hurricane.
Rachamin Gèsu. I stretched out my arms, holding my violin and bow out like dagger and
sword, my fists to the sky, and I focused the power on the  walls.  This  is  the  dance  that

crumbles  walls.  I  heard  thunder,  or  the  roaring  in my  ears.  The  barricaded  doors  and
windows of the fortress blew open with force enough  to  knock  back  anyone  who'd  stood
too close, with the crack of split wood and broken stone.  Burn,  I  said  to  the  walls,  and  I
could smell bitter smoke, hear cries of fear from inside. Burn, like you burned my family.
Burn, all of you, burn.
We broke our circle to let soldiers into the building. I shoved my violin into its case and
drew my  sword,  following  the  soldiers  in.  The  Circle  had  designed  their  fortifications  to
keep  us  out,  not  to  provide  themselves  with  escape  routes.  They  had  worked  out
strategies to fight us if we got inside, but the strategies were easy to guess and exploit. If
they used magefire, they'd kill their own. If they didn't use magefire, they'd never stand
against us. They were trapped.
The hallways were narrow and so at first I found myself behind a knot of people, with
more  pushing  from  behind.  Members  of  the  Circle  Guard  had  blocked  the  hallway;  the
knot  broke  loose  as  they  turned  and  fled.  I  was  swept  quickly  past  the  remains  of  the
fight, scattered bodies and slippery blood. The mages  would  be  upstairs,  with  the  guard
down  here  to  protect  them.  I  headed  for  the  staircase,  backing  off  as  a  gout  of  sudden
flame billowed down the stone spiral. It was only one mage, maybe two, but I frantically
gestured the approaching  soldiers  to  stand  back.  I  yanked  out  my  violin  and  started  to
play, loud enough for the sound to carry upstairs. Some of  the  soldiers  formed  a  clumsy
dance circle, but it hardly mattered. The mage couldn't see around the curve and fled  at
the sound of the music.
Dancers  and  other  musicians  arrived  and  began  forming  dance  circles  in  the  Circle's
Great Hall, so I shoved my violin away and drew my sword again, charging up the steps.
The mage had fled ahead of our advance, and the staircase opened onto a long hallway of
closed doors. "Knock them down," I ordered.
The doors had been barricaded, but one after another they collapsed in on themselves.
I ran to the end of the hallway, following Lupi through that door. The room was dark and
quiet, and richly furnished. "Is there anyone here?" the man beside me asked.
"Search," I said.
That room led to another room, and then another, this one brightly lit. I  came  in and
saw a  blue-robed  man  raising  his  hands  to  summon  magefire,  his  eyes  closed.  It  would
take a moment for the fire to come, and I ran forward, slamming my sword into his  gut.
He cried out, his fire dissolving like red mist. I pulled my sword out and he slipped to the
floor.
"Give me a clean death, damn you," he choked out. "Don't leave me like this."
I drew back  my  sword  to  cut  his  throat,  then  paused.  "Open  your  eyes,  old  man,"  I
said. "Look at me. Liemo. Look at me."
The  mage  who  had  held  me  hostage—who  had  forced  Mira  to  return  to  the
Circle—opened his eyes and squinted at me through his pain. "Do I know you?"
"You should," I said. "You made me your prisoner. You tried to have me maimed. And
you took from me the woman I loved most in the world."
Liemo's eyes widened slightly. "You're Miriamne's friend, aren't you?"
"I am Eliana," I said. "Generate of the Lupi and, yes. Mira's friend."
Liemo's  lips  twitched  into  almost  a  smile  and  he  motioned  for  me  to  bend  closer.  I
leaned down. "Do you want your friend?" he whispered. "She's not here. She slipped away
just before the battle. I don't know where she went."
"What makes you think I want to find her?" I said.

Liemo  laughed,  then  flinched  from  the  pain.  "The  woman  you  loved  most  in  the
world?" He shook his head. "Do as you please, girl, but give me a decent  death  first.  I'm
sorry I took your friend, and I'm sorry I threatened  you.  It  was—necessary."  He  closed
his eyes and turned his face away from me.
I  braced  my  sword  briefly  against  his  chest,  then  thrust  it  into  his  heart.  He  gave  a
brief jerk, then was still. I wiped my sword on his robes and then stood, dazed. The Lupi
waited, watching me.
"Search the rest of the room," I said. "Kill any mages you find." I sheathed my sword
and stumbled back down the stairs.
Outside, the air was gray with smoke and dust. I had seen enough battles now to know
we would win. There were Fedeli soldiers and Circle Guards stumbling through the haze,
crying  threats  and  searching  for  their  fellows,  but  most  had  fled  or  fallen.  I  wandered
toward the gardens. They had been trampled in the fighting; I could see scattered bits of
rosebush and leaves of flowers that would have bloomed yellow and white in a few weeks.
As I looked around at the devastation, I heard music. It was just a few notes, very  faint,
on a wisp of a breeze  that  stirred  the  dust  and  blew  more  choking  smoke  into  my  face.
There was music all around me, but this  was  not  a  Redentore  song.  Straining  to  hear,  I
caught another snatch of music on the breeze.
I  wound  my  way  through  to  the  other  side  of  the  gardens,  into  the  shadows  of  the
buildings that had once housed guards, servants, and musicians. The fighting had left this
part  of  the  enclave  almost  untouched.  No  one  was  here,  though  I  saw  a  terrified
guardsman  who  cried  out  and  fled  when  he  saw  me.  I  ignored  him.  The  doors  of  the
musicians' dormitory  stood  open;  inside  was  shadowed  and  hazy  with  stray  smoke,  but
oddly  peaceful.  The  music  was  louder  here—I  could  identify  the  music  now.  Finger
exercises. I stepped carefully around the corner, as quietly as I could, but Mira heard me,
and the music changed. Rachamin Arkah. Rachamin Gèsu. I slipped the door open.
Mira was alone.
She stood by the shuttered window, her back to me. She finished the song and lowered
her  violin  and  bow,  holding  them  slack  at  her  sides.  "Hello,  Eliana,"  she  said,  still  not
turning around.
"Mira," I said.
Mira  turned,  and  met  my  eyes.  She  set  her  violin  and  bow  down  and  reached  her
hands  out  to  grip  mine.  I  stepped  forward,  grasping  her  hands  with  my  own,  and  she
pulled  me  toward  her,  her  lips  soft  against  mine.  I  wrapped  my  arms  around  her,  my
heart pounding. Mira broke the kiss and pushed me away. Her eyes were frightened but
resolute, and they burned with dark fire.
"Go ahead and kill me," she said. "Just make it fast."
I shook my head. "I'm not—"
"You have no choice. Please." She closed her eyes for a moment, then opened them to
look at me again. "I mean it. I'm as much a prisoner to magery as you were to the Fedeli.
You  have  no choice.  If  you  want  to  destroy  the  Circle,  you  have  to  kill  me."  Her  eyes
scorched through me to the soles of my feet.
I drew my sword. Mira clasped my face and  pulled  it  to  hers  again.  I  felt  her  breath
mix with mine, the heat from her cheeks. Touching Mira was like drawing the power of a
thousand dancers; my head spun  and  I  could  see  light  like  a  million  stars.  She  took  my
hand and drew the tip of my sword to her heart. I felt her tense, and brace herself—
I  jerked  my  sword  back  as  Mira  threw  herself  forward,  catching  her  with  my  other

arm before she could fall. "The destruction of the Circle is nothing to me if it doesn't mean
your freedom. Mira. I will not kill you. If you have the will to die for me, you have the will
to defeat magery again. I know your heart. Some things are stronger than magefire."
Mira swallowed once, and I saw her cheeks grow pale. I picked up her violin and bow
and put them in the case that lay on the floor. She made no move  to  take  the  case,  so  I
slipped the strap over her shoulder. I would need to hide her  robes  somehow;  I  glanced
around the empty room, then opened her violin case again, shaking out  the  blanket  that
padded the violin inside and wrapping it around her shoulders. "You'll have to carry your
violin in your arms," I said. Mira took the violin as I handed it to her, but made no other
movement. "Come on," I said. "I'm getting you out of Cuore."
The  enclave  was  awash  with  smoke,  dust,  and  blood;  the  haze  rose  red  from  the
streets. I slipped one arm around Mira,  pulled  her  arm  over  my  shoulder;  I  would  look
like  someone  assisting  an  injured  companion.  I  ducked  my  head  to  hide  my  face,  but  I
didn't see anyone looking at us. Mira  played  the  part  of  a  wounded  soldier  well  enough,
stumbling through the streets like someone drunk and blind.
The  fight  was  in the  center  of  Cuore;  the  edge  of  Cuore  looked  like  the  battlefield's
frayed  hem.  Fleeing  Circle  guardsmen  and  Fedeli,  terrified  Lupi  and  Imperial  soldiers,
had flung themselves down here to catch their breath. The air had begun to clear, and you
could see that Cuore was cloaked in swaths of  thick  smoke.  Most  important,  there  were
riderless horses that had found their way here from the battle. They were skittish, but I
managed to persuade one to come to me, and to let Mira take the reins.
"Go," I said.
Mira  started  to  mount  the  horse,  then  turned  back.  "Why  did  you  save  me?"  she
whispered.
I took Mira's face in my hands and gave  her  one  last  gentle  kiss.  "You  know  why,"  I
said. "Go."
* * *
By evening, the dust had settled, and  a  gentle  rain  put  out  the  smoldering  fires.  The
enclave  was  secured.  The  mages  and  Fedeli,  slaughtered.  I  went  to  find  Isabella,  and
discovered that she was among the dead; so were Severo and the mad prophet, Amedeo.
I felt as lost as I had the night I returned to the ruins of my village. We had won.
PART FOUR
 
Then Follow Me

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Those that live by the sword will die by the sword.
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 11, verse 23.
"Clara, a word with you."
The enclave's  gardens  had  come  through  the  battle  for  Cuore  surprisingly  well.  Two
months after the war had ended,  there  were  no flowers  in the  garden,  but  many  would
bloom  again  next  year.  In  the  meantime,  damaged  benches  and  fountains  had  been
repaired, to allow for precisely this sort of informal mingling, maneuvering, and toadying.
"Of course, Eliana, I'm always happy to  spend  time  with  you."  Clara  sat  down  at  the
edge of the fountain, gesturing for me to join her. She wore the dark blue dress that had
become the uniform of the Servi, with a huge jeweled cross. Though it was a hot day, she
seemed perfectly comfortable: no sweat on her dress, and not a hair out of place.
"I understand Valentino has somehow gotten in trouble  with  the  Servi  again,"  I  said,
sitting down.
"Has he." Clara's eyes were distant as she toyed with her cross.
"Yes. It seems that someone interpreted the phrase  'Lady's  tits'  as  a  fervent  prayer.
That seems odd to me. Is this the sort of enforcement your people usually engage in?"
"I  imagine  there  were  some  ...  less-than-mitigating  circumstances,  perhaps?"  Clara
said.
"I'm confident that it was all just a misunderstanding," I said. "Would you look  into  it
for me?"
"I'd be glad to," Clara said.
"Also, you  know,"  I  said,  "this  is  the  third  or  fourth  time  that  Valentino  has  been  in
trouble?  It  was  only  two  months  ago  that  we  took  Cuore.  Each  time  it's  been  for
something  truly  petty.  I'm  sure  the  vast  majority  of  the  Servi  don't  use  their  office  to
pursue personal grudges, but..."
"Are you saying that Valentino is being targeted?" Clara said, her bright eyes widening
slightly.
I raised my hands in a calming gesture. "All I'm saying is that Valentino is a boy who is
skilled at raising the ire of powerful people. Not that anyone would mean to target him, of
course, but  perhaps  in Valentino's  case,  there  might  be  someone  who  genuinely  doesn't
realize that they're motivated by personal dislike?"
"Perhaps," Clara muttered.
"Well. I'm sure you can resolve it. There's no need to bring this to the attention of the
Emperor."
Clara's head jerked toward me. "I'm sure you don't really think it's so serious?"
"Servi  misusing  their  power  for  personal  gain?  I  would  think  that  would  be  serious,

don't you? But so long as this doesn't come up again,  I'm  sure  we  can  assume  that's  not
it."
"Of course," Clara said. Her voice could have frozen hot tea. "Was that all, Eliana?"
"Yes," I said. "That was all."
"Then perhaps you  might  take  a  moment  for  me,"  Clara  said,  her  manner  becoming
ingratiating again. "People have noticed ... well, as you said, it's been two months. Yet you
continue to dress in men's clothing."
I  looked  down  at  my  wine-red  tunic  and  hose.  I'd  traded  in the  trousers  and  rough
tunic that I'd worn as a soldier for soft fabrics in rich colors, but I had indeed continued to
wear men's clothes. "Yes," I said.
"I was wondering if you might like the name of a good dressmaker? Mine is excellent,
and ..."
I laughed out loud, and quickly controlled myself. "Excuse me. No, Clara, I don't think
that's necessary. I'm really quite comfortable in these."
"I only raise this because it's begun to cause a little bit of trouble," Clara said.
This was new to me. "What sort of trouble?"
Clara  considered  her  words  carefully  before  she  continued.  "Some  twenty  of  the
younger ladies of the court have taken up your fashion."
I'd heard rumors about these women, but nothing clear. I stifled a smile. "How is this
trouble?" I asked.
"They are refusing to wed," Clara said stiffly.
I raised one eyebrow. "Show me  where  Gèsu  says  marriage  is  required,"  I  said.  "He
never married."
"That's what these young women say."
"I'd  say  they've  got  a  point,"  I  said.  "If  they  don't  want  to  marry,  well,  I  hate  to
disappoint  you,  Clara,  but  I'm  behind  them  all  the  way.  Now  if  you'll  excuse  me,  I'm
meeting some people for lunch." I headed back toward the palace.
There was a low chuckle from the shadows as I rounded the edge of the garden, and I
turned  to  see  Giovanni.  "You'd  better  watch  your  tongue  around  her,  Eliana,"  he  said.
"Just think how much it would please Clara to have you prosecuted if you ever say 'Lady's
tits.' "
I glared at Giovanni. "She wouldn't dare."
"If she thought she could get away with it, she'd do it in a heartbeat," he said.
"Are you coming up for lunch?"
"Of  course.  I  came  looking  for  you  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  overhear  your
conversation."
My  room  in the  Imperial  Palace  looked  out  over  the  gardens.  I  arrived  just  as  the
servant  brought  up  our  lunch:  a  tray  of  cheese,  bread,  and  cold  roast  mutton.  Lucia
helped  herself  to  bread  and  cheese  while  Giovanni  sliced  the  meat.  I  looked  out  at  the
gardens; they were still crowded, despite the heat of the day.
Lucia  finished  her  lunch  and  leaned  back  in  her  chair,  fanning  herself  with  a  fan  of
woven palm fronds. "Did you get Valentino out of trouble again?"
"Yes," I said. "This time."

"Thank God we  have  the  Servi  to  protect  us  from  threats  like  Valentino,  eh  Lucia?"
Giovanni asked.
Lucia shot Giovanni a bitter look. "Not all the new Redentori  religious  orders  are  like
the Servi. Flavia's order is nothing like them."
"The Cantatori," I said. Flavia and some of the other musicians  and  dancers  who  had
served with the Lupi had started a religious order of their own.
"Well, maybe if Flavia ran the Servi they'd be less of a pain in the ass," Giovanni said.
"Much less," I said. "Flavia would tell them that as committed Redentori, they should
dance  the  Mass  at  least  once  every  day,  and  not  worry  about  what  everyone  else  was
doing."
"Would  they  even  be  the  Servi  if  they  weren't  sticking  their  nose  in everyone  else's
business?" Giovanni asked.
"Not for long, and I think that would be a good thing." I pushed my chair back from the
table.  "Is  summer  in Cuore  always  this  hot?  I  could  swear  it  never  felt  this  hot  at  the
conservatory."
"Go get yourself a fan," Lucia said. "There was a boy selling them just outside the gate
yesterday."
From a distance, I could  hear  bells  striking  the  hour.  "Maybe  later,"  I  said,  standing
up. "Council meeting today."
"Oh, lucky you," Giovanni said. "You get to talk to Clara twice in one day."
"And Placido; don't forget Placido."
"You can have my fan if you'd like," Lucia said. "I can go get another one."
"Oh, no," I said. "I think it would be too tempting to use it to swat Placido."
The Imperial Council was a council of advisors; the Emperor did not have to take  our
advice, which was  just  as  well  since  we  never  agreed  on anything.  I  had  come  to  really
hate Council meetings. Clara was on the Council, of course. So were Demetrio and Placido;
there were also three others who I hadn't met before the war ended: Romolo, Manlio, and
Benvenuto. Benvenuto was a scholar from the university, but much older than Placido; he
was reedy, with thin lips and white hair. Manlio was from a merchant family on the coast,
and Romolo was from some noble family that had supported Travan early  on.  Clara  and
Placido  were  by  far  the  most  vocal  Council  members,  and  I  felt  outnumbered  and  out
argued.  Half  the  time  I  suspected  that  Travan  agreed  with  me  but  didn't  have  the
backbone to stand up to Clara and Placido. The person I most often found myself agreeing
with was  Demetrio,  but  Demetrio  was  married  to  Clara,  and  his  initial  agreement  often
turned out to be part of her strategy.
The Council chamber was lavishly furnished,  with  a  thick  patterned  rug  on the  floor,
velvet-covered chairs, glass windows, and a long table topped  with  inlaid  marble.  Today
the windows had been propped open, but the room was stiflingly hot, and I  immediately
wished  I'd  accepted  Lucia's  offer  of  a  fan.  Clara  was  already  there  when  I  arrived,  still
looking  perfectly  composed.  She  had  a  fan  of  jet-black  feathers,  and  she  fanned  herself
gently, lost in thought. I pressed my damp palms against the cool marble, wishing I could
just lay my whole face down on it.
Demetrio arrived just after I did. I sat to the Emperor's left; Demetrio sat to his right.
Clara sat at the opposite end of the table. Demetrio greeted me politely and then sat down
with a barely suppressed yawn. "Sorry," he mumbled. "It's the heat." Benvenuto came in,
deep in conversation with Manlio, and  Romolo  came  in a  few  moments  later,  carrying  a

fan like Lucia's. Placido arrived last, his face  so  red  from  the  heat  he  looked  sunburned.
There was a rustle at the door:  Emperor  Travan.  In  unison,  we  stood;  Travan  came  in,
sat down, and nodded, and we all sat back down again.
Most of the day's business was tedious beyond words: a pair of noble houses in Varena
were  squabbling  over  something  involving  restrictions  on  certain  imports.  I  barely
understood why these imports were restricted in the first place, though Placido seemed to
find this  deeply  interesting  and  had  a  long  argument  over  it  with  Manlio.  Demetrio,  at
least, looked as bored as I felt. I wished Giovanni were on the Council; he would actually
have  some  understanding  of  the  trade  issues  we  discussed,  and  he  could  back  me  up
against Clara and Placido.
Watching Travan as he listened to Placido arguing with Manlio, I thought that he  had
aged  in the  last  two  months.  I  wondered  if  the  privilege  of  leadership  had  been  more
appealing in the abstract than in reality. I had to duck my head and compose my features
at the thought. Travan wasn't the first person to  discover  that  leadership  wasn't  always
as much fun as it looked, and he probably would not be the last.
A fly was buzzing around the room; it kept trying to land on my sweaty head. When it
buzzed around the Emperor's head, he made a gesture of annoyance and a servant came
in to  try  to  swat  it.  At  least  this  gave  me  something  more  entertaining  to  watch  than
Placido's increasingly red face. The servant chased the fly around the  room  twice  before
finally  shooing  it  out  a  window.  Of  course,  a  new  fly  found  its  way  in  moments  later.  I
wondered if Travan was going to order the windows shut, but to my relief, he didn't.
My  legs  itched  from  my  hose,  and  I  found  myself  thinking  longingly  of  the  looser
clothes I'd worn as generale of the Lupi. I wondered if maybe I should have  taken  Clara
up on her offer of a dressmaker;  a  dress,  today,  sounded  rather  more  comfortable  than
what I was wearing. I glanced toward the other end of the table.  Clara's  feather  fan  had
sped up slightly, and her face and hair were starting to look damp.
The argument over the squabbling noble houses petered out, and Travan looked down
at  some  papers  of  notes.  "Demetrio,"  he  said.  "Did  you  have  an  issue  you  wanted  to
discuss?"
Demetrio  nodded.  "Vesuvia."  He  looked  around  the  table.  "We  haven't  heard  any
rumors about them moving toward the border, but we can't assume our luck will hold."
"What would they gain from attacking us?" Romolo asked.
"Well,  revenge,  for  one  thing,"  Demetrio  said.  "There  was  a  great  deal  of  bitterness
over the last war, and it was our Circle that started it."
This was news to me and to Romolo; no one else  seemed  surprised.  "What  about  the
villages?" I blurted out. "The villages in Verdia that were burned?"
Demetrio's  face  was  impassive.  "There  were  burned-out  villages  in Vesuvia,  as  well.
It's hard to say who started the raids, but the first major blow was struck by our side."
I sat back, remembering Mira's flare of anger when I said the whole war had been over
a  perfume  ingredient.  I  wondered  if  she'd  known  that  our  side  started  it.  All  that
suffering, I thought, for something so trivial, and we were the ones who started it.
Demetrio was speaking again. "Without mages to defend  us,  they  will  assume  we  are
easy prey. So far as I know, they still have a Circle."
"We beat our own Circle, we can beat theirs," I mumbled.
"They  must  have  heard  stories  about  what  our  faith  can  do,"  Clara  said.  "Don't  you
think their mages will be too frightened to approach us?"

"I don't think we can count on that," Demetrio said.
"They'll  have  to  cross  the  wasteland  first,"  I  said.  "Our  Circle  was  terrified  of  the
wasteland; I can't imagine that their Circle feels differently."
"Now, if we could just make the wasteland a bit harder for their army to cross," Clara
said, thoughtfully.
"What are you talking about?" I said. "The wall? It was nowhere near complete."
"Our ancestors built far more complex roads and canals," Placido said. "Certainly if we
wished to complete the wall, we could see it done."
"Are  you  volunteering  to  go  build,  Placido?"  I  asked.  Everyone  laughed,  even  Clara;
Placido's red face turned purple and he forced out a laugh as well. Then he shot a look at
Travan.
"Tell me more about the wall," Travan said. "How close is it to done?"
I  spoke  before  anyone  else  could  answer.  "It's  barely  started,"  I  said.  "Seven  short
lengths have been constructed. There are miles and miles between each length. The slave
camps were at work for about half a year. It would take a very  long time to complete  at
that rate. If the Vesuviani move against us any time in the next ten years,  it  will  not  be
sufficient protection."
"It couldn't hurt to try to complete it," Placido said. "If we devoted more resources to
the construction, we could move up the timetable significantly."
"It  wouldn't  hurt  whom?"  I  said.  "Who,  exactly,  were  you  thinking  of  sending?"  I
remember  Mario's  comment,  back  in  Ravenna—that  if  the  Circle  wanted  a  wall,  they
should  hire  laborers  to  go  build  it.  With  a  high  enough  wage,  I  had  no  doubt  that  they
would  get  volunteers.  However,  after  war,  famine,  and  civil  war,  the  Empire's  treasury
was not exactly filled with piles of glittering gold.
"I realize that this is a painful subject for you, Generale Eliana," Clara said cautiously.
"And  of  course  the  wholesale  enslavement  of  the  farmers  on  the  border  was  entirely
wrong. However, the war against the Circle has left us with a certain population of people
who find themselves with very  little to do ..." She paused and tapped her fan against the
table thoughtfully. "I think some time in the wasteland, where the futility of depending on
the Lady can be fully contemplated, might be deeply beneficial to certain people."
"You're talking about recreating the slave labor  camps,  but  enslaving  the  priests  and
priestesses  who  served  the  Lady,"  I  said.  Clara  smiled  and  began  to  fan  herself  again.
"And anyone else who refuses to convert, no doubt. And when that's not enough, anyone
who fails to embrace the Redentori faith at your level of orthodoxy."
"If we need to imprison people, I see no reason that we shouldn't get useful work out of
them," Clara said. "Do you, Your Highness?"
I  turned  to  the  Emperor,  biting  my  lip  to  resist  the  urge  to  interrupt.  He  saw  my
agitation and nodded, giving me permission to speak.
"Highness, it may begin with the priests and priestesses of the  Lady,  but  there  won't
be  enough  of  them  to  complete  this  task.  There  won't  be  enough  open  Delia  Chiese  to
complete  this  task.  Sooner  or  later,  she  will  be  sending  down  people  like—like  the
Priestess Lucia."
Clara  laughed  out  loud  "Oh,  be  serious,  Generale  Eliana.  The  Priestess  Lucia  and  I
have had our disagreements, but I hardly think it's fair to say that I would send her into
exile."
Emperor Travan shrugged and turned back to me. "So how would you propose that we

protect ourselves from the Vesuviani?"
"Well,  first,  I  think  we  need  more  current  and  accurate  intelligence  than  a  suspicion
that they might want to take revenge on us," I said. "I think someone needs to go  down
there."
"Are you volunteering?" Placido asked.
It was a measure of how much I hated court that for a moment, that prospect sounded
appealing. But Travan shook his head. "No, Eliana is too recognizable to go as  a  spy.  But
it's not a bad idea. What if we find out that yes, they are massing against us?"
I paused to think about it. "When I was in Ravenna, I played for the funeral dance  of
the two executed reformers, Beneto and Jesca. This was before I knew the full power  of
the dances, but I remember the energy; to avert a riot, I pulled the energy down into the
ground under my feet. That night, I realized that I could make a witchlight again—barely,
with effort, but I could do it." I looked around the Council. "I think that the Empire should
create  some  permanent  installments  in  the  wasteland,  but  not  prisons.  Create
communities for dedicated Redentori; so long as they're housed and fed, I think you'll find
volunteers." It occurred to me that Flavia's order, the Cantatori, would probably like this
idea. "They can dance each day to restore the wasteland;  over  time,  perhaps  plants  will
flourish  again.  And  in  the  meantime,  they  can  keep  watch  on  the  border  and  fend  off
enemy  magery.  They  would  need  detachments  of  soldiers  as  well,  of  course.  A  few
communities like this, dotted along the border, would be far more protection than a wall."
"What do you think of that idea, Clara?" Travan asked.
Clara opened her mouth. "I think it's a terrible idea," she said immediately. She paused
to gather her thoughts—or, I rather suspected, to dredge up some reasons. "It's a terrible
risk for the Redentori, living right on the border like that."
"These would be volunteers," Travan said. "Your protective feelings are admirable, of
course. Go on."
"You're talking about the creation of an entire religious order," Clara said. "A new one."
"Or the expansion of an existing one, like the Cantatori," I said.
"I don't think that's a good idea."
"Because they might challenge the power of the Servi?"
"Of course not!" Clara was pricked into  vehemence  for  a  moment,  then  sat  back  and
summoned her kindest smile. "The proliferation of orders was something that weakened
the Delia Chiese. I think we can learn from their mistakes."
"To be sure. Why do you think it weakened them?"
"There were rivalries," Placido said, coming to Clara's rescue. "Factionalism. Precisely
the sort of problems that the Servi were created to prevent."
"God forbid that any of us should disagree, after all," I said.
"Well, exactly," Placido said. "I don't think God wants us to disagree."
I shot a look at the Emperor, wondering  if  he  saw  how  self-serving  Clara's  argument
was. I thought he probably did. Lowering his eyes, he plucked at the braid on his sleeve.
"Priestess Clara, I understand your concerns, but Eliana's idea seems to be so beneficial in
so many ways I can't possibly disregard it."
I  was  hoping  that  Travan  would  appoint  someone  like  Flavia  or  Lucia  to  create  the
wasteland guard posts, but Clara immediately said, "Well, though I disagree with the idea,
of  course  I  obey  your  command,  Your  Highness,  and  the  Servi  will  begin  setting  up

communities of Redentori immediately."
Travan's eyes flickered to me; I wanted to protest, to say that the Cantatori were far
better suited to the task than the  Servi,  but  he  said,  "As  you  wish.  Demetrio,  I  will  ask
you to find someone who can spy out the territory of  the  Vesuviani.  In  the  meantime,  I
think this meeting is concluded."
We rose as the Emperor left, then made our own way out. As I straightened my tunic
and  fought  the  urge  to  pluck  at  the  hose,  which  were  sticking  to  my  legs  in  a  really
awkward  way,  I  noticed  that  Clara  was  looking  at  me.  It  was  not  a  venomous  glare,  of
course; Clara would never have been so careless. It was a cool look of veiled patience. Like
a cat, I thought. Stalking her prey. I bit my lip and looked away.
* * *
I couldn't sleep that night, and after a while I got up and lit a candle. I was very  careful
not to use witchlight in Cuore, though it was tempting sometimes. The ceiling of my room
seemed very  high at night, with only candlelight  to  flicker  into  the  vaulted  corners.  The
darkness frightened me when I woke from dreams full of  blood  and  fire;  I  found  myself
wanting to summon witchlight, to see my room in a pure steady light that shone in every
corner and didn't dance in the breeze of my breath. Since  I  couldn't  do  that,  I  stumbled
out of the huge soft bed and went to sit in the window, instead. The moonlight comforted
me, along with the knowledge that the garden was there.
There  had  been  no  nightmares  that  night—no  sleep  at  all.  It's  the  heat,  I  thought,
fanning my linen nightshirt as I stood by the window. Maybe I could sleep if I went and
lay down next to one of the fountains in the garden. I laughed a little at the thought.
I liked my room fine during the day, but at night the palace was too  quiet.  The  stone
walls  deadened  sound  in  a  way  that  cloth  tent  walls  hadn't.  Living  in  the  Lupi
encampment,  I  was  always  surrounded  by  thousands  of  people,  and  some  nights  I
thought  I  could  hear  most  of  them  snoring.  Even  at  the  conservatory,  except  for  the
three-month gap between Lia and Mira, I'd always had a roommate.  Mira  had  talked  in
her sleep on occasion. Lia had snored.
After a while, I blew out my candle and curled up in the window seat. It was strange,
but sometimes I wished I could have just gone on living with the Lupi.  Not  that  I  would
have  wanted  a  never-ending  war,  but  if  I  could  have  somehow  created  a  village  of  my
closest  friends  and  allies,  and  spent  the  rest  of  my  life  living  in  a  tent—  well,  it  was  a
strange  thing  to  find  appealing,  but  I  would  have  liked  it  better  than  court.  Of  course,
once  the  war  was  over,  the  Lupi  had  scattered.  The  ones  with  homes  had  returned  to
them. Of the others, some had gone to resettle villages like Doratura, as I'd suggested. A
few  had  settled  in Cuore—Giovanni  and  Lucia,  of  course,  and  Michel,  who  was  still  the
Emperor's bodyguard. There were the Cantatori, of course, and some Lupi had joined the
city guard. But for the most part, my army was gone.
I felt guilty for feeling such a loss; we'd won the war, after all, and they had the right to
enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  struggle.  Still,  as  I  drifted  off  to  sleep  in  the  cushions  of  the
window seat, I wished I could hear birds, at least, and the wind through the trees.
* * *

"Let's run away," Mira said. "You've  got  your  violin  with  you,  I've  got  mine.  What
more do we need? We could just jump over the wall and go."
I  looked  out  over  Bascio.  But  instead  of  the  tiny  village  I  remembered  from  the
conservatory,  I  saw  the  Imperial  gardens  and  the  tightly  packed  buildings  of  Cuore.
"Run away?" I said. "But everyone I know is here. Lucia and Giovanni, the Emperor—"
" 'If you would journey with me,' " Mira quoted, " 'Turn your back on your home, on
your comforts, on all that you know. Then follow me.' "
I shook my head. "I don't know."
"It would be  an  adventure,  Eliana!"  Mira  said.  "We  could  see  the  world  together."
She clasped my hand and fell silent, looking into my eyes. My heart started knocking in
my  ears  as  I  returned  her  gaze.  Then  she  dropped  my  hand  and  clambered  over  the
wall. "Let's go."
I started to follow  her,  but  my  feet  wouldn't  move.  I  couldn't  cross  the  wall.  Mira
was already heading down the road. "Wait!" I called after her, but she didn't turn back.
I knew it was useless, but I called again, "Wait! I want to come with you!"
* * *
I woke in the darkness, convinced beyond reason that if  I  hurried,  I  would  find  Mira
waiting  in the  garden  below.  Unwilling  to  question  my  own  conviction,  I  threw  a  light
cloak over  my  nightshirt  and  thrust  my  bare  feet  into  my  boots.  My  heart  pounding,  I
eased my door shut and ran down the stairs and out into the garden.
No one was there. I sat down at the  edge  of  the  fountain  and  waited  for  a  long  time,
listening to the splash of the water. I finally made my way back up to my room just before
dawn.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
There is no greater love than that of the one who gives his life for his friend. 
—The Journey of Gèsu, chapter 43, verse 29.
It was perhaps a month later that I first heard the rumor from Giovanni. The heat had
eased  somewhat,  and  we  had  met  early  in  the  morning  for  a  practice  session  at  the
enclave training ground. This was not a part of the enclave I'd ever seen as "Daniele," but
noblemen  could  practice  their  skills  as  swordsmen  in  the  comfort  of  an  enclosed
courtyard.  Giovanni  tossed  me  a  sword  and  we  worked  together  for  an  hour  or  so,
stopping when the sun rose high enough to really get uncomfortable. Sitting down  in the
shade, we drank cooled  tea  and  watched  some  of  the  others  who  were  still  at  work.  By
virtue  of  regular  practice,  I  was—according  to  Giovanni  when  he  was  feeling

magnanimous—almost as good with a sword as he'd been when Placido had kicked his ass
back in his early days as a student.
"I don't know  why  I  do  this  to  myself,"  I  said,  putting  down  the  cup  of  cold  tea  and
stretching until my back cracked.
"It's for my scintillating conversation," Giovanni said, slouching next to me and refilling
his cup. "Or else you're keeping yourself in good form in case you get to lead another war.
I can't decide."
"Maybe it's in case I ever have to fight a duel with Placido."
"Better  have  me  fight  it  for  you,  if  this  comes  up  anytime  soon,"  Giovanni  said.  "He
may look like a pig, but he's faster with a sword than you'd expect."
"He beat you, after all."
"Exactly. Though that was a long time ago."
Giovanni took another swig of the tea, then checked carefully to see if anyone was close
enough to overhear our conversation. "There's a rumor going around about you," he said.
"Supposedly you were seen, toward the end of the battle for Cuore, spiriting someone out
of the city."
I bit my lip and looked away from Giovanni, watching the men who were still training
out in the sun. "Really," I said, when I trusted my voice to stay even.
"Yes, really," Giovanni said. "Who was it?"
"I don't know what you're talking about," I said.
Giovanni  stood  up  abruptly  and  went  to  put  away  the  training  equipment.  When  he
returned, he sat down closer to me and said, "The person I heard it from seemed to think
it was a Fedele priestess—someone you kept company with while you were here before."
"Rather an odd way to put it, but the priestess I 'kept company with' was Rosalba," I
said. "She's dead, remember? We found her body in Manico."
"That's what I told the person who told me the story," Giovanni said.
I thought back to the night of the battle. I hadn't thought anyone had  seen  me,  but  I
hadn't  really  taken  steps  to  disguise  myself;  there  hadn't  been  time.  "What  are  people
making of this?" I asked.
"The story I was told apparently  illustrated  your  gallantry,"  Giovanni  said.  His voice
was sour. "Risking your life to save a lady who'd fallen in love with you, thinking you were
a man."
I snorted. "Rosalba betrayed me to the Fedeli."
"Yeah, well, maybe that was supposed to be a lover's spat? I didn't come up  with  the
story." Giovanni slouched back against the wall, relaxing slightly. "I'm probably worrying
over nothing," he said.
We  got  up  to  go  and  walked  back  to  my  room,  chatting  about  nothing  in
particular—gossip about other people, how the rebuilding efforts were going, the weather.
When we reached my room, Giovanni said, "It was Mira, wasn't it?"
I didn't answer. Giovanni's face was rigid as he walked away.
The  extent  of  my  friendship  with  Mira  was  not  widely  known  beyond  my  closest
associates; it simply wasn't something I had liked talking about. Lia had kept it out of the
songs she wrote, and fearing for  Mira's  safety,  I'd  tried  to  make  sure  only  a  few  people
ever  heard  the  full  story  of  my  escape  from  the  Fedeli.  Giovanni  and  Lucia  knew,  of

course,  and  obviously  Isabella  had  known.  Flavia  and  Celia  knew  that  we'd  been  close
friends at the conservatory; so did Giula, but she hadn't ever joined the Lupi, even when
we'd put out a call for musicians. So far as I knew, she and her family were  still  living  in
Doratura.
Nonetheless, a week later Lucia told me that she'd heard a rumor that I had helped a
mage escape Cuore.  Her  face  was  puckered  with  worry  as  she  leaned  back  in her  chair
and plucked at the fabric of her skirt. "I thought you should know," she said.
I leaned back in my own chair,  looking  out  the  window.  It  was  dusk,  and  the  garden
was in deep shadow. "What do you think I should do about it?"
"Deny it," Lucia said. "Find out who's spreading the story and put a stop to it."
"The only way to kill a rumor is to start a better one," I said. "Denying it, pursuing the
people spreading it—these are just fresh logs for the fire."
"I think it's Clara who's spreading it," Lucia said. "But I can't prove that."
"Clara's too smart to spread the rumor herself. If I were her, I'd arrange for someone
who liked to gossip to overhear the most damaging information."
"Still, it's her doing."
"You're probably right," I said.
Lucia's hands were twisting the fabric now. "Is there anything to the rumor?"
"Would you think less of me if it were true?"
"Of  course  not,"  Lucia  said,  and  then  raised  her  eyes  to  meet  mine.  "I  mean  that.  I
know you, Eliana. If you helped a mage escape Cuore, you had a good reason to do it."
I laughed a little at that. "You're a priestess. You should probably be telling me that I
sinned and ought to go turn myself in to the Servi right now."
"If I ever reach the point of telling anyone to go to the Servi for anything, I hope God
strikes me dead."
"Whatever  would  Gèsu  say  about  that?"  I  tried  to  make  my  shaky  voice  take  on  a
teasing tone, with mixed success.
Lucia's hands  relaxed  their  grip  on her  skirt  and  she  leaned  forward.  "He'd  say  that
redemption is open to all who seek it, even Clara, and that I ought to remember that."
I could genuinely laugh at that. "I don't think you need  to  worry  about  Clara  seeking
redemption anytime soon. She thinks she's doing the work of God."
Lucia shook her head. "No. No, she's not. But I think you were. Redemption is open to
all who seek it—even a mage. That's why you saved Mira."
Had Lucia followed me that day? I turned to meet her eyes, shocked, and  she  simply
shrugged. "I know you, Eliana, and I know what you've told me about Mira. That's all."
I nodded a little.
It had grown quite dark while we talked, and I went to light a candle. "I would rather
die than tell any of this to the Servi," Lucia said. "But Clara is going to start asking around
soon,  and  she'll  know  better  than  to  rely  on  my  testimony,  or  Giovanni's.  Be  careful.
Giovanni's right. She hates you, and she's afraid of you. Please be careful."
I nodded again, and Lucia left.
Outside, it had grown quite dark. I settled into the window seat; I could see a few stars
and  a  sliver-thin  moon.  Back  at  the  conservatory,  when  the  Fedeli  had  come  to

investigate, Mira's secret ensemble had met and sorted out what to do—to deny, to keep
our  secret.  I  could  seek  out  my  friends  at  the  enclave  and  ask  them  to  lie  on  my
behalf—to give each of them a consistent story to tell Clara. They would do it, I was fairly
certain.  I  mulled  over  that  possibility  for  a  while,  and  then  discarded  it.  The  truly
damaging information—that I had smuggled someone out of Cuore—was already common
knowledge. I had no idea who it was who had seen me, so I couldn't very  well ask them to
change  their  story.  Clara  was  no idiot;  she  knew  when  she  was  being  lied  to.  A  unified
brick wall from my friends would only convince her that I was hiding some terrible secret.
The  truth  was  bad  enough,  I  thought,  but  I  had  no doubt  that  Clara  could  twist  it  into
something even worse if she wanted to.
Clara came to visit me a few mornings later. I poured tea for her as she settled into a
chair, her fan of black feathers flicking back and forth. With a look of  grave  concern,  she
told me that people were saying that I'd helped a mage to escape the fall of Cuore.
"Are  they,"  I  said.  Clara  was  toying  with  the  jeweled  cross  she  wore,  and  my  own
fingers strayed to Bella's cross, which I wore around my neck now on a silk cord.
"You don't seem surprised," Clara said. "Is there something to this rumor?"
"I first heard this story a few weeks ago," I said. "I know how gossip travels on the lips
of the malicious.  It's  said  I  helped  someone  to  escape,  so  naturally  there  are  some  who
assume the worst." I tightened my jaw to keep myself from spitting out my suspicion that
it was Clara herself who had started the rumor that the lady I'd helped was a mage.
Clara relaxed slightly into her chair. "Then of course you'll welcome an investigation,"
she said. "To clear your name."
"For you to investigate this slander will only give credibility to it," I said. "Is that what
you want?"
"Do you have something to hide?"
"Are you going to tell me next that 'innocence doesn't need to hide?' " I asked.
Clara wet her lips. "I'm not going to quote the Book of the Lady to you," she said. "But
it does seem to me that if your conscience is clear, then you'll know you  have  nothing  to
fear from me."
I  met  her  green  eyes.  "It  hardly  matters  whether  I  approve  or  not.  You're  going  to
investigate the story regardless."
"It's for your sake, Eliana," Clara said. "We can't have people believing that you, you of
all people, would be planning to create your own Circle to depose the Emperor."
Create my own Circle?  Depose  the  Emperor?  I  had  turned  away  from  Clara;  now  I
whirled  back  to  face  her.  "For  the  love  of  God,  Clara,  if  I  had  intended  to  depose  the
Emperor, wouldn't I have made my  bid  for  power  before  the  Lupi  were  disbanded?  An
army would have been a hell of a lot more use to me than one mage, don't you think?"
"I agree completely," Clara said, with a smile as full of false warmth as the midwinter
sun. She stood up and put a friendly hand on my arm. "And I'm confident that's what my
investigation will find."
"You  were  right,"  I  said  to  Lucia  over  lunch.  "Clara  has  decided  she  needs  to
investigate the rumors. Apparently now  the  story  is  that  I've  created  my  own  Circle  to
depose the Emperor."
"That's absurd," Lucia said.
"Oh, I agree,"  Giovanni  said.  "But  this  is  a  game  Clara  can't  lose.  Even  if  she  'clears'
Eliana of all suspicion, the fact that Eliana was investigated at all will be reason to distrust

her."
"Do you think she knows about my friendship with Mira?" I asked softly.
Giovanni  shook  his  head.  "No.  None  of  your  old  friends  have  joined  the  Servi.  Right
now, Clara—and Placido, I'm sure he's in on this—are just trying to stir up  suspicion  and
distrust. You have influence,  popular  support,  and  the  Emperor's  ear;  if  they  can  erode
any of those even a little, it's well worth their time."
I nodded, then lowered my eyes. Of course, the "worst" was true—I had saved a mage
from the fall of Cuore, though not for the reasons that Clara had implied. Maybe I should
flee,  I  thought.  Clara  was  highly  unlikely  to  send  people  to  hunt  me  down.  But  if  I  did,
everyone, not just Clara, would assume that I really had saved at least one mage, maybe
more, in an attempt to create my own  Circle  and  take  power  for  myself.  My  reputation
would be utterly destroyed, but more important, so would that of all my friends and allies,
from  Giovanni  and  Lucia  down  to  the  young  ladies  who  dressed  in  men's  clothes  and
refused to wed.
If worse came to worst, I thought, I could confess— that  I  had  saved  Mira  because  I
was in love with her. I wasn't sure what punishment would fall on me for that, but I was
fairly  confident  that  at  least  my  friends  wouldn't  suffer  for  my  carelessness  in  allowing
myself to be seen.
* * *
A few  days  after  my  conversation  with  Clara,  Flavia  came  by  my  room  for  a  visit.
Along with a fair number of the  Cantatori,  Flavia  had  remained  in Cuore.  As  Flavia  had
done throughout the war, the Cantatori wore gray robes styled like conservatory clothes.
Though  initially  the  Cantatori  were  made  up  solely  of  musicians  and  dancers  who  had
served with the Lupi or the Imperial Army, now they were attracting members who had
not joined during the war. Those who had served with the Lupi or the army belted their
robes with a red sash, like Flavia had; those who had joined after the war left their robes
unbelted. Flavia's sash was red wool, but in the heat of the summer she wore a linen robe
rather than a wool one. I invited her in and poured wine for both of us.
We chatted first about the outposts that were being set up in the wasteland. Flavia and
the other Cantatori were eager to participate but reluctant to  put  themselves  under  the
control of the Servi. "We're thinking of building our own," she said. "Do you think we'll be
able to persuade the Emperor to supply us with food like he's going to supply the Servi?"
"I don't know," I said. "Sometimes I think he doesn't like Clara any more than I do, but
he often does as she says, even so. And certainly Clara won't want him to."
"I  don't  understand  it."  Flavia  fidgeted  with  her  wine  cup.  "We're  talking  about
outposts  in  the  wasteland.  Why  would  Clara  want  to  control  something  so  remote,
somewhere so desolate?"
"Well, she's not going down there,"  I  said.  "And  this  is  Clara:  if  she  could  control  the
moon and the stars, she would."
Flavia laughed, but averted her  eyes.  "Speaking  of  Clara,"  she  said,  her  voice  heavy,
"she summoned me yesterday. She wanted to ask me questions about you."
"That's not surprising," I said. "What did you tell her? If you don't mind my asking?"
"I don't mind you asking," Flavia said. Her face was red. "She wanted to know how you

felt about the Circle, first of all. I told her you hated them. Everyone knew that. The story
going around, that you tried to set aside your own Circle—the only person less likely to do
that, I think, would be Lucia. And I told Clara that."
I nodded, and Flavia's flush deepened.
"So then she asked if you'd ever known a mage. I figured that I'd better not lie about
this—if  she  already  knew  about  Mira,  she'd  think  you  had  something  to  hide.  So  I  said
yes, there was a mage hiding at the conservatory. Mira. We all knew Mira; Mira was the
one who organized the first group of secret Redentori."
"Mira didn't organize Redentori exactly," I said. "We were just playing the music. ..."
Flavia  waved  her  hand  dismissively.  "Mira  knew  what  she  was  doing.  Bella  was  the
first one of us to really convert, but don't try to tell me that  any  of  us  were  just  playing
the music. Anyway, I told Clara that,  and  her  face—well,  it  was  like  I'd  just  given  her  a
present. Eliana, I have a terrible feeling that I gave her just what she was looking for."
She probably had, I thought,  but  I  shook  my  head.  "She  would  have  found  out  from
somewhere. You  were  right;  if  you  hadn't  told  her  I  knew  a  mage  at  the  conservatory,
she'd have found out from somewhere, and then she'd have figured that I had something
to hide, and that you were hiding it."
Flavia shook her head. "Yeah,  but  I  thought  about  it  later,  and  who  else  would  have
told her? Celia's moved back to her family's farm, Demetrio and Nolasco went back to the
conservatory,  and  I  don't  think  Clara  would  have  gone  all  the  way  down  to  Verdia  to
question them. I was afraid she already knew, but clearly she didn't. I wish I'd talked  to
you, before I talked to her."
"Would you have had time?"
"Not  really.  But—oh,  I  should  have  come  over  here  when  I  first  heard  the  rumor.  I
should have guessed that Clara—"
"How were you supposed to know?" I said. "Was that all she asked you about?"
"Then she wanted to know if you had any special connection to Mira. And I told her no,
you didn't. I figured if she didn't already know you two were roommates, I wasn't going to
be the one to tell her." Flavia paused, and sighed. "She had me swear that on the cross. I
did it. I figure Gèsu probably understands about lying to human scorpions like Clara."
Valentino was the next of my friends to give Clara a piece of the puzzle. I heard about
it  from  a  thoroughly  disgusted  Quirino,  who  couldn't  believe  Valentino  would  have
actually volunteered this information. "To Clara, of all people," he snarled, flinging himself
into  the  chair  by  my  fireplace.  "Valentino!  After  all  the  times  the  Servi  went  after
Valentino, I would have sworn that the only way Clara would get information out  of  him
would have involved hot irons."
"Maybe that's what he was afraid of," I said.
Quirino rolled his eyes. "He might have at least  waited  until  they  were  heating  them
instead of spilling everything he knew as soon as Clara had him alone."
"What did Clara ask him about?"
"The story about you, of course. Valentino fell all  over  himself  trying  to  convince  her
that you never, ever would have freed Rosalba. 'She was the one who turned Eliana in to
the  Fedeli,'  he  said.  'Eliana  never  would  have  freed  her.'  Never  mind  that  Rosalba  was
dead by the end of the war; if I know that, Clara certainly knows it and Valentino ought to
have known it."
I nodded. "Did Clara leave it at that?"

"Of course she didn't. This is Clara. She wanted to know how Valentino thought you'd
escaped from the Fedeli. He said that he'd heard that after you vanished, the Circle said it
was a priest—someone like Rosalba— and the Fedeli said it was  a  member  of  the  Circle.
And Clara pounced on that. 'A member of the Circle, Valentino? Think carefully: did  you
ever see Eliana meet with a mage?' "
I  thought  back—somewhat  frantically—over  my  months  in  the  enclave.  Could
Valentino have known about my meetings with Mira?
"Valentino said no, of course not. So then Clara asked about the priestess, and he said
that she wouldn't have been the one who freed you, since she was the one who turned you
in  in  the  first  place."  Quirino  sighed.  "I  think  that  was  basically  the  end  of  the
conversation. Valentino said that the thing that really worried him was that Clara seemed
so pleased."
I lowered my eyes.
"Eliana?" Quirino said. "How did you escape from the Fedeli?"
I poured Quirino some tea, to give myself  time  to  think  about  whether  I  should  give
him  the  honest  answer,  then  took  a  sip  from  my  own  cup.  "Well,  you  know,  I  think
Rosalba  rather  regretted  turning  me  in."  I  remembered  her  prayer,  her  shaking  voice,
and her pale face.
"Was she the one who helped you, then?"
I shook my head. "No. Valentino was right. It was a mage, Mira."
"Why would a mage have freed you?"
"The Circle ordered her to. They were afraid the Fedeli wouldn't be able to break me,
so they planned to follow me back to where the Lupi were wintering."
"But that didn't happen."
"No. Mira warned me. And she told me how to defeat magefire."
Quirino shook his head. "A mage told you that? Why?"
"That's a long story," I said. "The short version, I guess, is that we were friends."
Quirino went a little pale, and swallowed hard, but he nodded, and drank the rest of his
tea in silence.
Ulisse was the next of my old friends to come by for a visit. He had avoided me  since
our victory; apparently time hadn't significantly eased his humiliation at discovering that
his old  drinking  buddy  was  actually  the  lady  he  longed  for,  in  disguise.  Still,  today,  he
seemed  to  have  regained  a  little  of  his  old  confidence.  "Clara  was  asking  me  questions
about you," he said as I poured him some wine.
"She's been asking lots of people questions," I said.
"Yeah,  well,  she  asked  me—"  Ulisse  lowered  his  voice  to  barely  above  a  whisper
"—about Mira. Miriamne. The renegade mage. She wanted to know if you and  Mira  had
had any contact while you were spying in the enclave."
Ulisse had carried a message for Mira once—a sprig of winter jasmine that had meant,
meet me. I knew, looking at him, that  whether  or  not  he'd  known  at  the  time,  he  knew
now who he'd carried the message for.
"I told her no," Ulisse said. "Absolutely not, you hadn't."
I felt my face go  hot  and  then  cold.  How  would  Ulisse  have  known  for  certain  that  I
hadn't had contact? He was a student—he hadn't even lived in the enclave. To make such

an emphatic denial, he had to be lying, and I knew Clara would reach the same conclusion.
"Thank you for being such a loyal friend, Ulisse," I said softly, and let him out.
Late one afternoon a few days later,  I  heard  Clara's  voice  in the  corridor  outside  my
room, and stiffened, expecting a knock. But she was not coming to see me; a moment later
I heard Lucia's voice and realized Clara was speaking to Lucia, in the room next to mine.
"Good day, Priestess Clara," Lucia said, her voice very clear. "What a pleasure to see you.
Please come in."
After a moment's hesitation—Lucia, at least, was my friend—I pressed my ear against
the wall, straining to overhear their conversation.
They exchanged mutual pleasantries for a few minutes over tea, then Clara got  down
to  business.  "I'm  afraid  I  need  to  ask  you  some  questions  about  Eliana,"  Clara  said.  "I
realize that she's a good friend of yours, but your first duty, as I'm sure you're aware, is to
God, and your second is to Emperor Travan."
"Oh,  of  course,"  Lucia  said  so  implacably  that  I  shivered.  "I'm  happy  to  help  you
however I can."
Clara  paused  for  a  moment—surprised  by  Lucia's  willingness  to  cooperate,
perhaps—and then asked, "What can you tell me about Eliana's feelings toward the mage
who called herself Mira?"
"Nothing  at  all,"  Lucia  said,  her  voice  distinct  and  perfectly  courteous.  "I'm  terribly
sorry."
There was a sharp clink as  Clara  set  down  her  tea.  "Excuse  me,  Priestess  Lucia.  I'm
sure you know a great deal about the subject."
"Perhaps.  But  as  you  mentioned,  my  first  duty  is  to  God.  As  Eliana's  spiritual
counselor, all our conversations on that subject are privileged. It says in The Journey—"
"I don't need you to quote The Journey to me,"
Clara  said,  her  voice  sharp.  "Perhaps  you  can  enlighten  me  as  to  Eliana's  feelings
toward Emperor Travan."
"Again,  anything  Eliana  has  told  me  about  this  subject  is  under  God's  seal.  I  would,
however, point out that Eliana did put him in power."
"The Imperial Army and the Lupi put him in power," Clara said.
"Perhaps  you  should  ask  the  Emperor  who  he  credits—or  blames."  I  could  hear  the
hint of a smile in Lucia's voice.
"While serving the Lupi in Cuore, did Eliana meet with Mira at all?" Clara asked.
"Oh,  my  goodness,  you  must  realize  that  I  wasn't  there.  But  Michel  was.  Have  you
asked Michel?"
"I have." Clara's voice was stony. "He refused to talk to me. Why do you suppose that
was?"
"I couldn't imagine," Lucia said.
"How did Eliana escape  after  her  arrest  by  the  Fedeli?"  Clara  asked.  "Is  it  true  that
Mira was the one who freed her?"
"Again, I wasn't there," Lucia said. "I think you'd better ask Eliana that question."
"Rest assured," Clara said, and I could hear a rustle as she stood up. "I will do that."
I expected a knock on my own door next, but instead she knocked on Giovanni's.  His

room was on the other side of mine, and I went to listen without hesitation. He swung his
door open at the first knock. "Oh, good afternoon, Priestess Clara," he said. "Please come
in."
Again, I listened to slightly strained pleasantries. Clara made  herself  comfortable  and
Giovanni poured wine. Giovanni broached  the  subject  first.  "I'm  quite  sure  I  know  why
you're here," he said, "And I'm very  glad you came to me, because I can straighten all of
this out."
"Really. Well, I must say, I'm delighted to hear it," Clara said.
"Eliana did help someone escape during the fall of Cuore, but it wasn't a mage, nor was
it  a  priestess.  It  was  a  musician  who  panicked  under  fire,  a  friend  of  hers  from  the
conservatory."
"Really." Clara set down her cup with a  faint  click.  "Why  didn't  Eliana  simply  tell  me
this when I first began investigating?"
"Eliana is quite loyal to her friends," Giovanni said.  "The  musician  who  fled  would  be
deeply shamed if her cowardice were known. Eliana has a great deal of confidence in your
honor  and  fairness;  she  knew  that  you  would  investigate  the  rumor,  find  nothing,  and
close your investigation, her friend's honor intact."
"What was the name of this friend?"
"I'd really rather not say," Giovanni said.
"I'm afraid I must insist."
"Well..." Giovanni hesitated for a moment. "Giula," he said finally. "It was a young lady
named Giula."
"Perhaps," Clara said, "she saved two people during the battle."
Giovanni  laughed  out  loud,  an  easy,  casual  laugh.  "You  think  she  smuggled  out  the
musician, then ran back into  the  burning  enclave,  found  a  mage,  and  smuggled  her  out,
too? I spent much of the battle at her side, and take my word for it, she didn't have that
kind of time."
"But she saved Giula out of friendship. Mira was a friend too, wasn't she?"
"Once she was," Giovanni said.  "Eliana  knew  her  at  the  conservatory.  But  she  never
forgave her for leaving— or for destroying the Lupi."
"Not even after Mira freed her from the Fedeli?"
"If it was Mira who did it, she did it on the orders of the Circle."
"So she wouldn't have saved Mira out of sentiment?"
"Eliana is not a sentimental person."
"Interesting."  There  was  a  pause;  I  thought  Clara  had  probably  picked  up  her  cup
again. "You  see,  I  have  an  eyewitness—a  servant  from  the  enclave—prepared  to  swear
that he saw Eliana smuggling the mage Miriamne, also known as Mira, out of Cuore."
"Impossible. As I said, it was Giula."
"Giula can ride a horse?"
"Obviously, if that was how she got out of the city."
"Was Giula the sort of friend with whom Eliana might exchange a passionate kiss?"
"They were old friends."

"Just as Mira was an old friend." The cup clicked down  again  and  I  heard  a  rustle  as
Clara stood up. "But of course, Eliana is not a sentimental person. If she did smuggle Mira
out  of  the  city,  you  have  made  it  clear  that  in  your  opinion,  it  would  not  have  been  a
gesture of friendship. Thus, the theory that the purpose of saving the mage was to create
her  own  Circle—  Oh,  don't  shake  your  head  at  me,  Generale  Giovanni,  and  leave  your
sword  where  it  is.  I  will  overlook  your  blasphemy  in considering  a  physical  attack  on a
Priestess of God, given your fondness for Generale  Eliana.  Thank  you,  Generale.  You've
been most helpful."
The door clicked shut. There was no knock on my own door. Through the wall, I heard
a glass shatter against the floor.
The snare was closing around me. I decided to  go  to  the  Emperor—to  confess  to  him
that I had freed Mira, but not to challenge his power. I had done it because I loved Mira
and  knew  that  we  could  trust  her.  Surely,  I  thought  as  I  paced  the  floors  of  my  room,
Travan  will  understand.  Surely  he  has  loved  the  wrong  person—  and  surely,  he  will
understand that for those like us, sometimes there is no right person.
The corridor outside my room was empty, and I hurried down the stairs and through
the courtyard to Travan's quarters. But I was met at the door by  Michel.  "He  won't  see
you," Michel said.
I  stared  at  Michel;  for  a  moment,  I  couldn't  quite  believe  what  I'd  heard.  "Why?"  I
asked, finally.
Michel shook his head. He didn't answer right away, and I realized after a moment that
he was almost in tears. "I don't know," he said.
"Does he believe—the stories that Clara has been telling?"
"I don't know," Michel said again.
"You have to let me in," I said.
Michel shook his head. "I can't," he said. "Please, just go. I can't let you in."
Clara  was  waiting  when  I  returned  to  my  room,  with  Placido  and  three
Servi—witnesses.
"Eliana," Clara said, and her face  was  grave  with  a  hint  of  triumph.  "We  need  to  ask
you about Mira."
"I have nothing to say to you," I said.
"Then you will be charged with treason," Clara said. "Don't you at least want to defend
yourself?"
I pulled myself up as straight as I could stand. "Mira saved my life twice," I said. "She
saved me from the Circle; when they came to take her back, they used  me  as  a  hostage
against  her.  And  she  saved  me  from  the  Fedeli.  Mira  was  the  first  person  I  knew  who
dared  to  speak  against  the  Circle—who  dared  suggest  that  I  could  have  a  future  that
didn't  require  me  to  play  the  tunes  they  called.  Mira  was  one  of  the  Lupi,  even  if  she
didn't wear a red sash."
"One of the Lupi?" Clara said. "Mira  was  one  of  the  mages  sent  to  destroy  the  Lupi,
was she not?"
"Mira volunteered for that mission to protect as many of us as she could," I said.
"So she told you."
"Mira saved my life," I said again. "When she saved me from the Fedeli, she saved us
all—including Placido, since I knew he led the university  reformers.  I  couldn't  have  held

out  against  the  Fedele  torturer  forever.  Mira  was  the  person  who  told  me  about  the
power  of  the  Redentori  dances  against  magefire."  I  stepped  forward.  "Mira  renounced
magery once. I knew she could renounce it again."
"That doesn't matter," Clara said. "What you knew— or you thought you  knew.  Mira
was a mage—condemned by God." Her ringers touched the jeweled cross she wore.
I felt my face go hot and cold, and in a single furious gesture, I yanked the cross from
the  chain  around  Clara's  neck  and  threw  it  to  her  feet.  "How  dare  you  decide  for  God
whether Mira is condemned?" I demanded. "What have you risked for your faith?  What
have  you  sacrificed?  You  don't  love  God.  You  love  your  position,  your  comfort,  your
power. If God condemns anyone, it's you."
A faint smile flickered on Clara's lips. "On my authority as the head of the Servi," she
said, "I place you under arrest, Eliana, on suspicion of treason." She glanced at  the  cross
on the floor; one of her assistants quickly picked it up. "And blasphemy."
"You can rot in hell, Clara," I said. "To be accused by you of blasphemy is the highest
honor I can imagine."
* * *
Because of my stature—and perhaps because Giovanni threatened to kill  anyone  who
tried it—I was not imprisoned in the dungeon, but placed under house arrest and confined
to my room. Wary of giving me a public forum for more outbursts, Clara decided that my
trial would be closed. I would not be invited. Neither would Lucia and Giovanni.
"We have to get you out of here," Giovanni said.
"How?" I said.
"There  are  Lupi  still  in  Cuore,"  Giovanni  said.  "We  could  break  you  out.  Then
run—head north, far enough away that it's more trouble than it's worth to come after you.
I have family in Varena; my father owns ships. We could get  you  across  the  ocean  if  we
had to."
"Along with the Lupi?" I said. "All the Lupi who'd helped break me out?"
"Sure," Giovanni said, though I suspected he wasn't as confident of that as he wanted
me to think.
"And  everyone  else  that  Placido  and  Clara  would  go  after?  You  know  this  isn't  just
about me, Giovanni. If I run, it will be taken as proof of what Clara claims— proof that  I
saved a remnant of the Circle to help me make my own bid for power. What would be the
logical  thing  to  do  then?  Purge  Cuore  of  every  person  loyal  to  me,  from  Valentino  and
Quirino to the young women who dress like me." I looked at Giovanni in the  candlelight.
"Can you tell me this wouldn't happen?"
Giovanni was silent.
"It would happen," Lucia said.
Giovanni's head snapped up to glare at Lucia. "You aren't helping," he said.
"I don't think Eliana would want us to lie to her," Lucia said.
"No," I said. "I wouldn't."
Giovanni picked up a wineglass, took a swallow, then hurled the glass in frustration at

the fireplace. It smashed against the  stones,  and  Lucia  closed  her  eyes  and  pressed  her
hands against her  forehead,  blocking  him  out.  "Eliana,  Clara  wants  you  dead,"  Giovanni
said. "And she thinks she can get away with it. She's sure she can get away with it, or she
wouldn't have let it go this far."
"Why is Travan allowing this?" Lucia said. "Eliana, do you have any idea?"
I shook my head. "He wouldn't see me," I said. "I  tried  to  go  talk  to  him,  but  Michel
turned me away."
"Then you have to run," Giovanni said. But after what Lucia had said, I couldn't do it.
No matter what the price.
Lucia  and  Giovanni  spent  the  night  of  my  trial  in  my  room.  As  dusk  turned  to
darkness, Giovanni napped in a chair, and Lucia, at my insistence, took the bed. I took the
cushions  in  the  window  seat  for  myself—not  that  I  expected  to  sleep.  Very  late,  as  I
stared into the wispy light of the candle, there was a very soft tap at the door. I opened it:
Michel. "Can I come in?" he whispered.
I stood back to let him through and quietly poured us each a glass of wine. He sat down
across from me, in the window seat. Giovanni stirred, then went back to sleep.
"Has Travan agreed to see me?" I asked.
"No," Michel said. His shoulders were slumped; his head was bowed. "And he won't."
"Why?" I asked. "Is he that angry about this?"
Michel shook his head and covered his face with his hands. "I came tonight  because  I
thought you at least deserved to know why Travan has turned his back on you," he said.
His voice was muffled.
I waited.
Michel dropped his hands to the table, but didn't raise his face. "Travan doesn't really
like Clara or Placido any more than you do," he said. "He accepted them as allies early on
because it was necessary; now, they've got far too much influence. But, he can't just throw
them  out  of  power;  he  needs  people  to  turn  against  them."  He  swallowed.  "Travan  is
hoping that Clara will order you executed. Once  you're  dead,  he's  going  to  pretend  it  all
happened without his knowledge or consent. He'll use this  to  disband  the  Servi,  because
clearly they can't be trusted with power. He's hoping to use this to take down both Clara
and Placido."
I shook my head, unwilling to believe. "Did he tell you this?"
Michel shook his head, then nodded. "Sort of."
"Are you sure?"
He nodded. "Very sure."
I closed my eyes  and  rubbed  my  eyes  with  the  heels  of  my  hands.  "Michel,  will  you
carry  a  note  to  him  for  me?  If  you  don't  think  he'll  read  it  now—"  I  broke  off.  If  Clara
meant to have me executed, it could happen as soon as the  next  morning.  With  effort,  I
finished:  "—give  it  to  him  after  I'm  dead."  Michel  nodded,  and  I  moved  to  the  table,
getting out a sheet of paper, ink, and a pen.
When  you  hear  the  news  of  my  death,  Travan,  you  can  console  yourself  with  one
thing: I truly did save Mira on the night that Cuore fell. I saved Mira because I love her.
She is a friend, and when I faced her with  a  drawn  sword  between  us,  I  knew  that  I
could never betray a friend for political expediency. Alas, it's clear to me now that you
lack my compunctions.

I  saw  the  night  we  met  that  you  have  the  will  and  the  spirit  to  be  a  truly  great
Emperor, like the Emperors of the old days, before the Circle. But you will have to lead.
You will have to stand up to Clara  and  Placido  and  those  like  them— and believe  me,
even if Clara and Placido both died in their sleep tonight, there would be more like them
soon enough.  You've  chosen  to  listen  to  them;  you  can  choose  to  stop.  You  can  send
them away from Cuore, and dismantle the Servi. You can decree that  everyone  in the
Empire  may  follow  their  heart,  and  worship  the  god  they  believe  in.  You  are  the
Emperor. You are the one person here who can make that choice.
I've asked Michel to give this to you after I'm dead. You wouldn't listen to me in life,
but perhaps you'll listen to me now. As I saved Mira for friendship, I appeal to you now
as a friend to a friend: lead, Travan. For the sake  of  your  people.  We  fought  and  died
for you —not for Clara and Placido.
When I finished, Michel was still slumped in his chair, barely able to look at me. Once
the ink had dried, I folded the letter and sealed it, then gave it to Michel. Michel stood up
and finally raised his head; his eyes were full of tears. "Thank you, Generale," Michel said.
"For what?" I asked.
"For everything," he said. He touched his fist to his chest and held it out, then left the
room as quickly as he could.
Giovanni stirred in his chair, and for a moment I thought  he'd  been  awake  the  whole
time—but  then  he  settled  back  down  and  started  snoring.  I  still  didn't  feel  at  all  like
sleeping,  but  I  didn't  have  the  heart  to  wake  Giovanni  or  Lucia  for  the  company,  so  I
curled up in the window seat to wait for morning.
* * *
Darkness and agony and  Felice's  grinning  face  faded  into  the  wasteland  twilight.  I
felt a comforting hand clasping mine, and sat up, free of my bonds. "Mira," I said, but I
was  in the  valley  that  had  once  been  Ravenna,  beside  the  burnt-out  remnants  of  the
keep, a single fragment of cloth flapping like a lost banner in the night breeze.
Mario was beside me. "Don't be afraid," he said.
There  were  others  approaching  us.  Isabella  and  Rafi;  Vitale;  Severo.  There  were
hundreds here. All of them, Lupi who had died during the war.
"You all died because of me," I said.
"We all gave our lives," Mario said. "And we would give them again." Mario clasped
my hand gently, and for a moment, I felt the touch of warm flesh against mine. "Don't
forget that," he said. "It was our choice. Honor our lives by living for what we believed
in."
* * *
I woke early in the dawn to find Giovanni sitting at the table across from me. "You look

terrible," I said. "Maybe I should have had you sleep in the bed."
Giovanni didn't smile. "They've found you guilty, Eliana," he said gently.
"Oh," I said, and had a strange impulse to go back to  sleep.  Maybe  if  I  went  to  sleep
and woke up a second time, it wouldn't be true. I reached for the tea and almost knocked
it over. "What are they going to do to me?"
"Clara has sentenced you to death," he said.
I swallowed hard. "How is she going to do it?"
"Beheading."
My  hand,  on the  teacup,  shook  suddenly,  and  the  hot  tea  splashed  onto  my  hand.  I
yelped in pain and blew on the scald to cool it. "Well," I said, and was relieved to hear that
my voice was perfectly  steady.  "At  least  that's  always  looked  pretty  painless.  Fast.  Not
like hanging or burning. That's better  than  a  lot  of  the  ways  I  thought  I'd  die,  this  past
year."
"How  about  dying  in  your  own  bed  at  the  age  of  eighty,  surrounded  by  your
grandchildren?" Giovanni asked. "Did that ever occur to you as a possibility?"
"I never would've had grandchildren, Giovanni," I  said,  and  gave  him  a  wry  grin.  He
summoned up a weak smile in return and poured me a cup of tea.
"So this is it, then," I said. "They should be coming for me soon, I suppose."
"You might be able to convince Clara not to kill you if you begged for mercy," Giovanni
said. "It's the sort of gesture she'd go for."
I took a swallow of the tea. "If she were planning to burn me alive, I might be able to
make myself do it," I said. "As it is—" I sighed and closed my eyes. "Michel  told  me  last
night  that  Travan  is  hoping  to  use  this  to  shove  Placido  and  Clara  out  of  power—as  an
excuse to disband the Servi. Do you think it'll work?" Giovanni  started  to  answer,  and  I
looked up to fix him with a glare. "Truthfully. Do you think it'll work?"
Giovanni lowered his eyes. "It will probably work," he muttered reluctantly.
"It's  worth  dying  if  it  gets  Clara  out  of  power."  I  took  another  swallow  of  tea;  my
mouth had gone very dry. "I'm going to come back as a ghost and haunt Travan, though.
Do Redentori believe in ghosts?"
Giovanni  blinked  at  me  slowly  and  then  shrugged.  "I  think  the  question  is  open  to
debate."
"I  dreamed  about  Mario  last  night,"  I  said.  "It  was  a  nice  dream,  though.  He  didn't
haunt me."
"What did you dream about Mario?" Giovanni asked.
"He was there with all the Lupi who'd died, and he said that it was their choice, that I
shouldn't blame myself," I said. "Now that I'm going to join them, I guess they wanted to
reassure me."
Giovanni  smiled  and  reached  across  the  table  to  squeeze  my  hand.  Then  he  pushed
back  his  chair  and  stood  up.  "Eliana,  I  need  to  leave  for  a  while.  I  promise,  it  won't  be
long."
"What?" I stared at him. "Where are you going?"
"Privy," he said.
I started to shake my head in disbelief. He turned toward the door, then turned back
to me, slipped one hand behind my head, and kissed me on the lips. Then he broke away

and strode out.
"What the hell," I shouted after him. "Giovanni! Get back here." He didn't turn around.
"Giovanni!"
I knew within a few minutes that he hadn't gone to the privy, not unless he got lost or
fell in. I woke Lucia and asked her to go look for him, then paced the room, touching my
violin as I passed it but not picking it up to play. It was depressing, to be alone  like  this,
and frustrating to lack an audience for the morbid jokes I was coming up with to pass the
time and distract myself. Much more than an hour passed before there was a knock at the
door. I opened it to see Lucia, and a guard.
"Lucia," I said, "thank goodness. Did you find him?"
Lucia looked at the guard.
"You're free to go," the guard said.
I stared at him. "Giovanni said I'd been found guilty."
"You  were,"  the  guard  said.  "But  your  sentence  was  overturned.  New  evidence  has
come to light."
"What evidence?" I asked.
"Someone else confessed to freeing the mage," the guard said.
Lady's— "Where's Giovanni?" I said.
Lucia  slipped  her  arm  around  my  waist,  supporting  my  weight  as  if  she  thought  I
might  fall  suddenly.  "Giovanni  went  to  Clara,  and  said  that  you  delivered  Mira  as  a
prisoner to him, but that he was so taken by her beauty that he freed her."
Oh  my  God,  Giovanni.  "Giovanni,  you're  an  idiot;  you're  an  idiot,"  I  whispered.
"Where is he? I need to see him." Lucia shook her head. "I'm not going to let him do this,"
I said.
"He knew that," Lucia said. "Eliana, Giovanni's dead."
* * *
I'd spent the morning bracing myself to walk out of my room stoic and dignified;  now
that I was free to go, and safe, all I could do was sit down at my table and sob. This wasn't
what I'd been ready for. How could Giovanni possibly be dead? I'd  just  seen  him. Damn
you, Giovanni.
"But they all knew I did it," I said to Lucia.
"Giovanni  started  by  shouting  his  confession  from  the  center  of  the  gardens,"  Lucia
said. "He figured that if enough people knew that he'd confessed, Clara would look pretty
foolish executing you—and looking foolish is the one thing Clara can't stand. He said  that
you were protecting him." Lucia sat down  beside  me.  "He  wrote  you  a  letter,"  she  said,
and slipped it under my hands.
Eliana, the letter read.
By the time you read this, I'll be dead. I know you'll be angry—I suppose that's part

of what makes this worth it.
Typical.
I can't let them kill you. But you're right—it's worth dying to bring down the Servi. I
know you would never let me take your place, so I'm going to request that sentence be
carried out before they break the news to you. If they refuse,  I'll  attack  Placido;  with
any luck, I'll take him with me. Save Travan the trouble of deposing him.
I looked up. "Placido?" Lucia sighed. "Dead."
I  know  you'll  be  angry  at  me  for  doing  this,  but  as  time  passes,  I  hope  you  will
remember me with fondness and not with anger. Because just as you would die to save
Mira, I would die to save you. Because I love you.
I know neither one of us has ever believed — not  in the  Lady,  not  in Gèsu.  Not  the
way Lucia does, or Michel. But if there's a power, whatever name She goes by, I hope
She  takes  good  care  of  you.  Don't  behave  yourself  too  well,  though,  because  I'm
counting on seeing you again.
My love forever, Giovanni
I folded the letter so that my tears wouldn't make the ink run, and laid my head on my
arms.
* * *
Though  Giovanni's  death  wasn't  quite  what  Travan  had  planned  on,  it  worked  well
enough for  his  purposes.  Declaring  that  the  Servi  had  clearly  lost  their  way  if  they  had
turned on Generale Giovanni, hero  of  the  Empire,  he  removed  Clara  from  her  post  and
appointed, of all people, Lucia. Lucia had never bothered to disguise her contempt for the
very  idea of the Servi, and that, I concluded, was precisely what the Emperor wanted:  a
leader who would dismantle the organization. I found a couple of  extremely  trustworthy
former Lupi to serve as Lucia's bodyguards; she'd need them. Giovanni, I thought, would
have appreciated the irony.
There  was  a  Council  meeting  the  following  week.  I  took  my  seat,  cautiously.  There
were  a  few  new  faces—  one  of  the  old  reformers  that  Giovanni  probably  would  have
known,  one  of  the  Cantatori,  and  Lucia,  of  course.  Lucia  sat  beside  me,  and  we  rose
together as Travan came into the room.
I had not seen Travan since the last Council meeting, though Michel had told me that
Travan  read  my  letter.  I  had  to  fight  down  my  anger  when  I  saw  Travan;  my  hands
clenched  into  fists.  Travan's  gaze  swept  coolly  over  his  Council,  but  he  didn't  meet  my
eyes.  Nor  did  he  meet  my  eyes,  or  acknowledge  me  in  any  way,  for  the  rest  of  the
meeting. I found that without Clara and Placido there, I didn't have to say all  that  much
anyway.  At  least,  I  thought,  Travan  didn't  bar  me  from  the  meeting;  I  was  a  little
surprised that he had not. It didn't matter, though. Watching his back as he strode out at
the end, I  knew  that  it  would  take  a  great  crisis  to  inspire  me  to  go  to  another  Council

meeting. I might be a hero of the Empire, but I was no friend of the Emperor.
I  tried  not  to  think  about  Giovanni,  because  it  hurt  so  much.  But  for  the  first  few
weeks after his death,  I  kept  thinking  things  like,  I  need  to  remember  to  tell  Giovanni
about this later or Giovanni will be amused by that, only to  remember  a  moment  later
that he was dead. I avoided both Court and company, unwilling to risk weeping in front of
others. After the first wound of loss had started to heal, a few months later, I realized that
I was desperately lonely.
Lucia's new responsibilities kept her  away  from  me  most  of  the  time.  Flavia  had  left
Court: the Cantatori were staffing the border outposts, and Flavia was either in Verdia at
one of the outposts, or traveling through the Empire recruiting people to join the order, I
wasn't sure. Of my friends still at court, many were avoiding me—out of shame, I thought,
that they hadn't done more  to  foil  Clara's  investigation.  Or  maybe  it  was  because  I  had
avoided  people  so  assiduously  right  after  Giovanni's  death,  and  they  didn't  want  to
intrude. Regardless, I didn't know how to bridge the distance between us now, so I stayed
in my room, and brooded.
I have to leave, I thought one morning when I woke, stiff and cramped, in my window
seat. I'm dying  by  inches.  I  can't  stay  here.  I  could  go  back  to  Verdia.  To  teach  at  the
conservatory,  or  to  visit  Doratura.  Or  perhaps  I  could  join  the  Cantatori  and  play  my
violin  in the  wasteland  with  Flavia  and  the  others.  They  would  welcome  me,  surely.  It
might even be helpful to the order, if it were known that Generale Eliana had joined them.
There was an appeal to the idea, I thought, taking my violin and tuning it. I might not
have a whole lot of faith, but I could play while others danced, and pull their energy down
into those dark hills, so that someday grass might grow there again. I could lose myself in
the music; maybe someday I'd forget what I'd lost.
But if I leave Cuore, Mira won't know where to find me.
I  started  to  play  one  of  the  folk  tunes  I  had  learned  with  Mira,  back  at  the
conservatory. Giovanni knew how much I loved Mira; did Mira  know?  If  she  knew,  and
she was alive, why hadn't she come back to me? Maybe when she stopped doing magery
this  final  time,  the  sickness  had  killed  her.  Maybe  she  was  killed  trying  to  escape  from
Cuore.
Or maybe she was alive, but she didn't feel toward me as I felt toward her. Impossible,
 I  thought,  remembering  the  way  her  hands  had  gripped  mine.  But  I  found  myself
unwilling to believe that she was dead, either.
Perhaps, I thought, she's alive and she knows that I love her, but she's afraid to come
back to Cuore: she might be recognized, a message might be read. She could put  both  of
us in danger. But the Empire was vast, and the world vaster still. I couldn't very  well  go
buy a horse and set out searching, not without some idea of where to look. It would take
a miracle, I thought, to find her that way.
 
* * *
 
A  miracle.  After  breakfast,  I  went  to  the  Great  Cathedral.  Unlike  the  cathedral  in
Manico, the cathedral in Cuore had not been burned. As Lucia had once bitterly predicted,
the building was still in use, but for Redentori observances. There was a painting of Gèsu
behind the Great Altar, and the pews had been removed so that people would be able to
dance. There was no service in progress at the moment, and the cathedral was empty.  I
eased the door shut behind me and stepped forward into shadow.

I  had  come  to  pray,  but  now  that  I  was  inside  the  cathedral  I  had  to  admit  that  I
wasn't quite sure who to pray to. During the war, I'd continued to say my selfish prayers
to the Lord. I'd prayed to God when I'd truly feared that Lucia was dead, after Mira had
destroyed the  Lupi,  but  most  of  the  time  I  felt  deeply  awkward  asking  for  favors  from
God.  In  some  sense,  I  equated  the  Redentore  God  with  the  Lady;  the  Lady  was  too
important to bother with small things.  Years  ago,  during  the  war  with  Vesuvia—when  I
was still a Delia Chiesa—I had prayed to the Lady for victory in the war; I had prayed to
the Lord to protect my own small family, on their farm near the border.
I had come to the cathedral half intending to pray to the Lord, but now, looking around
at the ransacked interior, at the painting of Gèsu, I couldn't  bring  myself  to  do  it.  If  the
Lord was anywhere, He wasn't here.
I rather doubted that God spent much time here, either. It was dim inside, and damp,
almost chilly. I felt like I should say a prayer, though, so I crossed  myself  and  mumbled
something  in  the  Old  Tongue.  I  fingered  Bella's  cross  where  it  rested  against  my
collarbone, and suddenly thought of someone I could ask for a favor.
Giovanni.
The Delia Chiese believed in ghosts. Bella  had  loved  to  tell  ghost  stories:  most  of  her
ghosts returned to haunt those responsible for their death, to take revenge, or to give one
final message to those they'd loved. The  dead  knew  things  that  the  living  did  not.  They
could  deliver  messages,  sometimes—dire  warnings,  in  most  of  Bella's  stories,  but  still.
Mario had visited me the night before my trial, I felt sure  of  that;  he  had  brought  me  a
gentler message. Perhaps Giovanni could do the same. I wasn't sure what  the  Redentori
believed  about  ghosts,  but  I  didn't  care.  I  wanted  to  talk  to  Giovanni,  and  if  I  wasn't
supposed to do it, I didn't want to know.
Not in the cathedral, though.  I'd  find  God  and  the  Lord  playing  dice  together  behind
the  altar  before  I  found  Giovanni  anywhere  near  the  place.  I  went  back  out  into  the
sunshine,  made  sure  I  had  my  eagle  medallion,  and  went  for  a  walk  in  the  university
district.
Giovanni doubtless had a favorite tavern as a student, but I didn't know which it would
have  been.  I  went  to  the  tavern  where  I  used  to  meet  Michel;  Placido  and  Ulisse  both
spent time there, so chances were good Giovanni had as well. I bought  two  cups  of  wine
and took them to a table near the back. Drinking one, I stared across the  table,  thinking
about Giovanni.
He'd  hate  this  place  now,  I  knew  immediately.  He'd  mock  all  the  students  drinking
cheap  bad  wine  and  choking  down  the  half-burned  meals  this  tavern  served.  Well.  It
couldn't be helped. I took a sip of my own cheap, bad wine, and thought about how useless
it had been to come here.
Over  on  the  other  side  of  the  tavern  was  a  slightly  built  young  man,  very  young.
Brushing past him, another student spilled his wine, laughing at the young man's protest.
I  was  reminded  of  Giovanni's  story  about  being  bullied  by  Placido,  but  this  young
man—boy— just sank back down in his chair and gently righted his now-empty wine cup,
his head bowed.
Giovanni wasn't drinking that second cup  I'd  bought,  so  I  picked  it  up  and  made  my
way  over  to  the  young  man's  table.  "Here,"  I  said,  and  set  it  down  in  front  of  him.  "A
replacement."
"Thank you," the young man said, gaping, and  as  I  left,  I  could  hear  was  that  really
and what was she doing here buzzing at my heels.
I went for a walk along the river, thinking of the night I'd sat on the bank with Mira. I

sat down to watch the riverboats make their way up the river. It was a warm day, and I
could smell sewage and rotting weeds.  The  idea  of  talking  to  Giovanni,  of  asking  a  dead
friend  to  carry  a  message  for  me,  suddenly  seemed  absurd,  and  the  "offering"  of  wine
even more so; I was glad I'd given it to the student.
Well, let's think about this logically. I rested my chin on my arms. Mira could not be in
Cuore: I'd reached that conclusion a long time ago. If Mira had been in Cuore, she would
have  heard  about  my  trial  in  time  to  take  some  action—she  would  have  sent  me  a
message suggesting that I turn her into the Servi, most likely, and if I hadn't, she'd have
turned herself in. Or she'd have mounted a rescue attempt. Since she hadn't done any of
those things, I knew she was not in Cuore.
It's  a  big  Empire,  I  thought.  And  an  even  bigger  world.  But  Mira  ran  away  once
before, to Verdia. "I was born in Verdia," I remembered her saying. "I felt like I belonged
there."
But  where  within  Verdia?  Not  the  conservatory,  surely  not.  Somewhere  along  the
riverbank, I could hear music—someone was  playing  a  trumpet.  The  trumpet  made  me
think of Bella, and I rubbed her cross between my thumb and forefinger.
The  Cantatori.  Of  course.  Mira  would  have  needed  somewhere  to  hide,  and  she
wouldn't  have  wanted  to  go  through  the  mage-sickness  alone.  She  was  still  a  talented
musician, and she had always loved the Old Way music.  There  would  have  been  a  place
for her among the  Redentori  musicians  who  continued  to  play  and  dance  after  the  war.
And in addition to  the  new  outposts  along  the  border,  the  Cantatori  had  a  household  in
Pluma.
I'll go to Pluma, I thought, standing up and brushing off my clothes. It can't hurt to go
look. I thought, just for a moment, that I smelled winter jasmine, but when I turned my
head to sniff the air, it was gone.
* * *
For my trip to Pluma, I decided to disguise myself as a man again. As a woman violinist
in men's  clothing,  I  was  recognizable  to  far  too  many  people  as  Generale  Eliana,  and  I
longed for some privacy. But  I  was  thoroughly  accustomed  to  men's  clothing;  disguising
myself as a man sounded easier than putting on a dress.
I  still  had  my  clothes  from  my  days  with  the  Lupi,  but  they  were  threadbare  and
stained from ground-in dirt. I had new clothes made, simple clothes of plainer fabrics than
my  court  clothes,  and  new  boots.  I  purchased  extra  strings  for  my  violin,  and  took  the
case down from a shelf and oiled the leather. I tucked Giovanni's letter in the  case  along
with the letters from my parents.
I told Lucia that I was going to Verdia, but not who I was hoping to find. We had dinner
together  the  night  before  I  left.  She  was  cheerful,  but  her  new  responsibilities  were
weighing on her  heavily.  Dismantling  the  Servi  would  take  time,  and  Lucia  was  already
sick of the job. She picked at her meal and pushed her food away with a sigh and a rueful
smile. "I'm hoping to move to Verdia myself, once I'm done with this," she said.  "It  may
take a while, though. At least six months. Maybe a year."
I nodded. I thought it would take longer than that.
"I  don't  blame  you  for  leaving,"  she  said.  "You'll  have  to  write  to  me  sometimes,
though, to make me laugh."

"I'll try."
She smiled, and just for an instant, I saw the light in her eyes that I'd seen in Ravenna.
"Don't stay too long here," I said. "You weren't meant for this."
"None of us were," she said, and the light faded like a dying ember.
Traveling  as  "Daniele,"  a  musician  who  had  served  with  the  Lupi  but  was  now
returning  home  to  Verdia,  I  took  a  riverboat  back  down  the  Anira  River.  On  several
occasions, I saw people covertly using witchlight; I hid my own smile and said nothing.
Toward  the  end  of  the  trip,  I  roused  briefly  one  night  and  heard  someone  speaking
quietly out loud; propping myself  up  on my  elbow  and  squinting  in the  dim  light,  I  saw
another passenger kneeling, her hands raised up to pray to the Lady. I ducked my  head
down as she glanced around nervously, and I thought that she was nearly  as  covert  and
frightened as the Redentori I'd accidentally encountered in Cuore. I felt a strange twinge,
a longing that I  had  never  felt  sitting  in church  at  the  conservatory.  I  wondered  if  God
always  made  Herself  known  in  the  hidden  places,  or  if  it  was  simply  that  I  felt  most
comfortable seeking Her there.
The refugee camp outside of Pluma was gone. I stabled my horse and  then  made  my
way to the former inn that  was  now  the  household  of  the  Cantatori  in Pluma.  The  door
was answered by a young woman who quickly invited me in when she saw my violin case.
"I'm  looking  for  someone,"  I  said.  "A  young  lady  who  I  think  might  have  joined  your
order."
She sent me to the office of the local head of the order, a young woman named Prisca
who was addressed as "Dean." Though Prisca wore the red sash of a  Cantatore  who  had
served with the Lupi, I had never met her. She  was  young,  only  a  few  years  older  than
me,  and  a  little  awkward  in  her  own  authority.  Her  bassoon  rested  on  a  stand  in  the
corner  of  her  office.  "I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you,  Daniele,"  Prisca  said.  "What  is  the
name of the lady you are looking for?"
"I'm  not  sure  if  the  name  I  know  is  her  real  name,"  I  said.  "She's  about  your
height—gray eyes and dark hair. She plays the violin and she might have been sick when
she first arrived."
Prisca  studied  me  for  a  moment  and  then  turned  abruptly  to  look  out  the  window.
"You might be describing Bella," she said.
"Bella?" My voice cracked and I swallowed hard.
"Isabella. One of the other violinists shortened it to Bella, and it seemed to suit her."
I nodded. "I don't want to intrude if she doesn't want to see me. If you could tell her—"
I  considered  my  words  for  a  moment.  "Please  tell  her  that  Daniele  is  here,  but  if  she
doesn't want to see me, I will leave and not bother her again."
Prisca nodded. "I'll go find her."
I was too nervous to sit while she was gone. If Mira was not here, I had no idea where
to look next. Well, that wasn't true. I  could  go  down  to  the  wasteland  again  and  try  the
border outposts; she might have gone down there, trying to undo some of the damage she
caused  with  the  Circle.  I  went  to  look  out  Prisca's  window.  It  opened  onto  an  interior
courtyard; a gray-robed man was watering a small herb garden. His robes were unbelted;
he had not served with the Lupi. A breeze through the window wafted the scent of winter
jasmine to my face.
The door clicked shut and I turned, and saw Mira.
She had gained a little weight since the last time I saw her—which was  good,  because

when I  saw  her  at  the  enclave,  she  looked  half  starved.  She  wore  unbelted  gray  robes.
Her face was pale, and I feared  that  she  was  steeling  herself  to  tell  me  to  go  away.  But
then she said, "Eliana," her voice cracking, and crossed the room in two steps to grab me
in a tight hug.
I pressed my cheek against  her  shoulder,  feeling  the  scratchy  wool  of  her  robes,  her
hair brushing against my neck.
"I'm so sorry," she whispered. "By the time I heard about your trial, about Giovanni, it
was too late."
I nodded, not able to speak.
"You were right, you know," she said. "Some things are stronger than magefire."
I pulled back to look into her eyes. "You once asked me to go with you," I said. "That
day at the conservatory, when you tried to convince me to jump over the wall and go. Will
you come with me now?"
"Where?" Mira asked.
"I don't care," I said. "As long as it's with you."
Mira  smiled,  and  her  gray  eyes  lit  like  witchlight.  "Minstrel  life  is  hard,"  she  said.
"We'd  never  know  if  we'd  be  sleeping  in a  bed  or  under  a  bush;  some  nights  we  might
even go hungry."
"I've slept under a bush, and it wasn't so bad," I said. "I've gone hungry and survived.
We could be free, my love. We could see the world together."
Mira pulled my face to hers and kissed me. I could smell winter jasmine and rainwater;
her fingers laced in mine and she squeezed my hand like the hilt of a sword. I could hear
my heart pounding in my ears; beyond that, I could hear the wind in the trees outside the
window, and the sound of a trumpet.
"Come with me," I whispered.
"I will," Mira said. "The world will be ours."
About the Author
 
Naomi Kritzer grew up in Madison, Wisconsin, a  small  lunar  colony  populated  mostly
by  Ph.D.s.  She  moved  to  Minnesota  to  attend  college;  after  graduating  with  a  BA  in
religion,  she  became  a  technical  writer.  She  now  lives  in  Minneapolis  with  her  family.
TURNING  THE  STORM  is  her  second  novel.  Please  visit  her  website  at  http://
www.naomikritzer.com.
Version History
 
1.0—4Aug2004—Spell-checked and formatted from the paperback.

