
Evolutionary Intelligence 
for Healthcare Applications
This book highlights various evolutionary algorithm techniques for various 
medical conditions and introduces medical applications of evolutionary com­
putation for real-time diagnosis.
Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications presents how evo­
lutionary intelligence can be used in smart healthcare systems involving big 
data analytics, mobile health, personalized medicine, and clinical trial data 
management. It focuses on emerging concepts and approaches and highlights 
various evolutionary algorithm techniques used for early disease diagnosis, 
prediction, and prognosis for medical conditions. The book also presents eth­
ical issues and challenges that can occur within the healthcare system. 
Researchers, healthcare professionals, data scientists, systems engineers, 
students, programmers, clinicians, and policymakers will find this book of 
interest.

AIoT: Artificial Intelligence of Things – A Powerful Synergy
Series Editor: S. Balamurugan
The powerful synergy of Artificial intelligence (AI) and the Internet of 
Things (IoT) is now becoming a new horizon in the Industry 4.0 revolution. 
Despite the fact that the full ability of AI and the IoT are still in their baby 
steps, the powerful synergy of these two technologies could improve the 
problem-solving ability and could lead to transforming the world to the next 
level in automation. The capacity to house huge amounts of information has 
been rising in the last three to five years. This also comes along with privacy 
and security concerns. Sensors today can be applied to almost everything. 
This gives space for efficiently collecting huge amounts of real-time data and 
process the same instantaneously. The emergence of Artificial Intelligence 
based techniques like Machine Leaning and Deep Learning exhibits high 
capacity to solve complex problems. AI and IoT are independently exhibiting 
their powers in industrial applications, a super power could be tapped by syn­
ergizing AI and IoT (AIoT). The capability of IoT is expanded exponentially 
while applying artificial intelligence based strategies for efficient decision 
making. Forthcoming years will witness more optimization and networking 
opportunities by the synergy of Artificial Intelligence and IoT. It has been 
written in research reports by Industrial Verticals that complete human-com­
puter integration will be achieved by the year 2030. Also by the synergy 
of AI and IoT and also on advances in robotics and automation, up to 40% 
percent of the current workforce could be replaced by technology within the 
next 10–15 years. Considering the aforementioned research predictions the 
need for this Focus book series becomes important to keep updated with the 
synergies in Artificial Intelligence and IoT.
Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
T. Ananth Kumar, R. Rajmohan, M. Pavithra, and S. Balamurugan

Evolutionary  
Intelligence for  
Healthcare  
Applications
T. Ananth Kumar, R. Rajmohan,  
M. Pavithra, and S. Balamurugan

First edition published 2023
by CRC Press
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2023 T. Ananth Kumar, R. Rajmohan, M. Pavithra, S. Balamurugan
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all mate-
rial reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish 
in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please 
write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, repro-
duced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.
copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact 
mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Kumar, T. Ananth (Tamilarasan Ananth), author. | Rajmohan,  
R., author. | Pavithra, M., author. | Balamurugan, S. (Shanmugam), 1985-author.
Title: Evolutionary intelligence for healthcare applications / T. Ananth  
Kumar, R. Rajmohan, M. Pavithra, S. Balamurugan.
Description: First edition. | Boca Raton : CRC Press, 2023. | Includes  
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022038908 (print) | LCCN 2022038909 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9781032185040 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032185071 (paperback) |  
ISBN 9781003254874 (ebook)
Subjects: MESH: Medical Informatics Applications | Artificial Intelligence
Classification: LCC R855.3 (print) | LCC R855.3 (ebook) | NLM W 26.55.A7 |  
DDC 610.285--dc23/eng/20220919
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022038908
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022038909
ISBN: 978-1-032-18504-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-18507-1 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-25487-4 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874
Typeset in Times
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.

Contents
Preface	
ix
Acknowledgments	
xiii
About the Authors	
xv
	 1	 Evolutionary Intelligence	
1
1.1	
Introduction	
1
1.2	
Preliminaries	
2
1.2.1	 Evolutionary Computation	
2
1.3	
Evolutionary Algorithms	
2
1.3.1	 Representation of EA	
3
1.3.2	 Components of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs)	
4
1.3.3	 What Varieties of EA Are There to Choose from?	
5
1.3.4	 Typical EA Pseudo Code	
6
1.4	
Role of EA in Healthcare	
8
1.5	
Conclusion	
9
References	
9
	 2	 Heart Disease Diagnosis	
11
2.1	
Introduction	
11
2.2	
Heart Attack	
12
2.2.1	 Heart Attack	
13
2.2.2	 Arrhythmia	
13
2.2.3	 Heart Value Complications	
13
2.2.4	 Hypertension – Heart Disease	
14
2.3	
Heart Disease Classification Using EA	
14
2.3.1	 Preprocessing	
15
2.3.2	 Feature Selection	
16
2.3.3	 Filter Methods	
16
2.3.4	 Wrapper Methods	
17
2.3.5	 Forward Feature Selection	
17
2.3.6	 Backward Feature Elimination	
18
2.3.7	 Embedded Methods	
18
2.3.8	 LASSO Regularization (L1)	
18
2.3.9	 Random Forest Importance	
18

vi  Contents
2.4	
Challenges and Issues in Heart Disease Diagnosis	
19
2.4.1	 Traditional Systems	
19
2.4.2	 Existing Methodologies for Diagnosing 
Heart Diseases	
20
2.5	
EA for Heart Disease Diagnosis	
24
2.6	
Conclusion	
28
References	
28
	 3	 Diabetes Prediction and Classification	
31
3.1	
Introduction	
31
3.2	
Diabetes Types	
32
3.3	
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus	
32
3.4	
Gestational Diabetes	
33
3.5	
The Different Diabetes Types	
34
3.5.1	 Retinopathy and Associated Disorders	
34
3.5.2	 Renal Pathology Nephropathy	
36
3.5.3	 Neuropathy	
38
3.6	
EA for Diabetes	
39
3.6.1	 Hemorrhages	
40
3.6.2	 Hard Exudates	
41
3.6.3	 Soft-Consistency Effluents	
41
3.7	
Genetic Programming	
42
3.8	
Blood Vessel Division and Segmentation	
44
3.9	
Conclusion	
45
References	
45
	 4	 Degenerative Diseases	
49
4.1	
Introduction	
49
4.1.1	 Neurodegenerative Disease Classification	
50
4.2	
Early Prediction of Neurodegenerative Disease 
and Challenges	
54
4.2.1	 Early Prediction – Alzheimer’s Disease	
54
4.2.2	 Early Prediction – Parkinson’s Disease	
55
4.3	
EA for Treating Degenerative Disorders	
56
4.3.1	 Genetic Algorithms in Diagnosing 
Degenerative Disorders (DD)	
57
4.4	
Conclusion	
61
References	
62
	 5	 Tuberculosis	
65
5.1	
Introduction	
65
5.2	
Tuberculosis Classification	
67
5.2.1	 Pulmonary	
68

Contents  vii
5.2.2	 Extrapulmonary	
69
5.2.3	 Challenges in Diagnosing PTB and EPTB	
69
5.3	
EA for Diagnosing Tuberculosis	
72
5.3.1	 Role of EA in Tuberculosis Treatment	
73
5.4	
Conclusion	
75
References	
76
	 6	 Muscular Dystrophy	
79
6.1	
Introduction	
79
6.1.1	 Causes of Muscular Dystrophy	
79
6.1.2	 Types of Muscular Dystrophy	
80
6.1.3	 Diagnosing Muscular Dystrophy	
80
6.1.4	 Treating Muscular Dystrophy	
81
6.1.5	 Common Muscular Dsytrophy	
82
6.2	
Early Clinical Diagnosis of MD	
82
6.3	
EA for Diagnosing Muscular Dystrophy	
86
6.4	
Conclusion	
90
References	
91
	 7	 Tumor Prediction and Classification	
95
7.1	
Introduction	
95
7.2	
Tumor Types	
96
7.2.1	 Carcinogenic	
96
7.2.2	 Noncancerous	
97
7.2.3	 Precancerous	
97
7.3	
Carcinoma Classification	
98
7.3.1	 Lung Carcinoma	
99
7.3.2	 Blood Carcinoma	
100
7.3.3	 Colon Carcinoma	
102
7.3.4	 Bone Cancer	
103
7.3.5	 Liver Carcinoma	
104
7.3.6	 Bladder Carcinoma	
105
7.4	
EA for Tumor Classification	
106
7.4.1	 Feature Selection	
107
7.4.2	 Parameter Optimization	
110
7.5	
EA for Carcinoma Prediction	
111
7.5.1	 Feature Selection	
112
7.5.2	 Parameter Optimization	
112
7.6	
Conclusion	
113
References	
114
Index	
117


ix
Preface
In the recent two decades, the acceptance of metaheuristics, particularly 
swarm intelligence and evolutionary algorithms (EAs), has exploded. 
Researchers offer a plethora of algorithms and approaches every year, and 
they discover a growing number of innovative applications. When we con­
sider our daily lives, it becomes apparent that intelligent systems play a 
greater part in our work or practical actions, and numerous changes have 
been noted over the past several years in terms of intelligent approaches, 
methods, and techniques. Currently, the discipline of metaheuristics is hav­
ing considerable influence on the spectrum of healthcare, particularly in ill­
ness diagnosis and medicine discovery. Genetic intelligence has evolved as a 
new-generation technique belonging to the evolutionary computing category. 
While evolutionary computation, especially when biologically inspired, may 
be effective for search and optimization, selecting an optimal solution from a 
search space that is often huge and/or complicated is very much in line with 
the natural evolution process. Typically, the underlying process of evolution 
is driven by a stochastic heuristic that is suitable to a given optimization envi­
ronment. In genetic intelligence, the search for an optimal in a search space 
is defined by the way a swarm approaches its objective.
The healthcare industry needs to use genetic intelligence and EAs to 
develop new drugs and improve the quality of care provided to patients 
around the world. This will help the industry thrive and grow in the long 
run by reducing mortality rates and improving quality of life for patients. 
Healthcare quality improvement and cost reduction are two of the most press­
ing challenges in today’s healthcare business. Scheduling, planning, fore­
casting, and optimization challenges may all be described as evolutionary 
computation problems in the healthcare business. Even though evolutionary 
computation has been used to schedule and plan trauma systems and generic 
drug manufacturing, other problems in the healthcare industry, such as stra­
tegic planning in CAD prognosis and disease control, have not been properly 
developed for evolutionary information processing techniques.
The authors of this book were inspired to compile all EAs techniques 
and algorithms for healthcare, especially disease diagnosis, drug discovery, 
and bioinformatics modeling, to provide readers to research on this poten­
tial avenue of optimization in more contexts. The book would benefit several 

x  Preface
researchers and students as they can treat this as a strong base for exploring 
more opportunities of evolutionary intelligence algorithms in healthcare, and 
researchers can explore a lot of unexplored areas to find scope of problems 
to perform novel research. The book has been categorized into seven chap­
ters to discuss applications of evolutionary computation in disease diagnosis, 
especially for heart, diabetes, degenerative, tumors, tuberculosis, muscular 
dystrophy, COVID-19, and bioinformatics.
Chapter 1 deals with investigations on Mathematical Models of Evolutionary 
Intelligence. It starts by discussing about findings of various researchers from a 
variety of scientific and technical areas who have been investigating the capability 
of EAs. It contains primitive representation and primitive inference. This chapter 
briefly described the conceptual methodology behind evolutionary intelligence 
algorithms. Moreover, the basic structural components of EAs and the various 
types of EAs are discussed. Finally, the role of EA in healthcare is analyzed and 
summarized with respect to futuristic needs.
Chapter 2 mainly discusses the diagnosis of heart diseases using evolution­
ary intelligence and modeling. It includes evolutionary architecture, challenges, 
motivation, and research directions, followed by optimization mechanisms in 
heart classification, mathematical schemes like genetic offloading techniques, 
and optimization schemes. Finally, applications of genetic algorithms are 
employed to predict the occurrence of heart disease. Moreover, the importance 
of genetic algorithm in the discovery of relevant features in heart diagnosis is 
analyzed.
Chapter 3 studies, examines, and analyzes the most current uses of EA 
technology to various elements of diabetes education. This study tries to give 
insight and recommendations for the development of prospective, data-driven 
decision support platforms for diabetes care, with an emphasis on tailored 
patient management and lifetime educational interventions, using the infor­
mation and evidence collected.
Chapter 4 introduces the clinical treatments of degenerative diseases like 
Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. Next, the early prediction of neuro-degenera­
tive disease and challenges in the diagnosis are discussed. Finally, the EAs 
for treating degenerative disorders are briefed.
Chapter 5 deals with tuberculosis disease diagnosis with evolutionary 
modeling. It discusses the challenges and issues in tuberculosis classifica­
tion based on pulmonary and extrapulmonary problems. This chapter also 
provides a selection of examples chosen to illustrate how evolutionary intel­
ligence is advancing the field of infectious illness and assisting institutions in 
combating them more effectively.
Chapter 6 mainly discusses about the examination and treatment of 
muscular dystrophy and emphasizes the healthcare team’s involvement in 
treating individuals with this illness. This chapter describes the muscular 

Preface  xi
characteristics, EA model selection (e.g., traditional machine learning models 
versus EA learning models), and feature engineering which are discussed 
as crucial components of creating dystrophy diagnosis systems. In addi­
tion, we stress the difficulties of such healthcare-oriented dystrophy systems 
and suggest many research prospects for the medical and computer science 
communities.
Chapter 7 discusses about diagnosis of brain tumor using nature-inspired 
computing. Evolutionary population-based optimization algorithms are prev­
alent optimization algorithms inspired by nature. The aim of this chapter 
discusses about both carcinoma classification and tumor diagnosis using evo­
lutionary and genetics modeling.


xiii
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Almighty for giving us enough mental strength and 
belief in completing this work successfully. I thank my friends and family 
members for their help and support. I express my sincere thanks to the man­
agement of IFET College of Engineering, Tamilnadu, India. I wish to express 
my deep sense of gratitude and thanks to CRC Press for their valuable sug­
gestions and encouragement.
T. Ananth Kumar, Ph.D.
I thank my family and friends for their prolonged support towards the suc­
cessful completion of the book. I express my sincere thanks to the manage­
ment of VIT-AP University, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh, India. Also, I would 
like to thank the CRC Press for giving me the opportunity to edit this book.
R. Rajmohan, Ph.D.
I express my sincere thanks to the management of IFET College of 
Engineering, Tamilnadu, India, I would like to take this opportunity to spe­
cially thank CRC Press for kind help, encouragement and moral support.
M. Pavithra, M.Tech.
I thank my friends and family members for their support towards the suc­
cessful completion of the book. I wish to express my deep sense of gratitude 
and thanks to CRC Press for their valuable suggestions and encouragement.
S. Balamurugan, Ph.D.


xv
About the Authors
Dr. T. Ananth Kumar is working as Associate Professor 
in IFET college of Engineering affiliated to Anna 
University, Chennai. He received his Ph.D. degree in VLSI 
Design from Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, 
Tirunelveli. He received his master’s degree in VLSI 
Design from Anna University, Chennai, and bachelor’s 
degree in Electronics and communication engineering 
from Anna University, Chennai. He has presented papers 
in various National and International Conferences and 
Journals. His fields of interest are Networks on Chips, 
Computer Architecture, and ASIC design. He is the recipient of the Best 
Paper Award at INCODS 2017. He is the life member of ISTE and few mem­
bership bodies. He has eight patents in various domains. He has written many 
book chapters in Springer, IET Press, and Taylor & Francis press.
Dr. R. Rajmohan is currently working as Assistant 
Professor (Senior Grade-I) in VIT-AP University, 
Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh. He completed his Ph.D. 
in the field of wireless network at SSN College of 
Engineering under Anna University. He received his 
master’s degree in Network and Internet Engineering 
from Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, and bach­
elor’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering 
from Pondicherry University, Pondicherry. He has pub­
lished more than 70 papers in various reputed SCI and 
Scopus-indexed journals. His fields of interest are Wireless Network, Deep 
learning, and IoT. He has won the best educator award from the International 
Institute of Organized Research (I2OR) in the year 2019. He is the lifetime 
member of various educational bodies and acted as reviewer for Springer 
and other standard journals. He is currently acting as the academic editor for 
PLOS ONE journal.

xvi  About the Authors
Ms. M. Pavithra received her master’s degree in 
Distributed Computing System from Pondicherry 
University, Puducherry. She received her bachelor’s 
degree in Computer Science and Engineering from 
Anna University, Chennai. She is working as Assistant 
Professor in IFET College of Engineering afflicted 
to Anna University, Chennai. Her areas of interest 
are Artificial Intelligence, Network Security, and 
Computational intelligence.
Dr. S. Balamurugan PhD, SMIEEE, ACM Distinguished 
Speaker is the Director of Albert Einstein Engineering 
and Research Labs. India. He received his B.Tech. degree 
from PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, India, 
M.Tech., and Ph.D. degrees from Anna University, India. 
He has published 60 books, 300 international journals/
conferences, and 200 patents. He is also the Vice-Chairman 
of the Renewable Energy Society of India (RESI). He is also 
serving as a research consultant to many Companies, 
Startups, SMEs, and MSMEs. He is the series editor of 
book series’ and serving in various editorial capacities of several International 
Journals. He is also the recipient of the Young Scientist Award, Certificate of 
Exceptionalism, Outstanding Scientist Award, and Best Director Award. His 
biography is listed in “Marquis WHO’S WHO,” United States. His research 
interests include Artificial Intelligence, Augmented Reality, Internet of 
Things, Big Data Analytics, Cloud Computing, and Wearable Computing. He 
is a life member of ACM, IEEE, ISTE, and CSI.

1
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-1
1
Evolutionary 
Intelligence
1.1  INTRODUCTION
Evolutionary intelligence (EI) is popular in their field because it helps 
researchers and scientists improve their work. These techniques also per­
form admirably when applied to diagnosing medical conditions and creat­
ing new medications. There are many complex problems in the healthcare 
field, the majority of which cannot be solved in polynomial time [1]. The 
forecasting and diagnosis of fatal diseases could be greatly aided by tech­
niques derived from the field of evolutionary computation (EC). Therefore, 
medical students exert significant effort to implement these strategies 
in clinical and biomedical settings. This study’s primary objective is to 
provide an overview of the various EI methods and algorithms currently 
employed in the healthcare and medical fields for disease diagnosis. EI 
is beneficial not only to clinicians, counselors, and medical doctors but 
also to those who work in technical roles within the health industry, 
such as medical physicists and technicians, and those who want to learn 
more about systems in order to either implement them or better under­
stand them [2]. As a result, a concise introduction to EI is required for 
disease diagnosis in numerous healthcare and medical fields and special­
ties. The subsequent chapters in this book will each have an introduction 
similar to this one.

2  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
1.2  PRELIMINARIES
1.2.1  Evolutionary Computation
Using artificial intelligence, a group of global optimization algorithms 
known collectively as “evolutionary computation” were developed. In a wide 
range of computational models, evolutionary computation (EC) techniques 
are implemented as essential design components. These models utilize evolu­
tionary processes as their primary method of problem-solving; consequently, 
the techniques of EC are a fundamental aspect of their design. The natural 
evolutionary process that occurs in the world was used as a model for evolu­
tion and optimization in this scenario. EC, which is inspired by the process 
of biological evolution, can be used to find solutions to difficult optimization 
problems. In the field of healthcare application development, these techniques 
are commonly employed as analyzers and prediction algorithms. Similar 
techniques are employed in resolving complex problems, such as those with 
a large number of constraints or variables [3]. According to Darwin’s theory, 
a population’s ability to survive can be increased through the mutation of its 
existing members. This is made possible by natural selection. According to 
numerous pieces of evidence, the only individuals with a greater probability 
of having children are those who live longer. In other words, longer-lived 
individuals have a greater chance of having their genetic characteristics and 
specific traits selected from the population. Computers model the events that 
occur during the evolutionary processes of a variety of natural phenomena to 
convert these rules and apply them with the aid of computation to enhance 
their capacity for knowledge acquisition and the development of tools. EC 
is a collection of powerful techniques based on Darwinian evolution that is 
used to achieve a variety of functions, such as optimization, learning, and 
self-adaptation [4]. EC is a collection of numerous potent techniques that are 
based on Darwinian evolution and are used to accomplish a variety of tasks.
1.3  EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS
Several components comprise the design of an evolutionary algorithm (EA), 
including representation, parent selection, crossover operators, mutation 
operators, survival selection, and termination conditions [5]. These are some 
of the components that an EA may contain.

1  •  Evolutionary Intelligence  3
1.3.1  Representation of EA
First, it is essential to represent the genotypes and then map them to the phe­
notypes before proceeding to the representation step. In general, designers 
try to maintain as much consistency and condensability in the representations 
of genotype and phenotype as possible. This is done so that measurement 
metrics, like distance, can be mapped to phenotype space metrics without the 
loss of any information that is semantic [6].
A few examples of representations of EAs are shown in Figure 1.1: (a) 
representation of an integer, (b) representation of the structure of a pro­
tein on a lattice model, and (c) representation of a mathematical expression 
using a tree.
When it comes to the processing of information, an EA can, in general, 
make use of a wide variety of data representations. Tree structures, linear 
structures with variable lengths, and fixed- and variable-length linear struc­
tures are all examples of different kinds of linear structures. This figure 
displays three different illustrations for your perusal. A vector consisting 
of integers is depicted in Figure 1.1a. It has been noticed that the array of 
binary genes that make up its genotype consists of 10 different elements. 
Figure 1.1b [7] illustrates the relative encoding representation of a protein 
based on the Hydrophobic-Polar (HP) lattice model. [Note: Figure 1.1a 
depicts the absolute encoding representation of a protein.] Figure 1.1c is 
a diagram that illustrates a mathematical expression in the form of a tree. 
This tree structure is obviously a structure that can have a variable length 
and a flexible design.
G1 
G2 
G3 
P1 
P2 
P3 
Genotype
Phenotype
1000100011
[0101010]
[12, 28]
(a) 
(b) 
Protein
Structure
Representat
ion
(c) 
a
b
c
FIGURE 1.1  Examples of evolutionary algorithms.

4  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
1.3.2  Components of Evolutionary 
Algorithms (EAs)
The various components of the EA [8] can be classified into the following 
categories:
•	 Selecting Parents: This step aims to locate healthy parents that 
can be utilized in subsequent crossings. The level of goodness a 
parent demonstrates is directly proportional to how physically fit 
that parent is. The vast majority of parent selection programs are 
successful because they provide more opportunities to the parents 
who are more physically fit than to the other parents. Because of 
this, there is a greater chance that “good” children will be born.
•	 Operators of Change: It is comparable to the process that occurs 
when an individual or animal gives birth. Because of this, these 
two categories of operators, in addition to mutation operators, are 
collectively referred to as “reproductive operators.” The majority 
of the time, a crossover operator will combine the genes of two 
different individuals to create the genetic makeup of a third indi­
vidual. It endeavors to disassemble a person into their parts before 
reassembling those parts into an entirely new individual.
•	 Mutation Operators: This component simulates the mutation 
mechanism, which is the natural process by which certain genetic 
components evolve over time. As a result, a mutation operator will 
alter various components of an individual’s genome in the process 
of performing a standard modeling practice. On the other hand, 
mutations can be seen as a way to look for new things, which is the 
opposite of what crossover operators do. Crossover operators look 
for similarities between two different genes.
•	 Survival Selection: This technique assumes that a person’s level 
of goodness is typically correlated with how physically fit they are 
to select a subset of good people from a group of people. It does 
this based on the phrase “goodness is usually related to how fit a 
person is.” Therefore, the process of selecting offspring from their 
parents is identical to the process of selecting offspring from their 
own parents. In a typical setting such as EC4, the majority of the 
criteria that are used to select parents can also be applied to decide 
who lives.
•	 Termination Requirement: In order for an evolutionary algo­
rithm to be considered complete, it is necessary for this require­
ment to be satisfied.

1  •  Evolutionary Intelligence  5
1.3.3  What Varieties of EA Are There 
to Choose from?
The formula for the genetic programming algorithm. The genetic algorithm 
has been around longer than any other EA that has been studied. The idea 
was founded on Darwin’s theory of evolution, which served as the founda­
tion. In today’s world, distinguishing between a genetic algorithm and an EA 
is becoming an increasingly difficult task [9]. Individuals frequently use the 
phrases “evolutionary algorithm” and “genetic algorithm” when discussing 
different types of computer programs. In order to explain the operation of a 
genetic algorithm in a way that is simple to comprehend, we decided to use 
the canonical genetic algorithm [10] as a representative example. In the stan­
dard implementation of the genetic algorithm, the phenotype of each indi­
vidual is represented by a binary array of fixed length. This array contains 
the person’s genotype. After that, the normalized chance of being chosen 
is calculated by dividing each individual’s fitness by the group’s average fit­
ness as a whole. The algorithm then utilizes the data to determine which 
parents should participate in a one-point crossover to produce offspring that 
are subsequently subjected to mutations. In the end, those individuals who 
are born as a result of reproduction are the ones who go on to live in the sub­
sequent generation, and so on.
Genetic programming is a subset of genetic algorithms that can be stud­
ied on its own or in conjunction with other genetic algorithms. How they 
present themselves differentiates them from one another. When it comes to 
genetic programming [11], genotypes are the trees that can either stand for 
expressions or programs (Figure 1.1 depicts an example). Both parent selec­
tion and survival selection in genetic programming can, to a limited extent, 
still make use of some of the standard strategies for selection that are utilized 
by EAs. However, this is only to a certain degree. Because genetic program­
ming languages use crossover and mutation operators, these languages are 
distinguished from other programming languages. For instance, exchanging 
subtrees between two distinct trees and creating subtrees by accident are both 
excellent ideas.
Differential evolution is a heuristic method for optimizing globally 
continuous space functions that are not linear and cannot be differentiated. 
This method was developed in the 1960s. The term “evolutionary differen­
tiation” refers to differential evolution on occasion. There are many different 
kinds of evolutionary computing algorithms, including the differential EA. 
There are still a great many more. In the same way that other well-known 
direct search methods, such as genetic algorithms and evolution strategies, 
begin with a set of potential solutions, the differential EA [12] does the same 

6  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
thing. These candidate solutions are improved through iteratively introduc­
ing mutations into the population and selecting only the best of those that 
produce a lower value for the objective function to keep in the population. 
This procedure will continue until the most appropriate response has been 
determined.
Evolution Strategies, also known as ESs, is a type of direct search (and 
optimization) method that is modeled after how nature functions. They are 
a subset of a larger group of algorithms that are collectively referred to as 
“evolutionary algorithms” (EAs). These methods gradually improve solutions 
by subjecting a population of individuals with candidate solutions to muta­
tion, recombination, and selection [13]. Former EAs took many more cues 
from natural events than the current evolutionary strategy. Instead, it was 
fabricated in a laboratory to be utilized as a tool for numerical optimization. 
Because of this, the structure of the evolution strategy is entirely dissimilar 
to that of other EAs.
Multimodal optimization is a type of optimization that entails finding 
all or the majority of the locally best solutions to a problem. This can be 
done in order to maximize performance. This contrasts the conventional 
optimization method, which centers on identifying a single optimal solu­
tion. One of the subfields that fall under the umbrella of EC is known as 
“evolutionary multimodal optimization” [14]. In various ways, this subfield 
is connected to machine learning. It is also possible to look at multiple 
solutions to the optimization problem at hand in order to discover previ­
ously unknown relationships or properties. It is essential to have multiple 
solutions to acquire domain knowledge because these solutions can be ana­
lyzed to discover previously unknown things. In addition, the vast majority 
of algorithms for multimodal optimization not only locates multiple opti­
mal solutions in a single iteration but also maintain the diversity of their 
populations, enabling them to perform global optimization on multimodal 
functions.
1.3.4  Typical EA Pseudo Code
The way that nature operates inspired the development of EAs. It is typi­
cal for EAs to start with a population that has been seeded at random at 
the very beginning of the process. After that, it takes several generations 
for another shift in the population. When a new generation is starting, the 
people who will become the parents are selected because they are healthy. 
They produce new individuals through the process of reproduction, which 
results in offspring. These completely new human beings are brought into the 
world. Generally speaking, people will refer to this process as the generation 

1  •  Evolutionary Intelligence  7
process. Before beginning this procedure, a sample of children at random 
was chosen to experience a series of transformations. The algorithm will then 
use the survival selection criteria to determine which individuals have the 
most excellent chance of successfully passing their genes to the subsequent 
generation.
Algorithm 1: Evolutionary Algorithm
Choose suitable representation methods;
A(s): Population time for Parent s
B(c): Population time for Offspring c
S□ 0;
Initialize A(s);
while not termination condition do
temp = Parent Selection from A(s); B(c + 1) = Crossover in temp;
B(c + 1) = Mutate B(c + 1);
if overlapping then
A(s + 1) = Survival Selection from B(c + 1) U A(s); else
A(s + 1) = Survival Selection from B(c + 1);
end if
s □ s + 1;
end while
Good individuals can then be found in A(s)
This will be done by determining which individuals have the highest prob-
ability to accomplish this; we will determine which individuals have the 
highest probability of escaping unharmed. According to [15], if the algorithm 
described overlaps, both the parent and offspring populations will be con-
sidered when determining who will live and who will die. Only the parent 
population will be considered if the algorithm does not overlap. This is the 
reason for it, and it has to do with the complexity of overlapping algorithms. 
The algorithm needs to take into account both sets of inputs to consider both 
groups properly. In this scenario, the children are the only ones who will 
participate in the process of natural selection for survival. Only those indi-
viduals who have been accorded preferential treatment are permitted to pass 
on their lineage to subsequent generations. This privilege is not extended to 
the general population. Only those people who have been accorded special 
consideration are eligible to pass on their lineage to the subsequent genera-
tion. It is necessary to carry out this process several times that is not specified 
to achieve the goal [16].

8  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
1.4  ROLE OF EA IN HEALTHCARE
For the most part, medical decisions can be described as a search for the 
proper location. An expert pathologist who examines biopsies for malig­
nant cells will search through all possible cell features to find a collection 
of features that will enable him or her to make a conclusive diagnosis [17]. 
Radiologists search for the treatment that will be the most effective among all 
the possible treatments when planning a series of radiation doses [18].
Healthcare-related web searches tend to be comprehensive and in-depth. 
Using clinical tests as a foundation for making decisions in the field of medi­
cine is a smart move. Only one conclusion can be drawn after considering all 
of these points of evidence (e.g., benign or malignant). Searching can be diffi­
cult because variables in the domain are interdependent, and many real-world 
problems are non-linear. This makes it difficult to find similar things across 
the search space. This is due to the inherent non-linearity of the vast major­
ity of problems encountered in the real world and the close interdependence 
between the domain’s variables. In order to test and evaluate various machine 
learning techniques, a wide variety of medical issues are used as benchmarks 
[19]. Utilizing EC, it is possible to design effective search strategies for large, 
complex areas.
Evolving techniques make use of natural mechanisms to find the best way 
to search every area possible. The likelihood of getting stuck in an optimal local 
solution is reduced because of the parallelism they possess. Using the data cur­
rently available, it is difficult to build accurate models of the decision-making 
process in medicine. There are too many non-linear and uncertain parameters 
in the models to treat them analytically on the one hand. Medical specialists 
are frequently unavailable or unwilling to collaborate when it comes to turning 
their expertise into a useful decision-making tool [20].
This is even though many medical databases are accessible to the general 
public. Nowadays, medical results are both an archive of the patient’s medi­
cal history and an important repository for medical knowledge, thanks to the 
widespread adoption of electronic databases. Thus, the outcomes are able to 
fulfill both purposes at once. Increasingly sophisticated computational pro­
cessing tools are required to make effective use of the data that is currently 
available. Since there is so much data, it is difficult to keep up with it all. EC 
is used to perform a wide range of functions in medicine. When making a 
medical decision, it is almost always possible to find a place for evolutionary 
techniques to be applied. Medical imaging and signal processing, as well as 
planning and scheduling, are examples of jobs that EAs perform in medicine 
[21, 22].

1  •  Evolutionary Intelligence  9
1.5  CONCLUSION
Computer science and the natural world are brought closer together through 
EAs. The EA places a greater emphasis on gaining knowledge from observ­
ing natural processes than it does on developing original ideas. New com­
puter techniques are incredibly versatile and can be applied to a wide variety 
of contexts, and their foundation or model can be found in the natural laws 
that govern the universe. These algorithms have a wide range of potential 
applications in the medical field, including the diagnosis of conditions such 
as cancer and brain tumors, diabetic retinopathy, and cardiovascular disease, 
as well as the design and development of medications by the pharmaceutical 
industry. This chapter examines the fundamental structure and components 
of EAs, the various types of EAs, how they are utilized, and the reasons why 
they are significant to the healthcare field.
REFERENCES
1.  Chauhan, R. S., Taneja, K., Khanduja, R., Kamra, V., & Rattan, R. (Eds.). (2022). 
Evolutionary computation with intelligent systems: A multidisciplinary approach 
to society 5.0. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
2.  Lu, Y. (2019). Artificial intelligence: a survey on evolution, models, applications 
and future trends. Journal of Management Analytics, 6(1), 1–29.
3.  Glover, F. (1986). Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial 
intelligence. Computers and Operations Research, 13, 533–549.
4.  Nayyar, A., Garg, S., Gupta, D., & Khanna, A. (2018). Evolutionary computation: 
Theory and algorithms. In Advances in swarm intelligence for optimizing prob­
lems in computer science (pp. 1–26). New York, NY: Chapman and Hall/CRC.
5.  Reddy, S. (2018). Use of artificial intelligence in healthcare delivery. In Heston, 
T. (ed.). eHealth-making health care smarter (pp. 1–16). IntechOpen. https://doi.
org/10.5772/intechopen.74714
6.  Zhou, Z. H., Yu, Y., & Qian, C. (2019). Evolutionary learning: Advances in theo­
ries and algorithms (pp. 3–10). Singapore: Springer.
7.  Krasnogor, N., Hart, W., Smith, J., & Pelta, D. (1999). Protein structure prediction 
with evolutionary algorithms. International genetic and evolutionary computa­
tion conference (GECCO99) (pp. 1569–1601). Portland, OR: Morgan Kaufmann.
8.  Ma, X., Li, X., Zhang, Q., Tang, K., Liang, Z., Xie, W. … & Zhu, Z. (2018). 
A survey on cooperative co-evolutionary algorithms. IEEE Transactions on 
Evolutionary Computation, 23(3), 421–441.
9.  De Jong, K. A. (2006). Evolutionary computation: A unified approach. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

10  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
10.  Wong, K. C., Leung, K. S., & Wong, M. H. (2010). Effect of spatial locality on 
an evolutionary algorithm for multimodal optimization. In EvoApplications 2010, 
Part I, LNCS 6024 (pp. 481–490). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
11.  Banzhaf, W., Trujillo, L., Winkler, S., & Worzel, B. (2022). Genetic programming 
theory and practice XVIII. East Lansing, MI: Springer Nature.
12.  Opara, K. R., & Arabas, J. (2019). Differential evolution: a survey of theoretical 
analyses. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 44, 546–558.
13.  Wierstra, D., Schaul, T., Glasmachers, T., Sun, Y., Peters, J., & Schmidhuber, J. 
(2014). Natural evolution strategies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
15(1), 949–980.
14.  Wong, K. C. (2015). Evolutionary multimodal optimization: A short survey. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1508.00457.
15.  Whitley, D. (1994). A genetic algorithm tutorial. Statistics and Computing, 4(2), 
65–85.
16.  Chui, K. T., Lytras, M. D., Visvizi, A., & Sarirete, A. (2021). An overview of 
artificial intelligence and big data analytics for smart healthcare: requirements, 
applications, and challenges. Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Analytics for 
Smart Healthcare, 243–254.
17.  Walters, H. (2019). The evolving role of the radiologist. Future Healthcare 
Journal, 6(2), 93.
18.  Malik, H., Iqbal, A., Joshi, P., Agrawal, S., & Bakhsh, F. I. (Eds.). (2021). Metaheuristic 
and evolutionary computation: algorithms and applications. Singapore: Springer 
Nature.
19.  Shailaja, K., Seetharamulu, B., & Jabbar, M. A. (2018, March). Machine learning 
in healthcare: A review. In 2018 Second international conference on electronics, 
communication and aerospace technology (ICECA) (pp. 910–914). Coimbatore, 
India: IEEE.
20.  Cai, C. J., Reif, E., Hegde, N., Hipp, J., Kim, B., Smilkov, D. … & Terry, M. 
(2019, May). Human-centered tools for coping with imperfect algorithms during 
medical decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi conference on human 
factors in computing systems (paper 4, pp. 1–14). New York, NY: Association for 
Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300234
21.  Freitas, A. A. (2003). A survey of evolutionary algorithms for data mining and 
knowledge discovery. In Advances in evolutionary computing (pp. 819–845). 
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
22.  Nolle, L., & Schaefer, G. (2009). Evolutionary computing and its use in medi­
cal imaging. In Computational Intelligence in Medical Imaging: Techniques and 
Applications (pp. 41–60). Chapman and Hall/CRC.

11
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-2
2
Heart Disease 
Diagnosis
2.1  INTRODUCTION
The human heart beats with a force that is greater than that produced by any 
other human muscle. The heart’s position within the chest is very close to 
the anatomical center of the chest. When it is closed, the human adult heart 
has about the same circumference as a fist. The human heart beats between 
75 and 80 times per minute on average. This equates to approximately 
115,000 occurrences every single day and 42 million occurrences every year. 
Throughout a typical adult’s lifetime of 70 years, the human heart will have 
completed more than 2.5 billion beats [1]. Even when the body is at rest, the 
heart continues to pump blood to various body parts. Heart rates typically 
range between 60 and 100 beats per minute in adults and children older than 
10 years. An athlete who has put in the necessary work to improve their fit­
ness should have a heart rate between 40 and 60 beats per minute. The right 
atrium, which collects blood from veins and pumps it to the right ventricle, is 
one of the four chambers that make up the heart. The other three chambers 
are the left ventricle, left atrium, and left atrium. After receiving blood from 
the right atrium, the right ventricle pumps this blood to the lungs, where it 
becomes oxygen-rich. After this process, the right ventricle is responsible for 
regulating blood pressure. It is the job of the left atrium, which is situated on 
the left side of the heart, to pump oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left 
ventricle, which is located on the opposite side of the heart.
The left ventricle of the heart is the most potent chamber and is respon­
sible for pumping oxygen-rich blood throughout the body. The forceful con­
tractions of the left ventricle are responsible for the production of our blood 
pressure. Coronary arteries are blood vessels that deliver blood rich in oxygen 
to the heart’s muscle. These arteries can be found running along the surface 
of the heart. In addition, the heart is made up of a network of nerve tissue 

12  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
responsible for the transmission of complicated signals that control the con­
traction and relaxation of the heart muscle. The pericardium is a sac that 
wraps the entire heart from all sides. Heart valves are like doors between 
your heart chambers. They do this by moving back and forth to control the 
volume of blood allowed to pass through. Blood can move freely between 
the upper and lower chambers of the heart thanks to a set of valves known 
as the atrioventricular (AV) valves. The tricuspid valve is the name given 
to the valve that sits between the right atrium and the right ventricle of the 
heart.
The mitral valve is located in the door between left atrium and left ven­
tricle. When blood is pumped out of the ventricles, the semilunar (SL) valves 
relax and allow blood to flow freely. The aortic valve is the valve in the heart 
that opens when the left ventricle relaxes, allowing blood to flow freely from 
the left ventricle into the aorta (the artery that carries oxygen-rich blood to 
your body). When the pulmonary valve is allowed to relax, it allows unre­
stricted blood flow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary arteries (the 
only arteries that carry oxygen-poor blood to your lungs). The term “cardio­
vascular disease,” which is synonymous with “heart disease,” (HD) refers 
to a collection of conditions that adversely affect the cardiovascular system, 
specifically the heart and blood vessels. These diseases can affect a single 
chamber of the heart, multiple chambers of the heart, or the blood vessels 
themselves. A person can show disease symptoms depending on their health 
state. The term “heart disease” refers to a collection of conditions affecting 
the heart and the blood vessels.
2.2  HEART ATTACK
Myocardial infarction, more commonly known as a heart attack, is at the top 
of the list of cardiovascular diseases affecting people in the United States, 
according to both statistics and personal stories. In the United States, on aver­
age, someone has a heart attack about every 40 seconds. Even though heart 
attacks are often shown in movies and on TV, the symptoms you can see on 
the outside don’t tell you what is going on inside your body. A heart attack 
happens when the heart’s muscle is suddenly cut off from the oxygen it needs 
to work correctly. This happens when the blood flow that is used to bring 
oxygen to that part of the body slows down or stops. This is because of a con­
dition called atherosclerosis, which is caused by the slow buildup of plaque in 
the coronary arteries. This is something that can cause a heart attack. Plaque 
is made up of fatty deposits, cholesterol, and various other things. Blood clots 

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  13
can form around the plaque. This can slow down or stop the flow of blood, 
which can cause a heart attack.
Stroke is usually thought of as a type of HD because it changes how 
blood flows. This is because of how two things are related to each other. On 
the other hand, a stroke isn’t caused by problems with the heart. Instead, it’s 
caused by problems with how blood gets to the brain. Ischemic strokes make 
up 87 percent of all strokes and are caused when a blood vessel that brings 
blood and oxygen to the brain gets blocked. If the condition isn’t treated as 
soon as it’s noticed, some parts of the brain could be hurt or even die if they 
do not get enough blood and oxygen. Hemorrhagic strokes can also be caused 
by other things, like when blood vessels in the brain grow out of shape or 
when there are problems with the blood vessels.
2.2.1  Heart Attack
Heart failure is a condition that happens when the heart cannot pump blood 
as well as it should. Congestive heart failure is another name for heart failure. 
Even though the condition’s name might lead to believe that the heartbeat has 
stopped completely, that is not the case. Even though the heart is still beating, 
it is not pumping blood at a fast enough rate for the body to keep functioning 
normally. Heart failure that isn’t treated can cause symptoms like tiredness 
and shortness of breath, making even simple things like walking or climbing 
stairs hard.
2.2.2  Arrhythmia
Arrhythmia of the heart is a general term for any abnormal heartbeat, such 
as one that is too slow, too fast, has an irregular beat or tempo, or a mix of 
these things. If the heart does not have the right rhythm, it cannot pump as 
much blood to the rest of the body. There is a chance that the heart will not 
be able to pump enough blood to get enough oxygen and nutrients to the other 
organs in the body.
2.2.3  Heart Value Complications
Heart value complications can include a wide range of heart valve prob­
lems. Stenosis is a condition where the heart valves don’t open all the way 
to let blood flow typically. This makes it hard for the heart to work right. 
Regurgitation is a condition that can happen when the valves of the heart do 

14  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
not close properly, letting blood leak backward into the heart’s chambers. 
Since this is the case, blood will flow backward through the heart. The heart’s 
valves and arteries must be in good shape to lower the risk of complications 
that could cost a life.
2.2.4  Hypertension – Heart Disease
When a person’s high blood pressure is the leading cause of cardiovascu­
lar disease, the person’s blood pressure rises to levels that are medically 
concerning. High blood pressure makes the heart work less well, making it 
less able to do its job. These problems can be dangerous to a person’s life. 
High blood pressure can cause several life-threatening conditions, such as 
heart failure, thickening heart muscle, damage to the coronary arteries, and 
many others.
This chapter consists of evolutionary intelligence (EI) to explain the var­
ious types of HD. Doctors’ difficulties in diagnosing HD are also discussed, 
as the impact of EI on this research.
2.3  HEART DISEASE 
CLASSIFICATION USING EA
HD is the most complex and dangerous problem to deal with on a global 
scale right now. Because of this, the heart cannot pump enough blood to 
the rest of the body. This can lead to heart failure, a common problem 
for people with HD. Many things make it hard to diagnose and treat HD, 
especially in countries with insufficient diagnostic equipment or trained 
medical staff. Because of this, cardiology patients can get better diagno­
ses and treatments. The most important parts of the HD analysis process 
are choosing the disease classification and the features to be looked at [2]. 
HD is put into groups with the help of a high-dimensional dataset. High 
dimensionality can mess up the HD classification procedure, but you 
can avoid this by using the normalization method. So, the normalization 
method reduces the number of dimensions, and the mean-mode replace­
ment method fills in the gaps with a new value. With the Filter, Wrapper, 
and Embedded strategy, it was possible to choose and remove important 
features. An evolutionary algorithm (EA) has been used to classify things 
successfully. Figure 2.1 shows the whole organizational structure of the 
HD classification system.

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  15
2.3.1  Preprocessing
The first step in the HD diagnostic process is the preparation of the data [3]. 
The fact that the dataset has unnecessary data and information that was left 
out contributes to the decreased accuracy of the classification. The average 
residual value is calculated by using Formula 1, and the value that was left out 
of the calculation is found and filled in (1).
	
∑
( )
=
=
PS 
0Xz j
m
j
t
	
(2.1)
The data from the heart is represented by the letter “m” in Eq. (2.1). When 
referring to “average value,” is mentioned as “PS.” To normalize the HD data­
set, the zero-normalization technique must be used, which involves calculat­
ing the mean and standard deviation of the entire dataset. Using the Equation, 
the process can be completed (2):
	
( )
( )
=
−
′  
A
A
H y
F Y
	
(2.2)
Collecting Image from various
repositories 
1.  Removal of records containing missing values
2.  Replacement of missing values by the average
     value
3.  Normalizing by zero normalization 
Process the image to remove
the noise 
Selection of optimal feature set to
upsurge training performance
Extracting the feature 
Clustering the images 
Classifying the images 
Deep Learning and Evolutionary
Intelligence algorithm
Optimization
FIGURE 2.1  Organizational structure of heart disease classification.

16  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
It is possible to represent the normalized data with “A” value. The mean 
value (H) and standard deviation (F) can be calculated using Eq. (2.1) and 
Eq. (2.2), respectively Eq. (2.3),
	
∑(
)
∂=
−
=
 
1  
 
1
2
m
X t
average value
j
m
	
(2.3)
Remove unnecessary data from the hard drive using the normalization 
procedure. Preprocessing techniques are employed to remove noise from 
a dataset that has not been normalized. This is done to improve classi­
fication performance, which noise has been shown to impact negatively. 
Classification is slowed down due to the features of high dimension­
ality, which results in a long time for a prediction. Filter, Wrapper, and 
Embedded are just a few methods available for reducing the number of 
feature dimensions.
2.3.2  Feature Selection
The process of selecting features, also known as feature extraction, is an essen­
tial component of pattern recognition and machine learning (ML). Because 
of the feature selection (FS) methods, the computation cost is reduced, and 
there is also the potential for improving classification performance [4].
2.3.3  Filter Methods
In order to determine whether or not a filtering method is successful, cross-
validation is not utilized. Instead, univariate statistics are used to assess the 
overall quality of the features that are being measured. These methods are 
superior to those involving wrappers in terms of both speed and the amount 
of effort required. Filtering methods are more effective when working with 
datasets with a high dimension count.
Let’s discuss a few of these different approaches:
•	 Information Gain: The degree to which the entropy of a dataset 
is reduced as a result of changes made to that dataset. It is referred 
to as the information gain. You can use it to choose which features 
to use by determining the information gained from each variable 
in relation to the variable you want to use it for. You can use this 
method to choose which features to use.

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  17
•	 Fisher’s Score: When someone is watching, one of the most com­
mon ways to choose features is based on what is called the Fisher’s 
score. The algorithm we will use will provide us with the ranks of 
the variables in descending order, and these ranks will be based on 
the Fisher’s score. After that, we can select the variables based on 
what is currently taking place.
•	 Correlation Coefficient: The term “correlation” comes from the 
field of statistics and refers to a method for determining the degree 
to which two or more variables are connected linearly. We can 
determine what will happen with the first variable by compar­
ing it to two others and seeing how they behave. The selection 
of features based on correlation is predicated on the assumption 
that essential variables will closely connect to the objective being 
sought. Additionally, a connection must exist between the vari­
ables and the target, but there must be no connection between the 
variables themselves.
When two variables are connected in this way, we are able to make predic­
tions about the behavior of one variable based on the behavior of the other 
variable. Since this is the case, the model only needs to consider one of the 
related features if there are two of them, given that the other feature does not 
contribute any new information.
2.3.4  Wrapper Methods
Wrappers require a method capable of searching the space of all possible sub­
sets of features and evaluating the quality by learning and evaluating a clas­
sifier using only those features. A specific ML algorithm directs the selection 
of features, which is then used to optimize a given dataset by applying it to 
the selected features. It accomplishes this by employing a technique known 
as greedy searching, which involves evaluating every possible feature com­
bination in light of the evaluation criterion. In the vast majority of instances, 
the predictive accuracy of the wrapper methods is significantly higher than 
that of the filter methods.
2.3.5  Forward Feature Selection
Determine which variable has the highest level of performance relative to the 
objective as the initial step in this iterative methodology. After that, we select 
a second variable that will produce the best overall performance results when 

18  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
added to the initial variable. This procedure is repeated numerous times until 
the desired quality level is achieved.
2.3.6  Backward Feature Elimination
This technique operates in a manner that is opposed to the forward FS tech­
nique. In this phase, we will construct a model by compiling a list of accessi­
ble features. Then, utilizing this data, we extract from the model the variable 
that provides the most precise value for the evaluation metric. This process 
is repeated multiple times until the desired level of performance is achieved.
2.3.7  Embedded Methods
These methods incorporate interactions between characteristics while main­
taining an acceptable computational cost [5]. This allows them to reap the 
benefits of both the wrapper and filter methods. Embedded methods are con­
sidered iterative because they are responsible for managing each iteration of 
the process of training the model and painstakingly extracting the features 
that contribute the most to training for each iteration. This indicates that 
embedded methods are iterative in the conventional sense.
2.3.8  LASSO Regularization (L1)
In ML, preventing a model from becoming overfit involves applying a pen­
alty to each of the model’s parameters. This technique is also known as regu­
larization. In order to restrict the model’s freedom, this is performed. In the 
regularization of linear models, the penalty is applied to the coefficients that 
multiply each predictor. So that the model remains linear, this is performed. 
This demonstrates that the model is as precise as possible. One of the many 
types of regularization that can reduce coefficients to zero is the lasso regu­
larization, also known as the L1 regularization. Consequently, there is no 
longer a need to include this component in the model.
2.3.9  Random Forest Importance
The random forest algorithm is a bagging technique that combines the out­
puts of numerous decision trees into a single output. Random forests rank the 
tree-based strategies they employ based on how effectively they improve the 

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  19
node’s purity, or, in other words, a reduction in the impurity (Gini impurity) 
across all trees. The last nodes of trees contain notes that have undergone 
the slightest improvement in purity, while the very first nodes contain notes 
that have undergone the most significant improvement in purity. As a result, 
we are able to create a subset of the essential characteristics by pruning the 
branches of the trees below a specific node in the hierarchy.
2.4  CHALLENGES AND ISSUES IN 
HEART DISEASE DIAGNOSIS
More hospitals and other healthcare facilities are opening as people become 
more aware of how vital healthcare is and as technology improves. On the 
other hand, it is still hard to find healthcare that is both affordable and of 
high quality. Chronic diseases are a big problem for public health because 
they cause half of all deaths worldwide. Non-infectious diseases are also the 
leading cause of death and the leading cause of healthcare costs in the United 
States. People over 65 years are more likely to have HD, which has recently 
surpassed infectious diseases as the leading cause of death worldwide. Since 
these diseases are becoming more common, more people are getting sick. 
This makes everyone’s healthcare costs and social costs go up. Because of 
this, it is essential to take the proper precautions.
2.4.1  Traditional Systems
Doctors have a harder time making quick decisions when there are a lot of 
ambiguous factors to consider. Classification systems help doctors quickly 
and accurately analyze medical data. The first step is to create a model that 
can be used to classify existing records based on sample data. Classifiers 
for HD diagnosis have been developed using a variety of algorithmic 
approaches [5].
There is no other way to stop HD than to find and treat its underlying 
causes. This means that a solution can be found in the appropriate techniques 
are employed. Therefore, it is critical to discover what causes HD and develop 
a rapid, accurate method of diagnosis [6]. Medical diagnostic systems need 
to be feature-selective to accurately diagnose patients and predict their long-
term health [7]. Cutting-edge diagnostic techniques are required to identify 
this disease accurately.

20  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
Pattern recognition and ML have the same problem: deciding which fea­
tures to include in their datasets. Extracting features from a dataset is known 
as “feature extraction” (ML). In some cases, FS methods improve classifica­
tion performance while reducing the amount of time spent on the computer. 
One of the most pressing issues in ML and data mining is how to represent 
data effectively. Some features can be used to classify or predict, but not all 
of them. Several of the dataset’s features are either unnecessary or redundant 
and, therefore should be removed. The classification may not be as accu­
rate as it could be because of this feature. The FS process is recommended 
for classification and regression problems in order to improve the classifier’s 
overall performance and reduce the amount of work it needs to do [8].
New measurement techniques have made it possible to collect medi­
cal data that includes both useful and useless data and information that has 
already been collected. The description of the target class deteriorates when 
features that aren’t critical to the target class are included. It doesn’t help to 
include redundant characteristics when describing a target class, as they only 
make the process more cumbersome. To find the target class, some features 
are used multiple times. It is necessary to thoroughly search the sample space 
in order to extract useful information from these datasets [9].
Because the heart is the body’s engine and regulates blood flow, HD 
is hazardous and can even be fatal [10]. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), anxiety is a leading cause of death worldwide. HD 
is expected to claim the lives of 17.9 million people worldwide by the year 
2021, according to current projections. A person’s life can be saved if HD is 
detected early. There are currently a lot of studies underway to find reliable 
methods for doctors to diagnose a wide range of illnesses. A smaller number 
of factors (also referred to as “attributes”) that are more closely associated 
with cardiac disease are examined in this study, which makes use of classifi­
cation to predict diagnosis more accurately.
2.4.2  Existing Methodologies for Diagnosing 
Heart Diseases
Accuracy was achieved by using linear kernel support vector machine (SVM) 
classifiers, which Ashish et al. used in their detection of HD [11]. The method 
presented in [12] for hybrid neural networks had a reported accuracy of 
96.8 percent. This method was demonstrated. The algorithms’ separability 
split value, k-nearest neighbor (KNN), and feature space mapping were used 
in the study [13] to detect HD. Compared to the other two algorithms, KNN 
performed the best in classification accuracy (85.6 percent).

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  21
HD can be diagnosed using the method outlined in reference [14]. Particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) and neural network feed-forward back-propaga­
tion are used in this method. A decision tree is one of the tools used in the HD 
data mining procedure described in [15]. Using data mining techniques to 
detect cardiovascular disease was investigated by researchers [16]. Different 
classification methods, such as neural networks and decision trees, are used 
to forecast HD and identify the factors that are most likely to play a signifi­
cant role in its progression. To overcome the difficulties they encountered, the 
researchers in this study employed a wide range of research methods.
This repository at the University of California, Irvine (UCI) contains 
a large number of studies that have evaluated the classification prediction 
accuracy of the numerous clustering and classification algorithms that have 
been applied to HD [15]. You can find this information on the UCI website. 
In the information environment, several attempts have been made to make 
better decisions and recommendations using evidence. This is because bet­
ter analytical methods for predicting chronic HD are urgently required. The 
provision of appropriate medical advice, backed up by an accurate forecast 
of the patient’s likelihood of developing a minor illness in the near future, is 
one of the most important roles played by healthcare systems. It’s critical to 
understand that medical research [13] includes a variety of models for pre­
dicting the likelihood of developing various diseases.
Researchers have spent much time trying to find the most accurate ML 
method to investigate the links between HD and other factors. This article 
aims to predict and correct HD diagnoses, which aims to avoid unintended 
errors, reduce medical costs, and improve overall treatment quality [12].
Therefore, the researchers have presented statistical methods for under­
standing the three medical datasets to produce prediction models by extract­
ing relevant diagnostic rules. They did this in order to deal with the previously 
mentioned problems [15]. Decision trees, Naive Bayes (NB), SVM, and a 
priori algorithms have been used in this investigation to produce satisfactory 
results for the researcher. In the study described in citation [17], a fuzzy sys­
tem supported by a genetic algorithm was used to try and predict the likeli­
hood of developing HD. When it comes to predicting cardiovascular disease, 
the fuzzy decision support system (FDSS) method proposed has a high level 
of performance.
Artificial neural network (ANN), classification and regression tree 
(CART) algorithm, neural network, and logistic regression have been found 
to have respective accuracy levels of 97 percent, 87.6 percent, 95.6 percent, 
and 72.2 percent [18]. And the accuracy of the statistical technique known 
as logistic regression has been determined to be 97 percent. Reference [19] 
states that for two-, three-, and four-class classification problems, the accu­
racy of an automated method for early detection of class changes in patients 

22  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
with heart failure using classification algorithms was 97.87 percent and 
67 percent, respectively. On a dataset that included evaluation and validation 
approaches, the method was tested. In order to achieve this level of precision, 
researchers used an evaluation validation strategy dataset in conjunction with 
the algorithms they developed. In order to investigate a wide range of clas­
sification issues using a wide variety of classification algorithms, this dataset 
has been used by many researchers [20].
Decision trees were proposed as an alternative classification method 
by Ghiasi et al. [21]. When compared to the current methods, this method 
yields superior results to the others. To incorporate data mining into various 
disease forecasting initiatives currently underway, the proposed method was 
devised in the medical field. Using a decision tree-based method and neural 
system classifiers for cardiovascular disease diagnosis and prognosis were 
both successful (HD). For coronary artery disease prediction, data mining 
outperformed all other approaches. Healthcare administrators found using a 
decision tree to aid in the diagnosis of coronary disease to be a boon.
The study’s authors, Nagavelli et al. [22], created a diagnostic system 
based on ML to predict HD risk in patients. There were seven different ML 
methods and three different FS strategies used to conduct the performance 
evaluations. As a result, it is easy to distinguish between those who have and 
those who don’t have HD, as well as classify and identify them. Additionally, 
the optimistic receiver curves and the area under the curve for each classifier 
were analyzed. Using this decision support system, doctors are able to diag­
nose heart patients accurately.
Balamurugan et al. [2] demonstrated that Balamurugan and his colleagues 
could process the presence of HD features. The FS process was developed by 
combining an artificial gravitational cuckoo search (AGCS) algorithm with 
a particle bee optimized associative memory neural network (PBAMNN). 
In order to better mimic the behavior of AGCS algorithms, the feature was 
reduced in size. This was done to ensure a better match. Associative memory 
classifiers can now be used to process the data after the features have been 
discovered. Analyzing the results of simulations helped determine the useful­
ness of the proposed method.
The author [23] proposed a method for predicting chronic HD in patients 
using ML methods and Fourier transformations. As a result of this procedure, 
an effective medical recommendation system was created. In this context, 
“input” can refer to either the data or the time series information about the 
patients. The Fourier transformation can be used to extract information about 
frequencies from this. NB, ANN, and SVM were all used as classifiers in this 
study, as were ANN. The study’s findings show that using the deep learning 
methodology to produce reliable and accurate recommendations for cardiac 
patients was a success.

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  23
Improved HD diagnosis has been made possible by Brites and colleagues 
[24]. For the sake of FS, this procedure must be followed. HD’s recognition as 
a diagnostic category in the medical field was made possible by data science. 
A variety of HD classification strategies had already been developed, but the 
prediction accuracy was still lacking. A decision was made that simulations 
using multiple HD datasets would be the best option for the author to look 
into. For the sake of accuracy, this was implemented.
An ideal HD diagnosis method was presented by Magesh and Swarnalatha 
[25], that used cluster-based design thinking (DT) learning to select features 
(CDTL). It is possible to divide the CDTL into five distinct stages. Based on 
the distribution of the target labels, the initial dataset was divided into its 
component parts. The samples with a wide distribution across the popula­
tion were used to create the other possible group combination. As a result 
of the use of entropy, we discovered the commonalities between each class-
set combination. Additional acute characteristics have been included in the 
development of an entropy divider. Using all the noteworthy features, the HD 
diagnosis performance was successfully completed.
Tawid et al. were able to improve their ability to diagnose HD in patients 
by combining the rough sets (RSs) and PSO with the transductive support 
vector machine (TSVM) [26]. The data was located in the UCI repository at 
the time of this retrieval. The Z-score method was selected as the basis for the 
procedure used to normalize the data because it was believed to increase the 
data’s reliability while also reducing the amount of redundant data. Choosing 
the most advantageous attributes was the primary goal of the preliminary 
phase of implementing the PSO based on the RS-based attribute reduction 
method. The system’s overall performance is boosted, while the complex­
ity of the computations required is raised. After that, the RBF-based TSVM 
classification method was used to classify HD (radial basis function).
Kaur et al. [17] created an adaptively optimized fuzzy logic classification 
model for HD classification. This section will cover both the fuzzy classifi­
cation model and the RS-based FS module. Here, an alternative method for 
selecting the most valuable characteristics is presented: the “roughly based” 
technique. An essential part of the genetic algorithm is the generation of new 
chromosomes, fitness evaluation, crossover, mutation, and selection. Fuzzy 
rules are part of the classification optimization strategy, and some examples 
include fuzzification, fuzzy rule generation, and defuzzification. Fuzzy rule 
generation also uses the term “fuzzification.” Various high-dimensional data­
sets from UCI’s ML repository were used to verify the experiments. These 
datasets included the Swiss, Hungary, and Cleveland datasets.
Koppu et al. [27] used robotics and deep learning to develop a model for 
predicting HD. Early disease detection is a significant goal of this research, 
as it allows humans the opportunity to live longer and healthier lives. The 

24  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
cleaning procedure was the primary concern, in this case, to ensure that any 
missing values could be removed. The principal component analysis has been 
used to conceptualize the process of eliciting characteristics. Choosing the 
traits with the most significant fitness potential was a dragonfly algorithm 
(FODFA) job. A deep belief network (DBN), also known as a DBN, was used 
to obtain the feature vector. To test the model’s performance, three datasets 
were used: the Wisconsin breast cancer dataset (WBC dataset), the Cleveland 
dataset (Cleveland HD dataset), and the Starlog HD dataset (HD dataset). 
The development and implementation of an optimized neural network model 
for diagnosing and classifying HD in an extensive data framework [28]. The 
online and offline prediction stages of the TLB-ANN model’s operation 
can be distinguished from one another because of how it operates. The UCI 
repository provided the data needed to conduct an experimental evaluation.
Individual classification algorithms used to detect HD can benefit from 
FS methods because of these effects. A patient’s risk of developing HD can 
be estimated using one of these algorithms. Noise and dependency relation­
ships in the dataset can hinder the diagnosis process. There are many records 
of symptoms that have been recorded more than once in the initial datasets. 
There are also many records about accompanying syndromes. This neces­
sitates the use of a technique known as FS to eliminate features that are 
redundant or merely extraneous from the initial feature set. Various classi­
fier strategies for HD classification have been developed and documented in 
many academic papers. These methods contribute to an improvement in the 
HD diagnosis system’s general level of functionality. When trying to deter­
mine whether or not HD classification is effective, the research community 
is up against a formidable obstacle because of the observations mentioned 
above. The research above identifies a few limitations for the classification of 
HD from the dataset and makes some predictions regarding the most recent 
method for classifying HD from the dataset.
2.5  EA FOR HEART DISEASE DIAGNOSIS
Evolutionary modeling for HD diagnosis is shown in Figure 2.2. FS can be 
used to reduce the dataset’s dimensionality, which in turn can be used to 
create a model. In order to do this, only some of the measured features are 
selected (predictor variables). One of the most important aspects of statisti­
cal learning is reducing the data’s dimensionality or the number of features. 
A large number of features but a small number of observations in datasets, 
such as those used in bioinformatics, is typically not useful for producing 

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  25
the desired learning result and the small number of observations may cause 
the algorithm to overfit to the noise. Many of these features are ineffective 
in achieving the desired learning outcome. The data used in bioinformatics 
is an example of a collection. Reduce the number of features in a system to 
save storage space, speed up computations, and make it easier to understand.
For this reason, GA is particularly well-suited to problems in which 
domain knowledge and theory are either unavailable or impractical to address. 
Using the GA, the best solution to a problem is found by searching for it until 
a specific criterion is met. This will be done by conducting a thorough search. 
In order to achieve this result, the selection, crossover, and mutation operators 
should all be used at the same time.
The researchers [5] used a FS strategy to build an ensemble classification 
model. This model’s classification process takes only a few characteristics into 
account. Ensemble learning, a genetic algorithm, FS, and the results of biomedi­
cal tests were used to develop a classification strategy for detecting HD. A conclu­
sion that can be drawn based on these findings is how FS benefits vary depending 
on the ML approach employed. An accuracy of 97.57 percent was found across 
all datasets considered for the best-proposed model, which is based on a combi­
nation of the genetic algorithm and the ensemble learning model.
In [2], the author explains a method for predicting HD that can quickly 
and accurately identify abnormalities. In this passage, the method is outlined. 
Stochastic gradient boosting and a method that removes features recursively are 
used in the selection process. The Harris-Hawk optimization clustering method 
is used first to cluster the features, and then the data are classified based on the 
formed clusters. Next, a more advanced form of a deep genetic algorithm is 
Evolutionar
y modeling 
for Heart Disease Diagnosis is shown in Figure 3

FIGURE 2.2  Evolutionary modeling for heart disease diagnosis.

26  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
used to process the classification of the features. An improved genetic algo­
rithm is used to boost the initial weights of a deep neural network, resulting in 
better overall performance. The neural network’s performance improves due to 
this algorithm’s improvements to the weight recommendations it uses.
It stands for a hybrid genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm opti­
mization (PSO), which is what GAP SO-RF stands for. The random forest is 
well-suited to this strategy (RF) [29]. To identify the most accurate predictors 
of HD, it was created. In the first step of the proposed GAPSO-RF method, 
a multivariate statistical analysis is used to select the characteristics of the 
initial population that are most important. Discriminative mutations are car­
ried out after GA is applied. GAPSO-RF uses a GA modified for the global 
search, and a PSO for the local search. The idea of rehabilitating unsuccess­
ful candidates was also successfully implemented by PSO. The experiments 
showed that the GAPSO-RF method could accurately predict HD with a 
95.6 percent accuracy on the Cleveland dataset and a 91.4 percent accuracy 
on the Statlog dataset, according to the findings.
Using a genetic algorithm-based FS and an ensemble deep neural net­
work model to predict HD is proposed in [30]. This technique is referred to as 
a hybrid. A 0.04 learning rate and an Adam optimizer were used in conjunc­
tion with this algorithm to enhance the original model. The proposed algo­
rithm’s 98 percent accuracy in predicting HD is higher than the accuracy of 
the methods that preceded it. For example, random forest, logistic regression, 
SVM, and Decision Tree algorithms have all been shown to be less accurate 
and faster than the proposed hybrid deep learning-based approach.
Recent research suggests that a hybridized Ant Lion Crowd Search 
Optimization Genetic Algorithm (ALCSOGA) could be a valuable tool for FS 
[31]. Three components make up this hybrid optimization: Ant Lion, Crowd 
Search, and Genetic Algorithm. The ant lion algorithm is used to determine who 
will be in the elite group. The Crow Search Algorithm, on the other hand, uses 
each crow’s location and memory to analyze the objective function. Combining 
these two algorithms and then feeding them into the Genetic Algorithm can sig­
nificantly improve the efficiency of the FS procedure. A stochastic learning rate 
optimized for long-term memory is used to categorize the extracted optimized 
features (LSTM). As a result of the testing, the proposed system’s ability to pre­
dict HD was found to be superior to other, more traditional methods.
Predicting HD may be made easier with a fast and accurate method that 
can detect abnormalities in a patient’s heart rhythm in just a few minutes [2]. 
Stochastic gradient boosting and a method that removes features recursively 
are used in the selection process. The Harris-Hawk optimization clustering 
method is used first to cluster the features, and then the data are classified 
based on the clusters that were formed. Next, a more advanced form of a 
deep genetic algorithm is used to process the classification of the features. 

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  27
An improved genetic algorithm is used to boost the initial weights of a deep 
neural network, resulting in better overall performance. The neural network’s 
performance improves as a result of this algorithm’s improvements to the 
weight recommendations it uses. When compared to the most advanced tech­
niques currently available, the newly developed method for FS and classifica­
tion achieves an accuracy of 98.36 percent and 97.36 percent.
Researchers [32] used the Grey-wolf with Firefly algorithm and the 
Differential Evolution Algorithm to select features for the ANN efficiently, 
and the Differential Evolution Algorithm was used to fine-tune the hyper 
parameters of the ANN. Thus, in order to more accurately classify its chosen 
features, it has been dubbed the Grey Wolf Firefly algorithm with Differential 
Evolution (GF-DE). Using the proposed classification model, the neural net­
work is trained to obtain optimal weights, and many hyperparameters are 
effectively tuned. The results of this study demonstrate an efficient and accu­
rate way to predict cardiovascular disease, making it ideal for the task.
The authors of the paper [33] propose a SVM based on differential evolution 
for the early and accurate detection of heart conditions. Several different data 
preprocessing techniques are employed before the classification step. One-hot 
encoding, FS using differential evolution, and normalization are just a few of the 
techniques available. To ensure that the results are as precise as possible, this is 
done. This method is evaluated using the Z-Alizadeh Sani and Cleveland datas­
ets, as well as a genetic algorithm-based SVM, which has become increasingly 
popular in recent years (N2GC-nuSVM). Our experiments show that our differ­
ential evolution-based SVM outperforms all of the other evaluated algorithms to 
arrive at this conclusion. Following an evaluation of the efficacy of various algo­
rithms, this conclusion was reached. The proposed method for diagnosing HD 
has an accuracy range of 95.1 percent to 86.2 percent when applied to standard 
datasets. According to the study’s findings, HD diagnosis and prognosis could 
benefit from genetic algorithms – use of the UCI’s ML repository’s HD data. The 
ML repository at the UCI, houses the cardiovascular disease dataset. The pro­
posed method uses this dataset. Patients with various heart conditions can ben­
efit from improved classification and prognostication accuracy as a result of this.
A FS model was also used while developing the proposed intelligence sys­
tem model in [34]. In order to make a diagnosis of coronary artery disease, this 
model was created. A genetic algorithm and a SVM are two of the tools that are 
used in the FS process. It is the diagnostic system’s job to make decisions, and 
the system’s performance is measured using the precision, sensitivity, positive 
predictive value, and area under the curve (AUC) criteria described above. The 
z-Alizadeh sani model FS dataset was used in the tests. Out of the 54 features 
already present, this dataset generates 5 new features. A performance with an 
area under the curve of 93.7 percent, accuracy of 87.7 percent, and sensitivity 
of 87.7 percent can be achieved when these five characteristics are combined.

28  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
When the cost of the examination is considered, it is possible to say that 
the genetic algorithm-based FS model performs reasonably well. The drop in 
performance is not enough to be considered significant, and the result, which 
has an AUC of 93.7 percent, is still considered “very good.”
2.6  CONCLUSION
Because the conventional approaches to medical history are unreliable for 
diagnosing HD, the doctor will need to perform a battery of tests in order to 
arrive at an accurate diagnosis. Diagnostic tests that require invasive proce­
dures take a long time and cost money. If we can accurately diagnose diseases 
by using more advanced forms of EI in our diagnostic methods, this could 
have a significant impact on the field of medicine. The results of the most 
recent study show that cardiovascular disease has been the leading cause of 
death worldwide for the past twenty years. So, in this day and age, making a 
quick and accurate diagnosis is vital. This chapter aims to bring attention to 
some of the problems with using ML techniques to make predictions about 
HD. This article looks at some of the most important research projects that 
have used EAs in this field.
REFERENCES
1.  Tsao, C. W., Aday, A. W., Almarzooq, Z. I., Alonso, A., Beaton, A. Z., & 
Bittencourt, M. S. (2022). Heart disease and stroke statistics — 2022 update: A 
report from the American heart association. Circulation, 145(8), e153–e639.
2.  Balamurugan, R., Ratheesh, S., & Venila, Y. M. (2022). Classification of heart 
disease using adaptive Harris Hawk optimization-based clustering algorithm and 
enhanced deep genetic algorithm. Soft Computing 26, 2357–2373. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00500-021-06536-0
3.  Goranova, M., Contreras-Cruz, M. A., Hoyle, A., & Ochoa, G. (2020). “Optimising 
antibiotic treatments with multi-objective population-based algorithms,” 2020 
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CEC48606.2020.9185489
4.  Saranya, G., & Pravin, A. (2021). Feature selection techniques for disease diagno­
sis system: A survey. In Jude Hemanth, D., Vadivu, G., Sangeetha, M., Emilia Balas, 
V. (eds.). Artificial intelligence techniques for advanced computing applications 
(pp. 249–258). Singapore: Springer.
5.  Abdollahi, J., & Nouri-Moghaddam, B. (2022). A hybrid method for heart disease 
diagnosis utilizing feature selection based ensemble classifier model generation. 
Iran Journal of Computer Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42044-022-00104-x

2  •  Heart Disease Diagnosis  29
6.  El-Rashidy, N., El-Sappagh, S., Islam, S. M. R., El-Bakry, H. M., & Abdelrazek, 
S. (2021). Mobile Health in remote patient monitoring for chronic diseases: prin­
ciples, trends, and challenges. Diagnostics, 11(4), 607.
7.  Muhammad, L. J., & Algehyne, E. A. (2021). Fuzzy based expert system for diag­
nosis of coronary artery disease in Nigeria. Health and Technology, 11(2), 319–329.
8.  Diwakar, M., Tripathi, A., Joshi, K., Memoria, M., & Singh, P. (2021). Latest 
trends on heart disease prediction using machine learning and image fusion. 
Materials Today: Proceedings, 37, 3213–3218.
9.  Xu, Y., & Liu, J. (2021). High-speed train fault detection with unsupervised 
causality-based feature extraction methods. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 
49, 101312.
10.  Kondababu, A., Siddhartha, V., Kumar, B. B., & Penumutchi, B. (2021). A com­
parative study on machine learning based heart disease prediction. Materials 
Today: Proceedings.
11.  Ashish, L., Kumar, S., & Yeligeti, S. (2021). Ischemic heart disease detection 
using support vector machine and extreme gradient boosting method. Materials 
Today: Proceedings.
12.  Khan, A. H., Hussain, M., & Malik, M. K. (2021). Cardiac disorder classification 
by electrocardiogram sensing using deep neural network. Complexity, 2021.
13.  Mukherjee, R., Sadhu, S., & Kundu, A. (2022). Heart disease detection using 
feature selection based KNN classifier. In Gupta, D., Polkowski, Z., Khanna, A., 
Bhattacharyya, S., Castillo, O. (eds.). Proceedings of data analytics and manage­
ment (pp. 577–585). Singapore: Springer.
14.  Mienye, I. D., & Sun, Y. (2021). Improved heart disease prediction using particle 
swarm optimization based stacked sparse autoencoder. Electronics, 10(19), 2347.
15.  Ghosh, P., Azam, S., Karim, A., Jonkman, M., & Hasan, M. Z. (2021, May). Use 
of efficient machine learning techniques in the identification of patients with 
heart diseases. In Gokhale, A. (ed). 2021 the 5th International Conference on 
Information System and Data Mining (pp. 14–20). Silicon Valley, CA: Illinois 
State University.
16.  Premsmith, J., & Ketmaneechairat, H. (2021). A predictive model for heart dis­
ease detection using data mining techniques. Journal of Advances in Information 
Technology, 12(1), 14–20.
17.  Kaur, J., & Khehra, B. S. (2021). Fuzzy logic and hybrid based approaches for the 
risk of heart disease detection: state-of-the-art review. Journal of the Institution of 
Engineers (India): Series B, 1–17.
18.  Shorewala, V. (2021). Early detection of coronary heart disease using ensemble 
techniques. Informatics in Medicine Unlocked, 26, 100655.
19.  Bharti, R., Khamparia, A., Shabaz, M., Dhiman, G., Pande, S., & Singh, P. 
(2021). Prediction of heart disease using a combination of machine learning and 
deep learning. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2021. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2021/8387680
20.  Alarsan, F. I., & Younes, M. (2019). Analysis and classification of heart diseases using 
heartbeat features and machine learning algorithms. Journal of Big Data, 6(1), 1–15.
21.  Ghiasi, M. M., Zendehboudi, S., & Mohsenipour, A. A. (2020). Decision tree-
based diagnosis of coronary artery disease: CART model. Computer Methods and 
Programs in Biomedicine, 192, 105400.

30  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
22.  Nagavelli, U., Samanta, D., & Chakraborty, P. (2022). Machine learning technol­
ogy-based heart disease detection models. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 
2022. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7351061
23.  Ko, H., Lee, S., Park, Y., & Choi, A. (2022). A survey of recommendation sys­
tems: Recommendation models, techniques, and application fields. Electronics, 
11(1), 141.
24.  Brites, I. S., Silva, L. M., Barbosa, J. L., Rigo, S. J., Correia, S. D., & Leithardt, V. 
R. (2022, February). Machine learning and IoT applied to cardiovascular diseases 
identification through heart sounds: A literature review. In Rocha, Á., Ferrás, C., 
Méndez Porras, A., Jimenez Delgado, E. (eds.). International conference on infor­
mation technology & systems (pp. 356–388). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
25.  Magesh, G., & Swarnalatha, P. (2021). Optimal feature selection through a cluster-
based DT learning (CDTL) in heart disease prediction. Evolutionary Intelligence, 
14(2), 583–593.
26.  Tawhid, M. A., & Ibrahim, A. M. (2020). Hybrid binary particle swarm optimi­
zation and flower pollination algorithm based on rough set approach for feature 
selection problem. In Nature-inspired com.
27.  Koppu, S., Maddikunta, P. K. R., & Srivastava, G. (2020). Deep learning dis­
ease prediction model for use with intelligent robots. Computers and Electrical 
Engineering, 87, 106765.
28.  Kavitha, D., & Ravikumar, S. (2021). IOT and context-aware learning-based 
optimal neural network model for real-time health monitoring. Transactions on 
Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, 32(1), e4132.
29.  El-Shafiey, M. G., Hagag, A., El-Dahshan, E.-S. A., & Ismail M. A. (2022). A 
hybrid GA and PSO optimized approach for heart-disease prediction based on 
random forest. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 81, 18155–18179. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11042-022-12425-x
30.  Verma, K., Bartwal, A. S., & Thapliyal, M. P. (2021). A genetic algorithm based 
hybrid deep learning approach for heart disease prediction. Journal of Mountain 
Research, 16(3), 179–187.
31.  Kalaivani, K., Uma Maheswari, N., & Venkatesh, R. (2022). Heart disease diag­
nosis using optimized features of hybridized ALCSOGA algorithm and LSTM 
classifier. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 33(1–2), 95–123. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0954898X.2022.2061062
32.  Deepika, D., & Balaji, N. (2022). Effective heart disease prediction with grey-
wolf with firefly algorithm-differential evolution (GF-DE) for feature selection 
and weighted ANN classification. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and 
Biomedical Engineering, 25(12), 1409–1427.
33.  Idrees, A., Gilani, S. A. M., & Younas, I. (2022). Automatic prediction of coronary 
artery disease using differential evolution-based support vector machine. Journal 
of Intelligent and Fuzzy Systems: Applications in Engineering and Technology, 
43(4), 5023–5034.
34.  Lutimath, N. M., Ramachandra, H. V., Raghav, S., & Sharma, N. (2022). Prediction 
of heart disease using genetic algorithm. In Gupta, D., Khanna, A., Kansal, V., 
Fortino, G., Hassanien, A. E. (eds.). Proceedings of second doctoral symposium 
on computational intelligence. Advances in intelligent systems and computing, 
vol 1374. Singapore: Springer,. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-3346-1_4

31
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-3
3
Diabetes 
Prediction and 
Classification
3.1  INTRODUCTION
Diabetes is a significant health concern in Western countries, and its preva­
lence rapidly increasing in other parts of the world. It is not a disease but 
rather a group of diseases that share symptoms, signs, and complications but 
have unique causes. It is not a disease in and of itself; instead, it is a collec­
tion of symptoms. These conditions are now referred to as diabetes mellitus 
type 1 (T1DM), diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2DM), “other” diabetes mellitus, 
and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) [1]. A wide variety of complications 
fall under the “other” category; however, we will not be discussing them here 
because they only affect less than one percent of people with diabetes. GDM 
is a condition that affects about 5–6 percent of pregnant women and, in most 
cases, is a precursor to type 2 diabetes. T1DM affects about 5 to 10 percent 
of people who have diabetes, whereas T2DM is responsible for the condition 
in the remaining 90 percent of people with diabetes [2]. Insufficient insulin 
is the underlying cause of all diseases that comprise diabetes syndrome. This 
deficiency is something that all people with diabetes share in common with 
one another. Insulin resistance is a problem for people with type 2 diabetes 
because it makes insulin less effective. This is a problem because insulin 
resistance makes insulin less effective. Insulin deficiency is a complicated 
issue that may have several different causes, not all of which are fully under­
stood at this point.

32  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
3.2  DIABETES TYPES
The term “overweight metabolic syndrome” (OM) is a catchall term for a 
group of diseases that cause high blood sugar levels to persist for an extended 
period. Different manifestations of the same disease can be referred to as dia­
betes subtypes [3]. They are broken down into categories based on the various 
entry points through which people can contract the disease.
T1DM, also known as insulin-dependent diabetes or diabetes that develops 
in young people, is a form of diabetes caused by an autoimmune disease that leads 
to the destruction of beta cells in the pancreas. This damage is brought about by 
macrophages and activated C04+ and C08+ T cells that have made their way 
into the pancreatic islets. Adults between the ages of 20 and 40 years are typi­
cally diagnosed with type 2 diabetes for the first time. Evidence suggests that a 
person’s genes and environment each play a role in determining how likely they 
are to develop this form of diabetes. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene, 
located on chromosome 6, has been found to have a significant association with 
type 1 diabetes through research into genetics. The regular cells found within the 
body, as well as infectious and non-infectious agents found in the outside world, 
can be distinguished from one another with the assistance of the HLA proteins 
found on the cell’s surface. The autoimmune response that is a sign of type 1 
diabetes is triggered when there is a defect in the HLA proteins. The conclusion 
of this reaction can be found in the cells. The diabetic retinopathy (DR) gene, 
located close to the HLA gene, has been linked to type 1 diabetes. According to 
several pieces of evidence, certain viruses might be to blame for type 1 diabetes. 
[Requires further research] Idiopathic diabetes is a subtype of T1 0M that does 
not involve autoimmunity but can occur in some patients. This form of diabetes 
can occur in patients who have T1 0M. Although it occurs less frequently than 
the autoimmune form of TI OM, it can also affect people of African and Asian 
descent. Because the individual lacks antibodies that target beta cells, they cannot 
produce insulin and have an increased risk of developing ketoacidosis [1]. The 
origins of the disease as well as its progression are not completely understood.
3.3  TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Insulin resistance is the primary contributor to type 1 diabetes, which 
results from the body’s inability to produce or secrete an adequate amount 
of insulin. Around the world, approximately 90 percent of people diagnosed 

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  33
with diabetes have type 2, making it the most prevalent form of the disease. 
Most of the time, a diagnosis is made in a person’s forties. As people get 
older, their chances of developing type 2 diabetes and the number of people 
who already have the condition increase. Obesity-related diabetes and non-
obesity-related diabetes are the two subtypes that can be further subdivided 
under the umbrella of type 2 diabetes. It is common for people who are 
obese and have type 2 diabetes to develop resistance to the insulin that is 
produced by their bodies because cell receptors change. This is related to 
how fat is distributed throughout the stomach area. Insulin resistance at 
the post-receptor level is present in individuals with type 2 diabetes who 
do not have an excessive body fat. In addition to this, there is a decrease 
in the production and release of insulin. The dramatic shifts in diet and 
lifestyle that have taken place in developing countries are a significant con­
tributor to the high prevalence of diabetes in these regions [4]. T2DM, also 
known as adult-onset diabetes, is brought on by metabolic issues and being 
overweight.
3.4  GESTATIONAL DIABETES
GDM is a form of diabetes that only manifests itself in a pregnant woman 
and disappears after the birth of her child. After giving birth, a woman’s 
glucose levels typically return to normal. As a result of the significant 
changes that occur in women’s blood sugar levels during pregnancy and 
the gestational period, these individuals frequently experience feelings of 
hunger much more rapidly than is typical for them. In conjunction with the 
fact that the placenta produces more insulin and the baby’s body gradually 
becomes less sensitive to insulin by the end of the first trimester, the baby 
develops a temporary insulin resistance. Even though this form of diabetes 
disappears after pregnancy, it can still lead to several complications, some 
of which may persist indefinitely. For instance, GDM is a potential terato­
gen that significantly increases the likelihood that both the mother and the 
fetus will pass away while the mother is carrying her child. Also, the devel­
opment of diabetic nephropathy (DN) in GDM can lead to preeclampsia, 
which is linked to a number of problems with the development of the fetus, 
including intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), premature delivery, and 
stillbirth [5].

34  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
3.5  THE DIFFERENT DIABETES TYPES
3.5.1  Retinopathy and Associated Disorders
Even though DR is a common and distinct microvascular complication of 
diabetes, it is still the leading preventable cause of blindness in people of 
working age. It is present in one-third of diabetics and has been linked to an 
increased risk of life-threatening systemic vascular complications such as 
stroke, coronary heart disease, and heart failure. The best way to reduce the 
likelihood of retinopathy developing or becoming more severe is to maintain 
tight control of blood glucose levels, blood pressure, and possibly even blood 
lipids [6]. The most common cause of DR is microangiopathy, which mani­
fests as changes in the precapillary arterioles, capillaries, and venules of the 
retina. The damage is due to microvascular leakages, which are caused by a 
break in the inner blood-retinal barrier, and microvascular occlusions, which 
are also responsible for the break. The use of fluorescein angiography makes 
it possible to differentiate between these two diseases so that they can each 
be treated in their unique manner.
A microaneurysm is a small sac-like pouch that can be caused by a local­
ized stretching of the walls of the capillaries. This type of stretching can lead 
to microaneurysms. They typically take the form of a few red dots close to 
the macula and are frequently the first sign of retinopathy that a medical pro­
fessional will notice in a patient. Most retinal hemorrhages appear as “dots” 
or “blotches” in the dense middle layers of the retina. In extremely unusual 
instances, the top layer of nerve fibers can experience bleeding in the form of 
a flame. The majority of the time, extremely high blood pressure is to blame 
for this kind of bleeding. Yellow lipid deposits with precise edges make up 
hard exudates characterized by their consistency. They frequently manifest 
themselves at the periphery of microvascular leakage and have the potential 
to form a circinate pattern around a microaneurysm that is leaking. They may 
join forces to form enormous sheets of slime. Edema of the retina is caused 
by microvascular leakage, and its presence indicates that the barrier between 
the blood and the retina has been compromised. It can be a challenging to 
see because of hard exudates in the macula. It gives the thickening of the 
retina the appearance of spots that are greyish. Because of the thickening, the 
macula has a higher risk of developing a cyst that resembles a flower petal, 
which can result in a significant reduction in one’s field of vision [7].
DR in its early stages is relatively mild and does not spread. This is the 
beginning stage of DR, which can be identified by the presence of a few 

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  35
enlarged blood vessels in specific areas of the retina. Medical profession­
als give these areas of growth the name microaneurysms. At this stage, if 
even trace amounts of fluid are allowed to seep into the retina, the macula 
will swell, which will result in microaneurysms. This section of the retina is 
located relatively close to the optical center of the eye. Moderate DR that has 
not yet progressed to proliferative stages is the hallmark of stage 2 diabetic 
eye disease.
As the tiny blood vessels grow larger, they obstruct the flow of blood to 
the retina, which can cause damage to the retina. This indicates that the retina 
does not receive an adequate supply of nutrients. As a consequence of this, 
blood and various other fluids begin to accumulate in the macula. This stage 
of DR is referred to as severe nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR), 
the third stage of DR.
A significant reduction in the amount of blood that can reach this region 
is due to the blockage of a more significant number of the blood vessels found 
in the retina. When this occurs, the body receives messages instructing it to 
begin the formation of new blood vessels in the retina. These messages are 
sent by the retina.
The most advanced stage of diabetes-related eye disease is called prolif­
erative diabetic retinopathy (PDR). It is the final stage of DR, which is also 
the fourth stage. During this stage, the retina will continue to develop new 
blood vessels. Fluid can more easily escape from these blood vessels, which 
is because these blood vessels tend to be weak. In the most severe cases, this 
can result in vision problems such as blurriness, a reduced field of vision, and 
even blindness.
In order to determine what the characteristics of DR are, researchers 
use a variety of methodological approaches. The step of image preprocess­
ing is a significant one that contributes significantly to the enhancement of 
feature extraction and classification. This is since it enhances the character­
istics and qualities of the raw fundus images, making it more straightforward 
for an intelligent system to comprehend the significance of what they depict. 
It evens out the intensity of the structures, improves the image’s contrast, 
reduces lighting errors and blurriness, eliminates noise, and finds small pat­
terns (subtle lesions) that would otherwise be hidden by structures with a high 
level of intensity. It makes it possible for an intelligent system to find DR in its 
development’s early and middle stages. This demonstrates how critical it is to 
clean up artifacts and get rid of backgrounds.
Several different methods, including contrast enhancement contrast 
stretching morphological operations [8], histogram thresholding and his­
togram equalization [9, 10], smoothing [11], post-processing [12], shade-
correction [13], and illumination equalization/correction [14], are utilized to 
determine required features.

36  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
There are many different techniques for segmentation [15], such as 
region growing, thresholding, bottom-hat transform, unsupervised segmen­
tation techniques, watershed transformation, active contour model, image 
reconstruction, template matching, and ensemble-based techniques.
3.5.2  Renal Pathology Nephropathy
Diabetic nephropathy, also known as DN, is recognized as one of the pri­
mary contributors to end-stage renal disease in developed and developing 
nations worldwide. A DN is a form of chronic kidney disease (CKD) that 
can be caused by diabetes [16]. The kidneys are responsible for regulating 
the amount of water and salt that are present in the body. This is essential 
for maintaining healthy blood pressure and guarding against heart and blood 
vessels damage.
When a person has diabetes, whether it is type 1, type 2, or gestational 
diabetes, their body cannot produce or use insulin effectively. This is true 
regardless of which type of diabetes they have. Diabetes mellitus, which 
occurs during pregnancy and is also referred to as “gestational diabetes,” has 
been associated with an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the 
years to come.
Diabetes can be diagnosed when there is an abnormally high sugar 
level in the blood. When left unchecked, high glucose levels in the body 
can cause damage to organs like the kidneys and the heart over time. 
DN is a condition in which the kidneys become damaged as a result of 
diabetes.
3.5.2.1  Stages
By examining the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) [17], also referred to as the 
percentage of functional kidney tissue, a physician can determine the stage of 
kidney disease a patient is experiencing.
Stage 1: The kidneys have been damaged, but they still function nor­
mally, and the GFR is at least 90 percent.
Stage 2: The kidneys have been damaged, there has been some loss 
of kidney function, and the patient’s GFR is between 60 and 
89 percent.
Stage 3: Moderate to a severe loss of kidney function and a GFR that 
falls between 30 and 59 percent.
Stage 4: A GFR between 15 and 29 percent, along with a significant 
loss of function.

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  37
Kidney failure is indicated by a GFR of less than 15 percent and is present 
at this stage.
DN is a condition in which the kidneys become damaged due to dia­
betes. The most common complication of diabetes, DN, is also the lead­
ing cause of death among people with diabetes. Numerous researchers 
have turned to statistical methods to discover the factors that put dia­
betic patients at an increased risk of passing away. A significant amount 
of investigation has also been put into the study of the factors that can 
be utilized in the diagnosis of DN. You will likely develop renal disease, 
other microvascular lesions, and macrovascular disease if you have had 
high blood sugar and high blood pressure for a significant amount of time. 
Patients with type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes who took part in clinical 
trials have repeatedly shown that lowering their glycosylated hemoglobin 
(HbA1C) levels is linked to a lower risk of developing clinical and struc­
tural signs of DN. This finding has been demonstrated over and over again. 
Logistic regression analysis was selected as the methodology for the study 
so that prediction rules could be developed to identify diabetic patients 
who are at a high risk of complications and to investigate risk factors. Both 
a causal probabilistic network and a time series method were utilized in 
the research. In addition, the report recommended that diabetic patients 
use telemedicine and telecare services. Others made use of the collected 
data in conjunction with several artificial neural networks (ANNs) or deci­
sion trees to determine risk factors and forecast when diabetes would first 
manifest itself [18–20]. The majority of these papers, on the other hand, 
attempted to forecast when the onset of diabetes would occur, even though 
complications of the disease are far more significant for both the length 
and quality of life. Even though many people have tried to solve health 
issues by utilizing data mining techniques, there are a lot of challenges and 
restrictions associated with this. The most challenging aspect is compiling 
all of the information. It is complicated to obtain a dataset that is large 
enough for this kind of investigation because hospitals have not used elec­
tronic medical record systems in a very long time. Additionally, there have 
been instances where physicians and other medical professionals have 
resigned from their positions at university hospitals to take jobs at other 
medical facilities. This could result in different care plans being developed 
for each patient, including various approaches to conducting interviews 
and physical examinations. Some outpatients do not visit the hospital as 
frequently as they should because they are overconfident regarding their 
state of health or for other personal reasons. Because of all of these factors, 
the data gathered in a clinical setting might not be very reliable, they might 
not be sufficient, or they might not even exist. Because of this, it is difficult 
to obtain useful information from the data that is currently available. The 

38  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
algorithm is the root of a wide variety of additional challenging issues in 
medical data mining. Learning algorithms such as decision trees, ANNs, 
and support vector machines (SVMs) have been utilized in several stud­
ies in an effort to determine whether or not a patient has a disease or 
will develop one in the near or distant future (SVMs) [21]. It is difficult 
for users to understand what the results mean based on the variables that 
they input into these algorithms, although these algorithms are very good 
at generalization. This is especially true for ANNs and SVMs, which is 
why these algorithms are sometimes referred to as “black box” algorithms. 
Even though logistic regression (LR) is not very good at generalization, 
it is still widely used as the gold standard by doctors and other medical 
professionals. It provides the odds ratio for each input variable in addition 
to the percentage of variation found in the output variable, also referred 
to as the probabilistic output. In the realm of information retrieval, there 
are a lot of different approaches to select features (also called variables). 
These methods are used to rank the importance of the input features, and 
the end goal is to improve the performance of generalization by removing 
features that are a barrier to progress. Most of these methods are primarily 
concerned with how the features that are brought in should be ranked, as 
opposed to concentrating on what each feature tells us. However, in a real 
clinical setting, it may be useful for doctors to understand how each vari­
able affects the results. This is an explanation of how the prediction result 
would change if the value of a feature were changed.
3.5.3  Neuropathy
Diabetes puts a person at risk of developing nerve damage. This damage, 
known as neuropathy, can cause a great deal of discomfort. It can occur 
for a variety of reasons; however, it appears that they are all connected 
to having blood sugar levels that are abnormally high for an extended 
period. Controlling the blood sugar level should be a priority for everyone, 
and meet the primary care physician to avoid developing this condition. 
Diabetes can cause several types of neuropathies, including peripheral, 
autonomic, proximal, and focal neuropathies, which you and your doctor 
can discuss.
3.5.3.1  Neuropathy of the extremities
Nerves that are located outside of the brain and spinal cord can suffer 
damage from the condition known as peripheral neuropathy. The hands 
and feet of the vast majority of people who have this form of neuropathy 

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  39
are affected by pain, numbness, and weakness. It is also possible for it to 
have an effect on the body’s digestion, urination, and blood flow, among 
other organs and functions. The brain and spinal cord are both components 
of what is known as the central nervous system. The peripheral nervous 
system handles the information that is processed in the brain and sent out 
to the rest of the body. In addition, the nerves in the body’s extremities 
are responsible for transmitting sensory information to the central nervous 
system. Peripheral neuropathy can be brought on by a wide variety of con­
ditions and circumstances, including those that are inherited, infections, 
metabolic issues, traumatic injuries, and toxic exposure. The condition 
known as diabetes mellitus is one of the most typical causes of this. The 
majority of patients with peripheral neuropathy report that the pain feels 
like it is stabbing, burning, or tingling. The majority of the time, symptoms 
improve, mainly if the condition that was the source of the symptoms can 
be treated. Certain medications can help ease the discomfort caused by 
peripheral neuropathy.
Autonomic neuropathy is a disorder of the nervous system. Injuries to the 
nerves responsible for the body’s involuntary functions can lead to a condi­
tion known as autonomic neuropathy, a disease. Sexual function, blood pres­
sure, the ability to regulate the temperature in the body, digestion, and even 
bladder function could be impacted [22].
The damage to the nerves makes it difficult for the brain to commu­
nicate with the other autonomic nervous system components, including the 
heart, blood vessels, and sweat glands. Infections and other health problems, 
in addition to diabetes, can also cause autonomic neuropathy; however, dia­
betes is by far the most common cause of this condition. If you take certain 
medications, there is a possibility that you will suffer nerve damage as a side 
effect. Because different nerves are affected by the condition, each patient’s 
symptoms and treatment will be unique.
3.6  EA FOR DIABETES
Applying the principles of evolutionary intelligence in the quest to find a 
cure for DR. In order to gain an understanding of how DR develops and the 
symptoms it causes, it is essential to be familiar with the signs of occlusion 
and leakage in the retina. The disease DR is microangiopathy that causes 
blood vessels to leak and close off [23]. Capillaropathy, changes in the blood, 
and blockage of small blood vessels are the three components that make up 
the pathogenesis of DR. When someone has diabetes, what changes do you 

40  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
typically see in their blood vessels? A high blood sugar level is responsible 
for several changes in the blood vessels. These changes include capillaropa­
thy, in which the walls of the blood vessels become damaged; hematologi­
cal changes, in which the blood cells change shape, and the blood becomes 
thicker; and microvascular occlusion, which results in problems with blood 
flow and lower levels of oxygen.
The following are signs that someone has DR:
•	 Manifestation symptomatic of DR.
•	 Microaneurysms.
This is one of the indicators that NPDR is present. It is a locally-based out­
pouching of the capillary wall that spreads, becomes thicker, and moves out­
ward in a particular region. Plasma can leak from these microaneurysms into 
the retina because the blood-retinal barrier has been broken or thrombosed. 
Additionally, tiny microaneurysms stick out of the tiny blood vessels due to 
the broken blood-retinal barrier. These minuscule red dots will first manifest 
themselves close to the fovea as the first sign of DR.
On the other hand, it is difficult to spot them when looking at the fun­
dus. You will easily see them during the fundus fluorescein and geography 
examinations. Near the fovea, a cluster of tiny red dots is the initial mani­
festation of the disease. It is an image of an eye that has previously been 
examined with a fundus fluorescein angiogram; the microaneurysms visible 
in this image are depicted as tiny dots. Microaneurysms developed in the 
retina due to changes in the blood vessels in that tissue. It has the appear­
ance of a circle and is marked with a few dark red spots, now known as the 
macula.
3.6.1  Hemorrhages
They are easily confused with dot hemorrhages, which are more noticeable 
on the retina because they are larger and look very similar to them. This 
makes it easy to make a mistake. This is the case because they are com­
parable. Dot-blot hemorrhages may be larger versions of microaneurysms, 
which appear to be the same on the retina [24]. Hereditary spots and retinal 
hemorrhages can present themselves in the retinal nerve fiber layer, where 
they appear as flames, or in the middle layers of the retina, where they appear 
as red dots. Both of these conditions can impair vision. “Bleeding” is the 
term used to describe the leaking of blood vessels. It is important to note that 
although they appear to be red spots, their borders are not identical, and their 
densities vary.

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  41
3.6.2  Hard Exudates
Hard exudates form in the area where the normal retina meets the swol-
len retina in a patient who has retinal edema. They have a waxy appear-
ance, a yellow color, and precise edges. They are not only composed of 
macrophages that are loaded with lipids but also lipoproteins themselves. 
They are almost always found in clusters or rings around the retina and 
frequently surround microaneurysms in the eye. Because of this configu-
ration, the retina is protected from injury. After the leakage has been 
stopped, it may take several months or even years for these to disappear 
[25] completely.
3.6.3  Soft-Consistency Effluents
Hard exudates are characterized by their yellowish appearance, lipid com-
position, and typical location close to the macula. Their distinct edges can 
be identified and brought on by bleeding from blood vessels. Spots that look 
like cotton wool, on the other hand, are made up of axonal debris and are 
more prevalent in the area close to the optic nerve. This occurs because the 
cast is deposited in that location by the nerve fiber. Cotton wool spots can 
be light yellow or white, whereas hard exudates have a darker yellow color. 
In addition to this, there are a more significant number of cotton-wool spots 
located close to the optic nerve. Cotton wall spots are non-defined cloud 
formations that have the appearance of billowy clouds because they lack 
clear edges. Hard exudates are brought on by blood-vessels leaking, while 
soft exudates are brought on by blood- vessels blocked. There are cotton 
wall spots located on the surface of the organs’ skin. Most cases of chronic 
ischemic stroke [26] are brought on by the narrowing or blocking of an 
artery. Ischemia of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) occurs when there 
is a reduction in the amount of blood that flows to the retina. This causes the 
flow of axoplasm to become more sluggish, and it also causes axoplasmic 
debris to accumulate along the axons of retinal ganglion cells. This accu-
mulation, more commonly referred to as cotton wool spots (CWS), can be 
observed in the RNFL as lesions that appear white and fluffy [27]. Numerous 
mathematical models and a variety of perspectives on DR have been devel-
oped and put forward in recent years. Because it has been demonstrated that 
traditional methods have their limitations, we will be taking into account 
things like complicated features, a large number of computational complex-
ities, the presence of many solutions, and so on. As a result of evolutionary 
computing, there will be more than one approach to solving DR and other 
problems of a similar nature. The concepts of natural phenomena and human  

42  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
centricity will serve as the foundation for these approaches, and they will 
be used to drive an affinity, effectiveness, and treatment concept throughout 
society and industry. There will be some investigation into how it can be 
utilized for DR, and as a consequence, numerous evolutionary computing 
(EC) algorithms that can be utilized for DR will be described.
People have come to realize that using EC approaches, which are pri­
marily predicated on the concept of naturally occurring bird qualities, is the 
most effective way to construct a model. The term “evolutionary computing” 
refers to a computing strategy that is based on the processes that occur in 
nature. Most of the approaches and models developed to locate and diagnose 
DR are founded on EC algorithms. This is even though there have been many 
different strategies and models developed. When more complicated aspects, 
a variety of potential solutions, and computational challenges are considered, 
conventional methods become ineffective. As a direct consequence of this, 
EC and swarm intelligence have recently been applied in an effort to solve 
these various issues. This article discusses the various responses that EC has 
given to DR’s efforts throughout its history. We investigate how the EC algo­
rithms for the DR processes function in this particular environment to under­
stand better how they operate.
3.7  GENETIC PROGRAMMING
Natural selection is the mechanism that drives evolutionary change in liv­
ing things. The genetic algorithm (GA), is a method that is based on natural 
selection. The GA can provide solutions for problems that have constraints as 
well as problems that have no constraints [9]. GA are a powerful tool for solv­
ing problems that involve optimizing designs on a large scale. Researchers 
are interested in both the mechanics behind how GAs function as well as 
their applications. The optimization and search algorithm known as GA is a 
form of meta-heuristic search. It is founded on Darwin’s theory that evolu­
tion occurs due to natural selection working overtime. The scientific concept 
of “natural selection,” also known as “survival of the fittest,” is an essential 
component of evolutionary thought. The process of natural selection causes 
organisms to alter their behaviors in order to make it simpler for them to sur­
vive in the environments in which they find themselves. The following are a 
few examples of how GA typically operates:
Step 1: Create a population that is comprised of individuals chosen 
at random.

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  43
Step 2: Determine the level of physical fitness that each individual 
possesses.
Step 3: The patient gets to choose who will be their parents.
Step 4: Raise a family of children.
Step 5: Evaluate children.
Continue to iterate over Steps 3–5 until either a solution is found. This satis­
fies the fitness requirements, or a predetermined number of generations have 
passed.
To develop more effective solutions, If a chromosome has a higher fit­
ness value, there is a greater chance that it will be passed down to the subse­
quent generation. An estimated fitness value, the probability of a mutation 
(Pm), and the probability of a cross are used by the GA to determine which 
offspring to produce (Pc). The process of creating populations will continue 
indefinitely until all of the criteria have been satisfied and the optimal solu­
tion has been identified. Because of its high level of dependability, GA has 
been put to use in a diverse set of contexts. One of these is known as data 
retrieval (DR), and it is typically advised to be used to select features and 
enhance classifiers.
Wei et al. [28] describe a variety of EC techniques for segmentation. 
Blood vessel segmentation in the automatic DR process can be completed 
using this feature extraction method. It is a technique for extracting various 
characteristics. They are attempting to extract from the retina the blood 
vessels, texture, optic disc, and entropies by combining GA, SVM, and the 
Bacterial Foraging Algorithm (BFA). The process begins with segmen­
tation, continues with the extraction of image features using bifurcation 
points, texture, and entropy, and concludes with the extraction of statistical 
features. After removing the statistical features, the authors then use GA, 
BFO, and a neural network to separate the images into the three distinct 
categories of normal, NPDR, and PDR. After that, they look for the most 
effective way to categorize retinal lesions and assign them mild, moderate, 
or severe grades.
Kailasam et al. [29] created a very effective computer-aided design (CAD) 
model by combining GA and Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) 
in order to classify and find DR abnormalities. This resulted in a very accurate 
model. It has been demonstrated that this model is accurate. For the most part, 
the data from optical coherence tomography (OCT) was what Santos et al. [26] 
looked at in order to determine how well the SVM classifier worked. In order to 
make this classification, OCT data are the only ones that are used. The method 
that has been suggested makes use of a variety of instruments and approaches, 
such as the gathering of data and the application of an OCT data model. It is 
founded on the logarithmic of linear spaces. After distinguishing between the 

44  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
eyes of diabetic patients and those of healthy people, conduct a heuristic search 
using a GA. This will help you find the optimal parameter selection. The dis­
crimination process begins once the validation of the parameter of choices for 
selecting the SVM data model has been completed.
3.8  BLOOD VESSEL DIVISION 
AND SEGMENTATION
Miere et al. [30] demonstrate an approach to organizing things that preserves 
the most engaging aspects of the whole. Images of fundus autofluorescence 
(FAF), which are used to demonstrate segmentation and in which GA plays 
a significant role, were utilized by the author. However, GA can be perceived 
differently depending on who is doing the observing and who is experiencing. 
Images of the fundus’s own autofluorescence are what are used to demonstrate 
segmentation. Classification and segmentation are performed with the assis­
tance of both the GA quantification and this automatic quantification when 
determining how far along age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is and 
how to diagnose it. This is done so in order to determine how far along AMD 
is. They are looking for areas of the vessel structures in the retina where the 
GA does not fluoresce, and they are finding those areas. Muzammil et al. [31] 
proposed a segmentation system that could find blood vessels in retinal 
images by looking at things like dark spots, bright spots, and other things. 
This system would look for blood vessels in the image by analyzing things 
like dark spots, bright spots, and other things. The author developed a method 
to diagnose tractional retinal detachment using images of the retina as the 
basis for his or her work. When it comes to identifying bright spots from 
dark ones, this system has the potential to perform extraordinarily well and 
achieve remarkable results. The acronym RIS, which stands for “retinopathy 
image segmentation,” refers to the system that these people have developed. 
It correctly divides each of the areas. An approach referred to as “retinopa­
thy image segmentation,” which is founded on genetics, was utilized by the 
author of this study in order to determine which RIS system parameters are 
the most crucial genetic-based parameter detector–retinopathy image seg­
mentation (GBPD-RIS) [32]. In addition, they developed something known 
as tractional retinal detachment disease (TRDD. Images of the retinas taken 
from diabetic patients serve as the foundation for this system. The TRDD 
comprises three components: the gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) 
analysis, the basic frequency model (BFM), and the GBPD-TRDD system.

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  45
3.9  CONCLUSION
In the preceding decades, diabetes has been linked to a growing variety 
of health problems that have been reported worldwide. DR is the most 
prevalent complication of diabetes. DR has a significant impact on the 
human retina and results in total blindness. Few essential DR characteris­
tics include macular edema (MA), hard exudates (HE), homogeneous equi­
librium (HEM), soft exudates (SE) and new vessels on the disk (NVD). 
Traditionally, physicians manually examine patients and make societal 
judgements. It is quite difficult to identify DR with complex characteristics. 
In this context, in order to combat the current issue of DR, industries are 
using CAD and machine learning (ML) algorithms. The ML-based CAD 
system allows for optimal diagnosis decisions and early detection of DR. 
The automatic DR detection model utilizes DR photos as input to conduct 
a variety of trials on models derived from distinct algorithms. EA algo­
rithms play a crucial role in the identification of DR at an early stage. The 
EC and optimization algorithms of GA, particle swarm optimization, ant 
colony algorithm, bee colony algorithm, and cuckoo search are employed 
to create an autonomous CAD system for earlier identification of DR. In 
this chapter, a number of genetic systems and methodologies designed for 
DR are examined and evaluated based on the approach’s strengths and 
weaknesses. Following preprocessing, feature extraction, segmentation, 
and classification, the automatic DR models are classified. Methods and 
applications of salient features for feature extraction and classification are 
investigated in depth.
REFERENCES
1.  Hill-Briggs, F., Adler, N. E., Berkowitz, S. A., Chin, M. H., Gary-Webb, T. L., 
Navas-Acien, A. … & Haire-Joshu, D. (2021). Social determinants of health and 
diabetes: A scientific review. Diabetes Care, 44(1), 258–279.
2.  Eckel, R. H., Bornfeldt, K. E., & Goldberg, I. J. (2021). Cardiovascular disease in 
diabetes, beyond glucose. Cell Metabolism, 33(8), 1519–1545.
3.  Rahimi, G. R. M., Yousefabadi, H. A., Niyazi, A., Rahimi, N. M., & Alikhajeh, 
Y. (2022). Effects of lifestyle intervention on inflammatory markers and waist 
circumference in overweight/obese adults with metabolic syndrome: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Biological Research for 
Nursing, 24(1), 94–105.

46  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
4.  Ekundayo, T. C., Falade, A. O., Igere, B. E., Iwu, C. D., Adewoyin, M. A., 
Olasehinde, T. A. … Ijabadeniyi, O. A. (2022). Systematic and meta-analysis of 
mycobacterium avium subsp. Paratuberculosis related type 1 and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 1–11.
5.  Barani, M., Sargazi, S., Mohammadzadeh, V., Rahdar, A., Pandey, S., Jha, 
N. K. … & Thakur, V. K. (2021). Theranostic advances of bionanomaterials 
against gestational diabetes mellitus: A preliminary review. Journal of Functional 
Biomaterials, 12(4), 54.
6.  Dai, L., Wu, L., Li, H., Cai, C., Wu, Q., Kong, H. … & Jia, W. (2021). A deep 
learning system for detecting diabetic retinopathy across the disease spectrum. 
Nature Communications, 12(1), 1–11.
7.  Teo, Z. L., Tham, Y. C., Yu, M., Chee, M. L., Rim, T. H., Cheung, N. … & Cheng, 
C. Y. (2021). Global prevalence of diabetic retinopathy and projection of burden 
through 2045: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Ophthalmology, 128(11), 
1580–1591.
8.  Hussain, L., Alsolai, H., Hassine, S. B. H., Nour, M. K., Duhayyim, M. A., Hilal, 
A. M. … & Rizwanullah, M. (2022). Lung cancer prediction using robust machine 
learning and image enhancement methods on extracted gray-level co-occurrence 
matrix features. Applied Sciences, 12(13), 6517.
9.  Kaur, G., & Kansal, S. (2021, November). Power law transformation based 
weighted clipping tri-histogram equalisation. In Gupta, P. K., Gandotra, E., Tyagi, 
V., Sharma, A. (eds.). 2021 Sixth International Conference on Image Information 
Processing (ICIIP) (Vol. 6, pp. 455–460). Himachal Pradesh, India: IEEE.
10.  Zhou, J., Zhang, D., & Zhang, W. (2021). Adaptive histogram fusion-based colour 
restoration and enhancement for underwater images. International Journal of 
Security and Networks, 16(1), 49–59.
11.  Abdulrahman, A. A., Rasheed, M., & Shihab, S. (2021). The analytic of image 
processing smoothing spaces using wavelet. Journal of Physics: Conference 
Series, 1879(2), 022118.
12.  Li, W., Pan, B., Xia, J., & Duan, Q. (2022). Convolutional neural network-
based statistical post-processing of ensemble precipitation forecasts. Journal of 
Hydrology, 605, 127301.
13.  Conde, M. V., McDonagh, S., Maggioni, M., Leonardis, A., & Pérez-Pellitero, 
E. (2022). Model-based image signal processors via learnable dictionar­
ies. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 36(1), 
481–489.
14.  Jiang, Y., Quan, X. Q., Xing, Y., Da-yong, L., Xiong, Z., & Sun, Q. (2022). Design 
of optical imaging system for full-ocean-depth low-light colors. Optics and Lasers 
in Engineering, 154, 107042.
15.  Sarma, R., & Gupta, Y. K. (2021). A comparative study of new and exist­
ing segmentation techniques. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering, 1022(1), 012027.
16.  Miyabe, Y., Karasawa, K., Akiyama, K., Ogura, S., Takabe, T., Sugiura, N. … 
& Moriyama, T. (2021). Grading system utilising the total score of Oxford clas­
sification for predicting renal prognosis in IgA nephropathy. Scientific Reports, 
11(1), 1–8.

3  •  Diabetes Prediction and Classification  47
17.  Murton, M., Goff-Leggett, D., Bobrowska, A., Garcia Sanchez, J. J., James, 
G., Wittbrodt, E. … & Tuttle, K. (2021). Burden of chronic kidney disease by 
KDIGO categories of glomerular filtration rate and albuminuria: A systematic 
review. Advances in Therapy, 38(1), 180–200.
18.  Su, B. (2021). Using metabolic and biochemical indicators to predict diabetic 
retinopathy by back-propagation artificial neural network. Diabetes, Metabolic 
Syndrome and Obesity: Targets and Therapy, 14, 4031.
19.  Elsharkawy, M., Sharafeldeen, A., Soliman, A., Khalifa, F., Ghazal, M., 
El-Daydamony, E. … & El-Baz, A. (2022). A novel computer-aided diagnostic 
system for early detection of diabetic retinopathy using 3D-OCT higher-order 
spatial appearance model. Diagnostics, 12(2), 461.
20.  Rani, M. J., Shanthi, T., & Kaviya, P. (2021). Diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy 
from fundal photography. Annals of the Romanian Society for Cell Biology, 25(6), 
4526–4538.
21.  Abdelsalam, M. M., & Zahran, M. A. (2021). A novel approach of diabetic reti­
nopathy early detection based on multifractal geometry analysis for OCTA macu­
lar images using support vector machine. IEEE Access, 9, 22844–22858.
22.  Eleftheriadou, A., Williams, S., Nevitt, S., Brown, E., Roylance, R., & Wilding, 
J. P. (2021). The prevalence of cardiac autonomic neuropathy in prediabetes: a 
systematic review. Diabetologia, 64(2), 288–303.
23.  Mata-Moret, L., Hernández-Bel, L., Hernandez-Garfella, M. L., Castro-Navarro, 
V., Chiarri-Toumit, C., & Cervera-Taulet, E. (2021). Acute panendothelial retinal 
leakage in a patient with diabetes mellitus type 1 with a poor metabolic control. 
Archivos De La Sociedad Española De Oftalmología (English Edition), 96(11), 
598–601.
24.  Monferrer-Adsuara, C., Castro-Navarro, V., Gonzalez-Giron, N., Remoli-Sargues, 
L., Ortiz-Salvador, M., Montero-Hernandez, J. … & Cervera-Taulet, E. (2022). A 
case of bilateral unusual retinal hemorrhages in a COVID-19 patient. European 
Journal of Ophthalmology, 32(2), NP123–NP127.
25.  Huang, C., Zong, Y., Ding, Y., Luo, X., Clawson, K., & Peng, Y. (2021). A new 
deep learning approach for the retinal hard exudates detection based on super­
pixel multi-feature extraction and patch-based CNN. Neurocomputing, 452, 
521–533.
26.  Nazarova, M., Kulikova, S., Piradov, M. A., Limonova, A. S., Dobrynina, L. A., 
Konovalov, R. N. … & Nikulin, V. V. (2021). Multimodal assessment of the motor 
system in patients with chronic ischemic stroke. Stroke, 52(1), 241–249.
27.  Huang, L., Wang, C., Wang, W., Wang, Y., & Zhang, R. (2021). The specific pat­
tern of retinal nerve fiber layer thinning in Parkinson’s disease: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Neurology, 268(11), 4023–4032.
28.  Wei, J., Zhu, G., Fan, Z., Liu, J., Rong, Y., Mo, J. … & Chen, X. (2021). Genetic u-net: 
Automatically designed deep networks for retinal vessel segmentation using a genetic 
algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 41(2), 292–307.
29.  Kailasam, M. S., & Thiagarajan, M. (2021). Detection of lung tumor using dual 
tree complex wavelet transform and co-active adaptive neuro fuzzy inference 
system classification approach. International Journal of Imaging Systems and 
Technology, 31(4), 2032–2046.

48  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
30.  Miere, A., Capuano, V., Kessler, A., Zambrowski, O., Jung, C., Colantuono, D. … 
& Souied, E. (2021). Deep learning-based classification of retinal atrophy using 
fundus autofluorescence imaging. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 130, 
104198.
31.  Muzammil, N., Shah, S. A. A., Shahzad, A., Khan, M. A., & Ghoniem, R. M. 
(2022). Multifilters-based unsupervised method for retinal blood vessel segmen­
tation. Applied Sciences, 12(13), 6393.
32.  Bhandari, S., Rambola, R., & Kumari, R. (2019). Swarm intelligence and evolu­
tionary algorithms for diabetic retinopathy detection. In Bhandari, S., Rambola, 
R., Kumari, R., (eds.). Swarm intelligence and evolutionary algorithms in health­
care and drug development (pp. 65–92). New York, NY: Chapman and Hall/CRC.

49
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-4
4
Degenerative 
Diseases
4.1  INTRODUCTION
A degenerative disease will gradually deteriorate an organ or tissue until it 
is destroyed or will cause it to weaken over time as it spreads throughout the 
body. There is a wide variety of degenerative diseases, and a number of them 
are either directly associated with aging or worsen as people age. There are 
three types of degenerative diseases: cardiovascular, nervous, and malignant. 
Neurodegenerative diseases (NDD) of the nervous system occur when nerve 
cells in the brain or peripheral nervous system gradually lose function and 
eventually die. This may occur in either the central or peripheral nervous 
system. There is currently neither a treatment nor a cure for NDDs, nor is 
it possible to slow down their progression. Alternatively, specific treatments 
have the potential to alleviate the symptoms of these illnesses, regardless of 
whether they manifest physically or mentally. In the United States, hyperten­
sion, coronary artery disease, and myocardial infarction are the three most 
prevalent forms of cardiovascular disease. The category of neoplastic dis­
eases encompasses both cancer and other types of tumors. Parkinson’s dis­
ease (PD) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are merely two conditions that can 
affect the nervous system [1].
Numerous factors may contribute to the onset of degenerative diseases. 
In other instances, the progression of symptoms directly results from an 
unhealthy lifestyle, including an unhealthy diet and unhealthy food choices. 
Even though there are treatments for several degenerative diseases, there are 
still many that are incurable. If a patient finds themselves in this situation, the 
available treatment options are intended to alleviate their symptoms so they 
can return to their regular routines.
Some forms of degenerative disease, including cancer, are currently 
treatable. There is currently no treatment available for Parkinson’s and 

50  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
Alzheimer’s, among others. The primary goal of treatment for these condi­
tions is to alleviate the patient’s symptoms to the greatest extent possible.
Patients have sometimes prescribed medications such as carbidopa-
levodopa to treat the symptoms of PD. However, there is currently no cure for 
the disease itself. Patients who have undergone this treatment have reported 
a significant reduction in tremors, which improves their ability to walk and 
move around.
There is neither a treatment nor a cure for AD. Nevertheless, some medi­
cations can alleviate a number of the disease’s symptoms. Memantine and 
cholinesterase inhibitors are the most frequently prescribed medications for 
patients with AD. The effects of these medications are only temporary, but 
they are effective at preventing the symptoms from worsening. On the other 
hand, they are merely obstacles to the progression of the disease. Patients will 
require as much assistance as they can obtain during this time.
In addition to taking medication, people with Alzheimer’s must make 
significant lifestyle changes to combat the disease’s symptoms. Not only must 
they adjust their eating and exercise habits, but also their living arrangements 
if they are to achieve optimal health. Home environments for Alzheimer’s 
patients must be uncomplicated and devoid of clutter. Patients must adhere 
to their doctor’s instructions and ensure that their homes contain only the 
essential furniture, mirrors, and other safety measures.
4.1.1  Neurodegenerative Disease Classification
The condition known as NDD, which wreaks havoc on the nervous system 
and worsens with time, is more prevalent than you might think. It is not suit­
able for one’s health in any way. The quality of life of patients suffering from 
NDDs can be improved by analyzing the dynamics of their gait. Researchers 
have used changes in gait dynamics over time and the size of stride-to-stride 
fluctuations as a measure of walking physiology to determine the amount of 
pathological change that occurs in the locomotor control system in healthy 
people and people with NDDs.
4.1.1.1  Alzheimer’s disease
AD is a progressive brain disorder that causes people to lose their short-term 
memories, become paranoid, and believe things that are not true. Alzheimer’s 
patients often get the wrong diagnosis, thinking these symptoms are caused 
by stress or aging. AD must be treated with medicines every day. AD is a 
long-term illness that can last for many years or for the rest of a person’s life. 
Giving the right medication at the right time is essential to prevent serious 

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  51
brain damage. Early detection of this disease is complicated and expensive 
because it requires collecting much data, using complicated prediction tools, 
and having an experienced medical professional participate. Since automated 
systems do not make the same mistakes that people make, they can be used 
in systems that help doctors make decisions. Images (MRI scans), biomarkers 
(chemicals, blood flow), and numbers taken from MRI scans have all been 
used to study AD. This study is based on research that has already been done 
on AD. So they could tell whether or not a person had dementia. By automat­
ing the process of diagnosing AD, not only will it take less time, but there 
will also be less need for people to talk to each other.
In the early stages of AD, most people can do daily tasks without help. 
In some situations, the person can still go to work, drive, and do other social 
things. Even so, the person may still have anxiety or memory problems, like 
having trouble remembering familiar words or places. Family and close 
friends of the person have noticed that they cannot remember names as well 
as they used to. After a thorough medical interview, a doctor may find that a 
patient has problems with memory and concentration. In the early stages of 
AD, people often have trouble with:
•	 It is challenging to think of the right word or name at the right 
time.
•	 Having difficulty learning and remembering new people’s names 
when first meeting them.
•	 Spending each day in a mentally taxing environment, such as a work­
place or social setting, can be detrimental to one’s mental health.
•	 They have recently read something but then forgotten it, regardless 
of whether it was in a book or somewhere else.
•	 They have been unable to locate a valuable item or misplaced it.
Organizing and planning one’s activities and responsibilities are becoming 
progressively more difficult.
Patients with AD typically experience symptoms for a more extended 
period as the disease worsens. As the disease progresses, patients with 
dementia lose the ability to communicate, lose the ability to control their 
environment, and eventually lose the ability to even move around on their 
own. They struggle to find the right words and phrases to express themselves 
when coping with mental illness. People whose memories and cognitive abili­
ties continue to decline may require substantial assistance in their daily lives. 
At this stage, patients might need assistance with the following:
•	 Personal care and day-to-day activities 24 hours a day, seven days 
a week.

52  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
•	 The person loses consciousness of both their immediate surround­
ings and the most recent experiences that they have had.
•	 It is becoming more challenging to communicate effectively with 
other people.
•	 Infections, particularly pneumonia, are seen more frequently in the 
general population.
4.1.1.2  Parkinson’s disease
Approximately one million people in the United States are affected by PD, 
the most prevalent form of neurodegenerative movement disorder [2, 3]. In 
addition to tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia/akinesia, and unstable posture, 
the clinical picture also includes other motor and non-motor symptoms 
(NMSs). Although the patient’s symptoms are the most critical factor in 
determining a diagnosis, some tests can help differentiate this parkinson­
ism from others. Both the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and the buildup of misfolded alpha-synuclein 
in the form of Lewy bodies (LBs) are pathological signs of PD. These 
pathological signs occur in the SNpc. Once neurodegeneration has been 
discovered, it will have already spread to other central nervous system 
(CNS) regions.
In most cases, medical professionals cannot determine what caused a 
patient’s illness; however, in between 5 and 10 percent of these cases, dif­
ferent genetic causes have been identified. Dopamine replacement therapy is 
the standard treatment for PD, but individuals who have had the disease for 
extended periods may benefit more from other treatment modalities, such as 
deep brain stimulation (DBS). No treatment available can stop neurodegen­
eration, the progression of the disease, or the worsening of a patient’s disabil­
ity at this time. However, the treatments available today are very effective at 
controlling motor symptoms.
PD can cause tremors, one of the possible symptoms of the disease. 
Tremor often begins in one of your hands or fingers, but this isn’t unheard 
of. A pill-rolling tremor will occur when the thumb and forefinger are rubbed 
against one another in a back-and-forth motion. At rest, your hand may shake 
slightly.
Everything was moving at a snail’s pace at the time (bradykinesia). 
Having PD can slow down the movements over time, making even the most 
minor tasks difficult and time-consuming. While walking, it is possible to 
notice that the strides are becoming shorter. Muscles that are tense and mus­
cular muscle stiffness can strike anywhere on the body at anytime. Muscles 
in the body may begin to ache due to the inability to move normally.

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  53
As a result, the posture and balance will change. With PD, the posture 
may become hunched and lose the center of gravity.
A person’s inability to complete a series of tasks without paying attention 
to each step. The ability to smile, blink or swing the arms while walking may 
be lost. Different people speak in different ways, and you may not be able to 
understand what they are saying. The possibility exists that you will speak 
more slowly and muffle or slur your words during the interview. Your voice 
has fewer inflections than is typical for someone of your age, making it sound 
more like a robot than a human.
There are a variety of ways to go about writing. Because of this, writ­
ing may become more complex, and your writing may appear cramped. 
Involuntary movements, emotional instability, and cognitive decline are all 
symptoms of Huntington’s disease, a neurodegenerative disease that affects 
the brain (cognition).
Huntington’s disease affects people between the ages of 30 and 
40 years, and a person is most likely to be diagnosed with Huntington’s 
disease. Due to Huntington’s disease, which is the most common form of a 
degenerative brain disorder, Anxiety, depression, small involuntary move­
ments, and poor coordination are all early signs and symptoms that may be 
present in people with autism. People with Huntington’s disease are more 
likely to experience the involuntary jerks and twitches known as chorea. 
As the disease progresses, so do the tremors and movements that resemble 
tremors in intensity. People with this condition may find it more challeng­
ing to perform basic activities such as walking, talking, and swallowing. 
Many sufferers experience changes in their mental health and a decrease 
in their ability to think and reason. Once symptoms appear, a median life 
expectancy of 15 to 20 years is predicted for patients with adult-onset 
Huntington’s disease.
There are fewer cases of Huntington’s disease in children than in adults. 
Specifically, it refers to the type of disease that affects children and ado­
lescents. A person’s mobility and mental and emotional stability are also 
negatively impacted by this. Slurred speech and rigidity are also signs of the 
disease in children. The slow movement, clumsiness, a tendency to trip and 
fall, and a tendency to bump into things are all symptoms of PD. Drooling 
is also a possibility in this scenario. Although this is not always the case, it 
is not uncommon for people’s academic performance and reasoning abilities 
to decline with age. Between 30 and 50 percent of children who have been 
diagnosed with this condition are affected by it. A typical life expectancy for 
patients with juvenile-onset Huntington’s disease is between 10 and 15 years 
after the onset of symptoms. In comparison to the adult-onset form, this dis­
ease progresses more rapidly.

54  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
4.2  EARLY PREDICTION OF 
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE 
AND CHALLENGES
4.2.1  Early Prediction – Alzheimer’s Disease
AD, a NDD that is unavoidable and invariably fatal, will kill all elderly peo­
ple. AD is one reason Alzheimer’s patients’ memories and other mental skills 
worsen over time. This kind of dementia causes most cases of dementia. AD 
affects about 5 percent of the people over 65 in developing countries, but it 
affects 30 percent of people over 85, a very high number. By the year 2050, 
about 0.64 billion people are expected to have AD. In the last ten years, there 
have been many attempts to make computer-aided models that can decode 
MRI images by using machine learning (ML) strategies on the data. These 
models would get their information from the pictures. ML can help with early 
diagnosis, analysis of medical images, and the discovery and development 
of new treatments by using a variety of high-dimensional data sources [4]. 
During the preclinical stages, ML could accurately tell if a patient had AD or a 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Using ML with multiple high-dimensional 
data sources can help with early diagnosis, analysis of medical images, and 
finding and making new treatments [5]. The most crucial difference between 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Artificial neural network (ANN) is 
whether or not a model can accurately spot Alzheimer’s and mild cognitive 
impairment in the early stages of optimization. This can either convert or 
not, depending on your taste. SVM gives you a global solution, while ANN 
gives you an optimal local solution. The better choice is SVM. Both SVM 
and ANN need to have features taken out [6]. Shi et al. [7] suggested that 
neural networks and intelligent agents be used together to improve the way 
medical images are processed. On the other hand, DL uses a learning model 
that includes feature extraction [8]. DL has been shown to work well with 
large datasets, especially ones with images. Some researchers used ensemble 
methods to improve how well they could classify Alzheimer’s [9]. In the past 
few years, many academic studies have looked at how ML could be used to 
treat Alzheimer’s. In 2017, Litjens et al. [10] published a study about how DL 
techniques can be used to process medical images. Even though the models 
used in DL are often called “black boxes,” statistical methods can be used 
to figure out how uncertain the network is. Shen and his colleagues studied 
how DL affects AD [8, 11]. This study suggests that DL models include some 
uncertainty in their predictions. In 2018, Jose and his colleagues published 

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  55
a study that looked at how well different neuroimaging methods treat neuro­
logical disorders. Between 2006 and 2016, Pellegrini et al. [3] published 111 
papers about ML algorithms for treating dementia and cognitive impairment. 
It stressed the importance of using ideas from different fields to make unique 
ML models. Rathore et al. [12] overviews AD and its early stages. A recent 
study found that ML algorithms can help make early AD predictions better. 
The Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS) 2 neuroimaging dataset 
is used for this study to create new ML models for unbiased data classifica­
tion. Through a series of cognitive and neuroimaging tests, dementia is easy 
to spot. Using ML in these tasks not only makes them better but it also helps 
make new systems.
4.2.2  Early Prediction – Parkinson’s Disease
PD is a NDD affecting dopamine-producing brain cells and the CNS. There 
is currently no treatment for this condition. A person with Parkinson’s must 
learn to live with the symptoms for the rest of their lives and make accom­
modations for them. Due to advances in medical science, it is now possible to 
slow the progression of a patient’s condition. We still do not comprehend what 
causes a person to develop a disease for which there is no cure. Therefore, the 
most effective way to treat PD at this time is to obtain an accurate diagnosis 
as soon as the first symptoms appear.
Raundale et al. made the Parkinson’s Telemonitoring Vocal Data Set 
available so they could test the algorithms they had proposed. Maunika and 
Rao [13] suggested implementing the K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), State-
of-the-Art Supervised ML Algorithm with k equal to 5 to achieve an accu­
racy of 97.43 percent. In addition, they have shown that deep learning (DL) 
algorithms accurately predict the severity of PD in patients. The authors [14] 
investigated PD using three distinct ML techniques: the SVM, the KNN, and 
the ANN. After evaluating these three procedures, it was determined that 
they had an accuracy level close to 100 percent for the dataset being evalu­
ated. Typically, medical professionals who work in medical centers, such as 
doctors or medical representatives, assess the severity of PD. This has been a 
common practice for a considerable amount of time. Researchers [15] devised 
an innovative method for diagnosing PD using remote smartphone monitor­
ing of patients suspected of having the disease. In addition to data regarding 
the user’s postural instability, dexterity, gait, and tremor, the smartphone con­
tinuously records the user’s voice. Utilizing the framework’s two-step proce­
dure, the framework’s features are chosen. Utilizing all of this information, 
they were able to obtain very encouraging results, which is very encouraging. 
The authors [16] concluded that the best way to extract the various parts of 

56  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
the brain from structural MRI data would be to use a two-step procedure 
involving the statistical analysis and a ML technique. When determining 
the severity of PD, they were able to get within 93.75 percent of the actual 
value, which was the closest they could get. In addition to transfer learning, 
researchers employed two CNN models, namely Inception V3 and ResNet50, 
to determine whether a person had PD. By utilizing the Inception V3 model, 
they achieved a 96.67 percent accuracy rate to determine whether a person 
had PD. The algorithms known as Substancia Nigra (SN) and VGG16 CNN 
were applied to MRI scans in order to identify significant features. In order 
to classify PD, the extracted features were combined with three DL algo­
rithms known as ResNet-34, VGG-19, and ResNet-50. Based on the findings 
of a study that compared and analyzed each method, they determined that 
ResNet-50 provided the most precise results. The findings of the study led 
them to this conclusion. On the UCI dataset consisting of 45 acoustic fea­
tures, Ouhmida et al. [7] achieved the highest achievable level of accuracy, 
namely 93.10 percent. ANN and convolution neural networks (CNN) were 
used to complete this task successfully
4.3  EA FOR TREATING DEGENERATIVE 
DISORDERS
Patients suffering from a wide range of conditions, such as PD, glaucoma, 
diabetic retinopathy, and breast cancer, can be diagnosed and treated with the 
help of clinical datasets. In healthcare applications, data mining techniques 
are frequently used to better understand a patient’s medical history through 
recognizing patterns. This is accomplished using computer programs. The 
result is an improvement in the care provided to patients. The decisions you 
end up making due to [data mining] could not be better informed. Because 
patients’ clinical data contains several kinds of uncertainty, it can be chal­
lenging to arrive at a decision that is both all-encompassing and certain when 
working in practice. Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems will signifi­
cantly assist clinicians in seeking a second opinion before making a final 
decision and formulating a treatment plan in the case of PD. Several different 
conceptual frameworks for extracting knowledge from clinical datasets have 
been put forward. Numerous published works have utilized a wide variety of 
diagnostic approaches in order to make predictions regarding diseases such 
as lung cancer [5]. Additional information regarding a diagnostic framework 
that is comparable to that used for PD can be found in [4].

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  57
Every method used for diagnosing degenerative diseases allocates a size­
able portion of its resources to the extraction and classification of features. 
In the beginning, a supervised learning algorithm needs to be utilized to 
produce a training set for the classifier. After that, a test set is utilized to 
assess the classifier’s effectiveness. The decision trees (DT), the random for­
ests (RF), the KNN, and the SVM are some of these SVM. Features largely 
determine the performance of the classifier in the training set that is both 
irrelevant and redundant. In order to achieve an increase in performance, it is 
necessary to get rid of unnecessary features and select the feature subsets that 
offer the greatest benefit. Various feature selection algorithms [9–11] have 
been proposed in the published research that has been done in the scientific 
community.
It is possible that the diagnosis and treatment of degenerative diseases 
could be aided by applying bio-inspired computational algorithms. The 
genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm, firefly bat, bacterial foraging, and 
flower pollination are some examples of bio-inspired algorithms that were 
researched in [12]. Even though these models currently hold the lion’s share 
of the market share, additional research is required to improve the efficacy 
or performance of the many disease prediction models currently in use. A 
wide variety of ML and DL strategies have been used in various applications. 
These methods, despite the fact that they boost performance, have difficulty 
optimizing their parameters and suffer from overfitting.
4.3.1  Genetic Algorithms in Diagnosing 
Degenerative Disorders (DD)
It has been demonstrated that GAs, which are based on biology and are 
known as GAs, are constructive in finding solutions to optimization problems 
involving large search areas. These methods of searching do not have the 
problems that many other methods, such as complete, greedy, heuristic, and 
random, do. These problems include being stuck in an optimal local solution 
and/or having high computational costs. Exhaustive search, heuristic search, 
greedy search, and random search are some other categories of search strate­
gies. Random search is another type of search strategy. In order to enhance 
the overall quality of the feature set, many different ML applications, such 
as classification, clustering, and time-series prediction, have used the fea­
ture selection technique. The classification of NDDs and the prediction of 
their time series are of particular interest. Using time-series classification and 
time-series prediction, it is possible to classify those who have suffered brain 
damage and forecast the progression of the disease. It is absolutely necessary 

58  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
for you to make frequent use of both of these applications. In order to better 
describe and diagnose DD, GA has been utilized in the process. The classi­
fication of DD has been accomplished with these methods to a level of accu­
racy that is considered satisfactory (between 70 and 95 percent).
Figure 4.1 shows the GA strategy for identifying NDDs. The GA strategy 
and the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system were put together to make 
GANFIS, a hybrid diagnostic tool. This tool aims to be more accurate in iden­
tifying NDDs. The experiment used benchmark datasets from two NDDs, 
AD and PD. This was done to prove that the model presented was correct. 
This was done so that the model would be correct. Several different metrics, 
such as accuracy, precision, recall, f-score, and kappa coefficient, have been 
used to evaluate the proposed hybrid approach. Based on the experiments, 
GANFIS did a much better job diagnosing dementia and PD than the tradi­
tional neuro-fuzzy method. The study’s authors came up with an idea for a 
segmentation method that is based on GAs and could be used to accurately 
and quickly diagnose PD. Complex CNN models would have to be used for 
this method. Based on the results of the experiments, the proposed method of 
MRI to classify PD is better than the standard of care that is used now.
Early diagnosis of PD is important for starting treatment, which helps 
the doctor heal the patient, stop the disease from spreading to other brain 
cells, and, in the end, save many lives. As a result, this research aims to 
make a dynamic expert diagnostic system that can accurately predict PD. 
This system proposes a hybrid method that combines a piece of two-stage 
mutual information and an auto encoder-based dimensionality reduction 
approach with a genetically optimized Light GBM (MI-AE-GOLGBM) 
algorithm to improve the performance of the proposed system and predict 
Fig 
Neuroimaging
Dataset with
Clinically Deﬁned
Symptoms 
GA based Neuro
Imaging
Framework 
Genetic Evidence
of Degenerative
Disorders 
Biomarkers
abnormalities in
NDDs 
FIGURE 4.1  Genetic algorithm strategy for NDDs.

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  59
the best outcomes. This mixed-method aims to make the proposed system’s 
predictions more accurate. The proposed method, MI-AE-GOLGBM, uses 
four methods: mutual information, auto encoder, GA, and the LightGBM 
algorithm. Mutual information and auto encoder are used in this method to 
create a two-step strategy for reducing the number of dimensions and choos­
ing the most informative features from the input dataset. This method is used 
to pick out the most useful parts of the dataset. The Light GBM algorithm 
sorts PD patients from healthy controls by using the newly generated features 
and the best-optimized hyper parameters from the two-stage mutual informa­
tion and auto encoder-based dimension reduction methods as well as the GA. 
This makes the proposed system more accurate and reliable. The Light GBM 
algorithm uses the GA to optimize the algorithm’s hyper parameters smartly. 
The Light GBM algorithm uses these newly generated characteristics along 
with the best-optimized hyper parameters that have been given.
Researchers in [6] made algorithms for the three most important parts of 
diagnosing diseases that get worse over time. These issues are how to tell the 
difference between people with AD or frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and 
healthy controls (HC), how to tell the difference between behavioral FTD 
(bvFTD) and AD, and how to tell the difference between different types of 
primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Researchers in [7] also made algorithms 
to tell the difference between AD and FTD (When it comes to diagnosing 
degenerative diseases, each of these factors is very important. After being 
changed, KNN and Bayes Net Naive were added to the fitness function of 
GAs. Compared to principal component analysis, the following is true of 
these GAs: (PCA). The algorithms used to tell the difference between AD 
and HC have been checked by someone from the outside. The results back 
up the use of fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) 
imaging, which made it possible to diagnose AD, FTD, and other diseases 
with a very high level of accuracy. GAs were used to figure out which charac­
teristics are most important, and as few features as possible were used in the 
analysis. These traits may be taken into account when FDG-PET images of 
the brain are evaluated automatically.
Several studies have been proposed to find and tell the difference between 
different types of DD. However, most of these studies have only focused on 
telling the difference between healthy people and people with Alzheimer’s. 
Even so, many studies have been suggested to find and tell the difference 
between different DD groups. These studies did not find the most reliable bio­
markers, which would have led to more accurate results. They also did not use 
the best hyperparameters, which would have led to the best results possible. 
So, these studies did not come up with as good results as they could have. 
The authors of the research paper [8] came up with a new stacking-based 
ensemble learning system as a way to solve these problems. This system uses 

60  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
the GA tuning method for hyperparameters and the four traditional classi­
fiers already there. When the model was being evaluated, its accuracy, pre­
cision, recall, and F1 score were all looked at. The simulation shows that 
stacking-based ensemble learning, which uses a GA, can tell the difference 
between the CN group, the MCI group, and the AD group with an accuracy of 
96.7 percent, a recall rate of 96.5 percent, a precision rate of 97.9 percent, and 
an F1-score of 97.1 percent.
In, a new way of processing patient voices and using GAs to choose the 
neural network architecture for PD patients’ monitoring system were created. 
This was done at the same time as the study. The process of pre-processing 
a person’s voice is explained here so that the main parameters that can be 
used to evaluate a person’s condition can be found more easily. This is done 
so that the doctor can better understand how the patient is doing right now. It 
has been shown that how the data is organized directly affects how well GAs 
work when they are used to build neural networks. To do this, the level of suc­
cess with different data structures was compared. Because of this, a hybrid 
approach, in which one part of the neural network architecture is chosen by 
hand after careful analysis and the other part is built automatically, can give 
the most accurate results when figuring out how sick a patient is. This is 
because the hybrid approach takes the best parts of both the old and new ways 
of doing things. This is because the hybrid approach combines parts of both 
the old and new ways of doing things.
In this work, the idea is put forward that voice analysis could be used 
to create a new algorithm for diagnosing PD and that this algorithm could 
be used. In the first step of the process, a GA is used to choose the best-
extracted features. The next step is to use a network based on SVM to sort 
people into two groups: healthy and those with PD (SVM). This study’s 
dataset is made up of many different biomedical voice signals from 31 peo­
ple, 23 of whom had PD and 8 of whom were healthy. The results showed 
that classification accuracy of 94.50 percent could be reached with only 
four optimized features, 93.66 percent could be reached with only seven 
optimized features, and 94.22 percent could be reached with only nine opti­
mized features.
The authors evaluated and tested the method to see if it could be used 
to find early-stage PD. The method is based on using evolutionary algo­
rithms (EAs) to measure bradykinesia in finger tapping (FT) (PD). The 
study found that an instrument that could accurately measure the severity 
levels of bradykinesia in people with PD, was easy to use, used classifiers 
based on EAs, and could tell the difference between normality and early-
stage PD could be used to measure the severity levels of bradykinesia (PD) 
accurately. With the help of a new CAD system, we can accurately predict 
how mild cognitive impairment (MCI) will turn into AD one to three years 

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  61
before a clinical diagnosis is made. This system uses a GA and a ranking of 
features to look at data from structural magnetic resonance imaging. With 
this system, we can predict whether mild cognitive impairment will turn 
into a disease or not. They showed that combining feature ranking and GAs 
is an excellent way to accurately predict the progression from MCI to AD 
and to diagnose AD earlier.
Professionals in the medical field have suggested that GA, wavelet ker­
nels (WK), and Extreme Learning Machines (ELM) could be used as parts of 
a method for a correct diagnosis of PD. This research uses the ELM learning 
method to teach the single-layer neural network (SLNN) classifier how to 
work. The authors of this study were able to figure out the best values for each 
of these parameters and the total number of neurons that are hidden in ELM 
by using a GA. Statistical tools like classification accuracy, sensitivity, and 
specificity analysis, and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves are 
used to figure out how well the proposed GA-WK-ELM method works. The 
usefulness of these methods depends on how well they work. The GA-WK-
ELM method was found to have the highest classification accuracy, which 
was calculated to be 96.81 percent. This was found out after it was tried out.
The input dataset’s statistical distribution dramatically affects how well 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) diagnose diseases that get worse over 
time. Depending on the dataset, these results may look very different. Several 
different hyperparameters in how CNN models are set up can significantly 
affect how well they converge. Because we have so much data, one of the 
essential parts of this research is figuring out which parameters should be 
used to describe the network’s structure. The GA, has been getting much 
attention lately because it is becoming increasingly popular. Its goal is to 
choose a high-performance network architecture automatically. The authors 
showed that GA could be used to improve the structure of a network. The 
search space for GA includes both the configuration of the network structure 
and the hyperparameters. The authors showed that it is possible to improve 
how a network is built.
4.4  CONCLUSION
Degenerative disease is a condition that progresses predictably over time. 
Neurological conditions that last a long time are called degenerative dis­
eases. By 2050, 33 degenerative disease diagnoses per minute are expected. 
Rapid diagnosis is crucial. Cancer causes up to 70 percent of dementia cases. 
Unable to recall recent events is a warning sign. Disorientation, mood swings, 

62  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
fatigue, and inability to care for basic needs may worsen as the disease pro­
gresses. Isolating themselves from family and friends helps sick people cope 
with their illness. If a person cannot perform any bodily functions, they will 
die. Even after a thorough exam, it is difficult to predict a person’s lifespan, 
but the average is 3 to 9 years. This chapter explains how to use the evolution­
ary approach to extract valuable data from a dataset of degenerative diseases 
and use that data in ML algorithms to improve prediction accuracy, such as 
when diagnosing AD. This chapter shows how to use the evolutionary 
approach to extract valuable data from degenerative disease datasets. The 
chapter focused on using the evolutionary approach to extract valuable data 
from degenerative disease datasets. Comparing diseases helped. Early ML 
accuracy rates ranged from 72 to 84 percent. We used EAs to improve accu­
racy by 5–10 percent. Our goal was accomplished.
REFERENCES
1.  Segato, A., Marzullo, A., Calimeri, F., & De Momi, E. (2020). Artificial intelli­
gence for brain diseases: A systematic review. APL Bioengineering, 4(4), 041503.
2.  Trinh, J., & Farrer, M. (2013). Advances in the genetics of Parkinson disease. 
Nature Reviews Neurology, 9(8), 445–454.
3.  Gusella, J. F., Lee, J. M., & MacDonald, M. E. (2021). Huntington’s disease: 
Nearly four decades of human molecular genetics. Human Molecular Genetics, 
30(R2), R254–R263.
4.  Sudharsan, M., & Thailambal, G. (2021). Alzheimer’s disease prediction using 
machine learning techniques and principal component analysis (PCA). Materials 
Today: Proceedings.
5.  Kour, H., Manhas, J., & Sharma, V. (2022). Hybrid system based on genetic 
algorithm and neuro-fuzzy approach for neurodegenerative disease forecasting. 
In Gupta, D., Polkowski, Z., Khanna, A., Bhattacharyya, S., Castillo, O. (eds.). 
Proceedings of data analytics and management. Lecture notes on data engineer­
ing and communications technologies, vol 90. Singapore: Springer. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-16-6289-8_27
6.  Sreelakshmi, S., & Mathew, R. (2022). A hybrid approach for classifying 
Parkinson’s disease from brain MRI. In Ullah, A., Anwar, S., Rocha, Á., Gill, 
S. (eds.). Proceedings of international conference on information technology 
and applications. Lecture notes in networks and systems, vol 350. Singapore: 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-7618-5_15
7.  Dhar, J. (2022). An adaptive intelligent diagnostic system to predict early stage 
of Parkinson’s disease using two-stage dimension reduction with genetically 
optimized LightGBM algorithm. Neural Computing and Applications, 34, 4567–
4593. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-021-06612-4

4  •  Degenerative Diseases  63
8.  Díaz-Álvarez, J., Matias-Guiu, J. A., Cabrera-Martín, M. N., Pytel, V., Segovia-
Ríos, I., García-Gutiérrez, F., … & Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. 
(2022). Genetic algorithms for optimized diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and 
frontotemporal dementia using fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomogra­
phy imaging. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 983.
9.  Khoei, T. T., Catherine Labuhn, M., Caleb, T. D., Chen Hu, W., & Kaabouch, 
N. (2021). A stacking-based ensemble learning model with genetic algorithm 
for detecting early stages of Alzheimer’s disease, 2021 IEEE International 
Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT), pp. 215–222. https://doi.
org/10.1109/EIT51626.2021.9491904
10.  Shichkina, Y., Irishina, Y., Stanevich, E., & de Jesus Plasencia Salgueiro, A. (2021). 
Application of genetic algorithms for the selection of neural network architecture 
in the monitoring system for patients with Parkinson’s disease. Applied Sciences, 
11(12), 5470. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11125470
11.  Kuresan, H., & Samiappan, D. (2022). Genetic algorithm and principal compo­
nents analysis in speech-based Parkinson’s early diagnosis studies. International 
Journal of Nonlinear Analysis and Applications, 13(1), 591–602.
12.  Gao, C., Smith, S., Lones, M.. Jamieson, S., Alty, J., Cosgrove, J. … & Chen, S. 
(2018). Objective assessment of Bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease using evo­
lutionary algorithms: Clinical validation. Translational Neurodegeneration 7, 18. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-018-0124-x
13.  Glass, D. J., & Arnold, S. E. (2012). Some evolutionary perspectives on 
Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis and pathology. Alzheimer’s and Dementia, 
8(4), 343–351.
14.  Beheshti, I., Demirel, H., Matsuda, H., & Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. (2017). Classification of Alzheimer’s disease and prediction of mild 
cognitive impairment-to-Alzheimer’s conversion from structural magnetic 
resource imaging using feature ranking and a genetic algorithm. Computers in 
Biology and Medicine, 83, 109–119.
15.  Avci, D., & Dogantekin, A. (2016). An expert diagnosis system for Parkinson 
disease based on genetic algorithm-wavelet kernel-extreme learning machine. 
Parkinson’s Disease, 2016, 5264743. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/5264743
16.  Lee, S., Kim, J., Kang, H., Kang, D. Y., & Park, J. (2021). Genetic algorithm 
based deep learning neural network structure and hyperparameter optimization. 
Applied Sciences, 11(2), 744.


65
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-5
5
Tuberculosis
5.1  INTRODUCTION
Tuberculosis, more commonly referred to as TB, is a contagious disease 
that can be transmitted from one individual to another. It is one of the pri­
mary reasons why people pass away all over the world. Before the pandemic 
caused by the coronavirus (COVID-19), TB was the single disease respon­
sible for the most deaths. The bacillus that causes TB is spread through the 
air when people with the disease cough or sneeze, such as Mycobacterium 
TB (e.g., by coughing). Other areas of the body besides the lungs are also 
susceptible to TB infection. It is statistically more likely for the disease to be 
found in men than in women (approximately 90 percent of those diagnosed). 
Approximately one-quarter of the world’s population has been identified as 
having TB. TB is a disease that can be treated, and it is also a condition that 
can be avoided. The medication course required to treat TB disease typically 
lasts for a period of six months. Infections caused by TB can be cured with 
drug regimens ranging from one month to six months. There needs to be 
universal health coverage, also known as UHC, in place so that anyone who 
is afflicted with an illness or infection can receive the appropriate medical 
attention. By addressing risk factors for TB, such as poverty, undernutrition, 
HIV infection, smoking, and diabetes, it is possible to reduce the number of 
people who contract the disease and ultimately pass away as a result of it. 
Because of this policy, there will be a reduction in the total number of people 
who pass away from TB. However, some countries do not.
The initial actions are that there are fewer than 10 new cases and fewer 
than 1 death caused by the disease each year for nearly 100,000 people in that 
country. Scientists will need to make scientific advancements such as the develop­
ment of a new vaccine to reduce the number of TB cases around the world to the 
same level they have reached in these countries with a low burden of the disease.
The infectious disease is known as TB poses a significant risk to public 
health because it can affect people of any age and almost always results in the 

66  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
victim’s death. By the year 2021, it is anticipated that 10 million people will 
be afflicted with the disease, the majority of whom will be women and chil­
dren (3.3 million women, 5.5 million men, and 1.2 million children) (WHO, 
2021). In 2021, a single pathogen infection was responsible for 24 percent of 
all TB-related fatalities (WHO, 2021). Testing for and correctly diagnosing 
TB ought to be regarded as the most important and significant advance that 
can be made [1, 2]. On the other hand, TB infections are notoriously difficult 
to forecast, and it is not unusual for identification and diagnosis to take a con­
siderable amount of time. A delay in the diagnosis could result in drug resis­
tance, including multidrug resistance (MDR), which occurs when an isolate 
is resistant to two first-line drugs (rifampicin and isoniazid), and extensive 
drug resistance (XDR), which includes MDR and also shows resistance to 
fluoroquinolones and at least one of the injectable drugs. Both of these forms 
of drug resistance can be prevented by early detection and treatment. When 
conducting diagnostic tests in the medical field, laboratories frequently make 
use of high-priced microscopes to examine sputum and other samples from 
patients. Finding TB patients who are also infected with the disease can be 
challenging and time-consuming. Because of the similarities in their symp­
toms, the various forms of TB are typically difficult to differentiate from one 
another using decision boundaries or distinguishing rules. This is because the 
diseases share similar symptoms. Because of this, arriving at the appropriate 
conclusion or diagnosis can be quite challenging. Even though the diseases 
are difficult to manage, they must be treated as quickly as possible to prevent 
them from becoming even more severe.
Medical professionals can use machine learning (ML) methods to 
assist them in making decisions regarding how to diagnose or predict TB. 
Using a wide variety of statistical and ML techniques, researchers have 
been able to model and predict the progression of TB disease. Logical 
regression [3, 4], neural networks [5–8], support vector machines (SVMs) 
[9, 10], decision trees (DT) [11, 12], naive Bayes [13, 14], and other meth­
ods are included in these techniques. Many factors prevent these meth­
ods from being used to model actual issues that occur in the real world, 
even though they make important contributions. The fact that the user is 
expected to assume a particular model form, which in turn necessitates 
having an in-depth knowledge of the applicable theory, is the primary 
drawback of traditional methods. For instance, in order to solve problems 
involving regression, it is frequently sufficient to locate a set of model 
coefficients for linear or polynomial functions that accurately describe the 
input variables. This can be done in a number of different ways. In order 
to develop these models, you will need to have an understanding of the 
statistical distribution of the data.

5  •  Tuberculosis  67
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) may make it simpler to find solutions to 
problems that are neither linear nor simple [15]. The term “genetic program­
ming,” also abbreviated as “GP,” refers to an EA that can be used to find the 
optimal model in a way that is both original and astute. “GP,” in this particu­
lar instance, it is not a particular method for resolving issues. Instead, it is 
a method of developing mathematical models that is more general [16]. GP 
is superior to other ML methods for modelling or unsupervised learning in 
situations where it is impossible to predict the form the solution model will 
take in advance. This is the case in plenty of different scenarios. Through the 
creation of computer programs of varying lengths, GP has been successful in 
resolving various medical issues [17].
5.2  TUBERCULOSIS CLASSIFICATION
The TB is an infectious disease almost always caused by the bacterium known 
as Mycobacterium TB. The majority of the time, these microorganisms are 
inhaled together with the polluted air that is present. Infections typically 
travel through the blood and lymph system from the lungs to other body parts. 
However, the infection can also spread through other organs and the respiratory 
tract if they are exposed to the virus early. Bacteria can be dispersed through 
the air when a sick person talks, coughs, sneezes, or spits. A person needs to be 
exposed to only a trace of bacteria to become ill. The length of time you were 
exposed to the bacteria and how closely you were to it both play a role in deter­
mining your risk of becoming ill. People living or working close to an infected 
individual have a greater risk of contracting the disease.
People with pulmonary TB are more likely to cough up blood, experi­
ence weight loss, lose their appetite, get fevers, sweat at night, and lose their 
appetite. TB also causes people to lose their appetite. Another symptom of 
TB is that the disease can spread to other areas of the body, which can also 
cause the disease. The disease causes the human body to progress through 
two distinct stages of growth while it is present. It is common practice to 
refer to this stage as the “TB infection” stage. A progression characterizes 
the second stage of the disease toward a more authoritarian state [18]. At first, 
the infection “imports” itself from a host already carrying it. This can only 
happen when two people come into contact. There are two ways to look at 
TB: active disease or an infection that has not yet manifested itself. The most 
common form of active TB is known as pulmonary TB, but the disease can 
also spread to other organs, which is referred to as “extrapulmonary TB.”

68  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
5.2.1  Pulmonary
The phrase “about the respiratory system” is how the word “Pulmonary” 
is described when looked up in the dictionary. When the symptoms of TB 
become more severe, the organ most commonly affected is the lung. Despite 
this, the infection has the potential to spread to other parts of the body. 
Mycobacterium TB is the name of the bacterium that is responsible for the 
disease known as TB, which is transmitted through the air and destroys body 
tissue. In most cases, the bacterium known as Mycobacterium TB is to blame 
for its progression. When Mycobacterium TB primarily infects a person’s 
lungs, that person is said to have pulmonary TB. However, the disease can 
still move to other parts of the body if it starts here. Early detection and treat­
ment of pulmonary TB can result in a full recovery from the disease.
In North America and Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries, pul­
monary TB was commonly referred to as “consumption.” This disease was 
widespread throughout those time periods. Better living conditions and the 
discovery of antibiotics such as streptomycin and isoniazid allowed medi­
cal professionals to treat TB more effectively and put a stop to its further 
spread.
A trustworthy origination: according to the WHO, TB is one of the 
leading causes of death worldwide, Developing nations are home to the vast 
majority of TB victims, both infected and those who succumb to the disease. 
According to the American Lung Association (ALA), 9.6 million people are 
living with a form of disease that is still active in their bodies. A citation is 
required for this. If the disease is not treated, there is a possibility of develop­
ing life-threatening complications [3, 4]. Computerized tomography (CT) is 
currently the method that provides the highest accuracy when detecting TB 
in the lungs. When TB is suspected in the early stages of the disease, a chest 
X-ray, also known as a CXR, is typically performed to confirm the diagnosis. 
This is because CXRs are the most common, require the least amount of 
radiation, and cost the least amount of money. In addition to this, unexpected 
pathologic changes may be revealed. Researchers have spent decades trying 
to develop a computer-aided detection (CAD) system dependent on medical 
imaging to diagnose TB. To begin, CAD uses algorithms to select and extract 
useful pathogenic features from images. This provides meaningful quantita­
tive insight into the disease being investigated. Although these methods take 
a lot of time and rely heavily on the artificial extraction of patterns that con­
tain helpful information, CAD can still provide valuable quantitative insights. 
Because many diseases are only visible in a small portion of an image at 
a time, identifying features quickly becomes more difficult as the image is 
viewed in its entirety. Because of issues such as poor transferability between 

5  •  Tuberculosis  69
different datasets and unstable performance in newly generated data, the 
CAD system can also not make a well-grounded decision with a high degree 
of accuracy. These issues are caused by a large amount of medical image data 
and the dynamic nature of the disease, and they contribute to the fact that the 
CAD system cannot make a decision.
5.2.2  Extrapulmonary
Before the Mycobacterium TB infection can become active, it must first enter 
a dormant state, which most people already have. Patients are considered to 
have latent TB as long as they are infected with TB but do not exhibit any 
symptoms of active TB. When an infection of the lung manifests, it is not 
uncommon for a dormant infection to suddenly become active and conta­
gious. It can potentially affect the lymph nodes, the central nervous system, 
the bone and joint system, the genitourinary tract, the abdomen (including 
the internal abdominal organs and the peritoneum), and the pericardium. The 
medical term for TB that manifests in areas of the body other than the lungs 
is called extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB).
According to the Global TB Report published by the WHO, however, 
additional efforts are required to improve access to diagnosis and treatment, 
particularly in countries that account for more than half of the global gap. 
Conventional medical testing can be used to diagnose EPTB in several dif­
ferent ways. Pulmonary TB (PTB)-related research has been conducted a lot 
more frequently than EPTB-related research has. Due to the paucibacillary 
nature of EPTB, the disease is challenging to diagnose. A tissue biopsy, Ziehl-
Neelsen staining, fluorescent microscopy, and an interferon-release assay are 
the diagnostic procedures that can be used to diagnose EPTB. In regions with 
limited resources, there is not uncommon for insufficient laboratory facili­
ties, which precludes the application of these methods. In order to obtain 
samples from patients, it is necessary to perform invasive procedures [5]. 
The diagnosis of TB requires several procedures that take a significant 
amount of time. These procedures include sputum smear tests, cultures, and 
biopsy specimens.
5.2.3  Challenges in Diagnosing PTB and EPTB
In this part of the chapter, we will examine the various applications of ML 
and deep learning (DL) that can be used to diagnose TB. It is essential to 
detect TB at an early stage in order to prevent the disease from spreading. 

70  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
Even though a correct diagnosis of TB is possible, there are not enough quali­
fied radiologists to go around is a significant obstacle. Diagnostics performed 
by computers can often produce results that are more accurate and helpful 
than those performed by humans. It also makes it possible to construct the 
system with high precision at a cost that is lower than it would be with human 
diagnostics.
When trying to determine whether or not an individual had TB, 
researchers utilized a Bayesian Convolution Neural Network rather than 
a conventional Convolution Neural Network. When the system was put 
through its paces using the Montgomery and Shenzhen TB datasets, it 
achieved an accuracy rate of 96.4 percent for the Montgomery dataset and 
86.4 percent for the Shenzhen dataset [19]. In order to construct the sys­
tem, the Montgomery dataset was utilized. In order to detect TB in chest 
X-rays, researchers came up with the novel idea of using techniques such 
as segmentation, visualization, and DT classification. The total number of 
DT models that were utilized for transfer learning was nine (ResNet18 and 
ResNet50 and ResNet101 and ChexNet and InceptionV3 and Vgg19 and 
DenseNet201, and SqueezeNet and MobileNet). Cases of TB and other cases 
won’t be confused with one another using these models. U-net models were 
partitioned the data, and X-ray pictures were analyzed to determine how the 
data should be categorized. Images of the lungs after being dissected were 
also used in an experiment at one point. The incorporation of segmented 
lung regions significantly improved the detection of the system. Through 
the application of image segmentation, the accuracy increased from 97 per­
cent to 100 percent. According to the researchers’ findings, DenseNet201 
performed better than segmented lungs, and ChexNet performed better than 
other DT models [20].
The researchers were required to construct a Deep Convolution Neural 
Network model to evaluate the model’s generalizability. X-rays of the chests 
of people who suffered from TB were used for this purpose. In order to 
train the dataset, one group of chest X-rays is used, and another group is 
used to test the trained dataset. They arrived at the verdict that the diagnos­
tic performance of the model shifts depending on which dataset population 
is used to train it [21]. This was the conclusion that they came to after con­
ducting their research. Researchers hoped that by utilizing a convolution 
neural network, they could create a CAD TB system. Additionally, the use 
of a DT model to locate CXRs is recommended by reference [22]. This 
study used two different CXR datasets, both of which were available to 
the general public. One of these datasets came from the National Institutes 
of Health, and the other came from Shenzhen Hospital. The model was 
initially fine-tuned with the assistance of the artificial bee colony algo­
rithm, and then the linear average-based ensemble method was utilized to 

5  •  Tuberculosis  71
complete the process. It was discovered that the Deep Convolution Neural 
Network had a better overall performance when the three steps described 
above were carried out in conjunction with one another [23]. Researchers 
have proposed a number of potential methods for diagnosing TB. A data-
acquisition system can automatically take pictures of the sputum field of 
view, and the recognition system uses a method called transfer learning 
(VentNet) [24] to customize itself to the individual patient. When attempt­
ing to classify the data using multiclass categorization, the knowledge is 
typically transferred from one person to another. Because of improvements 
made to both the specificity and sensitivity of the test, the overall accuracy 
has increased to 95.05 percent. People have developed CAD systems that 
make use of image processing in order to locate cases of lung TB. Because 
of this, it was possible to detect and diagnose diseases more timely and 
accurately. The proposed system includes components for the cleaning and 
segmentation of data as well as the extraction of features and classification 
of data. The findings of this research indicate that it is possible to give the 
system greater specificity while preserving its existing levels of accuracy 
and sensitivity. The system’s accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity are all 
above average, coming in at a combined score of 76 percent. When pre­
sented with images of sputum microscopy, it has been hypothesized that 
a deep neural network could identify the location of TB bacilli [3]. The 
model in question achieves a recall rate of 83.78 percent and a precision rate 
of 67.5 percent. TB-AI [25] is the name given to a system that was devel­
oped by researchers and uses convolution neural networks. This system was 
developed to identify TB bacilli that can withstand an acidic environment. 
The training set consists of 45 samples with a total of 30 positive cases and 
30 negative cases. The test set consists of 210 samples drawn at random 
from the population, with 108 positive cases and 93 negative cases. There 
was a 97.94 percent correlation between how well this system worked and 
how well it worked. Researchers [26] have devised a method that utilizes 
digital image processing that involves multiple steps in order to categorize 
and count ZN-stained TB bacilli. It is used to divide bacilli in the same way 
that hue color components were previously used. Similarly, the structure of 
a bacillus is evaluated to determine whether or not it is able to survive in 
its natural setting. As evidenced by the display of a variety of micrographs, 
this technique has been demonstrated to be accurate to a level equivalent 
to 90 percent when counting bacilli. It was suggested that the non-linear 
SVM could be used as a primary screening method for TB infection [9]. In 
addition, a gradient EA is used in order to locate the optimal value for each 
parameter. The classification system does not involve any kind of medical 
examination and is based on data available to the general public. Another 
tool used to investigate TB transmission is called a C5.0 DT [27]. It has 

72  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
been discovered that the proposed algorithm produces useful results while 
simultaneously maintaining a low error rate. Paper 34 presented a novel 
algorithm for forecasting the finding of TB. This algorithm was used to 
make predictions. The conventional DT had to be modified in a few key­
ways to accommodate this development. Both SVM and random forests 
(RF) fall short of KNN’s 94 percent accuracy when it comes to the detec­
tion of TB. The study’s findings led the researchers to conclude that this 
approach, which does not require the participation of technical personnel, 
is capable of producing satisfactory outcomes.
In order to determine whether or not a person has TB, researchers use 
the Naive Bayesian method. The data that was utilized in this investigation 
originated from the medical files of patients who had previously been identi­
fied as having PTB or EPTB. The study’s findings led the researchers to real­
ize that the Naive Bayesian approach to ML is a viable option for detecting 
TB. When X-ray and lab results were considered, the correct response was 
obtained 85.95 percent of the time. Researchers created the most accurate 
DT model possible with the assistance of the Biomarker Patterns Software 
(BPS) [18]. When distinguishing between EPTB and non-EPTB, this model 
has a specificity of 97 percent and a sensitivity of 84 percent. The fact that 
this model correctly classified data 91.6 percent of the time suggests that the 
DT model could be helpful in the diagnosis of EPTB.
5.3  EA FOR DIAGNOSING TUBERCULOSIS
Detection of TB typically involves a series of steps beginning with a physical 
examination and continuing with laboratory testing. The patient’s prognosis 
can be determined using the first method, which consists of interrogating 
the patient with a series of targeted questions. The second method is used to 
validate the results of the first method, which was a physical examination. 
It is possible to skip the diagnosis entirely after a physical examination if 
the attending physician is confident of the patient’s condition, but doing so 
is not recommended. Treating TB in developing countries can be challeng­
ing because many hospitals do not have the necessary medical equipment. 
Researchers have been looking into how well, and quickly EAs can solve 
problems that occur in the real world [4], aiming to improve science and 
medicine. Evaluation of the surrounding environment needs to be incorpo­
rated into the diagnostic process for TB to reduce the number of people who 
get the disease and ultimately pass away from it.

5  •  Tuberculosis  73
5.3.1  Role of EA in Tuberculosis Treatment
Genetic algorithm-based tuberculosis diagnosis framework is shown in 
Figure 5.1. The use of GAs, one of a large number of traditional algorithms, 
has been widespread among researchers working to develop new methods 
for detecting TB in humans at an earlier stage than has ever been possible. A 
typical GA assigns a binary array of a fixed length to each individual in the 
initial population to serve as the genotype for that individual. Calculating the 
normalized probability of selection is possible by dividing each individual’s 
specific ability by the total ability level. This will allow for the calculation 
of the normalized probability of selection. The algorithm ultimately chooses 
the parents of the offspring through the use of a single-point crossover. When 
analyzing TB, it is necessary to select the initial feature that is most signifi­
cant in order to prevent the problem of overfitting. The most effective strategy 
for completing this mission is to use GA.
Stochastic search methods that are founded on natural genetics, such as 
GAs, have the potential to be very effective in environments that are both 
FIGURE 5.1  GA-based TB diagnosis framework.

74  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
large and complex. Problems are easier to address and resolve when their 
presence assists them. It is possible to find a solution to an optimization issue 
by employing a process known as a GA, which is iterative. A mechanism 
that encrypts and decrypts information can be used to locate each solution. 
As a consequence of this, every possible solution needs to be portrayed as a 
chromosome. This happens over and over again when going in the opposite 
direction. A feature can be missing or present at the I position; however, a 
value of zero or one indicates the absence of the feature. GAs always start 
with a collection of chromosomes chosen at random as their starting point. 
An evaluation of a solution’s efficiency and overall quality can be performed 
with the assistance of a fitness function. As a result, the fitness function in 
(1) takes the chromosome as an input and then returns the fitness value that 
is associated with it. The next thing to do is to figure out which people are in 
the best physical shape and have the most life experience to bring up the next 
generation. The creation of new populations from already existing ones can 
be accomplished by using two different reproductive operators: mutation and 
cross-breeding.
Subjects who took part in the study [28] The SVM classifier is used in 
TB drug resistance research and modeling. In order to improve the overall 
performance of SVM, GA is utilized to select the 20 features from the com­
plete feature set that are most relevant to the problem at hand. In addition, 
the kernels of the SVM model are analyzed to determine which would be the 
best fit for the SVM algorithm. We must keep feeding the trained SVM and 
GA model new data to achieve an accurate prediction of a patient’s response 
to treatment. The SVM combined with GA can accurately predict treatment 
resistance using data that has not yet been collected, and it only needs 20 
features. The findings backed up my assertion in this regard. It has been 
hypothesized [27] that an improved model that is based on ML could select 
the appropriate hyper-parameters and extract the most helpful texture char­
acteristics from pictures of TB. For our purposes, it is critical that we simul­
taneously improve our precision while also reducing the number of extracted 
characteristics. One of the challenges we face is optimizing our use of mul­
tiple tasks at once. The most valuable characteristics for a SVM classifier are 
selected with the aid of the outcomes of a genetic algorithm (GA) (SVM). We 
were able to achieve significantly higher accuracy and better results with the 
method that we proposed by making use of the ImageCLEF 2020 dataset as 
our primary resource. Compared to the prior art, our results with the pro­
posed method are significantly better.
Auscultation, the most widely used diagnostic method in pulmonol­
ogy, can differentiate between the many diseases that can affect the lungs 
and guide the diagnostic process toward more specialized procedures [29]. 
The creation of a hybrid GANN aims to automate lung sound diagnosis. 

5  •  Tuberculosis  75
An ANN’s training parameters and computation time can both be optimized 
and shortened with the help of this generalized artificial neural network 
(GANN). The recently developed method is able to distinguish between nor­
mal, wheezing, and crackling lung sounds.
Patients who are in a critical condition need to have a measurement taken 
of their arterial blood partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2). PetCO2, 
also known as Pet CO2, is a non-invasive method that can be used to pre­
dict PaCO2 in healthy individuals. However, in sicker individuals, it is pos­
sible that this method is biased and has less utility. This is the recommended 
method to use in order to circumvent the challenges that are associated with 
sampling arterial blood. The authors [30] developed a GA for predicting 
PaCO2 using capnography data collected from emergency room patients who 
were not intubated. The proposed system may improve both the accuracy and 
bias of the PaCO2 prediction.
On the basis of the Genetic-Neuro-Fuzzy Inferential method that was 
proposed in work [31], medical practitioners can reap the benefits of a deci­
sion support platform that assists them in administering a TB diagnosis that 
is accurate, timely, and cost-effective. [Note: this platform is only available 
to medical practitioners.] The utilization of this platform may also be of use 
in the treatment of TB. The performance evaluation found that the sensitivity 
and accuracy results of 60 percent and 70 percent fell within the acceptable 
range established by subject matter experts. The case study used 10 patients 
from St. Francis Catholic Hospital Okpara-In-Land, located in Delta State, 
Nigeria.
5.4  CONCLUSION
TB detection is critical in medicine because of the alarmingly high mortal­
ity rate associated with cancer. As a result, future generations will require 
tools for diagnosing, treating, and managing TB and its associated diseases. 
TB research has also incorporated technological methods for early detection 
and treatment due to global technological advancements and the rise in digi­
talization. The earlier TB is diagnosed and treated, the lower the number of 
deaths. Numerous subtypes, stages, and diagnostic challenges are associated 
with TB, and this chapter provides an overview of them. Aside from that, the 
chapter discusses the methodology that underpins the most recent diagnostic 
tools and technologies. Early detection in humans of TB is a significant focus 
of this paper, as are the various EA approaches that researchers from industry 
and academia have proposed.

76  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
REFERENCES
1.  Cheon, S. A., Cho, H. H., Kim, J., Lee, J., Kim, H. J., & Park, T. J. (2016). Recent 
tuberculosis diagnosis toward the end TB strategy. Journal of Microbiological 
Methods, 123, 51–61.
2.  World Health Organization. (2016). On the road to ending TB: Highlights from the 
30 highest TB burden countries. (no. WHO/HTM/TB/2016.06). Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization.
3.  Alsaffar, M., Alshammari, G., Alshammari, A., Aljaloud, S., Almurayziq, T. S., 
Hamad, A. A. … & Belay, A. (2021). Detection of tuberculosis disease using 
image processing technique. Mobile Information Systems, 2021. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2021/7424836
4.  Ejeh, S. O., Alabi, O. O., Ogungbola, O. O., Olatunde, O. O., & Dere, Z. O. 
(2022). A comparison of multinomial logistic regression and artificial neural 
network classification techniques applied to TB/HIV data. American Journal of 
Epidemiology, 6, 14–18.
5.  Lin, L., She, C., Chen, Y., Guo, Z., & Zeng, X. (2022). TB-NET: A two-branch 
neural network for direction of arrival estimation under model imperfections. 
Electronics, 11(2), 220.
6.  An, L., Peng, K., Yang, X., Huang, P., Luo, Y., Feng, P. … & Wei, B. (2022). 
E-TBNet: Light deep neural network for automatic detection of tuberculosis with 
X-ray DR imaging. Sensors, 22(3), 821.
7.  Pathak, K. C., Kundaram, S. S., Sarvaiya, J. N., & Darji, A. D. (2022). Diagnosis 
and analysis of tuberculosis disease using simple neural network and deep learn­
ing approach for chest X-ray images. In Mehta, M., Fournier-Viger, P., Patel, M., 
Lin, J. CW. (eds.). Tracking and preventing diseases with artificial intelligence 
(pp. 77–102). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
8.  Han, D., He, T., Yu, Y., Guo, Y., Chen, Y., Duan, H. … & Yu, N. (2022). Diagnosis 
of active pulmonary tuberculosis and community acquired pneumonia using con­
volution neural network based on transfer learning. Academic Radiology, 29(10), 
1486–1492.
9.  Zhang, Y. D., Wang, W., Zhang, X., & Wang, S. H. (2022). Secondary pulmonary 
tuberculosis recognition by 4-direction varying-distance GLCM and fuzzy SVM. 
Mobile Networks and Applications, 1–14.
10.  Yang, F., Yu, H., Kantipudi, K., Karki, M., Kassim, Y. M., Rosenthal, A. … & 
Jaeger, S. (2022). Differentiating between drug-sensitive and drug-resistant tuber­
culosis with machine learning for clinical and radiological features. Quantitative 
Imaging in Medicine and Surgery, 12(1), 675.
11.  Deelder, W., Napier, G., Campino, S., Palla, L., Phelan, J., & Clark, T. G. (2022). A 
modified decision tree approach to improve the prediction and mutation discovery for 
drug resistance in mycobacterium tuberculosis. BMC Genomics, 23(1), 1–7.
12.  Veselsky, A., Pavel, G., Ivan, B., Belik, V., & Lavrova, A. (2021, November). 
Assessment of bronchial blocking success in patients with destructive forms 
of tuberculosis using decision trees. In 2021 6th International Conference on 
Intelligent Informatics and Biomedical Sciences (ICIIBMS) (Vol. 6, pp. 135–136). 
Oita, Japan: IEEE.

5  •  Tuberculosis  77
13.  Geetha Pavani, P., Biswal, B., Sairam, M. V. S., & Bala Subrahmanyam, N. 
(2021). A semantic contour based segmentation of lungs from chest X-rays for the 
classification of tuberculosis using Naïve Bayes classifier. International Journal 
of Imaging Systems and Technology, 31(4), 2189–2203.
14.  Halliru, A., Wajiga, G. M., Malgwi, Y. M., & Maidabara, A. H. (2022). A model for 
prediction of drug resistant tuberculosis using data mining technique. Computer 
Science & IT Research Journal, 3(1), 1–22.
15.  Raghul, S., & Jeyakumar, G. (2022). Parallel and distributed computing approaches 
for evolutionary algorithms—A review. Soft Computing: Theories and Applications, 
433–445.
16.  Alsalibi, B., Mirjalili, S., Abualigah, L., & Gandomi, A. H. (2022). A comprehen­
sive survey on the recent variants and applications of membrane-inspired evolu­
tionary algorithms. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, 1–17.
17.  Karmakar, R. (2022). Application of genetic algorithm (GA) in medical science: A 
review. In Luhach, Kumar. A. (eds.). Second international conference on sustain­
able technologies for computational intelligence (pp. 83–94). Singapore: Springer.
18.  Migliori, G. B., Tiberi, S., Zumla, A., Petersen, E., Chakaya, J. M., Wejse, C. … 
& Zellweger, J. P. (2020). MDR/XDR-TB management of patients and contacts: 
Challenges facing the new decade. The 2020 clinical update by the global tuber­
culosis network. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 92, S15–S25.
19.  Tasci, E., Uluturk, C., & Ugur, A. (2021). A voting-based ensemble deep learning 
method focusing on image augmentation and preprocessing variations for tuber­
culosis detection. Neural Computing and Applications, 33(22), 15541–15555.
20.  Wong, A., Lee, J. R. H., Rahmat-Khah, H., Sabri, A., Alaref, A., & Liu, H. (2022). 
TB-Net: A tailored, self-attention deep convolutional neural network design for 
detection of tuberculosis cases from chest X-ray images. Frontiers in Artificial 
Intelligence, 5, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2022.827299
21.  Mahbub, M. K., Biswas, M., Gaur, L., Alenezi, F., & Santosh, K. C. (2022). 
Deep features to detect pulmonary abnormalities in chest x-rays due to infec­
tious diseaseX: covid-19, pneumonia, and tuberculosis. Information Sciences, 
592, 389–401.
22.  Zaidi, S. Z. Y., Akram, M. U., Jameel, A., & Alghamdi, N. S. (2022). A deep 
learning approach for the classification of TB from NIH CXR dataset. IET Image 
Processing, 16(3), 787–796.
23.  Nafisah, S. I., & Muhammad, G. (2022). Tuberculosis detection in chest radio­
graph using convolutional neural network architecture and explainable artificial 
intelligence. Neural Computing and Applications, Special Issue, 1–21.
24.  Sudarshan, V. K., Ramachandra, A., Tan, R., Ojha, N. S. M., & Tan, S. (2022). 
VEntNet: Hybrid deep convolutional neural network model for automated multi-
class categorization of chest X-rays. International Journal of Imaging Systems 
and Technology, 32(3), 778–797.
25.  Ravin, N., Saha, S., Schweitzer, A., Elahi, A., Dako, F., Mollura, D. … & 
Chapman, D. (2022). Mitigating domain shift in AI-based TB screening with 
unsupervised domain adaptation. IEEE Access, 10, 45997–46013.
26.  Shetty, D., & Vyas, D. (2022). Combination method for the diagnosis of tubercu­
lous lymphadenitis in high burden settings. Surgical and Experimental Pathology, 
5(1), 1–7.

78  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
27.  Sharma, A., Machado, E., Lima, K. V. B., Suffys, P. N., & Conceição, E. C. (2022). 
Tuberculosis drug resistance profiling based on machine learning: A literature 
review. Brazilian Journal of Infectious Diseases, 26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bjid.2022.102332
28.  Kanesamoorthy, K., & Dissanayake, M. B. (2021). Prediction of treatment failure 
of tuberculosis using support vector machine with genetic algorithm. International 
Journal of Mycobacteriology, 10(3), 279.
29.  Petmezas, G., Cheimariotis, G. A., Stefanopoulos, L., Rocha, B., Paiva, R. P., 
Katsaggelos, A. K. … & Maglaveras, N. (2022). Automated lung sound classifica­
tion using a hybrid CNN-LSTM network and focal loss function. Sensors, 22(3), 
1232.
30.  Alba, G. A., Samokhin, A. O., Wang, R. S., Wertheim, B. M., Haley, K. J., Padera, 
R. F. … & Maron, B. A. (2022). Pulmonary endothelial NEDD9 and the pro­
thrombotic pathophenotype of acute respiratory distress syndrome due to SARS-
CoV-2 infection. Pulmonary Circulation, 12(2), e12071.
31.  Siddiqui, A. K., & Garg, V. K. (2022). An analysis of adaptable intelligent models 
for pulmonary tuberculosis detection and classification. SN Computer Science, 
3(1), 1–8.

79
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-6
6
Muscular 
Dystrophy
6.1  INTRODUCTION
Muscular dystrophies (MDs) are a collection of inherited conditions that can be 
passed down from one generation to the next. Those afflicted with these condi­
tions experience a slow deterioration in their muscular strength in addition to 
an increase in the severity of their disability. The medical condition known as 
MD is progressive, which means that it gets worse with time [1]. It is common 
for it to begin by affecting a specific group of muscles, and then it will spread 
to affect all of the muscles. This can happen at any point during the progres­
sion of the condition. When some forms of MD reach a particular stage in their 
progression, they can cause damage to the heart and the muscles that control 
breathing. This contributes to the elevated mortality risk that is associated with 
the condition. The MD may be able to accomplish this at some point. Even 
though there is currently no cure for multiple sclerosis, there are treatments that 
can help alleviate many of the symptoms associated with the disease.
6.1.1  Causes of Muscular Dystrophy
MD is caused by alterations, or mutations, in the genes responsible for control­
ling the structure and function of a person’s muscles. It becomes more dif­
ficult for the muscles to perform their typical functions as a direct result of the 
mutations, which are the factors responsible for the changes in the structure of 
the muscle fibers. This causes a gradual increase in the severity of the impair­
ment over time. Within families, mutations are likely to be transmitted from 
one generation to the next. If your family has a history of multiple sclerosis, 
your primary care physician may advise you to undergo genetic testing and 
counseling. If this is the case, you should adhere to their recommendations. 

80  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
This information will allow your physician to calculate the likelihood of you 
developing multiple sclerosis or having a child with the condition.
6.1.2  Types of Muscular Dystrophy
There are many different kinds of subtypes of MD, and the symptoms of 
each are different. There are many subtypes, and depending on which one 
you have, your life expectancy or level of disability will be very different [2]. 
Some of the most common types of medical diagnoses are as follows:
•	 A myotonic dystrophy is a form of MD that can affect individuals 
at any stage. People who do not have myotonic dystrophy have a 
lower life expectancy than those who do, particularly if they have a 
severe condition. However, this is not something that occurs every 
time. Facioscapulohumeral MD can start in childhood or later in 
life. Because of how slowly it spreads, it is rare to see it in children. 
The most common and severe form of MD is called Duchenne 
(DMD). This form of disease affects a large number of people. The 
majority of patients with this type are male.
•	 The symptoms of Becker MD appear later in childhood than those 
of DMD, and the severity of Becker MD is not as severe as that of 
DMD. In most cases, a person’s life expectancy is unaffected by hav­
ing this condition. The first symptoms of limb-girdle MD, a group of 
conditions, typically show up in a person in their late teens or early 
20s. While some forms of the disease can rapidly deteriorate and 
ultimately be fatal, other manifestations of the illness progress more 
slowly but eventually prove fatal. The symptoms of oculopharyngeal 
MD, a form of MD, typically do not appear in a person until they are 
between the ages of 50 and 60, and the condition does not typically 
have an impact on a person’s life expectancy. The disease known as 
Emery-Dreifuss MD affects a significant number of people.
6.1.3  Diagnosing Muscular Dystrophy
The doctor may employ any number of diagnostic procedures in the search for 
underlying causes of muscle weakness [3]. Blood samples are taken for testing. 
It is these enzymes that are measured after an injury has occurred when a mus­
cle is injured. Your child’s doctor will apply prickly protrusions to various parts 
of his or her body in order to simulate an electrode placement. After that, your 
child’s doctor will instruct them to contract and release their muscles gradually. 

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  81
Electrodes are used to determine a subject’s electrical activity. Electrodes are 
inserted into the muscle and connected to a machine. Using a needle, your child 
will have a small piece of muscle removed. This procedure does not cause any 
discomfort. They’ll use a microscope to see if there are any missing or broken 
proteins in the sample. This test may reveal what type of MD your child has.
The subject’s reflexes, as well as their muscular strength and coordina­
tion, will be analysed. Other problems with a patient’s nervous system can 
be detected using these tests, which are helpful to doctors. EKG stands for 
electrocardiogram. The electrical signals sent from the heart can be used 
to determine the rate of your child’s heartbeat and whether or not it is in a 
healthy rhythm. Using imaging techniques, it is possible to see how well your 
child’s muscles are working. A magnetic resonance imaging exam, known as 
an MRI, is an option for them. Magnets and radio waves are used to create 
images of the subject’s internal organs. Sound waves are used in ultrasound 
imaging to produce images of the internal organs.
Doctors can search for the genes that cause MD using a sample of the 
patient’s blood. In addition to helping doctors figure out what is wrong, 
genetic testing is a must-have for anyone considering starting a family or 
with a history of the disease.
6.1.4  Treating Muscular Dystrophy
Currently, no treatment can reverse the effects of MD, but there are many 
things that can help with the physical difficulties and restrictions that come 
along with it. Something like [4] might be the case.
The goal of physical therapy is to keep muscles strong and flexible by 
performing a variety of exercises and stretches on a regular basis.
Through occupational therapy, your child will learn how to use their 
muscles in the most efficient way possible. In addition to providing therapy to 
their patients, therapists can also instruct patients on correctly using assistive 
devices such as wheelchairs, braces, and other similar devices.
People who have difficulty speaking because of weak muscles in their 
throat or face may benefit from speech therapy to improve their ability to 
communicate with others.
Respiratory therapy may be an option if your child is having difficulty 
breathing. They will either learn how to breathe more easily or buy equip­
ment to help them do so. Some of the symptoms may be alleviated by taking 
medication. DMD can be treated with a variety of medications, including 
eteplirsen (Exondys 51), golodirsen (Vyondys 53), and vitolarsen (Viltepso). 
People with a specific mutation in the gene responsible for DMD can receive 
injections of these medicines as a form of treatment. The use of these 

82  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
medications causes the body to produce more dystrophin, to be more precise. 
Have a discussion with your child’s doctor about any possible side effects.
Medications that can help treat epilepsy and stop muscle spasms.
Patients with heart issues may benefit from taking medication to lower 
their blood pressure. Medications are known as immunosuppressants slow 
down the immune system’s ability to damage muscle cells.
Your child’s breathing may improve, and muscle damage may be slowed 
if steroids like prednisone and deflazacort (Emflaza) are given early enough. 
They have the potential to cause serious harm, including bone fractures and 
an increased risk of illness.
Creatine is a naturally occurring molecule found in every body cell, 
including the brain and the heart. It is well known to help muscles get more 
energy and help people get more robust. Before giving your child any dietary 
supplements, make an appointment with your child’s primary care physician.
Some complications associated with MDs, such as heart problems and swal­
lowing difficulties, may be treated surgically. Researchers are always using clini­
cal trials to look for new possible treatments for MD. During these clinical tests, 
new drugs are looked at to see if they can treat patients and be given safely.
6.1.5  Common Muscular Dsytrophy
When it comes to muscle disease, the most common type of dystrophy is 
DMD [5]. Men are more likely to get the disease, despite it being possible 
for females to carry it and experience only mild symptoms. The progression 
of the disease is characterized by symptoms such as frequent falls, trouble 
getting out of bed, difficulty running and jumping, a waddling gait, and large 
calf muscles. Impairments in cognitive development and a slowed growth rate 
are also early indicators of the disease. Cerebral palsy is associated with an 
increased risk of falling, a common symptom.
Like Becker’s MD, DMD presents milder symptoms and progresses 
more slowly than Becker. Even in your 20s or 30s, you may not notice any 
symptoms until you are older. A chance exists for this to happen.
6.2  EARLY CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS OF MD
Imaging is an essential component of the diagnostic process for muscle dis­
eases because it gives the clinician additional information about the presence 
of the disease as well as the disease’s severity, extent, and activity.

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  83
Figure 6.1 shows the machine learning (ML) frameworks for muscular 
dystrophy diagnosis. The doctor may be unable to use the imaging modal­
ity that is most effective for diagnosing myopathies: MRI if you have a 
pacemaker or implant. Using muscle ultrasound to diagnose neuromuscular 
diseases has become increasingly common since it’s easy to use, lack of con­
traindications, and improved resolution for soft tissue structures have made 
it a valuable tool. Ultrasound technology advancements are to blame for this 
development. In myopathies, such as MD, an increase in echogenicity can be 
easily seen as an increase in connective tissue and fatty replacement. This has 
been linked to a decline in health-related quality of life and the progression 
of the illness. Ultrasound, on the other hand, is susceptible to biases intro­
duced by the operator as well as the interpreter. Ultrasound’s application is 
restricted to a more specialized market due to the technology’s reliance on 
changes in echo intensity. This makes comparing ultrasound results from dif­
ferent systems difficult. Some of the problems that have been identified could 
be solved using quantitative ultrasound and backscatter analysis.
Myositis is an immune-mediated inflammatory muscle disease that has 
been studied extensively. Dermatomyositis (DM) and polymyositis (PM) are fre­
quently effectively treated and cured by medication. Both conditions affect the 
proximal muscles, but only diabetes also affects the skin [6, 7]. Inclusion body 
myositis, also known as IBM, is a difficult-to-treat condition that primarily 
affects the quadriceps and extremity muscles. This condition results in severe 
muscle atrophy and fat replacement due to the inefficacy of conventional treat­
ments. Myositis can affect the muscles and the soft tissues surrounding them. 
The muscles and tissues surrounding the affected area may develop edema, 
fatty infiltration, subcutaneous necrosis, and even calcification as a direct result 
[8, 9]. This group faces a difficult challenge when correctly identifying and 
quantifying the pathology that can be seen on ultrasound in the various stages 
Muscle
MRI
Image
Database
Machine Learning
for Feature
Selection
Pretrained
Muscle MRI
Images with
Selected
Image Classiﬁers
and Functions
Dystrophy Classiﬁcation and
Diagnosis
FIGURE 6.1  ML frameworks for muscular dystrophy diagnosis.

84  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
and forms of the disease. This is especially true regarding changes that can be 
reversed by treatment. It appears that echo intensity measurements alone can­
not distinguish between the disease’s active phase and the presence of muscle 
inflammation and edema. According to an early ultrasound study, acute myosi­
tis was associated with lower echo intensities and increased muscle thickness.
In contrast, other studies on juvenile DM have demonstrated that effec­
tive treatment causes an acute increase in the muscle’s echo intensity before 
allowing it to return to normal. In contrast to the disease’s acute phase, chronic 
myositis is characterized by fatty replacement and fibrosis, both of which can 
cause excruciating pain. Chronic myositis has a significantly longer duration 
than acute myositis. Studies that IBM carried out show that the condition can 
be effectively differentiated from the disease when screening for it in muscles 
that are afflicted, such as the flexor digitorum profundus of the gastrocnemius.
Due to the diversity of pathologies and structures that myositis can affect, 
the diagnostic process for the disease may benefit from the extraction of mul­
tiple features or the analysis of the entire image. This was one of the many 
theories that were formalized after many hypotheses came before it. It is pos­
sible for there to be a “see-through” effect when there is edema, for instance, 
because there will be no perimysial echos. Even though the echo intensity has 
increased, it is still possible to see the bone beneath it. Among the possible 
manifestations of DM [10] are thickening of the fascia, inflammation of the 
subcutaneous tissue, and patchy involvement of the muscles. It may be easier 
to detect this type of structural change when examining the body’s structure 
as a whole, as opposed to a single muscle.
Recent research on computer-aided diagnostics (CAD) has led to the 
development of muscle evaluations that are both more accurate and more reli­
able [11] than previously available ones. An operator may not always be able 
to consistently leverage, detect, and quantitatively analyze image biomarkers 
and features with computer algorithms. New ML techniques, such as deep 
learning (DL) may be helpful in computer-assisted myopathy diagnosis.
A condensed glossary of terms used by numerous authors in this field 
and subsequent works. The Artificial Intelligence (AI) subfield of computer 
science aims to develop intelligent software and hardware for computers. ML 
is a subfield of AI that focuses on developing computer algorithms capable of 
concluding data using statistical analysis [12]. Commonly, a statistical model 
is developed by constructing a model based on a collection of training data 
and then working backward. In the future, statistical techniques such as clas­
sification and regression may be employed to analyze newly collected data 
and draw conclusions based on this model [13, 14]. “DL,” a subfield of ML, 
is distinguished from conventional ML by its reliance on neural networks, 
which are multilayered cascades of mathematical functions. This metric is 
what distinguishes DL from other ML strategies [15]. The network’s ability 

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  85
to perform computations depends on millions of parameters, all of which are 
automatically uncovered by the system through training data, which contains 
labels already assigned to the appropriate category (es). In DL, convolutional 
neural networks, also known as deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) 
[16], are widely used for image analysis. This method convolves the input 
image with a small number of reusable filters. This reduces the astronomi­
cally large number of network parameters, making them more manageable.
An image feature set pertinent to the current problem at hand is manually 
selected and computed initially. The combined feature sets are then used to 
train and test a classifier using traditional ML methods such as Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) [18] or Random Forests (RF) [17–20]. There are 20 of them 
available in total. Using these more traditional approaches to the design of engi­
neered features may result in a set of features that are either poorly selected 
or overly tailored to the training dataset. There is a possibility of either out­
come occurring. As a result, the accuracy and generalizability of the model’s 
predictions may remain unchanged. Conventional methods place an exces­
sive amount of reliance on the knowledge and experience of the algorithmic 
designer when selecting these features. The features generated by DL tech­
niques such as DCNNs [20] were neither designed nor selected by an engineer. 
These techniques instead generated these characteristics. DCNNs, are espe­
cially efficient at automatically learning image characteristics from data. As a 
result, DCNNs incorporate all processing pipeline stages into a single model, 
beginning with the most elementary and progressing to the most complex. This 
process involves the computation of features, the combination of features, and 
data classification at the very end. New technological and algorithmic advance­
ments have led to significant improvements in the use of DCNN methods for 
general-purpose image classification. These advancements have led to these 
improvements. This progress is a result of the increased precision that has been 
achieved. For instance, the entire image can now be classified with the same 
precision as a human hand. Previously, this was impossible.
Electromyography can be used in conjunction with other diagnos­
tic tools to determine whether or not a patient has muscular dystrophy. 
Electromyograms, also known as EMGs, are biomedical signals generated 
by muscle cells and characterized by an electrical potential. When these 
cells contract, an EMG is generated. EMG signals possess a low frequency 
(between 0 and 499 Hz) and a small amplitude compared to other types of 
signals. The EMG signal is predominantly comprised of frequencies between 
50 and 150 hertz. EMGs permit the acquisition of a great deal of information 
regarding the nervous system and the anatomical and psychological proper­
ties of the muscles. Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophy are, respec­
tively, two of the disease’s most prevalent forms. Early disease detection is 
essential for the overall effectiveness of the treatment plan. Using these data 

86  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
in future research could lead to the discovery of a treatment for the disorder 
as well as a better understanding of the disorder’s nature. Normal EMGs and 
abnormal EMGs tend to have waveforms that are very similar to each other, 
making it hard to tell the difference between them. Even though it is neces­
sary to do so in order to tell the difference between normal and abnormal 
EMG classes, the researcher is eager to process the signals. Even though it 
will take a lot of time and work, the researcher is eager to do it.
Due to its reliance on visual observation and the advice of experts, qualita­
tive EMG analysis is prone to produce inaccurate results. The qualitative EMG 
analysis provides no data that can be used to compare or categorize various 
EMG disorders. It has been hypothesized that computer algorithms inspired by 
EMG could provide a solution to this issue [22]. According to research, various 
diagnostic approaches, including classification schemes and extracted feature 
sets, can be used to identify muscular disorders. Among these are the conven­
tional bipolar EMG technique [21], linear and matrix electrode arrays [22], and 
various other classification techniques [23]. EMGs have been the subject of con­
siderable research. The motor frequency coefficient of variation (MFCV), the 
motor unit size (MU), the frequency spectrum, and the entropy are examples 
of parameters. EMG features were extracted using a wavelet transform (WT) in 
[21], and the EMG data were then classified using a variety of neural networks. 
In [24], the Time domain method was used to analyze and classify EMG signals. 
The authors of [25] propose utilizing autoregressive and wavelet neural networks 
to extract a variety of EMG features Three distinct approaches were utilised to 
simplify the classification of electromyographic data: support vector machines 
(SVMs), decision trees (DTs), and random forest neural networks (RFNNs) 
(RBFNs) [26, 27, 28]. The paper [29] analyses an EMG signal using extracted 
parametric power spectral and WT features. A neuro-fuzzy classifier is utilized 
for this analysis. The classification accuracy of each of these suggested methods 
ranges from 72 percent to 86 percent. The only way to significantly improve 
classification accuracy is to conduct exhaustive research on the topic. The accu­
racy of this study’s findings should be greater than ninety percent.
6.3  EA FOR DIAGNOSING 
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY
Myopathy is a disease that exclusively impacts the muscles and the tissues 
that are responsible for their support. It does not move to other body areas and 
does not spread. Myopathic symptoms include muscle weakness, stiffness, 
cramping, and spasms, as well as muscle dysfunction, cramping, and spasms. 

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  87
Other myopathic symptoms include muscle dysfunction, cramping, and 
spasms. However, based solely on a person’s symptoms, it can be extremely 
challenging to diagnose myopathy [13]. The study of the electrical signals 
that are sent by the nervous system is called electromyography. Both invasive 
and non-invasive methods can be used to measure electromyographic signals. 
On the other hand, if you only look at the EMG signals, you won’t be able 
to figure out what is wrong because normal and abnormal signals may have 
the same appearance. As a result, extracting helpful and informative features 
from EMG signals is necessary to develop diagnostic tools and systems. This 
is essential for the development of these tools and systems. In order to com­
plete the project, you must do this.
Extracting and selecting variable feature vectors and constructing clas­
sifier models are necessary to distinguish between normal and abnormal 
EMG signals. Standard EMG signals can only be distinguished from abnor­
mal signals in this manner. There are three ways to extract biological sig­
nals’ frequency, time, and frequency-time features, which can be done in 
both standard and abnormal circumstances. In order to accurately analyze 
an EMG signal, factors other than frequency and time must be considered. 
Thus, characteristics that consider both time and frequency are referred to as 
time-frequency characteristics.
Genetic algorithm (GA)-based ML and DL framework for dystrophy 
classification is shown in Figure 6.2. Time-frequency transformation meth­
ods [25] can be used to extract various time-frequency features from EMG 
signals. These characteristics can be used to monitor muscle activity. The 
Muscle
ECG recordings of Muscle
Muscle ECG
database with of
Muscle Dystrophy
biased Patients  
GA based Feature
Selection and
Extraction  
ML and DL based
Classiﬁers and
Algorithms 
Muscle
Dystrophy
Detection and
Classiﬁcation
FIGURE 6.2  GA-based ML and DL framework for dystrophy classification.

88  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
time-frequency properties of signals must be known in order to analyze them. 
The reason for this is that as time passes, the signal’s frequency changes. 
When creating automated diagnostic tools, we must distinguish between nor­
mal and abnormal EMG signals. A classifier model had to be built, and the 
appropriate feature subsets had to be acquired in order to distinguish between 
normal and abnormal signals. Researchers have used a variety of methods, 
such as Stockwell, Synchro-Extracting, Wigner–Ville, and Short-Time Fourier 
Transform, to extract the time-frequency characteristics of EMG signals from 
healthy people and people with ALS. EMG signals from both healthy and ALS 
patients were analyzed using these methods.
The GA [31] was utilized to narrow the list down to the 15 most critical 
characteristics. Using three distinct classification models for healthy individ­
uals and ALS patients, we examined the statistical significance of a few of 
these characteristics (one for each). In addition to the GA-selected features, 
we also used artificial neural networks to build classifiers for the extracted 
transformed time-frequency features. EMG classifiers can be constructed uti­
lizing features selected by a genetic algorithm based on the study’s results.
In order to record normal, myopathy, and ALS, concentric needle elec­
trodes are typically utilized for recording (EM) signals. These EMG signals 
can be located in an open database of EMGs. Replaying these signals can 
be done with the help of an EMG machine. The adopted EMG signals were 
recorded at a sampling rate, and their source was the electromyographic 
activity that was produced by the brachial biceps muscles. These values will 
be obtained following a database search containing EMG signal informa­
tion for both standard and abnormal readings. Time-frequency EMG images 
of ordinary, myopathic, and ALS patients have been made in many studies. 
These signals come from more than one place. These signals were changed 
by Stockwell, Wigner–Ville, the short-time Fourier transform, and the syn­
chro-extracting transform. The investigation used different ways to turn 
one-dimensional time series into two-dimensional time-frequency images. 
Gray-level co-occurrence matrices (GLCM) help choose surface features 
from time-frequency images. The generalized least squares correspondence 
method looks at how two pixels with different distances, directions, and levels 
of variation are related to each other in space [30]. This method gets data from 
a grayscale image. EMG signals from people with normal EMG, ALS, and 
myopathy were used to make typical EMG signal time-frequency images and a 
vector of the extracted features. These pictures were produced by applying four 
different image transformation techniques simultaneously. Time-frequency 
images will be used to extract a large number of valuable features that can be 
used to analyze and classify normal, myopathic, and ALS EMG signals. These 
features will be extracted using a technique called feature extraction. These 
factors are going to be considered in the analysis. The genetic algorithm will 

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  89
select a subset of those features that contain useful information from all oth­
ers to solve the problem. This subset will be chosen at random. In the future, 
machine learning and deep learning classifiers will be created using the most 
informative features and extracted time-frequency features to differentiate 
between normal, myopathic, and ALS cases. These classifiers will use the most 
informative features and extracted time-frequency features.
The authors [32] came up with a method to determine whether or not a 
person has DMD by combining a Raman hyperspectroscopic analysis of blood 
serum with a more sophisticated statistical analysis. This created a test that could 
determine whether or not a person has DMD. The combination was undertaken 
to achieve more precise results. A pattern-finding algorithm known as PLSA 
was applied to the serum spectral data of mice with DMD as well as mice with­
out the condition. This was done in order to make the patterns more visible 
(MDX). According to the findings of the cross-validation, diseased spectra can 
be identified with a sensitivity of 95.2 percent and a specificity of 94.6 percent.
The researchers [33] used genetic programming (GP) to generate a list of 
potential adjustments that could be made to the space occupied by grayscale 
images. The term “transform-based evolvable feature” (TEF) was coined to 
describe their concept within the business world context. A moment value is 
assigned to an image that has been GP-transformed to be utilized in a classifi­
cation activity. Because of this, it will be possible to use the image more pre­
cisely. The TEF makes it possible to search and improve the entire image space, 
which was impossible with many of the methods that came before it. These 
other methodologies were developed in the past, before the TEF. TEFs are con­
structed through the utilization of Cartesian GP, and then they are applied to a 
medical image classification task, specifically the detection of inclusions in cell 
images that indicate MD. This particular task focuses on the detection of inclu­
sions in cell images. The task at hand is a medical image classification task.
Researchers from [34] looked into the possibility of using next-gener­
ation sequencing, also known as NGS, to improve diagnostics for patients 
whose samples lacked specific molecular characterization. Hereditary myop­
athies were the primary focus of this particular research. Individualized NGS 
may benefit patients with early-onset myopathies and MDs, such as colla­
gen VI-related myopathy and congenital myasthenia syndromes. NGS can 
complete sequencing tasks in days or weeks, while traditional methods take 
months or years. Because of this, the care that these patients receive will be of 
a higher standard. In spite of this, a significant portion of the population that 
we were studying did not have a molecular diagnosis. This could be because 
NGS has inherent limitations in its ability to detect specific types of muta­
tions, or it could be because additional genes responsible for neuromuscular 
disorders have not yet been identified. Both of these possibilities are possible. 
The results could go either way in both of these scenarios.

90  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
A discussion on GP as a diagnostic tool for muscular disorders can be 
found in [35]. The utilization of biosignals was a topic of discussion. The 
electrical activity that is produced by particular cells, such as those found 
in the heart, the nervous system, and the muscles, is an important aspect of 
a biosignal. Because it provides information on the flow of data through the 
nervous system and the activation of various muscles as a result, the study 
of muscle signals is essential for understanding the function of the system. 
This is the case for the reasons that were discussed earlier. The abnormal 
electrical activity that is characteristic of neuropathies, MDs, and sclerosis 
can all be detected by this signal. Other potential uses for this signal include 
control systems for robotics, prosthetics, and even telemedicine, to name just 
a few of the many possible applications. The signals produced by electro­
myography are characterized as chaotic, non-stationary, and non-linear. As 
a direct consequence, the most recent generation of EMG pattern recogni­
tion systems incorporates modules for preprocessing, segmentation, feature 
extraction, dimensionality reduction, classification, and data control [36]. It is 
essential to locate a pattern that accounts for the entirety of the signal rather 
than focusing on the signal’s data points.
The early onset of these conditions, which are collectively referred to as 
CMDs, as well as the presence of histological characteristics that are sugges­
tive of a dystrophic process is what set them apart from other conditions. Due 
to the clinical and genetic heterogeneity that exists within the group that is 
comprised of congenital MDs, it is becoming increasingly difficult to obtain 
an accurate genetic diagnosis, even in this day and age when NGS technol­
ogy is available. In order to arrive at an accurate molecular diagnosis, the 
researchers investigated the diagnostic characteristics, differential diagnostic 
considerations, and available diagnostic tools for each of the different CMD 
subtypes. This allowed the researchers to arrive at an accurate molecular 
diagnosis. After that, they offered an instruction manual on how to use these 
resources methodically.
6.4  CONCLUSION
Researchers had to rely heavily on clinical data and observations, which 
represented a significant barrier, in order to classify and predict MD using 
EMG signals and imaging. This presented a challenge for the research­
ers. The researchers were faced with a difficult task as a result of this. 
Historically, EMG datasets were categorized using machine learning or deep 
learning algorithms, depending on whether they were being represented in 

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  91
the frequency or time domain. The conventional method does not result 
in accurate classification while also being efficient concerning both time 
and labor. It has been found that EA algorithms are a robust optimization 
method that can be utilized in selecting critical diagnostic features for MD. 
This discovery came about as a result of the fact that EA algorithms are 
practical. In this chapter, various electromyographic signals and imaging 
of the muscles were utilized to investigate the various genetic approaches 
to diagnosing MD.
REFERENCES
1.  Narasimhaiah, D., Uppin, M. S., & Ranganath, P. (2022). Genetics and muscle 
pathology in the diagnosis of muscular dystrophies: An update. Indian Journal of 
Pathology and Microbiology, 65(5), 259.
2.  Mohamadian, M., Rastegar, M., Pasamanesh, N., Ghadiri, A., Ghandil, P., & 
Naseri, M. (2021). Clinical and molecular spectrum of muscular dystrophies 
(MDs) with intellectual disability (ID): A comprehensive overview. Journal of 
Molecular Neuroscience, 72, 9–23.
3.  Bădilă, E., Lungu, I. I., Grumezescu, A. M., & Scafa Udriște, A. (2021). Diagnosis 
of cardiac abnormalities in muscular dystrophies. Medicina, 57(5), 488.
4.  Roy, B., & Griggs, R. (2021). Advances in treatments in muscular dystrophies and 
motor neuron disorders. Neurologic Clinics, 39(1), 87–112.
5.  Fortunato, F., Rossi, R., Falzarano, M. S., & Ferlini, A. (2021). Innovative 
therapeutic approaches for duchenne muscular dystrophy. Journal of Clinical 
Medicine, 10(4), 820.
6.  Aivazoglou, L. U., Guimarães, J. B., Link, T. M., Costa, M. A. F., Cardoso, F. N., 
de Mattos Lombardi Badia, B. … & da Rocha Corrêa Fernandes, A. (2021). MR 
imaging of inherited myopathies: a review and proposal of imaging algorithms. 
European Radiology, 31(11), 8498–8512.
7.  Pino, M. G., Rich, K. A., & Kolb, S. J. (2021). Update on biomarkers in spinal 
muscular atrophy. Biomarker Insights, 16, 11772719211035643.
8.  Alfano, L. N., Focht Garand, K. L., Malandraki, G. A., Salam, S., Machado, P. 
M., & Dimachkie, M. M. (2022). Measuring change in inclusion body myositis: 
Clinical assessments versus imaging. Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology, 
40(2), 404–413.
9.  Stock, M. S., & Thompson, B. J. (2021). Echo intensity as an indicator of skel­
etal muscle quality: Applications, methodology, and future directions. European 
Journal of Applied Physiology, 121(2), 369–380.
10.  Wijntjes, J., & van Alfen, N. (2021). Muscle ultrasound: Present state and future 
opportunities. Muscle and Nerve, 63(4), 455–466.
11.  Bazaga, A., Roldán, M., Badosa, C., Jiménez-Mallebrera, C., & Porta, J. M. 
(2019). A convolutional neural network for the automatic diagnosis of collagen 
VI-related muscular dystrophies. Applied Soft Computing, 85, 105772.

92  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
12.  Bowden, S. A., Connolly, A. M., Kinnett, K., & Zeitler, P. S. (2019). Management 
of adrenal insufficiency risk after long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy: Clinical practice recommendations. Journal of 
Neuromuscular Diseases, 6(1), 31–41.
13.  Cai, J., Xing, F., Batra, A., Liu, F., Walter, G. A., Vandenborne, K. … & Yang, 
L. (2019). Texture analysis for muscular dystrophy classification in MRI with 
improved class activation mapping. Pattern Recognition, 86, 368–375.
14.  Crisafulli, S., Sultana, J., Fontana, A., Salvo, F., Messina, S., & Trifirò, G. (2020). 
Global epidemiology of Duchenne muscular dystrophy: An updated systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, 15(1), 1–20.
15.  Ramli, A. A., Zhang, H., Hou, J., Liu, R., Liu, X., Nicorici, A. … & Henricson, 
E. (2021). Gait characterization in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) using 
a single-sensor accelerometer: Classical machine learning and deep learning 
approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.06295.
16.  Li, Y., Yang, Z., Wang, Y., Cao, X., & Xu, X. (2019). A neural network approach 
to analyze cross-sections of muscle fibers in pathological images. Computers in 
Biology and Medicine, 104, 97–104.
17.  Shin, Y., Yang, J., Lee, Y. H., & Kim, S. (2021). Artificial intelligence in musculo­
skeletal ultrasound imaging. Ultrasonography, 40(1), 30.
18.  Kehri, V., & Awale, R. N. (2018). Emg signal analysis for diagnosis of muscular 
dystrophy using wavelet transform, svm and ann. Biomedical and Pharmacology 
Journal, 11(3), 1583–1591.
19.  Alfano, L. N., & Mozaffar, T. (2021). Random forest: Random results or mean­
ingful insights for patients with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy? Brain, 
144(11), 3288–3290.
20.  Konda, A., Crump, K., Podlisny, D., Meyer, C. H., Blemker, S. S., Hart, J. & 
Feng, X. (2018). Fully automatic segmentation of all lower body muscles from 
high resolution MRI using a two-step DCNN model. Proceedings of 26th Annual 
Meeting ISMRM, Paris, France, 1398.
21.  Nizamis, K., Rijken, N. H., Van Middelaar, R., Neto, J., Koopman, B. F., & Sartori, 
M. (2020). Characterization of forearm muscle activation in duchenne muscular 
dystrophy via high-density electromyography: A case study on the implications 
for myoelectric control. Frontiers in Neurology, 11, 231.
22.  Rinaldi, M., Petrarca, M., Romano, A., Vasco, G., D’Anna, C., Schmid, M. … & 
Conforto, S. (2019, July). EMG-based indicators of muscular co-activation during 
gait in children with duchenne muscular dystrophy. In 2019 41st Annual inter­
national conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(EMBC) (pp. 3845–3848). Berlin, Germany: IEEE.
23.  Heller, S. A., Shih, R., Kalra, R., & Kang, P. B. (2020). Emery-Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy. Muscle & Nerve, 61(4), 436–448.
24.  Askarinejad, S. E., Nazari, M. A., & Borachalou, S. R. (2018, March). 
Experimental detection of muscle atrophy initiation Using sEMG signals. In 
2018 IEEE 4th Middle East Conference on Biomedical Engineering (MECBME) 
(pp. 34–38). Tunisia, Africa: IEEE.
25.  Liu, Z., Wang, X. A., Su, M., & Le, L. (2019). Research on rehabilitation training 
bed with action prediction based on NARX neural network. International Journal 
of Imaging Systems and Technology, 29(4), 539–546.

6  •  Muscular Dystrophy  93
26.  Toledo-Pérez, D. C., Rodríguez-Reséndiz, J., Gómez-Loenzo, R. A., & Jauregui-
Correa, J. C. (2019). Support vector machine-based EMG signal classification 
techniques: a review. Applied Sciences, 9(20), 4402.
27.  Altan, E., Pehlivan, K., & Kaplanoğlu, E. (2019, April). Comparison of EMG 
based finger motion classification algorithms. In 2019 27th Signal Processing and 
Communications Applications Conference (SIU) (pp. 1–4). Sivas, Turkey: IEEE.
28.  Lv, Z., Xiao, F., Wu, Z., Liu, Z., & Wang, Y. (2021). Hand gestures recognition 
from surface electromyogram signal based on self-organizing mapping and radial 
basis function network. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 68, 102629.
29.  Shanmuganathan, V., Yesudhas, H. R., Khan, M. S., Khari, M., & Gandomi, A. H. 
(2020). R-CNN and wavelet feature extraction for hand gesture recognition with 
EMG signals. Neural Computing and Applications, 32(21), 16723–16736.
30.  Verhaart, I. E., & Aartsma-Rus, A. (2019). Therapeutic developments for 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Nature Reviews Neurology, 15(7), 373–386.
31.  Khan, M. U., Aziz, S., Bilal, M., & Aamir, M. B. (2019, August). Classification 
of EMG signals for assessment of neuromuscular disorder using empirical mode 
decomposition and logistic regression. In 2019 International Conference on 
Applied and Engineering Mathematics (ICAEM) (pp. 237–243). Taxila, Pakistan: 
IEEE.
32.  Ambikapathy, B., Kirshnamurthy, K., & Venkatesan, R. (2021). Assessment of 
electromyograms using genetic algorithm and artificial neural networks. Evol. 
Intel. 14, 261–271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12065-018-0174-0
33.  Ralbovsky, N. M., Dey, P., Galfano, A & Dey, B. K. (2020). Diagnosis of a model 
of Duchenne muscular dystrophy in blood serum of mdx mice using raman hyper­
spectroscopy. Sci Rep, 10, 11734. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-68598-8
34.  Kowaliw, W., Banzhaf, N., Kharma, S., & Harding. (2009). Evolving novel 
image features using genetic programming-based image transforms. 2009 IEEE 
Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 2502–2507. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CEC.2009.4983255.
35.  Chae, J. H., Vasta, V., Cho, A., Lim, B. C., Zhang, Q., Eun, S. H. … & Hahn, S. H. 
(2015). Utility of next generation sequencing in genetic diagnosis of early onset 
neuromuscular disorders. Journal of Medical Genetics, 52(3), 208–216.
36.  Aviles, M., Sanchez-Reyes, L.-M., & Toledo-Pérez, D. C., (2021). A novel meth­
odology to classify myoelectric signals using genetic algorithms and support vec­
tor machines. 2021 XVII International Engineering Congress (CONIIN), pp. 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CONIIN54356.2021.9634836.


95
DOI: 10.1201/9781003254874-7
7
Tumor 
Prediction 
and 
Classification
7.1  INTRODUCTION
In the medical community, the term “cancer” describes a wide range of dis­
eases characterized by the uncontrollable division of abnormal cells and the 
ability to invade and destroy normal body tissue. In addition, cancer can 
develop in several different locations throughout the body. Metastasis, or 
the spreading of cancer to other body parts, is possible. According to the 
World Health Organization (WHO), cancer is the second leading cause of 
death worldwide. Many types of cancer now have higher survival rates due 
to advancements in cancer screening, treatment, and prevention. Cells in the 
human body grow in a predictable pattern under the guidance of a complex 
regulatory system. A lump or tumor is formed when a group of cells sud­
denly and uncontrollably begin to multiply. This process characterizes can­
cer. There is a risk that a tumor will spread to other parts of the body if it 
continues to grow out of control [1]. Every cell in the body is associated with 
a fixed life span, after which it dies naturally, which is termed as apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a process by which a cell receives an instruction to die which is 
thereafter replaced by a newer cell that functions comparatively in a better 
manner [2]. The cancerous cells are ones that lack the component needed 
to stop the whole process of cell division and death, making them carry on 
with their division activity for a prolonged lifetime. These tissues and cells 
accumulated in the body take the form of body outgrowths referred to as 

96  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
lumps that absorb the nutrients and oxygen, which are meant for other cells. 
Cancerous cells have the potential to form tumors, are capable of destroying 
the immune system, and may cause changes that stop the body from function­
ing normally.
There are numerous methods of treating cancer, such as chemotherapy, 
immunotherapy, radiation therapy, stem-cell transmission, and surgery. Apart 
from these, there are other disease-specific treatments that may be adopted 
with other therapies in combination, in order to maximize the effect on the 
cancer cells. The doctors usually prescribe the treatment depending on the 
stage of the cancer along with the person’s overall health.
The cancer cells begin at one part, spread out to other parts with time, 
affecting the whole body gradually, via lymph nodes i.e. the cluster of immu­
nization cells located all over the body. The spreading of cancer cells to other 
parts is medically termed as metastasis, which can be prevented by early 
treatment, making the need of early cancer detection all the more vital as a 
contribution to improve the cancer survival rate all over the world. This chap­
ter discusses different facets of cancer detection, followed by various evo­
lutionary intelligence algorithms that support or claim to facilitate an early 
detection of cancer of various kinds.
7.2  TUMOR TYPES
A tumor is a mass or group of abnormal cells that can form inside the body. 
Even if you have a tumor, that does not mean you have cancer. Many kinds 
of tumors are harmless (not cancerous). Tumors can start growing in any part 
of the body. They might affect the bones, skin, tissues, glands, and organs. 
Neoplasm is another word for a tumor. A tumor can be put into one of three 
different groups [3].
7.2.1  Carcinogenic
Tumors that are malignant or cancerous can spread to nearby tissue, glands, 
and other body parts. This is called metastasis. The new tumors have grown 
from metastases. Malignant tumors may come back in a patient after treat­
ment. These tumors could endanger a person’s life.
Malignant tumors have cells that multiply out of control and can spread 
locally or to other body parts. Malignant tumors are cancerous (i.e., they 
invade other sites). They could get to faraway places by going through the 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  97
bloodstream or the lymphatic system. Metastasis is the name for this process. 
Any part of the body can show signs of metastasis, but the liver, lungs, brain, 
and bones are the most common places for this to happen [4].
Treatment is needed to stop the malignant tumor from spreading. 
Surgery, followed by either chemotherapy or radiation therapy, is the best 
way to treat cancers in their early stages. If cancer has spread to other body 
parts, the best treatment will probably be one that works throughout the body, 
like chemotherapy or immunotherapy.
7.2.2  Noncancerous
Tumors that are not cancerous and rarely risk the patient’s life are called 
benign. They are localized, meaning they usually do not affect nearby tissue 
and do not spread to other body parts. Many tumors are harmless and do not 
need to be treated. On the other hand, some benign tumors can put pressure 
on other parts of the body and need medical help.
Benign tumors don’t spread to other parts of the body and stay in the 
place where they started. When cancerous tumors grow, they spread to other 
parts of the body. They don’t move to other buildings or parts of the body 
outside of the affected area. Tumors that are not harmful usually grow slowly 
and have precise edges.
Most of the time, benign tumors do not cause any harm. However, 
they can get big and press on nearby structures, which can be painful 
and cause other health problems. For example, a sizeable benign lung 
tumor can pressure the trachea (also called the windpipe), making breath­
ing hard. Because of this, it needs to be taken out by surgery right away. 
Benign tumors rarely come back after surgery is done to remove them. 
Common tumors that are not cancerous include fibroids in the uterus and 
lipomas on the skin.
Some types of benign tumors can change into cancerous tumors. 
These are carefully watched and may need to be taken out surgically in 
the future. For example, colon polyps, just another name for a group of 
abnormal cells, can turn into cancer and are usually removed through 
surgery [5].
7.2.3  Precancerous
Premalignant cells are cells that have not yet become cancer. They are 
abnormal cells that could turn into cancer cells, but they do not invade or 
spread on their own. If these non-cancerous tumors are not treated, they 

98  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
could become cancerous ones. Sometimes it can be hard to understand what 
precancerous cells are and whether or not they will turn into cancer. This 
is because there is no clear answer to the question. Most of the time, cells 
do not go from being normal on day one to becoming precancerous on day 
two and then cancerous on day three. Usually, this process takes more than 
three days.
It’s important to say again that precancerous cells are not the same 
as cancer cells. This means that if they are left alone and not treated, they 
won’t spread to other body parts. They are just abnormal cells that, if given 
enough time, might change in ways that turn them into cancer cells. If the 
cells are killed before turning into cancer cells, the disease should be utterly 
curable, at least in theory. Still, not all cells that could become cancerous 
need to be killed immediately. Another thing that confuses people is that 
many tumors have cancer cells and cells that are getting ready to become 
cancer in the same tissue. For example, some people with breast cancer 
have cancer cells in a tumor, but there may also be precancerous cells in 
other parts of the breasts or even in the tumor itself [6]. There are also pre­
cancerous cells in the tumor.
7.3  CARCINOMA CLASSIFICATION
For example, mucous membranes and gastrointestinal tracts are epithe­
lial tissues, which is where this occurs. According to the National Cancer 
Institute, carcinomas make up between 80 percent and 90 percent of all 
cancer cases.
In the body’s bone marrow, cancer called leukemia develops, which is 
responsible for producing blood cells. The thymus, tonsils, and spleen are 
all part of the lymphatic system, where lymphomas start. The immune sys­
tem and hormones are intertwined with the operation of this system. There 
are two main categories of mixed cancer: those that affect both normal and 
cancerous cells and those that simultaneously affect both normal and cancer­
ous cells. Plasma cells in the body’s circulatory system begin to mutate, and 
myeloma is the most common form of the disease.
Bones, muscle, fat, and cartilage can all be affected by sarcomas, which 
originate in connective tissue and spread to other tissues and organs. Younger 
people are more likely to develop sarcomas than older people. A doctor can 
distinguish one cancer from another based on the appearance of cancer cells. 
Doctors benefit from a thorough understanding of the various types of cancer 
when developing a treatment plan [6].

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  99
7.3.1  Lung Carcinoma
Lung carcinoma is the world’s third most common type of cancer, accounting 
for approximately 3 percent of all cases. Is one of the most invasive forms of 
cancer, spreading to other parts of the body quickly and frequently. In both 
sexes, it is the most deadly form of cancer. Around 2.21 million people will 
be affected by lung carcinoma in the world by 2020, according to the WHO. 
It is the leading cause of cancer-related death yearly, killing more people than 
any other single factor. Long-term smoking is linked to an increased risk of 
developing lung cancer and a higher mortality rate from the disease. There 
may be a link between a person’s ability to repair DNA damage and their risk 
of developing lung cancer from smoking, as well as gene-enzyme interactions 
that influence the activation or detoxification of carcinogens and the forma­
tion of DNA adducts. In addition, the level of DNA adduct formation may 
influence an individual’s susceptibility. A diverse disease, lung carcinoma 
can originate in many places within the bronchial tree. Because of this, the 
symptoms and signs of lung carcinoma can vary greatly depending on the dis­
ease’s anatomical location. If a patient is diagnosed with stage III or stage IV 
of the disease, he or she is 70 percent likely to survive.
There are approximately 25–30 percent of all lung cancers that are 
SQCLCs. These cancers usually begin in the main bronchi and progress to 
the carina. Forty percent of all lung cancers originate in the periphery of the 
bronchi, where they are known as adenocarcinomas (AdenoCA). Lobar atel­
ectasis and pneumonitis are two hallmarks of the progression of AdenoCAs. 
Interalveolar connections between the alveoli and the rest of the body are 
the primary means by which adenocarcinoma (AIS) and minimally invasive 
adenocarcinoma (MIA) spread from alveoli to the rest of the body. When 
complete resection is performed, patients with an AIS or MIA designation 
are considered to be in excellent health.
A visual representation of the non-small lung cancer staging system 
(NSCLC). To be clear, squamous and adenocarcinoma originate in the 
main and lobar bronchi, respectively, while adenocarcinomas originate in 
the peripheral lung tissue and the epithelial cells of the segmental bronchi, 
respectively. For non-small cell lung cancers in stage IV, the rate of distant 
metastasis to non-thoracic organs is shown. There is a correlation between 
the percentage of patients with squamous cell lung cancers and those with 
adenocarcinomas who have metastasized.
In contrast to other types of cancer, small cell lung cancers (SCLC) orig­
inate from the hormone-producing cells of the lung and typically present as 
central mediastinal tumors. All lung cancers, including SCLC, account for 
about 15 percent of all cases. Approximately 10–15 percent of all lung cancer 

100  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
cases are SCLC, a subtype of the disease. In contrast to small cell anaplas­
tic carcinomas, large cell anaplastic carcinomas, or NSCLC NOS, are more 
proximal in location and have a tendency to invade the mediastinum and its 
structures early on. This is because NSCLC-NOS, are less likely to invade 
the bronchial tree.
NSCLC-NOS accounts for about 10 percent of all NSCLC cases, and 
like SCLC, it spreads rapidly and is fatally so. In the superior sulcus, the 
pancoast cancer begins and then spreads throughout the body by invading 
adjacent structures. Tumors of the lungs can become multifocal, spread to the 
opposite lung, or even spread to the opposite side, depending on where they 
first appeared (referred to as “reverse metastasis” in this context) (M1). When 
lymph nodes in the mediastinum are compressed, it can result in esophageal 
compression and difficulty swallowing, venous compression and congestion 
due to collateral circulation, or tracheal compression. Mediastinum com­
pression is always linked to advanced lymph node involvement. Advanced 
lymph node involvement is almost always present when the mediastinum is 
compressed. The presence of metastatic disease in distant organs such as 
the liver, brain, or bone can be detected long before a primary lung lesion is 
discovered [7].
7.3.2  Blood Carcinoma
Many types of blood cancers can affect the blood cells and the “spongy” bone 
marrow that produces blood cells. This type of cancer alters the function and 
behavior of blood cells. Human blood cells can be classified into three types [9]. 
White blood cells play a critical role in the body’s ability to fight off infection. 
Red blood cells’ job is to transport oxygen throughout your body and carry 
carbon dioxide to your lungs, where it is exhaled. Platelets aid in the forma­
tion of blood clots when you are injured. One of the most common forms of 
blood cancer is acute myeloid leukemia [8].
7.3.2.1  Multiple myeloma
In the case of this type of cancer, your bone marrow, and lymphatic system 
produce blood cells that don’t function properly. Depending on the type of 
white blood cell, they all have a different effect on them.
7.3.2.2  Leukemia
In patients with leukemia, the production of white blood cells is abnormally 
high, making them unable to fight off infections. The type of white blood 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  101
cell affected and the rate at which the disease progresses (acute vs. chronic) 
distinguish the four different subtypes of leukemia [9, 10].
•	 Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL): This process is initiated by 
lymphocytes, white blood cells in the bone marrow. A high num­
ber of lymphocytes produced by people with ALL can inhibit the 
production of healthy white blood cells. If you don’t get treatment, 
ALL can get worse very fast.
•	 It’s the most common type of childhood cancer. Adults can also 
get ALL, despite the fact that it is more common in children 
between the ages of 3 and 5.
•	 Acute leukemia of the blood (AML): These cells, which generally 
mature into white blood cells, red blood cells, or platelets, are at 
the root of this condition. In patients with AML, the incidence of 
all three types of healthy blood cells is decreased. Rapidly pro­
gresses this form of leukemia. There is a higher incidence of AML 
in people 65 and older. Men are more susceptible than women to 
this condition.
•	 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL): Adults are more likely to 
be diagnosed with this type of leukemia than any other subtype. 
It begins in the bone marrow lymphocytes, like ALL, but it pro­
gresses more slowly. People with CLL typically don’t show any 
symptoms until years after they’ve already been diagnosed.
•	 Cancerous lymphoma (CLL) is most commonly found in people 
in their 70s and older. In addition to having a history of blood 
cancer in your family, exposure to chemicals such as weed­
killers and insecticides can raise your risk of developing the 
disease.
For those with a chronic form of myeloid leukemia (CML). Similar to AML, 
this type of blood cancer begins in myeloid cells. However, the growth of 
abnormal cells is slow.
•	 Men are more likely than women to be diagnosed with CML. 
Adults are the most common victims, but children of any age can 
fall prey to its snares.
7.3.2.3  Lymphoma
This is a cancerous disease that affects the lymphatic system. Within this 
network of blood vessels are your lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus gland. 
White blood cells are stored in the vessels and circulated throughout the body 

102  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
to help fight infection. Lymphoma begins in white blood cells, which are also 
known as lymphocytes. In terms of lymphoma, there are two main categories, 
which are as follows: B lymphocytes, or simply B cells, are the immune cells 
that give rise to Hodgkin’s lymphoma [11]. They are proteins made by these 
cells that protect the body from pathogens. Antibodies are a type of anti­
body. Reed-Sternberg cells are large lymphocytes found in the lymph nodes 
of people with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Non-lymphoma A type of immune 
cell known as a T cell can also be a source of Hodgkin’s disease. Non-
lymphoma Hodgkin’s is far more common than Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 
the general population.
Each type has a few distinct subtypes that can be further broken down. 
Depending on how cancer behaves and where it first manifests itself in the 
body, a subtype can be assigned to it. Individuals with weakened immune 
systems are more likely to develop lymphoma. In addition, having Epstein-
Barr virus, HIV, or Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection increases your 
risk. A lymphoma diagnosis is most commonly made in people ages 15 to 35 
(as well as those ages 50 and older).
7.3.2.4  Myeloma
The bone marrow’s plasma cells are affected by this disease. In the body, 
antibodies are produced by plasma cells, a type of white blood cell. The 
bone marrow is filled with cancerous cells from the myeloma virus. Bones 
can be damaged and they can obstruct healthy blood cells. Additionally, 
the antibodies produced by these cells are ineffective in protecting the 
body against infection. It’s called multiple myeloma because it can spread 
to multiple parts of your bone marrow, and that’s where the name comes 
from. Men of African-American descent are more likely than men of any 
other race or ethnicity to develop the disease, especially after the age 
of 50.
7.3.3  Colon Carcinoma
The cancer can spread to the colon when the large intestine becomes infected. 
The colon is located at the very end of the digestive system, at the furthest 
point from the mouth. This cancer is more common in the elderly, despite the 
fact that it can affect anyone at any time. Polyps, which are noncancerous 
clusters of cells found in the lining of the colon, are commonly thought to be 
the origin of the problem. If these polyps are left untreated, they may develop 
into colon cancer. Potentially small polyps may have few or no symptoms. 
Colon cancer risk can be reduced through routine screening tests, which can 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  103
detect polyps and remove them before they turn into cancerous tumors. Colon 
cancer can be controlled and kept under control with a variety of treatments, 
including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and 
immunotherapy [12].
Colorectal cancer, a term that combines the terms “colon cancer” and 
“rectal cancer,” refers to cancer that begins in the rectum. Colon cancer is 
sometimes referred to as cancer of the colon. Most cases of colon cancer 
are caused by genetic mutations, which alter the DNA of healthy cells in 
the intestine. A cell’s DNA contains a set of instructions that tell it what it 
should be doing at any given time. To keep your body functioning normally, 
healthy cells must grow and divide in a regulated manner. The cell will 
continue to divide even though it doesn’t need any new cells if its DNA is 
damaged and it develops cancer. As the cells begin to gather, a tumor will 
form. The cancer cells can spread to other tissues over time, causing their 
destruction. Additional to that, cancerous cells can spread throughout the 
body and form deposits in new locations, which is known as metastasis 
(metastasis) [13].
7.3.4  Bone Cancer
Bone cancer occurs when abnormal bone cells proliferate unchecked. Normal 
bone tissue is destroyed. One of your bones may be the source of the disease, 
or it may spread there from elsewhere in your body (called metastasis). Bone 
cancer is a rare occurrence. There are a large number of benign tumors that 
form in bones, which means that they are not cancerous and do not spread to 
other areas of the body. But they still have the potential to cause bone fragil­
ity, which can lead to fractures and more serious health problems. In terms of 
benign bone tumors, there are a few main categories of tumors that fall into 
this category:
Osteochondroma is the most common name for this condition. The 
majority of those affected are under the age of twenty. The leg is the 
most common site of a giant cell tumor. These can also become cancer­
ous in extremely rare circumstances. People in their twenties and thirties 
are most likely to develop osteoid osteoma, which affects the long bones. 
Osteoblastoma is a relatively rare tumor that typically affects young adults 
and grows in the spine and long bones. It is most commonly found in the 
spine.
•	 Hands and feet are the most common sites where enchondroma 
appears. In many cases, there are no symptoms at all. The most 
common type of tumor in the hand, it is called carcinoma.

104  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
7.3.4.1  Bone cancer that is the result of 
an undiagnosed malignancy
Primary bone cancer, or bone sarcoma, is a malignant tumor that originates in 
the bones. There is no known cause for it, but genetics may play a role. Some 
of the most common types of bone cancers are listed here:
•	 Knee and upper arm osteosarcoma are the most commonly 
affected areas. Adults with Paget’s bone disease may also be at risk 
for Ewing’s sarcoma, which is more common in people between 
the ages of 5 and 20 years, but it can also affect younger people. 
Sheath hernias are most commonly found in the rib cage; the upper 
arm; and the lower leg or foot. It’s also possible that the soft tissue 
that covers your bones is the source of the infection.
Chondrosarcoma is diagnosed most frequently in patients between the ages 
of 40 and 70 years. The hip and pelvis, as well as the leg, arm, and shoulder, 
are frequently affected by this cancer, which originates in the cartilage cells 
of your body.
•	 Despite the fact that it begins in the bones, multiple myeloma is 
not considered a primary bone cancer. The soft tissue found within 
bones, the marrow, is affected by this form of cancer.
•	 For the vast majority of people, cancer that spreads to their bones 
began in another part of their body first. An example of secondary 
bone cancer is when lung cancer has spread to the bones, resulting 
in secondary bone cancers. “Metastatic cancer” refers to cancer 
that has spread from one part of the body to another.
7.3.5  Liver Carcinoma
•	 Those with chronic liver disease or cirrhosis are more likely to 
develop a malignant tumor known as liver cancer, which begins 
in the liver. An aggressive tumor, liver cancer is. It is the seventh 
most common form of cancer in women and the fifth most com­
mon form of cancer in men, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Even 
more so, it is the third most common reason people die from cancer 
internationally. A yearly average of more than two times as many 
men as women are told they have liver cancer. We see this dispar­
ity all over the world. HCC is rare in South-Central Asia, Western 
Asia, Northern Europe, and Eastern Europe. East and Southeast 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  105
Asia, as well as the Middle and Western Africa, have the highest 
risk of liver cancer.
•	 In addition to being the body’s largest organ, the liver is also its 
largest gland. HCC, which is the most common form of liver can­
cer, is the sixth most common form of the disease and the third 
most common cause of cancer-related death in the United States 
overall. Liver cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related 
death in men worldwide.
•	 Liver cancer can be detected using various image-based diagnostic 
techniques such as ultrasonography, angiography, MRI, and com­
puted tomography (CT) scans. CT scan images are preferred for 
early diagnosis because of their high resolution and the fact that 
they are non-invasive to the human body. Using CT scans, liver 
lesions can be distinguished by comparing their pixel intensities. 
The manual segmentation of CT scans is a time-consuming and 
tedious process that requires a lot of effort. As a result, automatic 
segmentation is the best option because it will reduce diagnostic 
time and benefit patients [14].
7.3.6  Bladder Carcinoma
Bladder cancer is one of the most common types of cancer, and it is caused 
by the cells in the bladder. The bladder, a hollow muscular organ in the lower 
abdomen, serves as a storage facility for urine. Urothelial cells, which line the 
bladder’s interior, are where bladder cancer typically begins. Your kidneys 
and the tubes (ureters) that connect your kidneys to your bladder contain uro­
thelial cells. On rare occasions, urothelial cancer may develop in the kidneys 
or ureters, but this rarely happens. In most bladder cancer cases, the disease 
is discovered at an early stage, when it is most treatable. In spite of this, even 
bladder cancers that were diagnosed and successfully treated at an early stage 
can recur. In order to check for a recurrence of the disease, patients who have 
had treatment for bladder cancer typically require follow-up tests for several 
years after their treatment has ended [15].
7.3.6.1  Diagnosis of cancer of the bladder
Diagnostic procedures for bladder cancer include the following tests and 
procedures:
The scope examination of the bladder’s internal organs (cystoscopy). 
During a cystoscopy procedure, your doctor inserts a cystoscope into your 
urethra and uses it to view the inside of your bladder. Because of the lens on 

106  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
the cystoscope, your doctor can examine your urethra and bladder for any 
indications of disease, which can be seen through the lens. Cystoscopy can 
be done in a doctor’s office or a hospital.
•	 Tissue sampling for scientific research (biopsy). During a cystos­
copy, a specialized tool is inserted through the scope of the cys­
toscope and into your bladder to collect a cell sample for testing. 
This procedure may also be referred to as “transurethral resection 
of bladder tumor” (TURBT). TURBT can be used to treat bladder 
cancer as an alternative treatment option [16].
•	 Urine samples can be analyzed (urine cytology). Examining a 
urine sample under a microscope for signs of cancer cells is known 
as urine cytology. Your doctor can use imaging tests such as a CT 
urogram or a retrograde pyelogram to examine the structures of 
your urinary tract. A contrast dye will be injected into a vein in 
your hand during a CT urogram. Through your ureters and blad­
der, the dye will eventually pass. In order for your doctor to find 
any cancerous areas in your urinary tract, the X-ray images taken 
during the test provide a detailed view of your urinary tract.
7.4  EA FOR TUMOR CLASSIFICATION
Figure 7.1 is a simple model that can be used to diagnose a tumor. It starts 
with extracting and choosing features, then uses a machine learning model to 
make predictions. This model takes a tumor image as an input and then works 
by extracting and choosing features. Boundary detection and genetic opera­
tions like disintegration, thresholding, and filtration can be used to pull out 
features. There are different kinds of image noise in these methods. Because 
these features were taken out, predictions or diagnoses will be less accurate. 
If the right features are chosen, the model will be accurate.
Figure 7.1 denotes tumor classification model using evolutionary algo­
rithms. Feature selection is generally performed using genetic algorithms. 
Classifier or predictor efficiency can be improved and computing complexity 
reduced by the process of removing factors that have no bearing on the target 
class. Selecting a subset of features that properly characterize the data in 
terms of the specified problem space is the primary goal of feature selection. 
GAs have a long history of research and documentation as effective feature 
selectors across a wide range of domains. Binary chromosomal bits are a 
frequent application of GAs as feature selectors, where each bit signifies a 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  107
feature’s inclusion or exclusion. When calculating fitness, the predictor per­
formance is frequently used as the only metric. Classifiers like Naive Bayes 
(NB), k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), support vector machines (SVM), decision 
trees, logistic regression (LR), random forest (RF), or multilayer perceptron 
networks (MLPN) are typically used in cancer diagnosis [17].
7.4.1  Feature Selection
Ziyad et al. [18, 19, 20] used GAs in wavelet-GA to conduct feature selection 
on clinical data. Before using the GA, Haar wavelet processing was used to 
get wavelet coefficients. The chromosomal size was limited to 5 to locate 
5 appropriate wavelets. Random sampling using the two-sample t-test filter 
technique was used to construct the initial population. The fitness function 
combines average prior distribution and classifier error rate linearly (LDA). 
The GA used scattered crossover, Gaussian mutations, and stochastic uni­
form selection. Results from the LDA classifier were compared to those 
from NB, k-NN, SVM, adaptive resonance theory maps (ARTMAPs), fuzzy 
ARTMAPs, adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), and 
Brain Images
Feature Extraction and Feature
Selection using evolutionary
algorithms
ML and DL
Prediction Models
FIGURE 7.1  Tumor classification using EA.

108  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
AdaBoost. Using Wavelet-GA for the ovarian and prostate datasets took a sig­
nificant amount of time, and the results showed no significant improvement.
It was developed by Sahu et al. [21] using genetic algorithms (GAs) 
and learning automata (LAs) to select attributes (LA). Patients with vari­
ous tumors, including leukemia and lymphoma as well as those with a colon 
tumor, were used in the study. After a mutation, GALA adds a step that is 
either rewarded or punished by LA. To begin, the genetic algorithm (GA) uses 
an arbitrary number of genes across all chromosomes to get things going. We 
calculated fitness based on the SVM classifier’s performance on four-fifths 
of each dataset. Compared to all other models, GALA outperformed SVM + 
GA [19] and SFS-LDA [20] on the datasets Colon and Tumor 9.
For high-dimensional microarray data related to colon cancer, Jawahar 
et al. [22] presented a nested-GA based on information from the Cancer 
Genome Atlas, the TCGA DNA methylation dataset, and the NCBI Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO). Inner and outer GAs make up the nested 
GA. Every generation of the OGA-SVM requires a lot of computational 
resources because of IGA-role. NNW’s Each layer’s output is used to opti­
mise the other layers’ initializations. After the first iteration of the IGA-
NNW algorithm, the best chromosomes generated by OGA-SVM are used 
as a starting point. However, nested-performance GA’s was erratic when 
it comes to other datasets. It performed better, equal to or even worse 
than k-NN and RF, depending on the number of features selected. In the 
DNA methylation collection, the nested-GA outperformed GA-SVM and 
GA-NNW for all of the selected genes, but its performance was inconsistent 
in the other two datasets.
Bhandari et al. [23] presented a two-stage combined approach they called 
MI-GA for treating colon, ovarian, and lung cancer. Similarity Measure 
(MI), also known as provisional or uncontrolled entropy, is used to reduce 
the search space. This option is chosen because of a higher MI score, which 
indicates less uncertainty. Starting characteristics are randomly distributed 
across the population by the MI before being fed to the GA. In addition to 
uniform crossover and mutation and a BCSO, the genetic algorithm (GA) 
uses a dual and inverse combinator operator [24]. Fitness is determined by 
SVM accuracy. MI-GA outperformed all other feature selection methods for 
the five colon kernel functions in an SVM classifier. Although the SVM-
polynomial function took longer to run than other functions, it outperformed 
the others for lung (10 features) and colon (20 features) cancer datasets. Only 
one strategy seemed to have a clear advantage over ovarian cancer datasets: 
the linear equation took the most time.
Alhenawi et al. [25] developed a GA-based multilayer feature eliminator 
(MGRFE) and tested it on 19 microarray cancer datasets. There are three 
stages to the MGRFE process: random search reduction, wraparound search, 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  109
and cross-validation. The GA-RFE method is a layer-by-layer selection 
method. The GA uses techniques like differential integer coding, truncated 
selection, solitary crossover and mutation to get rid of repetitive genes. The 
foundation of the training module is the Naive Bayes classifier’s accuracy and 
the adjustments to equilibrium. MGRFE achieved a 100 percent reliability 
rate in some samples, including some of its earlier models.
SNP Barcodes for breast cancer pathways were discovered using a 
method devised by Bakos et al. [26]. Hybridization of the Taguchi-genetic 
algorithm (HTGA). Based on the SNP indices and genotypes found on the 
chromosomes, a random population was created. After 1000 iterations, the 
goal was achieved. SNP barcodes with more significant differences between 
cases and controls were detected by HTGA using the same dataset as particle 
swarms, chaotic particles and genetic algorithms.
The researchers [27] used GAs to supplement k-NN and SVM-based 
cancer classification, they used GAs for data reduction and feature selec­
tion, respectively. Deconstructing microarray data using DWT allows for 
the creation of a random population. The concept of fitness is based on 
the elitism and accuracy of k-NN classifiers. The bit-string mutation is the 
next step after mono and multipathing crossovers. The features selected 
were used to train k-NN and SVM classifiers. Using Haar and dp7 DWT, 
100 percent accuracy was achieved on four datasets. K-NN achieved 
91.67 percent accuracy, and SVM achieved 90 percent accuracy, on the 
colon dataset. Model selection and classification were done using wavelet-
based variable selection and discrete waves for leukemia and colon cancer 
datasets, respectively.
According to Aziz et al. [28], GAs improved a leukemia classifier 
model based on microarray data. Using a two-stage feature selection process 
improves the model’s performance based on training genes. An algorithm 
known as the genetic algorithm (GA) is used on the set of genes chosen to 
represent a random starting population. The LOOCV values will reveal the 
degree to which this population is fit that k-NN, SVM, and NB classifiers 
arrive at for it. The features were analyzed using statistical methods such 
as k-NN, SVM, NB, linear regression, ANN, and RF. Five of the models 
achieved accuracy and AUC greater than 0.95, and the relative standard error 
(RMSE) was low. Results from a comparison of the proposed algorithm to 
previous research showed that it could achieve 100 percent accuracy with just 
two genes.
MOGA and XGBoost are used by the researchers [29] to classify can­
cer. XGBoost, also known as Extreme Gradient Boosting, makes use of 
Classification and Regression Trees, or CARTS, to assess the importance of 
various features. MOGA is capable of optimizing a wide range of objective 
functions under certain conditions. Multi-goal optimization often leads to 

110  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
conflict, making it difficult to solve. When XGBoost was first used, it was 
for feature selection. The encoded characteristics were then used to build 
a binary array. A k-NN classifier trained on the chromosomal feature set 
was used to calculate the fitness score. Crossover and mutation are both 
accounted for in this model. A 10-fold cross-validation test is then run on 13 
cancer datasets to verify the selected features. For the most part, the accu­
racy of XGBoost0-MOGA features was on par with or slightly better than 
that of XGBoost, MOGA, or not using any features at all. It was found that 
both MOGA and XGBoost-MOGA were slower than XGBoost and the other 
algorithms that were compared. In contrast to XGBoost-MOGA, MOGA 
performed better.
7.4.2  Parameter Optimization
Bhandari [22] employed GAs for breast cancer feature selection and param­
eter optimization (GABPNN). Multimodal breast cancer data were localized, 
standardised, and coded. The fitness value was the reciprocal of the expected 
error for each chromosome. Each training fold optimises GABPNN network 
parameters. Against justify feature extraction, the authors evaluate the sug­
gested model to a version of GABPNN without feature selection. However, 
no benchmarks were used.
Koppad et al. [30] presented a hybrid approach using AdaBoost and GAs 
to identify tumours from gene expression datasets for UCI repository. The 
study presents a decision group, a collection of randomly selected classifi­
ers run a set number of times to answer the same issue. The ultimate out­
come is voted on by k-NN, Decision Tress, and NB. This decision group 
is AdaBoost’s basis classifier, and the GA optimises their weights. Fitness 
was a function of each classifier’s accuracy. Elitism classifies random single-
point crossover and bit-string mutation. AdaBoost-GA was compared against 
Bagging, RF, Rotation Forest, AdaBoost, AdaBoost-BPNN, AdaBoost-SVM, 
and AdaBoost-RF. AdaBoost-GA beat all other models in every dataset 
except lung cancer, when it was second behind AdaBoost-RF. AdaBoost-GA 
obtained the greatest AUC value for all datasets, although MCC results were 
inconsistent and other classifiers outperformed. AdaBoost-GA exhibited 
the lowest variance, suggesting the maximum stability, on colon and brain 
datasets.
Chen et al. [31] suggested GAs to enhance colorectal cancer image 
detection. Multiple techniques were used to extract characteristics from RGB 
photos. Each gene in the GA represented a selection strategy, a classifica­
tion method, and the amount of characteristics examined for classification. 
T-statistics, relief algorithm, gain ratio, Information Gain, and chi-squared 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  111
were used to rank features. k-NN, SVM, MLP, RF, random tree, J48, and 
KStar were examined. Initial population formation is random within the lim­
its of algorithms and max gene values. The fitness function was the classifi­
er’s average AUC value over a certain number of iterations. The models were 
evaluated and trained on colorectal and NHL datasets, and relief selection 
was used for all top AUC outcomes. Random Forest had the greatest AUC, 
while KStar dominated the top 10. For the NHL dataset, k-NN obtained the 
greatest AUC.
7.5  EA FOR CARCINOMA PREDICTION
Many researchers utilized the genetic algorithms for feature extraction 
from tumour datasets. Figure shows a model with three parts: feature extrac­
tion using GA, feature selection using classifier, and an DL model. Genetic 
techniques are used to pull out features. Choosing which features to use 
is the hard part. Learning classifiers have been used a lot in many works of 
literature.
Evolutionary algorithm-based carcinoma prediction model is shown in 
Figure 7.2. In many cases, the pre-processed image of the tumor will be used 
to get the features. In pre-processing, there are two steps: getting rid of image 
noise and irrelevant pixels.
Brain Images
Feature Extraction and Feature Selection
process using evolutionary algorithms
ML and DL classifier Models
for Carcinoma Prediction 
FIGURE 7.2  Carcinoma prediction using EA.

112  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
7.5.1  Feature Selection
Using spectroscopy methods, Jian et al. [32] used GAs to uncover key char­
acteristics for classifying bladder cancer. A random selection of six numbers 
was used to establish the initial population of the SERS. The final clas­
sification and the accuracy-based fitness function use linear discriminant 
analysis (LDA) as a classifier to determine the analysis results. The bottom 
25 percent of performers are subjected to single-point crossovers and muta­
tions, while the top 25 percent are selected for additional rounds. The func­
tion will be finished after it has completed 100 cycles. A PCA-based LDA 
classifier was utilised in order to verify the result that was suggested [33]. 
The PCA model’s ROC curve, specificity, and accuracy improved thanks 
to GAs.
Breast cancer data was utilised by Krishnamurthy et al. [34] to develop 
cancer detection algorithms that are readable by humans. They did an anal­
ysis using the digitised pictures from the Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset. 
In order to discretize the continuous data, a self-organizing map neural 
network (SOM) is constructed with the help of one hundred samples that 
are generated at random. The initial population of the GA is composed of 
random binary vectors. Deterministic reliability is a function of a selec­
tion attribute’s role in determining fitness. The biological controllers are 
referred to as single-point crossover and uniform mutation. After 100 itera­
tions of the GA, the characteristics are whittled down with the help of a dis­
coverability vector and put to use in the generation of inducelogical rules. 
Both the SVM [34] and euro rule [35] techniques were outperformed by the 
generated rules.
GAs were utilised by Liu et al. [36] in order to select lung cancer-
related features. A value of 0 for a characteristic indicates that it is not rep­
resented, while a value of 1 indicates that it is. Single-point crossover and 
bit-string mutation are the two methods that are used for feature selection. 
The k-NN misclassification procedure is reversed during the optimization 
process. The model utilizes global data’s lung cancer dataset. The proposed 
method achieved an accuracy rate of one hundred percent for multi-label 
data, which was marginally higher than k-NN without GA when k was set 
to 6.
7.5.2  Parameter Optimization
Julio et al. [37] employed GAs to improve a fuzzy system to identify breast 
cancer. The paper uses the Pittsburgh method, where each genome symbol­
izes a fuzzy inference system. Randomly produced fuzzy systems are the 

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  113
starting population. The Pittsburgh technique supports combinatorial optimi­
zation improvement via variance in the weighting factor. Stochastic uniform 
selection, single-point crossover, flip-bit mutation.
Davoudi et al. [38] used weighted mean GA to diagnose breast cancer. 
This study used Breast Cancer Wisconsin data. First, eight classification 
models are trained, and their accuracy predicted; next, the GA calcu­
lates the learning model’s weights. SVM [19], decision tree [39], Random 
Forest [40], Neural Network [41], AdaBoost [42], and Gaussian Nave 
Bayes [43] are evaluated. The GA is initialized arbitrarily for vertical vec­
tor weights. Cross-validation accuracy predicts each classifier’s candidate 
solutions. GA-based weighted predictors were compared to traditional ML 
models [43]. GA-based models achieved a greater accuracy rate than the 
classical model.
Houssein et al. [44] used GAs with SVM to enhance breast cancer ther­
mography. The study employed DMR-IR thermal imaging and a university 
database. The entire method uses two GA ensembles to determine the best 
modeling and optimized attributes. Uniform crossover, string-bit mutation, 
and uniform mutation are used to add randomization. The GA is used as 
a characteristic selector using an arbitrary binary encoded scalar, where 
0 denotes not included. The suggested techniques worked well, exceeding in 
terms of F1-score, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC, but the results 
were not uniform across metrics. Using GA for model selection decreases 
complexity compared to an exhaustive search, and the model precisely diag­
noses breast cancer.
7.6  CONCLUSION
Even though GAs have been utilized effectively in the classification, predic­
tion and diagnosis of several different cancers to a high degree of accuracy, 
additional study is needed to make them suitable for industrial application. 
Because they are computationally more expensive than more traditional 
methods (such as genetic algorithms), GAs are projected to become more 
affordable as the number of needed evolutions, fitness functions, selection 
rules, and genetic rules decrease. More recent studies suggest that high 
accuracy may not be possible for all types of cancer or that different models 
are needed for each type; Models that can classify multiple types of cancer 
are urgently needed, as are models for cancer types that have not previously 
been studied. Classifiers used in combination with GAs may require more 
investigation.

114  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
REFERENCES
1.  Mateo, J., Steuten, L., Aftimos, P., André, F., Davies, M., Garralda, E. … & 
Voest, E. (2022). Delivering precision oncology to patients with cancer. Nature 
Medicine, 28(4), 658–665.
2.  Cisneros-Villanueva, M., Hidalgo-Perez, L., Rios-Romero, M., Cedro-Tanda, 
A., Ruiz-Villavicencio, C. A., Page, K. … & Hidalgo-Miranda, A. (2022). Cell-
free DNA analysis in current cancer clinical trials: A review. British Journal of 
Cancer, 126(3), 391–400.
3.  van den Ende, T., van den Boorn, H. G., Hoonhout, N. M., Van Etten-Jamaludin, 
F. S., Meijer, S. L., Derks, S. … & van Laarhoven, H. W. (2020). Priming the 
tumor immune microenvironment with chemo (radio) therapy: A systematic 
review across tumor types. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Reviews on 
Cancer, 1874(1), 188386.
4.  Kim, D. P., Kus, K. J., & Ruiz, E. (2019). Basal cell carcinoma review. Hematology/
Oncology Clinics, 33(1), 13–24.
5.  Bae, S., Brumbaugh, J., & Bonavida, B. (2018). Exosomes derived from cancer­
ous and non-cancerous cells regulate the anti-tumor response in the tumor micro­
environment. Genes & Cancer, 9(3–4), 87.
6.  Saleh, T., & Carpenter, V. J. (2021). Potential use of senolytics for pharmacologi­
cal targeting of precancerous lesions. Molecular Pharmacology, 100(6), 580–587.
7.  Singal, A. G., Lampertico, P., & Nahon, P. (2020). Epidemiology and surveillance 
for hepatocellular carcinoma: New trends. Journal of Hepatology, 72(2), 250–261.
8.  Lee, C. K., Man, J., Lord, S., Cooper, W., Links, M., Gebski, V. … & Yang, J. C. 
H. (2018). Clinical and molecular characteristics associated with survival among 
patients treated with checkpoint inhibitors for advanced non–small cell lung car­
cinoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Oncology, 4(2), 210–216.
9.  Kabir, T., Tan, Z. Z., Syn, N. L., Wu, E., Lin, J. D., Zhao, J. J. … & Goh, B. 
K. (2022). Laparoscopic versus open resection of hepatocellular carcinoma in 
patients with cirrhosis: Meta-analysis. British Journal of Surgery, 109(1), 21–29.
10.  Paul, S., Rausch, C. R., Jain, N., Kadia, T., Ravandi, F., DiNardo, C. D. … & Jabbour, 
E. (2021). Treating leukemia in the time of COVID-19. Acta Haematologica, 144(2), 
132–145.
11.  Sehn, L. H., & Salles, G. (2021). Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 384(9), 842–858.
12.  Crudele, F., Bianchi, N., Astolfi, A., Grassilli, S., Brugnoli, F., Terrazzan, A. … & 
Volinia, S. (2021). The molecular networks of microRNAs and their targets in the 
drug resistance of colon carcinoma. Cancers, 13(17), 4355.
13.  Guida, A., Escudier, B., & Albiges, L. (2018). Treating patients with renal cell carci­
noma and bone metastases. Expert Review of Anticancer Therapy, 18(11), 1135–1143.
14.  Klein, W. M., Molmenti, E. P., Colombani, P. M., Grover, D. S., Schwarz, K. B., 
Boitnott, J. … & Torbenson, M. S. (2005). Primary liver carcinoma arising in people 
younger than 30 years. American Journal of Clinical Pathology, 124(4), 512–518.
15.  Renner, A., Burotto, M., Valdes, J. M., Roman, J. C., & Walton-Diaz, A. (2021). 
Neoadjuvant immunotherapy for muscle invasive urothelial bladder carcinoma: Will it 
change current standards? Therapeutic Advances in Urology, 13, 17562872211029779.

7  •  Tumor Prediction and Classification  115
16.  Iqbal, M. J., Javed, Z., Sadia, H., Qureshi, I. A., Irshad, A., Ahmed, R. … & 
Sharifi-Rad, J. (2021). Clinical applications of artificial intelligence and machine 
learning in cancer diagnosis: Looking into the future. Cancer Cell International, 
21(1), 1–11.
17.  Ziyad, S. R., Radha, V., & Vaiyapuri, T. (2021). Noise removal in lung LDCT 
images by novel discrete wavelet-based denoising with adaptive thresholding 
technique. International Journal of E-Health and Medical Communications 
(IJEHMC), 12(5), 1–15.
18.  Sahu, B., & Jagadev, A. K. (2021). A GALA based hybrid Gene selection model 
for identification of relevant genes for cancer microarray data. In Mishra, D., 
Buyya, R., Mohapatra, P., Patnaik, S. (eds.). Intelligent and cloud computing 
(pp. 827–835). Singapore: Springer.
19.  Resmini, R., Silva, L., Araujo, A. S., Medeiros, P., Muchaluat-Saade, D., & Conci, 
A. (2021). Combining genetic algorithms and SVM for breast cancer diagnosis 
using infrared thermography. Sensors, 21(14), 4802.
20.  Halder, A. K., Delgado, A. H., & Cordeiro, M. N. D. (2022). First multi-target 
QSAR model for predicting the cytotoxicity of acrylic acid-based dental mono­
mers. Dental Materials, 38(2), 333–346.
21.  Jahwar, A., & Ahmed, N. (2021). Swarm intelligence algorithms in gene selection 
profile based on classification of microarray data: A review. Journal of Applied 
Science and Technology Trends, 2(01), 01–09.
22.  Bhandari, A., Tripathy, B. K., Jawad, K., Bhatia, S., Rahmani, M. K. I., & 
Mashat, A. (2022). Cancer detection and prediction using genetic algorithms. 
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2022.
23.  Hidayati, T., Darmawan, E., Indrayanti, I., & Sun, S. (2021). The effect of black 
cumin seed oil consumption on the platelets and leukocytes number in healthy 
smokers in rural area Yogyakarta. Bali Medical Journal, 10(3), 1146–1151.
24.  Zhang, G., Peng, Z., Yan, C., Wang, J., Luo, J., & Luo, H. (2022). A novel liver 
cancer diagnosis method based on patient similarity network and DenseGCN. 
Scientific Reports, 12(1), 1–10.
25.  Alhenawi, E. A., Al-Sayyed, R., Hudaib, A., & Mirjalili, S. (2022). Feature selec­
tion methods on gene expression microarray data for cancer classification: A sys­
tematic review. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 140, 105051.
26.  Bakos, B., Kiss, A., Árvai, K., Szili, B., Deák-Kocsis, B., Tobiás, B. … & Lakatos, 
P. (2021). Co-occurrence of thyroid and breast cancer is associated with an 
increased oncogenic SNP burden. BMC Cancer, 21(1), 1–11.
27.  YAG˘IN, F. H., KÜÇÜKAKÇALI, Z., Cicek, I. B., & BAG˘ , H. G. (2021). The 
effects of variable selection and dimension reduction methods on the classifica­
tion model in the small round blue cell tumor dataset. Middle Black Sea Journal 
of Health Science, 7(3), 390–396.
28.  Aziz, R. M. (2022). Nature-inspired metaheuristics model for gene selection and 
classification of biomedical microarray data. Medical & Biological Engineering 
& Computing, 60(6), 1627–1646.
29.  Deng, X., Li, M., Deng, S., & Wang, L. (2022). Hybrid gene selection approach 
using XGBoost and multi-objective genetic algorithm for cancer classification. 
Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 60(3), 663–681.
30.  Koppad, S., Basava, A., Nash, K., Gkoutos, G. V., & Acharjee, A. (2022). 
Machine learning-based identification of colon cancer candidate diagnostics 
genes. Biology, 11(3), 365.

116  Evolutionary Intelligence for Healthcare Applications
31.  Chen, X., He, L., Li, Q., Liu, L., Li, S., Zhang, Y. … & Chen, X. (2022). Non-
invasive prediction of microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer by a genetic 
algorithm–enhanced artificial neural network–based CT radiomics signature. 
European Radiology, 1–12.
32.  Jian, Y., Zhang, N., Liu, T., Zhu, Y., Wang, D., Dong, H. … & Wu, W. (2022). 
Artificially Intelligent Olfaction for Fast and Noninvasive Diagnosis of Bladder 
Cancer from Urine. ACS Sensors, 7(6), 1720–1731.
33.  Taieb, A., Berkovic, G., Haifler, M., Cheshnovsky, O., & Shaked, N. T. (2022). 
Classification of tissue biopsies by raman spectroscopy guided by quantitative phase 
imaging and its application to bladder cancer. Journal of Biophotonics, e202200009.
34.  Krishnamurthy, P., Sarmadi, A., & Khorrami, F. (2021). Explainable classification 
by learning human-readable sentences in feature subsets. Information Sciences, 
564, 202–219.
35.  Abdullah, D. M., & Abdulazeez, A. M. (2021). Machine learning applications 
based on SVM classification a review. Qubahan Academic Journal, 1(2), 81–90.
36.  Liu, B., Yu, H., Zeng, X., Zhang, D., Gong, J., Tian, L. … & Liu, R. (2021). Lung 
cancer detection via breath by electronic nose enhanced with a sparse group fea­
ture selection approach. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 339, 129896.
37.  Hernández-Julio, Y. F., Muñoz-Hernández, H., Díaz-Pertuz, L. A., Prieto-Guevara, 
M., Arrieta-Hernández, N. S., Figueroa-Mendoza, N. A. … & Nieto-Bernal, W. 
(2022). Intelligent fuzzy clinical decision support system to predict the Coimbra 
breast cancer dataset. In Kahraman, C., Tolga, A. C., Cevik Onar, S., Cebi, S., 
Oztaysi, B., Sari, I. U. (eds.). International conference on intelligent and fuzzy 
systems (pp. 813–821). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
38.  Davoudi, K., & Thulasiraman, P. (2021). Evolving convolutional neural network 
parameters through the genetic algorithm for the breast cancer classification prob­
lem. Simulation, 97(8), 511–527.
39.  Ghiasi, M. M., & Zendehboudi, S. (2021). Application of decision tree-based 
ensemble learning in the classification of breast cancer. Computers in Biology 
and Medicine, 128, 104089.
40.  Huang, Z., & Chen, D. (2021). A breast cancer diagnosis method based on VIM 
feature selection and hierarchical clustering random forest algorithm. IEEE 
Access, 10, 3284–3293.
41.  Cai, X., Li, X., Razmjooy, N., & Ghadimi, N. (2021). Breast cancer diagnosis 
by convolutional neural network and advanced thermal exchange optimization 
algorithm. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2021.
42.  Yifan, D., Jialin, L., & Boxi, F. (2021, May). Forecast model of breast cancer diagno­
sis based on RF-AdaBoost. In 2021 International Conference on Communications, 
Information System and Computer Engineering (CISCE) (pp. 716–719). Beijing, 
China: IEEE.
43.  Khorshid, S. F., Abdulazeez, A. M., & Sallow, A. B. (2021). A comparative analy­
sis and predicting for breast cancer detection based on data mining models. Asian 
Journal of Research in Computer Science, 8(4), 45–59.
44.  Houssein, E. H., Emam, M. M., & Ali, A. A. (2022). An optimized deep learn­
ing architecture for breast cancer diagnosis based on improved marine predators 
algorithm. Neural Computing and Applications, 8, 1–19.

117
Index
A
Accident, 5
Acid-based, 115
AdaBoost, 108, 110, 113
Antibody, 102
Antigen, 32
Anti-tumor, 114
Atrioventricular, 12
Attribute, 23
Autism, 53
Autoimmune, 32
Automata, 108
Autonomous, 45
B
Bacillus, 65, 71
Bacteria, 67
Basic, 44, 53, 62
Bayesian, 70, 72
Bifurcation, 43
Bronchi, 99
Buildings, 97
C
Canonical, 5
Carcinogens, 99
Cardiac, 20, 22, 29, 47, 91
Cartesian, 89
Centuries, 68
Chi-squared, 110
Chondrosarcoma,104
Coefficient, 17, 58, 86
Computations, 23, 25, 85
Condensability, 3
Convolution, 56, 70, 71, 76
Cycles, 112
Cystoscopy, 105, 106
D
Data-sets, 23
DCNN, 85, 92
Defuzzification, 23
Detector–retinopathy, 44
Detoxification, 99
Diabetics, 34
Digestive, 102
Dioxide, 75, 100
Discriminative, 26
Disease-specific, 96
Disease’s, 50, 82, 84, 85, 99
Dopamine, 52
Dragonfly, 24
Drugs, 66, 82
Dynamic, 58, 69
Dysfunction, 86, 87
Dystrophic, 90
Dystrophin, 82
E
Echogenicity, 83
Electrocardiogram, 29, 81
Electromyography, 85, 87, 90, 92
Embedded, 14, 16, 18
Engine, 20
Equilibrium, 45, 109
Evolution-based, 27, 30
Exposure, 39, 101
F
Fabricated, 6
Facioscapulohumeral, 80, 92
Fibroids, 97
Fibrosis, 84
Fluorescein, 34, 40
Fluorodeoxyglucose, 63
Fundus, 35, 40, 44, 48

118  Index
G
GA-WK-ELM, 61
Genetic-Neuro-Fuzzy, 75
Glucose, 33, 34, 36, 45
Gradient, 25, 26, 29, 71, 109
Greedy, 17, 57
Grey-wolf, 27, 30
H
Hallmarks, 99
Hardware, 84
Helicobacter, 102
Hemorrhagic, 13
Huntington’s, 53, 62
Hybridization, 109
Hyperparameters, 27, 59–61
Hypertension, 14, 49
I
Idiopathic, 32
IGA-NNW, 108
IGA-role, 108
Immunization, 96
Immunotherapy, 96, 97, 103, 114
Industries, 45
Infection, 65–69, 71, 78, 100, 102, 104
Inherent, 8, 89
Injury, 41, 80
Instructions, 50, 103
Insulin-dependent, 32
Interferon-release, 69
Iteration, 6, 18, 108
K
Kernel, 20, 108
k-nearest, 20, 55, 107
KNN’s, 72
L
Laboratory, 6, 69, 72
Lattice, 3
Layer-by-layer, 109
Leukemia, 98, 100, 101, 108, 109, 114
Leukocyte, 32
Lymphatic, 97, 98, 100, 101
Lymphocytes, 101, 102
Lymphoma, 101, 102, 108, 114
M
Machines, 38, 61, 66, 85, 86, 93, 107
Maps, 107
Metabolic, 32, 33, 39, 45, 47
Meta-heuristic, 42
Metastases, 96, 114
Microaneurysm(s), 34, 35, 40, 41
Microangiopathy, 34, 39
Microarray, 108, 109, 115
Micrographs, 71
Microorganisms, 67
Microscope, 81, 106
Microvascular, 34, 37, 40
Multiclass, 71
Multi-goal, 109
Multi-label, 112
Multilayered, 84
Multivariate, 26
Myeloma, 98, 100, 102, 104
Myopathy, 84, 86–89
N
Neoplasm, 96
Neoplastic, 49
Neurocomputing, 47
Neurodegeneration, 52, 63
Neurodegenerative, 49, 50, 52–54, 62
Neurological, 55, 61
NSCLC, 99, 100
NSCLC-NOS, 100
O
Opportunity, 23
Osteochondroma, 103
Osteoma, 103
Ovarian, 108
Oxygenated, 11
P
Pacemaker, 83
Pandemic, 65
Paranoid, 50
Pouch, 34
Pregnancy, 33, 36
Pregnant, 31, 33
Privilege, 7
Probabilistic, 37, 38
Probability, 2, 7, 43, 73

Index  119
Q
Qualitative, 86
R
Radiologists, 8, 70
Reed-Sternberg, 102
Repository’s, 27
RS-based, 23
S
Sclerosis, 79, 80, 90
Specimens, 69
Spectra, 89
Spectral, 86, 89
Spectroscopy, 112, 116
Spongy, 100
Sputum, 66, 69, 71
Squeezenet, 70
Stem-cell, 96
Stenosis, 13
SVM-based, 109
Syndrome, 31, 32, 45, 47, 78
Systemic, 34, 92
T
Technologies, 30, 62, 75, 77
Temperature, 39
Template, 36
Thermography, 113, 115
Traditional, 19, 26, 41, 58, 60, 66, 73, 85, 89, 113
Tremor, 52, 55
Two-dimensional, 88
U
Ultrasonography, 92, 105
Umbrella, 6, 33
Unit, 86
Unnecessary, 15, 16, 20, 57
Unreliable, 28
V
Variance, 110, 113
Ventricle, 11, 12
Visualization, 70
Vitolarsen, 81
Vocal, 55
W
Watershed, 36
Waveforms, 86
Wavelet, 46, 47, 61, 86, 92, 93, 107
Waves, 81, 109
Worsen, 49, 54, 62
Wraps, 12
X
XGBoost, 109, 110, 115
XGBoost-MOGA, 110
X-ray, 68, 70, 72, 76, 77, 106
Z
Zero-normalization, 15
Ziehl-Neelsen, 69
Z-score, 23

