Signals and Communication Technology
Hemant Kumar
E. S. Gopi   Editors
RF, Microwave and 
Millimeter Wave 
Technologies

Signals and Communication Technology 
Series Editors 
Emre Celebi, Department of Computer Science, University of Central Arkansas, 
Conway, AR, USA 
Jingdong Chen, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China 
E. S. Gopi, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National 
Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
Amy Neustein, Linguistic Technology Systems, Fort Lee, NJ, USA 
Antonio Liotta, University of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy 
Mario Di Mauro, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy

This series is devoted to fundamentals and applications of modern methods of 
signal processing and cutting-edge communication technologies. The main topics 
are information and signal theory, acoustical signal processing, image processing 
and multimedia systems, mobile and wireless communications, and computer and 
communication networks. Volumes in the series address researchers in academia 
and industrial R&D departments. The series is application-oriented. The level of 
presentation of each individual volume, however, depends on the subject and can 
range from practical to scientiﬁc. 
Indexing: All books in “Signals and Communication Technology” are indexed 
by Scopus and zbMATH 
For general information about this book series, comments or suggestions, please 
contact Mary James at mary.james@springer.com or Ramesh Nath Premnath at 
ramesh.premnath@springer.com.

Hemant Kumar • E. S. Gopi 
Editors 
RF, Microwave and 
Millimeter Wave 
Technologies

Editors 
Hemant Kumar 
Department of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering 
National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
E. S. Gopi 
Department of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering 
National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchirappalli 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
ISSN 1860-4862
ISSN 1860-4870 (electronic) 
Signals and Communication Technology 
ISBN 978-3-031-62525-1
ISBN 978-3-031-62526-8 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.

Summary 
This book provides in-depth exposure to emerging technologies and recent advance-
ments in RF, Microwave, and Millimeter Wave Technologies. It covers the basic 
concepts along with the recent advancements in designing and developing antennas 
and circuits for the latest technologies. The concepts of mode compression, Full 
Duplex communication, massive MIMO, frequency selective surfaces, reﬂectarrays, 
and metasurfaces have been discussed in detail. Various types of antennas such as 
electrically small antennas, textile antennas, dielectric resonator antennas, etc., to 
be used for the latest wireless devices, RFID applications have been thoroughly 
explored. The concept of machine learning to develop data-driven models for 
antenna design is discussed brieﬂy to provide readers with an introduction to ML 
algorithms. 
The readers will be able to understand the theoretical concepts and practical 
design aspects of various antennas and high-frequency circuits. The target audience 
includes but is not limited to undergraduates, postgraduates, research scholars, 
academicians, scientists, and professionals who are interested in getting up-to-date 
with the latest knowledge in the ﬁeld of RF, Microwave, and Millimeter Wave 
Technologies.
v

Contents 
Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm 
Waves Technologies ..............................................................
1 
K. P. Ray 
Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole 
Antenna ........................................................................... 
17 
Hemant Kumar and Girish Kumar 
Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas ................................ 
29 
Rajbala Solanki 
Multiple Resonator –Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for 
Wireless Devices .................................................................. 
45 
Jyotibhusan Padhi and G. Shrikanth Reddy 
Textile Antennas for RFID Applications....................................... 
65 
Rajesh K. Singh 
Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric 
Resonator Antennas ............................................................. 
83 
Pragati Patel 
A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA ........................ 
93 
Manshree Mishra, Pramod Kumar Gupta, Garima Tiwari, Atul Kumar, 
and Biswajeet Mukherjee 
Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs .................................................. 107 
Ravi Kumar Arya 
Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and 
Way Forward ..................................................................... 119 
Jogesh Chandra Dash and Debdeep Sarkar
vii

viii
Contents
Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using 
Transmission Line Theory ...................................................... 147 
Debdeep Sarkar 
Frequency-Selective Surface and Its Applications in Radome 
Technology ........................................................................ 165 
Saptarshi Ghosh 
Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology .................. 175 
Sai Mitheran, T. N. Ram, Debrup Mukherjee, and Hemant Kumar 
Regression Model for Antenna Design......................................... 187 
E. S. Gopi 
Index............................................................................... 197

Introduction to Important Concepts 
of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves 
Technologies 
K. P. Ray 
1 
Introduction 
In the conceptual period of the development of wireless systems, only the 
lower-frequency 
band 
was 
utilized 
because 
of 
various 
limitations. 
Later, 
researchers became more cognizant of higher-frequency spectrum for efﬁcient 
transmission/reception, which includes radio frequency (RF), microwaves, and 
mm waves. In very generic terms, RF, microwaves, and mm waves are used to 
describe electromagnetic waves with frequency range from 1 MHz to 300 GHz. The 
corresponding wavelengths range is from 300 m to 1 mm [1, 2]. 
The whole electromagnetic spectrum is shown in Fig. 1 [3, 4]. Starting from the 
power supply band to cosmic rays, various bands with their frequency range and 
corresponding wave lengths are depicted in the diagram. From here, the relative 
position of various bands can be estimated. There is an important band of terahertz 
(1012 Hz), which is sandwiched between mm wave and optical region. Terahertz 
waves have become popular in recent years for their distinct features. In this 
chapter, terahertz will not be discussed further and is treated as higher end of mm 
waves. This ﬁgure also shows electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding range 
for electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) of electronic systems [3, 4]. Though the 
position of high frequency waves, radio waves, and microwaves are indicated in the 
Figure, it requires further discussions and quantiﬁcation (high-frequency waves are 
not meant here as “HF,” which will be elaborated later). 
K. P. Ray (✉) 
Electronics Engineering Department, Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT) DRDO, 
Pune, Maharashtra, India 
e-mail: kpray@diat.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_1
1

2
K. P. Ray
Fig. 1 Electromagnetic spectrum 
2 
RF, Microwaves and mm Waves 
Wireless communication systems from amplitude modulation (AM) broadcast to 
mm wave communication employ radio waves, operating from 1 MHz to 300 GHz. 
The term radio frequency (RF) is derived from radio waves; thus, in general terms, 
the entire frequency range is referred to as RF band. However, various researchers 
have deﬁned frequency range of RF, microwaves, and mm waves differently. There 
are no distinct boundaries between these frequency bands, which are discussed in 
the following section. 
Vendelin has put these frequency bands as [5]: 
RF:
1 MHz (or less) to 1 GHz 
Microwave:
1–30 GHz 
Millimeter wave: 
30–300 GHz (or higher) 
D. M. Pozar has categorized RF and microwave frequencies range from 30 MHz 
to 3000 MHz (3GHz) and 3 GHz to 300 GHz, respectively. The higher end of the 
microwave with wavelengths of the order of millimeters is referred to as mm waves. 
mm Waves are just below the optical region, wherein radio wave overlaps with light 
wave, and thus, these are also known as quasi-optical waves [6]. 
R. E. Collin describes microwaves as electromagnetic waves with frequency 
range of 300 MHz to 30 GHz, whereas frequency ranging from 30 GHz to 300 GHz 
are called mm waves [7]. 
Out of these three high-frequency regions, the microwave frequency range has 
been extensively researched, perhaps because of its application in radars during 
World War II and has become a fairly mature area. A few important researchers have 
deﬁned it slightly differently. K. C. Gupta has set the approximate range from 1 GHz 
to 30 GHz, sometimes extending up to 600 GHz, without explaining the higher-

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
3
Table 1 High-frequency band designation and corresponding wavelength 
Band designation
Nominal frequency range
Wavelength range 
MF
0.3–3 MHz
1000–100 m 
HF
3–30 MHz
100–10 m 
VHF
30–300 MHz
10–1 m 
UHF
300 MHz–3 GHz
1–0.1 m 
SHF
3 GHz–30 GHz
0.1–0.01 m 
L
1–2 GHz
30–15 cm 
S
2–4 GHz
15–7.5 cm 
C
4–8 GHz
7.5–3.75 cm 
X
8–12 GHz
3.75–2.5 cm 
Ku
12–18 GHz
2.5–1.66 cm 
K
18–27 GHz
1.66–1.11 cm 
Ka
27–40 GHz
11.1–7.5 mm 
V
40–75 GHz
7.5–4 mm 
W
75–110 GHz
4–2.72 mm 
mm
Up to 300 GHz
2.72–1 mm 
THz
300 GHz–3THz
1000–100 μm 
frequency range [8]. Samuel Y. Lio mentioned microwave frequencies roughly from 
1 GHz to 300 GHz and further opines that microwave means the wavelengths is in 
the micron ranges and thus frequencies extend up to optical regions [9]. Another 
interesting deﬁnition of microwave, based on its features, is given by Thomas S. 
Laverghetta [10]. He describes it as “A radiowave operating in the frequency range 
of 500 MHz to 20 GHz that requires printed circuit components be used instead of 
conventional lumped components.” We will further elaborate this deﬁnition in next 
section, when salient feature of microwave will be discussed, but it can be noted that 
frequency range of microwave is again different. 
It is noted from the above deliberation that there is no unanimity among different 
schemes of classiﬁcations to designate frequency bands of RF, microwaves, and 
mm waves. Without loss of generality, it can be summarized that RF approximately 
starts from 1 MHz, covers full of HF (high frequency), VHF (very high frequency), 
and a portion of UHF (ultrahigh frequency) up to 1 GHz. Microwave starts from 
1 GHz (L-band) and goes slightly beyond K- band up to 30 GHz, covering full band 
of super high frequency (SHF) band. Finally, mm wave ranges from 30 GHz to 
300 GHz [6, 11]. 
Table 1 shows commonly designated frequency bands with their ranges and 
corresponding wavelengths, which are used for most of the applications including 
radar and communication. For three bands of high frequency, the wavelength varies 
from 300 m to 0.3 m for RF and 30 cm to 1 cm for microwaves, whereas for mm 
wave, it is from 10 mm to 1 mm. One very important observation is made here 
that when wavelength is in meter, it is called meter-wave, and for mm wave, the 
wavelength is in mm; likewise, a technically correct name of microwave would have 
been centi-meter wave!

4
K. P. Ray
3 
Characteristic Features of High-Frequency Waves 
In high-frequency waves, particularly microwaves, there exist several interesting 
and unusual features, which are not seen in other electromagnetic frequency bands. 
These unique features, as elaborated below, make high-frequency waves suitable for 
various useful applications [6–8]. 
3.1 
Wider Bandwidth 
When the usage of wireless communication system became more extensive, the 
lower-frequency range became overpopulated leading to EMI (electromagnetic 
interference) issues. It became inevitable to move toward higher-frequency range. 
This yielded wider bandwidth, facilitating full utilization of technological advance-
ments in improved techniques and components. Wider bandwidth leads to higher 
data rate of communication systems. For example, 10% bandwidth at 1 MHz is 
100 kHz, which can provide a transmission/reception data rate of 100 kbps, whereas 
for the same percentage bandwidth at 10 GHz is 1 GHz, which in turn will provide 
much improved data rate of 1Gpbs [6, 8, 13]. This characteristic of high frequency 
will be further elucidated when wireless applications will be covered. 
3.2 
Insertion Phase of Components/Interconnects 
One of the important characteristic features of high-frequency waves stem from the 
fact that with increase in frequency, wavelength becomes smaller and smaller and, 
thus, becomes comparable or smaller than the sizes of commonly used electronic 
components, devices, and interconnects. This leads to rapid-phase variation of the 
signal passing through them, necessitating modiﬁcations in commonly used low-
frequency circuit theory based on voltage-current. 
To bring out this important concept of high-frequency waves, Fig. 2 is consid-
ered, wherein a small length of a metallic wire connects a voltage source to a load 
through two ammeters [12]. At low frequency, the current reading I1 and I2 would 
be the same, which is in consonance with conventional circuit theory, whereas at 
high frequency starting from RF, readings I1 and I2 will not be equal! It is not 
that the circuit theory is wrong, but some additional parameters have to be taken 
into account at high frequency. This variation of I1 and I2 over the length l is 
explained using the characteristic of amplitude-distance variation, which is known 
as wavelength. Assuming sinusoidal signal, when wavelength is much larger than 
the circuit dimension l, there will not be any noticeable variation of amplitude of the 
signal, whereas when l is comparable to the wavelength, there will be appreciable 
amplitude variation. This high-frequency circuit behavior is further explained in 
Fig. 3.

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
5
Fig. 2 Wire connecting a voltage source to a load; current ﬂow 
Figure 3a shows one cycle variation of the signal over the length, which is known 
as wavelength (λ). It corresponds to 360◦ phase difference and time period T. At low 
frequency of 300 kHz, λ = 1 km. Assuming that the wire length l as shown in Fig. 
2 equals to 3 cm, when it is mapped on wavelength of 1 km, it appears as a dot 
on the wavelength, as shown in Fig. 3b. The electrical path length travelled by the 
signal through l is negligibly small; thus, amplitude remains constant as ‘A’, and 
both the ammeters read same value of current. Next, we move to another example 
of higher frequency of 3 GHz with λ = 10 cm and map the same wire length of 
l = 3 cm around the same position as that of low-frequency case of Fig. 3b. The  
length covers around one third of λ indicating the insertion phase of the wire as 
108◦ and amplitude changes from A1 to A2. This is the reason for different readings 
of two ammeters in Fig. 2. 
To sum up the discussions, at lower frequencies, λ is very large that the phase 
change is insigniﬁcant across the dimensions of an element/component. One deals 
with only magnitude of voltage-current in the low-frequency circuit theory based 
on Kirchoff’s Law. At high frequencies, there is signiﬁcant variation of the phase 
of voltage-current over the physical dimensions of the element/device, as they are 
of the order of the λ. Consequently, Kirchhoff’s law-based analysis and concept 
of voltage-current are inadequate to represent the high frequency circuit behavior 
[6–10]. 
In other words, short λ means that for electrical effects, the propagation time 
from one end in a circuit to another end is comparable to the time period T of the 
exciting oscillating voltage-currents. It again means that conventional circuit theory 
no longer holds good to describe the high-frequency electrical phenomena [6–8]. 
Variations of amplitude and phase of the signal while passing through the compo-
nent represent its wave nature. Therefore, it is necessary to perform the analysis in 
terms of the associated electric and magnetic ﬁelds with circuit elements/device. In 
essence, high-frequency engineering deals with Maxwell’s equations, rigorous solu-
tions of which provide the wholistic description of electromagnetic ﬁelds at every 
point in the circuit [14–17]. The standard low-frequency circuit theory then becomes 
an approximation of these broader electromagnetic theory based on Maxwell’s

6
K. P. Ray
Fig. 3 Wire length ‘l’ on wavelength; (a) wavelength (b) ‘l’ represented on wavelength at 300 kHz 
(c) ‘l’ represented on wavelength at 3 GHz 
equations. Transmission line theory works as the transition between Kirchoff’s law-
based circuit theory and Maxwell’s equation-based ﬁeld theory, wherein instead of 
considering only magnitude of voltage and current, their special variation (phase) 
is brought in. Here, voltage-current waves, forward moving (incident) and reverse 
moving (reﬂected), are considered to get terminal characteristics of circuits.

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
7
3.3 
Higher Antenna Gain 
At high frequencies, wavelengths are shorter, which facilitates the development of 
high-directivity antennas. Antenna directivity, which is inversely proportional to 
beamwidths, in terms of its aperture (area) A, is given as: 
StartLayout 1st Row upper D equals StartFraction 4 pi upper A Over lamda squared EndFraction EndLayoutD = 4πA
λ2
(1) 
As can be noted from Eq. (1) that antenna directivity is proportional to its 
electrical area/size, at high frequencies, more directivity (smaller beamwidth) is 
obtained for a given physical antenna area. In other words, for the same directivity, 
antenna size becomes much larger as compared to that at high frequency. Also, 
antennas radiate efﬁciently if their size is comparable to the wavelength, which in 
turn yields higher gain. Further, at higher frequencies, antennas become compact, 
which is convenient for mobile applications. Additionally, high-frequency signals 
get reﬂected from perfect metallic surfaces, which can be very effectively utilized to 
develop highly efﬁcient radiator/receptors for wireless system. Further, it enhances 
retrodirective reﬂections increasing the radar cross-section (RCS) of the target. 
These aspects have very important consequences while realizing various high-
frequency systems. 
3.4 
Distributed Elements/Components 
Lumped elements, such as the carbon resistors, mica-capacitors, and compact 
inductors are used in low-frequency circuits. Because of the advancement in the 
ﬁeld of microelectronics, some high-frequency resistors, capacitors, and inductors 
have also been realized, but their usage in high frequencies is limited because of 
smaller wavelength. Consequently, in high-frequency systems, distributed circuit 
elements are often employed, wherein the phase of the signal (voltage-current) 
varies signiﬁcantly over the physical extent of the device as these are comparable to 
the wavelength. These elements are realized using small sections of transmission 
lines. For example, a short-circuited transmission line with length less than λ/4 
realizes an inductor, whereas in an open-circuited transmission line, same length 
would be a capacitor [7–10]. 
Another way of interpretation why lumped elements cannot be used at higher 
frequency is that the energy does not penetrate into the component and travels 
only on the outside surface/skin of the conductor. This high-frequency-related 
phenomenon is known as skin effect. The corresponding depth inside the conductor 
up to which the high-frequency energy penetrates is known as skin depth (δ). The 
formula for skin depth is given as:

8
K. P. Ray
StartLayout 1st Row delta equals StartFraction 1 Over StartRoot pi sigma f mu EndRoot EndFraction EndLayoutδ =
1
√πσf μ
(2) 
where σ is the conductivity and μ is the permeability of the material and f is the 
frequency of operation. 
As is noted from Eq. (2), the δ depth is dependent on the frequency and the 
material used. The value of δ for a commonly used metal copper at 3 GHz is 
0.000115 mm, which indicates that the energy truly travels along the top surface 
of the metal. This is the reason for realizing various high-frequency circuits on a 
printed circuit board (PCB) with copper, the thickness of which is 0.0356 mm (for 
1 oz of copper). Sometimes, gold plating of similar thickness is done for obtaining 
higher conductivity. 
3.5 
Characteristic Impedance 
Characteristic impedance (in ohms) determines the ﬂow of high-frequency energy 
through a transmission line or in a system. It is dynamic impedance that does 
not represent an ohmic loss and entirely depends on the physical and electrical 
characteristics of the transmission line. Most often, the value of characteristic 
impedance used in high frequency is 50 Ω, which is not an arbitrary value but has 
semblance of order in it [6, 8, 10, 18]. Considering Fig. 4, it is noted that for a 
particular transmission line, 30 Ω gives the maximum power handling capability, 
whereas 77 Ω yields the lowest attenuation. Therefore, the compromise between 
30 Ω and 77 Ω is chosen as 50 Ω for ideal characteristic impedance. 
The characteristic impedance becomes the reference parameter for high-
frequency systems as most of the input-output ports have the same value of 
impedance (50 Ω). Measurements are performed in terms of signal/ﬁeld amplitudes, 
phase differences, and power carried by waves with ports impedance of 50 Ω and 
unused ports terminated in 50 Ω. Here, the relative power or their ratio is expressed 
in decibel (dB), whereas absolute power is quantiﬁed with reference to 1 milliwatt 
(mW), which in decibels is denoted as dBm. It represents an absolute number in 
milliwatts. Commonly used power levels, starting from 1 microwatt to a megawatt, 
are represented in dBm in Table 2. 
At low frequencies, the maximum power transfer theorem gives the power 
delivered to the load, which, at high frequency, takes the form of impedance 
matching of the load with respect to the characteristic impedance of 50 Ω. If the  
load is not matched to 50 Ω, there will be reﬂected signal. The ratio of reﬂected 
signal to the incident signal is known as reﬂection coefﬁcient. It is the voltage ratio 
that is derived from power. The superimposition of reﬂected and incident signal 
gives rise to the standing wave pattern along the transmission line. High-frequency 
measurements are based on this standing wave pattern. The amplitudes and phase 
relationship of the reﬂection coefﬁcient determine the impedance characteristics of 
circuits/components.

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
9
Fig. 4 Choice of characteristic impedance based on attenuation and power handling capability 
[18] 
Table 2 Commonly used 
power levels in dBm 
Power 
1 μW 
1 mW  
1 W  
1 kW  
1 MW  
dBm
−30
0
30
60
90 
The reﬂection coefﬁcient varies between 0 and 1, where the former indicates 
no reﬂection and hence perfectly matched condition; the latter represents extreme 
mismatch. The standing wave amplitude depends on how well the port is matched 
with the transmission line. When there is no reﬂection (for perfect matching 
condition), standing waves will not get formed, which means the standing wave 
ratio (SWR) will be 1. In the case of 100% mismatch, SWR will be inﬁnity. 
The reﬂection coefﬁcient, when expressed in dB, is known as return loss (RL), 
which indicates the reﬂected power (loss) from the device due to mismatch. Thus, 
for a perfectly matched condition, the return loss will be a large negative number 
in dB, the corresponding values of reﬂection coefﬁcient and SWR will be 0 and 1, 
respectively. The value of RL for a large mismatch would be 0 dB with respective 
values of reﬂection coefﬁcient and SWR of 1 and inﬁnity.

10
K. P. Ray
3.6 
Resonance Phenomena 
High frequencies exhibit interesting feature of various atomic, molecular, and 
nuclear resonances, creating variety of applications in domains of basic science, 
industrial processing/monitoring, bulk heating/drying, medical diagnostics and 
treatments, etc. 
As is evident from elaborations in preceding sections, there are challenges in 
dealing with high-frequency waves starting from the analysis itself, where one has 
to employ ﬁeld theory based on Maxwell’s equations that has mathematical rigor. 
Secondly, as the components size is comparable or bigger than the wavelength, 
their realization with tight tolerances becomes that much complex. Thirdly, the 
main challenge exists for generation of high-frequency signals as the transit 
time of carriers through devices becomes comparable to the time period of the 
wave. Some of these challenges have been overcome by totally novel ideas and 
technological innovations. Moreover, complexities bring challenges and rewards 
hand in hand, providing unique opportunities to employ high-frequency domain for 
various applications. 
4 
Applications 
Research and study in the area of high-frequency waves (RF, microwaves, and 
millimeter waves) have led to several useful applications. Most of these applications 
are in the ﬁeld of radars, wireless networking and communication systems, security 
systems, environmental remote sensing, industrial and domestic processing, and 
medical systems. 
The majority of applications are on wireless systems, and its detailed electro-
magnetic spectrum is shown in Fig. 5. It covers some of the important wireless 
applications for all the three high-frequency wave signals [6, 8, 10]. The main 
applications are broadcast systems, cellular/mobile phones, global positioning 
systems (GPSs), PCSs, direct broadcast satellites (DBSs), radars, etc. Many more 
applications are added in recent past in this chart [10], making these systems all 
pervasive. Only the important applications of high-frequency waves are discussed 
in the following sections. 
4.1 
Radar 
Radar is a short form of radio detection and ranging (Radar), which was extensively 
researched and used during World War II. It is a high-frequency electromagnetic 
system used to detect the existence and location of the object/target [6, 8, 10].

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
11
Fig. 5 Electromagnetic spectrum for wireless applications [10] 
The increased reﬂection (RCS) of objects/targets because of their increased 
electrical size, coupled with higher gain and compact phased array antennas with 
fast electronic beam scanning, makes high frequencies preferred for developing 
radar systems. Radars have been developed across high-frequency bands. Starting 
from the lower end of RF band 3–30 MHz, where signal is bent from the ionosphere, 
long-distance over-the-horizon (OTH) radars are developed. On the extreme higher 
end of mm wave, W-band active Seeker and mm wave imaging radars have been 
realized. 
Radar systems ﬁnd applications in various military, commercial, and scien-
tiﬁc areas. In the ﬁeld of military applications, radars have been developed for 
detection/tracking of airborne objects like drones, aircraft, spacecraft, and missiles, 
navigation of air and marine, guidance of missile, Fire control, weapon fuses, etc. 
Radars play very important and increasing roles in modern-day electronics warfare 
(EW) and, therefore, national security of various countries. 
The main civilian application of radars are weather radars, surveillance and 
landing at airports, navigation, speed guns, security alarms, etc. Radars are also used 
in scientiﬁc applications such as remote sensing, astronomy, imaging/mapping, level 
and distance measurements, etc. 
4.2 
Wireless Communication System 
Various wireless communication systems are depicted in the chart given in Fig. 5. 
Out of these systems, the cellular telephone has become indispensable in our day-to-
day life. It enables functionalities such as mobile communication, voice/video call,

12
K. P. Ray
data sharing, messages, emails, etc. between people nearby or far away or in another 
part of the globe. It has been literally providing voice and data access to “everyone, 
everywhere, and every time.” Cellular networks have really revolutionized the 
telecommunication systems and the way in which human beings communicate with 
each other. 
The rapidly growing consumer demands, increasing business, and constant 
advancements in wireless miniaturized/improved components and efﬁcient tech-
nology have put cellular telephones and data systems in constant evolution mode. 
It involves the use of both old and new technologies, existing and newly allotted 
frequencies, advanced multiple access techniques, and international agreements 
between service providers/governments/regulatory agencies. 
The earliest cellular telephone system is usually referred to as ﬁrst-generation 
systems, or 1G, which brought in mobile devices. Second-generation cellular 
systems (2G) yielded improved performance employing various digital modulation 
schemes. This network also brought the ability to text and receive/send data across 
mobile devices. Then 3G brought in the mobile Web, and 4G made it faster, which 
was further improved by introducing the 5G. It is responsible for making more 
people connected than ever. Telecom carriers will redeﬁne high-speed wireless 
communications in 6G networks [19, 20]. 
Some of the important features of various generations of mobile communication 
technologies have been compared in Table 3. Each generation is an upgrade in the 
cellular network with an improvement over the older generation. It was discussed 
earlier in Sect. 3.1 that to take advantage of technological advancements, operating 
frequencies were increased in each wireless systems, not forgetting that lower 
frequency had quickly become overcrowded because of increased applications. It is 
noted from the table that for each generation, increased operating frequency brought 
in higher bandwidth, which in turn increased speed and data rate, and a host of other 
featural improvements. 
4.3 
Satellite Wireless System 
Except for lower end of RF, high-frequency signals are neither bent nor absorbed by 
the ionospheric layers and travel in sight line. This makes them suitable for satellite 
communication/broadcast, space communication, and radio astronomy. Satellite 
communication with a small group of satellites can cover the whole globe, including 
far-ﬂung areas such as sea, mountain, desert, etc., where cellular and conventional 
wireless systems cannot be deployed. Satellites were launched to provide voice, 
video, and data connectivity worldwide. But this service was closed down as it could 
not be made proﬁtable. On the other hand, satellite systems providing navigational 
global positioning systems (GPS) and direct broadcast systems (DBS) are highly 
popular and successful [6, 8].

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
13
Table 3 Comparison of features of various generations of mobile communication technologies 
Technologies 
Year introduced 
New feature introduced
Frequency
Bandwidth
Channel capacity 
1G
1979
Analog cell phone, calling
150–900 MHz
~30 KHz
~2.4 kbps 
2G/2.5G
1991
Digital, SMS, conference, MMS, 
long-distance call tracking, internet (in 2.5G) 
1.8 GHz
~ 200 kHz
~64 kbps 
3G
2001
Cheap data, GPS, broadband internet, SD 
video, streaming 
1.6–2 GHz
~100 MHz
~2 mbps 
4G
2009
Cheaper data, HD streaming, smart wearables, 
secured communication 
2–8 GHz
100 MHz
~100Mbps 
5G
2019
Internet of things, MIMO, cloud storage, 
cloud computing 
3–30 GHz
100 × BW/unit area 
10 GBPS 
6G (expected) 
2030s
High system capacity, global coverage, AI
20 GHz–10 THz 
Undeﬁned now
Up to 3 Tbps

14
K. P. Ray
4.4 
Scientiﬁc Applications 
When materials are subjected to high-frequency periodic electromagnetic ﬁelds, 
their atomic, molecular, and nuclear systems show different resonance phenomena. 
Many of the resonance absorption lines fall under microwave/millimeter-wave 
frequency range. These resonant lines are characteristic of molecular structure and 
intramolecular levels of energies. Hence, high-frequency waves become powerful 
tools to study basic characteristics of various materials experimentally. These 
are used extensively to quantify the density/concentration of various gases. For 
example, for control of pollution, emission of pollutants from the exhaust chimneys 
can be continuously measured. Likewise, there are many applications related to the 
resonance phenomenon [6, 8]. 
4.5 
Industrial/Medical Applications 
Materials having polar molecular structures absorb high-frequency energy and get 
heated. Heat generated inside the material is because of molecular friction; thus, it 
is generated inside-out and is uniform. This aspect of high-frequency heating has 
been adopted for numerous industrial applications. Some of these are: 
1. For agro-industries: drying of seeds; grains; blanching of vegetables; drying of 
fruits; making fruit powder; drying of spices; dehydration of grains/fruits/food 
products, soyabean, pulses, etc.; seed germination; increasing shelf life of food 
products including milk; converting butter into ghee; tea drying; oil extrac-
tion/separation, etc. 
2. Processing of ores/minerals 
3. Metal extraction 
4. Metal welding 
5. Processing of chemicals, polymers, nanomaterials, etc. 
6. Rubber vulcanization, etc. 
7. For medical applications: hyperthermia, irradiation, medical LINAC, disinfec-
tion of hospital waste, neutralization of COVID-19 virus, sterilization of medical 
instruments/tapes/cottons/laundry, etc. 
This list keeps increasing every year, indicating the usefulness of high-frequency 
waves. 
There are several other new and traditional applications of high frequency waves 
such as power beaming, RF identiﬁcation (RFID) system, ultra-wideband (UWB) 
systems, radiometry, plasma effects, etc.

Introduction to Important Concepts of RF, Microwaves, and mm Waves Technologies
15
References 
1. A.A. Oliner, Historical perspectives on microwave ﬁeld theory. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory 
Tech. MTT-32, 1022–1045 (1984) 
2. T.K. Sarkar, R.J. Mailloux, A.A. Oliner, M. Salazar-Palma, D. Sengupta, History of Wireless 
(Wiley, Hoboken, 2006) 
3. D.R.J. White, Electromagnetic Shielding Design: Materials and performs, MSEE/PE (Inter-
ference Control Technologies, Don White Consultants Inc., Gainesville, 1986) 
4. International Journal of EMCTM, Interference Technology Engineers’ Master, 1976–2001 
5. G.D. Vendelin, A.M. Pavio, U.L. Rohde, Microwave Circuit Design using Linear and Non-
linear Techniques, 2nd edn. (Engineering Rockwell Collins Phoenix Design Center Synergy 
Microwave Corporation, 2021) 
6. D.M. Pozar, Microwave and RF Design of Wireless Systems (Wiley, Hoboken, 2001) 
7. R.E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering, 2nd edn. (Wiley-IEEE Press, Hoboken, 
2001) 
8. K.C. Gupta, Microwaves (New Age International, New Delhi, 1979) 
9. S.Y. Lio, Microwave Devices and Circuits (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1990) 
10. T.S. Laverghetta, Microwaves and Wireless Simpliﬁed (Artech House, Boston/London, 2005) 
11. M.L. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New Delhi, 
1981) 
12. D. Roddy, Microwave Technology (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1986) 
13. D.K. Mishra, Radio-Frequency and Microwave Communication Circuits (Wiley Inter- Science, 
2004) 
14. J.D. Kraus, D.A. Fleisch, Electromagnetics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999) 
15. F. Ulaby, Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics (Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
2010) 
16. S.  Ramo, T.R. Whinnery, T. van Duzer,  Fields and Waves in Communication Electronics 
(Wiley, New York, 1994) 
17. C.A. Balanis, Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics (Wiley, New York, 1989) 
18. T.S. Laverghetta, Modern Microwave Measurements and Techniques (Artech House, Norwood, 
1988) 
19. https://www.ieee.org/searchresults/index.html?q=3g+cellular+network#gsc.tab=0&gsc.q=3g% 
20cellular%20network&gsc.page=1 
20. https://www.emfexplained.info/?ID=25196

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: 
A Case Study of Monopole Antenna 
Hemant Kumar and Girish Kumar 
1 
Introduction 
One of the most popular antennas employed in mobile communication systems is 
the monopole antenna. Monopole antennas are unbalanced and can be matched with 
50 Ω coaxial feed. This eliminates the need for a balun, which is required for a 
dipole antenna [1, 2]. 
For a monopole antenna mounted on an inﬁnite ground plane, the analysis and 
empirical formula for ﬁnding the resonant length and wire radius from a given 
resonance frequency are available [1]. However, monopole antennas are generally 
mounted on a ﬁnite-sized ground plane. The size and shape of the ground plane may 
vary based on the application and space restrictions. There are some applications 
where monopole antennas are mounted on a very small ground plane, such as a 
walkie-talkie, cell phone, etc. There are some other applications that can provide 
large ground planes, such as monopole antennas mounted on cars, trucks, aircraft, 
etc. Hence, it is important to study the effect of the ﬁnite ground plane on the 
characteristics of a monopole antenna. 
This work was done at EE Dept, IIT Bombay 
H. Kumar (✉) 
Electronics and Communication Engineering Department, National Institute of Technology 
Tiruchriappalli, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
e-mail: hemant@nitt.edu 
G. Kumar 
Electrical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India 
e-mail: gkumar@ee.iitb.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_2
17

18
H. Kumar and G. Kumar
Some papers are available for monopole antennas on a ﬁnite ground plane [3– 
13]. Different techniques based on the size and shape of the ﬁnite ground plane are 
given for variation of the input impedance of the monopole antenna [3–9]. These 
techniques are different in their complexity, accuracy, and assumptions considered 
based on the shape and size of the ﬁnite ground plane. Some of the techniques 
assume effects of magnetic edge current [3], vertex diffraction [5], physical surface 
current [9], etc. The effect on the radiation pattern of a monopole antenna mounted 
on a ﬁnite ground plane with circular and rectangular shapes is presented [9–11]. 
In [12, 13], the effect of thickness and conductivity of ﬁnite ground plane has been 
analyzed, respectively. In the literature, the main focus of the work was the input 
impedance and radiation pattern variation of the monopole antenna with respect to 
the shape and size of the ﬁnite ground plane. 
In this chapter, the effect of the ﬁnite circular ground plane on various charac-
teristics of a monopole antenna, such as reﬂection coefﬁcient, resonance frequency, 
input impedance, bandwidth, directivity, and radiation pattern, is analyzed. A ﬁnite 
circular ground plane with inﬁnite conductivity and negligible thickness has been 
considered. An approximate design equation for calculating the resonant length of a 
monopole antenna mounted on a small circular ground plane for a given resonance 
frequency is proposed. The analysis is done using a commercially available IE3D 
software based on the method of moments (MoM) [14]. The characteristics of 
a monopole antenna on a ﬁnite ground plane and inﬁnite ground plane are also 
compared. 
2 
Design Speciﬁcations 
A monopole antenna mounted on a ﬁnite circular ground plane is shown in Fig. 
1. A cylindrical wire of radius r and length l has been considered as a monopole 
mounted on a ﬁnite circular ground plane of radius R. Initially, the parameters of a 
monopole antenna such as length and radius of monopole have been chosen based 
on the formula for the inﬁnite ground plane as given below [1]: 
StartLayout 1st Row l plus r equals 0.24 lamda i EndLayoutl + r = 0.24λi
(1) 
where λi is the wavelength corresponding to the resonance frequency, ﬁ of a 
monopole antenna mounted on the inﬁnite ground plane. 
3 
Parametric Analysis 
In this section, the effect of varying the radius of the circular ground plane (R) for  
a ﬁxed value of length (l) and radius (r) of a monopole on various characteristics

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole Antenna
19
Fig. 1 Monopole antenna on 
a ﬁnite circular ground plane 
of the antenna, viz., reﬂection coefﬁcient, resonance frequency, input impedance, 
bandwidth, radiation pattern, and directivity, has been analyzed. 
Initially, ﬁxed values of length, l = 90 mm, and wire radius, r = 2 mm, have been 
chosen, and corresponding resonance frequency and wavelength are obtained using 
Eq. (1) as  ﬁ= 783 MHz and λi = 383 mm, respectively. 
3.1 
Effect on the Resonance Frequency of a Monopole 
Antenna 
Figure 2 shows the reﬂection coefﬁcient, |S11|, of the monopole antenna versus 
frequency for different sizes of the ground plane. The radius of the circular ground 
plane is varied from a very small value of 11 mm (0.028λi) to a value that is 
comparable to the wavelength. 
For comparison, simulation is also done for the inﬁnite ground plane. The curves 
are plotted for two different regions based on the size of the ground plane. In Fig. 
2a, the reﬂection coefﬁcient versus frequency plot is shown for the ground plane 
radius values (11, 18, 36, and 90) mm, which are less than or equal to the length of 
the monopole antenna. As the ground plane radius increases from 11 mm (0.028λi) 
to 90 mm (0.235λi), the resonance frequency decreases from 1.22 GHz to 0.8 GHz. 
For the ground plane radius greater than the length of the monopole antenna, the 
variation in the resonance frequency is small, which can be observed in Fig. 2b. 
As the radius of the ground plane increases from 144 mm (0.376λi) to inﬁnite size 
ground plane size, the resonance frequency ﬁrst decreases to 0.76 GHz and then 
saturates to nearly a constant value of 0.783 GHz (value for the inﬁnite ground 
plane).

20
H. Kumar and G. Kumar
Fig. 2 Reﬂection coefﬁcient versus frequency for different values of ground plane radius (a) less  
than or equal to and (b) greater than the monopole length, l = 90 mm, for r = 2 mm (0.0052λi) 
The resonance frequency variation with respect to variation in the ground plane 
radius by keeping the constant value of monopole radius, r = 2 mm, is plotted in Fig. 
3. For a small ground plane, as its size increases, the effective length of the antenna 
(from monopole tip to periphery of circular ground plane) increases, so resonance 
frequency decreases. For larger ground planes, the effect on resonance frequency 
is small. It can be observed from Fig. 3 that as the ground plane radius increases 
from 11 mm (0.028λi) to 198 mm (0.5λi), the resonance frequency decreases from 
1.22 GHz to 0.76 GHz. Further increase in ground plane radius shows comparatively

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole Antenna
21
Fig. 3 Variation of the resonance frequency of monopole antenna with the ground plane radius for 
l = 90 mm and r = 2 mm (0.0052λi) 
lesser variation in the resonance frequency, and then it settles to a constant value of 
ﬁ = 0.783 GHz, which is the resonance frequency as calculated from Eq. (1) for  
inﬁnite ground plane size. 
A similar analysis has been carried out for other values of wire radius for 
monopole antenna mounted on the ﬁnite ground plane. Based on these analyses and 
by using the curve ﬁtting technique, the expression for approximately calculating 
the resonance frequency of a monopole antenna mounted on a ﬁnite circular ground 
plane with wire radius, r < 0.016λi, is given as: 
StartLayout 1st Row l plus r plus x upper R equals 0.48 lamda r EndLayoutl + r + xR = 0.48λr
(2) 
where λr represents wavelength corresponding to the resonance frequency of the 
monopole antenna on a ﬁnite ground plane of radius, R, and x is given by: 
StartLayout 1st Row x equals StartLayout Enlarged left brace 1st Row 1st Column 2.2 2nd Column for upper R less than 0.04 lamda i 2nd Row 1st Column minus 0.76 ln left parenthesis upper R right parenthesis plus 4.4 2nd Column for 0.04 lamda i less than or equals upper R less than 0.45 lamda i EndLayout EndLayoutx =
⎧2.2
for R < 0.04λi
−0.76 ln(R) + 4.4 for 0.04λi ≤R < 0.45λi
(3) 
For ground plane radius, R > 0.45λi, Eq. (1) can be used to calculate the 
approximate value of resonance frequency. 
Percentage error versus ground plane radius plot is shown in Fig. 4. The  
approximate error between the value calculated from Eq. (2) and the simulated value 
is within ±3%. 
For a given resonance frequency, fr, for a monopole antenna on ﬁnite circular 
ground plane with radius (R), the length of monopole antenna (l) can be obtained 
using the following equation:

22
H. Kumar and G. Kumar
Fig. 4 Percentage error in resonance frequency of monopole antenna versus ground plane radius 
for l = 90 mm and r = 2 mm (0.0052λi) 
StartLayout 1st Row l equals 0.48 left parenthesis dollar sign c dollar sign slash dollar sign f r dollar sign right parenthesis minus r minus x upper R EndLayoutl = 0.48
⎛c/
f r
⎞
−r −xR
(4) 
where c is the velocity of light in air. 
3.2 
Effect on the Input Impedance of Monopole Antenna 
Figure 5 shows the variation of input impedance with ground plane radius for 
l = 90 mm and r = 2 mm (0.0052λi). Here also the plots are split into two regions 
depending on the size of the ground plane. Figure 5a shows the input impedance 
variation for the ground plane radius less than or equal to the length of the monopole. 
As the radius of the ground plane increases from 11 mm to 90 mm, the input 
impedance of the monopole antenna shifts toward the left side, and its real part 
decreases from approximately 100 Ω to 21 Ω, and it is matched with 50 Ω for 
R = 18 mm (0.047λi). Figure 5b shows the input impedance plot for the radius 
of the ground plane greater than the length of the monopole. As the ground plane 
radius increases from 144 mm to 216 mm, the input impedance ﬁrst decreases, and 
then it increases with a further increase in ground plane radius. Finally, the real part 
of input impedance approaches a value of approximately 36 Ω, which is obtained 
for inﬁnite ground plane size.

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole Antenna
23
Fig. 5 Input impedance variation with respect to ground plane radius (a) less than or equal to and 
(b) greater than the monopole length, l = 90 mm, for r = 2 mm (0.0052λi) 
3.3 
Effect on the Radiation Pattern of a Monopole Antenna 
Figure 6 shows the radiation pattern of a monopole antenna for different ground 
plane sizes at their corresponding resonance frequency obtained from Fig. 2 for 
r = 2 mm. For a smaller ground plane size (R < λi/4), the radiation pattern of 
the monopole antenna is similar to that of a dipole antenna, and the maximum 
radiation occurs in the direction perpendicular to the monopole, as shown in Fig. 
6a. As the ground plane size increases (R > λi/4), the radiation pattern changes, and 
the maximum radiation occurs at an angle “θ” with respect to the ground plane, as 
shown in Fig. 6b. For inﬁnite ground plane radius, the radiation is only at the top 
hemisphere with maxima in the direction of the ground plane. For all the ground 
plane sizes, the radiation pattern is uniform (circular) in the horizontal plane. 
3.4 
Effect on the Directivity of a Monopole Antenna 
Figure 7 shows the variation of directivity for different values of the ground plane 
radius. For ground plane radius, R < 0.1λi, the variation in the directivity is less 
than 0.1 dB, but for ground plane radius equal to or greater than the length of the 
monopole, the variation in the directivity value is large from approximately 1 dBi to 
4 dBi. For the inﬁnite ground plane, simulated directivity is 5.1 dBi at the resonance 
frequency, which matches with the theoretical value of a λi/4 monopole. 
For a ﬁnite ground plane with a larger radius, there is constructive and destructive 
interference between the main current component and the reﬂected current compo-

24
H. Kumar and G. Kumar
Fig. 6 Radiation pattern variation with the ground plane radius (a) less than and (b) greater than 
the monopole length, l = 90 mm, for r = 2 mm (0.0052λi) 
nent from the periphery of the circular ground plane, which behaves as an open 
circuit at the end. The waves, which are reﬂected for the radius of odd integer 
multiples of λi/4, will be 180◦ out of phase at the feed point, which will lead 
to destructive interference, and those which are reﬂected for the radius of even 
integer multiples of λi/4 will be in phase at the feed point, resulting in constructive 
interference. A similar phenomenon can be observed in the current distribution. 
Current distributions for a monopole antenna at different frequencies, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2, 
and 1.5 GHz for R = 288 mm (0.752λi), l = 90 mm, and r = 2 mm, are shown in Fig. 
8. The blue concentric rings on the ground plane appeared at a distance of integer 
multiple of λi/4 from the center of monopole antenna showing the destructive 
interference, which is the cause of standing wave pattern in the directivity plot for a 
ﬁnite ground plane of R ≥λi/4. 
4 
Conclusions 
A monopole antenna mounted on a ﬁnite circular ground plane is studied. The effect 
of varying the radius of a circular ground plane on the various characteristics of a 
monopole antenna such as reﬂection coefﬁcient, resonance frequency, bandwidth, 
input impedance, radiation pattern, and directivity has been analyzed. A simple 
approximate expression for ﬁnding the resonant length of monopole antenna 
mounted on a ﬁnite circular ground plane for a given resonance frequency is 
proposed. Also, the normalized value of ground plane radius is given for impedance 
matching with 50 Ω coaxial feed.

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole Antenna
25
Fig. 7 Directivity versus frequency for different values of ground plane radius (a) less than or  
equal to and (b) greater than the monopole length, l = 90 mm, for r = 2 mm (0.0052λi)

26
H. Kumar and G. Kumar
Fig. 8 Current distribution of 
monopole antenna at (a) 0.6,  
(b) 0.9, (c) 1.2, and (d) 
1.5 GHz for R = 288 mm 
(0.752λi), l = 90 mm, and 
r = 2 mm

Finite Circular Ground Plane Effects: A Case Study of Monopole Antenna
27
References 
1. C.A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design (Wiley-Interscience, 2005) 
2. T.A. Milligan, Modern Antenna Design (McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 2005) 
3. K. Awadalla, T. Maclean, Input impedance of a monopole antenna at the center of a ﬁnite 
ground plane. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 26(2), 244–248 (1978) 
4. P.E. Zimourtopoulos, J.N. Sahalos, G.A. Thiele, Input impedance of a monopole antenna on a 
ﬁnite polygonal ground plane. IEE Proc. H Microw. Opt. Antennas 130(4), 276–280 (1983) 
5. M. Hassan, Solution of a monopole antenna over a circular ﬁnite disk, in 1986 Antennas and 
Propagation Society International Symposium, Philadelphia, PA, USA, (1986), pp. 133–136 
6. M. Weiner, Monopole element at the center of a circular ground plane whose radius is small or 
comparable to a wavelength. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 35(5), 488–495 (1987) 
7. J. Richmond, Monopole antenna on circular disk. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 32(12), 1282– 
1287 (1984) 
8. J. Richmond, Monopole antenna on circular disk over ﬂat earth. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
33(6), 633–637 (1985) 
9. K. Awadalla, T. Maclean, Monopole antenna at center of circular ground plane: Input 
impedance and radiation pattern. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 27(2), 151–153 (1979) 
10. Z. Živkovi´c, D. Seni´c, C. Bodendorf, J. Skrzypczynski, A. Šaroli´c, Radiation pattern and 
impedance of a quarter wavelength monopole antenna above a ﬁnite ground plane, in Soft-
COM 2012, 20th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer 
Networks, Split, (2012), pp. 1–5 
11. L. Kibona, Analysis of the effects of rectangular ground plane on radiation pattern of the 
monopole antenna. Int. J. Sci. Res. Publ. 3(11), 1–4 (2013) 
12. Z. Shen, R.H. MacPhie, Input impedance of a monopole over a circular ground-plane of ﬁnite 
thickness, in IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium. 1998 Digest. 
Antennas: Gateways to the Global Network. Held in Conjunction with: USNC/URSI National 
Radio Science Meeting Atlanta, GA, USA, vol. 3, (1998), pp. 1726–1729 
13. C. Balanis, D. DeCarlo, Monopole antenna patterns on ﬁnite size composite ground planes. 
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 30(4), 764–768 (1982) 
14. IE3D Mentor Graphics, ver. 15.3, USA (2015)

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole 
Antennas 
Rajbala Solanki 
1 
Introduction 
In modern portable communication systems, integrating multiple communication 
technologies within the same system has elevated the demand for compact and 
wideband antennas. Dipole antennas, favored for their omnidirectional radiation, 
ﬁnd suitability in numerous wireless applications. However, dipole antennas with 
a small width-to-length ratio inherently offer narrow bandwidth. To address this 
limitation, various methods outlined in the literature aim to broaden the bandwidth. 
As the width of dipole antennas increases, so does the bandwidth, albeit at 
the expense of ﬂuctuating radiation patterns across the impedance bandwidth, 
heightened cross-polarization levels, and increased antenna size. Diverse shapes of 
dipole arms have been explored to augment dipole width and subsequently broaden 
the bandwidth [1–5]. Additionally, the introduction of parasitic resonators [6, 7], 
stubs [8], slots [9], stubs combined with slots [10], and passive elements [11] has 
been reported to enhance bandwidth, albeit often accompanied by variations in 
radiation pattern and larger antenna dimensions. 
Over the past decade, a notable technique known as mode compression has 
emerged as an effective means to broaden the bandwidth of various antenna types, 
including slot antennas [12, 13], microstrip antennas [14, 15], and dipole antennas 
[16–24]. In this approach, one mode is compressed in proximity to another mode, 
resulting in an expanded bandwidth. For instance, in a slot antenna conﬁgurations 
This research was conducted at IIT Bombay. 
R. Solanki (✉) 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore 
e-mail: rajbala@nus.edu.sg 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_3
29

30
R. Solanki
reported in [12], the fundamental mode is shifted up and combined with a third-
order mode to achieve increased bandwidth. Similarly, in patch antennas, modes are 
manipulated through various means such as loading vias or shorting pins [14] to  
achieve similar bandwidth expansion. In the realm of dual-mode dipole antennas, 
innovative strategies have been employed to broaden the bandwidth while main-
taining compactness. Techniques such as loading electrically small loop resonators 
[16–18], vias [19], stubs [20–22], capacitive loading [23], and combination of 
stub and loop [24] have been utilized to manipulate mode frequencies, effectively 
widening the bandwidth. 
In brief, the pursuit of wideband antennas in modern communication systems 
has spurred the development of various techniques, including mode compression, 
to address the challenges of limited bandwidth within compact form factors. These 
advancements hold promise for the continued evolution of wireless communication 
technologies. 
2 
Dipole Antenna 
Initially, a dipole antenna is designed to operate at approximately 3.3 GHz in 
its fundamental mode, serving as a benchmark for comparison. The antenna is 
constructed on a substrate featuring speciﬁc parameters: a dielectric constant of 
epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 2.55ϵr = 2.55, a substrate thickness h of 60 mil (1.5241.524 mm), and a loss tangent tangent deltatan δ of 
0.0180.018. Through the application of dipole design equation, the dipole’s dimensions 
are determined, resulting in a length (L) of 34 mm and  a width  (upper W Subscript dWd) of 4 mm. 
Given the requirement for a balanced feed in dipole antennas, simulations entail 
the connection of a “Discrete Port” between the top and bottom arms of the dipole 
antenna. This conﬁguration allows for the examination of the antenna parameters’ 
effects in isolation, devoid of any connector inﬂuence. In preparation for antenna 
prototype fabrication, the design encompasses a balun, realized through a tapered 
microstrip line, alongside a coaxial-SMA connector using CST-MWS software. 
The schematic representation of the antenna and its simulated outcomes are 
illustrated in Fig. 1. Herein, the dark- and light-colored dipole arms signify the top 
and bottom arms, respectively. Here, the dipole is fed at the center. Therefore, even 
harmonics do not get excited due to impedance mismatch as shown in Fig. 1b. The 
input impedance pertaining to the ﬁrst- and third-order modes approximates 50 upper Omega50Ω, 
while for the second-order mode, it escalates signiﬁcantly to approximately 300 upper Omega300Ω. 
Consequently, the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| plot exhibits no traces of even harmonics (second order), as 
illustrated in Fig. 1c. The fundamental mode frequency of the antenna is 3.33.3 GHz, 
while the third-order mode frequency is 9.29.2 GHz. 
Figure 2 illustrates the radiation patterns and current distributions of the antenna 
at the ﬁrst- and third-order modes. A notable distinction in the radiation patterns 
of these modes lies in the presence of side lobes, as evident in Fig. 2a,b, thereby 
constraining the practical applications of the third-order mode. This divergence 
in radiation patterns arises from differences in the current distributions at these

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
31
Fig. 1 (a) Schematic and simulated (b) input impedance and (c) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| plots of a dipole antenna 
two modes, as depicted in Fig. 2c,d. Nevertheless, by reﬁning the manipulation of 
current distributions, it becomes feasible to enhance the radiation patterns at higher 
order modes. 
3 
Stub-Loaded Dual-Mode Dipole Antenna 
3.1 
Need and Concept of Stub Loading 
As observed in Fig. 1b,c, the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| plot exhibits traces of two resonances: the 
ﬁrst-order mode resonance at 3.3 GHz and the third-order mode resonance at 9.2 
GHz. If we can manipulate the third-order mode to align it closer to the ﬁrst-
order mode, their combined effect may lead to a wider bandwidth. To achieve 
this, the designed dipole antenna is loaded with stubs, as depicted in Fig. 3. The  
stubs effectively lengthen the total path for the third-order mode while leaving the 
main path unaffected. Consequently, the third-order mode is shifted toward lower 
frequencies. The size and placement of the stubs determine the shifted frequency

32
R. Solanki
Fig. 2 Normalized radiation patterns at (a) 3.3 GHz and (b) 9.2 GHz and current distributions at 
(c) 3.3 GHz and (d) 9.2 GHz 
Fig. 3 Electric path lengths 
on the stub-loaded dipole 
antenna (dark color: top arm; 
light color: bottom arm) 
of the third-order mode. The calculation of stub parameters relies on the following 
concepts and equations: 
1. The stubs are loaded at the current null points of the shifted third-order mode. 
Consequently, the location of the stubs (or the distance from the center of the 
dipole: S) can be determined by equating the lengths of each lamda divided by 2λ/2 section of the 
shifted third-order mode.

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
33
2 left parenthesis upper S plus upper L Subscript s Baseline right parenthesis equals upper L Subscript d Baseline minus upper S plus upper L Subscript s Baseline equals one half lamda Subscript 3 n e w2(S + Ls) = Ld −S + Ls = 1
2λ3new
(1) 
upper S equals upper L Subscript d Baseline plus upper L Subscript s Baseline minus one half lamda Subscript 3 n e wS = Ld + Ls −1
2λ3new
(2) 
or 
upper S equals one fourth lamda Subscript 3 n e w Baseline minus upper L Subscript sS = 1
4λ3new −Ls
(3) 
or 
StartEnclose box bold italic upper S equals StartFraction bold italic upper L Subscript bold italic d Baseline minus bold italic upper L Subscript bold italic s Baseline Over bold 3 EndFraction EndEnclose S = Ld −Ls
3
(4) 
2. The path length for the shifted third-order mode is the sum of the dipole length 
and the lengths of the stubs. Therefore, the stub length will be given by 
2 upper L Subscript d Baseline plus 4 upper L Subscript s Baseline equals three halves lamda Subscript 3 n e w2Ld + 4Ls = 3
2λ3new
(5) 
three halves lamda 3 plus 4 upper L Subscript s Baseline equals three halves lamda Subscript 3 n e w3
2λ3 + 4Ls = 3
2λ3new
(6) 
bold right double arrow StartEnclose box bold italic upper L Subscript bold italic s Baseline equals three eighths left parenthesis bold italic lamda Subscript bold 3 bold italic n bold italic e bold italic w Baseline minus bold italic lamda bold 3 right parenthesis EndEnclose ⇒Ls = 3
8 (λ3new −λ3)
(7) 
where lamda 3λ3 represents the wavelength of the original third-order mode, lamda Subscript 3 n e wλ3new
denotes the wavelength of the new or shifted third-order mode, and upper L Subscript sLs stands for 
the stub length. Thus, depending on the desired frequency of the new or shifted 
third-order mode, the stub length can be calculated. 
In these calculations, the stub width is neglected due to its relatively smaller size 
compared to other parameters. However, the stub length, width, and position inﬂu-
ence antenna performance. Hence, a parametric analysis is presented in Sect. 3.2 to 
assess the effects of these parameters. 
3.2 
Antenna Geometry and Parametric Analysis 
Figure 4 illustrates the schematic of the stub-loaded dipole antenna for third-order 
mode compression. The antenna consists of a rectangular dipole and a symmetric 
pair of stubs loaded at an appropriate distance from the center of the dipole. A 
substrate with dielectric constant epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 2.55ϵr = 2.55, thickness h equals 1.524h = 1.524 mm, and loss 
tangent tangent delta equals 0.018tan δ = 0.018 is utilized to design the antenna. Printed in the xy-plane,

34
R. Solanki
Fig. 4 (a) Layered and (b) top and bottom views of the stub-loaded dipole antenna (Antenna 1) 
and (c) its geometrical parameters 
the antenna exhibits two-dimensional symmetries, one along the y-axis and another 
along the x-axis. As depicted in Fig. 4a,b, the two symmetric arms of the dipole 
are printed on the top and bottom sides of the substrate. In Fig. 4c, the dark- and 
light-colored arms of the dipole represent the top and bottom sides of the substrate, 
respectively. Each dipole arm is loaded with two symmetric stubs of length upper L Subscript sLs and 
width upper W Subscript sWs, positioned at a distance S from the center of the dipole. The length and 
width of the dipole are consistent with those described in Sect. 2, i.e., upper L Subscript d Baseline equals 17Ld = 17 mm 
and upper W Subscript d Baseline equals 4Wd = 4 mm. The length of the stubs is calculated using equation (7) to achieve 
a desired new third-order mode frequency of approximately 5.5 GHz. Subsequently, 
the length upper L Subscript sLs is determined to be approximately 8 mm. Next, the stub position is 
calculated using equation (4), resulting in upper S equals StartFraction 17 minus 8 Over 3 EndFraction equals 3S = 17−8
3
= 3 mm. The stub width is set 
to 1 mm. 
To investigate the effects of stub parameters, a parametric analysis of the stub 
length, width, and position is conducted using CST-MWS 2017. Each parameter is 
varied independently while keeping the others ﬁxed. 
3.2.1 
Variation in Stub Length Ls 
Initially, the stub length (upper L Subscript sLs) is varied from 7 mm to 9 mm while keeping upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 1Ws = 1
mm and upper S equals 3S = 3 mm constant. The simulated StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| and input impedance vs. frequency 
plots for three values of stub length upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 7Ls = 7 mm, 8 mm, and 9 mm are illustrated in 
Fig. 5.

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
35
Fig. 5 Simulated (a) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| and (b) input impedance vs. frequency plots of a stub-loaded dual-mode 
dipole antenna for three different stub lengths upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 7Ls = 7 mm, 8 mm, and 9 mm 
Fig. 6 Simulated (a) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| and (b) input impedance vs. frequency plots of a stub-loaded dual-mode 
dipole antenna for three different stub widths upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 0.5Ws = 0.5 mm, 1.0 mm, and 1.5 mm 
Observing the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| plot, there is no signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁrst-order mode 
frequency, whereas the third-order mode frequency decreases due to the increased 
path length. This observation aligns with the reactance null points in the input 
impedance vs. frequency plot. There is no signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁrst-order 
reactance null point, whereas the third-order reactance null point decreases with 
an increase in upper L Subscript sLs. 
The impact of stub length on the input resistance is negligible in the ﬁrst-order 
mode region. However, the input resistance decreases with an increase in upper L Subscript sLs at 
higher frequencies or in the third-order mode region. Consequently, upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 8Ls = 8 mm 
is chosen for further parametric analysis. 
3.2.2 
Effect of Variation in Stub Width Ws 
Subsequently, the stub width (upper W Subscript sWs) is varied from 0.5 mm to 1.5 mm while keeping 
upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 8Ls = 8 mm and upper S equals 3S = 3 mm constant. Figure 6 depicts the simulated StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| and input

36
R. Solanki
Fig. 7 Simulated (a) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| and (b) input impedance vs. frequency plots of a stub-loaded dual-mode 
dipole antenna for three different stub locations S = 2.5 mm, 3.0 mm, and 3.5 mm 
impedance vs. frequency plots for three values of stub width upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 0.5Ws = 0.5 mm, 1.0 
mm, and 1.5 mm. 
As the stub width increases, the ﬁrst-order mode frequency remains almost 
unchanged, while the third-order mode frequency decreases. This observation is 
conﬁrmed by the input reactance plot. The impact of upper W Subscript sWs on the input resistance is 
negligible in the ﬁrst-order mode region. However, the input resistance decreases 
with an increase in upper W Subscript sWs at higher frequencies or in the third-order mode region. 
Consequently, stub width upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 1Ws = 1 mm is selected for further parametric analysis. 
3.2.3 
Variation in Stub Location S 
Next, the stub location (S) is varied from 2.5 mm to 3.5 mm with a step size of 
0.5 mm. The simulated StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11|, resistance, and reactance vs. frequency plots for three 
values of stub location S = 2.5 mm, 3.0 mm, and 3.5 mm are depicted in Fig. 7. 
As the stubs move closer to the center of the dipole, the ﬁrst-order mode fre-
quency remains nearly unchanged, while the third-order mode frequency decreases. 
As shown in the input resistance curve, there is no signiﬁcant change in the 
resistance at lower frequencies (i.e., ﬁrst-order mode region). However, at higher 
frequencies (i.e., third-order mode region), the input resistance decreases as the 
stubs move closer to the center of the dipole. 
Given that the size and location of the stubs can alter or shift the third-order 
mode frequency without notably affecting the fundamental frequency, it follows 
that a wideband dipole antenna can be engineered by incorporating optimally sized 
stubs at a suitable distance from the center of the dipole.

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
37
Table 1 Geometrical 
parameters of the stub-loaded 
dual-mode dipole antenna 
Parameter 
Value (mm) 
Parameter 
Value (mm) 
upper L Subscript s u bLsub
35
upper W Subscript s u bWsub
21 
upper L Subscript dLd
17
upper W Subscript dWd
4 
upper L Subscript sLs
8
upper W Subscript sWs
1 
S
3 
Fig. 8 Current distributions of the stub-loaded dual-mode dipole antenna at (a) 3.2 GHz and (b) 
5.2 GHz 
3.3 
Optimized Stub-Loaded Dual-Mode Dipole Antenna 
After undergoing a parametric study, the stub-loaded dipole antenna has been 
optimized. The dimensions of the optimized antenna are summarized in Table 1. 
Current distributions of the antenna at 3.2 GHz and 5.2 GHz are presented in 
Fig. 8. Antenna modes can be distinguished by the total number of forward and 
reverse currents or by the presence of nulls. At 3.2 GHz, the current exhibits a half 
sinusoidal variation along the dipole length (with zero nulls), indicating radiation in 
its fundamental or ﬁrst-order mode. Conversely, at 5.2 GHz, two nulls are observed 
on the dipole, indicating radiation in the third-order mode. In the third-order mode, 
the maximum current is concentrated on the stubs and the middle part of the dipole. 
The direction of current on the stubs and the middle part of the dipole is consistent, 
thereby enhancing the radiation characteristics of the dipole at the shifted third-order 
mode. 
The simulated gain, efﬁciency, and radiation pattern of the antenna are illustrated 
in Fig. 9. The gain varies from 1.62 dBi to 2.57 dBi over the impedance bandwidth. 
Both radiation efﬁciency and total efﬁciency surpass 98% and 89%, respectively, 
across the entire impedance bandwidth. This indicates that the proposed antenna 
radiates effectively throughout the bandwidth. 
Radiation patterns at the lowest, highest, and center frequencies are presented in 
Fig. 9b–d. The radiation pattern exhibits a ﬁgure-of-eight shape and omnidirectional

38
R. Solanki
Fig. 9 Simulated results of the stub-loaded dual-mode dipole antenna: (a) gain and efﬁciency plots 
and radiation patterns at (b) 3.2 GHz, (c) 4.25 GHz, and (d) 5.3 GHz 
characteristics in the E- and H-planes, respectively, with cross-polarization levels 
below less than negative 22 dB< −22 dB over the bandwidth. 
4 
Bent Stub-Loaded Dual-Mode Dipole Antennas 
The stub-loaded dipole antenna discussed in Sect. 3.3 exhibits dimensions of 35 
mm times 21×21 mm, which corresponds to approximately 0.37 lamda Subscript upper L times 0.22 lamda Subscript upper L0.37λL × 0.22λL at its lowest 
operating frequency. To enhance the antenna’s compactness and reduce its width, 
two alternative conﬁgurations are proposed, employing bent stub loading technique 
as shown in Fig. 10. In both proposed conﬁgurations, labeled as Antenna 2 and 
Antenna 3, the basic dimensions of the dipole and the placement of the stubs remain

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
39
Fig. 10 Bent stub-loaded dual-mode dipole antennas with (a) single bend (Antenna 2) and (b) 
double bends (Antenna 3) 
consistent with the optimized design outlined in Table 1. For Antenna 2, the stub 
parameters are adjusted to achieve a reduction in width. By setting upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 6Ls = 6 mm, 
upper L Subscript s Baseline 1 Baseline equals 2Ls1 = 2 mm, and upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 1Ws = 1 mm, the overall dimensions are reduced to 35 mm 
times 17×17 mm, marking a reduction of approximately 19% in width compared to the 
original design. Antenna 3 further optimizes the design by introducing additional 
modiﬁcations to the stub parameters. With upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 4Ls = 4 mm, upper W Subscript s Baseline equals 1Ws = 1 mm, upper L Subscript s Baseline 1 Baseline equals 2Ls1 = 2 mm, 
upper W Subscript s Baseline 1 Baseline equals 0.75Ws1 = 0.75 mm, upper L Subscript s Baseline 2 Baseline equals 2Ls2 = 2 mm, and upper W Subscript s Baseline 2 Baseline equals 0.5Ws2 = 0.5 mm, the antenna size is further 
reduced to 35 mm times 13×13 mm, achieving a notable 38% reduction in width compared 
to the original conﬁguration (Fig. 4). An important aspect to highlight is that despite 
the variations in stub conﬁgurations and resulting antenna sizes, the total length of 
the stubs remains consistent across all designs, maintaining at 8 mm. This ensures 
that the performance of the antennas remains almost consistent while achieving the 
desired reduction in width. 
The performance of Antennas 1, 2, and 3 is compared in Fig. 11. The ﬁrst-
order mode frequency remains almost identical across all three antennas due to 
the consistent dipole parameters. However, a slight shift in the third-order mode 
frequency is observed, attributable to variations in stub shape and width. The 
impedance bandwidths for Antennas 1, 2, and 3 are measured at 49.2% (3.2– 
5.29 GHz), 50.6% (3.22–5.40 GHz), and 52.8% (3.22–5.53 GHz), respectively. 
Despite these slight differences, the variation in gain over the respective impedance 
bandwidths remains approximately the same. Based on these observations, it can 
be concluded that the performance of Antennas 1, 2, and 3 is largely similar, with 
Antenna 3 exhibiting a slight advantage. 
Figure 12 displays the current distribution of Antenna 3 at frequencies of 3.25 
GHz and 5.0 GHz. At 3.25 GHz, the current exhibits a single half sinusoidal vari-
ation along the length of the dipole, indicative of the ﬁrst-order mode. Conversely, 
at 5.0 GHz, the current distribution manifests three half sinusoidal variations or two 
nulls along the length of the dipole, characteristic of the third-order mode. Notably, 
the maximum current is observed on the stubs and the central portion of the dipole, 
with the direction of the currents aligned. This conﬁguration effectively enhances

40
R. Solanki
Fig. 11 (a) Simulated StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11|, (b) input impedance, and (c) gain plots of the stub-loaded dual-mode 
dipole antennas: Antennas 1, 2, and 3 
the radiation characteristics of the dipole antenna at the shifted third-order mode 
frequency. 
The simulated plots of efﬁciencies and radiation patterns of Antenna 3 are 
depicted in Fig. 13. The radiation efﬁciency and total efﬁciency exceed 96% and 
87%, respectively, across the entire impedance bandwidth, indicating effective 
radiation performance throughout. Comparatively, the efﬁciency of Antenna 3 is 
slightly lower than that of Antenna 1, which may be attributed to the bending of 
the stubs. The radiation pattern is plotted at three frequencies: the lowest frequency 
f Subscript upper L Baseline equals 3.22fL = 3.22 GHz, the center frequency f 0 equals 4.375f0 = 4.375 GHz, and the highest frequency 
of operation for StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue less than or equals negative 10|S11| ≤−10 dB, f Subscript upper H Baseline equals 5.53fH = 5.53 GHz. The pattern exhibits a ﬁgure-of-
eight shape in the E-plane and an omni pattern in the H-plane. It remains stable over 
the bandwidth, with cross-polarization levels of less than or equals negative 23≤−23 dB.

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
41
Fig. 12 Surface currents of Antenna 3 at (a) 3.25 GHz, and (b) 5.0 GHz 
5 
Summary 
In this chapter, we explore a technique aimed at compressing the third-order mode of 
a dipole antenna closer to its fundamental mode. Through this process, we introduce 
and discuss three conﬁgurations of wideband dual-mode dipole antennas. In the 
ﬁrst conﬁguration, a pair of symmetric stripline stubs is strategically loaded at 
the current null points of the third-order mode. We derive equations to calculate 
the optimal stub length and distance from the center of the dipole. These stub 
parameters effectively shift the third-order mode frequency without signiﬁcantly 
impacting the fundamental frequency. As we vary the stub length, we observe a 
corresponding decrease in the third-order mode frequency, while the fundamental 
frequency remains relatively stable. Similar effects are noted when adjusting the 
stub width, while the third-order mode frequency increases as the stubs move away 
from the dipole center. The optimized stub-loaded dipole antenna resulting from this 
conﬁguration exhibits an electrical size of 0.37 lamda Subscript upper L times 0.22 lamda Subscript upper L0.37λL ×0.22λL. It delivers a substantial 
49.2% bandwidth, along with a peak gain of 2.6 dBi and cross-polarization levels 
lower than negative 22−22 dB across the band. However, the introduction of stubs increases 
the overall width of the antenna. To address this, in conﬁgurations 2 and 3, we 
introduce single and double bends in the stubs, respectively, to effectively reduce 
the antenna’s width. In the case of the double-bent stub-loaded dual-mode dipole 
antenna in conﬁguration 3, we achieve an impressive 52.8% bandwidth, maintaining 
a peak gain of 2.6 dBi and cross-polarization levels lower than negative 23−23 dB over the

42
R. Solanki
Fig. 13 Simulated (a) efﬁciencies and radiation patterns of Antenna 3 at (b) 3.22 GHz, (c) 4.375 
GHz, and (d) 5.53 GHz 
band. This antenna possesses an electrical size of 0.38 lamda Subscript upper L times 0.14 lamda Subscript upper L0.38λL × 0.14λL, demonstrating 
a signiﬁcant reduction in width (by approximately 38%) as compared to the initial 
stub loaded dipole antenna conﬁguration. 
References 
1. T. Olsson, H.E. Nilsson, Bow-tie and dipole antenna feed robustness mechanisms. IEEE 
Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 5(1), 163–167 (2006) 
2. W.S. Yeoh, K.L. Wong, W.S.T. Rowe, Wideband miniaturized half bowtie printed dipole 
antenna with integrated balun for wireless applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 59(1), 
339–342 (2011) 
3. J. Lu, S. Lin, Y. Tian, L. Jing, M. Liu, Z. Zhao, The simulation and experiment of a UWB 
printed dipole antenna. Prog. Electromagn. Res. Lett. 36, 21–30 (2013)

Mode Compression Theory: Dipole Antennas
43
4. B. Feng, S. Li, W. An, S. Yin, J. Li, T. Qiu, U-shaped bow-tie magneto-electric dipole antenna 
with a modiﬁed horned reﬂector for ultra-wideband applications. IET Microwaves Antennas 
Propag. 8(12), 990–998 (2014) 
5. S.X. Ta, H. Choo, I. Park, Broadband printed-dipole antenna and its arrays for 5g applications. 
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 16, 2183–2186 (2017) 
6. R. Wu, Q.X. Chu, Resonator-loaded broadband antenna for LTE700/GSM850/GSM900 base 
stations. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 16, 501–504 (2017) 
7. D. Wen, Y. Hao, H. Wang, H. Zhou, Design of a wideband antenna with stable omnidirectional 
radiation pattern using the theory of characteristic modes. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65(5), 
2671–2676 (2017) 
8. W.J. Lu, J. Yu, L. Zhu, On the multi-resonant antennas: Theory, history, and new development. 
Int. J. RF Microwave Comput. Aided Eng. 29(9), e21808 (2019) 
9. A.T. Mobashsher, A. Abbosh, Slot-loaded folded dipole antenna with wideband and unidirec-
tional performance for L-band applications. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 13, 798–801 
(2014) 
10. W. Hu, X. Liu, S. Gao, L. Wen, Q. Luo, P. Fei, Y. Yin, Y. Liu, Compact wideband folded dipole 
antenna with multi-resonant modes. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67(11), 6789–6799 (2019) 
11. S. Shadrokh, Y.Q. Yu, F. Jolani, Z. Chen, Ultra compact end-loaded planar dipole antenna 
for ultra-wideband radar and communication applications. Electron. Lett. 50(21), 1495–1496 
(2014) 
12. W.J. Lu, L. Zhu, Planar dual-mode wideband antenna using short-circuited-strips loaded 
slotline radiator: Operation principle, design, and validation. Int. J. RF Microwave Comput. 
Aided Eng. 25(7), 573–581 (2015) 
13. W.J. Lu, L. Zhu, Wideband stub-loaded slotline antennas under multi-mode resonance 
operation. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 63(2), 818–823 (2015) 
14. N.W. Liu, L. Zhu, W.W. Choi, A differential-fed microstrip patch antenna with bandwidth 
enhancement under operation of TM10 and TM30 modes. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
65(4), 1607–1614 (2017) 
15. Z. Gan, Z.H. Tu, Dual-mode conjoint patch-pair for 5G wideband patch antenna array 
application. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 20(2), 244–248 (2021) 
16. W. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Dual-mode compression of dipole antenna by loading 
electrically small loop resonator IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68(4), 3243–3247 (2020) 
17. R. Solanki, Compact and broadband dual-mode dipole antenna. Prog. Electromagn. Res. Lett. 
106, 21–29 (2022). https://doi.org/10.2528/PIERL22060102 
18. R. Solanki, S. Moharir, Compact and broadband loop-loaded dual-mode dipole antenna. IETE 
J. Res. (2023). https://doi.org/10.1080/03772063.2023.2210091 
19. Y. Shi, J. Liu, Investigation of a via-loaded microstrip magnetic dipole antenna with enhanced 
bandwidth and gain. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67(7), 4836–4841 (2019) 
20. Y. Luo, Z.N. Chen, K. Ma, Enhanced bandwidth and directivity of a dual-mode compressed 
high-order mode stub-loaded dipole using characteristic mode analysis. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 67(3), 1922–1925 (2019) 
21. Y. Luo, X. Ma, N. Yan, W. An, K. Ma, Sidelobe suppression of dual-mode compressed high-
order-mode dipole by loading bent stubs. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 20(6), 898–902 
(2021) 
22. R. Solanki, Stub loaded dual-mode dipole antenna for wide bandwidth in a compact size, 
in 2022 IEEE Microwaves, Antennas, and Propagation Conference (MAPCON), Bangalore,  
India, 2022, pp. 923–927. https://doi.org/10.1109/MAPCON56011.2022.10047301 
23. H. Li, Y. Li, Mode compression method for wideband dipole antenna by dual-point capacitive 
loadings. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68(8), 6424–6428 (2020) 
24. R. Solanki, Third- and ﬁfth-order mode compression of a dipole antenna. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 70(12), 12294–12298 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2022.3209649

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically 
Small Antennas for Wireless Devices 
Jyotibhusan Padhi and G. Shrikanth Reddy 
1 
Introduction 
Electrically small antennas (ESAs) possess several inherent characteristics, such as 
compact size, cost-effectiveness, lightweight design, and ease of integration [1]. 
Due to these beneﬁts, ESAs are widely preferred for integration into miniaturized 
wireless devices, including mobile phones, laptops, routers, dongles, indoor base 
stations, biomedical sensors, RFID technology, and various other Internet of Things 
(IoT)-enabled devices [2–4]. Several techniques, like reactive element loading, 
metamaterial-inspired structures loading, and external matching circuit loading 
techniques, have been reported in the literature to design ESAs. Although these tech-
niques are useful, they have some limitations, such as scalability issues, dependence 
on the ground plane, complicated designs, etc. In addition, it is very challenging 
to incorporate multiple reactive elements and external matching circuits with 
antennas without increasing their overall surface area while maintaining low-quality 
factors, acceptable bandwidth, gain, efﬁciency, etc. This thesis explores the scalable 
techniques to mitigate the above challenges for designing multiband/wideband 
efﬁcient electrically small antennas while maintaining a small surface area [4– 
6]. This chapter discusses multiple stub resonators [4], parasitic resonators, and 
[5] loading techniques to design single/multiband/wideband ESAs. The method 
proposed in this chapter enables a 50% reduction in the electrical size of the 
antenna. Conﬁgurations presented in this chapter are characterized by adopting 
fundamental properties of electrically small antennas, as discussed in [7–17]. All 
antennas proposed meet Chu’s criteria for an ESA, i.e., electrical size K × a < 1.  
J. Padhi · G. S. Reddy (✉) 
School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, 
Himachal Pradesh, India 
e-mail: gopishrikanth@iitmandi.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_4
45

46
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Prototypes of all the proposed antennas were fabricated to validate the theoretical 
design techniques and their outcomes, and the measure results were veriﬁed with 
theoretical analysis. All the measured/experimental results match well with the 
theoretical results, which validate the proposed techniques. 
2 
Multiple Stub Resonator–Loaded Triple-Band Electrically 
Small Antenna 
In this section, a compact triple-band electrically small antenna (ESA) is designed 
to cater sub-6 GHz 5G NR band applications, namely, n78 (3.3 GHz to 3.8 GHz) 
band or n77 (3.3 GHz to 3.4 GHz) band, mobile WiMAX band (IEEE 802.16e), 
and DCS1800 MHz band. To design the proposed antenna, a simple impedance 
matching technique through stubs is used, which is easy to fabricate and scalable. 
2.1 
Design of Compact Triple-Band Antenna 
This section discusses the design process of multiple stub–loaded triple-band ESA. 
The proposed antenna consists of a bent monopole with added stub/resonator to 
achieve triple-band responses. In this work, fundamental limits of an ESA, as dis-
cussed in [7–9], are considered to evaluate the performance of the proposed antenna. 
Theoretical and experimental analyses are used to characterize the proposed antenna 
and ensure its suitability for wireless device. 
2.1.1 
Designs to Achieve Resonance Within the DCS Band 
The antenna presented in Fig. 1a is a basic printed monopole whose length is nearly 
quarter wavelength corresponding to 1.825 GHz. The resonance within the desired 
DCS band is achieved through three stage design process as discussed below. The 
proposed antenna is designed on a 1.6-mm-thick FR-4 substrate with loss tangent 
(tan δ) of 0.025 and dielectric constant (εr) = 4.3. Here, a 50-Ω CPW transmission 
line is used as a feed line for all the conﬁgurations shown in Fig. 1. The surface area 
of antenna_1 with CPW feed is 50 × 12.08 mm2. 
To reduce the overall size of the antenna, in the next stage, Antenna-1 is bent 
at ﬁve locations to reduce its surface area, as shown in Fig. 2. Here, the electrical 
length of the bent is nearly equal to the quarter wavelength at 1.825 GHz. It can be 
seen in Fig. 2 that though the bending has reduced the surface area of the monopole, 
it disturbed impedance characteristics at the desired frequency band. It can be seen 
in the impedance response in Fig. 2b; point “B” represents the inductive behavior.

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
47
Fig. 1 Basic printed monopole (Antenna-1). (a) Structure representation, (b) impedance response 
1.5–2 GHz, (c) simulated |S11| response (all dimensions are in mm) 
Fig. 2 Bent monopole (Antenna-2). (a) Structure representation, (b) impedance response 1.5– 
2 GHz, (c) simulated |S11| response (all dimensions are in mm) 
To improve the impedance response at 1.825 GHz, an impedance matching 
technique as discussed in [18, 19] is implemented. In stage 3, to nullify the inductive 
impedance, an appropriate stub length is calculated, and correspondingly, a meander 
line (stub-1) of length Lm1 = 8.35 mm (0.05λ) is added in series with the feed line 
of Antenna-2 as shown in Fig. 3a. 
The meander line stub-1 of length (Lm1) 0.05λ is responsible for the movement 
of impedance points from B to C as shown in Fig. 3b. The meander line of length 
0.05λ also corresponds to a minimum possible distance between impedance point 
B and a position/location on the Smith chart, which lies on unity impedance circle. 
Considering dimensional constraints, the initial width of the meander line is kept 
as W2 = 0.28 mm. The impedance response of the proposed antenna in stage 3 
depicts that the input impedance of the antenna is 51 + j64 Ω. It can be observed 
from Fig. 3b that the impedance response for Antenna-3 at 1.825 GHz is inductive 
and still far from the unity impedance point (D). To get impedance matching, a 
shunt stub (inverted L-shaped stub) is used to move impedance point C to D. The

48
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 3 Bent monopole with meander line stub (Antenna-3). (a) Structure representation, 
(b) impedance response 1.5–2 GHz, (c) simulated |S11| response (all dimensions are in mm) 
Fig. 4 Bent monopole with shunt stub (stub-2) (Antenna-4): (a) structure representation, (b) 
impedance response 1.5–2 GHz, (c) simulated |S11| response for different width of meander line 
W2 (all dimensions are in mm) 
proposed stub of length 0.055λ (9.06 mm) is loaded between the ground plane 
and the bended monopole to minimize inductive reactance as shown in Fig. 4a, b. 
The antenna conﬁguration along with two stubs is termed as Antenna-4. The gaps 
between successive turns in the meander line are optimized to tune the impedance 
response at 1.825 GHz, as shown in Fig. 4c. It is observed that the capacitive effect 
increases by increasing the line width (W2) of the meander line (Lm1). This effect 
aids to ﬁne-tune the impedance response at 1.825 GHz. 
2.1.2 
Design to Achieve Resonance at WiMAX and 5G New 
Radio-n77/n78 Bands 
The impedance characteristic of Antenna-4 is further analyzed to seek possibilities 
of a multiband response. The admittance chart presented in Fig. 5 indicates that 
an open-ended stub, i.e., stub-3, is suitable for achieving impedance matching at

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
49
Fig. 5 Bent monopole with open-circuited stub (stub-3) (Antenna-5). (a) Structure representation, 
(b) impedance response 2.5–4 GHz with and without stub-3, (c) simulated |S11| response for 
different stub length Ls3 (all dimensions are in mm) 
3.3 GHz. Admittance curves E and F (Fig. 5) present the effects of adding the 
stub-3 with the antenna. Here, the initial length of stub-3 is calculated through a 
similar process used for stub-1 and stub-2. The length for stub-3, i.e., LS3, is further 
optimized to tune the impedance bandwidth as shown in Fig. 5. 
Further, another resonator is added (or branched) at the space inside the bent 
structure as shown in Fig. 6a, to achieve additional resonance intended at 3.58 GHz. 
The impedance for Antenna-5 at 3.58 GHz (referring to point G in Fig. 6b) 
is 18.4 + j7.6Ω, which indicates an unmatched condition. Hence, by using the 
transmission line equivalence-stub matching technique as discussed in [20, 21], 
an inductive meander line (Lm2) of length ∼= 0.106λ in series with a capacitive 
rectangular patch of perimeter ∼= 0.116λ is loaded (branched) with bent monopole 
to achieve impedance matching at 3.58 GHz band. This addition brought the 
impedance point of 3.58 GHz from G to H, as shown in Fig. 6b (point H). As shown 
in Fig. 6a, the rectangular patch (capacitive stub) is arranged to facilitate fringing 
capacitances between the edges of the rectangular patch and the bent monopole. 
As a result, the proposed antenna shows good impedance matching at the 3.58 GHz 
band. The lower frequency of the desired operating band fL is approximated by using 
the dimensional values of Ws and LS as given in Eq. 1, where C is the speed of light 
in free space and Ws and LS are the dimensions of the capacitive stub. 
StartLayout 1st Row f Subscript upper L Baseline approximately equals StartFraction upper C Over 4 left bracket upper L Subscript m Baseline 2 Baseline plus 2 left parenthesis upper L Subscript upper S Baseline plus upper W Subscript upper S Baseline right bracket EndFraction EndLayoutfL ∼=
C
4
⎾
Lm2 + 2
⎛
LS + WS
⏋
(1) 
The effect of WS on the third resonance of Antenna-6 is summarized in Table 1. 
It is observed that the third resonant frequency shifts toward the lower bound with 
the increase in the width of the capacitive stub (WS).

50
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 6 Bent monopole loaded with inductive meander line and capacitive resonator (Antenna-6). 
(a) Structure representation, (b) impedance response 2.5–4 GHz, (c) simulated |S11| response for 
different values of “S” (all dimensions are in mm) 
As  shown in Fig.  6, the third resonator is placed at a distance S = 3.74 mm such 
that it does not affect the ﬁrst and or second operating band(s). However, it can be 
seen in Fig. 6c that there is a slight shift in the resonance point for the second and 
third frequency bands. The offset in the resonance point is attributed to the change 
in the real part of the impedance response, especially for the bent monopole. Hence, 
the width of the bent monopole is reduced from 1 mm to 0.6 mm to optimize the 
real value of impedance.

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
51
Table 1 Comparison of third resonance for different values of “WS” 
LS (mm)
WS (mm)
Lm2 + 2 (LS + WS)
fL (GHz) for third resonance 
3.36
1.25
18.15
4.0 
3.36
1.75
19.15
3.85 
3.36
2.25
20.15
3.695 
3.36
2.75
21.15
3.55 
Fig. 7 Multiple stub–loaded ESA: (a) complete structural layout and (b) simulated |S11| response 
and surface current distribution 
2.2 
Working Principle of Multiple Stub–Loaded Triple-Band 
ESA 
The working principle of the proposed antenna is further analyzed by observing 
the surface current distribution. The simulated impedance response of the antenna 
with the corresponding current distribution is presented in Fig. 7. It can be observed 
from the current distribution that quarter-wavelength bent metallic strip along with 
stub-1 and 2 is responsible for the resonance at the DCS1800 band. Here, stub-
1 and stub-2 are the matching elements for ﬁrst resonance at 1.8 GHz band. The 
current on the rightmost part of the metallic strip corresponds to the ﬁrst harmonic 
at 3.3 GHz, as shown in Fig. 7b, where the open-ended stub (i.e., stub 3) adds the 
capacitance to the input impedance of the antenna to generate matched response 
over the 3.3 GHz band. In addition, the capacitive stub-loaded meander line structure 
provides resonance at a higher operating band, i.e., at 3.58 GHz. The electrical 
length of the capacitive stub-loaded meander line is [2 (LS + WS) + Lm2] ∼= 
λ/4, where λ is the wavelength corresponding to 3.58 GHz. It can be observed 
that the achieved bandwidths for respective bands are acceptable for DCS1800-, 
WiMAX-, and 5G NR (n77, n78)-based wireless applications. All the optimized 
dimensions of the proposed antenna, which sufﬁciently cater for the impedance-
matching requirements for triple band operation, are given in Table 2. It can be 
observed from the optimized dimensional values that the length of the ﬁnal proposed

52
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Table 2 Optimized dimensions of proposed multiple stub–loaded ESA 
Name
Value (mm)
Name
Value (mm)
Name
Value (mm) 
La
24
L1
31.8
s
3.74 
Wa
11
W1
0.6
w2
0.15 
Wf
1.6
LS2
9.06
Fg
0.25 
LS3
3.3
WS
2.75
Lg
9.9 
Lm1
8.35
Lm2
8.93
LS
3.36 
antenna shown in Fig. 7 is almost 50% less compared to Antenna-1. The overall 
surface area of the proposed antenna is suitable for a wireless dongle or small router 
devices. 
2.3 
Compact Triple-Band ESA: Impedance and Radiation 
Characteristics Measurements 
To validate the theoretical analysis, a prototype of the proposed antenna is fabricated 
using (on) FR_4 substrate of 1.6 mm thickness. The overall dimension of the 
fabricated antenna is 24 × 11 × 1.6 mm3. The fabricated prototype is tested 
for its reﬂection parameter response, radiation characteristics, antenna gain, and 
efﬁciency characteristics. The S11 response of the fabricated antenna is measured 
using N5232B PNA Network Analyzer in an anechoic chamber, as shown in Fig. 8a. 
It can be observed from Fig. 8b that the proposed antenna offers -10 dB impedance 
bandwidth of 30 MHz (1.8 GHz to 1.83 GHz) for the ﬁrst band, 200 MHz (3.18 GHz 
to 3.38 GHz) for the second band, and 240 MHz (3.47 GHz to 3.71 GHz) for third 
band. It is also noted that for VSWR ≤ 3, the measured impedance bandwidths are 
151 MHz (1.699–1.85 GHz) for the DCS1800 band and 810 MHz (3.06–3.87 GHz) 
for the 3.3 GHz band. 
The proposed ESA(AUT) is tested for its radiation pattern characteristics and 
antenna gain in an anechoic chamber environment at a far ﬁeld distance, as shown in 
Fig. 8a. The current distribution presented in Fig. 7 indicates that the surface current 
on the loop structure (i.e., on the bent monopole) induces a strong magnetic ﬁeld in 
the XZ plane, whereas the strength of the electric ﬁeld is maximum in the XY plane. 
As a result, the proposed antenna offers an omnidirectional radiation pattern in the 
XZ plane and a monopole-type pattern in the XY plane shown in Fig. 9. 
The current distribution in correlation with radiation characteristics indicates that 
the proposed antenna is linearly polarized for all bands and suitable for applications 
like DCS, WiMAX, and 5G communication. The bent monopole exhibits λ/4 
resonance at 1.825 GHz, and ﬁrst harmonic is observed at 3.3 GHz as shown in 
Fig. 7b. Divergence in current distribution and ﬁled distribution at 1.825 GHz and 
3.3 GHz leads to a shift in phase center, and the maxima and minima of the radiation 
pattern of the proposed antenna at 3.3 GHz are not aligned with the radiation pattern

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
53
Fig. 8 Multiple stub–loaded ESA: (a) measurement setup and (b) measured reﬂection coefﬁcient 
response (|S11|) and fabricated prototype 
Fig. 9 Measured radiation pattern multiple stub–loaded ESA in (a) XZ and  (b) XY plane  
observed at 1.825 GHz. Likewise, for 3.58 GHz, the position of the resonator and 
orientation of the current lead to maximum radiation in the -XY plane. From surface 
current distribution, it is observed that the magnitude of the X-axis-oriented current 
(at the top edges of the CPW structure) is less at all resonating modes. Hence, a 
low-cross-pol level is maintained below −15 dB in the direction of maxima at all 
resonant frequencies. The measured gain and efﬁciency of the proposed antenna are 
presented in Fig. 10. This antenna exhibits gain of 0.95dBi, 1.92dBi, and 1.2dBi at

54
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 10 Simulated and 
measured gain (dBi) and 
radiation efﬁciency of 
multiple stub–loaded ESA 
1.825 GHz, 3.3 GHz, and 3.58 GHz, respectively, whereas the maximum radiation 
efﬁciency of the antenna is 88%, 83%, and 80% over the operating bandwidth(s). 
It is noted that the proposed antenna’s measured gain and efﬁciency characteristics 
are sufﬁcient to cater to the radiation requirements at desired frequency bands. 
Further, the proposed antenna is subjected to the dimensional limits of ESA, as 
reported in [7–17]. It is observed that at 1.825 GHz, the free space wave number, 
i.e., K = 0.038 rad/mm, whereas the radius of the smallest radian sphere “a” is 
13.2 mm. Hence, at 1.825 GHz, the value of K × a = 0.5. Similarly, the values of 
(K × a) at 3.3 GHz and 3.58 GHz are 0.9 and 0.97, respectively. The calculated 
value of “K × a” for all the intended frequency bands is less than “1,” indicating 
that the proposed antenna can be classiﬁed as an electrically small antenna (ESA). 
This antenna’s estimated lower-bound quality factor (Qlb) is 8.8, 34, and 817 for 
1.825 GHz, 3.3 GHz, and 3.58 GHz bands, respectively. The proposed multiple 
stub–loaded ESA is a highly miniaturized antenna. Hence, the quality factor for 
ESAs is usually high over the intended bands, and the same is reported for antennas 
with reduced electrical dimensions [7–17]. Due to this, the impedance bandwidth 
of the ESA of miniaturized antennas is low. However, the design technique ensured 
that the radiation efﬁciency at the intended bands remained high. 
3 
Multiple Resonator–Loaded Wideband ESA 
In this section, efﬁcient parasitic element–loaded electrically small antenna is 
discussed. Here, ESA is designed to cover 2.4 GHz Bluetooth/Wi-Fi, 5G new 
radio (n79), and 5 GHz WLAN band. Another important purpose of this work 
is to demonstrate that a wideband electrically small antenna can be designed by 
merging two adjacent resonating modes within a single passband. The design of 
the parasitic element–loaded conﬁguration is ﬂexible enough to be scaled for the 
desired frequency band and to provide frequency reconﬁgurability by means of 
integrating the antenna with parasitic elements. This work discusses an electrically

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
55
small antenna loaded with a parasitic loop resonator for dual-band and wideband 
operations. The antenna consists of a parasitic loop resonator, a driven element, 
and open-ended stubs. Here, the dimensional parameter of the open-ended stub 
plays a crucial role in impedance matching independently at the 5 GHz WLAN 
band, whereas the loop resonator is parasitically coupled with the driven element to 
achieve resonance at the lower frequency at 2.4 GHz. In this section, the design 
process of the antenna is discussed in multiple stages. The antenna is designed 
on an FR4 substrate, and it is theoretically analyzed using CST microwave studio. 
The proposed antenna offers an impedance bandwidth at 2.4 GHz and 4.3–5.8 GHz 
frequency bands with an efﬁciency of more than 80%. 
3.1 
Compact Antenna for 5 GHz WLAN Band 
A CPW feed printed monopole is designed for 5.4 GHz at the initial stage, as shown 
in Fig. 11 This printed monopole is designed on the 1.6-mm-thick FR-4 substrate 
with a dielectric constant(εr) and loss tangent(δ) of 4.3 and 0.025, respectively. For 
reference, the conventional printed monopole is termed as Antenna-0. 
3.1.1 
Tuning Impedance for 5 GHz WLAN Band 
The monopole (Antenna-0) is remodeled to an inverted “L” shape as shown in Fig. 
12a. This type of arrangement can induce a fringing ﬁeld and extend beyond the 
top edge of the structure along the Y-axis. So, the proposed inverted L-shaped 
structure can be used further to excite (drive) another parasitic resonator. Here, 
the electrical length of the inverted L-shaped monopole is kept at approximately 
quarter-wavelength to achieve resonance at 5.4 GHz. The width of the projection 
Fig. 11 CPW feed printed monopole antenna. (a) Structural representation of Antenna-0, (b) 
impedance response 4 GHz to 6 GHz of conventional monopole (Antenna-0)

56
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 12 Inverted L–shaped monopole: (a) structure of Antenna-1, (b) impedance response of 
Antenna-1, (c) L-shaped monopole with stub (Antenna-2), and (d) impedance response of 
Antenna-2 
in the driven element is kept narrow, as shown in Fig. 1b, to maintain maximum 
current(excitation) along the edges of the driven element. 
The impedance response of Antenna-1, as shown in Fig. 12b, indicates that it 
is highly inductive over the 5.0–5.7 GHz band. Here, the impedance response is 
improved (or inductive reactance reduced) by attaching an open-circuited stub (stub-
1) of length 6.3 mm = 0.1λ (where λ corresponds to the wavelength of 5.4 GHz 
frequency). The stub is added in series with the antenna to bring the impedance of 
5.4 GHz from position A to B, as shown in Fig. 12c, d. This conﬁguration with an 
open stub is termed as Antenna-2. 
3.2 
Dual-Band Compact ESA (Antenna-2) 
To introduce another operating band to Antenna-2, a parasitic element is loaded 
with the proposed antenna, as shown in Fig. 13. The quarter-wavelength parasitic

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
57
Fig. 13 Parasitic loop–loaded ESA (Antenna-3): (a) structural geometry; (b) simulated |S11| 
response; (c) surface current distribution at 2.43 GHz, 4.5 GHz, and 5.5 GHz; (d) ESA  with  
modiﬁed loop (Antenna-4); (e) |S11| response for different value of WCD; and  (f) S11 response 
for different value of g 
loop resonator is capacitively coupled (or loaded) with a driven element to achieve 
an additional resonance within the 2.4 GHz–2.48 GHz ISM band with an impedance 
bandwidth of 48 MHz. This conﬁguration is termed Antenna-3. Figure 13b shows 
that after adding a parasitic loop, the resonant frequency/impedance bandwidth is 
observed within the 5 GHz band, whereas an additional resonating mode (harmonic 
of the ﬁrst band) appears near the 4.5 GHz. The resonating behavior of Antenna-3 
is further analyzed through surface current distribution at different frequencies. 
The surface current distributions shown in Fig. 13c are re-analyzed to understand 
the operating mechanism. It indicates that the quarter-wavelength parasitic loop 
resonator provides resonance at two frequencies, one at 2.43 GHz and another at 
4.5 GHz. The surface current distribution also indicates that at 2.43 GHz, the surface 
current at arm-1 is 1800 out of phase to the current at arm-3, leading to current 
cancellation at the desired operating band. To minimize current cancellation, the 
spacing between arm-1 and arm-3 is increased by reducing the width for arm-1 and 
arm-2. Here, the width “WCD” (for arm-1 and arm-2) within Antenna-3 is reduced 
to 0.4 mm, as shown in Fig. 13d. It can be observed from Fig. 13e (the S11 response) 
that with the reduction of WCD, the resonance at 2.4 GHz band shifts further to a

58
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 14 Parasitic element–loaded ESA (Antenna-4) for different stub widths (WS). (a) Smith  
chart-impedance response from 4.5 to 5.6 GHz and (b) simulated |S11| response from 2 to 6 GHz 
lower bound. To maintain resonance within the 2.4 GHz WLAN band, the length 
of the loop resonator (L2) is considered to be 30.45 mm. The |S11| response for 
different values of gap “g” is also analyzed to observe its effects on 2.4 GHz band. 
It is observed from Fig. 13f that a strong capacitive coupling exists between the 
parasitic loop and driven elements for a lower value of “g.” Hence, an optimum 
spacing “g” of 0.2 mm is considered to maintain resonance at 2.4 GHz. 
3.2.1 
Bandwidth Improvement by Merging Resonating Modes 
The above analysis shows that Antenna-3 exhibits three resonating modes at 
2.4 GHz, 4.5 GHz, and 5.8 GHz. It is observed from Fig. 13b, c that the antenna with 
a loop resonator produces additional resonance at the 4.5 GHz band. Meanwhile, 
impedance mismatching condition arises from 4.7 to 5.6 GHz due to the parasitic 
load. Hence, current distributions (Fig. 13c) on the radiating elements at 4.5 GHz 
and 5.5 GHz are re-analyzed before merging two resonating modes (i.e., 4.5 GHz 
and 5.5 GHz). The existence of a coupling effect at 5.5 GHz is observed between 
the open-ended stub and the driven element. 
The dimension of Stub-1, especially its width “Ws,” is further optimized to 
stabilize/improve the impedance response between the 4.7 and 5.6 GHz band. It 
can be observed in Fig. 14a that at Ws = 0.3 mm, the impedance response for 4.7 
to 5.6 GHz is inductive, and as the value of “Ws” is increased, the resonant curve 
moves toward VSWR = 2 circles as shown in Fig. 14a. It can be observed from 
Fig. 14b that for WS = 0.6 mm, the proposed antenna offers impedance bandwidth 
(|S11| ≤−10 dB) of 60 MHz (2.4–2.46 GHz) and 1.58 GHz (4.3–5.88 GHz), 
which is suitable for Bluetooth/Wi-Fi/WLAN and 5G new radio (n-79) applications, 
respectively. 
The structural layout of the optimized antenna is shown in Fig. 15. The overall 
dimension of the proposed antenna is 0.06λ × 0.2λ, where λ is the wavelength at 
2.43 GHz. The parasitic loop resonator–loaded electrically small antenna (ESA)

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
59
Fig. 15 Parasitic 
element–loaded ESA: (a) 
antenna conﬁguration, (b) 
dimensional layout 
Table 3 Optimized 
dimensional parameters of 
parasitic element–loaded 
ESA 
Parameters 
LS1 
WS 
W1 
L1 
L2 
Value(mm) 
6.8 
0.6 
0.6 
6.2 
30.45 
Parameters 
W2 
Wa 
Lg 
Wf 
fg 
Value(mm) 
1.0 
6.3 
5.0 
1.6 
0.25 
offers 60 MHz and 1580 MHz impedance bandwidth (|S11| ≤−10 dB). The 
optimized dimension of the ﬁnal prototype is listed in Table 3. 
3.3 
Compact Dual-Band ESA: Impedance and Radiation 
Characteristics Measurement 
The prototype of the proposed antenna is fabricated on the 1.6-mm-thick FR-4 
substrate, where the total surface area occupied by the antenna is 26.4 × 8 mm2, 
as shown in Fig. 16a. 
The fabricated antenna is tested for its impedance and radiation characteristics. 
The measured |S11| response presented in Fig. 16b shows that the fabricated 
prototype of the proposed antenna offers impedance bandwidth (|S11| ≤-10 dB) 
of 60 MHz (2.4 GHz to 2.46 GHz) and 1580 MHz (4.3 to 5.88 GHz) for the ﬁrst 
and second bands, respectively. A minor deviation in the magnitude of measured 
|S11| results in comparison to the simulated results can be attributed to fabrication 
tolerance. 
The measured and simulated radiation patterns shown in Fig. 17 indicate 
that the antenna offers stable radiation characteristics over the entire operating

60
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
Fig. 16 Parasitic element–loaded ESA: (a) fabricated prototype and (b) measured reﬂection 
coefﬁcient 
Fig. 17 Measured radiation pattern of parasitic element–loaded ESA: (a) ZX plane  and (b) ZY  
plane 
band(s). The current distribution at 4.5 GHz and 5.5 GHz on the driven element 
contributes conventional monopole type E and H ﬁeld variation along the antenna. 
Hence, at higher frequencies, the proposed parasitic element–loaded ESA exhibits 
omnidirectional radiation patterns in ZX and ZY planes, respectively. However, the 
current variation on the quarter-wavelength parasitic loop at 2.4 GHz generates 
a magnetic dipole-type radiation pattern in the ZY plane and an omnidirectional 
pattern in the ZX plane, as shown in Fig. 17. The cross-polarization level is less 
(i.e., <-15 dB) than the co-polarization level of the antenna in both ZX and ZY 
planes. Figure 18 shows that the designed antenna exhibits a maximum gain of 
1 dBi and 3.8 dBi over 2.43 GHz and 5 GHz bands, respectively. As discussed 
in the previous section, the dimensional parameters of the radiating element and 
open-ended stub of the proposed ESA are optimized to improve its impedance 
matching. The proposed parasitic loop resonator–loaded ESA exhibits signiﬁcantly 
better radiation efﬁciency, i.e., 78–82% over the 2.4 GHz band and 80–95% over 
the 5.0 GHz band, respectively.

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
61
Fig. 18 Measured gain (dBi) and efﬁciency response of parasitic element–loaded ESA: over (a) 
2.4–2.5 GHz band and (b) 4–6.0 GHz band 
The proposed parasitic element–loaded antenna is further analyzed for its ESA 
characteristics [7–17]. It is calculated that the free space wavenumber (K) at  
2.43 GHz is 0.05, whereas the radius of the smallest radian sphere “a” enclosing the 
antenna is 13.5 mm. Hence, for 2.43 GHz, the value of “K × a” = 0.6 is less than 
1, which indicates that the proposed loop resonator–loaded antenna is electrically 
small. The design technique for the proposed is scalable to implement, and it can be 
used to design an ESA at any frequency band. 
4 
Conclusion 
This chapter presents multiple resonator–loaded multiband and wideband antenna. 
In one of the conﬁgurations, multiple resonators are directly attached to the 
base λ/4 length monopole antenna to generate resonance at a lower frequency, 
whose operating wavelength is larger than the size of the antenna. As a result, 
the antenna is more compact than the conventional quarter-wavelength printed 
monopole. In addition to this, due to the reduction in overall sizes of the antenna, 
the input impedance becomes highly reactive. Hence, this chapter discusses scalable 
impedance matching techniques to achieve matched impedance response while 
maintaining an electrically small antenna size. 
Further in another section, an electrically small antenna loaded with a parasitic 
loop resonator is discussed. Loading the parasitic loop with the driven element 
exhibits resonance lower than the resonance frequency of the driven element. In 
addition to this, an efﬁcient bandwidth improvement technique, i.e., by merging 
resonating modes, is presented. Here, to improve the impedance bandwidth of 
the proposed loop resonator–loaded ESA, two higher-order methods are merged 
into a single passband by tuning the stub dimension without increasing the 
speciﬁed dimension of the antenna. The measured reﬂection coefﬁcient response 
indicates that the proposed antenna offers impedance bandwidth of 60 MHz for the

62
J. Padhi and G. S. Reddy
2.4 GHz (Bluetooth/Wi-Fi) band and 1580 MHz for 5G-NR (n79)/WLAN/Wi-Fi 
band. The antenna offers a stable radiation pattern with more than 80% radiation 
efﬁciency over the operating bands. Overall dimension, simple design technique, 
and stable radiation characteristics make the proposed antenna suitable for indoor 
Wi-Fi/WLAN applications. 
References 
1. C. Zhu, T. Li, K. Li, et al., Electrically small metamaterial-inspired tri-band Antenna with meta-
mode. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 1738–1741 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
LAWP.2015.2421356 
2. A. Gupta, R.K. Chaudhary, The metamaterial Antenna: A novel miniaturized dual-band 
coplanar waveguide-fed Antenna with backed ground plane. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. 
Lett. 60(4), 41–48 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/MAP.2018.2839894 
3. B.J. Niu, Q.Y. Feng, P.L. Shu, Epsilon negative zeroth- and ﬁrst-order resonant antennas with 
extended bandwidth and high efﬁciency. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 61(12), 5878–5884 
(2013) 
4. G. Jyotibhusan Padhi, S. Reddy, A. Kumar, Multiple stubs loaded efﬁcient electrically small 
antenna for DCS/WiMAX/5G NR-n77/n78 applications. J. Electromagn. Waves Appl. (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09205071.2022.2131470 
5. J. Padhi, A. Kumar, G.S. Reddy, Parasitic element loaded efﬁcient electrically small Antenna 
for indoor wireless applications. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., Wiley 64(10), 1793–1799 (2022) 
6. J.B. Padhi, G.S. Reddy, Electrically small surface mountable chip antenna for 5G 
WiMAX/WLAN applications, in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and 
Propagation and USNC-URSI Radio Science meeting (APS/URSI), 021, (2021), pp. 1635– 
1636 
7. R.C. Hansen, R.E. Collin, Small Antenna: Handbook (Wiley/IEEE Press Publications, 2011) 
8. H.A. Wheeler, Fundamental limitations of small antennas. Proc. IRE 35(12), 1479–1484 
(1947). https://doi.org/10.1109/JRPROC.1947.226199 
9. L.J. Chu, Physical limitations of Omni-directional antennas. J. Appl. Phys. 19(12), 1163–1175 
(1948). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1715038 
10. R.F. Harrington, Effect of Antenna size on gain, bandwidth, and efﬁciency. J. Res. Natl. Bureau 
Stand. D Radio Propag. 64D(1), 1 (1960) 
11. R.E. Collin, S. Rothschild, Evaluation of antenna Q. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 12(1), 
23–27 (1964). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.1964.1138151 
12. R.C. Hansen, Fundamental limitations in antennas. Proc. IEEE 69(2), 170 (1981) 
13. J.S. Mclean, A re-examination of the fundamental limits on the radiation Q of electrically small 
antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 44, 672 (1996) 
14. D.F. Sievenpiper et al., Experimental validation of performance limits and design guidelines 
for small antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(1), 8–19 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TAP.2011.2167938 
15. A.D. Yaghjian, S.R. Best, Impedance, bandwidth, and Q of antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 53(4), 1298–1324 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2005.844443 
16. S.R. 
Best, 
D.L. 
Hanna, 
A 
performance 
comparison 
of 
fundamental 
small-antenna 
designs. IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. 52(1), 47–70 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MAP.2010.5466398 
17. G.A. Mavridis, D.E. Anagnostou, M.T. Chryssomallis, Evaluation of the quality factor, Q, 
of electrically small microstrip-patch antennas. IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. 53(4), 216–224 
(2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/MAP.2011.6097329 
18. D.M. Pozer, Microwave Engineering, 4th edn. (Wiley, 2013)

Multiple Resonator–Loaded Electrically Small Antennas for Wireless Devices
63
19. G. Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Ampliﬁers, 2nd edn. (Wiley, 1996), p. 506 
20. J.S. Hong, M.J. Lancaster, Microstrip Filters for RF/Microwave Applications (Wiley, 2001) 
21. G.N. Satish, K.V. Srivastava, A. Biswas, D. Kettle, A via-free left-handed transmission line 
with radial stubs, in APMC 2009 – Asia Paciﬁc Microwave Conference 2009, vol. 1, (2009), 
pp. 2501–2504. https://doi.org/10.1109/APMC.2009.5385214

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications 
Rajesh K. Singh 
1 
Introduction 
An antenna is a key component of RFID communication, it exists both at the 
reader and tag sides. In the past few years, the development of novel and compact 
antennas for readers and tags has been gaining attention to fulﬁll the increasing 
requirements of wireless industries. Nowadays, RFID has become one of the 
promising technologies being used for various applications. Previously, it was 
being used for short-range communication, but now, it is being used for long-
range communications (typically in meters). Depending on the communication 
range and frequencies, different shapes and types of antennas are being realized 
to fulﬁll the needs. Different frequency bands of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
such as 130 kHz (low frequency); 13.5 MHz (high frequency); 865–867 MHz, 
900 MHz, and 920 MHz (ultrahigh frequency); and 2.4 GHz, 5.8 GHz, and 
24 GHz (microwave frequency), are allocated for RFID applications [1–3]. Three-
dimensional, two-dimensional (planar), conformal, and textile antennas are being 
developed for various RFID applications. Three-dimensional antennas have high 
gain and efﬁciencies compared to planar antennas, while planar antennas are 
suitable for compact (low-volume) RFID systems where 3D antennas can’t ﬁt. In 
the era of 5G, 6G, and IOT, ﬂexible (realized on thin substrates or cloths) antennas 
became popular and sometimes are the only solution. Low-proﬁle and lightweight 
antennas are required to be integrated into cloths. The low cost could be another 
feature of the ﬂexible antennas when they are commercialized. Signiﬁcant work has 
R. K. Singh (✉) 
Electronics Engineering Department – DIAT, Pune, Maharashtra, India 
e-mail: rajesh_singh@diat.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_5
65

66
R. K. Singh
been done to realize 3D and planar antennas in the last decade. 3D antennas can 
be realized on thick substrates or made from metal sheets like copper, aluminum, 
etc. Planar antennas can be realized using thin substrates. Textile antennas come 
under planar antennas, which enhance the ﬂexibility of the system and provide extra 
features. However, planar (2D) antennas have low radiation efﬁciency and narrow 
bandwidth; these radiation characteristics of the antenna can be enhanced using 
existing techniques. 
Nowadays, wearable antennas are extensively used in various industrial and 
medical devices. In supporting the increasing interest in antenna research for 
body-centric communications, the IEEE 802.15 standardization group has been 
established to standardize applications intended for off-body, on-body, or in-
body communication [4–6]. Modern applications require wearable antenna to be 
lightweight, low-cost, ﬂexible, and maintenance-free. Textile is being used in devel-
oping ﬂexible antennas. The textile material is proven to be a promising material for 
wearable antennas. Different conductive and dielectric fabrics are available in the 
market, but developing antennas with such fabrics requires knowledge of the elec-
trical properties of such materials such as conductivity, permittivity, loss tangent, 
etc. Conventional antennas that include printed dipoles, monopoles, inverted-Fs 
(PIFAs), and microstrip patches have been used previously for developing wearable 
antennas [7–10]. Among them, microstrip antennas have planar geometry and a 
simple feeding method. These antennas can be easily etched on a printed circuit 
board (PCB). 
Textile materials have been studied and tested by many researchers, but there is 
a lot of scope in exploiting them to get the best-optimized performance. Flexible 
(textile) materials can be studied to achieve better performance with low-cost 
devices. 
Connection strategy (RF feeding to the textile antenna) is another area in which 
one can improve the performance of textile antennas. To feed RF signal in such 
antennas is not an easy task; it must be studied through some standard tests. One 
such issue is explained in [11]. There were cracks on the surface of the uncoated 
screen-printed textile antennas washed 20 times [11]. The RF feed connector may 
detach from the antenna (shown in Fig. 1) after many washes, which may increase 
the ohmic losses. Additionally, soldering is not possible for the fabric materials. 
To overcome the issue, coating can be done on top of the structure, but it doesn’t 
signiﬁcantly improve the performance. The use of snap buttons may be the solution 
for such issues. A few wearable antennas have been realized on thin substrates. 
Although these antennas are wearable, it may degrade the antenna performance 
while bending. A ﬂexible material is needed for an antenna to be developed for 
body-centric communication. If the placement of such wearable devices is in 
proximity to the human body, then it is mandatory to overcome the issue of the 
human body’s effect on the performance of antennas.

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
67
Fig. 1 RF connector 
detachment issue in 
textile-based antennas 
2 
3D Antennas 
Active RFIDs can detect or identify objects at a larger distance; hence, the read 
range is large, whereas passive RFIDs have a short read range of up to 10–15 m 
(typically); again, it depends on the transmitting power and gain of the reader and 
tag antennas. Additionally, the tags can be ﬁxed on metallic and non-metallic objects 
for identiﬁcation and tracking. There are different mechanisms (methods) to realize 
tags for metallic and non-metallic objects. 3D antennas for RFID readers and tags 
were realized to increase the read range of the system. The UHF RFID 3D solenoid 
antenna has been discussed in [12]. Solid and segmented solenoid antennas were 
presented to detect objects in the near-ﬁeld zone of the RFID system as shown in 
Fig. 2. The reﬂection coefﬁcients are plotted for both conﬁgurations as illustrated in 
Figs. 3a and b. 
Another 3D UHF RFID tag mounting on metallic surfaces for IoT indoor 
localization applications was presented in [13]. A 3D meander line narrow-band 
antenna for an RFID system for IOT application was realized in [14]. Various other 
3D antennas were developed to increase read range [15–17]. A UHF RFID reader 
3D antenna with high gain is presented in Fig. 4. Reﬂection coefﬁcients and axial 
ratio are plotted. The antenna operates in the frequency range of 855–885 MHz. It 
is designed on an F4B substrate with a dielectric constant of 2.65 and a thickness 
of 1.5 mm. Both substrate layers are of the same thickness. An air gap of 22 mm 
is created between the patch and feed to increase the impedance bandwidth of the 
overall structure.

68
R. K. Singh
Fig. 2 3D UHF RFID reader antenna. (a) Solid solenoid and (b) segmented solenoid [12] 
Fig. 3 Reﬂection coefﬁcients of (a) solid solenoid and (b) segmented solenoid 
3 
2D or Planar Antennas 
Several papers were reported on RFID planar antennas for both passive and active 
RFID readers and tags. It includes the slot [18], patch [19], PIFA [20], dipole 
[21], etc. An overview of passive RFID tag antenna design is presented in [22]. 
Broadband antennas were also realized to cover the frequency bands of UHF RFID 
for various countries [23]. The operating frequencies of UHF RFID are different in 
different countries. To cover all bands, a single wideband antenna can be realized. 
A dual monopole planar antenna is presented in [24]. It operates at two frequency 
bands, i.e., 2.4 and 5.8 GHz bands. 
Another tag antenna was developed to be used for metallic products or packages 
with metal material inside [25]. A few RFID planar antennas were also realized for 
the RFID reader. A compact RFID reader antenna for UHF near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld 
operations was realized in [26]. It achieved a good impedance bandwidth of 31 MHz, 
which covers the USA RFID band. There is enough space in the case of developing 
reader antennas compared to tag antennas. An array of radiating elements were also 
used to enhance the gain and to get a large read range. One such antenna was realized 
in [27].

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
69
Fig. 4 Circularly 
polarized 
UHF 
RFID 
reader 
antenna. 
(a) 
Geometry. 
Dimensions: 
W = L = 165 mm, Wp = 138 mm, Lp = 132 mm, Lf = 130 mm, Wf = 3.8 mm. (b) 
Photograph. (c) Reﬂection coefﬁcient. (d) Axial  ratio  
Another UHF RFID reader antenna design having multi-tag identiﬁcation for 
medical systems was realized in [28]. It may operate in various countries because 
of the different operating RFID frequencies. Various other reader and tag antennas 
were realized in the past. All the discussed antennas were realized on thick 
substrates.

70
R. K. Singh
4 
Conformal Antennas 
When RFID tags are packaged in labels, antennas must be conformed to their 
surface. The requirements for unconventional shapes of the tag antenna may arise on 
demand. For example, RFID tags can be embedded inside pipes, bottles, bottle caps, 
and any irregularly shaped products; antennas can be conformal to those shapes. A 
few conventionally and unconventionally shaped tag antennas were developed in 
[29–35]. Unconventionally shaped tags were realized in [29]. A ﬂexible anti-metal 
RFID based on a high-conductivity graphene ﬁlm was presented in [34]. A compact 
conformal/ﬂexible dipole antenna designed to be integrated into a soldier’s beret 
was discussed in [35] as shown in Fig. 5. The antenna was designed to be operated 
at the UHF RFID frequency of 866 MHz. 
An FSS AMC structure was used to block radiation toward the head of the 
soldier, and performance in terms of reﬂection coefﬁcient and radiation pattern 
was reported. The reported antenna involves foam in between the AMC and dipole 
structure so it is not fully ﬂexible. 
Fig. 5 Conformal dipole antenna with FSM-AMC structure [35]

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
71
5 
Textile Antennas 
Wearable devices are continuously receiving more attention in the research com-
munity for on-body communication or WBAN as well as for connecting wireless 
networks. It has various applications in medicine, sports, military, and space. 
Although there are various issues in developing wearable devices due to the lossy 
behavior of the human body that affects the performance of the antenna, devices 
are used extensively for various applications. There are various types of antennas 
developed as body-worn antennas. 
Best-suited materials that may give better performance when used in antennas 
must be studied. Additionally, connection strategies or RF feed becomes important 
in the case of textile-based antennas. 
5.1 
Materials for Textile-Based Antennas 
The attraction toward textile-based antennas urged researchers to study the char-
acteristics of dielectric and conductive fabric that helps in selecting the suitable 
material for a particular application because the antenna needs to be conformal to 
the surface of the body and also the antenna performance should not be changed 
when mounted on a human body. Additionally, materials with different electrical 
properties give different results. It is essential to study the material’s properties so 
that the material may be exploited to achieve better results. Various other properties 
like conformability, durability, etc. must be studied to obtain reliable and robust 
solutions. Different textile fabrics have been discussed in the next section. 
The materials used to realize ﬂexible antennas and affect their performance are 
conductive and dielectric fabrics. Conductive materials have electric conductive 
abilities, while dielectric materials have certain dielectric properties and tolerance to 
mechanical deformation (including bending, stretching, and twisting). The selection 
of material is done based on the abovementioned properties to ensure better 
characteristics of the antenna such as gain, radiation efﬁciency, and bandwidth. 
Conductive fabrics with high electrical conductivity are preferred to ensure the high 
efﬁciency of the antenna. Various conductive materials have been used and reported 
in the scientiﬁc literature. A few of them are listed in Table 1. 
A variety of conductive fabrics are embedded inside polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS) to realize a robust ﬂexible conductive layer for wearable/body-worn 
antennas. The embedded conductive fabric is also allowed to improve the adhesion 
of PDMS metal [36]. Table 2 shows various fabrics used to get a better combination. 
All the embedded fabric has undergone some kind of mechanical testing; the 
performance of the embedded conductive fabric is better compared to the fabric 
without encapsulation because the conductive fabric detaches from the substrate 
(PDMS).

72
R. K. Singh
Table 1 List of conductive 
materials 
Conductive material 
Conductivity (S/m) 
PEDOT: PSS
100–1500 
Polyaniline
5 
Polypyrrole
40–200 
Polyacetylene
200–1000 
Silver nanoparticles 
6.173 × 107 
Gold nanoparticles
4.098 × 107 
Copper nanoparticles 
5.813 × 107 
Table 2 Different conductive fabrics (CFs) with different conductivities 
Composition
t (mm)
σ (S/m) 
Nickel-copper-silver-coated nylon ripstop
0.13
7.7 × 105 
Copper-coated polyester taffeta
0.08
2.5 × 105 
Nickel-copper-coated ripstop
0.08
4.2 × 105 
Silver-coated ripstop
0.05
8 × 104 
Table 3 Dielectric fabrics (textile) and their properties 
S. no.
Substrate
Dielectric constant
Loss tangent 
1
Cotton
1.50
0.023 
2
PDMS
2.65
0.02 
3
Jeans
1.54
0.03 
4
Felt
1.22
0.016 
5
Kapton polyimide
3.5
0.003 
6
Silk
1.75
0.012 
7
Panama
2.12
0.05 
8
100% polyester
1.90
0.0045 
9
Cordura
1.90
0.0098 
Body-worn antennas for medical sensors are based on embroidered conductive 
polymer ﬁber (e-ﬁbers) on textiles [37]. Challenges and opportunities in embroidery 
and related manufacturing techniques for wearable antennas have been explained in 
[38]. During embroidering, an assistant yarn is used to couch the e-ﬁbers onto one 
side of the textile’s surface. 
Substrate materials with low dielectric constant, low dielectric loss, low coefﬁ-
cient of thermal expansion, and high thermal conductivity can be ideal materials for 
developing ﬂexible antennas. A low dielectric constant gives better efﬁciency, but 
it costs a large antenna size, whereas a high dielectric constant provides a compact 
geometry but with low gain. The substrate with features such as ﬂexibility, strength, 
washability, and stretchability tends to be the most popular and attractive to be used 
by researchers. Table 3 lists some of the used dielectric substrates (textile) in the 
past literature. Various other fabrics are used to realize antennas for RFID [39–43].

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
73
Fig. 6 Male snap button 
ﬁtted on a microstrip 
transmission line 
5.2 
Feeding/Connection Strategies for Textile-Based Antennas 
Realize an antenna on a textile fabric such as cloth. It is impossible to solder a feed 
connector on it. There are different connections used to feed textile-based antennas. 
The use of snap buttons may be the better solution in such antennas, but it gives 
more losses at high frequencies. The design/geometry of the snap button is simple; 
it is attached to the substrate using machine-washable glue [44]. 
The RF connector (SMA) used in a single-use wearable antenna can be replaced 
by a coaxial-to-microstrip transition via low-cost snap buttons [45]. The transition 
from coaxial to microstrip via snap buttons has already been tested. It is proven that 
snap buttons can be used up to 3 GHz with low losses. Figure 6 shows the male snap 
button ﬁtted at the microstrip line end. 
Snap buttons are used to connect the coaxial cable and textile patch antenna to 
a detachable feeding system [45, 46]. A pair of commercial snap buttons has been 
demonstrated as a detachable radio-frequency (RF) balanced connection between 
a garment-integrated textile dipole antenna and a passive sensor-enabled radio-
frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tag in a wearable wireless system [47]. 
The best connection strategy is discussed in [48] after analyzing electrical 
performance, manufacturing complexity, and mechanical stability. Three different 
potential connection strategies on textile materials were presented—conductive 
epoxy, snap button, butterﬂy claps, and wing solution. The wing solution was 
suggested as an available alternative solution; it has more mechanical stability and 
is simpler in manufacturing than other methods. 
5.3 
Textile-Based Antennas for RFID 
Several textile-based antennas were realized using these materials and connections. 
Textile antennas to be used for different applications of RFID are discussed here. 
A textile-based UHF RFID tag antenna comprising only textile materials (e-textile, 
textile substrate, and conductive yearn) has been presented in [49]. Screen-printed 
RFID antennas on two different fabrics and six different coating materials have been 
discussed in [50]. The reliability of the developed RFID tags was also tested after

74
R. K. Singh
applying a coating of glue-type material. Discontinuities and breaks were found 
due to the uneven surface; thus, hard coatings were suggested to keep the tag from 
breaking. 
The ﬂexible textile-concealed RFID tags for wearable applications were realized 
in [51]. It also showed the performance of the tag while bending. Several textile-
based antennas were realized to be integrated into the smart glove for RFID 
applications [52–63]. Later, the frequency selective surface (FSS), electromagnetic 
band gap (EBG), artiﬁcial magnetic conductor (AMC) structures, etc. were realized 
using textile fabrics [64–67]. A fabric-based CPW antenna integrated with EBG-
FSS structures was presented in [67]. It was also studied to determine its beneﬁts 
and safety. A textile-based Yagi-like antenna was realized in [59] as shown in Fig. 7. 
It is made on a cloth fabric. Two different fabrics (a bi-elastic 3D and a quadri-
elastic plain conductive fabric) have been tested and discussed. Human hand impact 
is considered here in Fig. 7b. When antennas are designed to be placed on the human 
body, bending, stretching, etc. analysis is compulsory to get the impact of its overall 
structure performance. 
Figure 8 shows the different bending scenarios. The antenna is placed on the 
back of a hand palm. At different bending, reﬂection coefﬁcients are plotted in Fig. 
9. It does not have a signiﬁcance on the performance, but it may not be true for all 
textile-based designs in proximity to the body. Here, the location of the antenna was 
chosen in such a way that it is less affected while bending and stretching. Another 
textile-based antenna to be ﬁtted at the same place was reported in [61] as shown  in  
Fig. 10. It is a dual-band antenna operating at 868 MHz and 2450 MHz. 
The reconﬁgurable textile-based antenna using the snap-on button concept is a 
promising practical engineering solution for reconﬁgurable textile antennas [44]. 
With an advancement in technology, research on realizing textile-based antennas, 
AMC, FSS, and EBG structures is ongoing. 
6 
Conclusion 
Various antennas used for RFID applications have been covered in this chapter. The 
discussion started with the 3D antennas; later, planar and conformal antennas were 
discussed. When it comes to textile antennas, feeding arrangements and properties 
of textile materials must be discussed. The electrical and mechanical properties of 
the materials are key for textile antennas. A few textile-based antennas for different 
applications of near- and far-ﬁeld RFID were discussed in detail.

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
75
650
750
850
950
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1050 
Frequency (GHz) 
b 
a 
Without hand (sim), 
Without hand (meas), 
With hand (sim) 
With hand (meas) 
|S11| (dB)
-20
-25 
0
-5
-10
-15 
Balun 
Snap 
button 
Open loop 
Director 
Conductive 
yarn 
Balanced 
feed 
Fig. 7 Textile-based Yagi-like ﬂexible antenna for UHF RFID systems [59]. (a) Photograph of the 
antenna. (b) Reﬂection coefﬁcient with and without hand

76
R. K. Singh
Fig. 8 Bending analysis of textile-based antenna to be placed on the back of a palm. (a) Cylinder 
radius, R = ∞ (no bending). (b) R  = 40 cm. (c) R  = 20 cm. (d) R  = 8 cm (almost closed hand) 
[59] 
Fig. 9 Reﬂection coefﬁcients 
at different bending [59] 
R=40 cm 
R=20 cm 
R=8 cm 
Straight hand (open hand) 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 1100 1200 
Frequency (MHz) 
|S11| (dB) 
–20 
0 
–5 
–10 
–15

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
77
Fig. 10 Textile-based Yagi-like ﬂexible dual-band antenna for UHF RFID systems [61]. (a) 
Photograph of the antenna. (b) Reﬂection coefﬁcients with and without hand

78
R. K. Singh
References 
1. S.S. Basat, K. Lim, J. Laskar, M.M. Tentzeris, Design and modeling of embedded 13.56 MHz 
RFID antennas, in 2005 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, 
Washington, DC, USA, vol. 4B, (2005), pp. 64–67. https://doi.org/10.1109/APS.2005.1552740 
2. K. Jomaa, F. Ndagijimana, H. Ayad, M. Fadlallah, J. Jomaah, Near-ﬁeld characteriza-
tion for 13.56 MHz RFID antenna, in 2017 International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Compatibility – EMC EUROPE, Angers, France, (2017), pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
EMCEurope.2017.8094759 
3. X. Qing, C.K. Goh, Z.N. Chen, UHF near-ﬁeld RFID reader antenna, in Proceedings of Asia 
Paciﬁc Microwave Conference, Singapore, (2009), pp. 2383–2386 
4. I. Gammoudi, M. Nedil, T.A. Denidni, L. Talbi, RFID off-body tag antenna for underground 
environment, in 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation & 
USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting, San Diego, CA, USA, (2017), pp. 2435–2436. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/APUSNCURSINRSM.2017.8073260 
5. J.D. Hughes, R. Horne, N. Brabon, J. Batchelor, An on-body UHF RFID tag with DDRR 
antenna for healthcare data streaming applications. IEEE J. Radio Freq. Identif. 6, 680–687 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/JRFID.2022.3216762 
6. A. Kiourti, RFID antennas for body-area applications: From wearables to implants. IEEE 
Antennas Propag. Mag. 60(5), 14–25 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/MAP.2018.2859167 
7. J. Alarcon, M. Egels, P. Pannier, A low proﬁle circularly polarized antenna for UHF RFID 
readers, in 2011 IEEE International Conference on RFID-Technologies and Applications, 
Sitges, Spain, (2011), pp. 469–472. https://doi.org/10.1109/RFID-TA.2011.6068680 
8. L. Tian, H. Guo, X. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Yang, Novel 3D RFID antenna with low proﬁle 
and low cost, in ISAPE2012, Xi’an, China, (2012), pp. 69–72. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ISAPE.2012.6408710 
9. P. Parthiban, B.-C. Seet, X.J. Li, Low-cost low-proﬁle UHF RFID reader antenna with 
reconﬁgurable beams and polarizations, in 2017 IEEE International Conference on RFID 
(RFID), Phoenix, AZ, USA, (2017), pp. 81–87. https://doi.org/10.1109/RFID.2017.7945591 
10. M. El Bekkali, P. Singh, M. El Bakkali, L. Kansal, G.K. Sodhi, A low proﬁle CPW-
Fed Slot antenna for UHF-RFID readers, in 2021 International Conference on Computer 
Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), Coimbatore, India, (2021), pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ICCCI50826.2021.9402378 
11. I. Kazani, F. Declercq, M.L. Scarpello, C. Hertleer, H. Rogier, D. Vande Ginste, G. De Mey, 
G. Guxho, L. Van Langenhove, Performance study of screen-printed textile antennas after 
repeated washing. Autex Res. J. 14(2), 47–54 (2014). https://doi.org/10.2478/v10304-012-
0049-x 
12. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Glove integrated solenoid antennas 
for near-ﬁeld UHF RFID applications, in 2019 IEEE Indian Conference on Antennas 
and Propogation (InCAP), Ahmedabad, India, (2019), pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
InCAP47789.2019.9134637 
13. M. Dhaouadi, F. Choubani, A novel 3D PILA-Type UHF RFID tag antenna mountable on 
metallic objects for IoT indoor localization. Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2021, Article ID 7643941, 
12 pages (2021). https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/7643941 
14. A. Mohamed, S.N. Azemi, S.A. Suhaimi, A. Ezanuddin, 3D miniature antenna design for 
RFID applications in IoT environment. Les Ulis: EDP Sci. 97 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1051/ 
matecconf/20179701092 
15. D. Kaddour, S. Tedjini, A. Djamel, 3D antenna for UHF RFID Tag On Molded interconnect 
device, in 2013 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium (APSURSI), 
Orlando, FL, USA, (2013), pp. 1502–1503. https://doi.org/10.1109/APS.2013.6711410 
16. D.V. Kholodnyak, P.A. Turalchuk, A.B. Mikhailov, S.Y. Dudnikov, I.B. Vendik, 3D 
antenna for UHF RFID tags with eliminated read-orientation sensitivity, in 2006 Euro-

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
79
pean Microwave Conference, Manchester, UK, (2006), pp. 583–586. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
EUMC.2006.281459 
17. C.M. Kruesi, R.J. Vyas, M.M. Tentzeris, Design and development of a novel 3-D cubic antenna 
for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and RFID applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
57(10), 3293–3299 (2009) 
18. S.-Y. Chen, P. Hsu, CPW-fed folded-slot antenna for 5.8 GHz RFID tags. Electron. Lett. 24, 
1516–1517 (2004) 
19. S.K. Padhi, N.C. Karmakar, C.L. Law, S. Aditya, A dual polarized aperture coupled circular 
patch antenna using a C-shaped coupling slot. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 51(12), 3295– 
3298 (2003) 
20. M. Hirvonen, P. Pursula, K. Jaakkola, K. Laukkanen, Planar inverted- F antenna for radio 
frequency identiﬁcation. Electron. Lett. 40, 848–850 (2004) 
21. Q. Xianming, Y. Ning, A folded dipole antenna for RFID. Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. 
Int. Symp. 1, 97–100 (2004) 
22. K.V.S. Rao, P.V. Nikitin, S.F. Lam, Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: A review and a 
practical application. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 53(12), 3870–3876 (2005). https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/TAP.2005.859919 
23. Y. Shi, C. Fang, K. Qi, C.-H. Liang, A broadband design of UHF fractal RFID tag antenna. 
Prog. Electromag. Res. Lett. 58, 45–51 (2016). https://doi.org/10.2528/PIERL15100406 
24. N. Ojaroudi Parchin, H. Jahanbakhsh Basherlou, R.A. Abd-Alhameed, J.M. Noras, Dual-
band monopole antenna for RFID applications. Future Internet 11, 31 (2019). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ﬁ11020031 
25. L. Mo, C. Li, Double loop inductive feed patch antenna design for Antimetal UHF RFID Tag. 
Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2019, Article ID 2917619, 8 pages (2019). https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2019/2917619 
26. L.X. Zheng, X. Zeming, C. Xuanliang, A compact RFID reader antenna for UHF near-ﬁeld and 
far-ﬁeld operations. Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2013, Article ID 961042, 5 pages (2013). https:// 
doi.org/10.1155/2013/961042 
27. D. Xie, X. Liu, H. Guo, X. Yang, Novel design of high-gain planar dipole-array antenna for 
RFID 2.45 GHz. Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2014, Article ID 704974, 6 pages (2014). https:// 
doi.org/10.1155/2014/704974 
28. J.S. Jung, J.N. Lee, J.M. Kim, J.K. Park, An UHF RFID reader antenna with Multitag 
identiﬁcation for extremely low-temperature medical systems. Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2020, 
Article ID 2482961, 11 pages (2020). https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2482961 
29. S. Wang, Y. Liu, T.T. Ye, “Unconventionally shaped” antenna design for UHF RFID tags. Int. 
J. Antennas Propag. 2021, Article ID 9965252, 9 pages (2021). https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/ 
9965252 
30. H. Rajagopalan, Y. Rahmat-Samii, A novel conformal all-surface mount RFID tag antenna 
design, in 2009 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, North 
Charleston, SC, USA, (2009), pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/APS.2009.5171872 
31. H. Rajagopalan, Y. Rahmat-Samii, Conformal RFID antenna design suitable for human 
monitoring and metallic platforms, in Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference on 
Antennas and Propagation, Barcelona, Spain, (2010), pp. 1–5 
32. J. Xi, T.T. Ye, Conformal UHF RFID tag antenna mountable on winebottle neck, in Proceed-
ings of the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Chicago, IL, 
USA, (2012), pp. 1–2. https://doi.org/10.1109/APS.2012.6349252 
33. S. Sajal, B.D. Braaten, A conformal antenna on a passive UHF RFID tag using 97% 
carbon content graphene-based conductors and paper substrates, in 2017 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Antennas and Propagation & USNC/URSI National Radio Sci-
ence Meeting, San Diego, CA, USA, (2017), pp. 2427–2428. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
APUSNCURSINRSM.2017.8073256 
34. B. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Liu, D. He, Z.P. Wu, Flexible anti-metal RFID tag 
antenna based on high-conductivity graphene assembly ﬁlm. Sensors 21, 1513 (2021). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/s21041513

80
R. K. Singh
35. S. Palani, R.K. Singh, K.P. Ray, M. Singh, A compact and ﬂexible dipole antenna to 
be integrated into military berets, in 2022 IEEE Microwaves, Antennas, and Propagation 
Conference (MAPCON), Bangalore, India, (2022), pp. 1774–1778. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
MAPCON56011.2022.10047703 
36. R.B.V.B. Simorangkir, Y. Yang, R.M. Hashmi, T. Björninen, K.P. Esselle, L. Ukkonen, 
Polydimethylsiloxane-embedded conductive fabric: Characterization and application for real-
ization of robust passive and active ﬂexible wearable antennas. IEEE Access 6, 48102–48112 
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2867696 
37. L. Zhang, Z. Wang, J.L. Volakis, Textile antennas and sensors for body-worn applica-
tions. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 11, 1690–1693 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
LAWP.2013.2239956 
38. A. Tsolis, W.G. Whittow, A.A. Alexandridis, J.C. Vardaxoglou, Embroidery and related 
manufacturing techniques for wearable antennas: Challenges and opportunities. Electronics 
3, 314–338 (2014). https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics3020314 
39. Z. Wang, L. Zhang, D. Psychoudakis, J.L. Volakis, Flexible textile antennas for body-worn 
communication, in Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Antenna Technology, 
Tucson, AZ, USA, (2012), pp. 205–208 
40. Toyobo Co., LTD., Osaka, Japan, PBO Fiber Zylon Technical Information, (2005) 
41. P. Salonen, J. Kim, Y. Rahmat-Samii, Dual-band E-shaped patch wearable textile antenna. 
Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp. 1A, 466–469 (2005) 
42. Y. Ouyang, W.J. Chappell, High frequency properties of electro-textiles for wearable antenna 
applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 56(2), 381–389 (2008) 
43. S. Bashir, A. Chauraya, R.M. Edwards, J. Vardaxoglou, A ﬂexible fabric metasurface for on-
body communication applications, in Proceedings of the Antennas Propagation Conference, 
Loughborough, UK., November 16–17, (2009), pp. 725–728 
44. S.J. Chen, D.C. Ranasinghe, C. Fumeaux, A robust snap-on button solution for reconﬁgurable 
wearable textile antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 66(9), 4541–4551 (2018). https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2018.2851288 
45. T. Kellomäki, Snaps to connect coaxial and microstrip lines in wearable systems. Int. J. 
Antennas Propag. 2012, Article ID 659287 10 pages (2012). https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/ 
659287 
46. I. Belov, M. Chedid, P. Leisner, Investigation of snap-on feeding arrangements for a wearable 
UHF textile patch antenna, in Proceedings of the Ambience 08 Smart Textiles Technology and 
Design, Boras, Sweden, (2008) 
47. S.J. Chen, C. Fumeaux, D.C. Ranasinghe, T. Kaufmann, Paired snap-on buttons connections 
for balanced antennas in wearable systems. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 1498–1501 
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/LAWP.2014.2363852 
48. S.P. Pinapati, T. Kaufmann, I. Linke, D. Ranasinghe, C. Fumeaux, Connection strategies for 
wearable microwave transmission lines and antennas, in 2015 International Symposium on 
Antennas and Propagation (ISAP), Hobart, TAS, Australia, (2015), pp. 1–4 
49. J. Virkki, Z. Wei, A. Liu, L. Ukkonen, T. Björninen, Wearable passive E-Textile UHF RFID 
tag based on a slotted patch antenna with sewn ground and microchip interconnections. Int. 
J. Antennas Propag. 2017, Article ID 3476017, 8 pages (2017). https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/ 
3476017 
50. T. Kellomäki, J. Virkki, S. Merilampi, L. Ukkonen, Towards washable wearable antennas: 
A comparison of coating materials for screen-printed textile-based UHF RFID tags. Int. J. 
Antennas Propag. 2012, Article ID 476570, 11 pages (2012). https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/ 
476570 
51. M. Wagih, Y. Wei, A. Komolafe, R. Torah, S. Beeby, Reliable UHF long-range textile-
integrated RFID tag based on a compact ﬂexible antenna ﬁlament. Sensors 20, 3435 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s20123435

Textile Antennas for RFID Applications
81
52. S. Ahmed, S.M.M. Rehman, L. Ukkonen, T. Björninen, Glove-integrated slotted patch antenna 
for wearable UHF RFID reader, in 2018 IEEE International Conference on RFID Technology 
& Application (RFID-TA), Macau, Macao, (2018), pp. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/RFID-
TA.2018.8552817 
53. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Design of a compact Yagi-Uda Antenna for near 
ﬁeld UHF RFID smart gloves, in IEEE International Conference on RFID Technology and 
Applications (RFID-TA), Pisa, Italy, (2019), pp. 1–4 
54. S. Ahmed, A. Mehmood, L. Sydänheimo, L. Ukkonen, T. Björninen, 2019 IEEE International 
Conference on RFID Technology and Applications (RFID-TA), Pisa, Italy, in Glove-integrated 
textile antenna with reduced SAR for wearable UHF RFID reader, (2019), pp. 231–235. https:/ 
/doi.org/10.1109/RFID-TA.2019.8892251 
55. S. Ahmed, S.T. Qureshi, L. Sydänheimo, L. Ukkonen, T. Björninen, Comparison of wearable 
E-textile split ring resonator and slotted patch RFID reader antennas embedded in work 
gloves. IEEE IEEE J. Radio Freq. Identif. 3(4), 259–264 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JRFID.2019.2926194 
56. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Glove integrated dual-band Yagi reader antenna 
for UHF RFID and Bluetooth application, in International Workshop on Antenna Technology 
(iWAT), Bucharest, Romania, (2020), pp. 1–4 
57. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Modiﬁed Yagi-Uda reader antenna for UHF 
RFID smart-glove, in 14th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EUCAP), 
Copenhagen, Denmark, (2020), pp. 1–4 
58. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Compact Quasi-Yagi reader antenna for UHF 
RFID smart-glove, in IEEE International Conference on Smart and Sustainable Technologies, 
Croatia, September 23–26, (2020) 
59. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, M. Terraroli, P. Perego, Compact and wearable 
Yagi-like textile antennas for near-ﬁeld UHF-RFID readers. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
69(3), 1324–1333 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2020.3030944 
60. A. Michel, R.K. Singh, P. Nepa, G. Manara, Smart glove for near-ﬁeld UHF RFID applications, 
in URSI General Assembly and Scientiﬁc Symposium, Rome, Italy, (2021), pp. 1–1 
61. R.K. Singh, A. Michel, P. Nepa, A. Salvatore, Wearable dual-band quasi-Yagi antenna for 
UHF-RFID and 2.4 GHz applications. IEEE J. Radio Freq. Identif. (RFID) 4(4), 420–427 
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/JRFID.2020.3000298 
62. A. Michel, R.K. Singh, P. Nepa, G. Manara, A smart glove for near-ﬁeld UHF RFID 
applications. URSI Radio Sci. Lett. 3, 1–4 (2022). https://www.ursi.org/Publications/ 
RadioScienceLetters/Volume3/RSL21-0046-ﬁnal.pdf 
63. A. Michel, R.K. Singh, On the use of power-transfer efﬁciency to analyze the performance of 
a 3D-printed wearable UHF-RFID antenna. URSI Radio Sci. Bull. 2021(377), 38–45 (2022) 
64. H.R. Raad, A.I. Abbosh, H.M. Al-Rizzo, D.G. Rucker, Flexible and compact AMC based 
antenna for telemedicine applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 61(2), 524–531 (2013). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2012.2223449 
65. R.C. Hadarig, M.E. de Cos, F. Las-Heras, UHF dipole-AMC combination for RFID appli-
cations. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 12, 1041–1044 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
LAWP.2013.2279095 
66. S. Genovesi, F. Costa, F. Fanciulli, A. Monorchio, Wearable inkjet-printed wideband antenna 
by using miniaturized AMC for sub-GHz applications. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 15, 
1927–1930 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/LAWP.2015.2513962 
67. A.Y.I. Ashyap et al., Highly efﬁcient wearable CPW antenna enabled by EBG-FSS structure for 
medical body area network applications. IEEE Access 6, 77529–77541 (2018). https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2883379

Recent Trends in the Design 
and Development of Dielectric Resonator 
Antennas 
Pragati Patel 
1 
Introduction 
An antenna is an important part of wireless communication systems. Efﬁcient 
antenna design improves the overall performance of such a system. The main 
role of an antenna is to transmit or receive electromagnetic waves [1]. The types 
of antennas can be wire, aperture, microstrip, array, reﬂector, lens, or dielectric 
resonator. Among all, microstrip antennas had been popular due to their advantages 
such as lightweight, compact, conformal, and ease of fabrication [2]. The shape of 
such microstrip antennas can be square, circular, triangular, etc. The frequency of 
modern wireless communication system is scaling upward to millimeter waves to 
meet the demand of multitasking or fast communications. The conductor losses of 
microstrip or other metallic antennas become severe at such high frequencies due to 
skin effect. Increased losses degrade efﬁciency of the antenna signiﬁcantly, which 
is undesired. Therefore, efﬁcient antennas are required at millimeter- and near-
millimeter-wave regions (10–300 GHz). Conversely, dielectric resonator antennas, 
or DRAs, became popular because of minimal conductor losses and absence of 
surface waves [3]. Dielectric resonators are popular as an energy-storing element 
in microwave circuits due to their compact size and high-quality factor. Application 
as efﬁcient radiators or antennas started because of the availability of low-quality 
factor dielectric materials, which could retain wideband antenna characteristics. 
The additional inherent advantages of DRAs are wide bandwidth, high radiation 
efﬁciency, and compact size at high frequency [4]. The bandwidth offered by 
DRAs is more than that of microstrip antennas because in the former, all sides 
P. Patel (✉) 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology 
Goa, Cuncolim, Goa, India 
e-mail: pragati@nitgoa.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_6
83

84
P. Patel
radiate, except for the grounded part, whereas in the latter, radiation takes place 
from two narrow radiating edges. Nevertheless, microstrip antennas and DRAs 
have many similar features. Both types of antennas behave like cavity resonators. 
Also, excitation techniques are similar for the two categories of antennas. In order 
to design DRA for modern wireless communications, the theory of dielectric 
resonators is ﬁrst discussed brieﬂy in the subsequent section. 
1.1 
Dielectric Resonators 
Dielectric resonators consist of low-loss, high-permittivity, and thermally stable 
ceramic material. Shapes of such resonators can be cylindrical, spherical, paral-
lelepiped, etc. The cost and size have been a challenge while designing microwave 
circuits, and miniaturization of such microwave circuits is possible due to the 
advancement in low loss temperature stable dielectric resonators. The ﬁrst thermally 
stable, low-loss dielectric material reported was barium tetratitanate ceramics in 
1970 [5]. After this breakthrough, many advanced dielectric resonators have been 
investigated. At resonant frequencies, an equal storage of electric or magnetic 
energies takes place. Therefore, input impedance is purely resistive at resonance. 
The quality factor or Q factor is an important ﬁgure of merit in the resonant 
circuits [6]. It is deﬁned as the ratio of electromagnetic energy stored to energy 
dissipated in the form of heat. The highest value of quality factor is around 10,000, 
which makes dielectric resonators suitable as an efﬁcient energy-storing element 
rather than as a radiating element. 
Due to aforementioned characteristics, dielectric resonators were popular as 
energy-storing elements in the shielded environment to prevent any radiation of 
energy until 1983. It was reported in the year 1983 that when shielding is removed 
and excited appropriately, they can behave as an efﬁcient radiator. 
1.2 
Dielectric Resonator Antennas (DRAs) 
The potential application of dielectric resonators as efﬁcient radiators started in the 
year 1983 when cylindrical, rectangular, and hemispherical shapes were investi-
gated. Detailed analysis of resonant modes, radiation characteristics, and techniques 
of excitation was reported in [7–9] for the three aforementioned basic geometries. 
Thereafter, an investigation of dielectric resonators as potential radiators started. 
DRAs operating at their fundamental modes irrespective of shape behave like a 
short horizontal magnetic dipole. They are designed to obtain certain characteristics 
such as compact size, wideband, circular polarization, gain enhancement, multiple 
input-multiple output (MIMO), and ultrawideband (UWB) [10]. The basic features 
and mode nomenclature are adopted from [11–13].

Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric Resonator Antennas
85
Fig. 1 Geometry of a 
rectangular DRA 
The main ﬁndings of investigations on basic shapes of DRAs can be summarized 
as follows [3]: 
• 
The size of the DRA is proportional to λ0/εr, where λ0 is the free space 
wavelength and εr is the dielectric constant. 
• 
The resonant frequency and radiation quality factor are dependent on the aspect 
ratio of the DRA for ﬁxed dielectric constant. 
• 
Low-loss dielectric materials can offer high radiation efﬁciency up to millimeter-
wave region because of minimal conductor losses and absence of surface waves. 
• 
The physical size of the DRA and bandwidth can be controlled due to the 
availability of a wide range of dielectric constants for dielectric materials. 
• 
The resonant frequency can vary from several MHz to several GHz. 
• 
Various excitation techniques available for the excitation of DRAs make integra-
tion with MIC or MMIC technology possible. 
• 
Different types of radiation patterns are possible depending upon resonant modes 
excited within the DRA, which can meet requirements of different applications. 
Resonant modes play an important role in determining radiation characteristics 
of DRA. Therefore, analysis or understanding of different modes excited inside the 
DRA is important. The modal theory is taken from dielectric resonators and does 
not consider the effect of feed or the coupling method. Therefore, it may affect the 
resonant frequency, quality factor, and cross-polar patterns of the DRA. Modes for 
the three basic geometries will be discussed. 
Rectangular-shaped DRAs shown in Fig. 1 excite two resonant modes, TE 
and TM. However, inclusion of ground plane in designing of rectangular DRA 
restricts the excitation of TM modes. Therefore, rectangular-shaped DRAs support 
TE modes only when mounted on a ground plane. The fundamental TE111 mode 
radiates like short horizontal magnetic dipoles. The three subscripts represent ﬁeld 
variations along the x, y, and z axis. 
Cylindrical-shaped DRAs shown in Fig. 2 excite TM01δ (radiate like short 
electric monopole), TE01δ, and HE11δ (radiate like a short horizontal magnetic 
dipole) modes. The three subscripts represent variations along azimuth, radial, and 
axial direction, whereas HEM refers to the hybrid mode. The value of δ can vary 
from 0 to 1 and is equal to 1 for high dielectric constant material. Hemispherical-

86
P. Patel
Fig. 2 Geometry of a 
cylindrical DRA 
Fig. 3 Geometry of a 
hemispherical DRA 
shaped DRAs shown in Fig. 3 excite two resonant modes, TE111 and TM101 
which radiate like a short horizontal magnetic dipole and short electric monopole, 
respectively. The three subscripts refer to ﬁeld variations along radial, azimuth, 
and elevation direction, whereas TE refers to transverse electric, and TM refers to 
transverse magnetic. 
2 
Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric 
Resonator Antennas 
Rectangular DRAs offer more degree of freedom than the other two geometries, viz., 
cylindrical and hemispherical DRAs. Thus, it has more ﬂexibility in choosing the 
desired antenna proﬁle. This means depending upon the application desired antenna 
proﬁle can be selected. Therefore, tall and slender or thin and wide designs are 
possible for given dielectric constant and resonant frequency. The radiation quality 
factor varies with the proﬁle and provides more design ﬂexibility. Therefore, the 
design of compact and wideband rectangular DRAs is challenging particularly at 
low-frequency applications. Numerous rectangular DRAs have been proposed to 
meet stringent requirements of modern communication systems. However, antennas 
offer limited bandwidth due to the resonant nature. The main reason for restriction 
in the enhancement of bandwidth is the impedance of the antenna, which varies with 
frequency. Some techniques for enhancement of bandwidth are lowering of radiation 
quality factor, external matching networks, modiﬁed feed network, and stacking 
of multiple resonators [3, 4]. The rectangular DRAs discussed have enhanced 
bandwidth based upon method of reduction of radiation quality factor. This is

Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric Resonator Antennas
87
achieved by reducing effective dielectric constant, which is directly related to the 
radiation quality factor. It is worth mentioning that a low dielectric constant material 
(εr < 10) is not preferred while designing a rectangular DRA because to resonate, 
ﬁelds should be contained within the DRA. 
The technique of edge grounding is used for size reduction in [15]. The ﬁeld 
conﬁguration within the half-rectangular DRA does not change if a PEC (or metal 
plate) is placed along the chopped edge [3, 4]. The PEC does not extend further than 
the edge dimensions. However, the major drawback is signiﬁcant reduction in the 
bandwidth as reported in [3, 4, 15]. The asymmetry exists in the radiation patterns 
due to the effect of metal plate used. The metal plate acts as a shorting post for 
electric ﬁelds as mentioned in [3, 4]. This reduces volume by approximately half 
and thus makes the antenna compact. It is similar to the use of shorting posts for 
patch antennas to reduce length of patch from λ/2 to λ/4. In [15], a rectangular DRA 
is designed ﬁrst using dielectric waveguide model [3, 4] to resonate at 1.22 GHz. 
The coaxial probe feeding is used to excite the rectangular DRA. However, the 
impedance bandwidth is reduced signiﬁcantly, and resonant frequency decreases. 
The resonant frequency shifted from 1.22 GHz to 918 MHz, and impedance 
bandwidth signiﬁcantly reduced from 16% to 5.4%. 
Next, the method of edge grounding along with lowering of effective dielectric 
constant is used to reduce size and improve impedance bandwidth [16–24]. The 
concept of designing compact rectangular and cylindrical DRAs involves incorpo-
ration of both perfect electric conductors (PEC) and perfect magnetic conductors 
(PMC) [16]. The perfect PMC condition is attained by utilizing a high dielectric 
constant interface. To enhance performance, a quarter-rectangular DRA is designed, 
offering a bandwidth of 26% and an impressive size reduction of 75%. Additionally, 
an innovative U-shaped DRA, inspired by rectangular DRA, has been proposed. 
This U-shaped design offers a broader bandwidth of 35% while achieving a size 
reduction of 50% when excited using a hook-shaped co-axial probe. 
In [17], a compact wideband rectangular dielectric resonator antenna using 
perforations and edge grounding is proposed as shown in Fig. 4. First a rectangular 
DRA is designed using dielectric waveguide model [3, 4] to resonate at 2.39 GHz. 
For excitation offset, coaxial probe feeding is used. Size reduction is achieved with 
the edge grounding method, and impedance bandwidth is improved by incorporating 
perforations. Perforations reduce the effective dielectric constant and thus improves 
impedance bandwidth. The proposed perforated rectangular DRA is made compact 
by approximately half of the original size. Improved BW up to 56% is attained, and 
a shift in resonant frequency is observed from 2.39 GHz to 2.82 GHz as shown in 
Fig. 5. The radiation pattern is affected at the plane where metal plate is attached. 
The gain and radiation efﬁciency are in the acceptable limit. 
Effective permittivity is calculated using [3]: 
StartLayout 1st Row epsilon Subscript eff Baseline equals left parenthesis StartFraction upper S Over p EndFraction right parenthesis squared plus epsilon Subscript r Baseline left bracket 1 minus left parenthesis StartFraction upper S Over p EndFraction right parenthesis squared right bracket EndLayoutεeff =
⎛S
p
⎞2
+ εr
⎾
1 −
⎛S
p
⎞2⏋

88
P. Patel
Fig. 4 Side view and top view (without ground plane): (a, c) Perforated rectangular DRA. (b, d) 
Proposed half-perforated edge-grounded rectangular DRA (P = Q = length or width of RDRA). 
The markings show dimensions of the square slot S, height of rectangular DRA H, offset O, probe 
length L, and periodicity p 
Fig. 5 S11 response of the proposed rectangular DRA 
where S represents dimension of the square slots, εr dielectric constant, εeff effective 
dielectric constant, and p periodicity. The optimum value of S = 4 mm and S/p = 0.6 
for εr = 10.2. The calculated value of εeff is approximately 6.11, which is around 
40% lower than the original dielectric constant. This will lower the quality factor and 
thus improves the bandwidth. This design is further made compact by reducing the 
size to quadrature of original size and maintaining impedance bandwidth of 47% 
[18]. The wideband, dual-band, and single band response can be obtained from

Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric Resonator Antennas
89
the perforrated rectangular DRA. The effective dielectric constant is adjusted to 
attain different bandwidth response, which makes the antenna suitable for various 
applications [19]. In order to ﬁll the slot with different dielectric constants, the 
feed is placed outside the rectangular DRA wall. In order to improve impedance 
matching, a rectangular microstrip patch is used between the wall of the DRA and 
the feeding probe. It should be noted that only one dielectric material at a time 
is used for ﬁlling the slots. The wideband design offers a bandwidth of 32.55% 
at a resonant frequency of 2.92 GHz (2.716–3.64 GHz) for air-ﬁlled slots. The 
dual-band designs offer a bandwidth of 11% (2.23–2.47 GHz) at 2.32 GHz; 3.2% 
(3.94–4.07 GHz) at 4.01 GHz for dielectric material with εr = 9.2; 8.7% (2.1– 
2.29 GHz) at 2.18 GHz; and 3% (3.70–3.81 GHz) at 3.76 GHz for εr = 12.85. The 
single-band design offers a bandwidth of 12% (2.35–2.65 GHz) at 2.48 GHz for 
εr = 6.15. 
The circularly polarized (CP) antennas are favored over linearly polarized 
ones due to misalignment issues between transmitter- and receiver-side antenna. 
Additionally, they address multipath problems arising from reﬂections of buildings 
and the ground. These circularly polarized antennas play a crucial role in modern 
wireless communication, satellite communication, and radar systems. To achieve 
CP, researchers have explored rectangular DRAs. This polarization state can be 
achieved through dual- or single-feed methods. The stringent conditions involve 
exciting two orthogonal modes with equal amplitude and quadrature phase. While 
dual-fed CP rectangular DRAs offer a wide axial ratio bandwidth compared to 
single-fed designs, the dual-feed approach necessitates additional space to external 
feeds. Over time, numerous CP antennas have been proposed based on these two 
methods [3, 4]. A wideband CP rectangular DRA is designed with single feed to 
operate at 5.8 GHz. Initially, a square rectangular DRA is designed and excited 
with an offset coaxial probe. The wide bandwidth is achieved by a high aspect 
ratio [4] that excites two resonant modes, TE111 and TE113, and merges them in 
the bandwidth of operation. This wide-band rectangular DRA is made CP through 
perturbation, achieved by strategically placing four square-shaped slots along the 
diagonals. The size of the slots is different along both diagonals, but the shape is 
symmetrical. They excite two orthogonal modes with a phase difference of 90◦, 
which is a stringent condition to achieve CP. The measured 10 dB impedance 
bandwidth is 48% (4.7–7.7 GHz) while in simulations 41% (4.8–7.3 GHz) for 
S11 ≤−10 dB. The axial ratio is simulated and measured in the boresight direction. 
The measured 3 dB axial ratio bandwidth is 11.5% (5.7–6.4 GHz) while in 
simulations 10% (5.6–6.2 GHz) as shown in Fig. 6. Experimental results are in 
close agreement with predicted results. However, small differences exist because 
of fabrication inconsistencies like placement of different dielectric layers, air gap 
formed between dielectric and ground plane, etc. 
Next, a wideband circularly polarized rectangular DRA using two square-
shaped slots along the diagonal is proposed and investigated to improve axial 
ratio bandwidth further. The square-shaped slots excite two orthogonal modes 
and provide a phase difference of 90◦ required to achieve circular polarization 
as mentioned earlier. Antenna prototype is experimentally veriﬁed and depicts

90
P. Patel
Fig. 6 Axial ratio plot for four-slot CP rectangular DRA 
Fig. 7 Axial ratio plot for two-slot CP rectangular DRA 
reasonably good performance over the complete band. It offers 3 dB axial ratio 
bandwidth from 4.7 to 6 GHz as shown in Fig. 7. The 10 dB impedance bandwidth 
is attained from 4.6 to 7 GHz. Hence, a complete axial ratio band is usable. The 
maximum gain of 5.6 dBi is obtained for right-hand circularly polarized waves with 
the efﬁciency [14] of more than 85% over the complete band. 
Further, new rectangular DRAs are proposed [21–24] to meet the requirement 
of modern communication systems. DRAs are designed mainly to achieve com-
pactness and wide impedance bandwidth. In [21], a compact half H-shaped DRA 
inspired from rectangular DRA is designed and developed. It offered a bandwidth of 
92% (4.3–8.9 GHz) at 5 GHz. A tuning fork–shaped DRA inspired from rectangular 
DRA is designed in [22]. It offers a wide impedance bandwidth of 154% (1.5– 
4.2 GHz) at 1.75 GHz. A novel low-proﬁle stacked edge-grounded rectangular 
DRA with compact size is designed for UWB applications [23]. It almost covers 
ultrawideband (UWB) from 3.6 to 11.8 GHz. A novel golden ratio–aided fractal 
rectangular DRA for C-band applications has been proposed in [24]. The structure 
is derived from the Fibonacci series approach, meticulously maintaining the golden 
ratio. This innovative design based on the Fibonacci series and Minkowski fractal 
investigates rectangular DRA for the ﬁrst time. To validate the concept, a prototype 
is developed and tested. Results reveal that the prototype offered a measured and

Recent Trends in the Design and Development of Dielectric Resonator Antennas
91
Fig. 8 S11 response of the proposed fractal rectangular DRA with the inset view of prototype 
simulated impedance bandwidth of 82% (3.80–8.70 GHz) as shown in Fig. 8. 
Additionally, a stable radiation pattern is observed over the desired frequency band 
with a peak measured gain of 7.62 dBi. Furthermore, the proposed fractal DRA 
exhibits excellent broadside directional radiation patterns, low cross-polarization 
levels, and favorable gain characteristics, making it a promising candidate for C-
band communication. 
3 
Conclusion 
Rectangular DRAs with high bandwidth and small size can be designed by 
using perforations and edge grounding techniques. These techniques enhance both 
bandwidth and size performance of the rectangular DRAs. The edge grounding 
technique with an extra metal plate lowers the efﬁciency of DRAs, which may 
not suit some applications. DRAs are better than conventional metallic antennas 
for modern wireless communication, which uses high-frequency bands. Satellite 
communication and radar systems need transmitter- and receiver-side antennas 
to align well. Circularly polarized DRAs do not depend on this alignment and 
also avoid multipath issues from reﬂections of buildings, grounds, etc. Using the 
perforation technique, we can design and develop circularly polarized rectangular 
DRAs as well.

92
P. Patel
References 
1. C.A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis, and Design (Wiley, 1997) 
2. G. Kumar, K.P. Ray, Broadband Microstrip Antennas (Artech House, 2003) 
3. A. Petosa, Dielectric Resonator Antenna Handbook (Artech House, 2007) 
4. K.M. Luk, K.W. Leung, Dielectric Resonator Antenna (Research Studies Press Ltd., 2002) 
5. D.J. Masse, R.A. Pucel, D.W. Readey, C.P. Hartwig, A new low-loss high-k temperature-
compensated dielectric for microwave applications. Proc. IEEE 59(11), 1628–1629 (1971) 
6. D. Kajfez, P. Guillon, Dielectric Resonators, 2nd edn. (Noble Publishing Corporation, Atlanta, 
1998) 
7. S.A. Long, M.W. McAllister, L.C. Shen, The resonant cylindrical dielectric cavity antenna. 
IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propag AP-31(3), 406–412 (1983) 
8. M.W. McAllister, S.A. Long, Resonant hemispherical dielectric antenna. Electron. Lett. 
20(16), 657–659 (1984) 
9. A. Petosa, A. Ittipiboon, Dielectric resonator antennas: A historical review and the current state 
of the art. IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. 52(5), 91–116 (2010) 
10. R.K. Mongia, P. Bhartia, Dielectric resonator antennas—A review and general design relations 
for resonant frequency and bandwidth. Int. J. Microw. Millimeter Wave Comput. Aided Eng. 
4, 230–247 (1994) 
11. Y.M.M. Antar, D. Cheng, G. Seguin, B. Henry, M.G. Keller, Modiﬁed waveguide model 
(MWGM) for rectangular resonator antenna (DRA). Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 19(2), 158– 
160 (1998) 
12. R.K. Mongia, Theoretical and experimental investigations on rectangular dielectric resonators. 
IEE Proc.-H 139, 98–104 (1992) 
13. R.K. Mongia, A. Ittipiboon, Theoretical and experimental investigations on rectangular 
dielectric resonator antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 45(9), 1348 (1997) 
14. H.A. Wheeler, The radiansphere around a small antenna. Proc. IRE 47, 1325–1331 (1959) 
15. M.T.K. Tam, R.D. Murch, Half volume dielectric resonator antenna designs. Electron. Lett. 
33(23), 1914–1916 (1997) 
16. A.A. Kishk, H. Wei, Size reduction method for dielectric resonator antennas. IEEE Antennas 
Propag. Mag. 53, 26–38 (2011) 
17. P. Patel, B. Mukherjee, J. Mukherjee, Compact wideband rectangular dielectric resonator 
antenna using perforations and edge grounding. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 490– 
493 (2015) 
18. P. Patel, G.S. Reddy, J. Mukherjee, B. Mukherjee, New wideband quadrature rectangular 
dielectric resonator antenna, in 2015 European Microwave Conference (EuMC), Paris, (2015), 
pp. 1335–1338 
19. E. Vernekar, P. Patel, M. Erramshetty, Perforated Rectangular Dielectric Resonator Antenna 
for Wideband, Dual Band and Single Band Application, in 2018 48th European Microwave 
Conference (EuMC), Madrid, (2018), pp. 384–387 
20. P. Patel, B. Mukherjee, J. Mukherjee, Wideband circularly polarized rectangular dielectric 
resonator antennas using square-shaped slots. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 15, 1309– 
1312 (2016) 
21. A. Gaonkar, P. Patel, Compact half H-shaped dielectric resonator antenna for wideband 
applications. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 64, 1849–1857 (2022) 
22. A. Gaonkar, P. Patel, Novel compact and wideband tuning fork shaped DRA. AEU Int. J. 
Electron. Commun. 54, 221–227 (2022) 
23. A. Gaonkar, A. Nair, P. Patel, Novel low proﬁle stacked edge grounded RDRA with compact 
size for UWB applications. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 65, 2011–2020 (2023) 
24. A. Gaonkar, M. Ayyappan, P. Patel, A novel fractal RDRA for C-band applications. IEEE 
Trans. Compon. Packag. Manuf. Technol. 13(7), 995–1002 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TCPMT.2023.3295480

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex 
Conformal CDRA 
Manshree Mishra, Pramod Kumar Gupta, Garima Tiwari, Atul Kumar, 
and Biswajeet Mukherjee 
1 
Introduction 
Concerning the growing demand for wireless communication, researchers are 
currently interested in the design of antennas that incorporate a variety of qualities, 
including high gain, wide bandwidth, a small dimension, high efﬁciency, and 
negligible ohmic loss. Such requirements are fulﬁlled by dielectric resonator 
antennas (DRAs) [1, 2]. Investigating DRAs on level ground planes (GP) in various 
shapes, like cylindrical, rectangular, hemispherical, sector, annular, and triangle 
DRAs, is done using many theoretical and numerical methods [3–32]. 
Several efforts to broaden the antenna’s bandwidth have been studied in [3– 
14]. In [3], the fundamental cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna (CDRA) 
perturbation excites higher-order modes, which also reduce the CDRA’s effective 
permittivity, aiding in increasing the antenna’s working frequency range by lowering 
the Q factor of the antenna. In [4], the study focuses on metallic perturbation within 
a DRA’s body to improve modal ﬁeld purity and drastically decrease undesired 
cross-polarized (XP) radiations. 
M. Mishra · P. K. Gupta · G. Tiwari 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, PDPM IIITDM Jabalpur, Jabalpur, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
A. Kumar 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Maulana Azad National Institute of 
Technology, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India 
B. Mukherjee (✉) 
Department of Electronic Science, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_7
93

94
M. Mishra et al.
In [5], wideband and dual-band capabilities of the DRA are attained by incor-
porating modiﬁed Sierpinski structure into the DRA. A broad fractal rectangular 
dielectric resonator antenna (RDRA) for wireless communication is introduced 
in [6] and is based on the dipole with a hook shape. In [7], a coaxial probe-
fed symmetrical triangular notched lateral cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna 
(LCDRA) is described. The CDRA has its longitudinal axis parallel to and its 
lateral surface maintained on the GP. Compared to the CDRA, the LCDRA has 
a signiﬁcantly broader impedance bandwidth and a lower resonant frequency. To 
further increase impedance bandwidth, two symmetrical triangular notches are 
added to two perpendicular edges of the LCDRA. In [8], the 4-element CDRA 
is excited by a tiny dielectric rod that serves as a ﬁeld launching element with 
an extended probe feed. In [9], to get a broad frequency with minimal cross-
polarization and directional gain, CDRA is stimulated using a dual feeding network. 
This is an example of a probe feed network with dual differential conﬁguration 
for CDRA. With minimal cross-polarization and a wide bandwidth, this proposed 
structure provides directional gain. In [10], dielectric materials are shaped to 
create wideband DRAs. Conical-shaped DRAs are investigated experimentally, with 
certain ﬁndings being validated mathematically. Four distinct cone forms are taken 
into consideration. It is believed that the excitation is a coaxial probe that has been 
moved away from the cone axis. In [11], the air gap between a microstrip line and 
a CDRA affects the impedance bandwidth, unloaded Q-factor, resonant frequency, 
and directivity. An investigation on a compact, half CDRA constructed of a ceramic 
material with a high permittivity is carried out in [12]. Peak gains in the azimuth 
plane are 3.6 dBi, while the elevation plane is 5.5 dBi. The DRA exhibits wide and 
stable radiation characteristics throughout the frequency band of 2.32–2.5 GHz. In 
[13], excitation occurs via a microstrip feed line to an inverted half CDRA studied 
to achieve wideband. Surprisingly, the author discovered that the antenna’s total 
radiating surface area increases. When the surface-area-to-volume (S/V) ratio of the 
antenna decreases, the antenna’s Q factor also decreases, increasing the antenna’s 
total bandwidth. In [14], it is recommended to generate a microstrip with an annular 
shape and a matching C-shaped-etched GP as a quad-band cylindrical DRA. 
To increase the antenna’s gain, various works are reported in [15–29]. A DRA is 
ﬁtted with a corrugated circular ring-shaped meta superstrate in order to increase 
the peak gain to 11.9 dBi [15]. In [16], the substrate loading of a 5 × 5 unit-
cell SRR improves the DRA gain. Currents with opposing orientation develop 
in split rings when SRRs are connected with an RDRA in the near-ﬁeld region; 
these currents effectively cancel the transverse ﬁelds. In [17], 50-unit metamaterial 
(MTM) cells are arranged to create an antenna. A dielectric substrate with two 
parallel, eight-shaped conducting strips etched across both faces results in a negative 
refractive index of 7.3–8.1 GHz constituting each unit cell of the RDRA. This 
allows the RDRA to cover its maximum bandwidth and enhance its gain. The 
high gain performance of the differentially coplanar-fed ﬁltering DRA loaded

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
95
with metallic vias is designed in [18]. A rectangular ﬁltering DRA with a broad 
bandwidth and high gain is studied in [19]. A bottom-side substrate excites a 
microstrip-connected slot in the microstrip feed line, which is intended to supply 
two radiation nulls in the frequency range for a ﬁltering function. In [20], a metallic 
boundary conﬁguration combined with DRA is used to amplify radiation in a certain 
direction in order to boost the gain for wideband wireless applications. In [21], at 
340 GHz, a higher-order DRA achieves great gain. The low-loss dielectric resonator 
of the antenna is made of high-resistivity silicon material, and the necessary modes 
are activated by on-chip feeding-patch complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor 
(CMOS) technology. By excitation of TE017, a higher-order mode, the antenna gain 
is signiﬁcantly increased to 6.7 dBi. In [22], for high gain, circularly polarized 
two-layered RDRA is taken into consideration. The DRA and a dielectric coat 
layer with corresponding dielectric constants of εr = 10 and 3.5 are part of the 
design conﬁguration. The outer layer has a high gain of 11 dBic and a larger 
impedance with CP bandwidths of 9.5% and 21%, respectively. In [23], using 
near-zero-index metamaterial, a higher-order-mode (TE031) dielectric resonator is 
employed to investigate the high gain of a quasi-Yagi magnetic dipole antenna. 
By using the higher-order TE031 mode as a magnetic-dipole driver, a high-gain 
quasi-Yagi antenna can be designed. In [24], it is successfully demonstrated that 
a 2 × 2 CDRA array using a microstrip aperture feed technique may achieve a gain 
of 13.9 dBi between 6.62 and 7.15 GHz. For maximum gain, a unique aperture 
feeding arrangement with 2 × 2 wideband dual-polarized DRAs is investigated 
in [25]. For millimeter-wave applications, an RDRA array with strong gain and 
bandwidth is demonstrated in [26]. In [27], uniaxial anisotropic materials are 
employed in RDRAs to improve boresight gain by enhancing side wall radiation. 
With a high broadside gain of 8.4 dBi, the DRA walls, various boundary conditions 
and electromagnetic wave interaction result in an impedance bandwidth of 20.65% 
(3.17–3.9 GHz). 
In [28], employing equilateral triangular uniaxial anisotropic DRAs increases 
impedance bandwidth and gain in the boresight direction. Increase in sidewall 
radiations lead to gain enhancement and decrease in the structure’s effective 
permittivity result in bandwidth enhancements. In [29], a different technique for 
creating grooves on an RDRA’s side walls in order to achieve a 9.6 dBi gain is 
examined. The gain of the DRA is improved by increasing radiations from the side 
wall boundary by adding corrugated engraved grooves to the side walls. 
In [30–32], various works are reported for the design and development of 
low-proﬁle CDRA. A completely novel, miniature, low-proﬁle stacked DRA for 
wideband applications, by also maintaining a high radiation efﬁciency with small 
electrical size is presented in [30]. A circular disc DR antenna, which is low proﬁle 
and has a low resonant frequency, is constructed in [31] using a material with a very 
high dielectric permittivity. In [32], an extremely low aspect ratio less than or equal 
to 6 is chosen to construct a low-proﬁle antenna.

96
M. Mishra et al.
In modern communication systems including RADAR systems, smart antennas, 
beam steering array antennas, wearable communication devices for body-area 
networks, spatial domain multiple access, Internet of Things (IoT), and aerospace 
applications, antennas on conformal structures have become essential components 
[33]. Flexible antennas are desirable because they may be employed on ﬂexible 
surfaces. Conformal DRAs can offer more gain and a wider bandwidth. A conformal 
antenna has a radiating element installed on or incorporated into an evenly curved 
surface, which can be spherical, cylindrical, or any other shape. The conformal 
antenna has several beneﬁts, including the ability for a 360-degree coverage, a 
low amount of undesired radiation, and lightweight. It is possible to review a 
summary of the body of research on conformal DRA in [34–38]. DRA with 
curved GP that are conformally concave and convex is suggested and examined 
in [34]. Using approximate models with a range of boundary conditions, the 
eigenmode approach and single-mode approximation are used to mathematically 
analyze their resonant frequencies and ﬁeld distributions. In [35], on both ﬂat 
and curved GP, the theory of homogeneity for stacked DRA is examined. To 
identify and assess the deﬁciencies of the widely used static capacitance models, 
a more thorough evaluation is conducted. To give better empirical equations, the 
effective medium theory is presented. High-dielectric-constant (HiK) patches and 
metal plates are used to load compact, arc-shaped conformal DRAs in [36]. Their 
concept of miniaturization is examined from several perspectives. The role of the 
conformal ground in size reduction is characterized by closed-form expressions that 
have been generated. In [37], ground effects are studied and used to accomplish 
various radiation performances on conformal arc-shaped. DRAs operating in the 
TE Subscript 11 normal delta Superscript upper ZTEZ
11δ mode. In [38], a low-proﬁle conformal CDRA with perturbation excited by 
differential feed is presented and analyzed. At 7.7 GHz and 8.7 GHz, the TM11δ and 
TM21δ modes are observed respectively. High broadside gain is obtained at the bent 
angle of ϕ1 = 24◦. 
In this chapter, perturbed CDRA with convex conformal GP for X band 
application is presented and examined. Analysis is done on how bent GP affects 
DRA’s radiation performance. To increase the bandwidth of the antenna, a higher 
electric ﬁeld region is perturbed. A comparison is made between the proposed 
design and the perturbed ﬂat CDRA. Design and simulation of the CDRA are done 
using CST Studio with transient domain solver. 
2 
Antenna Design and Analysis 
The proposed CDRA structure is designed in CST Studio with transient domain 
solver as depicted in Fig. 1. Dimensions from a 3D perspective view are shown 
in Fig. 1a. Side and bottom views of the proposed work are shown in Fig. 1b, 
c, respectively. The cylindrical dielectric resonator (CDR) having a radius of

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
97
Fig. 1 Convex conformal CDRA. (a) Dimensions from 3D perspective view Rd = 14 mm, 
Rg = 50 mm. (b) Side View L1 = 2.3 mm, L2 = 3.1 mm. (c) Bottom View ϕ1 = ϕ2 = 24.5◦, 
R = 60 mm. (d) Reﬂection coefﬁcient at different radius R 
Rd = 14 mm and a height of H = 5 mm is designed on Rogers TMM 10i having a 
permittivity of εr = 9.9, mounted on the convex conformal GP of radius R = 60 mm. 
The CDRA is excited using a 50 Ω coaxial cable. Initially, CDRA is designed 
to excite fundamental mode, by perturbing the basic CDRA higher-order modes 
generated, which results in the increase of antenna bandwidth. According to the 
perturbation theory, resonant frequency will increase if higher magnetic ﬁeld (H) 
portion is perturbed, and resonant frequency will decrease if higher electric ﬁeld (E) 
portion is perturbed [3]. The effect of this perturbation on the fundamental CDRA 
resonant frequency can be better understood using the following Eq. [3]: 
StartLayout 1st Row StartFraction omega minus omega 0 Over omega 0 EndFraction almost equals StartFraction triple integral Underscript upper Delta tau Endscripts left parenthesis mu StartAbsoluteValue upper H 0 EndAbsoluteValue squared minus epsilon StartAbsoluteValue upper E 0 EndAbsoluteValue squared right parenthesis d tau Over triple integral Underscript tau Endscripts left parenthesis mu StartAbsoluteValue upper H 0 EndAbsoluteValue squared plus epsilon StartAbsoluteValue upper E 0 EndAbsoluteValue squared right parenthesis d tau EndFraction EndLayoutω −ω0
ω0
≈
⎰⎰⎰
Δτ
(
μ|H0|2 −ε|E0|2)
dτ
⎰⎰⎰
τ
(
μ|H0|2 + ε|E0|2)
dτ
(1)

98
M. Mishra et al.
The denominator is proportional to the total energy stored, whereas terms in the 
numerator are proportional to the electric and magnetic energies removed by the 
perturbation. 
StartLayout 1st Row StartFraction omega minus omega 0 Over omega 0 EndFraction almost equals StartFraction normal upper Delta ModifyingAbove upper W With quotation dash Subscript m Baseline minus normal upper Delta ModifyingAbove upper W With quotation dash Subscript e Baseline Over upper W EndFraction EndLayoutω −ω0
ω0
≈ΔW m −ΔW e
W
(2) 
where W is the total energy contained within the original cavity and normal upper Delta ModifyingAbove upper W With quotation dash Subscript mΔW m and normal upper Delta ModifyingAbove upper W With quotation dash Subscript eΔW e
are time-average electric and magnetic energies originally contained inΔτ. 
StartLayout 1st Row StartFraction omega minus omega 0 Over omega 0 EndFraction almost equals StartFraction left parenthesis ModifyingAbove w With quotation dash Subscript m Baseline minus ModifyingAbove w With quotation dash Subscript e Baseline right parenthesis normal upper Delta tau Over ModifyingAbove w With caret tau EndFraction equals upper C StartFraction normal upper Delta tau Over tau EndFraction EndLayoutω −ω0
ω0
≈(wm −we) Δτ
ˆwτ
= C Δτ
τ
(3) 
In the proposed work, a higher–electric ﬁeld portion is perturbed to increase the 
bandwidth of the antenna. 
The radiation properties of convex conformal DRA and CDRA are explained by 
the geometric theory of diffraction (GTD). The creeping wave appears to radiate out 
surface diffracted rays in the tangent direction and to move along curved surfaces 
as surface rays [37]. Diffracted rays can cause the power to be sent to the squint 
side, producing split, tilted, or even larger beams. Equation (4) supports the use 
of the (CST) solver to simulate the performance of CCCDRA with various GP 
conﬁgurations. 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row upper E Subscript phi Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis equals upper C left parenthesis r right parenthesis left bracket upper E Subscript Surf Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis plus upper E Subscript Edge Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis right bracket 2nd Row equals minus j omega StartFraction mu 0 Over 4 pi EndFraction StartFraction e Superscript minus j k r Baseline Over r EndFraction integral Subscript minus phi 1 Superscript phi 2 Baseline e Superscript j k a cosine left parenthesis phi minus phi prime right parenthesis Baseline times Start 3 By 1 Matrix 1st Row upper I Subscript surf Baseline left parenthesis phi prime right parenthesis upper F Subscript surf Baseline left parenthesis phi minus phi prime right parenthesis plus 2nd Row upper I Subscript edge Baseline left parenthesis phi prime right parenthesis upper F Subscript edge Baseline left parenthesis phi minus phi prime right parenthesis times 3rd Row left bracket delta left parenthesis phi prime plus phi 1 right parenthesis plus delta left parenthesis phi prime minus phi 2 right parenthesis right bracket EndMatrix d phi Superscript prime Baseline EndLayout EndLayout
Eϕ (ϕ) = C(r)
⎾
ESurf (ϕ) + EEdge (ϕ)
⏋
= −jω μ0
4π
e−jkr
r
⎰ϕ2
−ϕ1 ejka cos (ϕ−ϕ') ×
⎧
⎨
⎩
Isurf
(
ϕ')
Fsurf
(
ϕ −ϕ')
+
Iedge
(
ϕ')
Fedge
(
ϕ −ϕ')
×
⎾
δ
(
ϕ' + ϕ1
)
+ δ
(
ϕ' −ϕ2
)⏋
⎫
⎬
⎭dϕ'
(4) 
where 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row upper I Subscript surf Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis equals upper I Superscript plus Baseline minus upper R dot upper I Superscript minus Baseline equals upper I 0 StartBinomialOrMatrix e Superscript minus alpha StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue Baseline e Superscript minus j beta StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue Baseline minus Choose upper R e Superscript alpha left parenthesis StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue minus 2 phi Super Subscript 1 comma 2 Superscript right parenthesis Baseline e Superscript j beta left parenthesis StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue minus 2 phi Super Subscript 1 comma 2 Superscript right parenthesis Baseline EndBinomialOrMatrix semicolon 2nd Row upper I Subscript edge Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis equals upper D dot upper I 0 e Superscript minus left parenthesis alpha plus j beta right parenthesis StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue Baseline semicolon beta equals StartFraction pi Over phi Subscript d r Baseline EndFraction semicolon upper D squared plus upper R squared equals 1 semicolon 3rd Row upper F Subscript surf Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis equals cosine phi dot u left parenthesis StartAbsoluteValue phi EndAbsoluteValue minus StartFraction pi Over 2 EndFraction right parenthesis semicolon upper F Subscript edge Baseline left parenthesis phi right parenthesis equals cosine phi EndLayout EndLayout
Isurf (ϕ) = I + −R · I −= I0
⎾e−α|ϕ|e−jβ|ϕ|−
R eα(|ϕ|−2ϕ1,2)ejβ(|ϕ|−2ϕ1,2)
⏋
;
Iedge (ϕ) = D · I0e−(α+jβ)|ϕ|; β =
π
ϕdr ; D2 + R2 = 1;
Fsurf (ϕ) = cos ϕ · u
(|ϕ| −π
2
)
; Fedge (ϕ) = cos ϕ
where K is the free space wavenumber, C(r) the pattern factor, D the diffraction at 
two edges, R the reﬂection on both edges, δ(x) the impulse function, u(x) the unit 
step , β the effective phase constant , and α the surface diffraction. 
On a curved ground, smooth convexity causes the emergence of surface and 
edge diffraction, whereas on planar GP edge, diffraction is observed. The GP of 
a CDRA is conformed at a radius of 60 mm for obtaining better performance of

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
99
the antenna. Here, the symmetrical (ϕ1 = ϕ2) GP is chosen because co-polarization 
is inﬂuenced by the symmetrical GP and cross polarization remains constant. The 
maximum bandwidth of 21% is achieved at a radius of 60 mm as shown in Fig. 1d. 
At R = 50 mm, 70 mm, and 80 mm, the bandwidth obtained is 1 GHz, 0.9 GHz, 
and 0.8 GHz, respectively. 
3 
Antenna Design Methodology 
The CDRA is designed and simulated using CST Studio and a transient domain 
solver. The Rogers TMM 10i (εr = 9.9) is used in the design of the 14 mm radius 
cylindrical dielectric resonator (CDR). The GP has a radius of 25 mm. Figure 2 
depicts the proposed antenna design methodology. Three steps are involved in the 
design of the CDRA. Figure 2a, b show the perspective and bottom views of Ant.1, 
Ant.2, and Ant.3, respectively. Initially, Ant.1 is ﬁrst created with a basic coaxial 
probe without perturbation as shown in Fig. 2a, b. Further, Ant.2 is obtained by 
perturbing Ant.1 as depicted in Fig. 2a, b, which lowers the resonant frequency as 
shown in Fig. 2c. This is because, according to perturbation theory, when an electric 
ﬁeld’s higher radiating portion is perturbed, the resonant frequency decreases; 
however, when a strong magnetic ﬁeld is present at the location of perturbation, 
the resonant frequency increases [3]. Based on the static capacitance model [3], the 
perturbation causes an approximate reduction in effective permittivity, which causes 
a drop in the quality factor and an increase in the bandwidth of the CDRA. The 
shape and position of the perturbation are selected to maximize the surface-area-to-
volume (S/V) ratio. The CDRA’s bandwidth increases as the S/V ratio reaches its 
maximum. Additionally, the appropriate frequency range is attained at this speciﬁc 
point. Finally, on Ant.2, convex conformal GP is introduced to obtain Ant.3, as 
illustrated in Fig. 2a. In the conformal DRA, there are TE and TM modes; in the 
bending DRA, there is no hybrid mode [34, 37]. The TE and TM modes’ ﬁelds are 
axisymmetric and do not change in azimuth. Conversely, the hybrid modes’ ﬁelds 
ﬂuctuate in the azimuth direction [37]. 
When it comes to efﬁciency and bandwidth, CDRA provides better and more 
ﬂexible results. As seen in Fig. 2c, the bandwidth acquired for the proposed CDRA 
is 21%, which is more than the bandwidth of Ant.1 and Ant.2. The perturbation 
causes the ﬁeld to be spread asymmetrically, which lowers the antenna’s gain for 
Ant.2 at lower frequencies. The gain of Ant.3 further decreases because the convex 
conformal GP cannot concentrate the ﬁelds in a particular region, but the antenna 
still has a high gain, which is greater than 5 dBi throughout the entire frequency 
band. Ant.3’s peak gain is 7 dBi at 11.5 GHz frequency as shown in Fig. 2d.

100
M. Mishra et al.
Fig. 2 Antenna design methodologies. (a) Perspective view of CDRA.  (b) Bottom view of CDRA.  
(c) Reﬂection coefﬁcient comparison of all three-step antennas. (d) Gain comparison of all three-
step antennas 
4 
Parametric Study 
A parametric analysis of the height and radius of the CDRA is carried out. As seen 
in Fig. 3a, a maximum bandwidth of 21% (9.7–12.1 GHz) is attained at height 
H = 5 mm, and as shown in Fig. 3b, a maximum peak gain of 7 dBi is attained 
at 11.5 GHz. At H = 3 mm, 4 mm, and 6 mm, the maximum bandwidth of 0.1 GHz, 
0.3 GHz, and 0.7 GHz is obtained, respectively, and a peak gain of 7.1 dBi, 7.3 
dBi, and 7.2 dBi at 10.1GHz, 10.1 GHz, and 10.8 GHz is obtained, respectively.

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
101
Fig. 3 Parametric study on various parameters of CDRA. (a) Reﬂection coefﬁcient at CDRA 
height (H), (b) gain at CDRA height (H), (c) reﬂection coefﬁcient at CDRA radius (Rd), (d) gain  
at CDRA radius (Rd), (e) reﬂection coefﬁcient at CDRA perturbed height (Hp), (f) gain at CDRA  
perturbed height (Hp)

102
M. Mishra et al.
Antenna area increases in tandem with antenna height, leading to an increase in S/V 
ratio, a decrease in Q factor, and an increase in antenna band. Because the effective 
aperture area grows with CDRA height, the antenna gain also increases. The effect 
of the radius (Rd) of the CDRA  is  shown in Fig.  3c and Fig. 3d and at Rd = 14 mm 
maximum bandwidth of 21% and a peak gain of 7 dBi at 11.5 GHz frequency is 
achieved. At Rd = 10 mm, 12 mm, and 16 mm, the maximum bandwidth of 1.1 GHz, 
0.2 GHz, and 1.5 GHz, respectively, and a peak gain of 6.2 dBi, 7.7 dBi, and 7.3 
dBi at 10.8 GHz, 12.2 GHz, and 10.8 GHz are obtained, respectively. Furthermore, 
the CDRA’s height and radius are selected to make it a low-proﬁle antenna. The 
proposed DRA has a low proﬁle of 0.16 λ0, where λ0 is the wavelength of the lower 
cutoff frequency. A parametric study is performed on the height of the perturbation 
and at Hp = 4 mm, maximum bandwidth of 21% is achieved, and a peak gain of 7 
dBi at 11.5 GHz frequency is obtained as shown in Fig. 3e, f. Higher-order modes 
are generated by perturbing the basic CDRA, increasing the antenna’s bandwidth. 
At Hp = 2 mm, 6 mm, and 8 mm, the bandwidth obtained is 0.9 GHz, 0.6 GHz, and 
0.3 GHz, respectively, as well as a peak gain of 7 dBi at 12.1 GHz. 
5 
Results and Discussion 
The proposed antenna has an impedance bandwidth of 2.3 GHz, which ranges from 
9.8 GHz to 12.1 GHz as shown in Fig. 4a. The peak gain of the proposed CDRA 
is 7 dBi at 11.5 GHz, and 94.5% efﬁciency is obtained at 10.8 GHz as shown in 
Fig. 4b. The radiation pattern for both ϕ = 0◦ and ϕ = 90◦ is shown in Fig. 5, and 
it can be observed that the cross polarization is below −20 dB. Table 1 presents a 
comparison between the proposed work and the other simulated work, and it can be 
observed that both the bandwidth and gain is superior to the other reported work. 
Fig. 4 Proposed work. (a) Reﬂection coefﬁcient. (b) Gain and efﬁciency

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
103
Fig. 5 Radiation pattern. (a) At  f = 10 GHz. (b) At  f = 10.7 GHz. (c) At  f = 11.7 GHz

104
M. Mishra et al.
Table 1 Comparing the proposed work to already published research 
Refs.
H (λ0)
εr
B.W
P.G.
Antenna + feeding technique 
[4]
0.14
10
8.5
6
CDRA+ CF 
[6]
0.17
9.8
19
6.6
SIW Slot 
[31]
0.09
9.9
18.4
7
CBDRA+ AC 
[32]
0.1
9
26
5
CSDRA 
[33]
0.08
9.9
16.5
6
CDRA 
[34]
0.08
12.3
14.2
7
SFASDRA 
P.S.
0.16
10.2
21
7
CCCDRA 
AC Aperture coupled, B.W bandwidth in %, CBDRA conformal bent DRA, CF coaxial feed, 
CSDRA conformal stacked DRA, H CDRA height in terms of electrical length, MF microstrip 
feed, P.G. Peak gain (dBi), P.S. Proposed structure, SFASDRA Slot fed arc-shaped DRA 
6 
Conclusion 
In this chapter, CDRAs with convex conformal GP are investigated and presented. 
A CDRA with improved radiation performance at R = 60 mm was consequently 
selected for the proposed work. An impedance bandwidth of 21% is achieved 
due to perturbation. The peak gain obtained is 7 dBi at 11.5 GHz. Applications 
for proposed antenna are found in the X-band. The topic on wearable DRAs and 
conformal, ﬂexible electronic systems is expanded by this communication. 
Acknowledgments The research described in this chapter is supported by the SERB, DST project 
No.-CRG/2020/000635. 
References 
1. B. Mukherjee, M. Chauhan, Dielectric Resonator Antennas (Artech, 2021) 
2. B. Mukherjee, P. Patel, J. Mukherjee, A review of the recent advances in dielectric resonator 
antennas. J. Electromagn. Waves Appl. 34(9), 1095–1158 (2020) 
3. M. Mishra, A. Rajput, P.K. Gupta, B. Mukherjee, Low proﬁle, wideband, high gain CDRA 
with Microstrip feed for ISM and C band applications. Prog. Electromagn. Res. C 126, 77–90 
(2022) 
4. D. Guha, H. Gajera, C. Kumar, Perturbation technique to improve purity of modal ﬁelds 
in dielectric resonator antenna resulting in reduced cross-polarized radiation. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 63(7), 3253–3257 (2015) 
5. H. Liu, L. Ying, W. Ming, G. Shuxi, Dual-broadband dielectric resonator antenna based on 
modiﬁed Sierpinski fractal geometry. Electron. Lett. 51(11), 806–808 (2015) 
6. W. Luo, Y. Feng, Y. Ren, B. Yin, A novel wideband fractal rectangular dielectric resonator 
antenna with improved radiation performance. AEU-Int. J. Electron. Commun. 142, 153984, 
ISSN 1434–8411 (2021) 
7. D. Sankaranarayanan, V.K. Duggirala, B. Mukherjee, Laterally placed CDRA with triangular 
notches for ultra wideband applications. Frequenz 72(1–2), 1–6 (2018) 
8. D. Guha, Y.M.M. Antar, Four-element cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna for wideband 
monopole-like radiation. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 54(9), 2657–2662 (2006). https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2006.880766

A Low-Proﬁle Perturbed Convex Conformal CDRA
105
9. A. Singh, S.K. Sharma, Investigation on wideband CDRA with directive radiation patterns and 
low cross-polarization. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 58(5), 1779–1783 (2010) 
10. A.A. Kishk, Y. Yin, A.W. Glisson, Conical dielectric resonator antennas for wideband 
applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 50(4), 469–474 (2002) 
11. G. Drossos, Z. Wu, L.E. Davis, The air gap effect on a microstrip-coupled cylindrical dielectric 
resonator antenna. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 20(1), 36–40 (1999) 
12. A.V.P. Kumar et al., Microstripline-fed half cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna for 2.4-
GHz WLAN application. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 48(4), 724–726 (2006) 
13. A.V. Praveen Kumar et al., Microstripline fed cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna with a 
coplanar parasitic strip. Prog. Electromagn. Res. 60, 143–152 (2006) 
14. A. Sharma, R.K. Gangwar, Compact quad-band cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna with 
complementary C-shaped defected ground structure. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 58(3), 611– 
615 (2016) 
15. M. Chauhan, A. Rajput, B. Mukherjee, Wideband circularly polarized low proﬁle dielectric 
resonator antenna with meta superstrate for high gain. AEU – Int. J. Electron. Commun. 128, 
153524 (2021) 
16. M. Sinha, V. Killamsetty, B. Mukherjee, Near ﬁeld analysis of RDRA loaded with Split ring 
resonators superstrate. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. (Wiley) 60(2), 472–478 (2018) 
17. A.K. Pandey, M. Chauhan, V.K. Killamsety, B. Mukherjee, High gain compact rectangular 
dielectric resonator antenna using metamaterial as superstrate. Int. J. RF Microw. Comput. 
Aided Eng. Wiley 29(12), 1–10 (2019) 
18. C. Tong et al., Differentially coplanar-fed ﬁltering dielectric resonator antenna for millimeter-
wave applications. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 18(4), 786–790 (2019) 
19. P.F. Hu et al., A compact ﬁltering dielectric resonator antenna with wide bandwidth and high 
gain. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 64(8), 3645–3651 (2016) 
20. R. Cicchetti et al., A high-gain mushroom-shaped dielectric resonator antenna for wideband 
wireless applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 64(7), 2848–2861 (2016) 
21. C. Li, T. Chiu, 340-GHz low-cost and high-gain on-Chip higher order mode dielectric resonator 
antenna for THz applications. IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol. 7(3), 284–294 (2017) 
22. A.A. Abdulmajid, Y. Khalil, S. Khamas, Higher-order-mode circularly polarized two- layer 
rectangular dielectric resonator antenna. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 17(6), 1114–1117 
(2018) 
23. L. Yang et al., High-gain magnetic-dipole Quasi-Yagi antenna using higher-order mode 
dielectric resonator with near-zero-index metamaterial. Int. J. RF Microwave Comput. Aided 
Eng. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/mmce.22329 
24. C. Sarkar, D. Guha, C. Kumar, Advanced design of higher mode-based dielectric resonator 
antenna array featuring high-gain operation over a large frequency band. Microw. Opt. Technol. 
Lett. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/mop.32621 
25. J. Kowalewski et al., A millimeter-wave broadband dual-polarized dielectric resonator antenna 
based on hybrid modes. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 19(7), 1068–1072 (2020) 
26. Z. Chen et al., Millimeter-wave rectangular dielectric resonator antenna Array with enlarged 
DRA dimensions, wideband capability, and high-gain performance. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 68(4), 3271–3276 (2020) 
27. S. Fakhte, H. Oraizi, L. Matekovits, High gain rectangular dielectric resonator antenna using 
uniaxial material at fundamental mode. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65(1), 342–347 (2017) 
28. S. Fakhte, I. Aryanian, L. Matekovits, Analysis and experiment of equilateral triangular 
uniaxial-anisotropic dielectric resonator antennas. IEEE Access 6, 63071–63079 (2018) 
29. S. Fakhte, H. Oraizi, L. Matekovits, Gain improvement of rectangular dielectric resonator 
antenna by engraving grooves on its side walls. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 16, 2167– 
2170 (2017) 
30. P.K. Gupta, A. Rajput, M. Mishra, B. Mukherjee, A compact low proﬁle, wideband and high 
gain stacked dielectric resonator antenna. Electromagnetics 43(3), 163–174 (2023) 
31. K.W. Leung, K.M. Luk, E.K.N. Yung, S. Lai, Characteristics of a low-proﬁle circular disk DR 
antenna with very high permittivity. JET Electron. Lett. 31(6), 417–418 (1995)

106
M. Mishra et al.
32. K.P. Esselle, A low-proﬁle rectangular dielectric-resonator antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 44(9), 1296–1297 (1996) 
33. E. Rodriguez-Villegas, S. Iranmanesh, S.A. Imtiaz, Wearable medical devices: High-level 
system design considerations and tradeoffs. IEEE Solid-State Circuits Mag. 10(4), 43–52 
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSSC.2018.2867247 
34. M. Boyuan, J. Pan, E. Wang, Y. Luo, Conformal bent dielectric resonator antennas with curving 
ground plane. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67(3), 1931–1936 (2019) 
35. M. Boyuan, J. Pan, D. Yang, Y.X. Guo, Investigation on homogenization of ﬂat and conformal 
stacked dielectric resonator antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 70(2), 1482–1487 (2022) 
36. M. Boyuan, J. Pan, E. Wang, D. Yang, Miniaturized conformal arc dielectric resonator antennas 
using dielectric and metallic loading. IEEE Access 7, 139518–139525 (2019) 
37. M. Boyuan, J. Pan, E. Wang, D. Yang, Estimation and utilization of ground effects on 
conformal dielectric resonator antennas. IEEE Access 7, 162387–162394 (2019) 
38. M. Mishra, A. Rajput, P.K. Gupta, B. Mukherjee, A low proﬁle perturbed CDRA with convex 
conformal ground plane excited by differential feed. AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun. 173, 
155033 (2024) ISSN 1434-8411

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs 
Ravi Kumar Arya 
1 
Introduction 
Applications like radar, satellite communication, and long-distance communication 
have increased demand for high-gain antennas. Because of their distinct advantages, 
parabolic reﬂectors or antenna arrays have traditionally been used to meet the 
requirement for high gain. Because of their curved and electrically large sur-
faces, parabolic reﬂectors have large mass/volume ratios, which may make them 
unsuitable for some applications. Because high surface accuracy is required for 
these frequencies, parabolic antennas intended for high-frequency applications also 
require careful fabrication. On the other hand, the antenna arrays, while they have 
several advantageous characteristics, like their low proﬁle and scan capability, 
also require large, costly electronic circuitry for beamforming, which can result in 
signiﬁcant losses at higher frequencies, which raises concerns. Before going further 
into the chapter, we will discuss a few salient features of reﬂectarrays. 
Reﬂectarray antennas [1–4] offer a unique approach to achieving high-gain 
performance. Unlike traditional parabolic reﬂectors, reﬂectarrays utilize a ﬂat 
surface covered with precisely designed elements (often printed microstrip patches, 
dipoles, or rings) (refer to Fig. 1). These elements manipulate the phase of the 
reﬂected waves, effectively focusing on the outgoing beam in a desired direction. 
This innovative design offers a signiﬁcant cost advantage over conventional antenna 
arrays. The phase shifting elements in a reﬂectarray can be fabricated using cost-
effective printed circuit board (PCB) techniques, simplifying the manufacturing 
process compared to complex antenna networks. This combination of a ﬂat surface 
R. K. Arya (✉) 
Xiangshan Laboratory, Zhongshan Institute of Changchun University of Science and Technology, 
Zhongshan, China 
e-mail: raviarya@cust.edu.cn 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_8
107

108
R. K. Arya
Fig. 1 Typical reﬂectarray 
and PCB-based elements makes reﬂectarray antennas, a compelling solution for 
applications demanding high-gain performance in a compact, lightweight, and cost-
effective package. 
Reﬂectarrays offer several beneﬁts compared to other types of antennas, includ-
ing: 
• 
High Gain: Reﬂectarrays can provide high gain, similar to reﬂector antennas 
depending upon their designs. This helps them to be employed for the appli-
cations where high gain is required such as in long-distance communication and 
radar systems. 
• 
Low Proﬁle: Reﬂectarrays can be designed to provide high gain with a low proﬁle 
which helps them to be usable for speciﬁc applications where space or height is 
constrained, such as on aircraft or satellites. 
• 
Simple Feed System: Compared to other antennas such as phased arrays, reﬂec-
tarrays employ a simpler feed system. 
• 
Beam Shaping and Steering: Reﬂectarrays can be customized to create speciﬁc 
shape beams as per particular applications such as pencil beams, etc. by changing 
the phase of the individual elements. If electronically controlled elements are 
used in reﬂectarray, the reﬂectarray can be made reconﬁgurable and can steer or 
shape the beam in different directions. 
• 
Lightweight: Reﬂectarrays are generally low in weight as compared to conven-
tional parabolic dish antennas, which makes them easy to install. 
• 
Frequency Agility: In recent research works, there have been reﬂectarrays that can 
operate over a wide range of frequencies, which makes them usable for multiband 
or multipurpose applications.

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs
109
• 
Wideband Operation: Recent advancements have also shown an improvement in 
reﬂectarray bandwidth. By using customized elements, reﬂectarrays have shown 
the potential to operate over a wider range of frequencies. 
• 
Easy Manufacturing: Reﬂectarrays can be manufactured using traditional PCB 
techniques, which makes them cost-effective and easy to manufacture. 
• 
Ruggedness and Durability: Reﬂectarrays are typically more rugged and durable 
as they do not employ any moving parts. It helps them to have high reliability in 
harsh environmental conditions. 
Overall, reﬂectarrays provide a combination of performance, versatility, and 
practicality that makes them well suited for a wide range of communication, radar, 
and satellite applications. 
This chapter introduces four distinct reﬂectarray designs, each offering unique 
advantages. The ﬁrst two, categorized as metal-only reﬂectarray (MORA) antennas, 
utilize purely metallic elements for construction, eliminating the need for dielectric 
materials. Conversely, the remaining two reﬂectarrays leverage grounded dielectric 
elements to achieve broadband functionality. One of these broadband designs 
incorporates a phase-compensating ﬂat lens to minimize the required maximum 
permittivity of the dielectric blocks. We will compare the performance of all four 
reﬂectarrays and highlight their beneﬁts, particularly when compared to traditional 
narrowband designs that rely on resonant elements. Subsequent sections delve 
deeper into the details of these innovative reﬂectarray conﬁgurations. 
2 
Reﬂectarray Design 
In the next sections, we present two distinct metal-only reﬂectarray (MORA) 
designs, both utilizing the same feed horn with a skew angle. The ﬁrst MORA directs 
its beam in the specular direction, while the second design achieves broadside 
radiation. We will explore the speciﬁcs of these MORA conﬁgurations in subsequent 
sections. 
The emergence of 3D printing has opened exciting possibilities for dielectric-
based reﬂectarrays [5]. However, a key challenge lies in the limited permittivity 
range offered by current 3D printing materials. The ﬁrst dielectric reﬂectarray 
design utilizes dielectric blocks backed by a ground plane, but this approach 
demands high permittivity values, which can be restrictive. 
To address this limitation, we propose a second reﬂectarray incorporating a 
phase-compensating ﬂat lens. This innovative design signiﬁcantly reduces the 
required permittivity of the dielectric blocks, achieved by strategically placing the 
lens in front of the feed horn. We will delve deeper into the details of this approach 
later. 
Before, discussing different types of these reﬂectarrays, it is important to discuss 
the typical process of designing conventional reﬂectarrays.

110
R. K. Arya
Fig. 2 Typical reﬂectarray unit cell 
2.1 
Conventional Reﬂectarray Design Process 
The conventional approach to reﬂectarray design, as outlined in [1–3], involves 
initially fabricating microstrip patches of various sizes (as depicted in Fig. 2a), 
shapes, and orientations on a dielectric substrate. This conﬁguration enables local 
phase control (as illustrated in Fig. 2b) of the reﬂected wave when it is illuminated 
by an offset-fed horn (see Fig. 1), which illuminates the surface. Normally, a unit cell 
of speciﬁc dimensions is used as the reﬂecting element for controlling the reﬂected 
wave’s phase. The patches in such reﬂectarray are separated from each other by unit 
cell periodicity and are supported by a dielectric layer. 
Overall, designing a reﬂectarray involves several steps and considerations. It 
involves several steps: 
• 
Requirements Deﬁnition: Determine the speciﬁcations and requirements of the 
reﬂectarray, including frequency of operation, gain, bandwidth, beamwidth, 
polarization, or any other parameters that are relevant to the desired application. 
• 
Substrate Selection: Select a suitable substrate material for the reﬂectarray by 
choosing the dielectric constant, loss tangent, cost, and mechanical properties of 
the substrate. 
• 
Array Element Design: Decide the type and shape of the array element based on 
desired radiation properties. 
• 
Element Parameters’ Calculation: After the array element is selected, use an 
electromagnetic simulation software to determine the dimensions of the array 
element with the desired phase distribution. 
• 
Phase Distribution Optimization: Optimize array elements over the reﬂectarray 
surface so that they provide the desired phase distribution to steer the beam in

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs
111
the desired direction. This optimization process may include ﬁxing dimensions, 
positions, and phase shifts of the elements to minimize sidelobes, maximize gain, 
or get other desired performance goals. 
• 
Design Feed Network: Design the convenient feed to illuminate the reﬂectarray. 
• 
Simulation and Performance Analysis: Use electromagnetic simulation software 
such as CST Studio, Ansys HFSS, FEKO, etc. to simulate the reﬂectarray 
design to verify if it is providing the desired results. Analyze key performance 
metrics such as radiation patterns, bandwidth, gain, sidelobe levels, beamwidth, 
impedance matching, and efﬁciency to evaluate the design’s performance against 
the speciﬁed requirements. 
• 
Prototype Fabrication and Testing: Fabricate the reﬂectarray prototype using 
appropriate manufacturing techniques. Once fabricated, test the reﬂectarray 
prototype in an anechoic chamber or other controlled environment to validate 
its performance. 
• 
Iterative Optimization: Iteratively reﬁne the reﬂectarray design based on the 
similarity between simulation results and experimental measurements. Fine-tune 
the element parameters, feed design, and other factors to achieve the best possible 
performance within the given constraints. 
• 
Finalization and Documentation: Finalize the reﬂectarray design, and document 
the speciﬁcations, simulation results, fabrication details, measurement setup, and 
testing steps for future reference and replication. 
Throughout the design process, it is important to consider practical constraints 
such as material availability, manufacturing capabilities, cost, environmental factors, 
and measurement capabilities. It is worthwhile to consult electromagnetics, antenna 
design, and RF engineering experts to ensure a successful reﬂectarray design. 
Following the above steps, most conventional reﬂectarrays are designed. In the 
following sections, we discuss more about other innovative techniques to design 
different reﬂectarrays. 
2.2 
Offset-Fed Metal-Only Reﬂectarray Antennas 
Recently, there has been a growing interest in metal-only reﬂectarray antennas due 
to their avoidance of dielectric materials, making them not only cost-effective but 
also less susceptible to environmental conditions when deployed in space. Several 
metal-only designs have been proposed by researchers, ranging from the earliest 
iteration [1] utilizing slot-type elements [6, 7] to more complex three-dimensional 
designs [8–11]. 
The design process of these reﬂectarrays commences with the placement of the 
feed horn. It is assumed that the feed horn illuminates the reﬂectarray surface at 
angles depicted in Figs. 1 and 3. Reﬂectarray elements situated at a height, h, from  
the ground plane are tasked with reﬂecting the incident ﬁeld in a manner that directs 
the reﬂected beam toward the desired direction (phi Subscript b Baseline comma theta Subscript b Baselineϕb, θb). For achieving a collimated

112
R. K. Arya
Fig. 3 Typical metal-only reﬂectarray 
beam in the (phi Subscript b Baseline comma theta Subscript b Baselineϕb, θb) direction, the progressive phase distribution required for these 
reﬂectarray elements can be mathematically expressed as [3] 
phi left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis equals minus k 0 x Subscript i Baseline sine theta Subscript b Baseline cosine phi Subscript b Baseline minus k 0 y Subscript i Baseline sine theta Subscript b Baseline sine phi Subscript bφ(xi, yi) = −k0xi sin θb cos ϕb −k0yi sin θb sin ϕb
(1) 
where element i prime si's coordinates are denoted by phi left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesisφ(xi, yi) and k 0k0 denotes the propaga-
tion constant in vacuum. 
The reﬂected ﬁeld from the reﬂectarray is the desired ﬁeld contributed from all 
the elements of the reﬂectarray. The phase of the reﬂected ﬁeld at each element 
results from the sum of the incident phase and the phase shift introduced by each 
element, and we can express it as follows: 
phi left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis equals minus k 0 d Subscript i Baseline plus phi Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesisφ(xi, yi) = −k0di + φR(xi, yi)
(2) 
where element i introduces phase shift of phi Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesisφR(xi, yi) and d Subscript idi denotes the separation 
of the element to the phase center of the feed. 
From equations (1) and (2), the phase shift needed at each element comes out to 
be 
phi Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline comma y Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis equals k 0 left parenthesis d Subscript i Baseline minus sine theta Subscript b Baseline left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline cosine phi Subscript b Baseline plus y Subscript i Baseline sine phi Subscript b Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesisφR(xi, yi) = k0(di −sin θb(xi cos ϕb + yi sin ϕb))
(3) 
The reﬂectarray is made of many phasing elements. So, phasing element design 
constitutes a crucial aspect of reﬂectarray design.

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs
113
The aperture efﬁciency of these reﬂectarrays is determined by computing the 
simulated gain using the following formula: 
eta equals StartFraction upper G lamda squared Over 4 pi upper A EndFractionη = Gλ2
4πA
(4) 
where A and G represent the physical area and gain of the reﬂectarray at the 
wavelength, lamdaλ. 
2.2.1 
Results 
As previously noted, simulations were conducted for two offset-fed prototype 
reﬂectarrays, considering radiation in both normal and specular directions. For more 
details, please refer to [11–13]. The parameters for the reﬂectarray setup are as 
follows: The design frequency f is 35.6 GHz; the aperture dimensions are upper A Subscript x Baseline times upper A Subscript yAx ×Ay, 
where upper A Subscript x Baseline equals upper A Subscript y Baseline equals 96.83Ax = Ay = 96.83 mm (11.5 lamda11.5λ); the tilt angle is represented by upper Theta equals 30 Superscript ringΘ = 30◦; the  
thickness is h equals 0.787h = 0.787 mm; and the height of the feed is upper H Subscript f Baseline equals 75Hf = 75 mm (8.9 lamda8.9λ). 
According to the simulations, the reﬂectarray, for the normal beam, achieved 
a simulated gain of 26.2 dBi at 35.6 GHz, with an aperture efﬁciency of 25.5%, 
calculated using equation (4), while the reﬂectarray for specular beam achieved a 
gain of 28 dBi at 35.6 GHz, with an aperture efﬁciency of 35.4% as discussed in 
[11–13]. 
2.3 
Dielectric Reﬂectarray Designs 
As compared to conventional reﬂectarray design, we introduce an alternate design 
to the conventional approach for designing dielectric reﬂectarray. This reﬂectarray 
design invokes the image principle to show the principle of the design, and it is 
similar to that of designing graded-index lenses [14]. We use offset-fed reﬂectarray 
design in this study as it is the most commonly used conﬁguration in academia and 
industry. 
We start the design process by ﬁrst looking at the design of a transmitarray. 
Designing a transmitarray is easy as it uses the Ray Optics method. The design 
for the reﬂectarray can be easily formulated by taking out half of the transmitarray 
and replacing the other half with a PEC ground plane. 
Initially, we begin by assuming that the feed horn illuminates the reﬂectarray 
surface at an angle upper ThetaΘ, depicted in Fig. 4, as the ﬁrst step. Next, we determine 
the phase distribution on the top surface of the reﬂectarray located at upper Phi Subscript i nФin, when 
illuminated by the feed horn. We calculate the desired phase distribution at upper Phi Subscript o u tФout. 
By both these phase distributions, we can embed the dielectric blocks between 
upper Phi Subscript i nФin and upper Phi Subscript o u tФout planes so that the compensating phase introduced by these dielectric 
blocks enforces the phase distribution at the exit aperture to the desired distribution

114
R. K. Arya
Fig. 4 Location of the input and output aperture 
calculated at the exit plane, upper Phi Subscript o u tФout. Once we place these dielectric blocks, it is similar 
to the design of a transmitarray only with the difference that the output beam is 
offset by an angle upper ThetaΘ as compared to the normal incidence as is common with typical 
transmitarray. 
Once the phase distribution at the input aperture, upper Phi Subscript i nФin, and the desired phase 
distribution at the exit aperture, upper Phi Subscript o u tФout, are known, we can calculate the desired 
permittivity of the dielectric blocks as follows: 
upper Phi Subscript o u t Baseline minus upper Phi Subscript i n Baseline equals StartFraction 2 pi t Over lamda 0 EndFraction StartRoot epsilon Subscript r j Baseline EndRootФout −Фin = 2πt
λ0
√ϵrj
(5) 
where lamda 0λ0 is the free space wavelength, t is the thickness of the dielectric block, and 
epsilon Subscript r jϵrj is the dielectric constant of the jth block along y-axis. 
We then calculate the values of epsilon Subscript r jϵrj needed at different locations of the reﬂectar-
ray. The placement of these dielectric blocks completes our design for transmitarray 
and thus forms the transmitarray as shown in Fig. 5. 
The transmitarray works as a preliminary design for the reﬂectarray. We convert it 
to the reﬂectarray by placing the PEC sheet at x–y plane at z equals 0z = 0 mm and removing 
the part of the dielectric blocks below z equals 0z = 0 mm. The placement of PEC sheet at 
z equals 0z = 0 mm will reﬂect the incident beam from the feed horn in the specular direction. 
The ﬁnal design of the converted reﬂectarray is shown in Fig. 6. This completes our 
design for the offset-fed dielectric reﬂectarray.

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs
115
Fig. 5 Dielectric transmitarray 
Fig. 6 Offset-fed dielectric reﬂectarray

116
R. K. Arya
Fig. 7 Dielectric reﬂectarray with phase-compensating ﬂat lens 
We position different dielectric blocks above the ground plane to achieve the 
desired phase compensation. Each block measures x times xx × x with a height of h where 
both x and h are decided by reﬂectarray properties and frequency of operation. 
Normally, it is found that a design of this type needs a high value of dielectric 
constant for the dielectric blocks. However, obtaining materials that have such a 
vast expanse of values of permittivities for the reﬂectarray is difﬁcult from the 
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) materials. Even advanced techniques like 3D 
printing with air-void embedding [15] are not helpful in this scenario as the 3D 
printing materials with high epsilon Subscript rϵr values are not easily available or are quite expensive. 
To reduce the maximum required value of the permittivity of the dielectric blocks, 
we propose a modiﬁed design by incorporating a lens as explained next. 
In this design, we employ the same methodology as described earlier for the 
design process. However, for the second reﬂectarray, we maintain the same physical 
parameters while introducing a phase-compensating ﬂat lens between the horn and 
the array. This lens aims to decrease the phase excursion of the spherical wave as it 
interacts with the dielectric blocks, as depicted in Fig. 7. With the inclusion of the 
lens, the maximum permittivity required for the dielectric blocks reduces to lower 
values as compared to when the lens is not used. 
The desired values of permittivity in this design can be achieved by using the 
Dial-a-Dielectric (DaD) technique [16]. We can use ABS as printing material with 
printed conductive patches to realize desired permittivity values that otherwise 
cannot be achieved by 3D printing alone.

Reﬂectarray Antenna Designs
117
2.3.1 
Results 
The previous publications [11–13] demonstrated the effectiveness of the reﬂectarray 
design with the phase-compensating ﬂat lens. It was found that it was possible to 
get a gain of 6 dB gain with the introduction of the phase-compensating ﬂat lens. 
It was also found that dielectric constant values required by reﬂectarray were also 
decreased drastically by the introduction of the lens. 
3 
Conclusion 
This chapter explored the design of four versatile reﬂectarray antennas. We began 
with two metal-only reﬂectarrays (MORAs). To showcase the design ﬂexibility, one 
MORA directs its beam in the normal direction, while the other achieves a specular 
beam. Interestingly, the specular design boasts both higher gain and lower sidelobe 
levels compared to its normal beam counterpart. 
Next, we ventured into dielectric reﬂectarrays, introducing two designs that both 
utilize dielectric blocks backed by a ground plane to achieve a specular beam. 
The key difference lies in the inclusion of a phase-compensating ﬂat lens in one 
design. This lens offers signiﬁcant advantages: It drastically reduces the maximum 
permittivity required for the dielectric blocks, making them more suitable for 3D 
printing and potentially lowering the overall antenna proﬁle. However, the lens 
introduces phase shifts that necessitate adjustments to the permittivity values to 
maintain the desired specular beam direction. 
References 
1. D. Berry, R. Malech, W. Kennedy, The reﬂectarray antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
11(6), 645–651 (1963) 
2. D.M. Pozar, S.D. Targonski, H.D. Syrigos, Design of millimeter wave microstrip reﬂectarrays. 
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 45(2), 287–296 (1997) 
3. J. Huang, J.A. Encinar, Reﬂectarray Antennas (Wiley, 2008) 
4. J. Budhu, Y. Rahmat-Samii, Understanding the appearance of specular reﬂection in offset fed 
reﬂectarray antennas, in 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation 
(APSURSI) (IEEE, 2011), pp. 97–100 
5. P. Nayeri, M. Liang, R. A. Sabory-Garcı, M. Tuo, F. Yang, M. Gehm, H. Xin, A. Z. Elsherbeni, 
et al., 3D printed dielectric reﬂectarrays: low-cost high-gain antennas at sub-millimeter waves. 
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 62(4), 2000–2008 (2014) 
6. G. Carluccio, A. Mazzinghi, A. Freni. Design of complementary reﬂectarray. Electron. Lett. 
50(1), 16–17 (2014) 
7. R. Deng, F. Yang, S. Xu, M. Li, A low-cost metal-only reﬂectarray using modiﬁed slot-type 
Phoenix element with 360◦ phase coverage. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 64(4), 1556–1560 
(2016) 
8. Y. H. Cho, W. J. Byun, M. S. Song, High gain metal-only reﬂectarray antenna composed of 
multiple rectangular grooves. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 59(12), 4559–4568 (2011)

118
R. K. Arya
9. W. Lee, M. Yi, J. So, Y. J. Yoon, Non-resonant conductor reﬂectarray element for linear 
reﬂection phase. Electron. Lett. 51(9), 669–671 (2015) 
10. H.-T. Chou, C.-Y. Lin, M.-H. Wu, A high efﬁcient reﬂectarray antenna consisted of periodic 
all-metallic elements for the Ku-band DTV applications. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 
14, 1542–1545 (2015) 
11. S.V. Pandey, Techniques for Designing Microwave and Millimeter Wave Antennas and Compo-
nents Using Artiﬁcially Engineered Materials and Metasurfaces. PhD thesis, The Pennsylvania 
State University, 2017 
12. R. Mittra, S. Pandey, R.K. Arya, Offset-fed metal-only reﬂectarray antenna designs, in 2017 
Sixth Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Antennas and Propagation (APCAP), pp. 1–3 (2017) 
13. S. Pandey, R.K. Arya, R. Mittra, S. Zhang, D. Cadman, W. Whittow, Y. Vardaxoglou, Offset-fed 
metal-only reﬂectarray antenna design using 3D-cross elements, in 2018 IEEE International 
Symposium on Antennas and Propagation & USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting, pp. 
1629–1630 (2018) 
14. R.K. Arya, S. Pandey, R. Mittra, A technique for designing ﬂat lenses using artiﬁcially engi-
neered materials, in 2014 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium 
(APSURSI) (IEEE, 2014), pp. 769–770 
15. S. Zhang, R.K. Arya, S. Pandey, Y. Vardaxoglou, W. Whittow, R. Mittra, 3D-printed planar 
graded index lenses. IET Microwaves Antennas Propag. 10(13), 1411–1419 (2016) 
16. R.K. Arya, S. Zhang, Y. Vardaxoglou, W. Whittow, R. Mittra. 3D-printed millimeter wave lens 
antenna, in 2017 10th Global Symposium on Millimeter-Waves (IEEE, 2017), pp. 172–174

Antennas for Full-Duplex 
Communication: State of the Art 
and Way Forward 
Jogesh Chandra Dash 
and Debdeep Sarkar 
1 
Introduction 
In the coming years, wireless user trafﬁc is expected to surge exponentially 
compared to the contemporary ﬁfth-generation (5G) load. Therefore, it is expected 
to achieve twice the energy efﬁciency, 1 Tbps peak data rate, double the spectral 
efﬁciency, and 10 times reduced communication latency in 6G compared to 5G [1]. 
These requirements are crucial to enable futuristic applications such as extended 
reality, digital twin, holography, smart health care, autonomous vehicles, dense 
cellular connectivity, and many more. Thus, it is time to think beyond the existing 
communication system which works in the traditional half-duplex (HD) mode. 
HD mode of communication performs in either time-division duplexing (TDD) 
or frequency-division duplexing (FDD). These two duplexing techniques leverage 
the orthogonality of time/frequency resources at the expense of spectral efﬁciency 
[2]. On the other hand, in-band full-duplex (IBFD) communication has attracted 
signiﬁcant attention due to its remarkable properties to deal with spectral scarcity. 
It, theoretically, doubles the spectral efﬁciency compared to the half-duplex system 
and reduces the communication latency due to its simultaneous transmission and 
reception over the same time and frequency slot. The schematic representation of 
the FD and HD communication system is shown in Fig. 1. However, the serious 
bottleneck associated with the IBFD system is the self-interference (SI) caused by 
J. C. Dash 
National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Rourkela, Odisha, India 
e-mail: dashjc@nitrkl.ac.in 
D. Sarkar (✉) 
Indian Institute of Science Bangalore, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 
e-mail: debdeep@iisc.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_9
119

120
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 1 A schematic representation of HD and FD wireless communication systems 
Fig. 2 Schematic representation of SI signal and desired SoI in FD communication system 
its transmitter signal into the receiver which prevents the reception of the actual 
signal of interest (SoI). The schematic representation of SI is provided in Fig. 2. 
The SI signal is a very high-power signal, which can be over a million times 
stronger compared to SoI. It is reported that a conventional wireless communication 
system requires more than 100 dB of SI cancellation (SIC) to achieve a signal-to-
interference noise ratio (SINR) similar to that of the HD communication system 
[3–6]. In this circumstance, for successful implementation of FD communication, it 
is highly essential to suppress the SI signal well below the receiver’s thermal noise 
ﬂoor. To achieve the isolation level of more than 100 dB, SIC is performed jointly 
in three different stages, namely RF/antenna domain, analog domain, and digital 
domain. 
A few recently reported analog and digital SIC techniques such as nonlinear SI 
cancellation using an auxiliary transmitter [7], a bandpass common-gate structure 
with high-Q selectivity [8], RF rejection by injecting a Tx signal replica into Rx 
and cancelling at a low-noise ampliﬁer (LNA) [9–12], transmit SIC beamformer 
[13], basis function selection-based SIC [14], using variable fractional delay ﬁnite

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
121
impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter [15], and digital SI canceller Antennas for Full-Duplex 
Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward using demodulation reference 
signal conﬁguration [16], etc. are a few. However, analog/digital SIC techniques use 
additional circuitry and signal processing blocks, which leads to increased design 
complexity, power consumption, latency, and system cost. Therefore, a high degree 
of antenna domain SIC suppression can reduce the subsequent analog and digital 
domain cancellation load. 
2 
FD Antenna Design and SIC Techniques 
2.1 
Layered Multi-radiator FD Antenna with SIC Using NFDS 
and DGS 
Figure 3 shows the proposed two-port antenna that comprises a three-layer structure 
[17]. The coaxially fed microstrip patch antenna in Fig. 4a is designed on an 
RTD5880 substrate of 1.571.57 mm thickness, having epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 2.2εr = 2.2 and tangent delta equals 0.0009tan δ = 0.0009. An  
inverted L-shaped structure is connected from one end of the patch radiating edge 
and directed toward the non-radiating edge to create an asymmetry in the design, 
thereby reducing the inter-element H-plane coupling. A rectangular portion having 
the dimension of l Subscript d Baseline times w Subscript dld×wd is etched from the ground plane to design a defected ground 
structure (DGS) (Fig. 4b). Another dielectric sheet RT5880LZ of 0.50.5 mm thickness 
having epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 1.96εr = 1.96 and tangent delta equals 0.0019tan δ = 0.0019 is placed above the microstrip antenna at 
h 2h2 height (Fig. 4c–d). Inspired by the antenna decoupling surface proposed in [18], 
two parallel microstrip lines are designed on that dielectric sheet immediately above 
the inter-element spacing and the near-ﬁeld region, which act as NFDS. Note that 
the NFDS substrate should be low loss and its dielectric permittivity should be as 
low as possible to avoid the effect of dielectric loading on the antenna radiation 
performance. The resonant combination of DGS and the NFDS helps in reducing 
ﬁeld coupling between the two nearby antennas. 
A detailed analysis of the aforementioned decoupling mechanism by examining 
the ﬁeld distribution has been provided in the subsequent section. It has been shown 
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of proposed two-port antenna at 5.85 GHz

122
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 4 Proposed two-port antenna showing dimensions for individual layers in Fig. 3: (a) top layer, 
(b) middle layer, (c) ground plane, and (d) side view. Dimensions: upper L equals 1.092 lamda 0L = 1.092λ0, upper W equals 0.507 lamda 0W = 0.507λ0, 
l 1 equals 0.31 lamda 0l1 = 0.31λ0, w 1 equals 0.38 lamda 0w1 = 0.38λ0, l 2 equals lamda 0l2 = λ0, w 2 equals 0.4 lamda 0w2 = 0.4λ0, g 1 equals 0.039 lamda 0g1 = 0.039λ0, g 2 equals 0.068 lamda 0g2 = 0.068λ0, g 3 almost equals 0.01 lamda 0g3 ≈0.01λ0, 
l Subscript d Baseline equals 0.394 lamda 0ld = 0.394λ0, w Subscript d Baseline equals 0.117 lamda 0wd = 0.117λ0, l Subscript s Baseline equals 0.478 lamda 0ls = 0.478λ0, w Subscript s Baseline equals 0.018 lamda 0ws = 0.018λ0, g Subscript s Baseline equals 0.00429 lamda 0gs = 0.00429λ0, h 1 equals 0.0057 lamda 0h1 = 0.0057λ0, 
h 2 equals 0.0136 lamda 0h2 = 0.0136λ0, h 3 equals 0.03 lamda 0h3 = 0.03λ0
that the reduction of ﬁeld coupling, both E- and H-ﬁelds, helps in reducing the 
mutual coupling between the nearby radiating elements to an extremely low value. 
2.1.1 
Explanation of Decoupling Mechanism in Proposed Two-Port 
Antenna 
In this section, we present the design evolution of the proposed two-port antenna 
along with its decoupling mechanism. For each design stage, we examine the ﬁeld 
distribution, mutual coupling (upper S 21 divided by upper S 12S21/S12), and impedance matching (upper S 11S11) levels and 
the 2D radiation pattern. 
Stage-0 Initially, an antenna system having two closely spaced (g 2 equals 0.06 lamda 0g2 = 0.06λ0) 
microstrip patches (dimensions of l 1 times w 1l1 × w1 each) is designed (Fig. 5). The patch 
antenna works at 5.855.85 GHz LTE band with good impedance matching (StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue less than negative 10|S11| < −10
dB). However, strong H- and E-ﬁeld coupling between the nearby antennas (StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue equals StartAbsoluteValue upper S 12 EndAbsoluteValue|S21| =
|S12| about negative 11−11 dB) can be observed (Fig. 5). The 2D radiation patterns (E-/H-
plane) of antenna #1 and #2 at stage-0 are shown in Fig. 6a and b respectively. The 
patterns show a good cross-polar level (below negative 20−20 dB) at both the E- and H-planes 
for two antenna elements. 
Stage-1 Next, the L-shaped structure of Fig. 4a is included to create an asymmetry 
in the microstrip antenna structure designed in stage-0 to reduce the mutual coupling 
(Fig. 7), which can be veriﬁed from the H-ﬁeld distribution in Fig. 7. As compared 
to stage-0, stage-1 exhibits 8 dB increase in the isolation. The L-shaped structure 
increases the effective electrical length of individual antenna elements, causing a

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
123
Frequency (GHz) 
5.9
5.8
5.7
5.6
5.5
6.0 
5 
0 
10 
20 
15 
A/m 
375 
0 
750 
1500 
1125 
V/m 
–20 
0 
–15 
–5 
–10 
–25 
S11 
S21 
S21 
S22 
a 
b 
S-parameter (dB) 
H- field 
E- field 
W1 
W 
L
l1 
g2 
#1
#2 
Fig. 5 (a) Schematic of the proposed two-port antenna at stage 0, and (b) H- and  E-ﬁeld  
distribution on the patches of the stage-0 antenna conﬁguration at 5.85 GHz, along with the 
frequency variation of S-parameters (port 1 is excited, while keeping port 2 terminated with 
matched load). Note that we have upper S 11 equals upper S 22S11 = S22 due to structural symmetry (reciprocity ensures 
upper S 12 equals upper S 21S12 = S21) 
shift in the operating frequency from 5.855.85 GHz at stage-0 to 5.755.75 GHz at stage-
1. However, the asymmetry in the antenna design varies the individual antenna 
impedance matching, and the E-ﬁeld coupling still exists as shown in Fig. 7. The  
2D radiation pattern for the stage-1 antenna conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 8. The  
asymmetry introduced in this stage increases the cross-polar level than the antenna 
conﬁguration at stage-0. However, the cross-polar level is below negative 15−15 dB at the 
broadside direction for both the antenna elements (see Fig. 8). 
Stage-2 Stage-2 incorporates both the DGS (Fig. 4b) and the NFDS (Fig. 4c) in 
conjunction with the asymmetric patch conﬁguration of stage-1. DGS loading in 
the ground plane reduces the surface wave excitation thereby improving the cross-
polar response (see Fig. 14), and the dimension of the DGS determines the stop-band 
effect by incorporating transmission zero at the frequency of interest [19, 20]. The

124
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 6 Simulated 2D radiation pattern at 5.855.85 GHz of antenna design stage-0 (Fig. 5): (a) Antenna 
#1 and (b) Antenna #2 
Fig. 7 H- and E-ﬁeld distribution on the patches of the stage-1 antenna conﬁguration (see only 
Fig. 4a) at 5.85 GHz, along with the frequency variation of S-parameters (port 1 is excited while 
keeping port 2 terminated with matched load). Note that, due to structural asymmetry, we have 
upper S 11 not equals upper S 22S11 /= S22 (reciprocity ensures upper S 12 equals upper S 21S12 = S21, as expected) 
height between NFDS and the antenna ground plane determines the phase of the 
partially diffracted wave to cancel out the coupled wave. Also, the height between 
the defected ground and NFDS ensures an extremely low value of the inter-element 
mutual coupling. The dimensions of DGS and NFDS and the height between them 
are carefully decided using parametric analysis as shown in Fig. 9. 
The parametric study is conducted for the DGS design parameters l Subscript dld and w Subscript dwd and 
the NFDS design parameters l Subscript sls, w Subscript sws, and h 2h2. It is observed that the variation of l Subscript dld
and w Subscript dwd has very little impact on impedance matching; however, these decide the

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
125
Fig. 8 Simulated 2D radiation pattern at 5.75.7 GHz of antenna design stage-1 (Fig. 4a): (a) Antenna 
#1 and (b) Antenna #2 
Fig. 9 Studies on parameters: (a) l Subscript dld, (b) w Subscript dwd, (c) l Subscript sls, (d) w Subscript sws, and  (e) h 2h2, to understand the respective 
effects on S-parameter response of the proposed two-port antenna conﬁguration 
resonant frequency for upper S 21S21 (upper S 12S12). As shown in Fig. 9a and b, there is a gradual 
decrease (increase) in the frequency for the mutual coupling parameter with a 
gradual increase (decrease) in l Subscript dld (wd) values observed. On the other hand, the 
variation of NFDS design parameters (l Subscript sls, w Subscript sws, and h 2h2) alters the antenna operating 
frequency due to the superstrate loading effect. Moreover, the NFDS design 
parameters improve the mutual coupling performance at the frequency of interest 
as shown in Fig. 9c–e. The parametric study provides an intuition for NFDS design 
in the presence of DGS to reduce the mutual coupling. Moreover, the study of 
power ﬂow between the antenna elements for different stages of antenna design

126
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 10 Schematic diagram of proposed two-port antenna at 5.85 GHz 
is provided in Fig. 10. At design stage-0 (see Fig. 5), the closely spaced antenna 
elements create signiﬁcant power ﬂow between them through the substrate and in 
the near-ﬁeld region (see Fig. 10) due to the absence of any decoupling technique. 
The asymmetry introduced at the stage-1 (Fig. 4a) antenna design reduces the power 
ﬂow in the substrate region, from antenna number sign 1#1 to antenna number sign 2#2, compared to stage-0 (see 
Fig. 10). At stage-2 the use of DGS and NFDS along with the asymmetry introduced 
in stage-1 completely prevents the power ﬂow both in the substrate region and in the 
near-ﬁled region of antenna number sign 2#2 from antenna number sign 1#1 (see Fig. 10). 
The combined resonant effect of DGS and NFDS reduces both the H-ﬁeld and 
E-ﬁeld coupling between the nearby antennas as shown in Fig. 11. Consequently, 
the proposed technique exhibits the good impedance matching at 5.855.85 GHz desired 
operating frequency and reduces the mutual coupling between the nearby antennas 
having upper S 11 less than negative 10S11
< −10 dB and upper S 21 divided by upper S 12 less than negative 90S21/S12
< −90 dB, respectively, as shown in 
Fig. 11. Antenna #1 covers 5749 MHz–5949 MHz operating band having negative 10−10 dB 
impedance bandwidth of 200 MHz, while antenna #2 covers 5762 MHz–5978 MHz 
operating band having negative 10−10 dB impedance bandwidth 216 MHz. The overlapping 
bandwidth of the antenna is 187 MHz. 
2.1.2 
Prototype Fabrication and Measurement Results 
Figure 12a–c depicts the fabricated antenna prototype. The superstrate with NFDS 
structure is supported, and height h 2h2 is adjusted by four dielectric screws at four

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
127
Fig. 11 H- and E-ﬁeld distribution on the patches of the stage-2 antenna conﬁguration (see 
complete Fig. 3) at 5.85 GHz, along with the frequency variation of S-parameters (port 1 is excited 
while keeping port 2 terminated with matched load). Here, also, due to structural asymmetry, we 
have upper S 11 not equals upper S 22S11 /= S22 (reciprocity ensures upper S 12 equals upper S 21S12 = S21, as expected) 
Fig. 12 Fabricated proposed antenna prototype: (a) top view (without superstrate), (b) bottom 
view, (c) top view (with superstrate), and (d) far-ﬁeld radiation pattern measurement setup in 
anechoic chamber 
corners of the antenna (see Fig. 13). The S-parameters for the proposed two-port 
antenna are measured using Agilent N5230A PNA and compared with the simu-
lation results (see Fig. 13). The measured inter-element isolation at the operating 
frequency is almost equals 90≈90 dB. It is more than 25 dB over the complete operating band. The 
deviation in the S-parameter is due to the fabrication tolerances and surrounding

128
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 13 Frequency variation 
of simulated and measured 
S-parameters for the proposed 
antenna in Fig. 1 
Fig. 14 Simulated and measured patterns at 5.85 GHz: (a) E-plane (Antenna 1), (b) H-plane  
(Antenna 1), (c) E-plane (Antenna 2), (d) H-plane (Antenna 2), and (e) frequency variation of 
simulated and measured gain for the proposed antenna 
effects. Figure 12d depicts the antenna far-ﬁeld measurement setup. The measured 
and simulated far-ﬁeld E-plane and H-plane co/cross-polar pattern is provided in 
Fig. 14. The proposed antenna exhibits a maximum gain of 7.117.11 dBi at 10 Superscript ring10◦broadside 
tilt angle and 6.696.69 dBi gain at 0 Superscript ring0◦broadside direction. The simulated and measured 
gain over frequency curve is provided in Fig. 15. A comparison study of these 
earlier published works with the proposed technique is provided in Table 1. The  
comparison study shows that the proposed technique exhibits maximum possible 
isolation (greater than 90> 90 dB) with very close inter-element spacing (almost equals 0.01 lamda 0≈0.01λ0) compared to 
the earlier published works. Moreover, the impedance bandwidth and the gain of

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
129
Fig. 15 Schematic representation of SI signal and desired SoI in FD communication system 
the proposed antenna are comparable with the earlier reported results as provided in 
Table 1. 
2.2 
Planar Multi-radiator FD Antenna with SIC Using Field 
Conﬁnement Method 
In this section, a multi-radiator FD antenna design is discussed where the planarity 
in design is achieved unlike section 2.1. The schematic of the proposed planar 
multi-radiator antenna is shown in Fig. 15 [31], where SIC is obtained using two 
techniques acting simultaneously such as the ﬁeld conﬁnement technique using 
metallic vias and stop-band characteristic by defected ground structure (DGS). The 
multi-radiator structure contains two half-mode microstrip patch radiating structures 
designed on an RTD 5880 substrate having epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 2.2ϵr = 2.2, tangent delta equals 0.0009tan δ = 0.0009, with an overall 
dimension upper L Subscript g Baseline times upper W Subscript g Baseline times hLg × Wg × h (38 mm times× 80 mm times× 1.61.6 mm). A detailed design evolution 
of the proposed FD antenna is shown in Fig. 16. 
Initially, in stage-I of the design ﬂow, two inset-fed microstrip patch antennas are 
designed having upper T upper M 01T M01 mode, and the corresponding antenna dimension is length 
(l Subscript p Baseline equals 16.2lp = 16.2 mm) and width (w Subscript p Baseline equals 20wp = 20 mm) of the patch, width of notch (g 1 equals 0.625g1 = 0.625
mm), width of microstrip feed-line (w Subscript f Baseline equals 2.75wf = 2.75 mm), and the inset depth (l 1 equals 5l1 = 5
mm) [32, 33]. The two antennas such as the transmitter (number sign 1 colon upper T x#1 : T x) and a receiver 
(number sign 2 colon upper R x#2 : Rx) are placed adjacent to each other with 180 Superscript ring180◦orientation with a separation 
g equals 6g = 6 mm as shown in Fig. 16. The antennas are designed at 5.95.9 GHz operating 
frequency as shown in the S-parameter (vertical bar upper S 11|S11) curve in Fig. 17a. In contrast, the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue|S21|
parameter of negative 11.8−11.8 dB between number sign 1 colon upper T x#1 : T x and number sign 2 colon upper R x#2 : Rx as  shown in Fig. 17b signiﬁes 
high mutual coupling leading to high antenna domain SI due to proximity between 
the antennas having similar polarization state. To improve the inter-element isolation 
(StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue|S21|) compared to stage-I, two metallic vias are placed at two adjacent sides of the

130
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Table 1 Comparison of proposed two-port antenna with other structures available in open literature 
Ref.
Edge spacing (lamda 0λ0)
OF (GHz)
IBW (%)
Isolation (dB)
Decoupling technique
Max. Gain (dBi) 
[21]
0.06
2.45
1.5
greater than>25
Ring DGS
NA 
[22]
0.135
5.8
NA
greater than>24.5
Metamaterial structure
4 
[23]
0.1
5.4
NA
greater than>23
Modiﬁed-U shape DS
4.24 
[24]
0.11
4.8
5.21
greater than>16
SMLR
NA 
[25]
0.07
3.5
2.8
greater than>35
PCR
tilde∼6 
[26]
0.13
5.25
2.6
greater than>16
FSS
9 
[27]
0.19
10
3
greater than>37
Slot 
[28]
0.14
4
NA
greater than>45
PBO
5.3 
[29]
NA
2.4
9
greater than>35
180 hybrid/ DGS
4 
[30]
0.09
4.7
6.5
greater than>50
PAC
tilde∼3 
Prop.
almost equals≈0.01
5.85
3.41
greater than>90
Asymmetry+DGS+NFDS
7.11 
(OF: operating frequency and IBW: 10 dB impedance bandwidth)

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
131
Fig. 16 Design evolution of proposed planar multi-radiator FD antenna from stage-I to stage-IV 
Tx and Rx microstrip antenna at y equals minus l Subscript p Baseline divided by 2y = −lp/2 and y equals l Subscript p Baseline divided by 2y = lp/2 of stage-I (see Fig. 16), 
in addition to a series of metallic vias at g 3g3 distance away from the non-radiating 
edge as shown in stage-II of Fig. 16. The via diameter (d) and the distance between 
two consecutive vias (p) are 1 mm and 1.51.5 mm, respectively. This leads to a d/p 
value of approximately 0.660.66, which restricts the ﬁeld coupling between radiating 
patches. On the other hand, it has been taken care of that the via positioning should 
not affect the antenna operating frequency and polarization state. The upper S 11S11 plot for 
stage-II design in Fig. 17a shows an uninterrupted operating frequency of 5.95.9 GHz 
with improved upper S 21S21 of negative 19−19 dB, whereas a change in antenna bandwidth is observed. 
Furthermore, the surface current distributions in Fig. 18 for stage-I and stage-II show 
the unaffected polarization state. 
In stage-III, another series of metallic vias is placed, having the same d divided by pd/p ratio 
as in stage-I, at y equals 0y = 0 position, thereby reducing the antenna size. Furthermore, it 
changes the antenna operating mode from upper T upper M Subscript 0 comma 1T M0,1 to upper T upper M Subscript 0 comma 1 divided by 2T M0,1/2 at 5.95.9 GHz operating 
frequency and improves the antenna donation isolation to 31.531.5 dB (see Fig. 17b) 
due to the ﬁeld conﬁnement provided metallic via loading. Finally, in stage-IV two 
U-shaped slots are etched out from the ground near the fees line locations of the 
Tx and Rx antennas to further improve the antenna donation isolation. The slot 
design parameters such as slot-dimensions (l Subscript d Baseline 1 Baseline equals 3ld1 = 3 mm, l Subscript d Baseline 2 Baseline equals 11.5ld2 = 11.5 mm, w Subscript d Baseline equals 1wd = 1
mm), slot-position relative to the feed-line (d Subscript s Baseline equals 0.5ds = 0.5 mm), and the relative distance 
between two slots (y Subscript s Baseline equals 21.15ys = 21.15 mm) are optimized such that the Tx–Rx isolation 
is signiﬁcantly enhanced to 87.0887.08 dB compared to stage-III (Fig. 17b), without 
compromising on the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| response (Fig. 17a). 
Simulated Poynting power ﬂow between the Tx and Rx antennas through the 
substrate for various design stages is provided in Fig. 19. This provides a clear visual 
understanding of the coupling between the Tx and Rx antennas. A gradual decrease

132
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Frequency (GHz) 
5.9
5.8
5.7
6.1
6.0 
–20 
–60 
–40 
–10 
–90 
|S21| (dB) 
b 
Stage II 
Stage III 
Stage IV 
Stage I 
–80 
–30 
–70 
–50 
Frequency (GHz) 
5.9
5.8
5.7
6.1
6.0 
–5 
–25 
–15 
0 
–40 
|S11| (dB) 
a 
Stage II 
Stage III 
Stage IV 
Stage I 
–35 
–10 
–30 
–20 
Fig. 17 Simulated S-parameters response for stage-I to stage-IV as shown in Fig. 2: (a) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue equals StartAbsoluteValue upper S 22 EndAbsoluteValue|S11| =
|S22| and (b) StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue equals StartAbsoluteValue upper S 12 EndAbsoluteValue|S21| = |S12|
Fig. 18 Schematic representation of SI signal and desired SoI in FD communication system 
in the ﬁeld coupling between the antennas can be observed in Fig. 19, where the 
ﬁeld coupling is drastically reduced in stage-IV compared to stage-I. This validates 
the coupling S-parameter response provided in Fig. 17b. Table 2 provides a detailed 
account of the antenna’s performance parameters during different design stages. The 
table shows an improvement in antenna domain isolation and efﬁciency at stage-IV 
compared to stage-I, without any impact on the antenna’s operating frequency and 
cross-polar level. The miniaturization from upper T upper M Subscript 0 comma 1T M0,1 mode to upper T upper M Subscript 0 comma 1 divided by 2T M0,1/2 mode by via 
loading causes a decrease in impedance bandwidth and gain from stage-I to stage-
IV. However, the obtained bandwidth and the antenna gain are sufﬁcient to meet 
the application requirement of the IEEE 802.11p band, which is used for V2X-
ITS (Intelligent Transportation System) applications around 5.95.9 GHz [34]. Table 3 
compares the proposed work with some earlier published work, highlighting the 
distinct advantage of the proposed work. It provides maximum Tx–Rx isolation with 
a planar design, without the use of any conventional techniques such as complex 
feeding lines, circulators, hybrid networks, etc.

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
133
Fig. 19 Poynting-vector distribution showing power ﬂow between the Tx and Rx antennas of the 
proposed FD antenna for (a) Stage-I, (b) Stage-II, (c) Stage-III, and (d) Stage-IV. Here, Tx is 
excited, and Rx is terminated in matched load 
Table 2 Antenna performance at various design stages 
Antenna 
OF (GHz) 
IBW (percent sign%) 
PG (dBi) 
TE (percent sign%) 
Max. isolation (dB) 
X-pol (dB) 
Stage-I
5.9
3.38
7.65
88.5
11.8
>20 
Stage-II 
5.9
1.6
7.65
89.2
19
>20 
Stage-III 
5.9
1.6
6.2
90.5
31.5
>20 
Stage-IV 
5.9
1.6
5.63
90.5
87.08
>20 
OF: Operating Frequency, IBW: negative 10−10 dB Impedance Bandwidth, PG: Peak Gain, and TE: Total 
Efﬁciency 
2.2.1 
Parametric Studies and Experimental Results 
A parametric study has been carried out to investigate the impact of various design 
parameters on the proposed design for stage-IV of Fig. 16. The study focuses on the 
effective length (l Subscript d Baseline equals l Subscript d Baseline 1 Baseline plus l Subscript d Baseline 2ld = ld1 + ld2), width (w Subscript dwd), and relative positions (d Subscript sds and y Subscript sys) of  
two U-shaped slots as shown in Fig. 20. Increasing the values of l Subscript dld and w Subscript dwd shifts the 
resonant band-stop StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue|S21| response toward lower frequencies, as shown in Fig. 20a 
and b. It is possible to customize the band-stop response at a desired frequency 
by keeping either w Subscript dwd or l Subscript dld ﬁxed and then varying the other. Refer to [40] for  the  
equivalent circuit modeling of defected ground structures. As the distance between 
the two ground-perturbing slots (d Subscript sds) and the width of the slots (y Subscript sys) are reduced, they 
start to approach each other. This causes the effective mutual inductance of the slots 
to increase, which shifts the frequency response of the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 21 EndAbsoluteValue|S21| band-stop toward lower 
frequencies. For more details, please refer to [41]. You can also see the graphs of this 
behavior in Fig. 20c and d. Figure 20 conﬁrms that the StartAbsoluteValue upper S 11 EndAbsoluteValue|S11|-characteristics remain 
unaffected by parametric variations, meaning that the mutual coupling response can

134
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Table 3 Comparison of proposed work with other structures available in open literature 
[Ref.]
f 0f0 (GHz)
IBW (percent sign%)
Size (lamda 0 cubedλ3
0)
SIC method
Polarization
Isolation (dB)
Structure 
[35]
2.452.45
4.14.1
0.1060.106
BFN
Co-CP
greater than 47> 47
Non-planar 
[36]
2.442.44
4
0.030.03
QFN
Co-CP
greater than 40.6> 40.6
Non-planar 
[37]
2.452.45
11.711.7
0.0290.029
Near-ﬁeld cancellation
Co-LP
greater than 38> 38
Non-planar 
[38]
2.442.44
4.94.9
0.00250.0025
Decoupling resonator
Co-LP
greater than 20> 20
Non-planar 
[39]
6.296.29
1.61.6
0.0310.031
Two coupling path
Co-LP
greater than 40> 40
Non-planar 
Prop.
5.95.9
1.61.6
0.0340.034
Field conﬁnement
Co-LP
almost equals 90≈90
Planar 
lamda 0λ0: free-space wavelength corresponding to f 0f0, BNF: Beamforming network, and QNF: Quadrature feeding network

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
135
Fig. 20 Parametric study of stage-IV design parameters: (a) l Subscript dld, (b) w Subscript dwd, (c) d Subscript sds, and  (d) y Subscript sys of Fig. 2 
to observe the effect of parameter variation on FD antenna S-parameter (unit: mm) 
be ﬁne-tuned without affecting the impedance matching performance. The results 
of the study provide a better understanding of the proposed design. 
Figure 21 depicts the two-port FD antenna prototype. Figure 22 shows the 
corresponding S-parameter response and gain plot with far-ﬁeld measurement setup 
in the anechoic chamber, while the inset displays the image of Agilent N5230A 
PNA. The S-parameters that were simulated and measured are in good agreement, 
as can be seen in Fig. 22a. The individual antenna gain is stable around 5.63 dBi in 
the operating band around 5.95.9 GHz, as shown in Fig. 22b. Both the simulated and 
measured 2D radiation patterns of the individual antenna element show an X-pol 
level of below 20 dB, as depicted in Fig. 23. 
2.3 
Planar Shared-Radiator FD Antenna with SIC Using Vias 
and Stub Resonator 
Unlike Sects. 2.1 and 2.2, this section discusses a colinearly polarized shared-
radiator (SR) FD antenna design where the planarity and further compactness with

136
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 21 Fabricated prototype 
of the proposed two-element 
FD antenna system of Fig. 1: 
(a) top view and (b) bottom 
view 
Fig. 22 Frequency variation of simulated and measured (a) S-parameters and (b) gain with far-
ﬁeld measurement setup in anechoic chamber of proposed FD antenna system as shown in Fig. 3 
Fig. 23 2D radiation pattern of the Tx antenna of the two-element prototype of Fig. 1: (a) xoz-
plane and (b) yoz-plane 
simplicity in design are achieved. The schematic of the proposed SR-FD antenna 
is shown in Fig. 24 [42], where the SIC is achieved using via and stub resonator 
loading. The antenna is designed at 5.95.9 GHz operating frequency on a single Roger

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
137
Fig. 24 3D schematic design 
of the proposed 
shared-radiator FD antenna 
Fig. 25 (a) Top  and (b) cross-section view of the proposed SR-FD antenna. Dimensions: w Subscript g Baseline equals 1.024 lamda 0wg =
1.024λ0, l Subscript g Baseline equals 0.841 lamda 0lg = 0.841λ0, h equals 0.031 lamda 0h = 0.031λ0, l Subscript s Baseline equals 0.222 lamda 0ls = 0.222λ0, l Subscript d Baseline equals 0.033 lamda 0ld = 0.033λ0, l equals 0.353 lamda 0l = 0.353λ0, w equals 0.432 lamda 0w = 0.432λ0, 
l 1 equals 0.075 lamda 0l1 = 0.075λ0, w 1 equals 0.098 lamda 0w1 = 0.098λ0, w Subscript f Baseline equals 0.034 lamda 0wf = 0.034λ0 (where lamda 0λ0 represents the free-space wavelength at 
5.95.9 GHz operating frequency) 
RTD5880 substrate (epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 2.2ϵr = 2.2, tangent delta equals 0.0009tan δ = 0.0009) having  l Subscript g Baseline times w Subscript g Baseline times hlg × wg × h (0.841 lamda 00.841λ0 times×
1.024 lamda 01.024λ0 times× 0.031 lamda 00.031λ0, where lamda 0λ0 is the free-space wavelength at 5.95.9 GHz operating 
frequency), see Fig. 25. The rest of the design parameters are mentioned in Fig. 25. 
A detailed design evolution of the proposed antenna along with various performance 
parameters at different stages is shown in Fig. 26. The design evolution contains a 
comparative study of the E-ﬁeld distribution, S-parameter response, and radiation 
pattern at different design stages, see Fig. 26. 
Initially, in stage-1, a single microstrip structure is designed with two inset feeds 
at either end of the radiation edge, thereby providing a two-port conﬁguration in 
a shared metallic structure, see Fig. 26. The two ports act as transmitter (Tx) and 
receiver (Rx) ports for an FD antenna system. The antenna dimensions having length

138
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 26 Design evolution of the proposed SR-FD antenna. (Note: (1) here E-ﬁeld distribution 
corresponds to port number sign 1#1:Tx excitation while port number sign 2#2:Rx terminated to matched load, and (2) due 
to the identical radiation pattern for both Tx and Rx ports, the 2D pattern for only number sign 1#1:Tx port is 
provided here) 
(l equals 17.71l = 17.71 mm) and width (w equals 22w = 22 mm) of patch, width of notch (w 1 equals 5w1 = 5 mm), 
width of microstrip feed-line (w Subscript f Baseline equals 1.75wf = 1.75 mm), and the inset depth (l Subscript f Baseline equals 5.5lf = 5.5
mm) are chosen [32] such that the antenna operates in upper T upper M Subscript 1 comma 0T M1,0 fundamental modes 
at 5.95.9 GHz operating frequency. The S-parameter plot of the stage-1 design shows 
the good impedance matching of both Tx and Rx ports. However, unlike multi-
radiator structures, the proposed FD antenna at stage-1 suffers from the extremely 
high mutual coupling between the Tx and Rx ports, as shown in E-ﬁeld distribution 
in Fig. 26 and which also reﬂects in the S-parameter plot having upper S 21 equals negative 2.1S21 = −2.1 dB. 
Here, the E-ﬁeld of the SR-FD antenna is computed for the Tx port, while the Rx 
is terminated to match termination. The radiation pattern in stage-1 shows a stable 
response. To improve the Tx to Rx isolation, a series of metallic vias is placed at the 
center line of the SR-FD antenna as shown in the stage-2 design. The via loading 
makes the Tx and Rx ports operate at upper T upper M Subscript 1 divided by 2 comma 0T M1/2,0 mode and reduces to mutual coupling 
upper S 21 equals negative 7.21S21 = −7.21 dB, which is also visible in reducing the E-ﬁeld coupling in the Rx 
port of stage-2 design compared to stage-1. However, the ﬁeld suppression between 
the Tx and Rx is perfectly achieved which affects the modal purity and makes the 
radiation pattern tilt, as shown in the stage-2 design in Fig. 26. It has been taken 
care that the upper S 11S11 parameter is unaffected by the via loading, and the updated design 
parameters at stage-2 are l equals 17.5l = 17.5 mm, w equals 22w = 22 mm, w 1 equals 5w1 = 5 mm, w Subscript f Baseline equals 1.75wf = 1.75
mm, and l Subscript f Baseline equals 3.55lf = 3.55 mm. Finally, in stage-3 two L-shaped microstrip stub resonators 
are designed at either side of the via loading such that the Tx and Rx isolation 
is signiﬁcantly improved to negative 60.8−60.8 dB, without affecting the antenna reﬂection

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
139
Table 4 Antenna performance at various design stages 
Antenna 
f 0f0 (GHz) 
IBW (percent sign%) 
PRG (dBi) 
TE (percent sign%) 
Max. Isolation (dB) 
X-pol (dB) 
Stage-1 
5.9
5.59
3.9
32.3
2.1
>18 
Stage-2 
5.9
6.05
6.19
76.9
7.21
>18 
Stage-3 
5.9
2.1
6.65
89.5
60.8
>18 
f 0f0: Operating frequency, IBW: negative 10−10 dB Impedance bandwidth, PRG: Peak realized gain, and TE: 
Total efﬁciency (TE of a single antenna is computed while terminating the other antenna to a 
50-ohm match load) 
coefﬁcient response, see Fig. 26. Here, the loaded stub resonators provide band-stop 
characteristics which are explained in the subsequent discussion. Furthermore, the 
E-ﬁeld distribution in stage-3 depicts the signiﬁcant coupling reduction near zero 
between the Tx and RX ports. 
Table 4 shows the comparative study of various performance parameters at 
the three design stages. The Tx–Rx SIC or inter-element isolation is signiﬁcantly 
improved from 2.12.1 dB in stage-1 to 60.860.8 dB in stage-3. Furthermore, a gradual 
increase in antenna gain and efﬁciency from stage-1 to stage-3 is also observed 
due to reduced Tx–Rx interference. The physical dimension reduction of individual 
antennas due to via loading results in a decrease of impedance bandwidth from 
5.59 percent sign5.59% at stage-1 to 2.1 percent sign2.1% at stage-3 as shown in Table 4. 
To provide a better insight into the stop-band response of L-shaped stub 
resonators, an equivalent circuit model is provided in Fig. 27a. Here, we use parallel 
RCL tank circuits to effectively represent the microstrip antennas. To represent 
the coaxial probes for the Tx and Rx ports, we use upper L Subscript f Baseline 1Lf 1 and upper L Subscript f Baseline 2Lf 2, respectively. 
The upper L Subscript v Baseline 1Lv1 and upper L Subscript v Baseline 2Lv2 are used to represent the shorted vias. Finally, the LC tank 
circuit represents the L-shaped stub. The Keysight ADS software was used to verify 
the proposed equivalent circuit model. The lumped element circuit parameters are 
given in Fig. 27. Additionally, excellent agreement was observed when comparing 
the response generated by the ADS software with the EM simulation result, as 
demonstrated in Fig. 27b. Table 5 compares the proposed work with the other state-
of-the-art counterparts in the open literature. This highlights the distinctness of 
the proposed work having a planar geometry with a shared-radiator structure. It 
is noticeable from the table that the proposed design achieves better inter-element 
isolation compared to its counterparts without using any conventional techniques, 
such as beamforming/feeding networks, bulky hybrid couplers, or circulators. 
2.3.1 
Parametric Studies and Experimental Results 
In order to gain more understanding of the proposed FD antenna design, a 
parametric analysis for the following parameters: stub length (l Subscript sls), the gap between 
the stub and the antenna’s non-radiating edge (l Subscript dld), and the distance between two 
consecutive vias (p) are carried out. Refer to Fig. 28 for more details. It is evident 
that an increase in the value of l Subscript sls results in a reduction of the operating frequency 
and the corresponding stop-band response, as shown in Fig. 28a. This allows for

140
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 27 (a) Equivalent circuit model for the proposed SR-FD antenna (Design Stage: 3) and 
(b) comparison of S-parameter response of stage-3 SR-FD antenna using CST-MWS and ADS. 
(upper L Subscript f Baseline 1 Baseline equals upper L Subscript f Baseline 2 Baseline equals 0.44Lf 1 = Lf 2 = 0.44 nH, upper L 1 equals upper L 2 equals 0.101L1 = L2 = 0.101 nH, upper C 1 equals upper C 2 equals 0.101C1 = C2 = 0.101 nH, upper C 1 equals upper C 2 equals 8.1C1 = C2 = 8.1 pF, 
upper R 1 equals upper R 2 equals 83.05 upper OmegaR1 = R2 = 83.05Ω, upper L Subscript v Baseline 1 Baseline equals upper L Subscript v Baseline 2 Baseline equals 1Lv1 = Lv2 = 1 nH, upper L Subscript s Baseline equals 0.15Ls = 0.15 nH, upper C Subscript s Baseline equals 4.847Cs = 4.847 pF) 
tuning the stop-band response based on the required operating band, providing high 
inter-port isolation ﬂexibility. Furthermore, the value of l Subscript s Baseline equals 0.222 lamda 0 equals 11.325ls = 0.222λ0 = 11.325
mm is kept ﬁxed, and the l Subscript dld variation is performed. Figure 28b depicts that the 
impedance matching is unaffected by the variation of l Subscript dld; however, a small impact on 
the inter-port coupling is observed. Figure 28c illustrates the S-parameters response 
for changes in p. The response for p equals 1p = 1 and 1.51.5 mm is nearly identical, although 
choosing p equals 1p = 1 mm may result in a physical slot in the center line of the microstrip 
structure. A rise in p signiﬁcantly ampliﬁes the ﬁeld coupling from port number sign 1#1:Tx to 
number sign 2#2:Rx, eventually resulting in a degraded response. This is clearly illustrated in 
Fig. 28c. 
The prototype of the proposed SR-FD antenna is shown in Fig. 29. In Fig. 30a, 
the measured S-parameters (with an image of Agilent N5230A PNA in the inset) 
are presented along with the simulated values, which show good agreement. 
The simulated and measured peak-gain values’ frequency variation can be seen 
in Fig. 30b (far-ﬁeld measurement setup in the inset). One antenna of the FD 
system’s simulated and measured 2D radiation patterns (with the other antenna port 
terminated with a matched load) shows a peak gain of 6.516.51 dBi at 5.95.9 GHz (refer to 
Fig. 30b), along with an X-pol level below negative 18−18 dB (refer to Fig. 31).

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
141
Table 5 Comparison of proposed work with other structures available in the open literature 
[Ref]
f 0f0 (GHz)
BW (%)
Size (lamda cubedλ3)
SIC method
Polarization
Isolation (dB)
Planar
SR 
[35]
2.452.45
4.14.1
0.1060.106
BNF
Co-CP
greater than 47> 47
No
No 
[32]
2.442.44
4
0.030.03
QFN
Co-CP
greater than 40.6> 40.6
No
No 
[37]
2.452.45
11.711.7
0.0290.029
Near-ﬁeld cancellation
Co-LP
greater than 38> 38
No
No 
[38]
2.442.44
4.94.9
0.00250.0025
Decoupling resonator
Co-LP
greater than 20> 20
No
Yes 
[39]
6.296.29
1.61.6
0.0310.031
Two coupling path
Co-LP
greater than 40> 40
No
Yes 
[43]
3.53.5
11.411.4
0.0630.063
Mode cancellation
Co-LP
greater than 50> 50
No
Yes 
[44]
2.452.45
4.54.5
0.0070.007
DGS
Co-LP
greater than 25> 25
Yes
No 
[17]
5.855.85
3.413.41
0.0270.027
Asymmetry + DGS +NFDS
Co-LP
greater than 90> 90
No
No 
[31]
5.95.9
1.61.6
0.0340.034
Field conﬁnement
Co-LP
almost equals 90≈90
Yes
No 
Prop.
5.9
2.1
0.026
Vias and stub resonator
Co-LP
>60
Yes
Yes 
lamda 0λ0: free-space wavelength corresponding to f 0f0, BNF: Beamforming network, QNF: Quadrature feeding network, DGS: Defected ground structure, 
NFDS: Near-ﬁeld decoupling structure, and SR: Shared radiator

142
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
Fig. 28 Parametric study of Stage-IV design parameters: (a) l Subscript sls, (b) l Subscript dld, and  (c) p of Fig. 2 to 
observe the effect of parameter variation on FD antenna S-parameter (unit: mm) 
Fig. 29 Fabricated prototype 
of the proposed SR-FD 
antenna system of Fig. 1: (a) 
top view and (b) bottom view 
3 
Conclusion 
Full-duplex-enabled antenna technology is emerging research for future wireless 
communication. In this chapter, we address the fundamental problem in full-duplex 
(FD) antenna systems, i.e., self-interference (SI), by providing various antenna 
design techniques. Chronologically, we discuss the three different state-of-the-art 
FD antenna designs along with SIC based on design complexity, compactness, 
and integrability. The initial FD antenna design uses three different techniques 
such as design asymmetry, near-ﬁeld decoupling mechanism, and defective ground

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
143
Fig. 30 Frequency variation of simulated and measured (a) S-parameters and (b) gain with far-
ﬁeld measurement setup in anechoic chamber of proposed FD antenna system as shown in Fig. 1 
Fig. 31 Fabricated prototype of the proposed SR-FD antenna system of Fig. 1: (a) top view and 
(b) bottom view 
structure combinedly to suppress the SI level to almost equals 90≈90 dB. However, this is a stacked 
design with a multi-radiator system. The second design uses the ﬁeld conﬁnement 
technique with a defected ground structure to reduce SI to nearly 90 dB having 
planar geometry with multi-radiator operation. The ﬁnal design uses shorted vias 
with resonator loading, thereby surprising SI by 60 dB, where it is a planar design 
with shared-radiator operation. 
References 
1. 6G The Next Hyper-Connected Experience for All, White paper Samsung Research. [Online] 
Available: https://research.samsung.com/next-generation-communications 
2. H. Holma, S. Heikkinen, O.-A. Lehtinen, A. Toskala, Interference considerations for the time 
division duplex mode of the UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 
18(8), 1386–1393 (2000)

144
J. C. Dash and D. Sarkar
3. D. Kim, H. Lee, D. Hong, A survey of in-band full-duplex transmission: From the perspective 
of PHY and MAC layers. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 17(4), 2017–2046 (2015) 
4. A. Sabharwal, P. Schniter, D. Guo, D.W. Bliss, S. Rangarajan, R. Wichman, In-band full-duplex 
wireless: challenges and opportunities. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 32(9), 1637–1652 (2014) 
5. Z. Zhang, K. Long, A.V. Vasilakos, L. Hanzo, Full-duplex wireless communications: Chal-
lenges, solutions, and future research directions. Proc. IEEE 104(7), 1369–1409 (2016) 
6. H. Li et al., Self-interference cancellation enabling high-throughput short-reach wireless full-
duplex communication. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 17(10), 6475–6486 (2018). https://doi. 
org/10.1109/TWC.2018.2859985 
7. T. Fukui, K. Komatsu, Y. Miyaji, H. Uehara, Analog self-interference cancellation using 
auxiliary transmitter considering IQ imbalance and ampliﬁer nonlinearity. IEEE Trans. Wirel. 
Commun. 19(11), 7439–7452 (2020) 
8. H. Wang, Z. Wang, P. Heydari, An LO leakage suppression technique for blocker-tolerant 
wideband receivers with high-Q selectivity at RF input. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits 56(6), 
1682–1696 (2021) 
9. K.E. Kolodziej, J.G. Mcmichael, B.T. Perry, Multitap RF canceller for in-band full-duplex 
wireless communications. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 15(6), 4321–4334 (2016) 
10. D. Korpi et al., Full-duplex mobile device: pushing the limits. IEEE Commun. Mag. 54(9), 
80–87 (2016) 
11. T. Chen, J. Zhou, M.B. Dastjerdi, J. Diakonikolas, H. Krishnaswamy, G. Zussman, Demo 
abstract: Full-duplex with a compact frequency domain equalization-based RF canceller, in 
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, May 2017, pp. 972–973 
12. A. Nagulu, T. Chen, G. Zussman, H. Krishnaswamy, A single antenna full-duplex radio using 
a non-magnetic, CMOS circulator with in-built isolation tuning, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), May 2019, pp. 1–6 
13. A. Liu, W. Sheng, T. Riihonen, Per-antenna self-interference cancellation beamforming design 
for digital phased array. IEEE Signal Process. Lett. 29, 2442–2446 (2022) 
14. K. Komatsu, Y. Miyaji, H. Uehara, Basis function selection of frequency-domain hammerstein 
self-interference canceller for in-band full-duplex wireless communications. IEEE Trans. 
Wirel. Commun. 17(6), 3768–3780 (2018) 
15. C. Li, H. Zhao, F. Wu, Y. Tang, Digital self-interference cancellation with variable fractional 
delay FIR ﬁlter for full-duplex radios. IEEE Commun. Lett. 22(5), 1082–1085 (2018) 
16. S. Mori, K. Mizutani, H. Harada, A digital self-interference cancellation scheme for in-band 
full-duplex-applied 5G system and its software-deﬁned radio implementation. IEEE Open J. 
Veh. Technol. 4, 444–456 (2023) 
17. J.C. Dash, D. Sarkar, Microstrip patch antenna system with enhanced inter-port isolation for 
full-duplex/MIMO applications. IEEE Access 9, 156222–156228 (2021) 
18. K. Wu, C. Wei, X. Mei, Z. Zhang, Array-antenna decoupling surface. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 65(12), 6728–6738 (2017) 
19. J.C. Dash et al., Design of dual band patch antenna with bandwidth enhancement using 
complementary defected ground structure, in 2nd International Conference on Contemporary 
Computing and Informatics (IC3I), pp. 271–274 (2016) 
20. I. Bahl et al., Microstrip Lines and Slotlines (3rd edn.) (Artech, 2013) 
21. R. Anitha et al., Enhanced isolation with defected ground structure in MIMO antenna. Electron. 
Lett. 50(24), 1784–1786 (2014) 
22. A. Iqbal et al., Metamaterial-based highly isolated MIMO antenna for portable wireless 
applications. Electronics 7(10), 267 (2018) 
23. A. Iqbal et al., Modiﬁed U-shaped resonator as decoupling structure in MIMO antenna. 
Electronics 7(10), 267 (2020) 
24. M. Alsathet et al., Implementation of slotted meander-line resonators for isolation enhancement 
in microstrip patch antenna arrays. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 12, 15–18 (2013) 
25. K.S. Vishvaksenan, K. Mithra, R. Kalaiarasan, K.S. Raj, Mutual coupling reduction in 
microstrip patch antenna arrays using parallel coupled-line resonators. IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett. 16, 2146–2149 (2017)

Antennas for Full-Duplex Communication: State of the Art and Way Forward
145
26. T. Hassan, M.U. Khan, H. Attia, M.S. Sharawi, An FSS based correlation reduction technique 
for MIMO antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 66(9), 4900–4905 (2018) 
27. M. Kiani-Kharaji, H.R. Hassani, S. Mohammad-Ali-Nezhad, Wide scan phased array patch 
antenna with mutual coupling reduction. IET Microw. Antennas Propag. 12(12), 1932–1938 
(2018) 
28. A. Ghadimi, V. Nayyeri, M. Khanjarian, M. Soleimani, O.M. Ramahi, A systematic approach 
for mutual coupling reduction between microstrip antennas using pixelization and binary 
optimization. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 19(12), 2048–2052 (2020) 
29. G. Makar, N. Tran, T. Karacolak, A high-isolation monopole array with ring hybrid feeding 
structure for in-band full-duplex systems. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 16, 356–359 
(2017) 
30. J. Zhou et al., Integrated full duplex radios. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55(4), 142–151 (2017) 
31. J.C. Dash, D. Sarkar, A colinearly polarized full-duplex antenna with extremely high Tx–Rx 
isolation. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 21(12), 2387–2391 (2022) 
32. L.I. Basilio, M.A. Khayat, J.T. Williams, S.A. Long, The dependence of the input impedance on 
feed position of probe and microstrip line-fed patch antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
49(1), 45–47 (2001) 
33. C.A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2016) 
34. Intelligent transport systems (ITS) usage, report ITU-R M.2445-0, ITU-R (International 
Telecommunication Union, 2018). [Available Online] 
35. J. Ha, M.A. Elmansouri, P. Valale Prasannakumar, D.S. Filipovic, Monostatic co-polarized full-
duplex antenna with left- or right-hand circular polarization. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 
65(10), 5103–5111 (2017) 
36. D. Wu, Y. Sun, B. Wang, R. Lian, A compact, monostatic, co-circularly polarized simultaneous 
transmit and receive (STAR) antenna with high isolation. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 
19(7), 1127–1131 (2020) 
37. D. Wu, Y. Zang, H. Luyen, M. Li, N. Behdad, A compact, low-proﬁle simultaneous transmit 
and receive antenna with monopole-like radiation characteristics. IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett. 18(4), 611–615 (2019) 
38. Y. He, Y. Li, Compact co-linearly polarized microstrip antenna with fence-strip resonator 
loading for in-band full-duplex systems. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 69(11), 7125–7133 
(2021) 
39. W. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Design of a stacked co-polarized full-duplex antenna with 
broadside radiation. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 69(11), 7111–7118 (2021) 
40. D. Ahn, J.S. Park, C.S. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Qian, T. Itoh, A design of the low-pass ﬁlter using 
the novel microstrip defected ground structure. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 49(1), 
86–93 (2001) 
41. C.S. Kim, J.S. Park, D. Ahn, J.B. Lim, A novel 1-D periodic defected ground structure for 
planar circuits. IEEE Microwave Guid. Wave Lett. 10(4), 131–133 (2000) 
42. J.C. Dash, D. Sarkar, A co-linearly polarized shared radiator-based full-duplex antenna with 
high Tx-Rx isolation using vias and stub resonator. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs 
70(7), 2400–2404 (2023) 
43. Y.-Z. Liang, F.-C. Chen, W.-F. Zeng, Q.-X. Chu, Design of self-decoupling dielectric resonator 
antenna with shared radiator. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TAP.2022.3217118 
44. K.  Kumari, M. Saikia,  R.K.  Jaiswal,  S.  Malik, K.V. Srivastava,  A compact, low-proﬁle shorted  
TM 1/2,0 mode planar copolarized microstrip antenna for full-duplex systems. IEEE Antennas 
Wireless Propag. Lett. 21(9), 1887–1891 (2022)

Understanding Metasurface-Based 
Microwave Absorbers Using 
Transmission Line Theory 
Debdeep Sarkar 
1 
A Brief Historical Perspective on Microwave Absorbers 
and Anechoic Chambers 
Electromagnetic (EM) wave absorbers and anechoic chambers are deployed by 
wireless system designers for measurement of a variety of antenna parameters 
like: impedance, gain, beamwidth, cross-polarization levels, radiation patterns, 
polarization states, monostatic and bistatic Radar cross sections, effective radiated 
power, boresight alignment, tracking error, etc. The term “Anechoic” means “free 
from echo,” where the echo can be of acoustic waves (e.g., sound waves) as well 
as EM waves (e.g., radio frequency signals). Anechoic chambers minimize the 
reﬂections of incident EM radiation through absorption as well as signiﬁcantly 
reduce the external spurious EM interferences (EMI). Such chambers typically 
have minimum and maximum working frequencies around 30 MHz and 100 GHz, 
respectively. In the test region, such chambers can possess reﬂection levels as low 
as negative 70−70 dB and high shielding isolation around 140 dB. 
As discussed in [1], the ﬁrst patented absorber using quarter-wavelength res-
onance concept around 2 GHz region was realized by Naamlooze Vennootschap 
Machinerieen in Netherlands, long back in 1936. During World War-II, more 
concerted efforts to achieve practical useful absorbers were carried out by both 
Germany and the USA. It is interesting to point out that, while the German research 
was focused on design of microwave absorbers for camouﬂaging Radars, the US 
research was more directed towards synthesis of absorbers for improvement of 
Radar performance by minimizing interfering reﬂections [1]. The German project 
bearing the code name “Schormteinfeger” (translating to “chimney sweep”) devel-
D. Sarkar (✉) 
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India 
e-mail: debdeep@iisc.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_10
147

148
D. Sarkar
oped multiple operational material for usage in camouﬂaging of submarine snorkels 
and periscopes. Among these methodologies, one was the “Jaumann” absorbers, 
which were rigid 3-inch thick broad-band material, constituted by alternate layers of 
rigid plastic and resistive sheets, having the ability to remain stable even after long 
exposures in submerged submarine environment. Such Jaumann absorbing layers 
effectively provided a reﬂection coefﬁcient less than negative 20−20 dB over the 2 hyphen hyphen 152–15 GHz 
frequency range of about 2 hyphen hyphen 152–15 GHz, for incident angles near the normal. During 
the period of 1941 hyphen hyphen 19451941–1945, the US project led by Halpern at the Radiation Laboratory 
led to the evolution of Halpern-anti-radar-paint (HARP) materials, which can be 
more accurately described as rubber sheets rather than “paints” [1]. In addition to 
the HARP materials, design of the popular Salisbury screen absorber also came 
into the picture during this period. Salisbury showed that an efﬁcient resonant 
absorber could be achieved by locating a suitable resistive sheet at a distance of 
quarter-wavelength from a reﬂeding surface. Using this Salisbury screen concept in 
a practical scenario, a US based Rubber company spearheaded the manufacture of 
special resistive cloth named as “Uskon Cloth.” For more discussions on the history 
of microwave absorbers, one must refer to [1]. 
When compared to other applications, more absorbers are deployed in Anechoic 
Chambers in modern times [2–4]. Figure 1 demonstrates the usage of pyramidal 
absorbers or Radar Absorbent Materials (RAMs) inside a representative Anechoic 
chamber. Typically, such pyramidal RAMs are made of rubberized foam material 
impregnated with controlled mixtures of carbon and iron. To be sufﬁciently lossy, 
RAM can be neither a good electrical conductor nor a good electrical insulator, as 
neither type actually absorbs any incident EM power. Typically, there is a grey paint 
that helps in protection of such delicate Pyramidal RAMs. In the GHz frequency 
range, ray-optical methods provide computationally efﬁcient modeling approaches 
to evaluate the wave propagation in such electrically very large chambers. However, 
Fig. 1 A photograph of Radar Cross Section (RCS) measurement setup inside Anechoic Chamber 
(Courtesy: Microwave Lab, Dept. of ECE, IISc Bangalore)

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
149
while pyramidal RAMs are extremely useful for building Anechoic chambers, many 
other applications demand the use of electrically thin and ﬂat absorbing layers for 
the RCS reduction of structures. Hence, one needs to investigate the design of such 
thin EM absorbing layers, fundamentally motivated from the Salisbury screen and 
Jaumann layer principles. 
2 
Salisbury Screen and Its Analysis Using Plane Waves and 
Transmission Line Theory 
As discussed in the previous section, a number of techniques have been proposed 
in the quest of controlling the reﬂection of EM waves from conducting bodies. 
The Salisbury screen is one such interesting solution, consisting of a thin resistive 
sheet mounted a quarter-wavelength above a conductor backing plate (see Fig. 2). 
In [5], the author provides insightful analytical treatment of multiple electric and 
magnetic Salisbury screens, which complements the computer code based trial-and-
error approach for efﬁcient design of Salisbury screens. To provide more insights 
into the Salisbury screen performance, we consider the case of a multi-layered 
media, illuminated by normally incident uniform plane wave from free-space 
(Fig. 3). In front of the semi-inﬁnitely extended perfect electrical conductor (PEC) 
medium, we have two layers comprising of medium-1 (permittivity epsilon 1ε1, permeability 
mu 1μ1, thickness h) and medium-2 (permittivity epsilon 2ε2, permeability mu 2μ2, thickness d), 
respectively (Fig. 3). We assume both medium to be non-magnetic, implying mu 1 equals mu 2 equals mu 0μ1 =
μ2 = μ0. Moreover, we consider that medium-1 is purely dielectric, whereas 
medium-2 has ﬁnite conductivity of sigma 2σ2. 
The reﬂection coefﬁcient upper Gamma Subscript i n𝚪in for the EM wave with the left-interface can be 
computed from plane wave and transmission line theory as [6]: 
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of a Salisbury Screen (inspired from [5])

150
D. Sarkar
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of 
a semi-inﬁnite multi-layered 
media illuminated by 
normally incident plane EM 
wave from free-space 
upper Gamma Subscript i n Baseline equals StartFraction eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline minus eta 0 Over eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline plus eta 0 EndFraction comma𝚪in = ηin,2 −η0
ηin,2 + η0
,
(1) 
where eta 0 equals StartRoot mu 0 divided by epsilon 0 EndRootη0 = √μ0/ε0 is the intrinsic impedance of free-space, and eta Subscript i n comma 2ηin,2 is the input 
impedance for medium-2 backed by the medium-1 and PEC media, given by: 
eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline equals eta 2 left bracket StartFraction eta Subscript i n comma 1 Baseline plus j eta 2 tangent k 2 d Over eta 2 plus j eta Subscript i n comma 1 Baseline tangent k 2 d EndFraction right bracket periodηin,2 = η2
⎾ηin,1 + jη2 tan k2d
η2 + jηin,1 tan k2d
⏋
.
(2) 
Here the quantities eta 2η2 and k 2k2, respectively, denote the intrinsic impedance and 
complex propagation constant for medium-2, given by: 
eta 2 equals StartRoot mu 0 divided by epsilon Subscript c Baseline 2 Baseline EndRoot and k 2 equals omega StartRoot mu 0 epsilon Subscript c Baseline 2 Baseline EndRoot commaη2 =
√
μ0/εc2 and k2 = ω√μ0εc2,
(3) 
where epsilon Subscript c Baseline 2εc2 is the complex permittivity of medium-2: 
epsilon Subscript c Baseline 2 Baseline equals epsilon 0 epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline plus StartFraction sigma 2 Over j omega EndFraction periodεc2 = ε0εr2 + σ2
jω.
(4) 
Furthermore, eta Subscript i n comma 1ηin,1 represents the input impedance experienced at the left-interface 
of medium-1 backed by PEC, which can be expressed as: 
eta Subscript i n comma 1 Baseline equals eta 1 left bracket StartFraction eta Subscript upper L Baseline plus j eta 1 tangent k 1 h Over eta 1 plus j eta Subscript upper L Baseline tangent k 1 h EndFraction right bracket commaηin,1 = η1
⎾ηL + jη1 tan k1h
η1 + jηL tan k1h
⏋
,
(5) 
where eta 1η1 and k 1k1 represent the intrinsic impedance and complex propagation 
constant for medium-1, respectively: 
eta 1 equals StartRoot mu 0 divided by epsilon 1 EndRoot and k 1 equals omega StartRoot mu 0 epsilon 1 EndRoot periodη1 =
√
μ0/ε1 and k1 = ω√μ0ε1.
(6)

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
151
Since the intrinsic impedance for the PEC medium is zero (i.e., eta Subscript upper L Baseline equals 0ηL = 0), the above 
expression for eta Subscript i n comma 1ηin,1 reduces to: 
eta Subscript i n comma 1 Baseline equals j eta 1 tangent k 1 hηin,1 = jη1 tan k1h
(7) 
Once upper Gamma Subscript i n𝚪in is obtained from (1), for given values of epsilon 1ε1, epsilon 2ε2, sigma 2σ2, d and h, we can 
compute the absorption coefﬁcient A as: 
upper A equals 1 minus StartAbsoluteValue upper Gamma Subscript i n Baseline EndAbsoluteValue squared periodA = 1 −|𝚪in|2.
(8) 
Note that, for semi-inﬁnitely extended conductor media, there would be no trans-
mission coefﬁcient for consideration. 
Considering the chosen set of parameters (h comma d comma epsilon Subscript r Baseline 1 Baseline comma epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baselineh, d, εr1, εr2 and sigma 1σ1), Fig. 4 represents 
the variation of upper R Subscript i n Baseline equals Re left parenthesis eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline right parenthesisRin = Re
(
ηin,2
)
and upper X Subscript i n Baseline equals Im left parenthesis eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline right parenthesisXin = Im
(
ηin,2
)
over the frequency range of 
1 hyphen hyphen 111–11 GHz, demonstrating the shunt resonance (i.e., upper X Subscript i n Baseline equals 0Xin = 0) behavior near 6 GHz. 
Figure 5 further showcase that the presence of a thin conductive layer leads to 
reduction of reﬂection coefﬁcient (and enhancement of absorption) over a narrow 
bandwidth near the resonance frequency. To investigate the impact of various 
Fig. 4 Frequency variation 
of normalized eta Subscript i n comma 2ηin,2 for the 
conﬁguration of Fig. 3 with 
h equals 3h = 3 mm, epsilon Subscript r Baseline 1 Baseline equals 9εr1 = 9, d equals 1d = 1
mm, epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 12εr2 = 12, sigma 2 equals 3σ2 = 3 S/m. 
Here upper R Subscript i n Baseline equals Re left parenthesis eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline right parenthesisRin = Re
(
ηin,2
)
and 
upper X Subscript i n Baseline equals Im left parenthesis eta Subscript i n comma 2 Baseline right parenthesisXin = Im
(
ηin,2
)
Fig. 5 For the conﬁguration of Fig. 3 with h equals 3h = 3 mm, epsilon Subscript r Baseline 1 Baseline equals 9εr1 = 9, d equals 1d = 1 mm, epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 12εr2 = 12, sigma 2 equals 3σ2 = 3 S/m: 
(a) reﬂection coefﬁcient 20 log Subscript 10 Baseline StartAbsoluteValue upper Gamma Subscript i n Baseline EndAbsoluteValue20 log10 |𝚪in| (in dB) and (b) absorption coefﬁcient A (in linear scale)

152
D. Sarkar
Fig. 6 Simulated 2D 
distribution of absorption 
coefﬁcient A for the 
conﬁguration of Fig. 3 over 
the frequency range of 1 hyphen hyphen 111–11
GHz and sigma 2σ2-range from 
0.1 hyphen hyphen 200.1–20 S/m, considering: (a) 
h equals 2h = 2 mm, (b) h equals 3h = 3 mm, 
and (c) h equals 4h = 4 mm. Rest of the 
parameters are kept as 
epsilon Subscript r Baseline 1 Baseline equals 9εr1 = 9, d equals 1d = 1 mm, epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 12εr2 = 12
parameters of the multi-layered Salisbury screen inspired conﬁguration, we generate 
2D plots of absorption coefﬁcient with respect to frequency and conductivity values. 
Figure 6 shows that for increase in h, one shifts the absorption band to in lower 
frequency ranges. Moreover, Fig. 7 suggests that high dielectric constant and low 
thickness for medium-2 can ensure same absorption band for a wide range of 
conductivity values.

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
153
Fig. 7 Simulated 2D 
distribution of absorption 
coefﬁcient A for the 
conﬁguration of Fig. 3 over 
the frequency range of 1 hyphen hyphen 111–11
GHz and sigma 2σ2-range from 
0.1 hyphen hyphen 200.1–20 S/m, considering: (a) 
d equals 2d = 2 mm and epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 6εr2 = 6, (b) 
d equals 1d = 1 mm and epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 12εr2 = 12, (c) 
d equals 0.5d = 0.5 mm and epsilon Subscript r Baseline 2 Baseline equals 24εr2 = 24. 
Rest of the parameters are 
kept as epsilon Subscript r Baseline 1 Baseline equals 9εr1 = 9, h equals 3h = 3 mm 
3 
Proﬁle Reduction of Salisbury Screen Using Metasurfaces 
3.1 
Concept of Jaumann Absorbers 
As analyzed in the previous section, the classic Salisbury screen is probably the 
simplest of all absorbers (Fig. 2). In case of Salisbury screens, one places the 
resistive sheet a quarter-wavelength away from the metallic plate in order to be 
at the location with the maximum electric ﬁeld. But this constraint on distance to 
be lamda divided by 4λ/4 makes the combined conﬁguration electrically thick, rendering it unsuitable 
for many applications. Moreover, while one can achieve a single reﬂection-zero 
to occur at a desired operating frequency of Salisbury screen, the StartAbsoluteValue upper Gamma Subscript i n Baseline EndAbsoluteValue less than negative 20|𝚪in| < −20

154
D. Sarkar
Fig. 8 (a) Schematic diagram of two-sheet Jaumann Absorbers for wideband operation. (b) 
Representative frequency variation of reﬂection coefﬁcient magnitude for such Jaumann absorbers 
dB bandwidth of such an absorber is very low (typically less than 20 percent sign< 20%). To enhance 
the bandwidth, one generally uses the concept of adding additional sheets, which 
leads to the formation of Jaumann absorber [7]. Furthermore, it is possible to add 
some capacitive reactance in series alongside the resistive components, such that one 
achieve bandwidth expansion with reduced inter-sheet spacing [7]. It is discussed in 
[7] that sheets equipped with shunt capacitive reactances can also reduce the inter-
sheet spacing, but at the expense of shrinked absorption bandwidth. 
Figure 8 demonstrates the conﬁguration of an optimum Jaumann absorber 
designed using a simple two-sheet conﬁguration, where both sheets have complex 
(capacitive) impedances [7]. Using the well-known “double-notch” concept, the 
authors demonstrate a StartAbsoluteValue upper Gamma Subscript i n Baseline EndAbsoluteValue less than negative 20|𝚪in| < −20 dB bandwidth exceeding 100 percent sign100% using this two-
sheet Jaumann absorber. 
3.2 
Synthesizing Electrically Thin Absorbers Using 
High-Impedance Metasurfaces 
In the recent past, space-time metamaterials and metasurfaces have gained sig-
niﬁcant popularity for their diverse application areas ranging from antennas, 
frequency-selective surface (FSS) Radomes, superlenses to non-reciprocal circuits 
and reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces (RIS) [8–18]. Spatial metamaterials and 
metasurfaces are generally constructed by a periodic array of sub-wavelength unit-
cells, so that “effective homogeneity” condition is satisﬁed [19–21]. Historically 
speaking, one of the reasons behind the immense popularity of metamaterials is the 
negative refraction, which does not occur in “naturally” synthesized materials [19– 
21]. This negative refraction in metamaterials, which leads to “reversal of Snell’s 
law” and paves the way for Superlens design, is intrinsically connected to the 
of backward waves having anti-parallel group and phase-velocity (or oppositely 
pointed Poynting vector and propagation vector) [19]. While backward waves

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
155
can exist in different type of artiﬁcially engineered structures, their experimental 
veriﬁcation in effectively homogeneous negative-index metamaterial medium was 
ﬁrst carried out only couple of decades back, using the thin-wire(TW)-split ring 
resonator (SRR) arrays [19]. After that, researchers also demonstrated the backward 
wave phenomena in Composite Right Left Handed Transmission Lines (CRLH TL) 
[19–21]. Depending upon the unit-cell lumped parameters, the CRLH TLs can 
exhibit stop bands, which can be extended for 2D CRLH TL architectures. Note 
that, electromagnetic bandgap (EBG) structures, which are visually similar to the 2D 
CRLH TL conﬁgurations, can be realized by strategic placement of unit-cells (e.g., 
mushroom type conﬁgurations) to provide a stop-band for the surface-wave modes 
[19–21]. EBG metasurfaces have frequency dependent surface impedance features, 
which can be controlled by changing the properties (e.g., shape, size, lumped 
component loading) of the constituent sub-wavelength unit-cells. This opens up 
the possibility of synthesizing high-impedance surfaces (HIS) or artiﬁcial magnetic 
conductors (AMCs) [19–21]. 
Figure 9 illustrates the concept of traditional electric conductor and artiﬁcial 
magnetic conductors. In Fig. 9a, we show a PEC plate which provides a reﬂection 
coefﬁcient upper Gamma equals negative 1𝚪= −1 [6]. Figure 9b demonstrates a two-dimensional (2D) array 
of several small ﬂat inclusions (here, sub-wavelength square-shaped microstrip 
patches) distributed periodically near a ﬂat surface. Such a 2D array of sub-
wavelength patches can indeed behave as an frequency-selective surface (FSS) for 
an interacting incident EM wave interacts with it. One can electromagnetically 
characterize the 2D patch array as an anisotropic impedance tensor, whose values 
and speciﬁc forms are in general dependant on factors like frequency, incidence 
angle for impinging EM wave, shape, density, and size of the unit-cells (e.g., 
a comma b comma g comma wa, b, g, w etc for Fig. 9b). Now, we can place this FSS (i.e., 2D array of square 
Fig. 9 Schematic diagrams of: (a) Perfect electric conductor plate having reﬂection coefﬁcient 
upper Gamma equals negative 1𝚪= −1, (b) High impedance Metasurface conﬁguration based on array of sub-wavelength square 
patches, displaying artiﬁcial magnetic conductor characteristics with upper Gamma equals plus 1𝚪= +1

156
D. Sarkar
patches) in front of a highly conductive metallic plate at a distance h, which is 
assumed to be much smaller than the operating wavelength (i.e., h much less than lamdah ⪡λ)), along 
with a dielectric layer sandwiched between the FSS and the metal plate (Fig. 3b). 
Using transmission line theory, one can calculate the surface impedance at the top 
surface of this combined metasurface layer comprising of FSS, dielectric spacer and 
a ground plane [22]. It is showcased in [22] that one can realize the equivalent shunt 
impedance to attain very high values in a desired frequency range. This implies that 
the top-interface of the metasurface would have a reﬂectivity of upper Gamma equals plus 1𝚪= +1. 
Now, let us assume that a normally incident plane wave impinges upon this 
metasurface. Since upper Gamma equals plus 1𝚪= +1, the total tangential component of the electric ﬁeld 
and of the magnetic ﬁeld on the top of this metasurface are, respectively, upper E Subscript t Superscript total Baseline almost equals 2 upper E Subscript t Superscript incidentEtotal
t
≈
2Eincident
t
and upper H Subscript t Superscript total Baseline almost equals 0H total
t
≈0, indicating that the metasurface will operate like a 
“magnetic wall.” Thus, unlike the case of a simple metallic ground plane (i.e., 
electric wall), here the tangential component of the total electric ﬁeld becomes 
signiﬁcant on the top surface. Therefore, if we can place a thin layer of resistive 
sheet on top of such high impedance metasurface, the high electric ﬁeld intensity 
at the top layer would cause part of the incident energy to be dissipated on this 
resistive sheet. In this way, one can demonstrate by transmission line theory that 
the reﬂection coefﬁcient can be signiﬁcantly reduced. Clearly, it is possible to 
extend this argument for the scenarios with oblique incidence. This opens up the 
possibilities of reduction the reﬂection coefﬁcient as well as the scattering cross 
section of such structures [22, 23]. 
3.3 
Equivalent Circuit Model for Metasurface Absorbers 
In [23], the authors describe a possible realization of metasurface-based microwave 
absorber around 2.452.45 GHz, where lumped resistors between the sub-wavelength 
metallic patches are used instead of resistive screens (see Fig. 10). Note that, the 
impedance of such a lossy FSS screen on the top layer can be represented through a 
series RLC circuit [24]: 
upper Z Subscript upper F upper S upper S Baseline equals upper R plus j omega upper L plus StartFraction 1 Over j omega upper C EndFraction equals upper R minus j left parenthesis StartFraction 1 minus omega squared upper L upper C Over omega upper C EndFraction right parenthesis periodZFSS = R + jωL +
1
jωC = R −j
⎛1 −ω2LC
ωC
⎞
.
(9) 
The surface impedance of the metasurface absorber can be calculated by considering 
the parallel connection between the FSS impedance and the surface impedance of 
thin grounded dielectric slab denoted by upper Z Subscript dZd using the relation: 
upper Z Subscript upper R Baseline equals StartFraction upper Z Subscript d Baseline upper Z Subscript upper F upper S upper S Baseline Over upper Z Subscript d Baseline plus upper Z Subscript upper F upper S upper S Baseline EndFraction commaZR =
ZdZFSS
Zd + ZFSS
,
(10) 
where upper Z Subscript dZd can be evaluated as: 
upper Z Subscript d Baseline equals j upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline tangent k Subscript n Baseline d periodZd = jZT E,T M
m
tan knd.
(11)

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
157
Fig. 10 Artiﬁcial magnetic conductor with lumped resistor loading for metasurface absorber 
applications (inspired from [23]) along with its equivalent circuit model [24] 
Here upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper EZT E
m
and upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper MZT M
m
, the characteristic impedances of the slab for TE and TM 
polarization, are computed via the following equations: 
upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E Baseline equals StartFraction omega mu Subscript r Baseline mu 0 Over k Subscript n Baseline EndFraction and upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper M Baseline equals StartFraction k Subscript n Baseline Over omega epsilon Subscript r Baseline epsilon 0 EndFraction commaZT E
m
= ωμrμ0
kn
and ZT M
m
=
kn
ωεrε0
,
(12) 
with k Subscript nkn representing the propagation constant along the normal direction of the slab 
as: 
k Subscript n Baseline equals StartRoot k squared minus k Subscript t Superscript 2 Baseline EndRoot periodkn =
/
k2 −k2t .
(13) 
Here k Subscript t Baseline equals k 0 sine thetakt = k0 sin θ, with thetaθ being the incidence angle of the incoming wave with 
respect to the normal. Using analytical simpliﬁcations, one can ﬁnd out the real and 
the imaginary parts of the input impedance upper Z Subscript upper RZR as: 
Re StartSet upper Z Subscript upper R Baseline EndSet equals StartFraction upper R upper Z Subscript d Superscript 2 Baseline Over left bracket StartFraction 1 minus omega squared upper L upper C Over omega upper C EndFraction minus upper Z Subscript d Baseline right bracket squared plus upper R squared EndFractionRe {ZR} =
RZ2
d
⎾
1−ω2LC
ωC
−Zd
⏋2
+ R2
(14) 
Im StartSet upper Z Subscript upper R Baseline EndSet equals StartStartFraction left bracket minus omega upper L upper Z Subscript d Baseline plus StartFraction upper Z Subscript d Baseline Over omega upper C EndFraction right bracket dot left bracket StartFraction 1 minus omega squared upper L upper C Over omega upper C EndFraction minus upper Z Subscript d Baseline right bracket plus upper R squared upper Z Subscript d Baseline OverOver left bracket StartFraction 1 minus omega squared upper L upper C Over omega upper C EndFraction minus upper Z Subscript d Baseline right bracket squared plus upper R squared EndEndFraction periodIm {ZR} =
⎾
−ωLZd + Zd
ωC
⏋
·
⎾
1−ω2LC
ωC
−Zd
⏋
+ R2Zd
⎾
1−ω2LC
ωC
−Zd
⏋2
+ R2
.
(15) 
When the inductive impedance of the substrate upper Z Subscript dZd and the imaginary part of the FSS 
impedance left parenthesis 1 minus omega squared upper L upper C right parenthesis divided by omega upper C(1−ω2LC)/ωC become same, the parallel circuit resonates, making the

158
D. Sarkar
impedance purely real for thin substrates. In that case, we obtain: 
Re StartSet upper Z Subscript upper R Baseline EndSet equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline right parenthesis squared tangent squared k Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline d Over upper R EndFraction periodRe {ZR} =
⎛
ZT E,T M
m
⎞2
tan2 kT E,T M
m
d
R
.
(16) 
To absorb the incoming signal, Re StartSet upper Z Subscript upper R Baseline EndSetRe {ZR} should match the free-space impedance eta 0η0, 
which leads to the following expression of optimal FSS resistance upper R Subscript o p tRopt as: 
upper R Subscript o p t Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis upper Z Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline right parenthesis squared tangent squared k Subscript m Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline d Over eta 0 Superscript upper T upper E comma upper T upper M Baseline EndFraction periodRopt =
⎛
ZT E,T M
m
⎞2
tan2 kT E,T M
m
d
ηT E,T M
0
.
(17) 
The equation (17) highlights that upper R Subscript o p tRopt is strongly dependent on substrate permittiv-
ity as well as thickness. Now, to derive the optimal surface resistance upper R Subscript o p tRopt from the 
equivalent circuit, one needs to formulate a relation between the lumped resistance 
of the equivalent circuit and the surface resistance of the FSS. Ideally, upper R Subscript o p tRopt should 
be exactly equal to the resistance of the coating resistive ink, if it were uniform. 
However, for the FSS the coating resistive ink or lumped resistor locations can not be 
treated as uniform, which implies that upper R Subscript o p tRopt will also dependent on unit-cell topology 
and shape, besides being controlled via substrate dielectric constant and thickness. 
More details on the design of equivalent circuit model of metasurface absorbers and 
their extension into wideband conﬁgurations are provided in [24–27]. 
4 
RCS Reduction Using Metasurface Absorbers 
As discussed earlier in Sect. 3.2, electrically thin metasurface-based absorbing 
screens can potentially reduce the scattering cross section compared to a conducting 
screen of same dimension. In [28–31], various metasurface-assisted techniques 
(EM wave absorption, scattering cancellation, polarization conversion, etc.) for 
narrowband as well as wideband radar cross section (RCS) reduction are discussed. 
In this section, we demonstrate this RCS reduction using metasurface absorbers, 
using full-wave simulations via CST Microwave Studio. 
For the RCS analysis, we choose the printed square loop-based narrowband meta-
surface absorber as discussed in [26]. The dimensions for the four-fold symmetric 
polarization-insensitive unit-cell are provided in the caption of Fig. 11. The substrate 
chosen is FR4-Epoxy with epsilon Subscript r Baseline equals 4.25εr = 4.25 and tangent delta equals 0.02tan δ = 0.02. Using the periodic boundary 
condition in CST-MWS we carry out the simulation of S-parameters over the 
frequency range of 5 hyphen hyphen 75–7 GHz ﬁrst, considering orthogonal polarization states (Mode-
1 and Mode-2 as indicated in Fig. 11b). Figure 12 corroborates the results in [26], 
indicating that co-polar reﬂection coefﬁcient has dipped to negative 13.18−13.18 dB around 6.16.1
GHz, indicating the existence of narrowband absorption around it. Figure 12 further 
conﬁrms that negligible polarization conversion is occurring between mode-1 to

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
159
Fig. 11 (a) Schematic 
diagram of the square-loop 
unit-cell with dimensional 
parameters with a equals 7.5a = 7.5 mm, 
w equals 0.2w = 0.2 mm, p equals 10p = 10 mm 
and h equals 1h = 1 mm chosen same 
as those in [26]. (b) 
Orthogonal polarization states 
considered for excitation of 
the unit-cell array by incident 
EM wave 
Fig. 12 Frequency variation 
of inter-modal S-parameter 
magnitude, demonstrating 
possible mode-conversion 
using the square-loop 
unit-cell based metasurface 
(see Fig. 11) 
mode-2, as the simulated transmission coefﬁcient is only negative 65.81−65.81 dB in magnitude 
at 6.16.1 GHz. 
Next we evaluate the RCS characteristics for a ﬁnite metasurface structure 
consisting of square-loop arrays. It is well-known that RCS or sigma left parenthesis theta comma phi right parenthesisσ(θ, φ) provides

160
D. Sarkar
a measure of the scattering properties of a speciﬁc radar target, and is computed by 
the formula: 
sigma left parenthesis theta comma phi right parenthesis equals 4 pi StartFraction Power Radiated Per Unit Solid Angle Over Irradiance due to incoming Plane Wave EndFractionσ(θ, φ) = 4π Power Radiated Per Unit Solid Angle
Irradiance due to incoming Plane Wave
(18) 
Note that, here “irradiance” stands for incoming power per unit area. RCS generally 
depends on the incident wave properties like polarization, propagation angle (theta comma phiθ, φ), 
operation frequency, as well as the target material characteristics, shape, size, etc. 
Radar engineers generally use the notions of “monostatic RCS” and “bistatic 
RCS” which differ with respect to the relative alignment of excitation and probe 
direction. For a monostatic RCS, the probe direction for the scattered radiation is 
always same with the propagation direction of the incoming exciting plane wave. 
Therefore, monostatic RCS computation requires a sweep of the exciting plane 
wave. Each recorded data point quantiﬁes the probability of backscattering by the 
target for an excitation of a plane wave from the respective direction. On the other 
hand for the bistatic RCS, the exciting plane wave direction is ﬁxed and probes the 
probability of scattering in all other direction (not only backscattering). To calculate 
a bistatic RCS using CST-MWs, one must deﬁne a farﬁeld/RCS monitor as well 
as a ﬁxed plane wave excitation. The total RCS is typically deﬁned as the ratio of 
the scattered power to the intensity of the incident plane wave. For our case, we 
evaluate the monostatic RCS at the resonance frequency for the ﬁnite sized absorber 
conﬁguration in Fig. 13 comprising of 12 times 1212 × 12 array of square-loop unit-cells. 
Figures 14 and 15 highlight that the use of absorptive metasurface has signiﬁcantly 
reduced the RCS by more than 15 dB around the broadside direction. Figure 15 
Fig. 13 Schematic diagram of an upper N times upper NN × N array (upper N equals 12N = 12) of square-loop unit-cells (shown in 
Zoomed view) placed along the xy-plane, with a equals 7.5a = 7.5 mm, w equals 0.2w = 0.2 mm, p equals 12.5p = 12.5 mm 
and h equals 1h = 1 mm. Note that, the entire metasurface occupies a physical area of upper L Subscript g Baseline 2 Baseline times upper L Subscript g Baseline 2Lg2 × Lg2, where  
upper L Subscript g Baseline 2 Baseline equals upper N pLg2 = Np

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
161
Fig. 14 Simulated angular RCS pattern at the resonance frequency for: (a) only PEC plate (i.e., 
no square-loop array), (b) absorbing metasurface (i.e., with square-loop array) as shown in Fig. 13 
Fig. 15 Variation of 
simulated RCS at the 
resonance frequency with 
respect to thetaθ for phi equals 0 Superscript oφ = 0o, 
considering only PEC plate 
(i.e., no square-loop array) 
along with absorbing 
metasurface (i.e., with 
square-loop array)

162
D. Sarkar
further highlights that the RCS reduction performance is reasonably stable for a 
wide angular range. 
5 
Conclusion 
In this chapter, we highlight the usage of artiﬁcially engineered metasurfaces with 
judiciously tailored surface impedance values for EM absorption and consequent 
RCS reduction of targets. One must note here that this idea of realizing absorptive 
metasurfaces via a combined high impedance metasurface with a resistive layer 
on top [22, 23], is simply the extension from single-screen Salisbury screens. 
However, these metasurface absorbers provide additional advantage in terms of 
the electrical proﬁle miniaturization and weight reduction of absorbing layers. 
Using Transmission line theory, we demonstrate the possibility of using equiv-
alent circuit models for prediction of Metasurface absorber performance. Using 
multi-layered metasurface-based absorbing screens, it is possible to enhance the 
operational bandwidth to cover the Radar bands from 2 hyphen hyphen 182–18 GHz. Furthermore, 
use of polarization-insensitive unit-cells can help to achieve stable RCS reduction 
performance over a wide range of incidence angles. 
References 
1. W. Emerson, Electromagnetic wave absorbers and anechoic chambers through the years. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag. 21(4), 484–490 (1973) 
2. W. Sun, K. Liu, C. Balanis, Analysis of singly and doubly periodic absorbers by frequency-
domain ﬁnite difference method. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 44(6), 798–805 (1996) 
3. V. Rodriguez, Basic rules for indoor anechoic chamber design. IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag. 
58(6), 82–93 (2016) 
4. Q. Xu, Y. Huang, X. Zhu, L. Xing, P. Duxbury, J. Noonan, Building a better anechoic chamber: 
a geometric optics-based systematic solution, simulated and veriﬁed. IEEE Antennas Propag. 
Mag. 58(2), 94–119 (2016) 
5. R.L. Fante, M.T. McCormack, Reﬂection properties of the Salisbury screen. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 36(10), 1443–1454 (1988) 
6. D.K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics (2nd edn.) (Pearson Education Asia Ltd, 2006) 
7. E.F. Knott, C.D. Lunden, The two-sheet capacitive Jaumann absorber. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 43(11), 1339–1343 (1995) 
8. J.B. Pendry, A.J. Holden, W.J. Stewart, I. Youngs, Extremely low frequency plasmons in 
metallic mesostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76(25), 4773–4776 (1996) 
9. J.B. Pendry, A.J. Holden, D.J. Robbins, W.J. Stewart, Low frequency plasmons in thin-wire 
structures. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 10(22), 4785–4809 (1998) 
10. J.B. Pendry, A.J. Holden, D.J. Robbins, W.J. Stewart, Magnetism from conductors and 
enhanced nonlinear phenomena. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 47(11), 2075–2084 
(1999) 
11. D.R. Smith, W.J. Padilla, D.C. Vier, S.C. Nemat-Nasser, S. Schultz, Composite medium with 
simultaneously negative permeability and permittivity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84(18), 4184–4187 
(2000)

Understanding Metasurface-Based Microwave Absorbers Using Transmission. . .
163
12. D. Sarkar, FDTD Analysis of Guided Electromagnetic Wave Interaction with Time Modulated 
Dielectric Medium. SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering (Springer, Singa-
pore, 2022) 
13. A. Kumar, J.C. Dash, D. Sarkar, Computational techniques for design and analysis of time-
varying capacitor loaded transmission lines using FDTD and simulink. IEEE J. Multiscale 
Multiphys. Comput. Tech. 7, 228–235 (2022) 
14. R. Malleboina, J.C. Dash, A. Lemma, D. Sarkar, On the aperture size of digitally coded 
metasurfaces for beam steering applications using anomalous reﬂection, in Proceedings of 
International Microwave and Antenna Symposium (IMAS), Cairo, Egypt, pp. 255–258 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IMAS55807.2023.10066942 
15. R. Malleboina, J.C. Dash, D. Sarkar, Design of anomalous reﬂectors by phase gradient unit 
cell-based digitally coded metasurface. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 22(9), 2305–2309 
(2023) 
16. A. Kumar, D. Sarkar, FDTD analysis of space-time metamaterials using modulated TVTLs 
for frequency translation, mixing and non-reciprocity, in Proceedings of 53rd European 
Microwave Conference (EuMC), Berlin, Germany, pp. 311–314 (2023). https://doi.org/10. 
23919/EuMC58039.2023.10290288 
17. R. Malleboina, D. Sarkar, Coded metasurfaces for two-dimensional steering and splitting 
of incident radiation, in Proceedings of Microwave, Antennas, and Propagation Conference 
(MAPCON), Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India (2023) 
18. Y. Chandrakapure, A. Kumar, Easha, D. Sarkar, G. Banerjee, Time-modulated metasurface for 
spooﬁng doppler radar, in Proceedings of Microwave, Antennas, and Propagation Conference 
(MAPCON), Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India (2023) 
19. S.A. Ramakrishna, T.M. Grzegorczyk, Physics and Applications of Negative Refractive Index 
Materials (CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group and SPIE Press, 2009) 
20. G.V. Eleftheriades, K.G. Balmain, Negative Refraction Metamaterials: Fundamental Princi-
ples and Applications (IEEE, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2005) 
21. C. Caloz, T. Itoh, Electromagnetic Metamaterials: Transmission Line Theory and Microwave 
Applications, The Engineering Approach (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2006) 
22. N. Engheta, Thin absorbing screen using metamaterial surfaces. Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. 
Antennas Propag. 2, 392–395 (2002) 
23. H. Mosallaei, K. Sarabandi, A one-layer ultra-thin meta-surface absorber, in Proc. IEEE Int. 
Symp. on Antennas Propag. (2005) 
24. F. Costa, A. Monorchio, G. Manara, Analysis and design of ultra thin electromagnetic 
absorbers comprising resistively loaded high impedance surfaces. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 58(5), 1551–1558 (2010) 
25. F. Costa, S. Genovesi, A. Monorchio, G. Manara, A circuit-based model for the interpretation 
of perfect metamaterial absorbers. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 61(3), 1201–1209 (2013) 
26. S. Ghosh, K.V. Srivastava, An equivalent circuit model of FSS based metamaterial absorber 
using coupled line theory. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 511–514 (2015) 
27. Z. Yao, S. Xiao, Y. Li, B. Wang, On the design of wideband absorber based on multilayer and 
multiresonant FSS array. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 20(3), 284–288 (2021) 
28. M. Paquay, J.C. Iriarte, I. Ederra, R. Gonzalo, P. de-Maagt, Thin AMC structure for radar 
cross-section reduction. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 55(12), 3630–3638 (2007) 
29. A. Murugesan, K.T. Selvan, A.K. Iyer, K.V. Srivastava, A. Alphones, A review of metasurface-
assisted RCS reduction techniques. Prog. Electromagn. Res. B 94, 75–103 (2021) 
30. E. Ameri, S. Esmaeli, S. Sedighy, Ultra wideband radar cross section reduction by using 
polarization conversion metasurfaces. Sci. Rep. 9, 478 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
018-36542-6 
31. A. Dhumal, M.S. Bisht, A. Bhardwaj, M. Saikia, S. Malik, K.V. Srivastava, Screen printed 
polarization independent microwave absorber for wideband RCS reduction. IEEE Trans. 
Electromagn. Compat. 65(1), 96–103 (2023)

Frequency-Selective Surface and Its 
Applications in Radome Technology 
Saptarshi Ghosh 
1 
Introduction 
Since the last few decades, frequency-selective surfaces (FSSs) have drawn signif-
icant research attention due to their potential applications [1–3]. It is believed that 
Franklin and Maroni invented the concept of using FSS structures in a parabolic 
reﬂector by using half-wavelength wire sections [4]. With time, several other 
applications of FSS have been developed, and its importance has subsequently 
been increased. In the early days, FSS structures have mainly been used as 
spatial ﬁlters, where some of the frequency bands (in-band frequency) are allowed 
for transmission through the geometry, while others (out-of-band frequency) are 
reﬂected. Later, FSS designs have further been employed in different applications, 
such as the reduction of radar cross section (RCS) in defense [5], electromagnetic 
(EM) shielding in commercial devices [6], radomes in aerospace sectors [7], 
improvement in antenna performance [8], etc. They have also been exploited in 
various technologically advanced areas, such as artiﬁcial magnetic conductors [9], 
high impedance surfaces [10], digitally coding metasurfaces [11], reconﬁgurable 
intelligent surfaces [12], etc. 
FSSs are periodic structures of metal-dielectric patterns in one- or two-
dimensional arrays often realized on planar conﬁgurations. The metallic patterns 
are generally printed on either single or both sides of the dielectric. Traditional 
FSS patterns are designed using various elements, such as patch, dipole, slot, ring, 
loop, etc., a glimpse of which is shown in Fig. 1. Various commercially available 
substrates are used as dielectrics, such as FR4, RT Duroid, Taconic, etc., depending 
S. Ghosh (✉) 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Indore, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
e-mail: sghosh@iiti.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_11
165

166
S. Ghosh
Fig. 1 Different types of FSS elements widely used over past decades: (a) square patch, (b) 
circular patch, (c) square loop, (d) circular loop, (e) Jerusalem cross, (f) tripole element, (g) cross  
dipole, and (h) hexagonal loop 
on their applications and frequencies of operation. Multilayer designs are also 
developed, where multiple dielectric layers are combined to achieve desired EM 
responses. 
The basic principle of an FSS geometry can be explained by the resonance 
phenomenon. When a plane EM wave is incident on an FSS, the structure resonates 
at a speciﬁc frequency, which depends on the metallic patterns present in one period 
(unit cell), material properties of the constituent substrates, as well as the orientation 
of the incident EM wave. The shapes of the metallic elements and their spacing 
control the effective inductance and capacitance, respectively, of the design, whereas 
the polarization and incident angle govern the exposure of the incident wave on the 
structure. A brief overview of two different types of FSS designs is provided here. 
Two complementary planar arrays, an array of patches and an array of slots, are 
considered to show the basic characteristics of FSS designs. A simple FSS structure 
consisting of a periodic array of metallic patches, as shown in Fig. 2a, has a low-pass 
characteristic [13–15]. While impinged by a plane EM wave, this FSS geometry 
transmits the lower-frequency components (but reﬂects the higher frequencies), 
thereby exhibiting a low-pass ﬁlter behavior. The complementary structure, an array 
of metallic slots, has a large inductive effect due to its topology (and a small 
capacitive effect) and therefore exhibits a high-pass ﬁlter response as observed in 
Fig. 2b. When these two types of geometries are combined in a single design (by 
printing on the opposite sides of a dielectric substrate), the structure will exhibit 
a bandpass or bandstop ﬁlter response. Designs can be modiﬁed to include both 
inductance and capacitance in the same layer, and the ﬁltering characteristic can be 
achieved from a single metallic layer geometry. As per requirement, FSS geometries 
can also be converted to an absorber, polarizer, or rasorber by selectively designing 
the metallic patterns and regulating the transmission and reﬂection properties.

Frequency-Selective Surface and Its Applications in Radome Technology
167
Frequency [GHz] 
a 
5
35
25
15
45 
–10 
0 
–5 
Magnitude of transmission (|S21|) |dB| 
Frequency [GHz] 
b 
5
35
25
15
45 
–10 
0 
–20
Magnitude of transmission (|S21|) |dB| 
Fig. 2 Two periodic geometries are considered for exhibiting the frequency selective operation 
of FSS structures, (a) metallic patches and (b) slots (or wire-grids), along with their transmission 
coefﬁcients. The patches exhibit a low-pass response, and the slots exhibit a high-pass behavior 
2 
Equivalent Circuit Analysis 
Figure 3a shows the schematic view of the array structure of an FSS-based structure. 
The proposed design consists of a cross-dipole geometry printed in a periodic 
pattern on the top side of a dielectric substrate, whereas the back side is empty. 
When the structure is illuminated by a plane EM wave, one part of the incident 
wave is reﬂected from the top surface, and the other part is transmitted through the 
geometry, with an assumption that the signals are not attenuated in the dielectric. 
The side view of the geometry is depicted in Fig. 3b. 
An equivalent circuit model is devised for the structure, as shown in Fig. 3c, and 
it is observed that the top FSS provides a series R-L-C circuit and the dielectric is 
represented by a transmission line. The air medium present in the surroundings is 
marked as an impedance (Z0) of 377 ohm. In the design, the top surface inductance 
(L) is provided by the metallic pattern of the cross dipole, the capacitance (C) is  
obtained due to the gaps between the neighboring unit cells, and the resistance (R) 
results owing to ﬁnite conductivity of the metal. The electric ﬁeld is oriented in the 
vertical direction, which will create a time-varying magnetic ﬂux generated along 
the cross-dipole length and subsequently results in the inductance. In contrast, a gap 
between the successive cross-dipoles exhibits the required capacitance.

168
S. Ghosh
Fig. 3 (a) Schematic diagram of an FSS-based geometry. (b) Side view of the unit cell geometry. 
(c) Equivalent circuit model of the structure 
Hence, the input impedance of the structure according to the circuit model can 
be expressed as: 
StartLayout 1st Row upper Z Subscript in Baseline equals left brace upper R plus j omega upper L plus 1 divided by j omega upper C right brace double vertical bar upper Z Subscript d Baseline EndLayoutZin = {R + jωL + 1/jωC}
‖‖‖Zd
where Zd is the impedance of the dielectric substrate terminated by an inﬁnitely 
large air spacer. Therefore, by varying different parameters of the FSS design as well 
as substrate properties, the input impedance of the structure (Zin) can be precisely 
tuned to a high or low impedance value, and consequently, a bandstop or bandpass 
ﬁlter structure can be realized at a particular frequency. 
It is noteworthy that the horizontal length of the cross dipole doesn’t participate 
in the calculation of the resonance frequency, since no current ﬂows through this 
segment under this condition. However, when the electric ﬁeld is orthogonally 
incident (i.e., a horizontally oriented E-ﬁeld), the horizontal dipole will provide 
the requisite inductance, and the vertical dipole will become inactive. Thus, the 
metallic pattern is made of two dipoles, one of which contributes to the resonance 
for the horizontal E-ﬁeld, while the other participates for the vertical E-ﬁeld. This 
further conﬁrms the fact that the performance of an FSS geometry depends on the 
properties as well as the direction of the incident EM wave. 
3 
Radome Structure 
A radome is a structural enclosure that protects a set of electronic equipment. In 
earlier days, the radome was constructed of materials transparent to radio-frequency 
(RF) signals, such that the impinging EM wave can get transmitted through the

Frequency-Selective Surface and Its Applications in Radome Technology
169
radome structure and interact with inside electronic devices without any attenuation. 
Several types of radomes have been developed based on their applications, such 
as stationary radomes and dynamic radomes. Stationary radomes are used over 
grounded or ﬁxed structures, like radomes at the Cryptologic Operations Center 
in Japan, whereas dynamic radomes are used in aircraft, missiles, and defense 
sectors. Those radomes not only protect the antennas and other electronic equipment 
mounted on the outer bodies of aircraft from weather but also conceal the equipment 
from view. 
To achieve the maximum transfer of RF signal while passing through the 
radome material, two criteria should be simultaneously satisﬁed [16]: one, the input 
impedance of the radome structure should be matched to that of the free space such 
that the incoming EM wave encounters a minimal reﬂection, and second, the radome 
should be built with low-loss materials, such that the insertion loss will be very small 
and the RF signal passes unattenuated. 
To achieve the ﬁrst condition, one sample radome structure is drawn in Fig. 4 
along with its side view. The structure is assumed to be made of a single-layer 
material having a relative permittivity of ε2, a relative permeability of μ2, and 
an intrinsic impedance of η2. Air is present on both sides of the radome material 
(medium 1 and medium 3). Then, the wave impedance (Z2) of medium 2 at the left 
interface (z = 0) can be derived in Eq. (1): 
StartLayout 1st Row upper Z 2 left parenthesis 0 right parenthesis equals eta 2 StartFraction eta 3 cosine beta 2 d plus j eta 2 sine beta 2 d Over eta 2 cosine beta 2 d plus j eta 3 sine beta 2 d EndFraction EndLayoutZ2(0) = η2
η3 cos β2d + jη2 sin β2d
η2 cos β2d + jη3 sin β2d
(1) 
where β2 is the phase constant and d is the thickness of the radome material. The 
EM wave will transmit from medium 1 to medium 2 without any reﬂection if the 
wave impedance at the interface [Z2(0)] matches with that of the intrinsic impedance 
of air (η1 = 377 ohm); i.e., Z2(0) should be equal to η1. While solving Eq. (1) using  
this condition, two solutions are generated: 
Solution 1: d = λg/2, when η1 = η3, i.e., similar material (air) is present on both 
sides of the radome. 
Solution 2: d = (λg + 1)/4, when eta 2 equals StartRoot eta 1 eta 3 EndRootη2 = √η1η3 and η1 /= η3, i.e., different materials 
are present on different sides of the radome; one example is when the inside of 
the radome is ﬁlled up with some different materials. 
Here, λg corresponds to the guided wavelength, expressed as lamda Subscript g Baseline equals lamda 0 divided by StartRoot normal epsilon Subscript r Baseline EndRootλg = λ0/√εr, 
where λg is free space wavelength and εr is relative permittivity of the radome 
material. 
To achieve the second condition, the materials should be of low loss, like 
polycarbonate, ABS, Flexiglass, or composites, which have very small dielectric 
loss tangents (in the order of 0.0005). With these two conditions (impedance 
matching and low-loss materials), the radome will exhibit minimal reﬂection and 
absorption behavior, and the maximum RF signal will get transmitted through the 
material from one side to another, thereby representing an all-pass ﬁlter response.

170
S. Ghosh
Fig. 4 One radome structure and its side view, showing the impedance matching concept 
4 
FSS-Based Radome Structure 
With the advent of technology, radome structures have been integrated with 
advanced features. Earlier radomes are meant to transmit EM waves over a wide 
frequency band, thereby posing a security threat to the aircraft and other moving 
objects. In particular, when a stealth aircraft is ﬂying during a coveted mission, the 
signal radiated by the antenna mounted inside the radome can easily be detected by 
the enemy radars and will pose a security threat. To resolve this problem, the radome 
can be covered with a metal sheet, but this will completely block communication. 
Hence, researchers have started using a bandpass ﬁlter geometry on the top of a 
radome structure, such that only the intended signal will be passed through the 
radome and make communication with the antennas underneath, whereas unwanted 
signals will get reﬂected from the radome surface and get scattered in different 
directions [17, 18]. Thus, a bandpass ﬁlter-based radome structure has become a 
widely popular research topic in stealth applications. 
Figure 5 illustrates the schematic diagram of a bandpass ﬁlter-based radome 
structure. As shown in the side view, the radome geometry is designed such that 
the RF signal impinging at a particular frequency (f0) will get transmitted through 
the radome without any attenuation, whereas the out-of-band frequencies (f0 ± Δf) 
are reﬂected from the radome surface. There exist several techniques to design a 
bandpass ﬁlter; however, the FSS concept is widely used for ﬁlter applications owing 
to its simple design procedure, low-cost fabrication, and wide adaptability. An FSS 
geometry can be mounted on a radome structure, and the frequency response of such 
FSS-based radomes can be precisely controlled as per the requirement. 
Figure 6 illustrates a scenario where an FSS-based periodic geometry is wrapped 
on a radome structure. The design of the FSS geometry and the radome materials 
will be selected such that only the intended frequency will be transmitted across the

Frequency-Selective Surface and Its Applications in Radome Technology
171
Fig. 5 An improved radome structure with a bandpass ﬁlter characteristic 
Fig. 6 A schematic diagram presenting an FSS-based radome with its applications 
radome (from inside to outside and vice versa), whereas out-of-band frequencies 
will be reﬂected from the surface. By articulately designing the surface, the reﬂected 
signal can be scattered in different directions, and the radar cross-section (RCS) 
signature can be signiﬁcantly reduced for the radome structure. 
5 
Literature Review of FSS-Based Radome 
In the last few years, numerous FSS-based radome structures have been designed 
with various characteristics across different frequency bands. Some of the radomes 
are developed on planar surfaces, whereas some others are designed on non-planar 
surfaces [19]. Some structures are built with multiband operations [20], and few 
radomes are developed for wideband operations [21]. One of the radome structures, 
presented in Ref. [22], has been described in brief to explain the FSS-based radome 
mechanism.

172
S. Ghosh
The proposed radome structure is developed on a conical surface aiming to 
operate at 6 GHz. One monopole antenna is also designed at around 6 GHz to 
demonstrate the radome performance. The concept is numerically simulated and 
experimentally demonstrated. Initially, one planar FSS structure has been designed 
based on the aperture-coupled resonator concept, where three metallic layers are 
used along with two intermediate dielectric layers. The top and bottom metallic 
patterns are of patch shape, whereas the middle layer is of slot type. Such a patch-
slot-patch combination exhibits a second-order ﬁlter characteristic with a highly 
selective ﬁltering property. Once the ﬁlter response is obtained at around 6 GHz, the 
geometry has been conformed to a conical shape, with a height of 99.56 mm and a 
half-angle of 41.04◦. 
Afterward, a monopole antenna operating at 6 GHz with a reﬂecting ground 
plane is developed. The antenna geometry offers a good radiation performance with 
an omnidirectional radiation pattern in a standalone condition, and the reﬂection 
coefﬁcient is relatively wide centering around 6 GHz. However, when the antenna 
element is covered by the conical radome, the reﬂection coefﬁcient of the antenna 
and radome combination has been greatly changed. The input bandwidth becomes 
much narrower along with a high roll-off factor at the two ends. At the designed 
band, the antenna’s performance remains almost similar to that of the original 
monopole antenna, whereas its out-of-band response is greatly suppressed. Thus, the 
presented radome structure allows for transmission of RF signals at around 6 GHz, 
whereas out-of-band signals are either suppressed or reﬂected from its surface, 
thereby ensuring high security for the electronic equipment enclosing the radome. 
The performance of the structure has successfully been validated by carrying out 
full-wave simulation and free space measurement. 
6 
Conclusion 
A review of FSS-based radome designs and their operating mechanism has been 
presented in this chapter. Initially, a brief description of FSS structures has been 
provided, and later, the concept is explained with the help of an equivalent circuit 
model. Afterward, the need for FSS in radome designs is emphasized followed by 
the literature review of one FSS-based radome structure. 
This chapter will be immensely beneﬁcial to the readers in understanding 
the radome structures and their working principles. Several unexplored topics on 
radome concept, including absorptive radomes and reconﬁgurable radomes, can be 
investigated, and this chapter can act as a guide. 
References 
1. T.K. Wu, Frequency Selective Surface and Grid Array (Wiley, New York, 1995) 
2. J.C. Vardaxglou, Frequency Selective Surfaces: Analysis and Design, 1st edn. (Wiley, New 
York, 1997)

Frequency-Selective Surface and Its Applications in Radome Technology
173
3. B.A. Munk, Frequency Selective Surfaces: Theory and Design, 1st edn. (Wiley, New York, 
2000) 
4. G. Marconi, C. S. Franklin, Reﬂector for Use in Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony, U.S. 
Patent, 1,301,473, (1919) 
5. M. Gustafsson, RCS reduction of integrated antenna arrays with resistive sheets. J. Electro-
magn. Waves Appl. 20(1), 27–40 (2006) 
6. W.F. Bahret, The beginnings of stealth technology. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 29(4), 
1377–1385 (1993) 
7. S. Narayan, G. Gulati, B. Sangeetha, R.U. Nair, Novel metamaterial-element-based FSS for 
airborne radome applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 66(9), 4695–4707 (2018) 
8. S.H. Abadi, K. Ghaemi, N. Behdad, Ultra-wideband, true-time delay reﬂectarray antennas 
using ground-plane-backed, miniaturized element frequency selective surfaces. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 63(2), 534–542 (2015) 
9. G.M. Monorchio, L. Lanuzza, Synthesis of artiﬁcial magnetic conductors by using multilay-
ered frequency selective surfaces. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 1, 196–199 (2002) 
10. F. Costa, A. Monorchio, G. Manara, Analysis and design of ultrathin electromagnetic absorbers 
comprising resistively loaded high impedance surfaces. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 58(5), 
1551–1558 (2010) 
11. L.G. da Silva, S.A. Cerqueira, Wide incident angle digital coding metasurface applied to 
reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces, in 2021 Antenna Measurement Techniques Association 
Symposium (AMTA), Daytona Beach, FL, USA, (2021), pp. 1–5 
12. S. Dey, M.A. Shukoor, Implementation of 3-Bit reconﬁgurable intelligent surface for sub-6 
GHz range based on modiﬁed square loop FSS and tunable varactors, in IEEE Microwaves, 
Antennas, and Propagation Conference (MAPCON), Bangalore, India, (2022), pp. 973–977 
13. S.W. Lee, G. Zarrillo, C.L. Law, Simple formulas for transmission through periodic metal grids 
or plates. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 30, 904–909 (1982) 
14. R. Mittra, C. Chan, T. Cwik, Techniques for analyzing frequency selective surfaces- a review. 
IEEE Proc. 76(23), 1593–1615 (1988) 
15. F. Bayatpur, Metamaterial-Inspired Frequency-Selective Surfaces, PhD thesis, (University of 
Michigan, 2009) 
16. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 3rd edn. (Wiley, Hoboken, 2005) 
17. G. Qian et al., Switchable broadband dual-polarized frequency-selective rasorber/absorber. 
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 18(12), 2508–2512 (2019) 
18. M. Tang, D.-F. Zhou, Q.-K. Liu, Z.-N. Yao, Q. Liu, Low-proﬁle FSS-based polarization-
insensitive rasorber with switchable transmission band. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 
20(6), 1038–1042 (2021) 
19. A. Gouda, S. Ghosh, An analytical study of curved frequency selective surfaces for shielding 
applications. Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett. 65(2), 3139–3146 (2023) 
20. A. Sharma, S. Malik, S. Ghosh, K.V. Srivastava, A miniaturized frequency selective rasorber 
with independently regulated selective dual-transmission response. IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett. 21(2), 257–261 (2022) 
21. S.C. Bakshi, D. Mitra, F.L. Teixeira, Wide-angle broadband rasorber for switchable and 
conformal application. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 69(2), 1205–1216 (2021) 
22. H. Zhou et al., Filter-antenna consisting of conical FSS radome and monopole antenna. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag. 60(6), 3040–3045 (2012)

Algorithmic Applications for Massive 
MIMO Technology 
Sai Mitheran, T. N. Ram, Debrup Mukherjee, and Hemant Kumar 
1 
Introduction 
With the rise of 5G and 6G technology, wireless communication systems are 
subjected to growing demands for vast network capacity while maintaining low 
latency and increased availability. The idea behind massive multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) evolved with the global bandwidth shortage, grouping antennas 
at both the transmitting and the receiving end to improve energy efﬁciency and 
increase spectral efﬁciency [1]. Keeping up with various factors such as increased 
peak data rates, connection density, and spectrum usage while ensuring minimum 
latency remains a challenge for MIMO technology [2]. This technology is focal to 
the wireless sector, as it emphasizes the union of antennas, radios, and spectrum 
to serve the high-speed and capacity requirements of 5G. The extra antennas used 
by massive MIMO help focus energy to increase throughput/efﬁciency with simple 
processing. The advantages that it encompasses, such as the signiﬁcant multiplexing 
gain from extra antennas and beamforming, enable the usage of sensors with 
improved data rates and reliability. Further, it also makes it possible to sense data 
from concurrent sensors with reduced latency [2]. Consequently, this technology 
has been applied in real-time solutions that call for smart sensor applications, 
such as in smart grids [3], smart antennas [4], smart environmental monitoring 
[5], autonomous vehicles [6], and remote healthcare [7]. Massive MIMO design 
is currently the most heavily researched ﬁeld in antenna design. In [8], the authors 
Sai Mitheran and T. N. Ram have contributed equally. 
S. Mitheran · T. N. Ram · D. Mukherjee · H. Kumar (✉) 
Department, National Institute of Technology Tiruchirappalli, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
e-mail: hemant@nitt.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_12
175

176
S. Mitheran et al.
have explored the optimal number of antennas, active users, and transmit power of 
a MIMO system. The design of cost- and energy-efﬁcient massive MIMO arrays 
is explored in [9]. In [10], the problem of pilot beam pattern design for channel 
estimation is studied, and a novel algorithm for the same is proposed. 
As other domains and interdisciplinary venues such as augmented reality (AR), 
virtual reality (VR), and Internet of Things (IoT) developed, early MIMO systems 
were unable to meet requirements such as that of spectral efﬁciency for hassle-
free usage. The Massive MIMO theory addressed the rising inﬂux in wireless data 
trafﬁc [1]. These systems were validated to ensure indoor and outdoor operational 
efﬁciency and robust operation that requires low-complexity radio frequency and 
baseband circuit. The success of this technology and the attraction it gained for 
5G was bound to its successful hardware implementation, which was built with 
low-complexity and low-cost hardware for both digital baseband and analog radio-
frequency (RF) chains. In addition, several advancements focusing on algorithms 
[11], such as precoding, detection, and scheduling, have been designed to reduce 
cost and power, allowing optimal operational conditions that enable its widespread 
use. MIMO is also used in radar, which has made its presence crucial in several 
applications. In [12], the authors have explored the beneﬁts of having a large number 
of virtual spatial antenna channels [13]. proposes a novel MIMO radar positioning 
scheme for automatic guided vehicles. 
Several approaches in the past have been aimed at improving the diversity of 
applications involving massive MIMO technology [14, 15]. These attempts illustrate 
that algorithms intertwined with such technology can beneﬁt research and its 
applications by creating a broader impact. Hence, this chapter contributes to an 
experimental overview of designing algorithms from both software paradigms that 
are leveraged to provide solutions for various applications involving massive MIMO 
technology and antenna design in 5G systems—speciﬁcally: 
• 
A novel rule-based algorithm for obstacle detection—involving massive MIMO 
radar and the theory of cognition (Software 1.0). This algorithm is very efﬁcient 
in terms of space and time complexity. 
• 
Learning algorithms for MIMO-based antenna applications—machine learning 
and deep learning algorithms used for human activity classiﬁcation, using human 
movement data captured by a radar device (Software 2.0). 
2 
Proposed Algorithms in MIMO Applications 
This section illustrates the applications of algorithms from both software paradigms 
to massive MIMO radar technology, to provide an overview of the multifarious 
domains to which the union of the aforementioned methods can prove to be 
beneﬁcial. The signiﬁcance of combining algorithmic design with massive MIMO 
technology is demonstrated in terms of both Software 1.0 and Software 2.0.

Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology
177
Software 1.0 refers to the traditional software development paradigm involving 
conventional data structures, systems, and algorithms [16]. It involves explicit 
algorithmic programming, wherein the code directly controls the functioning of 
the software. All the code written in this work is primarily categorized under this 
particular paradigm: written in various languages such as Python and C++. Here, 
the individual focuses on deﬁning a set of rules in program space that entails 
instructions to be compiled into a binary and then executed. 
Software 2.0 is associated with specifying a given goal on the behavior of a 
program. The algorithmic rules are not explicitly deﬁned by the programmer, but the 
“code” originates from the computations involved. A typical example of the code in 
this paradigm can be observed embedded in the weights of a neural network. Unlike 
rule-based instructions, this paradigm consists of many factors, such as the collected 
dataset (labeled/unlabeled) and the network architecture, which acts as the skeleton 
within which the weights are ﬁlled. It has a broader range of applications in speech 
recognition [17], games [18], computer vision [19], graphics [20], etc. Although it 
has certain disadvantages in terms of lacking intuitiveness and being vulnerable to 
adversarial attacks, they have proven to be better in practice, having advantages such 
as portability and efﬁciency. 
2.1 
Obstacle Detection: Rule-Based Approach 
Obstacle detection is a critical component of self-driving cars. This technology 
calls for an intelligent radar system for sensing the environment. A cognitive 
radar (CR) system senses the environment, learns from it, and makes judgments 
depending on what it has learned. However, for CR to be useful, an antenna that 
offers a high waveform diversity at the transmitter is needed. MMIMO radar is a 
perfect candidate for this purpose. Besides providing a high degree of freedom, 
massive MIMO also provides high spectral efﬁciency by allowing its antenna array 
to focus beams in some desired directions. In [21], the authors have presented a 
reinforcement-learning-based approach for CR System. This sub-section presents a 
novel rule-based (Software 1.0) algorithm for the CR system. 
2.1.1 
Problem Deﬁnition 
Consider a massive MIMO radar with NT transmitter and NR receiver antennas, 
both of which are uniform linear arrays with λ/2 spacing between them, where λ 
is the operating wavelength. Let s(t) ∈ C N T be the transmitted signal from all NT 
transmitter antennas, where 
StartLayout 1st Row s left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals upper W bold upper Phi left parenthesis t right parenthesis EndLayouts(t) = WФ(t)

178
S. Mitheran et al.
s(t) is a result of the linear combination of NT independent orthonormal signals
Ф(t) ∈ CN T and W = [w1, w2 . . . wNT]T ∈ CN T×N T is the beamforming weight 
matrix. 
Let y ∈ CN R×N T be the received signal, and from [21], 
StartLayout 1st Row bold italic y equals alpha bold italic h left parenthesis theta right parenthesis plus bold italic c EndLayouty = αh(θ) + c
where c ∈ CN R×N T is the spatially colored disturbance vector and α ∈ C is a 
deterministic unknown variable that accounts for two-way path loss. From [21, 22], 
it can be written 
StartLayout 1st Row bold italic h left parenthesis theta right parenthesis equals left parenthesis upper W Superscript upper T Baseline bold italic a Subscript upper T Baseline left parenthesis theta right parenthesis right parenthesis circled times bold italic a Subscript upper R Baseline left parenthesis theta right parenthesis EndLayouth(θ) = (W T aT (θ)) ⊗aR(θ)
where ⊗ signiﬁes Kronecker product and aT (θ) and a(θ) are the array manifold 
vectors of the transmitter and receiver, respectively. 
a(θ) = [1, e Superscript StartFraction j left parenthesis 2 pi d right parenthesis Over lamda EndFractione
j(2πd)
λ
sin(θ), . . . , e Superscript StartFraction j left parenthesis 2 pi d right parenthesis Over lamda EndFractione
j(2πd)
λ
(NT−1) sin(θ)]T and aR(θ) is deﬁned 
in a similar manner. Also, the beam pattern can be expressed as B(θ) = bold italic a Subscript upper T Superscript upper TaT
T (θ) 
(WWH)bold italic a Subscript upper T Superscript asteriska∗
T (θ) [21–23]. 
2.1.2 
Detection of Target 
The received signal is processed by spatial ﬁlters, which divides the radar ﬁeld 
of view into L different angle bins. The system transmits K different pulses k ∈ 
{1, . . . ,}. Let  bold italic y Subscript l Superscript kyk
l be the received signal for the kth pulse k = 1, . . .  , at  lth bin l = 
1, . . . ,L. There are two cases for the received signal: 
StartLayout 1st Row left parenthesis upper I right parenthesis colon bold italic y Subscript l Superscript k Baseline equals bold italic c Subscript l Superscript k EndLayout(I) : yk
l = ck
l
StartLayout 1st Row left parenthesis II right parenthesis colon bold italic y Subscript l Superscript k Baseline equals alpha bold italic h Subscript l Superscript k Baseline plus bold italic c Subscript l Superscript k EndLayout(II) : yk
l = αhk
l + ck
l
Case (I) happens when there is no target in the angle bin, and the radar receives 
only noise. Case (II) is when there is a target in the bin. To differentiate the two 
cases, a test statistic Λ is required. Using [12], 
StartLayout 1st Row upper Lamda Subscript l Superscript k Baseline equals StartFraction 2 StartAbsoluteValue left parenthesis h Subscript l Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper H Baseline y Subscript l Superscript k Baseline EndAbsoluteValue squared Over left parenthesis h Subscript l Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper H Baseline ModifyingAbove normal upper Gamma With caret left parenthesis h Subscript l Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis EndFraction EndLayoutΛk
l =
2
|||
(
hk
l
)H yk
l
|||
2
(
hk
l
)H ˆ𝚪
(
hk
l
)
(1) 
where ModifyingAbove upper Gamma With caretˆ𝚪is the estimate of 𝚪. Using the assumption that c Subscript l Superscript kck
l is a stationary discrete 
and circular complex valued process, 𝚪= E {left parenthesis c Subscript l Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis left parenthesis c Subscript l Superscript k Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper H
(
ck
l
) (
ck
l
)H}. upper Lamda Subscript l Superscript kΛk
l > λ corresponds to 
case (II) and upper Lamda Subscript l Superscript kΛk
l < λ to case (I) where λ is the operating wavelength [12, 21].

Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology
179
2.1.3 
An Algorithm for Cognition 
If a radar is cognitive, it learns from the pulses previously sent. In this case, the 
beamforming weight matrix W is updated each time a pulse arrives at the receiver. 
This is done in such a way that more power is focused on angle bins where target 
was detected. 
An algorithm to change W matrix to focus more power on certain angle bins 
is presented in [21]. Let Wk be the updated W matrix after the kth pulse that was 
sent arrives. Before the ﬁrst pulse is transmitted, the beamforming weight matrix 
is identity matrix (W0 = I). When kth pulse arrives, upper Lamda Subscript l Superscript kΛk
l is calculated for all the 
bins using the formula in (II-A2). Using this estimate, the radar can ﬁnd the bins 
where the target is present. The W matrix is then updated such that more power is 
transmitted to these bins. 
A radar was simulated, and the target was present at −30Ñ with respect to the 
radar. It was made cognitive using Algorithm 1, and the results are shown in Fig. 1. 
The graph compares the antenna beam when the ﬁrst pulse is sent and the beam 
after the 50th pulse was sent as a function of the azimuth angle from the antenna, 
showing that the radar focuses more power at the direction of the target. 
Fig. 1 The dashed red line shows the antenna beam pattern when the ﬁrst pulse was sent. The 
solid blue line represents the beam pattern after the 50th pulse was sent

180
S. Mitheran et al.
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for Cognitive Radar 
1: Initialize DP = 0L, K  = 50, W0 = I 
2: for each time step k do 
3: for l = 1 → L do 
4: Calculate Λ k l  
5: end for 
6: if k == 1 then 
7: for l = 1 → L do DP(l) ←Λ k l  
8: end for 
9: else 
10: for l = 1 → L do DP(l) ← DP(l) · (k −1) + Λ k l  k  
11: end for 
12: end if 
13: Find Wk+1 by focusing more power on angle bins l ∈{l: DP(l) >  λ} 
14: end for 
2.2 
Human Activity Classiﬁcation: Learning-Based Approach 
This sub-section employs machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algo-
rithms for massive MIMO radars, aiding commercial applications. The experimental 
analysis of human activity classiﬁcation has been conducted using a publicly 
available dataset [24]. The proposed hypothesis aims to develop high-efﬁciency 
methods with minimal processing time while outperforming previously proposed 
methods applied for the task at hand. The activities provided in the dataset include 
walking, running, and jumping. The data has been carefully curated by Davoli et 
al. [24], where a single-radar device is used to measure the activity of one person 
in front of it, avoiding angular information. A single transmitter-receiver pair is 
employed (NT = NR = 1), with deﬁned parameters for the transmitted waveform 
upon veriﬁcation, some of which include bandwidth B = 1.0 GHz, reset time TR = 
32νs, NC = 128 chirp signals, and a chirp interval T = 128νs. 
The dataset employed for analyzing various ML algorithms consists of features 
extracted from the radar data, as mentioned in [24], and numeric labels for classes. 
Further, to evaluate the DL algorithm, normalized spectrogram data is obtained in 
the form of images of size 512 × 53 (Fig. 2), representative of the measured radar 
data. Since the objective is to classify the data points into one of N classes (where 
N = 3), this can be formulated as a simple multi-class classiﬁcation problem.

Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology
181
Walking 
0
400
300
200
100
500 
20 
40 
0 
Running 
0
400
300
200
100
500 
20 
40 
0 
Jumping 
0
400
300
200
100
500 
20 
40 
0 
Fig. 2 Normalized spectrogram 
Table 1 Comparison of the performance of common ml algorithms in terms of accuracy, 
following a 80-20 train-test split 
Algorithm
Accuracy 
Algorithm
Accuracy 
Ada Boost Classiﬁer
0.94
Label Propagation
0.97 
Bagging Classiﬁer
0.87
Label Spreading
0.97 
Bernoulli NB
0.3
Linear Discriminant Analysis
0.98 
Calibrated Classiﬁer CV
0.93
Linear SVC
0.96 
Complement NB
0.63
Logistic Regression
0.96 
Decision Tree Classiﬁer
0.97
Logistic Regression CV
0.93 
Extra Tree Classiﬁer
0.8
MLP Classiﬁer
0.97 
Extra Trees Classiﬁer
0.97
Multi nomial NB
0.93 
Gaussian NB
0.93
Nearest Centroid
0.96 
Gaussian Process Classiﬁer
0.97
Nu SVC
0.93 
Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer
0.96
Passive Aggressive Classiﬁer
0.64 
Hist Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer 
0.93
Perceptron
0.94 
K Neighbors Classiﬁer
0.94
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis 
0.93 
Random Forest Classiﬁer
0.95
Radius Neighbors Classiﬁer
0.91 
Ridge Classiﬁer
0.97
SGD Classiﬁer
0.76 
Ridge Classiﬁer CV
0.96
SVC
0.97 
2.2.1 
Analysis of Machine Learning Algorithms 
An extensive survey of different ML algorithms is presented, typically used for 
classiﬁcation tasks as shown in Table 1. The algorithms are readily available for 
implementation through the scikit-learn library [25]. From the results obtained, it 
can be inferred that the performance of most algorithms is reasonable, with the 
exception of a few baselines such as Bernoulli NB, which is suitable for discrete 
data, and complement NB, commonly adopted for imbalanced datasets. These 
algorithms rely on precomputed features that have already been extracted, simply

182
S. Mitheran et al.
leveraging the patterns in the feature distribution to classify the activity according 
to its class. As a result, the performance of the ML algorithms is nearly on par with 
the data-driven feature-extractor explained in the next section. 
2.2.2 
Analysis of Deep Learning Algorithms 
Upon obtaining the normalized spectrogram, data in the form of images, as shown 
in Fig. 2, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is designed to classify the recorded 
activity as detected by the radar device. Although this method does not utilize 
precomputed features as the ML algorithms illustrated above, the superior ability 
of CNN to extract features from raw data contributes to the performance gain. The 
spectrogram data is complex valued and incompatible with preliminary architectural 
modules available in the PyTorch [26] deep learning framework. Hence, complex-
valued operations are implemented, as elucidated by Trabelsi et al. [27] using  the  
Python programming language and PyTorch. Speciﬁcally, this paper implements 
Complex Convolution, Complex Rectiﬁed Linear Units (ReLU), Complex Max 
Pooling, and Complex Fully Connected (Linear) layers, using a wrapper function 
for existing modules, as shown in Algorithm 2. 
Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for Complex Module Wrapper [27] 
1: import torch.nn as nn 
2: def wrapper fn (m1:nn.Module, m2:nn.Module, input) 
3: # m1 and m2 are module pairs, (nn.Conv2d, etc) 
4: real = m1(input.real) - m2(input.imag) # Re(output) 
5: imag = m1(input.imag) + m2(input.real) # Im(output) 
6: return real + i · imag # Complex operation of input module 
The standard block consisting of ﬁve operations (ABCDE) is repeated 5 times, 
with the combinations for each pass as per the operations legend shown in Fig. 3. 
The kernel size for the single stride convolutions is speciﬁed as m x n, and the max-
pooling layers use a 2 × 2 kernel. The ReLU [28] activation is adopted as the real 
counterpart [27] of the activation layers, which help in introducing sparsity. Given 
very few data points and the over-parameterized network, sparsity arises when the 
inputs are negative and aid the model’s learning process to prevent overﬁtting on 
the training split. Max pooling is used to scale down the spatial dimensions of the 
feature maps, to reduce the compute and network’s number of parameters. To train 
the CNN with the spectrogram images, a standard train/test split of 80:20 is used, 
with a batch size of 8 for 50 epochs. For the optimization of the neural network, the 
SGD [29] optimizer is employed, with a learning rate of α = 0.01 and a momentum 
of β = 0.9. The standard multi-class classiﬁcation cross-entropy loss function is 
used.

Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology
183
Fig. 3 Overall architecture of the CNN, standard block, and the sequence of standard block 
operations for all ﬁve blocks 
Table 2 Performance 
analysis of the convolutional 
neural network in terms of 
accuracy and compute 
Metric
Value 
Training time
22 s 
Number of parameters in the model 
16,467 
FLOPS
0.126G 
Test accuracy
98.6% 
The results obtained are provided in Table 2. Classiﬁcation accuracy is reported 
on the testing set to account for model performance. As this is achieved with 
minimal compute overhead, the number of model parameters and Giga FLOPS 
(ﬂoating-point operations per second) is calculated. The training time reported is 
the time taken to optimize the CNN for convergence with the available labeled 
data samples, which is quite optimal for adaptation across datasets. The number 
of parameters refers to all the weight and bias matrices that represent the layers of 
the CNN. Given the minimal number of parameters and FLOPS, the importance of 
such vital applications using MMIMO technology is undeniable, having the ability 
to scale up and maintain computational efﬁciency while still providing promising 
results. 
3 
Conclusion 
This chapter inspects and analyzes various algorithmic applications that can be 
exploited to produce advancements in massive MIMO applications for 5G systems, 
including antenna design. Speciﬁcally, it presents an experimental overview of 
leveraging the two software paradigms, namely, Software 1.0 (rule-based algo-

184
S. Mitheran et al.
rithms) and Software 2.0 (intelligent learning-based algorithms), to aid develop-
ments in massive MIMO technology and its use cases. Firstly, this chapter proposes 
an obstacle detection algorithm using a novel rule-based method, with the potential 
to be employed in autonomous vehicles. This method involves massive MIMO 
radar and the theory of cognition. Further, machine learning and deep learning 
algorithms are employed for human activity classiﬁcation, using human movement 
data captured by a radar device. The performance of the proposed algorithms for the 
tasks at hand demonstrates the scope for the development of massive MIMO systems 
using algorithmic design. The authors of this work hope to encourage future work on 
accelerating massive MIMO applications by harnessing advancements from other 
inter-disciplinary avenues. 
References 
1. N.H.M. Adnan, I.M. Raﬁqul, A.Z. Alam, Massive mimo for ﬁfth generation (5g): Oppor-
tunities and challenges, in International Conference on Computer and Communication 
Engineering (ICCCE), vol. 2016, (2016), pp. 47–52 
2. R. Chataut, R. Akl, Massive MIMO systems for 5g and beyond networks—Overview, recent 
trends, challenges, and future research direction. Sensors 20(10) (2020). Available https:// 
www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/10/2753 
3. J. Jiang, H. Sun, W.-Y. Chiu, Energy efﬁcient massive MIMO system design for smart grid 
communications, in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops 
(ICC), (2016), pp. 337–341 
4. T. Kaiser, Smart Antennas: State of the Art (Hindawi Publishing Corporation, 2005) 
5. H. Yuan, Z. Yin, C. Zhao, Z. Yang, S. Gao, S. Zhao, L. Xu, T. Tan, Y. Fang, Evaluation of smart 
environmental protection systems and novel UV-oriented solution for integration, resilience, 
inclusiveness and sustainability, in 2020 5th International Conference on Universal Village 
(UV), (2020), pp. 1–77 
6. S. Sun, A.P. Petropulu, H.V. Poor, MIMO radar for advanced driver-assistance systems and 
autonomous driving: Advantages and challenges. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 37(4), 98–117 
(2020) 
7. J. Kim, D. Han, J.-M. Chung, Virtual MIMO based wireless communication for remote medical 
condition monitoring, in International Conference on Smart Homes and Health Telematics, 
(Springer, 2010), pp. 259–262 
8. E. Bjornson, L. Sanguinetti, J. Hoydis, M. Debbah, Optimal design of energy-efﬁcient multi-
user MIMO systems: Is massive MIMO the answer? IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 14(6), 
3059–3075 (2015) 
9. A. Puglielli, A. Townley, G. LaCaille, V. Milovanovic, P. Lu, K. Trot-skovsky, A. Whitcombe, 
N. Narevsky, G. Wright, T. Courtade, E. Alon, B. Nikolic, A.M. Niknejad, Design of energy-
and cost-efﬁcient massive MIMO arrays. Proc. IEEE 104(3), 586–606 (2016) 
10. S. Noh, M.D. Zoltowski, Y. Sung, D.J. Love, Pilot beam pattern design for channel estimation 
in massive MIMO systems. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Sign. Proces. 8(5), 787–801 (2014) 
11. D. Borges, P. Montezuma, R. Dinis, M. Beko, Massive MIMO techniques for 5g and beyond— 
opportunities and challenges. Electronics 10(14) (2021). Available: https://www.mdpi.com/ 
2079-9292/10/14/1667 
12. S. Fortunati, L. Sanguinetti, F. Gini, M.S. Greco, B. Himed, Massive MIMO radar for target 
detection. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 68, 859–871 (2020)

Algorithmic Applications for Massive MIMO Technology
185
13. Z. Chen, X. He, Z. Cao, Y. Jin, J. Li, Position estimation of automatic-guided vehicle based on 
MIMO antenna array. Electronics 7(9) (2018) Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/7/ 
9/193 
14. M.A. Albreem, M. Juntti, S. Shahabuddin, Massive MIMO detection techniques: A survey. 
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 21(4), 3109–3132 (2019) 
15. W. Ajib, D. Haccoun, An overview of scheduling algorithms in MIMO-based fourth-generation 
wireless systems. IEEE Netw. 19(5), 43–48 (2005) 
16. A. Karpathy, Software 2.0 (2021). Available: https://karpathy.medium.com/software-2-0-
a64152b37c35 
17. A. Amberkar, P. Awasarmol, G. Deshmukh, P. Dave, Speech recognition using recurrent 
neural networks, in 2018 International Conference on Current Trends Towards Converging 
Technologies (ICCTCT), (IEEE, 2018), pp. 1–4 
18. G.N. Yannakakis, J. Togelius, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Games (Springer, 2018) 
19. D. Forsyth, J. Ponce, Computer Vision: A Modern Approach (Prentice hall, 2011) 
20. H. Samet, R.E. Webber, Hierarchical data structures and algorithms for computer graphics. i. 
Fundamentals. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 8(3), 48–68 (1988) 
21. A.M. Ahmed, A.A. Ahmad, S. Fortunati, A. Sezgin, M.S. Greco, F. Gini, A reinforcement 
learning based approach for multitarget detection in massive MIMO radar. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. 
Electron. Syst. 57(5), 2622–2636 (2021) 
22. B. Friedlander, On transmit beamforming for MIMO radar. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 
48, 3376–3388 (2012) 
23. J. Li, P. Stoica, MIMO radar with colocated antennas. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 24(5), 106– 
114 (2007) 
24. A. Davoli, G. Guerzoni, G.M. Vitetta, Machine learning and deep learning techniques for 
colocated MIMO radars: A tutorial overview. IEEE Access 9, 33704–33755 (2021) 
25. F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. 
Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, 
M. Perrot, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 
2825–2830 (2011) 
26. A. Paszke, S. Gross,  F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury,  G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N.  
Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, 
S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala, PyTorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
32, ed. by H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alche-Buc, E. Fox, R. Garnett, 
(Curran Associates, Inc., 2019), pp. 8024–8035. Available: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/ 
9015-pytorchan-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf 
27. C. Trabelsi, O. Bilaniuk, Y. Zhang, D. Serdyuk, S. Subramanian, J. F. Santos, S. Mehri, N. 
Rostamzadeh, Y. Bengio, and C. J. Pal, “Deep Complex Networks,” 2018 
28. V. Nair, G.E. Hinton, Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines, in 
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine 
Learning, ser. ICML’10. Madison, WI, USA: Omnipress, (2010), pp. 807–814 
29. S. Ruder, An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv, 
1609.04747 (2016)

Regression Model for Antenna Design 
E. S. Gopi 
1 
Linear Basis Regression Using Parametric Approach 
Consider the input random vectors be represented as bold xx and the corresponding 
observed noisy output variable be represented as t. Let bold x bold 1x1,bold x bold 2x2 midline horizontal ellipsis· · · bold x Subscript bold upper NxN are the outcome 
of the input random vector bold xx and the corresponding noisy outcome of the output 
random variable t be represented as t 1t1, t 2t2 midline horizontal ellipsis· · · t Subscript upper NtN respectively (refer Fig. 1). There 
is the hidden parametric relationship between the input vector bold xx and the noisy 
observation bold tt is represented as y left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisy(x). The requirement is to obtain the parametric 
model that describes the empirical relationship as described below. 
StartLayout 1st Row 1st Column y left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 3rd Column bold w Superscript upper T right bracket Baseline phi left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis EndLayout StartLayout 2nd Row 1st Column y left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis 2nd Column equals 3rd Column w 0 f 0 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis plus w 1 f 1 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x right parenthesis EndLayouty(x) = wT ]φ(x)Alt-text already available with first equation in this block
(1) 
y(x) = w0f0(x) + w1f1(x) + · · · +  wM−1fM−1(x)
(2) 
Data-driven model y left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisy(x) involves obtaining w 0w0, w 1w1, midline horizontal ellipsis· · · w Subscript upper M minus 1wM−1 using the training 
set bold x bold 1x1, midline horizontal ellipsis· · · bold x Subscript bold upper NxN, t 1t1, midline horizontal ellipsis· · · t Subscript upper NtN with predeﬁned selection of basis functions f 0 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf0(x), f 1 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf1(x), 
f 2 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf2(x) midline horizontal ellipsis· · · f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisfM−1(x) . The training set satisﬁes the following set of equations. 
StartLayout 1st Row bold t bold 1 equals w 0 f 0 left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis plus w 1 f 1 left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis plus epsilon EndLayout StartLayout 2nd Row bold t bold 2 equals w 0 f 0 left parenthesis bold x bold 2 right parenthesis plus w 1 f 1 left parenthesis bold x bold 2 right parenthesis plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 2 right parenthesis plus epsilon EndLayout StartLayout 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis EndLayout StartLayout 4th Row bold t Subscript bold upper N Baseline equals w 0 f 0 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline right parenthesis plus w 1 f 1 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline right parenthesis plus midline horizontal ellipsis plus w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline right parenthesis plus epsilon EndLayoutt1 = w0f0(x1) + w1f1(x1) + · · · + wM−1fM−1(x1) + ϵAlt-text already available with first equation in this block
(3) 
t2 = w0f0(x2) + w1f1(x2) + · · · + wM−1fM−1(x2) + ϵAlt-text already available with first equation in this block
(4) 
· · · Alt-text already available with first equation in this block
(5) 
tN = w0f0(xN) + w1f1(xN) + · · · + wM−1fM−1(xN) + ϵ
(6) 
E. S. Gopi (✉) 
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India 
e-mail: esgopi@nitt.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8_13
187

188
E. S. Gopi
Fig. 1 Illustration of Linear 
regression 
epsilonϵ is the random variable that follows Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and 
variance sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2σ 2
N. Since the functions f 0 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf0(x), f 1 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf1(x), f 2 left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisf2(x) midline horizontal ellipsis· · ·
f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x right parenthesisfM−1(x) are ﬁxed, 
the likelihood function of f left parenthesis t Subscript i Baseline divided by bold w right parenthesisf (ti/w) follows Gaussian density function with mean 
bold w Superscript upper T Baseline bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold i Baseline right parenthesiswT f(xi) (constant) and variance sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2σ 2
N . The unknown vector bold w equalsw = Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row w 0 2nd Row w 1 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row w Subscript upper M minus 1 EndMatrix
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
w0
w1
· · ·
wM−1
⎤
⎥⎥⎦is 
estimated as follows. Refer Fig. 1 for illustration of Linear regression model. 
1.1 
Least Square Technique 
In this technique, the unknown vector bold ww is estimated by minimizing the StartAbsoluteValue EndAbsoluteValue bold t minus bold upper F bold w StartAbsoluteValue EndAbsoluteValue squared||t −Fw||2, 
where bold t equalst = Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row t 0 2nd Row t 1 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row t Subscript upper N minus 1 EndMatrix
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
t0
t1
· · ·
tN−1
⎤
⎥⎥⎦and bold upper F equals Start 4 By 2 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column f 0 left parenthesis bold x bold 0 right parenthesis 2nd Column f 1 left parenthesis bold x bold 0 right parenthesis midline horizontal ellipsis f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column f 0 left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis 2nd Column f 1 left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis midline horizontal ellipsis f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis 3rd Row 1st Column midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row 1st Column f 0 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Column f 1 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis midline horizontal ellipsis f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrixF =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
f0(x0)
f1(x0) · · · fM−1(x0)
f0(x1)
f1(x1) · · · fM−1(x1)
· · ·
f0(xN−1) f1(xN−1) · · · fM−1(xN−1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦. This is  
obtained as follows. Let us represent bold f Subscript bold i Baseline equals Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row f Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 0 right parenthesis 2nd Row f Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis bold x bold 1 right parenthesis 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row f Subscript i Baseline left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrixfi =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
fi(x0)
fi(x1)
· · ·
fi(xN−1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦. 
Thus we can estimate bold ww such that StartAbsoluteValue EndAbsoluteValue bold t minus w 0 bold f bold 0 minus w 1 bold f bold 1 minus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline StartAbsoluteValue EndAbsoluteValue squared||t −w0f0 −w1f1 −· · · wM−1fM−1||2 is 
minimized. The vector w 0 bold f bold 0 plus w 1 bold f bold 1 plus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baselinew0f0 + w1f1 + · · · wM−1fM−1 lies in the vector space V 
spanned by the vectors bold f bold 0f0,bold f bold 0f0, midline horizontal ellipsis· · · bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1fM−1 and are chosen such that magnitude of the 
vector bold e equals left parenthesis bold t minus w 0 bold f bold 0 minus w 1 bold f bold 1 minus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesise = (t−w0f0 −w1f1 −· · · wM−1fM−1) is minimized. This happens when the 
error vector bold ee is orthogonal to the vector space V . Every error vector bold ee is orthogonal 
to every individual vectors than spans the space V (refer Fig. 2). i.e. bold e Superscript upper T Baseline bold f Subscript bold i Baseline equals bold f Subscript bold i Superscript upper T Baseline bold e equals 0eT fi = fT
i e = 0
for all i equals 1 comma midline horizontal ellipsis upper N∀i = 1, · · · N
bold f Subscript bold i Superscript upper T Baseline left parenthesis bold t minus w 0 bold f bold 0 minus w 1 bold f bold 1 minus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis equals 0fT
i (t −w0f0 −w1f1 −· · · wM−1fM−1) = 0
right double arrow bold f bold 0 Superscript bold upper T Baseline bold t equals bold f bold 0 Superscript bold upper T Baseline left parenthesis w 0 bold f bold 0 plus w 1 bold f bold 1 plus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesis⇒fT
0 t = fT
0 (w0f0 + w1f1 + · · · wM−1fM−1)
bold f bold 1 Superscript bold upper T Baseline bold t equals bold f bold 1 Superscript bold upper T Baseline left parenthesis w 0 bold f bold 0 plus w 1 bold f bold 1 plus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesisfT
1 t = fT
1 (w0f0 + w1f1 + · · · wM−1fM−1)
bold f bold 2 Superscript bold upper T Baseline bold t equals bold f bold 2 Superscript bold upper T Baseline left parenthesis w 0 bold f bold 0 plus w 1 bold f bold 1 plus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesisfT
2 t = fT
2 (w0f0 + w1f1 + · · · wM−1fM−1)

Regression Model for Antenna Design
189
Fig. 2 Illustration of Least 
Square Technique 
Fig. 3 Illustration of 
Maximum Likelihood 
estimation 
. · · ·
bold f Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Superscript bold upper T Baseline bold t equals bold f Subscript bold upper N minus bold 1 Superscript bold upper T Baseline left parenthesis w 0 bold f bold 0 plus w 1 bold f bold 1 plus midline horizontal ellipsis w Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline bold f Subscript bold upper M minus bold 1 Baseline right parenthesisfT
N−1t = fT
N−1(w0f0 + w1f1 + · · · wM−1fM−1)
right double arrow bold w equals left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold t⇒w = (FT F)−1FT t
1.2 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation 
Consider the outcome of the random vector bold xx, bold x bold 1x1 ends up with the outcome of the 
random variable t as t 1t1, n 1n1 number of times. Let outcome of the random vector bold xx, 
bold x bold 2x2 ends up with the outcome of the random variable t as t 1t1, n 2n2 number of times. 
Similarly outcome of the random vector bold xx, bold x Subscript bold kxk ends up with the outcome of the 
random variable t as t 1t1, n Subscript knk number of times. Then the estimate of bold xx given the 
outcome of the random variable t as t 1t1 is obtained as x Subscript rxr, where r equals a r g Subscript m Baseline m a x n Subscript mr = argmmaxnm
(refer Fig. 3). 
The unknown vector bold ww is estimated by maximizing the likelihood function 
p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesis equals p left parenthesis t 0 divided by bold w right parenthesis p left parenthesis t 1 divided by bold w right parenthesis bold w right parenthesis p left parenthesis t 3 divided by bold w right parenthesis midline horizontal ellipsis p left parenthesis t Subscript upper N minus 1 Baseline divided by bold w right parenthesisp(t/w)
=
p(t0/w)p(t1/w)w)p(t3/w) · · · p(tN−1/w). with density function 
p left parenthesis t Subscript k Baseline divided by bold w right parenthesisp(tk/w) follows Gaussian distributed with mean bold w Superscript upper T Baseline f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold k Baseline right parenthesiswT f (xk) with k equals 0 midline horizontal ellipsis upper N minus 1k = 0 · · · N −1
with variance sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2σ 2
N . Thus p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesisp(t/w) is given as follows.

190
E. S. Gopi
Fig. 4 Illustration of 
Likelihood fucntion 
p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesis equals left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over 2 pi sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction right parenthesis Superscript StartFraction upper N Over 2 EndFraction Baseline product Underscript i equals 0 Overscript upper N minus 1 Endscripts e Superscript minus StartFraction left parenthesis bold t Super Subscript bold i Superscript minus bold w Super Superscript upper T Superscript f left parenthesis bold x Super Subscript bold i Superscript right parenthesis right parenthesis squared Over 2 sigma Super Subscript upper N Super Superscript 2 Superscript EndFractionp(t/w) = (
1
2πσ 2
N
)
N
2
N−1
∏
i=0
e
−(ti−wT f (xi))2
2σ2
N
(7) 
Refer Fig. 4 for the illustration of Likelihood function. Since logarithm func-
tion is the increasing function. Maximizing p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesisp(t/w) is equivalent to maximizing 
l o g left parenthesis p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesis right parenthesislog(p(t/w)), which is further interpreted as minimizing the following. 
sigma summation Underscript i equals 0 Overscript i equals upper N minus 1 Endscripts left parenthesis bold t Subscript bold i Baseline minus bold w Superscript upper T Baseline f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold i Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis squared period
i=N−1
⎲
i=0
(ti −wT f (xi))2.
(8) 
This is the Least Square technique for estimating the vector bold ww and hence bold ww is 
estimated as right double arrow bold w equals left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold t⇒w = (FT F)−1FT t. The Maximum Likelihood estimation of the 
vector bold ww in regression model t Subscript k Baseline equals bold w Superscript upper T Baseline f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold k Baseline right parenthesis plus epsilontk = wT f (xk) + ϵ ends up with Least square 
estimation if epsilonϵ follows Gaussian distributed. 
1.3 
Bayes Technique 
Let bold x bold 1x1, bold x bold 2x2,midline horizontal ellipsis· · · bold x Subscript bold upper NxN be the outcomes of the random vector bold xx that ends up with identical 
outcome of the random variable t as t 1t1.Then the best estimate of bold xx given the 
observation of the outcome of the random variable bold tt are obtained as one of the 
following. (refer Fig. 5)

Regression Model for Antenna Design
191
Fig. 5 Illustration of 
Conditional Mean, Median 
and Mean estimates, MMAE, 
MAP estimation 
1. Mean of x 1x1, x 2x2,x 3x3,midline horizontal ellipsis· · ·
x Subscript upper NxN is known as conditional mean estimate. This is 
otherwise known as Minimum Mean Square Estimation (MMSE). 
2. Median of x 1x1, x 2x2,x 3x3,midline horizontal ellipsis· · · x Subscript upper NxN is known as conditional median estimate. This is 
otherwise known as Minimum Mean Absolute Error Estimation (MMAE). 
3. Mode of x 1x1, x 2x2,x 3x3,midline horizontal ellipsis· · ·
x Subscript upper NxN is known as Conditional mode estimate. This is 
otherwise known as Maximum a posteriori density estimation (MAP). 
The posterior density function p left parenthesis bold w divided by bold t right parenthesisp(w/t) is computed as follows. 
p left parenthesis bold w divided by bold t right parenthesis equals StartFraction p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesis p left parenthesis bold w right parenthesis Over integral p left parenthesis bold t divided by bold w right parenthesis p left parenthesis bold w right parenthesis d bold w EndFractionp(w/t) =
p(t/w)p(w)
⎰
p(t/w)p(w)dw
(9) 
If bold ww follows Gaussian distribution with mean as the zero vector and co-variance 
matrix sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2 Baseline bold upper Iσ 2
NI, where bold upper II is the Identity matrix. 
It can be shown that p left parenthesis bold w divided by bold t right parenthesisp(w/t) follows Multivariate Gaussian distributed with mean 
vector left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F plus StartFraction sigma Subscript bold upper N Superscript 2 Baseline Over sigma Subscript bold upper W Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction bold upper I right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold t(FT F + σ 2
N
σ 2
W I)−1FT t and Co-variance matrix left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F plus StartFraction sigma Subscript bold upper N Superscript 2 Baseline Over sigma Subscript bold upper W Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction bold upper I right parenthesis Superscript negative 1(FT F + σ 2
N
σ 2
W I)−1. 
The random vector 
bold ww is estimated as the conditional mean/conditional 
median/conditional mode of the posterior density function p left parenthesis bold w divided by bold t right parenthesisp(w/t) and is given 
as the following.(refer Fig. 6) bold w equals left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F plus StartFraction sigma Subscript bold upper N Superscript 2 Baseline Over sigma Subscript bold upper W Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction bold upper I right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold tw = (FT F + σ 2
N
σ 2
W I)−1FT t. 
2 
Gaussian Smoothing 
From least square technique (refer section 1.1), the regression model is obtained as 
the following. 
y left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis equals bold w Superscript upper T Baseline bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis equals bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t right parenthesis Superscript upper T Baseline bold w right parenthesisy(xtest) = wT f(xtest) = f(xT
test)w)
(10)

192
E. S. Gopi
Fig. 6 Illustration of Linear regression 
where 
bold w equals left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold tw = (FT F)−1FT t
(11) 
and bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t right parenthesis Baseline equalsf(xtest) = Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row f 0 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row f 1 left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row f Subscript upper M minus 1 Baseline left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis EndMatrix
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
f0(xtest)
f1(xtest)
· · ·
fM−1(xtest)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
StartLayout 1st Row long right double arrow y left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis equals bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper T Baseline left parenthesis left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold t right parenthesis EndLayout StartLayout 2nd Row long right double arrow y left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis equals sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript i equals upper N Endscripts k left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline comma bold x Subscript bold i Baseline right parenthesis t Subscript i EndLayout =⇒y(xtest) = f(xtest)T ((FT F)−1FT t)Alt-text already available with first equation in this block
(12)
=⇒ y(xtest) = 
i=N
⎲
i=1 
k(xtest, xi)ti
(13) 
wherek left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline comma bold x Subscript bold i Baseline right parenthesisk(xtest, xi) is the kernel function given as the following. 
k left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline comma bold x Subscript bold i Baseline right parenthesis equals sigma summation Underscript i equals 1 Overscript i equals upper N Endscripts bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper T Baseline left parenthesis upper F Superscript upper T Baseline upper F right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesisk(xtest, xi) =
i=N
⎲
i=1
f(xtest)T (F T F)−1f(xtest)
(14) 
Refer Fig. 7 for illustration (14).

Regression Model for Antenna Design
193
Fig. 7 Illustration of Kernel smoothing technique for regression 
3 
Gaussian Process Technique 
In this technique the training data observation data 
t Subscript ntn corresponding to the 
input vector 
bold x Subscript bold nxn is modeled as Gaussian distributed with mean 
phi left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold n Baseline right parenthesisφ(xn) and 
variance sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2σ 2
N. The idea behind Gaussian process based estimation of the target 
corresponding to the test input vector bold x Subscript bold t e s txtest is to obtain the conditional density 
function f left parenthesis t Subscript t e s t Baseline divided by t 1 t 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x bold 1 bold x bold 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesisf (ttest/t1t2 · · · x1x2 · · · xNxtest) and the mean of the obtained density 
function is declared as the estimate. It can be shown that the density function 
f left parenthesis t Subscript t e s t Baseline divided by t 1 t 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x bold 1 bold x bold 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesisf (ttest/t1t2 · · · x1x2 · · · xNxtest) follows Gaussian distributed with mean and 
variance computed as follows. Let k left parenthesis bold x Subscript i Baseline comma bold x Subscript j Baseline right parenthesis equals upper E left parenthesis normal upper Phi Subscript bold x Sub Subscript bold i Subscript Baseline comma normal upper Phi Subscript bold x Sub Subscript bold j Subscript Baseline right parenthesis equals k Subscript i jk(xi, xj) = E(Φxi, Φxj) = kij , where upper E left parenthesis period right parenthesisE(.)
is the Expectation operator. The co-variance matrix of the vector bold t equals Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row t 1 2nd Row t 2 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row t Subscript upper N EndMatrixt =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
t1
t2
· · ·
tN
⎤
⎥⎥⎦is 
given as the following. bold c Subscript bold t Baseline equalsct = Start 4 By 4 Matrix 1st Row 1st Column k 11 plus sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2 2nd Column k 12 3rd Column midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Column k Subscript 1 upper N 2nd Row 1st Column k 21 2nd Column k 22 plus sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2 3rd Column midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Column k Subscript 2 upper N 3rd Row 1st Column midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row 1st Column k Subscript upper N Baseline 1 2nd Column k Subscript upper N Baseline 2 3rd Column midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Column k Subscript upper N upper N Baseline plus sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2 Baseline EndMatrix
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
k11 + σ 2
N
k12
· · ·
k1N
k21
k22 + σ 2
N · · ·
k2N
· · ·
kN1
kN2
· · · kNN + σ 2
N
⎤
⎥⎥⎦. 
Let bold k equals Start 4 By 1 Matrix 1st Row bold k Subscript bold t e s t bold comma bold 1 Baseline 2nd Row bold k Subscript bold t e s t bold comma bold 2 Baseline 3rd Row midline horizontal ellipsis 4th Row bold k Subscript bold t e s t bold comma bold upper N EndMatrixk =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
ktest,1
ktest,2
· · ·
ktest,N
⎤
⎥⎥⎦and sigma squared equals bold k Subscript bold t e s t bold comma bold t e s tσ 2 = ktest,test. The a posterior density function 
f left parenthesis t Subscript t e s t Baseline divided by t 1 t 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x bold 1 bold x bold 2 midline horizontal ellipsis bold x Subscript bold upper N Baseline bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesisf (ttest/t1t2 · · · x1x2 · · · xNxtest) follows Gaussian distributed with mean bold k Superscript upper T Baseline upper C Subscript t Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold tkT C−1
t
t
and variance sigma squared minus bold k Superscript upper T Baseline upper C Subscript t Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold kσ 2 −kT C−1
t
k. Thus the estimate corresponding to random vector bold x Subscript bold t e s txtest
is given as the following. bold k Superscript upper T Baseline upper C Subscript t Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold tkT C−1
t
t Refer Fig. 8 for the illustration of the Gaussian 
process.

194
E. S. Gopi
Fig. 8 Illustration of Gaussian Process 
4 
Intuitive Understanding on the Impact of Number of Data 
on Estimating w 
Given the dataset, it is understood that every outcome of the random vector bold ww
ends up with individual regression model. For the arbitrary testing vector bold x Subscript bold t e s txtest, the  
outcome of the random vector t Subscript t e s tttest is obtained as follows. 
t Subscript t e s t Baseline equals bold w Superscript upper T Baseline f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis plus epsilonttest = wT f (xtest) + ϵ
(15) 
In this f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesisf (xtest) is ﬁxed, the predicted value t Subscript t e s tttest depends upon the choice of bold ww
and epsilonϵ. It can be shown that the density function t Subscript t e s tttest follows Gaussian with mean 
vector left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F plus StartFraction sigma Subscript bold upper N Superscript 2 Baseline Over sigma Subscript bold upper W Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction bold upper I right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 Baseline bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold t(FT F + σ 2
N
σ 2
W I)−1FT t and variance f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis Superscript upper T Baseline left parenthesis bold upper F Superscript upper T Baseline bold upper F plus StartFraction sigma Subscript bold upper N Superscript 2 Baseline Over sigma Subscript bold upper W Superscript 2 Baseline EndFraction bold upper I right parenthesis Superscript negative 1 f left parenthesis bold x Subscript bold t e s t Baseline right parenthesis plus StartFraction 1 Over beta EndFractionf (xtest)T (FT F + σ 2
N
σ 2
W I)−1f (xtest) + 1
β . It  
is understood that the size of the matrix bold upper FF is upper N times upper MN × M. It can also be shown that the 
variance of the predictive variable t Subscript t e s tttest decreases as N increases and as N tends 
to normal infinity∞, the variance tends to StartFraction 1 Over beta EndFraction1
β . Refer Fig. 9 for the illustration. In this case, it is 
understood that the value of sigma Subscript upper N Superscript 2σ 2
N. 
5 
Conclusion 
In this chapter, we have discussed the basic data-driven model establishing the 
relationship between the random vector bold xx (input) and the target scalar t (output) 
using various regression techniques. Other techniques like Evidence approximation, 
Approximate inference techniques, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, and Deep learning 
regression techniques [1–4] are recommended for further reading on this topic.

Regression Model for Antenna Design
195
Fig. 9 Illustration that the variance of the density function of the predictive distribution t Subscript t e s tttest
decreases as the number of training data increases. Also mean of the predictive distribution t Subscript t e s tttest
converges to the true value as the number of training data increases 
References 
1. L. Cheng, F. Yin, S. Theodoridis, S. Chatzis T.-H. Chang, Rethinking Bayesian learning for 
data analysis: The art of prior and inference in sparsity-aware modeling. IEEE Signal Process. 
Mag. 39(6), 18–52 (2022) 
2. C.M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Springer, 2006) 
3. E.S. Gopi, Pattern Recognition and Computational Intelligence Techniques Using Matlab 
(Springer, 2020) 
4. I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep Learning (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 
London (2016)

Index 
A 
Additive manufacturing, 107, 109, 111 
Algorithm design and analysis, 176, 181–183 
B 
Bandwidth, 4, 12, 13, 18, 19, 24, 29–31, 
37–41, 45, 49, 51, 52, 54, 55, 57–59, 61, 
66–68, 71, 83, 85–91, 93–96, 98, 100, 
102, 104, 109–111, 126, 128, 130–133, 
139, 151, 154, 162, 172, 175, 180 
Broadband antennas, 68 
C 
Characteristic impedance, 8–9, 157 
Characteristic modes, 37, 39, 40, 84, 85 
Circuit theory, 4–6 
Compact antennas, 29, 55–56 
Compact size, 45, 83, 84, 90 
Conformal, 65, 70, 71, 74, 83, 93–104 
Co-polarization, 60, 99 
D 
Dielectric resonator antennas (DRAs), 83–91, 
93 
Dipole antennas, 17, 23, 29–42, 70, 73, 95 
Directivity, 7, 18, 19, 23–25, 94 
Distributed components, 7–8 
Driven element, 55–58, 60, 61 
Dual-mode, 30–41 
E 
Efﬁciency, 37, 38, 40, 42, 45, 52–55, 60–62, 
65, 66, 71, 72, 83, 85, 87, 90, 91, 93, 
95, 99, 102, 111, 113, 119, 132, 139, 
175–177, 183 
Electrically small antennas (ESAs), 45–62 
Equivalent circuit, 133, 139, 140, 156–158, 
167–168, 172 
F 
Field theory, 6, 10 
Finite circular ground, 17–26 
5G communication, 13, 52, 119, 175 
Frequency-selective surface (FSS), 70, 74, 130, 
154–158, 165–172 
Full-duplex, 119–143 
G 
Gaussian process, 181, 193–194 
H 
High-gain antennas, 107 
I 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), 
132 
Internet of Things (IoT), 13, 45, 67, 96, 176 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to 
Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
H. Kumar, E. S. Gopi (eds.), RF, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies, 
Signals and Communication Technology, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62526-8
197

198
Index 
K 
Kernel smoothing, 193 
L 
Linear regression, 188, 192 
Low-proﬁle, 65, 90, 93–104, 107, 108 
Lumped components, 3, 155 
M 
Machine learning (ML), 176, 180–182, 184 
Metal-only reﬂectarray (MORA), 109, 
111–113, 117 
Metasurface, 147–162, 165 
Microstrip antenna, 29, 66, 83, 84, 121, 122, 
131, 139 
Microwave absorber, 147–162 
Microwaves, 1–14, 65, 83, 84 
mm waves, 1–14, 83, 95 
Mode compression, 29–42 
Modes, 12, 29–37, 39–41, 84–86, 89, 93, 95, 
96, 99, 119, 129, 131, 132, 138, 141, 
155, 191 
Monopole, 17–26, 46–50, 52, 55, 56, 61, 66, 
68, 85, 86, 172 
Multi-mode, 30–41 
Multiple input-multiple output (MIMO), 13, 
84, 175–184 
Mutual coupling, 122, 124–126, 129, 133, 138 
O 
Omnidirectional radiation, 29, 52, 60, 172 
P 
Periodic structures, 165 
Perturbation, 89, 93, 96–99, 104 
R 
Radar, 2, 3, 10–11, 89, 91, 96, 107–109, 147, 
160, 162, 170, 176–180, 182, 184 
Radar cross-section (RCS), 7, 11, 147–149, 
158–162, 165, 171 
Radio frequency (RF), 1–14, 66, 67, 71, 73, 
111, 120, 147, 168–170, 172, 176 
Radome, 154, 165–172 
Reader antennas, 67–69 
Reﬂectarray, 107–117 
Resonance, 10, 14, 31, 46–52, 55, 57, 58, 61, 
84, 151, 166, 168 
Resonance frequency, 17–24, 61, 151, 160, 168 
Resonating modes, 53, 54, 57–59, 61 
S 
Satellite communications, 12, 89, 91, 107 
Self-interference cancellation, 120–129, 
135–142 
Skin depth, 7 
Stub loading, 31–33, 38 
Stub resonators, 45, 46, 135–142 
T 
Tag antennas, 67–70, 73 
Textile, 65–77 
3D printing, 109, 116, 117 
Transmission line, 6–9, 46, 49, 73, 147–162, 
167 
Transmitarray, 113–115 
U 
UHF-RFID, 67–70, 73, 75, 77 
Unit cell, 94, 110, 154, 155, 158–160, 162, 
166–168 
V 
V2X, 132 
W 
Wireless systems, 1, 7, 10, 12, 73, 147

