
My Sun and Stars
A novel of homoerotic fantasy by
L.E. Bryce

Phaze
6470A Glenway Avenue, #109
Cincinnati, OH 45211-5222
This is a work  of  fiction.  Names,  places,  characters  and  incidents  are  either  the  product  of  the  author's
imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to any actual persons, living or dead, organizations,
events or locales is entirely coincidental.
eBook ISBN 1-59426-642-5
My Sun and Stars © 2006 by L.E. Bryce
All rights reserved under the International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. No part of this book
may  be  reproduced  or  transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,  without  permission  in  writing
from the publisher.
Cover art © 2006 by Kathryn Lively
Phaze is an imprint of Mundania Press, LLC.
www.Phaze.com

Also by the Author
Dead to the World

Part One
My Sun and Stars

Chapter One
Adeja  received  his  new  orders  with  a  professional  silence  belying  his  relief.  A  promotion  from
guarding the central hall of the palace to the quarters of the royal heir was nothing to scoff at. Zhanil was a
friend of the army and often exchanged small talk with the soldiers posted to the royal household.
"The prince asked specifically for you," said Meden. "It's a great honor, if you want to call it that." The
smile his commanding officer gave him was mystifying, one part conspiratorial and one part mocking. "As a
post, it has its own risks and rewards. You might find it a welcome change—or not. Dinhal will take you."
In  his  three  years  on  duty  in  the  Rhodeen  capital,  Adeja  had  never  been  anywhere  near  the  royal
apartments, situated on the third level of the palace. Dinhal, who was Meden's personal message boy, was
a dour guide, saying nothing and handing him over to the prince's chief eunuch without ceremony.
Adeja rarely trusted eunuchs. They all seemed to possess the same secretive, shifty eyes, a trait that
came  perhaps  from  being  unmanned  and  having  only  food  and  gossip  to  console  them.  This  particular
eunuch was a dark-skinned Juvan with a prominent double chin and narrow eyes that  were  nearly  lost  in
the fleshy folds of his face. Adeja disliked him at once. Still, he remembered his place and handed over his
orders.
Unfolding the missive, the eunuch gave it no more than  a  cursory  glance.  "My  name  is  Nakhet,"  he
said, "and when you do not take orders from our master you will take them from me. Now then, the prince
is waiting within and we cannot keep him."
From the foyer, Adeja followed the eunuch through a series of rooms, each more elaborate and richly
furnished than the last. Several sleek cats lounged on cushions throughout the apartment, and servants were
busy at their tasks. A few glanced up when he passed, returning to work only when Nakhet chastised them.
At last, they came to a terraced hanging garden with a view of the city and mountains beyond. Nakhet
waved Adeja toward a reflecting pool tiled with blue mosaics. "Wait here while I inform  Prince  Sephil  of
your arrival."
Adeja,  casually  inspecting  his  surroundings,  froze  at  the  name.  "I'm  sorry,  I  didn't  quite  hear  you.
Surely there must be some mistake. I've been assigned to guard Crown Prince Zhanil."
Nakhet's laughter did not reassure him. Waving a plump hand thick with rings, the eunuch indicated the
missive in his other. "I have your orders right here, soldier. You have been assigned to the household of the
king's second son. Now, if there are no more questions, we cannot keep him waiting."
Once the eunuch was gone, Adeja knotted his hands into fists. Everyone knew the younger prince was
a simpering fool who was not  even  permitted  at  court.  No  wonder  Meden  mocked  him.  This  was  not  a
promotion at all.
Nakhet returned with two other eunuchs and a young man dressed in clinging, pale green silk. Adeja
made the requisite bow, formally presented himself for duty, and waited. If he remembered correctly, Sephil
Brasides was nineteen years old with no military training whatsoever. His appearance certainly confirmed
the tales: beardless and willowy, with pale skin and a mass of light brown hair that fell nearly to his waist.
Had it not been for the apple bobbing at his throat, Adeja might have taken him for a girl.
"Is this the new sentry?" asked a low voice.
"Yes, my lord," replied Nakhet. "He comes highly recommended."
The prince now stood directly in front of him, in a cloud of costly fragrance that made his nose twitch.
"What is your name, soldier?"
"Adeja ked Shamuz, my lord."
"Adeja,"  Sephil  purred,  drawing  out  the  syllables  as  if  tasting  them.  Adeja  lowered  his  eyes  to  the
pebbled mosaic that encircled the pool. He could feel the prince's gaze crawling over  him,  appraising  him
like a prospective buyer at a horse auction.
Sephil  stepped  back.  "Yes,  he  will  serve.  That  will  be  all  for  now.  Nakhet,  see  to  it  this  guard  is
properly stationed and that he knows the duties of the household."
* * * *
Adeja's  shift  lasted  from  sunset  to  dawn.  Mostly  it  was  quiet  and  uneventful,  although  the  prince
occasionally entertained. Musicians and dancers came in, and the guests brushed through the foyer in their

finery  and  costly  fragrances;  Adeja  could  not  fail  to  notice  that  most  of  them  were  young  noblemen,
probably the prince's friends. A few looked in his direction and smirked, making lewd comments about his
physique. As they were usually drunk or high on kif when they jeered him, he ignored them.
On a few occasions he saw a eunuch bring in a  youth  for  the  prince's  pleasure,  and  could  hear  the
moaning and carrying on several rooms away. Adeja quickly learned that the prince had  a  healthy  sexual
appetite and apparently no taste for girls.
During the day, he went  back  to  the  barracks  to  eat  and  sleep.  Most  of  his  fellow  guards  had  day
shifts, but a few were in when he arrived. They lost no time in asking how well he liked being posted to a
prince's apartments. "That one never  leaves  his  rooms.  He  likes  his  parties,  too,  I've  heard,"  said  Hedir.
"You must see some interesting things."
Adeja  shrugged.  He  knew  better  than  to  complain  about  his  employer  or  share  gossip.  Men  got
demoted or worse for engaging in such business. "It's really quite boring."
One night as he stood sentry duty in the foyer, he spied a figure moving through the shadows. It was
not unusual for the servants to move about in the quiet hours, tidying up or going to and from trysts after the
master retired. A palace never truly slept.
Even in the darkness from several feet away he could tell that this was neither a servant nor a eunuch.
He tightened his grip on his pike, ready to call the alarm and strike if the stranger did not identify himself.
"Who is there?"
In a swirl of silk, Sephil approached him. "Adeja, come with me to the terrace."
"My post is here, my lord," he answered.
"Are you telling me you like standing at attention for twelve hours at a time? You do not even have to
use the privy?" Sephil's laughter was so disjointed Adeja could not help but wonder if he had been drinking
or smoking kif. "I order you to come with me. You cannot very well guard me if I am elsewhere."
"My duty is to watch the door."
"You will not need that here." Sephil touched the pike, then, as Adeja slowly relaxed, eased it from his
hand and leaned it against the wall by the door. "I gave you an order. You will accompany me."
The hanging garden was  cool  and  quiet  but  for  the  soft  splash  of  the  fountain.  During  the  day,  the
terrace afforded a commanding view of the city's western quarter and the mountains crowning the horizon.
Stars spangled the night sky, and in the distance flickering torches delineated the ceremonial shrine of  the
pyramid of the Moon.
"Where do you come from, Adeja?" Sephil asked softly. "You are not a native of Rhodeen."
"I'm from Tajhaan, my lord."
Once again Sephil responded with that tipsy laugh. "Oh, you do not need to be so formal with me. You
may call me Sephil. Tell me, is Tajhaan much different than Rhodeen?"
Even the most slow-witted prostitute  knew  the  basic  differences  between  the  two  kingdoms.  Either
Sephil was making inane small talk or he really was that ignorant. "Tajhaan is an oasis in the middle of the
desert, my lord." Adeja gazed out over the city, bordered by the wide silvery ribbon of the river Khul. "This
is a green land, not at all like home."
"Have you traveled far?"
"I've been many places and seen many things," answered Adeja.
Sighing, Sephil leaned against the terrace. "I would like to travel. I have never seen the desert or the
ocean. I have never been much of anywhere. My father has a palace in Cassiare. When I was a boy we
spent summers there and I saw the silk farms, but that was all."
Why  the  prince  felt  a  need  to  confide  in  him,  Adeja  did  not  know.  It  made  him  slightly  uneasy.
"Traveling isn't as safe as it once was. Too many Turyar about," he said.
"I have heard about them. Are they very dangerous?"
"They're horsemen from the steppes north of the Sevaa wastes," replied Adeja. "They appear  out  of
nowhere and attack without warning or  mercy,  and  where  they've  been  they  leave  smoldering  ruins  and
piles of corpses. Men, women, children, it doesn't matter to them. I've seen them kill everything down to the
village dogs. They have no cities  and  no  kings,  just  scattered  clans  with  chieftains  whom  you  can't  trust
enough to bargain with. Stay behind your walls and be thankful you don't have to deal with them."
"Keep to my apartments and amusements like a woman and leave the rest to soldiers like you, is that
it?" asked Sephil. Moving closer, he dropped his voice. "Tell me, soldier, what do you like in bed? Do you
like boys?"
The question was so unexpected, so shamelessly blunt Adeja did not know how to answer. "Why  do
you want to know, my lord?"
"I will not dance around my reason for bringing you here," explained Sephil. "You see, I enjoy having

handsome  guardsmen  on  duty.  I  enjoy  watching  you  stand  at  attention  for  hours  at  a  time.  You  never
twitch, never even blink. I cannot help but wonder what it would take to make you lose control."
This teasing was thoroughly inappropriate. No doubt the prince  was  drunk  and  would  not  remember
any of it in the morning. "My lord, I am on duty, and my duty is to guard the door not to—"
"Not to pleasure me in my bed?"
"My lord, I think you are—"
"I am not drunk," answered Sephil, "and I do not smoke kif. I know what I am doing, and I hardly think
you would refuse me if given the chance."
"I am a soldier, my lord."
Sephil laughed. "Oh, I have had soldiers before. They are insatiable. In fact, the last one could not get
enough of my mouth." He leaned in close enough that their bodies touched. Adeja tried to move away, but
Sephil  hooked  an  arm  through  his  and  bent  to  his  ear.  "Bedez  was  uncut,  and  he  once  told  me  that  all
Tajhaani men were the same. I thoroughly enjoyed sucking him off."
Whether it was appropriate to rebuff a prince or not, Adeja broke away in horror. Of all the things he
expected Sephil might say, hearing him confess such wantonness was not one of them. "My lord, I would
never do such things with a member of the royal family. Your father would have my head if I did."
"Bedez  said  that,  too,  and  the  one  before  him,  but  I  know  enough  about  you  soldiers  to  know  you
cannot get enough sex. I would not be surprised if you were hard right now, and picturing me on my knees
in front of you. Besides, my father does not care what I do."
With Sephil's hands  roaming  his  arms  and  chest,  it  was  getting  increasingly  difficult  to  concentrate.
"What happened to him, this Bedez?"
"He grew tiresome and started making demands. He wanted jewels and horses, and threatened to brag
to everyone about how he pleasured me," answered Sephil. "I had him sent to Mekesh on the edge of the
Sevaa wastes. There was nothing else I could do."
A chill knotted Adeja's belly at the prince's matter-of-fact tone. If he was not  very,  very  careful,  he
could end the same way. "If it's a plaything you want, my lord, you're better off buying yourself an akesh."
"What is that?"
"An akesh is a pleasure slave, a pedith."
"I have had plenty of those, but it is not the same. Having a slave who will do anything you command
defeats the purpose. I prefer men like you."
Adeja  carefully  disentangled  his  arm  and  crossed  both  over  his  chest.  "I  don't  go  around  bedding
princes."
"Oh, am I that ugly?" laughed Sephil.
"One should not meddle with those above one's station," said Adeja.
It  might  mean  nothing  to  you,  but  sooner  or  later  someone  will  put  a  knife  to  my  throat  for
daring  to meddle with a king's  son, Adeja thought. It was no wonder Brasidios  barred  his  younger  son
from court. "Does your father know what you do?"
"I told you, as long as I do not create a public scandal, he does not care what I do."
However, that did not mean the king did not care what Adeja  did. He found  it  extremely  difficult  to
concentrate with Sephil pressing up against him, stroking his bicep through the thin wool of his tunic.  Had
the prince been anyone else, had he been an akesh or a bakti  from the local brothel, his teasing would not
have gone on this long. Adeja would have already pushed him  to  his  knees  and  shown  him  exactly  what
soldiers did with whores.
* * * *
"What is the matter with him, Nakhet?"
At once, the eunuch moved to his side. "With whom, my prince?"
Sephil glanced in the direction of the foyer, trusting Nakhet's eyes to follow. The Tajhaani guard was
off duty, but his presence hung heavy in the air, a thorn that refused to be pruned  to  fit  Sephil's  tidy  little
world. "He does not respond like the other ones."
"Give  him  time,  my  lord.  These  soldiers  are  rather  dense,  but  once  this  one  understands  what  is
required of him I doubt he will be able to resist your charms for long."
"Yes, I think he will give good chase." Sephil slid his foot from his sandal to trace the fountain tiles with
lacquered toes. But I do not want him to be quite like  the last one, he added privately. Bedez had been
good to look at and even better in bed, yet in their hours together something had been lacking.
In quiet moments, when Nakhet was not present to reassure him, Sephil wondered if perhaps he was
mistaken in trying to repeat the experience. I should  send  the man back  to his barracks  and  forget  the
whole thing.

Even as the thought formed, Sephil dismissed it. Adeja would remain, if only because he could not be
trusted to keep silent if he left. Nakhet assured him otherwise, of course, but of late the eunuch's promises
gave him no comfort. Adeja might stand wordless at his post, but who knew what he did or said when he
was off-duty?
And I want him to stay, and  learn  to like  me. I will be that much lonelier if he does  not.  Sephil
drew his hair back from his face and bent over the edge of the fountain to try to catch his reflection in the
water. I am not ugly, so why does he resist?
His eyes once again darted toward the foyer, where dull, stalwart  Eumos  stood  guard,  wishing  night
would come and Adeja with it. 
"After tonight's entertainment," said Nakhet, "he may be better disposed to serve you."
"Is there to be another party?" sighed Sephil. Last night had been enough for him, and the thought of
one  more  evening  in  the  company  of  Ethurel  and  the  other  disaffected  young  noblemen  who  helped
themselves to his hospitality held little interest. Once, they had  been  beloved  links  to  an  outside  world  he
was no longer allowed to see; he had delighted  in  them,  and  let  himself  believe  that  his  sentiments  were
returned. Of late, however, the emptiness of their interactions made his stomach roil, heightening his sense
of alienation and growing despair.
I will never have true friends, or family, he thought. Even Zhanil has no time for me.
"Where do you find the money to afford all the wine and kif and pleasure slaves? Father keeps me on
such a short allowance."
If  he  had  expected  a  forthright  answer,  Nakhet  disappointed  him.  "You  know  I  have  investments
throughout the city," said the eunuch. "Do not trouble yourself anymore thinking about such things and trust
me."
As  he  left,  a  servant  came  in  with  a  selection  of  robes.  Sephil,  tempted  to  send  the  man  away,
regarded the embroidered silks with distaste. That is the problem, he thought. I cannot  trust Nakhet,  but
there is no one else.

Chapter Two
Now  would  have  been  the  ideal  moment  for  Adeja  to  go  to  his  commanding  officer  and  request  a
transfer, but in order to have it approved he would have to divulge the reason for his request. Only a fool
would tell the truth, and from the hints Sephil had thrown in his direction, he knew the prince would thwart
the attempt.
For  the  next  two  weeks  he  remained  at  his  post,  pointedly  ignoring  the  prince's  increasingly
provocative efforts at seduction. If he did not respond, perhaps Sephil would grow weary of the chase and
send him back to the barracks. A demotion from the royal household would tarnish his  career,  but  at  this
point it was better than the alternative.
Each night before bed, Sephil emerged from his bedchamber for what had become a ritual. Giving no
thought to whom might be watching, he walked up to  Adeja  and  ran  his  fingers  over  Adeja's  ceremonial
breastplate and sword belt, stroking a palm over the bulge  in  his  leggings.  Adeja  drew  a  long  breath  and
held it, determined to betray no reaction.
Sephil leaned forward to breathe in his ear, licking his earlobe before speaking. "If you want me, you
know where I sleep."
Adeja stayed at his post and counted tiles, anything to take his mind off his erection and the tempting
morsel laying in bed only a few rooms away.
After  a  few  nights,  Sephil's  tactics  became  more  aggressive.  He  sent  a  servant  with  a  platter  of
long-stemmed mushrooms whose phallic caps were dipped in an opaque  white  wine  sauce,  and  mounded
pastries tipped  with  nipples  of  candied  almonds.  Toward  midnight,  Sephil  came  out,  spied  the  untouched
food and wine on the sideboard, and carefully speared a mushroom on a silver fork, suggestively licking off
the sauce and drawing the purplish head between his  lips  before  consuming  it.  "You  could  be  enjoying  a
better feast than this," he said.
"I do not eat or drink on duty, my lord," answered Adeja.
"Perhaps I should have you exchange shifts with Eumos and invite you back when you are not on duty.
Then you will not have such a ready excuse."
Eumos, the guard who had the day shift, was a pockmarked, middle-aged veteran obviously chosen by
the king. As the man slept in a different barracks, Adeja did not know him, and Eumos had little to say to
him, though at times he wore a sympathetic look that said he knew everything.
If I were old and ugly like him, my life would be so much simpler. Adeja never anticipated the day
when he would think such a thing, but there it was.
Two nights later, Sephil brought a pleasure slave into the foyer and slowly made love to him on a pile
of cushions he had ordered the servants to place there. With his  mouth  and  hands  he  drove  the  youth  to
ecstasy before taking his pleasure, mounting him from an angle that allowed  Adeja  to  watch  his  buttocks
pumping and clenching.
The little whore wants me to fuck him right here. Adeja wanted to close his eyes, knowing it would
probably be best if he did, but nothing could shut out the moans and gasps.
Once  they  were  finished,  Sephil  gave  Adeja  a  disappointed  look  and  turned  to  nuzzle  his  partner.
Shortly afterward, they withdrew into the bedchamber and throughout the night Adeja heard muffled sounds
of ecstasy which he did his best to ignore. Had they remained in the foyer, he could not say what he would
have done.
The pleasure slave left just as Eumos came on duty. Adeja greeted him, handed over the ceremonial
pike and helmet, and hurried back to the barracks where he spent half an hour masturbating in the deserted
privy. He could not endure much more of this teasing. Now was the time either to draw a brand across his
face, request a transfer, or contemplate desertion. The alternative was unthinkable.
Meden was away, and a calmer assessment of the situation made desertion an unlikely choice. All he
could do was show restraint on duty, though by now he was crazy enough with lust to forget propriety, to
throw Sephil down on the floor and take him like the whore he was. He wanted to hear that seductive voice
moaning his name, and yet at the same time he wanted to beat the  prince  bloody  for  playing  games  with

him.
In his experience, sex and violence were not such divergent forces.
He went to his cot and slept for a few hours before he was roused by the call to the noon mess. Three
coppers bought him a quarter of an hour with a youth from an establishment that catered to soldiers.  The
boy's  rehearsed  cries  of  encouragement  did  nothing  to  sate  Adeja's  hunger,  and  though  he  climaxed  he
went away disillusioned.
Evening found him in a sour temper which Sephil's appearance did not alleviate,  especially  when  the
prince made a point of commenting upon his restraint. "Hallisos was hot enough for two men last night. Tell
me, have you ever had two mouths sucking you at the same time? Such a pity, you could have fucked us
both."
Sephil  obviously  did  not  care  that  Nakhet  and  another  eunuch  stood  within  earshot.  Knowing  their
proclivities for gossip, the entire court probably knew by now.
His apprehension only increased when Sephil left and Nakhet approached him. "Perhaps you have not
noticed," commented the eunuch, "but there are many more opportunities in this household than elsewhere."
"I've never been an overly ambitious man," answered Adeja. "I'm curious, though. Is Eumos keen on
the…opportunities here?"
Nakhet narrowed his eyes. "Eumos was recommended by the king, but sadly he does not, shall we say,
qualify for advancement. Unfair though it may be to a veteran, the best  opportunities  come  to  those  who
are young and fit."
As the eunuch's gaze traveled up and down  his  body,  Adeja  wanted  to  ask  him  point-blank  how  he
could get away with such shameless pandering. "I'm used to my soldier's routine."
"Life without change is dull, soldier," said Nakhet. "You would do well to consider your options while
they are still available to you."
Uneasiness  dogged  Adeja  through  the  next  few  hours.  The  eunuch's  subtle  prodding  was  more
disturbing than Sephil's blatant overtures. He had endured enough. Tomorrow he  would  ask  Meden  for  a
transfer  and  take  what  menial  post  he  could  get.  Even  a  colorless  existence  in  Tajhaan  held  better
prospects at this point.
Night  fell  on  the  city.  By  the  quiet  air  of  the  household,  Adeja  could  tell  Sephil  would  not  be
entertaining. Later a musician might be summoned, or a pleasure slave, as the prince did not  like  to  sleep
alone, yet for now all was calm.
Twilight  colored  the  foyer  in  shadows  and  deep  cobalt.  A  light  breeze  stirred  the  hangings  in  the
hallway beyond. Servants had not yet come to light the lamps in the prince's drawing room, and Adeja did
not even hear their small movements.
"I sent them away," murmured a voice beside him.
Sephil, draped in a dark robe embroidered with lotus flowers, stood at his elbow.
"What do you want?" asked Adeja.
"To know why you keep saying no to me."
"Because you're a prince and I'm a soldier."
Sephil stood unbearably close now, his hands sliding across Adeja's  middle  to  do  things  with  his  belt
that should not be allowed.  Adeja's  breath  hitched  as  those  hands  ventured  lower,  seeking  his  groin.  He
wanted to grab those hands and shove them away, and at the same time he wanted to pull them against his
growing erection. "Why are you playing with me?" he gasped. "This is dangerous."
"It is just an innocent bit of fun, that is all," Sephil said sweetly, sounding like one who believed it. "You
are always so serious. We are just playing. Nothing will come of it. And besides, how many other soldiers
can boast of being in the mouth of a prince?"
His nimble fingers found the ties of Adeja's trousers and made short work of them, spreading open his
fly to release his cock. Adeja felt a hand enclose the head, drawing him out with long, languorous strokes.
He swallowed hard to stifle a groan.
"You are just like Bedez," Sephil purred in his ear. "I am going to enjoy this very much."
Still holding his cock, Sephil sank to his knees in a silken flutter. At the first touch of his tongue, Adeja
nearly lost his grip on his pike. Now, as that tongue swirled around the head of his erection, pulling back his
foreskin and darting into the slit, he clasped the weapon even tighter. Before he realized what he was doing,
the fingers of his other hand tangled in Sephil's hair and he was rhythmically thrusting his hips.
Sephil made pleased noises in his throat. The hem of his robe was hitched up to his waist, and his hand
was lost in the shadow between his legs.
The prince was skilled, there was no doubt, but his tricks were nothing  a  good  whore  did  not  know.
Perhaps  the  threat  of  discovery  or  the  knowledge  that  he  was  doing  something  so  thoroughly  forbidden

made  the  encounter  so  delicious.  All  Adeja  knew  was  he  did  not  last  very  long.  Trembling,  clenching
Sephil's hair in a tight fist, his thrusts quickened and he came hard in that hot mouth.
He heard Sephil come, but did not look. His trousers still undone, his damp flesh softening between his
legs,  he  rested  his  pike  against  the  wall  and  sank  down,  breathing  hard.  Now  he  was  at  eye  level  with
Sephil, who licked his fingers with a sated smile.
It was wrong, the whole thing was wrong and he should have rearranged his clothing and returned to
his post at once, but he needed a brief space in which to catch his wind. "When," he gasped, "did you start
doing this?"
Sephil gently touched his leg, encased in its embossed leather greave. Affection, however,  played  no
part  in  this  encounter,  and  holding  each  other  in  the  afterglow  would  have  been  both  awkward  and
inappropriate. Adeja made no move to touch him.
"I was sixteen," answered Sephil. "There  was  a  guard  assigned  to  these  apartments  who  was  quite
handsome. One hot day I went past him into the garden to sit by the pool. I was wearing a  thin  garment,
very thin. Perhaps you will say it was immodest of me, but these are my apartments and one never really
pays attention to what the servants might be looking at. I saw his eyes on me then, and when I came back.
I knew what sex was, and I knew the way this man was looking at me.  It  was  insolent,  of  course,  but  I
never felt so excited. He wanted me. I invited him in that night and asked him why he had looked me that
way. Of course, he did not protest as much as you. In fact, he fucked me three different ways that night. I
could not get enough of him."
"Where is he now?"
Sephil shrugged. "We carried on for a while, and then one day he was not there anymore. My father
learned what I was doing. He confined me here and the man was posted elsewhere. The new guard was
old and  quite  ugly,  worse  than  Eumos.  It  was  almost  two  years  before  I  could  get  rid  of  him  and  get
Bedez."
"So you just fucked him and packed him off like so much baggage?"
"You are insolent, soldier. I told you, I had nothing to do with his being sent away."
Adeja looked at him. "Maybe, but you don't seem to care very much  about  it.  And  as  for  insolence,
you're a fine one to talk about that when you just sucked off a lowborn soldier."
"You were hard. You wanted it."
"Men do stupid things when they're hard. Did you really think I could stand that much teasing?" Adeja
tucked himself back into his trousers and fastened the ties. "If your father finds out, I'll end up like all the
others. Did you ever stop to think about that?"
"My father does not care what I do as long as I do not bother him or create a public scandal." Sephil
gathered his robes around him and stood up. "But if you really do not want me," he said coldly, "then I will
not bother you any longer."
He swept out of the foyer. Moments later, Adeja heard a door slam, then another. Getting to his feet,
he retrieved his pike and returned to his post, but the rest of his watch was awkward.
At  dawn,  Nakhet  entered  the  foyer  and  gave  him  a  knowing  look  that  Adeja  did  not  return.  The
thought of the eunuch eavesdropping on him was repulsive.
"It is not wise to upset the  prince,"  said  Nakhet.  "A  guard  should  remember  his  place  and  be  more
cooperative."
"A guard's place is at the door."
Twice that day Adeja almost went down to  Meden's  office  to  apply  for  a  transfer,  but  matters  had
gone too far for that. Should he make the attempt, someone on the prince's staff,  probably  Nakhet,  might
retaliate with  the  charge  that  he  acted  inappropriately.  For  all  he  knew,  half  a  dozen  eunuchs  had  been
watching him with Sephil, all of whom could easily step forward and accuse him of rape.
Desertion became an increasingly appealing option. However, he  did  not  have  enough  ready  coin  to
see him out of Rhodeen. Another month or two and he might be able to pull it off, provided he could survive
that long at his current post.
* * * *
Bedez had not done that,  had  not  done  or  said  those  things  at  all.  In  fact,  Sephil  had  put  very  little
effort into seducing him, since the man had not cared beyond wanting to know how often they could fuck
and how much trouble he would get into for bedding a king's son. Adeja, on the other hand, was proving to
be more trouble than his good looks and hard cock were worth.
Sephil sat on the edge of his bed, toying with the tassel  from  the  gilded  draperies  above.  Acting  the
part of the amoral seducer did not sit well with him, or at least, it no longer provided the satisfaction it once
had. I only do it because it is what everyone thinks I am. If Father wants to call me a whore,  I should

at least try not to disappoint  him as I do  in everything  else. And yet, he realized, by acting the part he
became  that  very  thing  he  loathed.  For  once,  I  would  like  someone  to  approach  me,  not  because  I
propositioned them, but because they want to.
 "It might be best to cast about the slave markets for a strong, virile Tajhaani slave, if that is what you
desire, my lord," said Nakhet. "Otherwise we risk a scandal." 
"I am sure my father knows what I am doing. And you know  perfectly  well  that  he  does  not  care,"
replied Sephil. "I do not want a slave." The pleasure slaves Nakhet procured for him  were  empty-headed
creatures so willing to perform they were devoid of any personality.  No  slave,  no  creature  broken  to  the
lash, could be any different. Taking a slave to bed was nothing like having a real man, a pair of strong arms
to hold him and keep him safe. 
For all the difficulty he  caused,  Adeja  was  a  real  man.  Sephil  sighed,  wrapped  his  arms  around  his
knees, and pondered his next move.

Chapter Three
Sephil maintained a carefully studied silence, barely acknowledging Adeja's presence while showering
lavish praise on a bewildered Eumos.  His  disdain  might  have  been  bearable  if  not  for  the  ominous  looks
Nakhet threw in the direction of the foyer.
Adeja gave no sign that he noticed. Outwardly he continued with his duties, standing at strict attention
while his mind wandered, formulating plans to escape the city. He would have no more than twelve hours,
and he would have to go on no sleep at all, which he could  counter  by  sleeping  through  the  days  before.
Arranging a brief furlough would  buy  him  an  extra  day  or  two  and  could  easily  be  accomplished  on  the
barracks  end,  but  convincing  Nakhet  he  was  entitled  to  leisure  time  for  whores  and  drink  would  be
considerably more difficult. As the eunuch already spied on his master, it was possible he would have Adeja
watched as well.
Twelve hours was probably all he was going to get. Speed and guile would be his only allies.
In the quiet attending his thoughts, he almost did not hear the soft footfalls on the marble floor. "Who
goes there?" he growled, shifting his hold on his weapon.
The willowy figure silhouetted in the doorway belonged to Sephil. Adeja tensed, waiting for words of
reproach  or  seduction,  but  the  prince  said  nothing,  only  took  his  hand  and  gently  tugged  at  him  until  he
followed.
While  Adeja  had  seen  most  of  the  other  rooms,  he  had  never  been  in  the  prince's  bedchamber.  A
luxurious  contrast  to  the  barracks,  in  which  his  lumpy  cot  was  one  of  several  in  a  drab  room,  Sephil's
chamber was floored with velvet-deep carpets and furnished with exotic  woods  and  ivories.  A  sheer  silk
curtain, shimmering gold in the light of a single candelabra, draped a bed piled high with cushions.
Sephil turned and, undoing the clasp that held his robe closed, let the garment slide from his shoulders.
Underneath, his naked skin glowed in the golden light. "Take  off  your  clothes,"  he  murmured.  It  sounded
more like a request than a command.
Adeja tore his eyes from the prince's body to study the latticed screens against one wall. Behind them,
anyone might be watching. "No," he answered.
Ivory fingers reached out to touch his cheek, his lips. "It is torture for me to lie alone thinking of you
just outside the door," said Sephil. "Am I truly so terrible that you do not want to touch me?" His fingers slid
down Adeja's breastplate in search of the fastenings. "Take this off and let me feel you."
Fear and desire quickened Adeja's pulse. He knew what peril he had entered into, and yet he could not
deny that he wanted the beautiful young body that was being so freely offered to him. The need in Sephil's
eyes was so earnest, so intense that before he knew what he was doing Adeja covered the prince's fingers
with his own and helped him remove the armor.
Before he let it fall to the carpet, Sephil touched his lips to the breastplate and the sunburst that  was
the emblem of the royal house. "Do you know what my name means?" he asked softly. "Sepha'il. It is very
old, and means 'little moon.' The Sun was my ancestor. Before he loved the mortal  woman  who  was  my
foremother, he loved the Moon."
His fingers slid into the crease of Adeja's tunic, undoing the ties and kissing the bare skin underneath.
"I want you to be my Sun."
They kissed as Adeja flung off the last articles of his clothing. Sephil was hungry for the touch of his
lips, for slow lovemaking. Adeja found it difficult to accommodate him. Usually he did his business quickly,
with boys for whom sex was merely another transaction. Now he found himself on a soft bed in a candlelit
room with a partner who did not simply want to be mounted but  stroked  and  fingered,  caressed  as  if  the
encounter actually meant something.
Sephil was insatiable, skilled in arousing a partner's spent desire. Adeja rode him twice that night, but
bringing  him  to  climax  was  more  work  than  pleasure.  By  the  time  the  prince  climbed  off  his  softening
member and lay down beside him, Adeja was too exhausted for the pillow talk Sephil clearly wanted.
"Do you do that every night?" he mumbled.
"You  make  light  of  my  proclivities."  Sephil  turned  over  and  propped  himself  up  on  his  arm  to  gaze

down at his lover. "Perhaps you think I should be doing more princely things?"
Adeja briefly closed his eyes. After sex, all he wanted to do was sleep. "I'd thought of that."
"You think I am spoiled, but you know nothing," said Sephil. "I am not my father's heir. I do not know
how to do anything. I do not even leave these apartments. When my brother becomes king, I will never sit
on his council. No one will ever ask me for advice or favors. This and my entertainments with my friends
are all I have."
"If you want to play, do it with slaves. The man you sent to Mekesh is probably dead."
"Nakhet suggested I have his throat cut in some back alley, but I said no. Mekesh is  very  far  away,
and Bedez could be alive and well."
Opening his eyes, Adeja looked at him. The prince  actually  seemed  to  believe  his  own  nonsense.  "I
doubt it. You don't know anything about being a soldier, and you don't know anything about life on a frontier
like that. If you don't believe me when I tell you what shit holes places like Mekesh are, ask your brother."
"Bedez is a soldier," said Sephil. "He knows how to survive."
"That doesn't mean he wanted to be sent there. You shouldn't have played with him in the first place.
I'm surprised you can even get away with it. Most fathers I know  would  kill their  sons  for  bringing  such
shame on their families. At least, that's what they would do in Tajhaan. Maybe things are different here."
Sephil laughed harshly, but his eyes reflected deep hurt. "My father tried to kill me the first time, then
he decided he did not care what I do. He does not care who my friends are or what I do with my lovers.
He does not even notice me."
"And when he does notice you, what do you think will happen? You'll be lucky if he doesn't  kill you,
but I've got no illusions about what he'll do to me," said Adeja. "Did you ever think about that?"
Sephil evaded the question. "I want you to like me," he said softly. "Bedez did, you  know.  When  we
were together he used to call me his little bakti."
Adeja sucked in a gasp of disbelief. You ignorant  little fool.  "Do you even know what that means?
Since you like Tajhaani men so much, you might at least learn the language."
"It was his pet name for me."
"No," said Adeja. "It means whore, because  that's  all  you  were  to  him,  a  little  whore  with  a  gilded
ass."
"I do not believe you." But the strangled sound Sephil made in his throat told Adeja he did. "He liked
me."
"You don't make men like you by rubbing up against their cocks and showing them your  naked  body
like a bitch in heat. If a man wants that he can get it with far less risk in a brothel."
"Are you always this insolent?" Sephil asked sharply. "Why are you even telling me this? It would have
been better had I not known."
Adeja sat up and began looking for his clothing. By the prince's tone, he knew in a moment or two he
would  be  ordered  to  leave.  "Because  a  boy  who  acts  like  a  whore  should  at  least  know  what  he  is  in
somebody else's language."
"Get out!" hissed Sephil.
There it was, cold and laced with venom, but under it Adeja discerned the voice of a child who would
burst into tears the moment he was alone. He climbed off the bed and snatched his trousers off the carpet.
"If you wanted somebody to flatter you, you'd have done better than to show your backside to a soldier. I
can get a cheaper fuck elsewhere, and I don't have even to say anything to the whore."
An outraged shriek was followed by a cushion hurled at his head. Adeja dropped the clothing and bits
of leather armor in his hands. Grasping Sephil's wrists, he wedged a knee between the prince's thighs and
pinned him to the  mattress.  Sephil  cursed  him  until,  with  a  wide-eyed  look  of  terror,  he  realized  he  was
trapped. "Get off me!"
A scrape of leather soles against tiles behind one of the screens reminded Adeja that one or more of
the eunuchs were watching. That alone should have instructed him to behave with greater caution, but he
was beyond caring. "You wanted to be fucked by a soldier," he hissed in Sephil's ear, "and so I did. Maybe
you'd like me to bring two or three of my friends in here to show you how we really fuck pretty boys when
we sack a town?"
Sephil twisted and struggled. "If you do not get off me I am going to scream and—"
Adeja loosened his grip just long enough to slap him. "And then what? The guards are going to come
running? You stupid boy, I am the guard." To his dismay, he found himself growing hard again, and he could
see by the look on Sephil's face that the prince realized it.
"I did not do anything to you."
"You ordered me to drop my trousers and fuck you like some cheap whore," retorted Adeja. "You've

got to be the stupidest prince in the world if you don't understand how dangerous that is. I'm probably going
to be killed for all this, and none of it was my idea."
"I told you, my father does not—"
Adeja slapped him again. "Shut up. I don't care what you think your father will or won't do. Men like
me are put to death for toying with princes like you." Shoving the prince away from him in disgust, he got up
to find a towel and get dressed. "I don't really care to end up like all the others."
On the floor beside the bed he spied Sephil's robe. Picking up the garment, he  flung  it  at  the  prince.
"Cover yourself up."
The revulsion he felt now was the same he experienced when looking at the naked body of a whore
with whom he had just finished, when the haze of need finally dissipated. His erection did not discriminate,
his lust did not care what a willing woman or youth looked like under the garish paint, scent and shameless
manner. It was only afterward that he felt remorse. A whore's life was nothing to envy.
Unlike those cheap women and boys, Sephil was beautiful. It sickened Adeja to picture him lying nude
on a pallet in a squalid brothel, with a stranger's seed all over his thighs, and it made him angry. If I were
this boy's father, I'd strangle him for shame. "You got what you wanted. I hope you're satisfied," he said
tightly, and slammed the door behind him.

Chapter Four
A new tension filled the household. This time there was no  waiting  silence,  no  sense  of  anticipation,
only the strain generated by two individuals who did not want to see or speak to each other.
At  any  moment,  Adeja  expected  to  be  dismissed  or  arrested.  Having  sex  with  the  prince  was  bad
enough in its own right, but insolence was another matter entirely. Nakhet did not address the issue, which
Adeja found odd, though there was no question that he knew about it.
Raucous  parties  filled  the  evenings.  Sephil's  friends  called  on  him,  oftentimes  arriving  with  male  or
female pleasure slaves on their arms, and the sounds of sex occasionally drifted out into the foyer above the
usual laughter, music, and carousing. Servants came just before dawn to lead dazed and drunken partygoers
home.
One night, however, the young men left early, filing out of the  prince's  sitting  room  and  muttering  to
themselves. The musicians followed them out shortly afterward. Something was not right. Adeja sensed a
similar unease among the servants who were called in to tidy up, but as the matter did not concern him he
gave it no attention.
The servants  did  their  work,  extinguished  the  lamps,  and  withdrew.  Once  again  the  apartment  was
silent, the prince and his eunuchs presumably having retired some time before.
It was not long before Adeja found he was mistaken. Sephil,  a  dark  dressing  gown  wrapped  over  a
linen shift, stepped into the foyer. "Adeja," he whispered. "Come with me to the terrace."
"I'm not going to fuck you out in the open," Adeja answered sharply.
"I am not here for sex." Sephil's voice was small, and he looked unusually pale. "I want to sit outside.
Will you watch over me there?"
"My post is at the door, my lord."
"You  do  realize  that  if  someone  wanted  to  hurt  me  there  are  at  least  three  other  ways  into  this
apartment, yes?" asked Sephil.
Adeja frowned. "My orders are to guard the door, not your person."
Sephil reached past him to touch the heavy wood. "I suppose it is worth more than I am. Come outside
with me. The door will still be here when you return."
Outside in the hanging garden, the late spring air was cool and fragrant  with  night-blooming  flowers.
Sephil sat down on the rim of the reflecting pool and contemplated the dark water. "I sent them away," he
murmured.
Adeja made no comment. If the prince wanted to talk to the empty air, that was his business.
Sephil apparently took his silence as a cue to continue. "I asked if any of them would still be my friends
if I were not a prince. For once I was serious, but they laughed at me and said I was a terrible bore when I
talked like that. I would have laughed, too, and forgotten about it. Then I had  a  strange  moment.  Do  you
know the kind, when you suddenly realize that everyone else is laughing but you are not part of the joke? I
had a moment like that, and I suddenly thought of all the times when I was ill or sad  and  how  they  were
never there."
He picked up a leaf that had fallen from an overhanging fruit tree and turned it in  his  fingers.  "They
only come here because it is a scandalous thing for them to do. They are not my friends. I wanted them to
be, but they care nothing for me." As his head drooped, his loose hair fell forward to obscure his face.  "It is
such a terrible feeling to know you have nobody, that you are alone."
Adeja had no idea what to say. He did not know why Sephil even bothered to tell him this. "A man's
family is all he needs," he finally answered.
"I do  not  have  a  family.  I  have  been  trying  to  tell  you  that  all  along.  I  have  been  shut  up  in  these
apartments for three years because of what happened with that guard. I have not seen or heard from my
family since then. I am as good as dead to them. The only family I ever really had was Carran, but he  is
gone now."
"Who was that?"
Sephil pushed back a strand of his hair and sat up a little. "He was the eunuch who looked  after  me

when I was small. My mother died when I was born. I had a wet nurse, and then Carran came. He used to
play with me and tell me stories, and sometimes when I was afraid of the dark he would stay awake with
me until I fell asleep. He always used to tell me what a fine, strong prince I would grow up to be and  he
would praise me when I did things well. He died when I was eleven. I wanted to go to his funeral but my
father said it was inappropriate for such a young prince to mourn so over a servant.
"Nakhet  has  no  time  for  stories  or  games.  He  calls  it  nonsense.  If  I  want  someone  to  keep  me
company he calls for a pleasure slave." Rising, Sephil walked slowly to the edge of the terrace  and  stood
contemplating the distant pyramid of the Moon. "I could not sleep. Would you stay in my room  until  I  fall
asleep?"
Instinct cautioned Adeja against saying yes. Who was to say this young man, with his wildly oscillating
moods,  would  not  shake  off  his  melancholy  and  try  to  seduce  him  again?  "I  will  stand  just  inside  the
chamber door, my lord."
Sephil took his hand and led him to the bedchamber, where a single oil lamp burned. He removed his
dressing gown but kept on his  linen  shift  as  he  climbed  under  the  green  silk  coverlet.  "You  promise  me,
Adeja? You will not leave until Eumos comes?"
Adeja gripped his pike and went to stand by the door. He would have put out the light, but Sephil would
not hear of it. The sheer gold hangings blurred his view of the prince, so he listened for Sephil's breathing
and was relieved as it slowly dropped into the even rhythm of sleep.
His eyes roamed the chamber, lingering over the screens on the opposite side of the bed. There were
too  many  shadows  to  see  what  might  be  lurking  behind  the  intricate  latticework,  but  he  could  feel  the
presence of another. If Nakhet has the time to spy on his master, he certainly has  the time to sit by his
bed.
Sephil's sleep was broken by a nightmare in which he thrashed and made little cries. Adeja made  no
move to go to him until it became apparent that he was half-awake and crying into the pillow. Propping the
pike by the door, Adeja approached the bed and drew back the hangings. "Are you all right?" he asked.
A muffled sob told him no. Adeja contemplated the screen, the recumbent form on the bed and quickly
stripped off his armor and boots, leaving the rest of his clothing on. He climbed onto the pillows to lie beside
the prince but would not get under the coverlet even when Sephil drew it back in invitation.
"You're really too old for this," he said softly.
"I am not as brave as you, Adeja. I have always been afraid of the dark," said Sephil, "but I am more
afraid of being left alone in the dark."
Adeja spent the rest of the night gazing up at the golden web swaying above his head, stroking the hair
spilled across his chest and murmuring mindless words of comfort. When dawn began to lighten the space
behind the screens, he gently disentangled himself from Sephil's arms, put on his armor, and went back to
the foyer.
Eumos  was  already  on  duty.  "I  thought  you'd  left,"  said  the  man.  Whatever  else  he  might  have
thought—and  his  imagination  probably  ran  riot  at  the  sight  of  Adeja's  disheveled  clothing—he  kept  it  to
himself.
* * * *
"Oh, Sephil, you are such a bore when you talk like that," said Ethurel.
"So you would not visit me?"
Sputtering with laughter, the  young  nobleman  exchanged  glances  with  his  friends  before  answering.
"Everyone knows your father refuses to have you at court and that you are only a prince in name. Keeping
time  with  you  is  such  a  deliciously  scandalous  thing  to  do  because  no  one  knows  what  you  are  about
sealed up here in your apartments."
Sephil drew a sharp breath. "So you care nothing for me?"
"Oh, now you are being tiresome. You have such marvelous parties and—"
"That is not what I meant."
Afterward, Sephil did not remember throwing his guests out, only the smart of humiliation at realizing
the life he had lived for three years was a lie.
Talking  to  Adeja  brought  him  some  measure  of  peace,  even  if  the  soldier  did  not  quite  understand
everything he was trying to say. He must think  I am spoiled  and  selfish.  Yes, I have  been  stupid,  but
what I want is only what everyone else wants.
Seeing the truth was like being told someone had died. But I am the one  who  is  dead,  do  you  not
see?  I thought  I lived. Not until now  did  I  understand  that  I  really  died  all  those  years  ago  when
Father confined  me to these rooms and  the world forgot  that a person  named  Sephil  Brasides  ever
existed.

* * * *
The household became a somber place. Sephil hosted no  further  entertainments  and  had  no  visitors.
Now that it was brought to his attention, Adeja began to notice how no communication passed between the
prince and other members of the royal family. He knew Sephil had sent a message to Zhanil requesting his
company,  and  that  the  Crown  Prince  sent  back  a  terse  reply  stating  he  was  busy  with  more  important
matters.
From Eumos he heard Sephil had a poor appetite and spent much time sitting in the garden reading or
staring out at the city from the terrace. Sometimes the sound of weeping could be heard coming from the
bedchamber, but Eumos offered no comment on this. Nakhet brought in a physician, who could not seem to
find anything wrong with the patient other than he seemed out of spirits.
Each  night,  once  the  servants  were  asleep,  Sephil  came  out  wearing  his  dressing  gown  and  a
despondent  look.  Although  the  prince  often  wrapped  his  arms  around  Adeja  and  asked  to  be  held,  the
gesture was anything but sexual. Whatever troubled him had smothered his libido.
Nakhet did not like the arrangement, which thoroughly puzzled Adeja. So  he  doesn't  care  if  I  fuck
the prince but all of a sudden he cares that I sit by his bed  and  hold  his hand?  Had it been his place,
he would have asked why Nakhet  did not watch over Sephil or appoint someone to do it. A guard's place
was at the door, not holding some frightened, womanish prince like a child.
As sitting with Sephil often required him to remove his armor, Adeja usually emerged from the prince's
chambers in a state of disarray. Eumos greeted him with a raised eyebrow, but otherwise did not care what
he  did.  "I  had  enough  of  that  nonsense  with  the  other  one,"  he  explained.  "He  rubbed  my  nose  in  it
everyday."
Adeja adjusted his breastplate. As soon as he returned to the barracks he would be taking it  off,  but
there was no need to arouse any suspicions. "What was Bedez like?" he asked. "I've heard tales, of course,
but I'd rather hear it from you."
"Whatever you've heard probably isn't far off the truth. He might still be here if he hadn't confused his
head with his balls."
Bedez certainly would not have wasted time in Sephil's bed unless sex was part of the bargain. Adeja
did not know why he bothered, and the eunuchs probably would not have complained had he kept his post
by the door and left a distraught Sephil to his sorrows. That's what I ought  to do.  All this coddling  isn't
good for him.
Adeja  typically  did  not  spend  much  time  reflecting  on  things,  but  as  he  walked  through  the  palace
corridors, where servants bustled about on errands and officials gathered for the  day's  business,  he  could
not help but wonder why Sephil clung so fiercely to him when he did nothing to encourage such interest.
The  newly  chaste  Sephil  made  Adeja  no  more  comfortable  than  he  had  been  before.  Desertion
remained in his plans, which were still weeks away from fruition. By then, the prince would have shrugged
off his melancholy, called his friends back, and taken a more familiar interest in his night guard.
He won't be my problem for  much longer, though Adeja. Stripping to his tunic, he climbed onto his
cot,  still  warm  from  its  nightly  occupant,  and  slept  until  the  afternoon  mess.  After  lunch,  he  beat  two
comrades  at  keidu, which  no  one  in  Rhodeen  could  seem  to  play  with  any  skill,  and  added  his  small
winnings to the sum he kept tied in a rag in his footlocker. Just before sunset, he went down to the common
bath, cleaned up, and got dressed for the evening shift.
* * * *
Nakhet  came  in  wearing  an  unreadable  look.  Rather  than  explain,  he  gestured  to  the  servant  who
oversaw Sephil's wardrobe. "Find something suitable for the prince to wear out. No  bright  colors,  and  his
hair must be pulled back."
"What is it?" asked Sephil. Watching the youth scurry for the clothes press, his anticipation turned  to
dread. Visitors no longer came to the apartment and Zhanil  had  rebuffed  him.  The  response  he  received
had  been  courteous  but  firm:  I  regret  to  tell  you  that  at  this  time  there  are  many  urgent  matters
requiring my attention at court,  so any  request  you  might wish to make  will have  to wait. It sounded
so formulaic that it might as well have been written by one of Zhanil's secretaries.
Not  even  a  few  moments  to  spare  for  your  own  brother?  Sephil  cherished  such  affectionate
memories of him that only now did it occur to him that Zhanil might not share his sentiments.
Nakhet nudged him. "There is no time to waste, my prince." A length of black silk hung over his arms.
"The king wishes to see you."
Sephil  gazed  in  the  mirror,  at  his  long  hair  and  girlish  face.  His  father  had  always  despised  his
appearance, and would like it no better now.
* * * *

Right away Adeja knew this evening was going to be different. No sooner had he appeared for duty
than did a eunuch hustle him into the prince's bedchamber. "He's been asking for you," the man said.
"If he's sick, call a physician," replied Adeja.
"A physician has already come and prescribed a sleeping draught, but the prince says he won't take it
unless you sit with him first."
"That is quite enough chatter, Jhadan." Nakhet's ponderous bulk filled the doorway. "You will not keep
the prince waiting, soldier. We have already had to listen to his weeping for several hours."
Dressed in  a  rumpled  shift,  Sephil  curled  around  one  of  the  larger  silk  cushions,  strands  of  his  hair
plastered to a face swollen from crying. Nakhet cleared his throat and made an announcement of Adeja's
arrival that was not immediately acknowledged. The eunuch bent forward to jostle Sephil's shoulder when
the prince stirred, looking up at Adeja with bloodshot eyes slow to focus. "Why did you leave?"
"I don't  have  the  day  duty,  my  lord."  Adeja  glanced  nervously  at  Nakhet,  wishing  he  would  leave.
"Now, what's the matter that you won't do as you're told?"
"All they want to do is make me sleep." Sensing now that they were not alone, Sephil lifted his  head
and  ordered  the  eunuchs  to  get  out.  Nakhet  gave  a  little  bow  as  he  closed  the  door.  Adeja  thought  his
manner entirely too smug.
Sephil let his head droop again. "My father sent for me today. He wants me to get married."
"Is that all? Getting married isn't bad news, unless the woman is old or ugly," said Adeja. He carefully
set his pike on the floor and pulled a chair up to the bed. "So who is this maid?"
"A princess from Tajhaan," said Sephil, "but I do not want to marry."
"Don't  you  like  women,  my  lord?"  From  what  he  observed,  Adeja  already  knew  the  answer,  but
anything that kept Sephil from wallowing in his nauseating self-pity would do.
Sephil shook his head. "Not really. I tried to tell my father what an unlikely match I am, but all he did
was to tell me what an ungrateful son I was to spurn such a beautiful princess."
"Any other man would jump at the chance to have a pretty wife."
"Adeja, are you married?" Sephil asked softly.
"No, but then most soldiers aren't married," he said. "There  was  a  woman  once,  a  widow  I  took  up
with before leaving Tajhaan. We had a good time together, but then she decided she didn't really want to be
married to a young man or a soldier. Last I heard, she was married to a man with a little votive stand on the
Street of the Ancestors. So, is this princess of yours a daughter of the High Prince?"
Sephil nodded. "My father said her name is Terreh. All Nakhet can do is go on about how lovely she is
and  how  many  sons  I  will  have."  Groaning,  he  threw  an  arm  over  his  face.  "I  saw  the  princess  Zhanil
married. Everybody said how pretty she was, and then when she came she looked like a horse."
A pretty  wife  might  be  just  the  thing  to  cheer  you  up,  foolish  boy.  "I don't  think  you'll  have  to
worry. Tajhaani women are known for their beauty. Having a wife would be good for  you.  She  can  give
you sons who—"
"Who will see how unimportant their father is and be ashamed." Tears welled up in  Sephil's  eyes.  "I
am nobody, Adeja. Even my father said so. He told me he would rather marry this princess to a beggar on
the street than waste her on me, but my father needs this alliance against the Turyar, and the High Prince
of Tajhaan insists that she be married to a king's son. I always  knew  I  meant  nothing  to  him,  that  I  was
worthless, but I thought perhaps after three years he might have come to care for me just a little."
He lifted trembling hands to his face.  "Adeja, nothing has changed. I wish I were dead. I am not just
saying that. I sit and think all the time about dying. I wonder if anyone would even notice if I was gone."
Adeja could not help but glance back toward the door. For once, he rued Nakhet's absence. Had the
eunuch been there to interject with some meaningless platitude, he would not have had to wrestle with his
own awkward reaction. "You don't really want to die—"
"You do not understand what my life is like. Gods, why does no one listen  when  I  try  to  tell  them?"
Sephil clutched the pillow and buried his face in the stiff embroidery. Adeja started  to  touch  his  shoulder,
hesitated and gave in, gingerly pulling strands of the prince's hair away from his face.
After  a  time,  Sephil  looked  up.  His  eyes  were  red,  yet  dry.  "Nakhet  thinks  I  sleep  with  the  lamp
because I am afraid of shadows. No, it is because I have terrible dreams. In one dream I am standing in my
father's  throne  room  but  everyone  has  gone  away,  far  away  to  some  distant  place,  the  entire  city  even
down to the mice. They have forgotten me and I know it was deliberate. Then I have another dream. I am
standing with my father and he takes me by the hand and presents me to the court. He is smiling and says
how proud he is of me and I can feel how much he loves me."
Adeja realized then that he was still stroking Sephil's hair. "I'd say that was a good dream."
The corners of Sephil's mouth turned up in a grim smile. "Then I wake up and it is not true."

* * * *
"My lord, you have a visitor."
Sephil preferred to stay in  bed,  but  Nakhet  insisted.  Behind  him,  a  servant  waited  with  his  dressing
gown and a comb to straighten his hair.
Still bleary-eyed, wanting nothing more than to  hide  under  his  coverlets  and  forget  the  world,  Sephil
followed Nakhet out of the bedchamber and through the sitting room. "Who is waiting for me?" he asked.
"If it is Ethurel or another false friend, I will not see them."
"You will see, my lord."
When he saw who awaited him in the foyer, Sephil stopped and choked back  a  breath.  "Zhanil?"  he
croaked.
They  had  not  seen  each  other  in  three  years.  Three  years  in  which  Sephil  had  forgotten  what  his
brother looked like. At twenty-six, Zhanil was taller, broader in the chest and shoulders than he had been,
and with his neatly trimmed black beard  he  seemed  like  a  younger,  more  compassionate  version  of  their
father.
"You have grown, little moon," he said gently. 
When he held out his arms, Sephil flew into them. Zhanil held him close, kissing his temple. "There is
no need for tears. Father finally gave me permission to see you, so I came at once."
"He has not forgiven me."
"Yes, he has," said Zhanil.
"No, he even told me so."
Zhanil drew back. "It is difficult for him  to  show  compassion,  Sephil.  Do  not  judge  him  too  harshly.
What he did, he tried to do for your own good."
"And letting me carry on with my parties and lovers is for my own good? Why did he not simply lock
me in a dungeon somewhere?"
"He wanted you to learn the error of your ways, and you cannot learn anything shut up in a dungeon."
Zhanil touched his cheek with a callused hand. "I think you have learned."
As usual, Zhanil did not understand. "Father is only releasing me because of this alliance with Tajhaan.
I do not want to get married."
"I know, but princes must often do things they do not like." Once again, Zhanil embraced him, stroking
his hair and making soft, hushing noises. "It will be all right, little moon. It will be all right."
Opening his eyes, Sephil peered over  his  brother's  shoulder  and  saw  Adeja  at  his  post  by  the  door.
Adeja met his gaze and nodded his approval.

Chapter Five
Weighing the coins in his palm, Adeja counted them again. With a few more arrangements, he  could
leave Shemin-at-Khul forever, go back to Tajhaan or maybe farther south to Juva where the pay was good
and the military strong enough to keep the Turyar at bay.
At this point, he should have been making preparations to leave, but something kept him back. It took
him a  few  days  to  realize  that  it  was  Sephil.  So  fragile  and  childlike,  not  the  brazen  seducer  of  several
weeks ago, this was the real prince behind the façade.
Gods, I'm no physician. The boy needs a healer or maybe a priest to look  after  him, not a plain
soldier or a passel of shifty eunuchs. I can stand guard, fight off attackers, splint broken  bones  and
sew up wounds, but I can't do anything for what ails him.
Days passed into weeks and still he did nothing. If he wanted to get to Tajhaan or Juva, he needed to
leave now while travel was still feasible. At the height of summer, the desert could kill even the hardiest of
souls. He had more than enough money hoarded, and his comrades were beginning to wonder why he spent
none of it on drink or whores.
"Guarding  the  prince's  household  leaves  me  too  tired  for  anything  else,"  he  explained.  It  was  not
entirely a lie. Watching over Sephil took almost as much energy as making love to him.
"Yeah, I can imagine," snorted Hedir. "I used to be  posted  in  Bedez's  barracks,  and  he  was  always
boasting how sweet that boy's hole was."
"Bedez was full of shit," barked Adeja.
"They don't pack soldiers off to Mekesh for lying."
"They do if it's the king's son a man's shitting on."
Hedir snorted. "I heard you have to look hard to find a cock and balls on that prince. I certainly can't
imagine him fucking anything with a cunt. Look, it's nothing to me if he likes to be rammed up his hole. So
do you give it to him good?"
Adeja gave him a hard shove. "Trust me, if I was getting a piece of that sweet hole you'd know about
it."
It  was  far  too  late  to  box  Sephil's  ear  for  allowing  himself  to  acquire  such  a  reputation.  Given  the
situation, it was no wonder the king scorned the boy. A Tajhaani father would have cut his son's throat long
ago, but Adeja could only guess Brasidios did not do it because it would have called attention to and given
credence to the rumors.
* * * *
"I would like to go to the temple of Abh," murmured Sephil. "I feel like I am suffocating here."
Adeja gently combed his fingers through the hair spilling over his chest. Abh was the Rhodeen god of
healing. "Do you want me to take you?"
"At this time of night I do not think I would be able to leave. I will have Eumos escort me tomorrow."
Sephil ran his hands along the seam in Adeja's tunic where Adeja removed his breastplate and unbuttoned
the  garment.  Although  they  lay  entwined  on  Sephil's  bed  for  close  to  an  hour,  nothing  sexual  passed
between them. "If anyone asks, I will tell them I wish to purify myself before the wedding."
"Getting married is  supposed  to  be  a  joyful  occasion,"  said  Adeja,  "but  here  you're  treating  it  like  a
funeral. This is a chance for you  to  make  things  better  for  yourself.  Be  a  good  husband  and  sire  strong
sons. I think you can do that."
Sephil gave a little sigh. "For most of my life I have been trying to please my father. It seems so futile
to think anything can change now."
"My lord, you're not going to get anywhere by sitting here feeling sorry for yourself."
"Perhaps, but it is one of the few things I actually know how to do," said Sephil. "Adeja, I want you to
know what I did before was not about you or those other men. I remember now. After my father punished
me I was angry with him, so angry because nothing I did was ever good enough. I wanted him to open his
eyes and see me. It worked, only now it is worse than it ever was before."
"I  don't  believe  he  hates  you,"  said  Adeja.  "I  know  what  you  told  me,  but  parents  and  children

sometimes say or  do  things  they  don't  really  mean.  My  father  had  plenty  to  say  when  I  told  him  I  was
turning my back on the family trade to become a soldier. I'd never heard such awful things from him, but in
the end he wept and embraced me."
"You were not there when my father told me he wished I was never born." Sephil tightened his fingers
in the folds of the tunic. "He meant every word of it."
"What does your brother say to all this?"
Sephil sat up in the middle of the bed with his back to Adeja. "Zhanil thinks I am too sensitive. People
love him, so he cannot imagine any other sort of life."
On many occasions, Adeja saw crowds swarm Zhanil in the streets, all wanting to touch his hand  or
the hem of his garment as he rode past. "Sephil, you're no less worthy of being loved."
Turning, Sephil took his hand and bent forward to kiss him. His touch was soft, almost hesitant. "You
should be my chief eunuch instead of Nakhet."
"Thanks, but I'd rather keep my balls."
"What I meant was I want you to stay with me always. I feel better when you are here." Sephil took
one of his hands, lifted it to his lips and kissed it. "You are my Sun, do you know that?"
Adeja wished Sephil would not say such sentimental things. It made it so much harder to leave him.
"Will you stay here tonight?"
"You already know that I'll keep my post," answered Adeja, "same as I do every night."
"No, I meant—" Sephil bit his lip  against  embarrassment.  "You  would  think  that  after  all  this  time  I
might know how to do this, but somehow it feels different. All those other times, I felt bold and uninhibited.
I might as well have been smoking kif. Now I feel more afraid than anything."
Adeja touched his cheek, running a callused  fingertip  over  soft  lips.  "You  want  me  to  make  love  to
you? I didn't think you wanted sex."
"If  you  do  not  want  to,  just  tell  me."  Sephil  kissed  his  fingers.  His  eyes  were  moist,  shining  in  the
golden candlelight. "Please understand, Adeja, I am not ordering you to do this. It  is  just  that  it  means  so
much to me. For once in my life I want to feel what it is like to be loved."
Brushing his hair aside, Adeja cupped his face between his hands  and  kissed  him.  Sephil  responded,
twining his arms around Adeja's back and eagerly helping him undress, but his actions were not those of a
promiscuous  seducer.  Once  they  were  both  naked,  he  lay  back  among  the  pillows  and  let  Adeja  take
control of their lovemaking.
The next hour was a languid blur of kissing and touching in which the act of penetration seemed more
an  afterthought  than  anything  else.  Here,  too,  Sephil  yielded,  allowing  Adeja  to  mount  him  however  he
wished. "I do not care," he said, "as long as you love me."
Adeja  did  not  stop  to  ask  what  he  meant,  and  his  only  response  was  a  grunt.  Now  was  when  he
usually turned a boy over onto his hands and knees to take him from behind. It did  not  occur  to  him  until
much later that he chose to make love to Sephil in the position that allowed him to fully embrace and kiss his
lover while they arched and groaned toward climax.
Exhausted, lying sated and content in Adeja's arms, Sephil murmured, "It has never been that way with
a lover before." He kissed Adeja's shoulder. "I should not keep you here. I know you want to leave."
"I never said any such thing."
"No, perhaps you did not say it, but I know it in my  heart,"  said  Sephil.  "Some  nights  I  feel  you  pull
away  from  me,  as  if  your  heart  is  elsewhere.  Since  you  came  here,  I  understand  things  I  should  have
known a long time ago."
Adeja did not know what to say. "You shouldn't pay too much attention to a soldier's rough manners,
Sephil. Some things I said in anger. That business about Bedez and his pet name for you, that wasn't any of
my concern."
"You said them because I deserved them."  Sephil  smiled  up  at  him.  "If  a  soldier  cannot  tell  me  the
truth, then who can?"
* * * *
"I think it would be best if you resigned from my lord's household," said Nakhet. "You need not worry
about future employment, as I can arrange a suitable post—"
"At Mekesh?" finished Adeja. He had scarcely reported for his post when the chief eunuch pulled him
into a side room. "I'd hardly call that a promotion."
"It is not necessarily a death sentence. The garrison  out  there  could  use  a  man  of  your…prodigious
talents."
Adeja watched the door, half-expecting Sephil to enter at any moment. The last time a guard was sent
to  Mekesh,  the  prince  gave  the  order.  He  said  he  knew  I  wanted  to  leave.  He  must  have  known  I

planned to desert him. "Has he said he wants me to go?"
Nakhet's  smile  was  so  smug  that  Adeja  would  have  liked  to  smash  his  fist  into  it.  "Perhaps  this
explanation is above a common soldier, but certain inconveniences must be put out of the way for political
expediency. My lord is a prince who is about to take a wife, and the king intends for the  current  state  of
affairs in this household to improve. Of course, your continued presence here is detrimental to that."
"I'm no threat to the prince's marriage and  you  know  that,"  said  Adeja.  "I've  been  urging  him  to  go
through with it the same as you have."
"Ah, but we cannot have such an impressionable youth whispering words of love to a mere soldier, can
we? My lord has always been high-strung and frail, and regardless of what he may wish, it  is  in  his  very
best interest this business does not continue."
Adeja knotted his fists in his sword belt. "So fucking him is all right, but anything more than that isn't, is
that what you're saying?"
Nakhet made a dismissive gesture. "If that is what you call it in your vulgar soldier's vernacular."
"Actually, we call it something much worse, and we usually say it about whores in the lower city," said
Adeja. "And we have words for men like you, too, but I'm sure you already know what they are."
The veins in Nakhet's forehead  and  neck  bulged  with  thinly  constrained  anger.  "It  is  not  for  you  to
question what your betters do," he said tightly. "My duty is to keep my lord healthy and happy, and I have
done so. In spite of your outrageous resistance, he was set on having you. He refused to  send  you  away
even after that unfortunate night you spent in his bed. Of course, had it been my decision, I would have had
you sent away at once."
"Even though you were the one who arranged the whole thing?" asked Adeja.
Guards, borrowed from another garrison, came in  at  Nakhet's  signal  to  take  custody  of  Adeja.  One
demanded his pike and sword, which he was reluctant to hand over. Seeing his hesitation, Nakhet warned
him against making a scene.
"The prince would not allow—"
"My lord is in no state of mind to decide what is best for him, and these men have been told that," said
Nakhet. "You will be escorted to the city gates and from there taken to Mekesh. You need not worry about
your belongings. They have already been collected from your barracks and  your  commanding  officer  has
been told that you are being transferred. And you need not worry about this."
A small, threadbare bundle landed heavily on the desk; Adeja heard the familiar clink of coins within.
"You are awfully frugal for a soldier," commented the eunuch. "One would think that you were saving  up
for something. You will find it is all there, plus a generous severance pay, though I doubt you will find much
to spend it on at Mekesh."
Nakhet paused, lifting his finger to stop the guards as they stepped forward. Apparently he could not
resist  one  more  jibe.  "I  think,"  he  said,  "this  might  be  a  good  time  to  caution  you  that  the  garrison
commanders at Mekesh deal very harshly with deserters."
* * * *
Sephil found his chief eunuch hunched over the household accounts in the little study just off the foyer.
"Where is he, Nakhet?"
Without looking up from his books, Nakhet gave a little shrug. "Who, my lord?"
"Do not feign ignorance with me. You know perfectly well who I mean. Where is Adeja? He should
have reported for his shift by now."
"He has gone," answered Nakhet.
Sephil wanted to shake him out of his nonchalance. "He left the city?"
"I believe he is well on his way to Mekesh by now."
"Mekesh?" 
"Yes, my lord," Nakhet replied irritably.
Surging forward, Sephil swept the books and papers off the desk. "Look at me when I speak to you!
What have you done?"
"Only what is best for you, my lord."
"I did not tell you to do this!"
Without waiting for a reply, he raced out to the terrace. Night was falling over the city. The pyramid of
the Moon hulked in the growing shadows, the distant mountains black against the last tendrils of sunset, and
somewhere  in  that  landscape  was  the  one  thing—no,  the  only  thing—Sephil  wanted,  his  sole  comfort.
Straining to see, to find Adeja, and knowing he could not, he uttered a long, low cry that brought the entire
household running. "What have you done?"
Nakhet appeared behind him. "My prince," he said smoothly, "it is for the  best.  You  are  about  to  be

married, and who knows what this marriage will do for your station? Your father's favor—"
"I do not care  about that! You idiot, my father cares  nothing for me and never will, no matter who I
marry!" He sank to his knees, curled into himself and wept, not caring who saw or heard. "You knew—you
 knew what he was to me. How could you do this? What have you done?"
If one could physically tear hope from a living soul, Sephil imagined it would feel  very  much  like  the
emptiness he felt now.

Chapter Six
Mekesh guarded the heights on the northwestern fringe of the Sevaa wastes, where the Khishtil Pass
cut through the mountains and led down into the fertile Khul river valley.
Sevaa stretched over a  swath  of  five  hundred  miles,  running  from  the  steppes  populated  by  Turyar
horsemen south to the mountain range that separated it from Tajhaan. Ancient kings had built fortresses to
guard  the  heights,  but  after  centuries  of  relative  peace  and  prosperity,  Rhodeen  neglected  its  western
defenses. The once-formidable strongholds had fallen into disrepair, and now only Mekesh stood  between
the Turyar and the fertile river valley on the other side of the mountains.
It was hard to believe anything could live on the plain. Heat shimmered off the earth below the cliffs
on  which  the  stronghold  stood,  and  there  was  no  vegetation  beyond  the  pass.  Scorpions  eked  out  an
existence  in  the  waste,  while  from  the  walls  one  occasionally  saw  a  black  thread  whipping  across  the
dunes. At least one man a year fell victim to the daku,  the  deadliest  serpent  known  to  man.  Given  such
dangers and the lack of water, it was small wonder that caravans went weeks out of their way to skirt the
waste, taking the long southeastern route around the mountains toward Cassiare.
Supplies came from Shemin-at-Khul once a  month,  but  never  very  much  or  of  high  quality.  Rations
were thin and the discipline harsh. Sentries were posted at all hours, drills were constant, and desertion was
punished with mutilation and death. As he entered the stronghold, Adeja passed under  a  gate  spiked  with
the heads of traitorous soldiers.
"We leave them tied out overnight for the scorpions to finish, though sometimes the daku  get to them
first. You can hear them screaming all the way back from the privy when it's the scorpions," said Radhar,
under whose guard Adeja had come through the pass. "The snakes do quick work, but in the morning we've
got to wear full armor in going out there to get the bodies. Daku  can rear up and hit a man in the face if
you get them angry."
A hard cot and footlocker were provided in a drafty room packed with eleven other cots. Armor and
garrison-issue clothes, clearly secondhand, were also given to him; the tunic was too tight across the chest.
"You'll not get a woman here to let it out for you," said a man whose broad face was splotched with broken
blood vessels. "You'll be lucky if you see a woman once a year. They send a few whores once in a while,
but by the time you get to fuck one she'll be worn out from the rest of us."
Over  a  meal  of  thin  soup  and  ale,  Adeja  made  discreet  inquiries  and  learned  that  a  soldier  named
Bedez had indeed served but took an  arrow  through  the  eye  just  three  months  before.  "He  had  a  pretty
face," snorted Radhar, "until he got here. Did you know him?"
Adeja had been alternately curious and restive about his predecessor. "I served with him in  Tajhaan.
I'd heard he was here."
"He got in some trouble over a man's pretty son. What'd you do to get sent out here?"
"Nothing, really."
Radhar  exchanged  looks  with  Andias,  the  man  with  the  splotched  face.  Both  of  them  snorted.
"Everybody's done something, otherwise they wouldn't be here," said Radhar. "You don't want to say, that's
your problem, but I can tell you whatever you did there's bound to be somebody here who's done ten times
worse."
Adeja sipped at his ale, the sourest stuff he had ever tasted. "I got in a fight with my commander over
some  woman.  Bit  his  ear  off,"  he  lied.  If  he  was  going  to  be  an  undesirable  he  might  as  well  be  an
interesting one.
"Is that what you did?" asked Andias. He glanced over at Radhar. "You owe me fifteen."
Adeja raised an eyebrow. "I take it you had a bet going?"
"We lay wagers on all the new arrivals," Radhar said quickly. "With your looks, I had you pegged for
some trouble with another man's wife."
Adeja put the ale aside. Another swallow and he thought he might vomit. "I've fucked a few of those,
but that's not what got me out here."
After lunch he was assigned a unit and entered onto the duty roster. Every man had a shift upon the

walls or as lookout in one of Mekesh's three towers. His captain  assigned  him  the  evening  watch  on  the
north wall. His other shift was in the mess,  scrubbing  pots  and  tables  with  sand  under  the  direction  of  a
cook who promptly took Adeja aside and shook a work reddened finger at him. "I heard you bit the ear off
your last captain," he grumbled. "You do that here and what the scorpions leave of you will end up minced
and rolled into a meat pie."
Only in retrospect did he realize it was not the wisest lie he could have told. Adeja nodded obediently
and fetched the sand bucket from the corner. Kaf wanted the grease stains scoured off the kitchen walls
and he wanted it done quickly.
Seeing him, the two other soldiers already at work shifted over to make room for him. They were from
his  unit,  the  Jackals,  and  managed  to  introduce  themselves  before  Kaf  yelled  at  them  to  stifle  the  idle
chatter. Jackals usually took the evening watch, while the morning and afternoon watches were allotted to
the Scorpions and Vultures, the two other units. Rivalries were friendly, but in their frustration with the king
and their hatred of the Turyar all three units shared common cause.
Attacks from the Turyar were sporadic. Already inured to a hard life on the steppes, the horsemen did
not seem as bothered by  the  harsh  environment  and  easily  traversed  the  waste  to  fire  arrows  or  launch
baskets of scorpions at the men on the walls. One was occasionally picked off by a canny archer, and then
it was cause for celebration, but most of the time their raids were too stealthy and lightning-swift to allow
retaliation.
On his first night, Adeja  crouched  with  his  pike  behind  the  crenellated  wall  and  listened  to  a  Turya
raiding party fill the darkness with their eerie ululating cries. Off to the left, a brazier tempted him with its
warmth, but Radhar cautioned him against standing too close to it. "That's the first place their arrows  will
go. Sometimes they throw pitch in, and if you're right there, well, that's not a pretty way to die. I saw a man
go up like a torch just ten months ago. It took five days to get rid of the stink."
"How long have you been here?" asked Adeja.
Radhar shrugged. "Three years, I think. There's no point in counting. Once you come here, you never
leave."
"New orders don't come?"
"Who's going to remember you're even out here? Oh, we've an unspoken rule that if you last ten years
you can walk out of here and the sentries won't stop you, but nobody's ever lasted that  long.  Your  friend
Bedez, he lasted six months."
"I said I knew him," said Adeja, "not that he was my friend."
What he truly wanted to know was if Mekesh was such a forlorn post, with no hope of reprieve, then
why did anyone stay? It was  a  question  he  had  to  phrase  carefully,  and  prudence  kept  him  from  asking
outright, but when he did the answer was not unexpected. "We still have  families  back  in  Rhodeen,"  said
Radhar. "We're the only thing standing between them and the Turyar.
"It's  not  so  bad  up  north  in  Khalgar.  They  still  keep  their  defenses  strong,  so  the  Turyar  can't  get
through the mountains there."
"What about the Dolmen Pass just north of us?" asked Adeja.
Radhar  shook  his  head.  "It's  little  more  than  a  switchback  trail.  Foot  soldiers  might  be  able  to  get
through, but  it's  too  steep  for  an  army  of  horses  and  supply  trains.  This  far  south  it's  treacherous  going
across the wastes, but once they get past us, the Turyar will find a clear path through the Khishtil Pass.  It
won't be long either, you mark my words."
Weeks slowly turned to months, and high summer came to the waste. Adeja did not envy the men on
the afternoon watch as they returned from their shifts worn out by the heat and sun. Moist cloths and ale
was often taken up to the walls, and in places awnings were erected, but the precautions were not always
sufficient.  In  his  second  week,  Adeja  saw  a  man  taken  down  who  had  collapsed  from  heat  stroke;  the
sentry never came out of his delirium and died early the next day.
Burial rites at Mekesh were perfunctory. Elsewhere garrisons set aside a small room or two to act as
a shrine, and the altar was cluttered with the gods worshipped by the many different peoples who served.
Special care  was  always  taken  with  the  dead,  especially  when  a  man  fell  while  executing  his  duty,  and
sometimes there was no outside family to take custody of the body. A man's comrades were his family, for
they  often  knew  him  better  than  any  wife  or  offspring.  Units  laid  claim  to  certain  corners  of  military
cemeteries, soliciting donations and making the arrangements.
"It used to be better," said one soldier, as the sentry's body was carried out of the infirmary. "There are
caves up in the pass where we could give the dead proper rites, but it means too many men gone from here
for too long, and too much risk of desertion."
Adeja watched the corpse, sprawled haphazardly on a stretcher without even the dignity of a shroud,

disappear around the corner. "You can't have been here that long," he said.
"No," replied the soldier, "but our stories outlast us. You know, when the Turyar come, no one will bury
our bones, or tell our families how we died."
"Once a man gets sent here, I don't think it matters."
A heavily equipped detail was sent out to the edge of the waste to dig down into the hot sand,  while
archers and pikemen stood lookout for Turya raiders or agitated scorpions or daku.  Digging a sand grave
was difficult work, as the loose grains kept sliding back down into the hole and filling it, but at  last  it  was
deep enough for the corpse. The soldier's body, stripped of armor and clothing which were returned to the
storeroom, was brought out on a tarp and laid in the hole. No prayers were spoken and no marker was left;
the shifting sands would have buried it within a day.
"Sometimes we dig down and find another body, or the winds shift the sands and uncover the grave,"
said Andias. "The heat and sand dry them out. Sometimes we can even tell who it is."
"No prayers?" asked Adeja.
"What gods are going to listen to us out here?"
The arrival of a supply train from Shemin-at-Khul was reason to celebrate. Sacks of flour and onions,
and jugs of  ale  were  carted  into  the  storerooms,  while  the  unit  commanders  went  about  delivering  mail.
Adeja read out a few letters for men who could not read, and was surprised at the packet that arrived for
him. Whoever wrote him had done so on good parchment, though he cringed when a caught a whiff of the
expensive scent. No doubt some woman or  whore  had  found  out  where  he  was  stationed  and  was  now
trying to make his life even more difficult than it already was.
From the muttered curses some of his comrades made, he knew he was not alone. Such letters were a
staple of barracks life, angry missives wanting money, claiming paternity or frothing with  scorn  for  lovers
abruptly vanished. Women knew nothing about the military. It was not as if a soldier had a choice of post,
or when or how he was deployed.
Breaking  the  plain  wax  seal,  he  was  surprised  to  find  the  letter  was  from  Sephil.  He  sniffed  the
parchment, wondering why the prince bothered to write. It was such a silly, effeminate thing to do.
I miss you,  Adeja.  The Tajhaani  embassy  has  arrived  and  my bride  is in a palace  on  the other
side of the city. I do not want to see her; I am afraid  of  what she will think  of  me. Yours is the only
face I want to see now. I want you to know it was not my wish that you be sent to this place. I did not
want to send you away at all, as you were the only thing that made my days  bearable,  but if I had  to
choose  I  would  have  had  you  posted  to  Cassiare.  Nakhet  arranged  otherwise,  and  without  my
knowing. He said the whole affair  was an  embarrassment  best left forgotten,  never  mind that it was
his idea in the first place.
The other soldiers made catcalls at the fragrance oozing off the letter. "Oh, you had a  wealthy  one,"
said Javan. "I've heard they even put perfume on their—"
"Shut up and let me finish reading."
Nakhet says you asked for a transfer, but I do not believe him, and I have no way to get you out
without further  endangering  your  life. I know  you  wanted  nothing  to  do  with  me.  You  told  me  the
truth, but perhaps  you  thought  what Bedez  thought.  I was shameless with  him  and  with  you,  and  I
cringe to think of those times. I tried very hard  to understand  and  to change.  All I truly wanted  was
for you to care for me.
Adeja burned the letter on the kitchen hearth, where Kaf complained loudly about the smoke. Writing
back was out of the question. Nakhet would only intercept his correspondence, and he could not afford to
be so stupid as to put his sentiments down on paper, provided he could even obtain writing materials.
A second letter came a month later.
You did not write back,  Adeja.  I cannot  blame you  for  despising  me.  It  is  my  fault  you  are  in
that  terrible  place.  I  asked  Eumos  if  anything  can  be  done,  but  it  would  take  an  order  from  my
father  or brother  to release  you,  and  I fear  they will send  men to execute  you  instead.  I  would  tell
you  to  abandon  your  post  and  flee,  except  that  Eumos  tells  me  it  is  terribly  difficult  to  escape
Mekesh, and if you were caught you would suffer horribly.
I do not know what advice to give you because I do not know what to do. I can only urge you to
be strong and ask you to forgive me for this.
I have seen this princess. There was a ceremony in the palace of the Sun. You were right: she is
beautiful.  Zhanil  says  he  envies  me,  but  I  do  not  believe  him.  I  smile  as  best  I  can  because  it  is
expected  of  me,  but  I  feel  nothing  for  this  girl  except  pity.  She  is  disappointed  in  me.  Nakhet
suggested I grow a beard, as this might make me resemble Zhanil more and  please  her better. I only
wish she were not Tajhaani because it reminds me of you.

My father  tells me to be grateful,  that such  a beautiful,  royal  bride  is more than  I deserve.  He
told me if I behave well my sons may be restored  to the succession;  he says  nothing  of  me. On other
days he tells me he will have one of my cousins consummate the marriage, as I obviously am not fit to
do it myself. Zhanil has found a woman to teach me about pleasing a maiden but my heart is not in it.
I am doing my best to obey, I truly am, but it is so terribly hard.
Adeja's  companions  chuckled.  Javan  flicked  the  corner  of  the  scented  parchment  with  a  dirty
fingernail. "That rich mistress of yours won't give up, eh?"
Sooner or later, he feared one of them would find out a young man was writing to him, and the king's
son at that. Sephil needed to be a man and stop clinging to him for comfort he could not give. His world had
narrowed to its harshest elements: searing sun, discipline as hard as  the  cot  upon  which  he  slept  and  the
fear that rode out of the waste at night. His future was a hole in the sand, whether it came in a week, six
months or three years from now. He had no more time for princes and their petty concerns.
* * * *
"I have said it before, brother: you are too sensitive. Of course she likes you."
Zhanil  seemed  not  at  all  concerned  by  the  murmuring  and  suspicious  glances  of  the  Tajhaani
delegation. Smiling at them, he lifted his cup in salute and drank. Sephil did not note their reaction. It took
every ounce of self control he possessed not to flee the hall in terror. In the three years of his exile he had
forgotten what it felt like to stand among people and be watched by all.
"No, she does not," he whispered. "She is looking at Dashir."
All  he  could  see  of  his  betrothed  was  a  slender  column  of  orange  and  saffron  silk  topped  by  a
gold-spangled veil. Almond-shaped eyes met his and quickly darted away to study the royal cousins.
During the ceremony, the princess  approached  the  eldest  cousin,  bowed  and  offered  her  hand.  The
Tajhaani interpreter apologized for the error, telling the king  that  she  had  mistaken  Prince  Dashir  for  her
future husband. While the court tried to smother its amusement behind jeweled hands  and  fans,  Brasidios
brusquely motioned to his younger son, who stood pale and nervous beside Zhanil. Sephil prayed the  gods
would make him disappear. 
Naturally, the gods ignored him.
When the interpreter explained the situation to the princess, she gave her delicate hand to Sephil, but it
was not with the same enthusiasm with which she had greeted Dashir.
Afterward, Dashir could not resist making light of the mishap. "I see the king has let you out of your
gilded cage." Maturity had not blunted his cruelty. Not caring who saw, he plucked at Sephil's sleeve with
rough fingers. "Pity, I thought you dead these last few years." 
"I realize  this  is  all  very  sudden  for  you,"  murmured  Zhanil.  "Had  it  been  up  to  me  I  would  have
negotiated  for  a  longer  courtship,  but  you  understand  this  alliance  must  be  consummated  as  soon  as
possible."
"It has been explained to me," said Sephil.
Zhanil placed a  reassuring  hand  upon  his  shoulder.  "So  your  first  meeting  was  not  the  success  you
wished it to be. These political matches often start cold, but once you become better acquainted with each
other things will improve. Spend time wooing  her.  Perhaps  you  should  learn  a  few  words  of  Tajhaani  to
demonstrate your good intentions."
"If you think that will help," Sephil answered colorlessly. He did as he was told, trimming his hair and
growing a beard to improve his appearance, while in private he did not think any amount of effort would win
Terreh's interest. His brother and cousins were all so dignified, so masculine, he could never match them.
After the ceremony and reception in the palace of the Sun, Zhanil invited him to  back  his  residence.
Although their father approved the visit to the temple of Abh,  going  out  remained  a  rare  privilege.  Sephil
demurred  at  the  invitation.  Zhanil  quickly  realized  what  the  matter  was  and  took  the  matter  in  hand  by
speaking to Brasidios and the two eunuchs appointed as Sephil's minders.
Sephil envied his brother's ability to speak so easily to their father. When together, Brasidios and Zhanil
seemed more  like  equals  than  ruler  and  subordinate.  Even  though  he  was  once  again  received  at  court,
Sephil knew his presence was not welcome. When addressed, he hesitated to  meet  his  father's  eyes  and
could not string together more than two words at a time. What an  idiot he must think  I am. He was not
even capable of managing his own household, for when he attempted to evict Nakhet, the eunuch refused
to go, and there was nothing Sephil could do to force him.
"Come," said Zhanil, tugging at his arm. "Let us go and forget diplomatic matters for a few hours."
Set in a garden  surrounded  by  climbing  vines  and  fruit  trees,  the  gathering  was  small  and  informal.
Zhanil's wife, housebound and heavy with her third child, welcomed Sephil with warm words, urging him to
eat the delicacies her cooks had prepared.

"You look so pale," she said, "and I am certain the ceremony was exhausting." When he refused  the
food, she pressed strong red wine upon him and was not satisfied until he drank.
Two small boys came out with their nurses. It shamed Sephil to realize these were his nephews and he
did not even know their names. Zhanil greeted them with unabashed paternal affection, setting them upon
his lap while Sephil sat under a lime tree watching the scene. The tranquil bonds shared among these people
did not encompass him, and he could not help but feel a sharp sadness at knowing they were strangers to
him.
One small thing gave him hope. Swallowing his  fear,  he  finally  wrote  to  the  garrison  commander  at
Mekesh  ordering  Adeja's  release.  Although  only  his  father  or  brother  had  the  authority  to  make  such
demands,  he  decided  he  had  nothing  to  lose  by  trying.  His  father  needed  this  alliance  and  could  not  do
anything to him that was worse than what had been done before. If he locks  me away  again  I  will  not
have  to marry this princess,  and  if he puts me to death  it will be a welcome end  to  my  troubles.  As
long as Adeja is safe and I have done something worthwhile, I do not care about the rest.
A small smile escaped him at how confident and strong Zhanil  was,  how  happy  he  seemed  with  his
family. I have no place in his world, he thought. I do not think I ever did.

Chapter Seven
It began with a dark, thick object sailing over the wall and breaking open in the outer court.
Adeja did not see the incoming jar, only heard the crash of  terracotta  against  the  flagstones  and  the
alarmed cries of the men standing nearby. Turning his head, he saw the sentries  below  scattering  from  a
writhing mass of dark shapes that darted out toward  them.  He  froze  in  recognition  even  before  the  men
below shouted up that daku had been loosed inside the walls.
Another missile struck the stairs leading down from the walls,  tumbled,  and  broke  open.  Radhar,  his
shield  instinctively  raised,  had  the  post  nearest  the  steps.  He  glanced  down,  shrinking  back  as  he
simultaneously slammed the lip of his shield against the ground to protect his feet. "Scorpions!" he cried.
The  Turyar  had  chosen  the  perfect  night  for  a  raid.  A  new  moon  offered  almost  no  light.  Shapes
scuttled through the shadows, but there was no telling how many gathered  below  the  walls.  Thus  far  the
enemy operated in near-total silence, a marked change from their trademark battle shrieks.
More jars sailed over the walls, breaking on the stones. Pitch spattered out in  all  directions,  catching
fire from the braziers. Half the courtyard ignited in an instant, catching two men who did not move quickly
enough out of the way. Their screams echoed up to the walls.
Men from the other two units were running out, some bleary with sleep and  still  struggling  to  get  on
their armor. One tripped over a daku  and fell convulsing as it struck him. Another man speared the snake
and flung the writhing body into the fire.
Adeja and the men on the walls dispatched the scorpions, using their pikes and shields to sweep them
into  the  fire.  The  heat  was  now  climbing  toward  the  stairs,  blackening  the  stones  and  threatening  the
nearest escape route.
Arrows whistled through the night, sailing over the walls like fireflies. Some glanced off stones, others
found their mark. Shields went up, though not soon enough for some. Even as an arrow sliced through the
first layer of his shield, Adeja saw Andias take one in the shoulder. With a cry, the man stumbled back, his
arm falling to his side and exposing his torso to the pair of arrows that thudded into him half a second later.
He twitched, made a gurgling sound, and lay motionless.
No one  saw  the  first  Turyar  coming  over  the  walls  until  the  bugle  of  a  tower  sentry  alerted  them.
Adeja turned into the onrush of two men. One he struck with his shield, delivering a backhanded blow that
sent the man tumbling off the wall into the courtyard. The second he shoved back, where Javan gutted him
with a sword. Beyond them, he saw more coming, a swarm  of  quilted  armor  and  boar-tusk  helmets,  and
now they were climbing up from multiple points along the wall.
"They've got siege ladders!" someone shouted.
Radhar and two others raced to push one of the ladders down. Radhar  leaned  out  into  the  darkness
that took off his head and sent it flying into the night. Spears made quick work of the other two men. Turyar
surged up and over the wall, and there was no one to stop them.
Adeja smashed his shield into another Turya—a large man with wild eyes and pale braids as thick as a
woman's wrist—who wielded the short sword typical of the steppes. Two blows landed in the center of his
shield,  the  third  augmented  by  the  man's  weight.  Dropping  his  pike,  now  useless  in  such  close  quarters,
Adeja unsheathed his sword and shoved the man back before jamming the  point  into  his  belly.  Layers  of
quilted armor and flesh yielded, the man grunting as Adeja wrenched the blade out again. He fell, but Adeja
was  already  turning,  moving  on  without  looking  to  see  if  the  Turya  was  dead.  Whether  the  man  died
instantly or bled out it made no difference as long as he was incapacitated. No one had time to be thorough
in the heat of battle.
His thigh stung, and he felt a warm  stickiness  saturate  his  trousers.  There  was  no  time  to  stop  and
investigate a wound he could not even remember receiving. Someone was shouting orders, but it  was  not
his commander, whom he had seen fall under a hail  of  Turya  arrows.  He  could  not  make  out  what  was
being said, nor did he much care at this point. The stronghold was being overrun, and he knew that if he did
not get off the walls he was going to die.
With nothing left to fuel them, the fire in the courtyard began to burn out. Stumbling over fallen men,

his wound beginning to hamper his movements now that he was aware of it, he made it down the stairs and
across  the  court.  A  dismembered  daku  twitched  in  the  doorway  leading  to  the  mess,  the  half-charred
corpse of one of its victims sprawled nearby. More snakes might be coiled in the shadows, but he could not
afford to hesitate now.
Men occasionally ran past him, carrying weapons or searching for their superiors. No one stopped him.
When he reached  the  barracks  the  place  was  empty,  dark  but  for  the  flickering  glow  of  flames  coming
through the window slat. A thin haze of smoke clung to the air, smelling of  timber  and  pitch.  The  Turyar
must have set fire to other parts of the stronghold.
Adeja got his money out of the footlocker. He shoved it under his belt, tied a cloth around his wound,
and ran out again.
Turyar were now inside the main citadel. As he ducked into the mess hall on his way to the kitchen, he
surprised two who were stripping a body on the floor. Killing them both, he started to step over the corpse
when it twitched and a hand grasped his ankle.
Kaf had been stabbed in half a dozen places and now lay  in  a  widening  pool  of  his  own  blood.  "All
over," he gasped. "They…opened the gates…."
All Adeja could do for him was cut his throat. He did not stay to catch Kaf's last breath, but went for
the kitchen and seized  an  empty  skin  from  the  shelf.  Food,  stored  in  the  root  cellar,  would  be  harder  to
obtain and he did not have time to prize up the trapdoor. Thick shouts, growing steadily closer, reached him
from the mess. Adeja dropped the  skin,  bent  to  pick  it  up,  and  saw  the  bloody  tracks  he  made.  He  had
stepped in Kaf's blood. I should've cut his fucking head off while I was at it, he thought savagely.
No time for food.  I've got money and  something  for  water, and  that'll have  to do.  He seized the
waterskin and fled out through a side room to the ledge leading to the midden. Darkness obscured the path,
but under Kaf's unrelenting direction he had carried garbage this way so many times  he  could  have  gone
blind.
The kitchen midden spilled over a rocky  ledge  overlooking  the  pass.  On  Adeja's  first  day,  Kaf  took
great pleasure in informing him that many would-be deserters tried that route. The cook then  motioned  to
the square tower overhead and with his finger made a cutting motion across his throat.
Gripping the edge of the wall with his hands, Adeja looked up toward the tower's black hulk. Everyone
who could was running for the gates. Whoever was left above was either using their last arrows against the
Turyar or holing up for a last stand. No one would be watching the pass, and even if they should somehow
see him in the dark a friendly arrow in the  back  was  better  than  being  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Turyar  now
ransacking the kitchen behind him.
A twenty-five foot drop awaited him. Shoving the empty skin between his teeth, he swung a leg over
the edge,  took  a  breath,  and  let  go.  Half  a  second  later  he  landed  heavily  in  a  stinking  pile.  He  gagged
around the waterskin, not even wanting to know what he was crawling through.
The pile spilled down a steep incline toward a stone wall facing the pass. He slid and scraped his way
down until he reached the crumbling masonry. How far down it was to the floor of the pass he could  not
gauge in the dark, but knew stakes had been driven into the rock wall to prevent enemies from scaling up.
Putting out his hand, Adeja gripped one of the stakes; it pointed downward and was sturdy enough to serve
as a handhold.
He felt his way down, using the stakes and digging into the rock with his fingers. Twice he nearly lost
his grip, and by the time he reached the ground he was scraped and bruised. Behind him the night sky was
alight. The sentry towers blazed, filling the air  with  heavy  smoke.  Distant  shouts  were  smothered  by  the
sound of falling timbers and masonry. Any Rhodeen who were still alive would soon wish otherwise.
He  hugged  the  walls  of  the  pass,  listening  for  sounds  of  pursuit  as  he  scrabbled  deeper  into  the
darkness. Once alerted by the rumble of hooves, he ducked into the shadows behind a boulder and watched
from his hiding place as a band of Turya horsemen passed bearing torches. Up ahead he heard shouts and
a  startled  cry.  A  short  time  later  the  riders  reappeared,  heading  back  toward  the  fortress.  Six  torches
streaked by, throwing eerie patterns of light and shadow onto the walls before darkness reclaimed the pass.
Somewhere on the path ahead was a corpse. Adeja limped and crawled along, not knowing what  he
would stumble upon in the shadows. His limbs ached and throbbed, and the stench of the midden clung to
his clothing. If the Turyar came this way again they would surely smell him. Two springs watered the pass,
but they were far into the mountains and Adeja did not know the terrain well enough to be certain of finding
them. The wound in his thigh had to be kept clean, and he needed to fill the skin.
When dawn came he went only a short distance farther before finding a hiding place well off the path,
a shady hollow where he could sleep for a few hours before resuming his march.
Thirst and pain kept him half-awake, and a rattling sound stirred him. Opening one eye, he saw nothing

by his head. The noise came from farther down, by his feet, and he realized he  should  have  checked  the
hollow  beforehand.  He  kept  his  breathing  very  even,  his  body  very  still  and  relaxed.  Chances  were  the
rattlesnake's fangs would not be able to pierce  his  thick  leather  boots,  but  he  could  not  risk  being  struck
farther up.
Around his head he had tied a cloth to keep off sun and sweat. Keeping his lower body as motionless
as possible, he undid it and wrapped it over and around his left hand until it was thickly swathed. With his
right  he  picked  up  a  fist-sized  stone.  Slowly  he  sat  up  with  his  left  hand  extended.  The  snake  coiled,
gathered, and struck out, latching onto his  hand.  The  right  hand  with  the  stone  came  down,  crushing  the
serpent's head again and again until his instincts told him it was safely dead.
Flinging the dead snake away from him, Adeja quickly vacated  the  hollow  and  returned  to  the  path.
Adrenaline shuddered through him. He wanted to run, to put as much distance  between  him,  the  serpent,
and the Turyar as possible, but his body would not obey him. He felt as though he had been wounded in a
thousand places and his lips were cracked from thirst.
Two  more  snakes  appeared  on  the  path  but  no  more  Turyar.  Adeja  did  not  rest  secure  in  that
knowledge. Sooner or later, once they were finished plundering and razing  Mekesh,  they  would  enter  the
pass. Instinct cautioned him to travel at night, but in the darkness he ran a greater risk of running afoul of
serpents  or  predators  who  hunted  once  the  sun  went  down.  He  carefully  chose  his  next  hiding  place,
clearing it of a pair of scorpions before bedding down. A campfire would have reassured him, but he could
not take the chance and so spent much of the night half-awake.
Six days saw him through the pass. On the second he found a spring where he could bathe his wound,
scrub off some of the midden filth, and fill his waterskin. By then he was  tormented  by  thirst,  but  he  still
possessed enough sense to wait until nightfall. There were too  many  hiding  places  above  and  around  the
spring,  too  many  vantage  points  from  which  a  Turya  archer  could  take  him.  He  had  not  ruled  out  the
possibility that the Turyar were watching the springs hoping to lure survivors.
On a few occasions riders came down the pass. He hid from them, but they did not seem to be looking
for him. They  behaved  more  like  scouts.  Reconnaissance  could  only  mean  an  invasion  of  Rhodeen  was
imminent.
Around this time Adeja discovered his money was gone. He remembered tucking it securely under his
belt but could not recall where or when the bundle disappeared; the only likely scenario was that it fell out
when he jumped into and then crawled through the midden. Now, left penniless on the eve of an invasion,
he  had  to  abandon  his  original  intention  of  skirting  around  the  Khul  river  valley  and  making  straight  for
Khalgar. He would have to return to Shemin-at-Khul, file a report and face the wrath of a command that
would blame him for the fall of Mekesh.
And when the attack comes, they'll stick  me right in the front  lines and  you  can  be sure  I won't
have  the  same  luck  twice.  The  prospect  was  so  glum  he  toyed  with  avoiding  the  city  altogether  and
foraging his way to Khalgar, but a diet of insects and raw herbs was not going to get him very far. His belly
ached with hunger and his wound needed attention.
The seventh day brought him down to Kesse, a village watered by a rushing stream where he did his
best  to  bathe  before  approaching  anyone.  Nevertheless,  his  haggard  appearance  alarmed  the  villagers
almost  as  much  as  the  news  he  carried.  Though  they  had  no  money  to  spare,  they  gave  him  food  and
dressed his wound, and the very next day a farmer offered him a ride in his cart to the next village.

Chapter Eight
"This is all the room I have right now," said Meden, indicating a rough pallet on the floor. "You ought to
be down in the central barracks so they can assign you a new post, but on account of your wound and for
old times I'll let it pass. Stay the night if you want, but in the morning you've got to go."
Adeja did not bother reminding him that he had  already  reported  to  the  city's  central  authorities  and
been sent on to the palace to make a formal deposition. Had his wound not put him in so much discomfort
he would not have troubled his former captain for a bed for the night. The officers who took his statement
were  far  from  pleasant,  phrasing  their  questions  in  a  tone  that  implied  he  was  to  blame  for  the  current
situation. The farther he was from the palace, the better.
His lost wages were not, they coldly informed him, their concern, and the best he could hope for at the
moment was a new post. Tomorrow was soon enough to make an application. For now he simply wanted to
lie down, close his eyes, and relieve some of the exhaustion that dogged him the past thirteen days.
Rest was more easily desired than obtained. Men  constantly  moved  in  and  out  of  the  barracks,  and
most of them wanted to know what he saw on the frontier and how he had  been  wounded.  For  the  time
being, he said nothing about Mekesh. His injury, he  said,  came  from  a  minor  skirmish,  and  since  he  was
unfit for rigorous duty at the moment, he had  been  sent  back  to  the  city  to  convalesce.  How  many  men
believed his lie he did not know. It did not concern him.
Last of all, a man wearing the royal sunburst limped toward him, took his arm,  and  urged  him  into  a
private corner. "I've got some news for you," he said. "I think you might want to hear it."
Under the helmet, Adeja saw Eumos' lined, pockmarked face. "Did you just come off duty?"
"Yes, but not from where you think," answered Eumos. "I'm in Zhanil's household now."
"You got a promotion?"
Eumos shook his head. "I wouldn't call it that."
Adeja noticed how stiffly he moved. "You look like you were in a fight."
"You  and  me  both,"  said  Eumos.  "I  overheard  the  news  about  Mekesh.  Zhanil  and  Brasidios  are
already calling their generals in, but they don't want to make it public yet. It's been nothing but dispatches
coming in and out all afternoon. I heard somebody drop your name, so I asked around and  found  out  you
were staying here."
Leaning forward, Eumos dropped his voice. "I wouldn't if I were you, Adeja. I didn't do with the prince
what you did and they were still going to execute me. If you've got any sense, get out of the palace and out
of the city before the king starts looking for you."
"What happened?" asked Adeja.
"The  prince  got  much  worse  after  you  left,"  explained  Eumos.  "Nakhet  told  him  you  were  dead.  I
wasn't there for what happened, but the night guard told me he ordered his servants out of his chamber and
cut his wrists."
Adeja took a deep breath. Only a desperate man opened his veins like that. Oh, gods,  you  little fool.
"What happened next?" It surprised him how hard his voice was trembling.
"The  prince  didn't  die,  but  he  was  very  sick  and  wanted  to  go  to  the  temple  of  Abh.  I  guess  the
physician they called couldn't do anything for him," said  Eumos.  "Nakhet  wouldn't  let  him  go.  The  prince
called me in and whispered in my ear. Nakhet wanted to know what he said, of course, then turned me out
when I wouldn't tell him.
"I went straight to Zhanil, just as the young prince said. I told him everything." Eumos reached out and
put a hand on Adeja's arm. "You'll have to forgive me. I had  to  tell  him  about  you,  too,  but  you  were  at
Mekesh. I didn't think it would matter."
His gaze roaming the barracks, Adeja knew he  ought  to  leave  the  palace  grounds  immediately.  "Go
on," he urged.
"Zhanil stormed his brother's household. He arrested Nakhet and some  of  the  others,  and  personally
took  his  brother  to  the  temple,  but  I  don't  know  what  happened  to  him  after  that.  The  king  arrived  at
midnight and it was awful. Half the household  was  executed  on  the  spot,  including  Nakhet,  and  the  king

was going to kill me, too, but Zhanil put in a good word. I got off with fifteen lashes. It hurts like cold death,
but it's better than what I might've gotten."
Fifteen lashes were more than Adeja had any right to expect. For all he  knew,  the  king's  men  were
looking for him at that very moment. "I can't stay here."
Eumos nodded. "I know somebody in the city who can give you a bed for the night. Quickly, get your
things and let's go."
In the corridor outside a sentry came looking for Meden. Adeja caught his arm. "What's your hurry?"
he asked. "Shouldn't you be at your post?"
"On the walls," the young man gasped. "He's got to see this."
Emerging into the warm summer night, Adeja and Eumos saw people climbing to the roofs and walls.
Soldiers, eunuchs, and servants gathered together, pointing and exchanging gossip. The stairs were too thick
with people, so Eumos led Adeja along a back route to a sentry tower affording an unobstructed view of the
city and fields beyond.
"We saw it around sunset," said one of the men on duty.
Where the mountains loomed over the western horizon, the tiny pinpricks of campfires  blanketed  the
foothills. "There must be hundreds of them out there," said Adeja. He did not mention the Turyar. No one
did, but they all knew. Only an army could support a camp that size.
Kesse would be a smoking ruin by now. If the people  were  smart  enough  to  heed  his  warning  they
might have fled in time.
When they came down from the tower, Eumos handed Adeja a slip of paper. "This is the address of
the friend I was telling you about. It's two streets down from the tax office. He said he'll wait for you  till
midnight, no later. Sorry I can't do more, but I'm taking a big risk as it is."
Adeja thanked him and made his way toward the palace gate. He got no farther. The sentries, seeing
he was Tajhaani, stopped him at once, and when they saw his wound took him into custody. An attempt to
provide a false name yielded a hard blow to the face, as one of the men on  duty  identified  him.  Bleeding
from a cut lip, he was taken to a warren of rooms under the barracks and locked into one of the unlit cells.
The cell stank of musty air and stale urine. A bucket occupied one dank corner, and a stone slab in the
other was the only place to sit or sleep. No blanket or pillow had been provided. Nor did anyone answer his
questions, not even to tell him what he was being charged with. "You can't hold me unless you tell me what
the charge is," he growled into the darkness.
Heavy footfalls and the rattle of keys answered his complaint. A face appeared at the door. "I do not
need a reason beyond that you are contemptible," said a man's cold voice.
Through the barred slat Adeja saw the speaker.  A  thin  golden  circlet  banded  heavy  brows  above  a
face that conveyed dignity but very little warmth. "Look, I wasn't drinking or making trouble. I was about to
find myself lodging for the night when those men grabbed me."
"This is the only lodging we have for deserters," answered the man.
Adeja strained against the chain that fixed him to the wall. "Who are you calling a deserter?"
"I am your king."
So  this  was  Sephil's  father,  the  man  whose  coldness  had  driven  him  to  attempt  suicide.  Already
irritable, Adeja suddenly felt far less cooperative than he might otherwise have been. "I don't  care  whose
gilded cunt spit you out, I'm no deserter," he said. "I escaped that place with my life after  the Turyar came
over the walls, and I was wounded. I no longer had a post to defend. Didn't you read the fucking report?"
His face distorted by shadows and torchlight, Brasidios appeared to curl his lip. "On the contrary," he
replied, "I have read and heard more about you in the last two weeks than I would have wished to hear in a
lifetime."
Adeja sank back against the wall with a sigh. Here it comes, he thought. "You're not here because of
what happened at Mekesh."
"My son was a frail, ignorant young man, and you took advantage of him."
Yes, it was exactly as he expected. The king had come on account of his son. "I did no  such  thing,"
replied Adeja. "I was forced to accept that assignment."
"Seducing him was not part of your commission," snapped Brasidios. "You have been the ruin of him,
and now you will answer for it."
The king's choice of words strongly suggested that Sephil had died. "Do you really believe that? I was
just the latest in a long line of soldiers your son seduced, and you know it, too." Adeja wanted to add that he
had cared about Sephil, but he read the other man's hostility well enough to realize that claim would not get
him very far. "If you want to punish somebody, go after Nakhet. He's the one responsible for the evil in that
household." Too late, he recalled that the eunuch had already been executed. Now, it seemed, it would be

his turn.
"I did not come here to be subjected to your insolence," said Brasidios.
"Then why did you come?" asked Adeja. "Why didn't you just send somebody down here  to  cut  my
throat and be done with it?"
The shadow of a smile flickered across Brasidios' face. "Oh, you are going to be executed, as the one
who opened the gates of Mekesh to the Turyar and brought war to Rhodeen."
"That's a lie and you fucking well know it!" Adeja surged forward,  but  the  chains  bit  into  his  wrists,
jerking him back. Death he expected, yet not under such pretenses.
"You want somebody to blame for what's happening now, for the Turyar and your son's death, blame
yourself. Go ahead and kill me, but it's not going to change anything. Mekesh was lost decades  ago.  You
neglected it just as you did your son, and now  you've  lost  both.  So  go  ahead,  make  me  a  scapegoat  and
execute me, but when the Turyar throw down your walls, skin you alive and stick your head on a fucking
pole, you'll remember me."

Chapter Nine
The sound of a key rattling in the lock jarred Adeja out of an uneasy sleep. "What is it?" he mumbled.
"If it's anymore of that slop you call food, you can fuck off."
"If you're complaining, that means your wound hasn't gone bad," said a familiar voice. "Get up and look
lively. There isn't a lot of time."
Adeja's eyes watered at the lamplight streaming in through the slat. It took a moment for him to focus
on Meden's face. "What are you doing here?"
"You'll see. Pessen, hurry up with the keys."
As he sat up, kneading sore muscles where he had lain on the hard slab, the door opened and two men
entered. One of them grasped his wrist to unlock the chain. "It's a risk we're taking."
"The man we've got is Tajhaani enough to pass," said Meden. "Once they put the hood over his head
and tie him to the stake nobody's going to notice the difference.  Adeja,  do  you  think  you  can  get  up  and
walk?"
Adeja had been given food and medicine for his wound, and informed that his execution  was  set  for
the day after next. What time he did not spend sleeping, he spent brooding and preparing for his fate. "I can
manage. Are they that impatient to see me burn to death?"
"No, but we didn't think we should wait any longer to get you out. For now, just keep your mouth shut
and follow me."
Meden  stopped  him  in  the  narrow  corridor,  ordered  him  to  strip,  and  gave  him  a  commoner's
threadbare tunic and leggings. Two soldiers shouldered past him into the cell, dragging a naked, unconscious
man between them.
"All right," said Meden. "We're taking you to the gates. The man they just brought in, that's Adeja ked
Shamuz. From now on, you're going to have to call yourself something else, at least until you're  far  away
from here."
No one in the prison or at the entrance leading up to the ground level had been drugged or killed. The
sentries simply let them pass. Adeja looked at them, then at Meden. "What's going on here?"
Pessen put a hand on his shoulder. "All they see is  a  commoner  who  got  a  bit  drunk  and  disorderly
with some soldiers the night before and is now being taken home. Our other prisoner is still in custody." He
winked before giving Meden a nod and walking away.
"But if you really want to be executed," said Meden, "we can turn around and forget this whole thing,
but I hardly think the little whore is worth it."
Even at this late hour the streets hummed with activity. People milled around, talking  and  conducting
business. "It's been panic the last two days," said Meden. "The Turyar now have the entire western region
and our lookouts say they're moving in this direction. Refugees started pouring in early yesterday with awful
stories, and that started it. They wanted in and a lot of people here wanted out. Half the city is trying to run
for Cassiare, but the king has closed the gates and declared martial law."
In that case, Adeja did not ask how Meden planned to get him  out  of  the  city.  Presumably  the  man
already had a plan. "What was that business before about the stake?"
"The king plans to have you burned alive as a sacrifice  to  the  Sun  to  ensure  our  victory  against  the
Turyar. It took some doing, but we got a condemned prisoner who looks a bit like you."
"Won't the king know the difference?"
Meden shouldered aside a vendor who got too close and put a warning hand on his  sword  when  the
man cursed him. "Not really. That is, how much of you did Brasidios really  see in the shadows? Only the
guards got a good look at you and they let you walk out of there."
They were almost through the bazaar, coming up on the tenements that faced the outer walls. Crowds
were thick here, people and their carts loaded and ready to flee the moment the king relented. Lights blazed
on the walls from dozens of braziers, and in their glow scores of archers stood ready to fire on the crowd if
they turned to a mob.
Brasidios is an idiot, thought Adeja. He should just open the gates and let these people  go.  Once

the Turyar  come, they're only  going  to get in the way.  "Why did they do it?" he  asked.  "Why  are  you
going to all this trouble?"
"I told you before," answered Meden. "Things have been happening while you were rotting in that cell.
The story's all over the city now, in every barracks and wine sink where soldiers gather. Eumos has been
talking."
"Eumos is going to get himself killed."
"Not if Prince Zhanil looks the other way, and most of the men in the city take their orders from him.
Mekesh was bad enough, and I haven't heard from a single man who thinks you're a deserter, not even the
Crown Prince. Everybody knows you're being killed because of that whore."
Adeja seized Meden's arm and pulled him aside under the awning of a squalid tenement, where he had
to wave aside two beggars before continuing. "That's a king's son you're insulting.  Don't  let  me  hear  you
call him a whore again."
Meden lifted his hand. "Don't chew my ear off," he said. "I'm only repeating what I've heard. Shit, if I
didn't know you better I'd say you sounded like a man in love."
To that, Adeja made no answer. "It doesn't matter anyway, I suppose. What I really want to know is
how you plan to get me out of the city when the gates are locked. Open them for one man and you're going
to have a mob on your hands. I'm assuming no patrols are going out?"
"They're coming and going by the south gate," said Meden, "but that's a civilian-free zone and you'd be
noticed. Besides, I know the sentries manning the walls over here. If you can manage a rope, they'll let you
down."
As they neared the wall, Adeja saw sentries arranged along the stairs. Meden gave  him  a  bundle  to
carry. "You just be silent and follow me like a servant, got that?" Clearing his throat,  he  roared  up  to  the
first sentry, a young man who shrank back at the imposing Juvan coming at him. "News is in from the south
gate, and there's a package for Ondor. He's expecting us. Is he up there, or is he  sleeping  it  off  in  some
wine sink again?"
Too green to form a proper  answer  and  seeing  the  captain's  badge  on  Meden's  arm,  the  youth  just
waved them through. Adeja, still holding the bundle  under  his  arm,  tried  to  look  servile  as  he  climbed  up
after Meden.
The walls were so thick with soldiers it was difficult to maneuver. No one on the  king's  war  council
seemed to have any sense, as these men would fall like scythed wheat once Turya archers started raining
arrows down on them.
Meden steered him to the edge of the wall,  which  dropped  forty  feet  to  the  dark  plain  below.  Fires
burned in the distance, a sea of lights reflected in the slowly churning river. Daybreak would see the Turyar
ford the  Khul  and  launch  their  attack.  By  this  time  tomorrow  the  gates  would  be  thrown  down  and  the
streets choked with marauding warriors and corpses.
A dour-faced man came over to Meden. "We've sent emissaries to try to negotiate," he said, "but they
keep coming back without their ears or hands." Adeja noticed his badge bore the royal sunburst, meaning he
was under Zhanil's direct command.
"You're wasting your time," answered Adeja. "Get these men  off  the  walls.  They're  perfect  targets,
clustered together like this."
Ondor gave him an appraising look. "So you're the one, eh? I heard you had a leg wound. Think you
can climb a rope?"
"I can outrun fifty Turyar if it'll keep me from roasting alive."
"Good  enough,"  said  Ondor.  "It's  too  bad  you're  not  staying.  We  could  use  as  many  good  men  as
possible."
One less man can't hurt your odds. You already don't have a crow's chance  of  holding  this city.
"I've seen as much of the Turyar as I care to see, but thanks."
A second man, also wearing the Sun badge over his armor, called out, gesturing Adeja over to the lip
of the wall where a sturdy rope snaked down into the  darkness.  He  took  the  bundle  from  Adeja's  hands
then, strangely enough, gave it back  to  him.  Under  his  close-fitting  helmet,  his  face  seemed  familiar,  but
Adeja  could  not  be  certain.  "There  is  food  and  water  here,"  he  said.  "There  is  also  a  letter  of
recommendation. They will accept it in Bhellin."
Adeja looked dumbly at the bundle before slinging it over his  shoulder  and  across  his  chest.  "You're
sending me to Khalgar?"
"It's the best place right now," said Meden, coming up behind him. "I'd say go back to Tajhaan, but I've
heard things aren't so good there these days. Khalgar doesn't have trouble with the Turyar, and they've  a
good strong army if you want to enlist."

A gloved hand pressed a pouch into his  palm.  Coins  rattled  inside.  Adeja  looked  up  and  once  again
faced the man who handed him the bundle. "It is not much but it will  get  you  somewhere  safe,"  the  man
said. "Go north through the hill country of Ottabia to get to Bhellin. It is a difficult route but I do not think
you will be followed."
Adeja took a moment to bid Meden farewell. Bending close to the man's ear, he murmured, "I wouldn't
say this to any of the Rhodeen men, but you're Juvan. This city isn't going to hold. Get out of here while you
still can."
The only answer Meden gave was to place  his  hands  on  the  rope  to  steady  it.  Adeja  grasped  hold,
swung his legs over the wall and slowly began his descent.

Chapter Ten
From Shemin-at-Khul it took two weeks on foot to reach the Khalgari border.  That  first  night,  while
darkness provided him some cover, Adeja stumbled and ran until his legs would no longer carry him. That
day he spent curled in a ditch,  watching  the  thin  smoke  that  rose  from  the  distant  city  grow  thicker  and
blacker. By the second day, he could no longer see the western horizon.
Any soldiers left in the city would be the first to  die.  The  royal  family,  nobles,  and  priests  would  be
next. Sephil died just in time. Adeja did not like to dwell on what abuse Turya warriors would have inflicted
on his body before killing him and hanging what was left on the walls.
It's the best thing that could have happened, Adeja told himself, yet in quiet moments he wondered
why he continued to feel such a terrible ache whenever he thought of the prince.
Pursuit did not concern him once he left the Khul river valley. If Brasidios knew about the deception, if
he was even alive, he no longer had the resources to go after a single man, and the Turyar had too much to
do sacking  and  razing  the  city  to  care  if  a  few  stragglers  got  away.  In  fact,  the  Turyar  often  let  some
civilians escape to spread their fearsome reputations to cities and towns that might offer resistance.
He took his time, stopping in villages wherever he could to supplement his stores with nourishing food
or purchase medicine. Two days he spent with a woman whose husband was away  fighting  for  the  king,
and saw no harm in comforting such a winsome and accommodating wife who probably did not yet know
she was a widow. Apparently he was a more considerate lover than what she was used to, as he left with
extra food and a little pot of ointment to ease  his itching wound. His discomfort was a good sign, she told
him, as it meant he was healing.
The third week brought him to a stretch  of  low,  dusty  hills  shaded  by  olive  and  oak  trees.  He  soon
found a road leading past villages where the people no longer had the light coloring or spoke the language of
Rhodeen. This was, they told him, the province of Ottabia, the poorest of Khalgar's four principalities. Little
could be spared for travelers, but villagers along the way gave him a place to sleep and pointed him toward
a complex of buildings on a distant hill where he was told he might be able to find food or even work.
Weary from exertion and the heat, Adeja did not start out until midmorning, and so did not reach  the
hill until  sunset.  In  the  waning  light,  he  paused  before  a  rough  stone  image  of  Abh,  god  of  healing  and
wisdom. 
At the gate, he inquired if there was room for a tired man to spend the night. The man on watch, not
even a proper sentry, lazily inquired if he had any weapons, gesturing when he saw that the visitor did not
speak Khalgari. Adeja gave over his sword but kept his little  knife.  From  there,  he  was  directed  down  a
path to the first building, where several rooms provided accommodations for pilgrims and other travelers. 
No one else appeared to be staying, so he  had  the  facilities  to  himself.  A  priest  dressed  in  the  pale
yellow robes of the god brought water for washing and later a plain meal of flat bread and olives. "I speak
the language of Rhodeen," he said. "If you come in peace, you are welcome here."
"It's good to see familiar gods again," Adeja told the priest.
"Where are you from?" asked the priest. "You have the accent of Tajhaan."
Parts of his story came out. He omitted most of the details, yet as he spoke the priest's narrowing eyes
made him question the wisdom of having spoken at all.
"You deserted the army of Rhodeen, then?"
Adeja shook his head. "No, you have to have a post to desert and I had none. I was discharged fairly.
I'm on my way to Bhellin, but I'm a bit weary and this wound of  mine  is  still  healing."  Talking  made  him
thirsty, and the ale brewed by the priests was very good. He paused to moisten his throat. "I've got a bit of
money if you want it."
"We do not charge travelers for our hospitality."
"Well, then, I can work around here if you need it."
At this, the priest raised an eyebrow. "Are you asking for employment?"
"My father was a stonemason back in Tajhaan. He taught me and my brothers a bit of the craft, and I
used to go around with him before I gave it up and tried my fortune in the army."

"What makes you think we need a stonemason?"
Adeja  motioned  to  the  darkness  beyond  the  open  doorway.  "I  saw  some  places  where  you've  got
crumbling  mortar.  I  could  patch  it  up  for  you.  Or  if  you'd  rather  have  a  guard,  I  can  do  that,  too,  and
probably do a better job than the one you've got watching your gate now."
No answer was forthcoming. In an empty room, Adeja went to sleep lulled by a mild breeze and soft
cricket sounds coming through the window slat. Why he offered his services at a craft he had not practiced
in at least fifteen years he could not say. Perhaps  I'm tired of  being  a  soldier,  of  living  it  rough  and
fighting all the time, and spending my money on drink and whores. Maybe it's time to give it up,  find
a quiet place  and  trade,  and  maybe  have  a  wife  and  sons,  but  that's  not  going  to  happen  in  any
man's army.
Rolling over onto his back, he gazed up at the ceiling with its chipping plaster. Well, you're  not going
to find  a wife here,  either. These priests don't get married, and  they're not going  to let  you  keep  a
woman.  Still,  it'd  be  good  to  stay  here  a  few  months,  just  long  enough  to  get  some  rest,  before
moving on to Bhellin.
Morning  brought  two  priests  who  questioned  him  at  length  about  his  military  background.  Finally,
weary of their questions, he produced the letter of recommendation and handed it to them.
As they perused it, their disbelief only grew. "This letter is signed by the Crown Prince of Rhodeen,"
said one.
Taking back the paper, he examined it. Sure enough, it was signed Zhanil Brasides  at the bottom. "I
thought it was from my captain."
"So we are to take it that you never met Prince Zhanil?"
"No, and I don't  know  why  he'd  bother  to  write  me  a  letter."  Adeja's  thoughts  drifted  far  from  the
suspicious priests and the room in which they sat,  going  back  four  weeks  to  the  night  of  his  escape.  He
recalled the nameless man on the walls who handed him the money. Could that have been Zhanil? While he
had seen the prince before, he could  not  recall  whether  the  soldier  had  resembled  him  or  not;  there  had
been too much darkness and confusion. "Why would he do such a thing?"
"Why would who do what?" asked one of  the  priests,  and  he  was  abruptly  reminded  they  were  still
present. At that point, necessity compelled him to confess more  of  his  story.  He  left  out  all  reference  to
Sephil except to say that he had been involved in a  scandalous  affair  in  Shemin-at-Khul  and  was  sent  to
Mekesh, from which he barely escaped with his life.
"The king  blamed  me  for  losing  the  stronghold  and  opening  the  Khishtil  Pass  up  to  the  Turyar,"  he
finished. "He needed someone to blame for the horde at his gates, and he certainly wasn't going to point the
finger at himself. It's true, I never spoke to Prince Zhanil, but the men who helped me escape told me he
felt it was wrong to punish a soldier for doing  his  duty.  He  might  have  arranged  the  whole  thing,  I  don't
know."
When they asked if he had news about the city, he told them everything he knew. "What I saw didn't
look good. I don't think the city held for half a day. I saw smoke from the walls that evening, and the next
day you could see the whole horizon was dark."
That afternoon he learned why the priests asked. He was escorted from the traveler's lodge to another
part  of  the  complex,  where  yet  another  priest  showed  him  around.  "My  name  is  Darinthes,"  he  said.  "I
heard there was someone here who had news about the city. Is it truly as bad as my brothers are saying?"
"All I saw was the smoke," said Adeja. "I don't know anything else. I take it you're from the temple of
Abh in Shemin-at-Khul?"
Darinthes nodded. He was a youngish man,  his  face  reddened  by  sun  and  wind.  "When  the  Turyar
appeared below the pass we were ordered to evacuate with some of our patients. We have been  waiting
for word that it is safe to return, but now it seems we will have to stay here a very long time."
Adeja was tempted to ask about Sephil. He wanted to know if Darinthes attended him in his last hours
or knew anyone who had. For the time being, however, silence was the wiser course. He gave his name as
Shamuz  and  went  to  work  that  morning  repairing  part  of  a  circuit  wall.  Although  he  had  not  touched  a
trowel or mortar in fifteen years, he still remembered enough to satisfy the priests.
The wall took two weeks to repair. Weeds had  to  be  pulled  away  from  crumbling  mortar,  old  nests
uprooted,  and  in  some  places  entire  sections  needed  to  be  knocked  down  and  rebuilt.  Adeja  worked
diligently, wondering what his father would say at seeing his soldier son return to the craft he abandoned as
a youth. He'd look at this wall and tell me what shit it was, that's what he'd do.
Only the seasons hastened his work. Whatever was to be done had to be finished by  winter,  for  the
damp weather would ruin the mortar before it set. Summer turned toward autumn and gradually  the  days
cooled, but it was still hot enough to make him wrap a damp cloth around his head before setting to work.

A job in a courtyard garden was just the thing for the last days of summer. Decades  of weather and
earth tremors dislodged some of the colored tiles from the walls. Adeja picked through the chipped pieces
he collected from the undergrowth. While he soaked them in water, he scoured the wall where they were
to be reset, loosening a few others in the process.
Standing back to survey the task, he saw most of the wall would have to be restored. The priests might
like their natural gardens,  but  all  that  half-wild  ivy  and  other  vegetation  wreaked  havoc  on  the  masonry,
leaving deposits of mold that rotted the mortar and limestone used in the wall's construction. Fortunately, the
pattern was simple enough that he could remove all the tiles, clean and replace them without having to be
an artist.
He gathered the loose tiles in his tunic, which he removed in the heat, and turned to go when his gaze
fell upon the two figures sitting in the shade on the other side  of  the  courtyard.  One  was  a  priest  whose
name he did not  recall,  but  the  other  was  a  young  man  with  thin  hands  clasped  in  the  lap  of  a  novice's
unbleached robe. His face was obscured by a fall of light brown hair, but the set of his shoulders  was  so
familiar that Adeja dropped the bundle. Tiles rattled and spilled onto the pavement.
When the young man lifted his eyes to see what the source of the commotion was, Adeja forgot about
the mess at his feet.
The youth murmured something to the priest and quickly averted his  eyes.  "Forgive  him  for  staring,"
said the priest. "He thought you were someone he knew."
Shaking tiles off his feet, Adeja took a step forward. "Sephil?"
Dark eyes widened in a pale face.  Sephil looked from him to the priest and shook his head. "No," he
gasped. "I am seeing things."
The priest, whom Adeja now remembered was called Kalion, made reassuring noises even as  Sephil
began to hyperventilate. "There is nothing to fear," he said. "This is Shamuz, a stonemason who is staying
with us for a while."
"No, my name is Adeja ked Shamuz," corrected Adeja. "Sephil, I thought you were dead."
It was now Kalion's turn to be puzzled. "Then you must be the soldier he told us about, the one  who
was sent to Mekesh and died."
"Do  I  look  dead  to  you?"  Once  again,  his  gaze  traveled  from  the  priest  to  Sephil,  whose  eyes  still
reflected his terror. He looked thinner and paler than Adeja had ever seen him. "Yes, I went to Mekesh, but
I got out of there when the Turyar attacked. When I got back to Shemin-at-Khul, I heard stories that  the
king's son was dead. Sephil, look at me. I am not dead."
Kalion appraised them both. "It seems lies have been told on both sides."
"Sephil," said Adeja, cautiously taking a step closer, "I am not a ghost." He looked over at the priest.
"Will you leave us for a moment?"
"Yes, but only for a moment. He  is  still  my  charge,"  murmured  Kalion.  When  he  rose  to  go,  Sephil
grasped his arm with a pleading look. "I will be just inside," he said.
Adeja took the seat he vacated. "I heard you were dead. They told me you'd cut your wrists and bled
to death."
"I did," Sephil answered in a ragged voice, "but I did not die. I am inept at everything I do, you see. I
could not even kill myself properly."
"Don't talk like that." Adeja wanted to put an arm on his shoulder, yet at the moment Sephil seemed to
shun his touch. "Why would you do such a stupid thing? I wasn't dead and you were about to be married."
"I did it because I did not want to live. Nakhet said you had been killed and that it was best to forget
about you. I ordered him to leave, but I found it was not so easy to be rid of him," Sephil explained. "As for
the princess, I saw how she and my cousin Dashir looked at each other."
Adeja clenched his jaw, not knowing whether to embrace him or slap him. "What you did was selfish,"
he said, "and I don't mean your father's alliance. Tajhaan never would have sent troops in time."
"If I was a soldier surrounded by enemies, you would have called it honorable. I was a coward, but I
was alone. I was not strong enough to do my duty, so I left it to those who could do better. Despise me if
you want to, but know this: I was dead to my family a long time ago. Once you were gone, all I had before
me was a hopeless future. There was no reason for me to go on living."
"For everything you've done  I  really  ought  to  despise  you,"  said  Adeja,  sighing  heavily,  "but  I  can't.
Now tell me, how did you get from the temple of Abh all the way here?"
"Kalion  told  me  some  of  the  priests  were  ordered  to  leave  the  city  before  the  Turyar  attacked.  I
remember traveling in a wagon with them, but I was drugged for most of the journey. I know Zhanil gave
the  order."  Sephil  closed  his  eyes  and  when  he  reached  for  Adeja's  hand  his  loose  sleeve  fell  away,
revealing the scars livid against the white skin of his wrist. "How did you find me?"

"Chance  and  the  gods,"  replied  Adeja.  And  perhaps  Zhanil,  if  he  had  been  the  man  upon  the  wall,
played his own part. He gave  me money and  told me which  way to come. He knew  I  would  find  this
place, and Sephil. "Would you rather I left?"
"Why do you say that?"
"You seem afraid of me."
Sephil quickly covered his face with his hands. "I sent letters to you through  Eumos,  but  you  did  not
answer. I thought you were either dead or you despised me. Part of me  does  not  believe  you  are  real.  I
have been very sick, seeing and dreaming strange things. I do not want this to be just another dream."
"I'm not good with writing letters, and there weren't any materials at Mekesh," said Adeja. "Would you
feel better if I showed you the wound the Turyar gave me?"
Sephil shook his head. "I am sorry about the letters. I complained so much, I would not have blamed
you for not writing back."
"That's all right," replied Adeja. "The men thought I had a mistress in Shemin-at-Khul, and  that  I  got
sent  to  Mekesh  for  attacking  my  commanding  officer.  I  never  showed  them  the  letters  or  told  them
anything about you."
Nodding, Sephil made a face. "I borrowed the parchment from Zhanil's wife; that is why it smelled like
perfume.  I  could  not  trust  Nakhet  to  ask  him  for  writing  materials.  I  sent  another  letter  to  the  garrison
commander at Mekesh ordering him to release you. I was too afraid to go to my father or my brother, but I
waited too long. That night Nakhet told me he had spies at Mekesh who told him you were dead. Perhaps
he intercepted the letter, or he perhaps simply said it out of spite. All I know is he told me it did me no good
to weep for a mere soldier. Zhanil put him to death for everything he did."
At this moment, Kalion reappeared and gently informed them that it was time for Sephil to rest. "You
can see each other later," he said, nodding to Adeja. "The  prince  has  been  gravely  ill and  has  just  had  a
terrible shock."
Once someone got around to telling him that Shemin-at-Khul had fallen and that his father and brother
were dead, Sephil would have yet another shock. Adeja decided he was not going to be the bearer of that
news,  though  he  could  well  guess  that  when  it  did  come  he  would  be  called  upon  to  comfort  Sephil
afterward.
An  hour  later,  the  high  priest  summoned  him.  He  was  conducted  to  a  plainly  furnished  office
overlooking one of the complex's three gardens, where a tall, somber man awaited him.  After  introducing
himself as Bedren, he promptly demanded to hear the entire story. "Had you told us in the beginning  who
you were, it might have spared Prince Sephil much pain."
"I had no idea he was alive, never mind that he was here," explained Adeja. "All I knew was he'd been
taken to the temple of Abh to die. I just assumed that he had."
"Now that you are here you must stay," said Bedren. "At least until he is well enough to manage on his
own. His brother urged us to give him the best possible care, and that is what we mean to do."
"Zhanil's corpse is probably feeding the crows by now."
Bedren frowned at his lack of tact. "Have you said anything to him regarding the state of his family or
city?"
When  Adeja  shook  his  head,  Bedren  visibly  relaxed.  "Then  you  must  continue  to  feign  ignorance.
What you say is likely to be true, but this is not the time for the prince to hear it."
Not  that  he  liked  having  his  life  ordered  for  him,  but  as  it  was  a  tolerable  situation  Adeja  did  not
complain. He now spent part of each day with Sephil, helping him take his exercise outdoors, keeping him
company in the courtyard garden while he worked at repairing the wall and sitting with him at night until he
fell asleep. Sephil spoke very little during their time together, but Kalion reported that his appetite and color
improved.
At  the  beginning  of  autumn,  word  trickled  in  that  Shemin-at-Khul  had  fallen  to  the  Turyar,  while  a
frightened  populace  in  Cassiare,  hoping  for  mercy,  opened  its  gates  to  the  conquerors.  Turyar  warlords
seized control of both cities and  set  up  their  own  tribal  rule.  News  concerning  Sephil's  family  was  grim.
Rumors were rampant that the males were put to death  while  all  royal  women  of  childbearing  age  were
given to their captors to breed sons. Adeja had never known the Turyar to spare women, but in the case  of
a royal line it was not an inconceivable possibility for warlords wishing to establish their own dynasties.
Zhanil  fell  early,  said  the  informant,  whispering  his  news  near  the  circuit  wall  where  Adeja  knew
Sephil would not come looking for him. "He rode out to meet them with five hundred men and never came
back except hanging from a pole without his head."
In the square before the ruined pyramid of the Sun, the corpses of the king and his heir were stripped
and hung upside down for the carrion birds. The  informant  went  on  to  say  that  Zhanil's  sons  were  flung

from  the  pyramid  terrace,  and  his  unborn  child  hacked  from  his  mother's  womb.  Other  noblemen  met
similarly brutal ends.
"Some say Prince Dashir escaped," said the man. "The king made him Crown Prince when Zhanil fell,
but he didn't stay to fight. I heard he escaped with the Tajhaani ambassadors and the princess."
If Dashir survived, it would not be long before the man  turned  up  in  the  royal  court  of  Tajhaan  and
proclaimed himself king of Rhodeen.
Adeja obeyed the priests and said nothing to Sephil, yet in the prince's somber demeanor he could not
help but think Sephil already knew his family was dead.
* * * *
Such a strange irony, Sephil thought, that the one  member of  the royal  family least worth saving
was the only one who had survived.
No one told him anything outright, of course, but it was not difficult to understand the good intentions of
the priests. They meant to spare his fragile nerves, but they could not prevent him from overhearing things.
He knew his father was dead, and Zhanil. With that last realization, grief pervaded his numbness and he sat
alone in his cubicle, aching at the memories of their final moments together.
Sephil, you did not have  to do  this. Through his drugged haze, he recalled his brother sitting on his
bed, gently stroking his hands below his bandaged wrists. You should have come to me. You should  have
told me how unhappy you were.
I tried. You could not hear me. His lips formed words he could not utter. Tears of shame blurred his
vision. Zhanil, he whispered around the sobs knotting his throat. I want it to be over.
And the end came, but the gods took the wrong brother.
Now that Adeja was here, seemingly resurrected from the  dead,  his  heart  should  have  been  lighter.
Instead, his relief felt bittersweet. No longer was Adeja a soldier with strict orders to stay with his charge.
Nothing beyond his recuperating wound kept him at the sanctuary, as he made no secret of his distaste for
what Sephil had done and had spoken openly of leaving once he was able.
It is for the best, Sephil told himself. I have nothing to offer him. Yes, I will let him go.
Not  once  did  the  priests  approach  him  about  claiming  the  throne  of  Rhodeen,  and  for  that  he  was
grateful. A man who could not govern his own life had no business leading armies or ruling others. His one
small wish was to live out his days in this quiet, healing place and to forget he had ever been a prince.
* * * *
It was many weeks later, as a cold wind blew fallen leaves across the courtyards, that Bedren called
Adeja in when Sephil received the news.
For  the  sake  of  the  prince's  nerves,  most  of  the  details  were  carefully  omitted.  At  several  points,
Bedren asked if there were any questions, but Sephil was silent until the end, when he simply nodded and
said he already knew.
Bedren and Kalion inquired if he wanted anything. Sephil took a moment to answer, looking down  at
his folded hands, then at Adeja. "I would like to be alone."
Alone meant Adeja was to stay. Sephil waited until the door closed before rising and asking Adeja to
hold him. He neither wept nor spoke. Tears would come later, once the shock wore away.
Adeja hesitated to embrace him too  tightly,  for  though  he  had  put  on  weight  Sephil  still  seemed  too
small and fragile. "There's one thing they didn't tell you," he said. "You're now the king of Rhodeen."
His face still muffled in the fabric of Adeja's tunic, Sephil shook his head. "I can only imagine what my
father would say if he could see me at this moment."
"Forget about him," said Adeja.
"It is easier to say that than to do it. Zhanil should not have died. The gods are so cruel, to cut down
those who most deserve to live," murmured Sephil. "I had no idea until it was almost too late how much he
cared."
Drawing  back  a  little,  he  gazed  up  at  Adeja.  "Even  if  I  wanted,  I  could  not  possibly  become  king.
Dashir is the heir to the throne."
"Dashir might be dead," said Adeja.
"I doubt it. He has always been cunning. If anyone escaped, I believe it would have been him."
"Your claim is just as strong as his."
Sephil slowly drew away. "Please, do not try to push me into something I do not want. I have no desire
to take the throne of Rhodeen. I never did, and even if I wanted to, neither my cousin nor the Turyar are
going to stand aside and let me be king."
Adeja cupped Sephil's cheek in his palm. Now that the prince  did  not  have  eunuchs  to  attend  to  his
toilette, stubble shadowed his once-smooth face.  "Darinthes told me Zhanil sent royal tokens with you just

as he sent a letter with me. If you ask the priests, they'll take you to Bhellin. I will go with you. And if you
ever decide you want to fight for your throne, I'll be the first soldier in your army."
"I would never ask you to do that for me," answered Sephil.
He turned his head toward the window. "You seem to want the throne for me much more than I want
it for myself. Let it go, Adeja. It may sound strange to you, but I am at peace here.  If  I  went  to  Bhellin,
men would scorn me and try to kill me, either as  an  imposter  or  a  legitimate  threat.  It  is  not  worth  it.  If
Dashir is alive and wants to take Rhodeen back from the Turyar and rebuild the dynasty, let him. I do not
want to be king."
Sephil lifted his hands to touch Adeja's arms, his fingertips hesitantly ghosting along the rough wool of
Adeja's sleeves as though the brazen prince of eight months ago had never been. "I want to stay here with
you," he murmured. "What I  did  before  was  stupid  and  callous.  If  you  walked  out  the  door  right  now,  I
would not blame you. I have little to offer you, but would you stay if I asked?"
"Right now I have no plans to go elsewhere." With another lover, Adeja might have laughed to dispel
the tension, but Sephil was in such earnest it did not seem appropriate.
Clasping Sephil's wrists, he turned them over and lightly stroked his thumbs over the scars. "You never
really told me why you did this."
"I did not cut  my  wrists  because  you  were  gone,"  answered  Sephil.  "You  would  have  left  anyway.
Nakhet told me you had planned to desert the army to get away from me. I knew in my heart it was no lie.
I never gave you any reason to want to stay with me, and at least twenty reasons to want to leave. I  did
this because I loved you and I hurt you, and only when you were gone did I truly understand how alone I
was. I did not want to go on living like that."
A lump formed in Adeja's throat. Women he had known made more impassioned speeches, weeping
and tearing their hair, yet with them he had been as stone. "I won't lie to you, Sephil. Nakhet told you the
truth. I was going to desert,  but  I  stayed.  And  I'll  stay  now  only  if  you  promise  me  that  you'll  never  do
anything like this to yourself again."
Sephil bent his head to kiss the hands holding his. "Adeja, you do not have to stay.  You  do  not  even
have to touch me if you do not want to. All those other times, you did it only because I—"
Adeja silenced him with a kiss. "I am not going to leave you, and I never said that I didn't want you."
Lifting a finger, he traced Sephil's lips before kissing him again. "I never said that. That last time, when you
asked me to love you, I did it because I wanted to."
"You truly wanted me?"
Adeja was surprised at the passion with which he was dropping kisses on Sephil's lips and eyelids. He
pulled Sephil hard against him, nearly crushing that frail body with his need. "Didn't you once call me your
Sun?"
Sephil's eyes widened and a little gasp escaped him. "Yes," he breathed, "and I meant it."
"Then I'll be that again, the Sun to your Moon." Adeja dipped his head to kiss the curve of Sephil's jaw
and tease the delicate lines of his throat.
"But I cannot offer you anything."
Adeja uttered a short laugh. "Do you think I have any more or less to offer you? I've never understood
what it was you wanted with a rough soldier like me."
Like a shy maiden, Sephil ducked his head. The first hint of a blush stained his cheeks. "Should I tell
you?"
"I think you'd better, my prince."
Right away, Sephil placed two fingers over his lips to silence him. "Do not call me that anymore. I am
just Sephil." He let his hand fall, sliding over Adeja's chest to cover his heart. "All I wanted were two strong
arms to hold me, to keep me safe and to love me. That is all I want now."
"Then I can do that." Adeja bent his lips to touch Sephil's head. In the uncertain days to come, he could
do that very well indeed.

Part Two
Little Moon
 

Chapter One
With slow, rhythmic movements, Sephil swept the courtyard. In late summer, apples and wild berries
bloomed here. Now dead leaves dropped from the trees, and were caught in a swirling dance by the wind
blowing over the sanctuary wall.
As he dragged the heather broom over the stones, Sephil did not mind  that  within  the  hour  his  work
would be undone by windborne dust or the fall of brittle foliage still clinging to the trees. What he did was
for the satisfaction of some small accomplishment against what was otherwise a bland existence.
When it grew too dark or the weather too harsh to work outdoors, he spent his time reading, puzzling
over  philosophical  or  devotional  books  the  priests  of  Abh  gave  him  to  read,  and  trying  to  master  the
Khalgari language. From his earliest days with slate and primer, Sephil was a poor scholar, giving up when
his efforts learned only scorn from his father and tutors. Now he wanted desperately to learn, yet because
he did not know how to interpret religious texts he had to turn to Kalion, the priest who accompanied him on
the journey from Shemin-at-Khul and now acted as his tutor.
"When Ulishban speaks of being unable to keep water from  spilling  out  between  his  fingers,  it  is  an
analogy illustrating the futility of forming material attachments," explained Kalion. "The things men value in
this world are in fact things which have no value at all, and the desire to possess them is a waste of spiritual
energy.  Do  not  grasp  for  more  than  what  you  are  given.  In  this  way  one  can  accept  the  otherwise
uncontrollable forces which rule his destiny and be at peace."
This Sephil understood all too well. As the only surviving son of the king, and regardless of what others
might think, the throne of Rhodeen lay within his rights. King and throne, however, represented mere ideas,
words rather than reality. It never occurred to anyone that the younger son might assume power, or want
to.
Renounce the world, said the holy texts, and renounce pain. 
Through pain, he had tried to renounce the world altogether; the scars on his wrists reminded him that
the gods were not yet ready to receive him. Forced to live, Sephil did his best to absorb the  healing  god's
teachings  and  perform  the  meditations  the  priests  prescribed  for  him;  he  felt  a  curious  sense  of  calm,
serenity  as  fragile  as  a  cobweb.  He  wanted  it  to  last,  but  knew  somehow  that,  like  all  else  he  found
comforting and good, it would eventually be torn from him. 
And like his dream of calm, with each day his former life as a disgraced prince of Rhodeen slid just a
little  further  from  him,  a  persona  that  might  have  belonged  to  someone  else.  Sometimes,  however,  vivid
recollections of  his  excesses,  shameless  words  and  deeds,  shone  through  the  haze,  making  him  recoil  in
horror. 
That cannot have been me, he thought, yet the priests encouraged him to embrace his shame in order
to learn  from  it.  Memories  of  wanton  behavior,  petulant  scenes  and  selfish  desires  brought  an  agony  of
self-revulsion before he began to understand how loneliness and rejection could warp the soul. The person
who had hosted riotous parties and cavorted with soldiers and catamites to spite his father and fill his empty
hours was a distorted reflection of his true self.
Now Sephil was simply a novice who dressed in unbleached wool and tended the sanctuary grounds.
His hands, their fingernails once bright with lacquer, were now roughened by work. Time became fluid, so
when he turned twenty in mid-autumn he scarcely noticed.
Somewhere  on  the  grounds,  Adeja  worked  at  repairing  crumbling  masonry.  The  man's  presence
remained among the few things anchoring Sephil to  reality,  and  he  could  sense  the  man  even  from  afar.
Once lovers, they had not touched in six months, at first because Sephil was too fragile for such intimacy,
then because he did not wish to encourage a practice he would most likely have to renounce.
A day  will  come  when  he  must  leave  me.  Adeja  was  a  foreigner  and  a  soldier.  Not  for  him  a
monotonous life in a quiet sanctuary. One day he would crave a wife and sons, and more than Sephil could
ever offer him. He is not mine to keep.
Finishing his circuit of the courtyard, he laid the  broom  against  a  stone  bench  and  sat  down  to  rest.
Already  a  chill  wind,  smelling  of  wood  smoke  and  dead  leaves,  swirled  past  him,  scattering  his  efforts.
Sephil watched with detached interest. Tomorrow he would return to complete the same task, and the next

day. The elements merely acknowledged this.
Shuffling  feet  scraped  the  stones,  drawing  his  attention  to  the  end  of  the  path.  An  elderly  priest,
half-blind and leaning on a stick, moved toward the bench. Like him, the man was a regular visitor, taking
sun and fresh air to invigorate his spirits. Sephil stood, went to his side and offered his arm.
"Unniri, are you well today?" he inquired.
Unniri grunted and smiled, his mouth still showing most of its teeth. Kalion told him the old priest was
nearly a hundred years old. "Young man," he said, lightly touching Sephil's arm with a brown, thickly gnarled
hand, "why are you still here?"
The priest, who spoke the tongue of Rhodeen as well as Khalgar, often sat with Sephil and described
his childhood in Bhellin and his life as a clerk overseeing the royal monuments, for he had not always served
Abh. However, he could not seem to recall anyone's name. 
"I was sweeping the courtyard," answered Sephil. "I wanted to rest before I go in."
Bobbing his head, the old man clucked his tongue. "But the world awaits you, young one. You will see
mighty cities, and have a lovely wife and children to care for you in your dotage."
The thought was so absurd that Sephil could not help but smile. "Oh, no, not I," he replied. "I am not at
all interested in marriage." 
Unniri patted his hand. "One day you will have a strong son, mighty in the land."
He  spoke  with  conviction,  yet  Sephil  knew  from  others  that  Unniri's  offspring  stood  high  in  the
Khalgari court. "You have many strong sons and grandsons, remember?"
Lifting his head, Unniri turned his face toward Sephil and,  for  a  moment,  his  eyes  seemed  to  focus.
"You will make a star," he said, "for the horsemen and the green land of rivers."
He  is  lost  in  his  own  mind.  Carran,  the  eunuch  who  had  been  Sephil's  childhood  guardian,  once
mentioned the very old were sometimes capable of prophecy. "Those close to death's door see things you
and I cannot," he said. Perhaps the elderly were very wise, but Sephil preferred to regard Unniri's mumbling
as the fancies of a wandering memory.
"The  gods  made  the  stars,"  he  said.  "They  are  the  tears  of  the  Moon-maiden.  Do  they  believe
something else in Khalgar?"
Unniri smiled. "Your son will wear a crown of stars."
"I am not married."
"You will make a star," repeated Unniri, "for the horsemen and the green land of rivers."
Suddenly uncomfortable, Sephil looked away. As a prince, exiled from court and  left  to  consort  with
the  jaded  sons  of  the  nobility,  he  occasionally  summoned  fortunetellers  to  amuse  him  and  his  guests  by
casting the dice or reading palms. Words, their prophecies were but the words of charlatans who promised
great  wealth,  power  or  renown  to  anyone  foolish  enough  to  offer  coin,  and  Sephil  gave  them  as  much
attention as he did those eunuchs who praised his wisdom and beauty.
Unniri, who spoke so softly his words seemed like cobwebs, made him tremble where the flamboyant
sycophants of Shemin-at-Khul could not. A son who will be king, he thought. But no, that could not be, or
rather, the words did not mean what they implied on their face.
It could  mean anything, thought Sephil. One son who would wear a  crown:  it  might  mean  his  own
offspring, or even Adeja, whom he referred to as his Sun. No, I will not entangle  myself in this web of
meanings. To have a son, I must marry, and I will not do that.
As a prince, even a disgraced one, a political marriage was an inevitable duty, and his father, seeking
an alliance with Tajhaan against the Turyar, betrothed him  to  a  princess  whose  lovely,  kohl-rimmed  eyes
regarded him with disdain. But the kingdom whose laws  dictated  his  world  was  gone,  and  his  royal  rank
vanished with it.
Shaking his head, he stroked Unniri's hand and once again enquired after his health. He did not have
the heart to tear away the old man's illusions by crying them false.
* * * *
Not quite perfect, judged Adeja, studying the result  of  his  work  in  the  atrium,  but  it  would  serve.  If
anything, his labors in the sanctuary  were  good  practice  for  the  stonemason's  craft  he  meant  to  take  up
once he left.
And  when  will  I  do  that?  he  wondered.  Several  times  already  Sephil  gave  him  leave  to  go,  even
encouraged his departure, but Adeja judged it too soon. His health certainly presented no obstacle, for the
wound he had received from the Turyar at Mekesh had healed cleanly.
Perhaps with winter coming it isn't so good  a time for  traveling. Adeja turned the thought over in
his mind, accepting it  as  an  acceptable  reason  for  staying  where  he  was,  before  brushing  it  aside  as  an
excuse. Quite simply he had promised Sephil he would remain.  Fragile  and  alone  in  the  world,  his  family

either slain or scattered to the winds by the Turyar, the prince needed a protector.
"But what can he possibly need protection from?" Adeja asked the wall. "Too many prayers, perhaps,
or  the  dust  he  sweeps  up  each  day  in  the  courtyard?"  In  this  place  Sephil  carried  no  title  and,  having
renounced his claim to Rhodeen's throne, presented no threat to anyone.
A good idea at the time, it did not bear closer consideration. It was folly to expect a soldier to remain
when he had no post to fill. No matter what he promised, Adeja knew he must soon leave or go mad in the
piety and silence of the place.
Adeja took a brief rest, ate a few dried apple slices, and washed them down with water from a nearby
well before returning to  finish  his  work.  Now  that  the  grout  had  dried  between  the  tiles,  he  could  scrub
away the residue. Even with the rags he tied around his knees they ached from the unfamiliar posture, and
his back strained. Still, he gritted his teeth and continued with the task, knowing the work he meant to find in
the cities would make this seem fair by comparison.
In the late afternoon, Sephil came to observe his work. For some time he stood quietly in the entryway,
contemplating the damp tiles and the man at his feet before speaking. "You should be working in a palace
or grand temple," he murmured, "not wasting your time here."
Adeja nodded at the compliment. "Your color is better," he said. "Have you been outside?"
Sephil looked at him, flushed, and dropped his gaze to the tiles once more. "It is lovely work."
"It'll serve." Adeja rose and unfurled his back,  easing  the  stiffness  from  his  tendons  with  an  audible
pop.
"If you are sore," said Sephil, "come to my cell tonight and I will rub ointment into your back."
Unless they came from a physician or a withered  old  mother  who  dabbled  in  herbs,  such  invitations
could only lead in one direction. Adeja knew better than to accept, for it would persuade Sephil to believe
that which was untrue. With words he tells me to go, but with everything  he does  he wants me to stay.
A tactic employed by a desperate woman or a lover who could not decide what he or she truly wanted.
"You needn't bother," answered Adeja. "I can get ointment from the infirmary."
Sephil's smile evaporated. "I only wanted to do something for you," he said in a small voice. "I had no
intention of seducing you."
We'll see about that. Adeja relented. "All right, you can rub my back and tell me about your dull day
sweeping the yard and praying."
At supper they did not sit together. As a layman, Adeja must eat at the far end of the table,  but  like
anyone who came into the sanctuary, he had to attend evening prayers. Adeja  went  through  the  motions,
feigning  interest  while  letting  his  mind  roam.  Abh  was  not  his  god,  and  the  gods  to  whom  he  did  pay
reverence heard his prayers less often than they ought. It was, Adeja knew,  a  shameful  lack  of  devotion
from a man whose father had taught him better.
Afterward, the priests congregated in the halls, discussing  practical  and  philosophical  matters.  Adeja
slipped out, relieved himself, and washed before threading his way through the shadows to Sephil's door.
Sephil  slept  alone  in  a  cell  six  paces  across,  on  a  cot  furnished  with  a  rough  blanket.  An  oil  lamp
burned on a table, giving off  enough  light  that  Adeja  could  see  the  blotches  on  Sephil's  cheeks  and  jaw.
"What did you do to yourself?"
"I know you do not like the beard." Sephil put his hand to his cheek, careful not to touch the cut by his
mouth. "I tried to shave, but it seems I made a mess of it."
Adeja stepped inside and closed the door. "The beard means nothing unless you planned  to  have  me
kiss you. I thought you said you hadn't any intention of seducing me. Did you lie?"
"I told you the truth," said Sephil. "I do not like the beard, either. I am not used to hair on my face  and
would not have grown the beard at all if I did not think that was how a proper man was supposed to look." 
"You're never going to look like your brother," said Adeja, "or be him."
Sephil made no answer. Turning, he motioned to the bed, where a linen cloth and jar of  ointment  sat
atop the blanket. "I did not lie when I  offered  to  rub  your  back.  I  am  not  asking  you  for  anything  more,
tonight or any other night until you leave."
"I never said I was going," replied Adeja.
"I know you are not happy here. This is no life for a soldier."
Adeja sighed. "It's not the fighting and marching I miss, that can be a miserable business. These priests
just aren't my people. All this quiet and praying makes my head ache. Still, I did promise I'd stay, and when
I give my word I keep it."
"You would be miserable keeping that promise," said Sephil.
This was not a conversation Adeja wanted to have tonight. Being  released  from  his  promise  did  not
bring the relief it should. "It's the wrong season for traveling, anyway.  But  are  you  sure  you  want  me  to

go?"
"I am no longer a prince to command you, Adeja," answered Sephil. "I know what you promised, but I
would not have you remain and be unhappy just so I can feel safe. The world does not know I am here, and
even if it did it would not matter. I am no threat to anyone." Turning aside, he patted the bed. "Come, I will
do your back."
Adeja glanced around the cell. It was not the first time he had been here, but on all his previous visits
he stayed only a moment. Aside from the table and bed, the cell's furnishings consisted of a stool and small
chest  for  clothing  and  toiletries,  nothing  to  recall  the  luxurious  apartments  that  housed  the  prince  in
Shemin-at-Khul. "Where are your shaving things?" he asked. "If you're going to do this yourself you should
learn to do it properly."
"Are  you  going  to  show  me?"  Sephil  opened  the  chest  and,  from  under  a  stack  of  neatly  folded
garments, drew out a razor and a little pot of ointment, which he gave to Adeja.
"You need a mirror," said Adeja. When Sephil presented him with a small looking glass, he took it over
to the wash basin on the table and held it to the wall. "You need to hang it here. Tomorrow I'll get a nail and
hammer and some string."
"I can do it," Sephil said softly.
"Yes, and you'll smash your thumb with the hammer."
"Then show me how to do it so I do not hurt myself."
He sounded so very much like a child demanding to be allowed to do adult things that Adeja could not
help but smile. Among other things, it meant Sephil was emerging from his former listlessness. "All right, I'll
show you tomorrow."
Adeja instructed Sephil to sit on the edge of the bed and dab the ointment over his lower face while he
inspected the razor. "Make sure you keep this sharp," he said. Sitting down beside Sephil, he approved the
young man's efforts, handing him a linen cloth to wipe his hands. "Clean your face in warm water first. It
makes shaving easier. Now tilt your head just so and don't move."
Not once did Sephil close his eyes. Adeja  felt  his  gaze,  without  malice  or  suspicion,  as  he  began  to
repair the haphazard job Sephil had done, smoothing rough patches while careful not to touch areas  where
Sephil had nicked himself. "Have one of the priests watch you when you do this tomorrow. There, that'll do
it. You're done."
Sephil went to the basin, rinsed, and dried his face.  He returned, still holding the linen cloth. "Do  you
want me to do your back?"
"It's not necessary," answered Adeja.
Before the last word  left  his  mouth,  Sephil  leaned  across  and  kissed  him.  Adeja  dropped  the  razor,
heard it clink on the bare floor. His arms unfroze, came up to clasp Sephil around the waist and draw him
deeper into the heat of the kiss before pushing him away. "We shouldn't be doing this," he breathed.
Sephil ducked his head, as unnerved by his actions as Adeja. "It was not supposed to be that kind of
kiss. I just wanted to thank you for being so patient with me, but—I am so foolish. I should have just said
thank you and left it at that. If you want to leave—"
Perhaps if he had not been so weary and hungry for sex, Adeja would have done just that, yet in their
closeness he and Sephil seemed to generate a heat, an attraction that begged greater contact. "No," he said
huskily, "it is all right."
The kisses that fell on his lips and jaw were tentative, asking a question only Adeja could answer.
How far Sephil wished to take things, he had no idea. Twice before, when the young man seduced him
with his mouth and his body, Adeja had been passive, even though he was not accustomed to letting others
take the  lead.  Habit  urged  him  to  pull  aside  their  clothing,  push  Sephil  down  onto  the  bed  and  do  as  he
pleased. With a male lover this usually meant turning the young man over on his hands and knees, spitting
into his hand and inserting his cock. His partner's pleasure had nothing to do with it.
Now he held back, responding to Sephil's kisses and the tongue seeking entrance into his mouth when
his body ached for more. When slender fingers slid under his tunic to explore  his  chest,  he  pulled  off  the
garment, helped Sephil out of his shift, and tossed the jar of ointment, meant for his back and never  used,
onto the heap of clothing on the floor.
"I thought priests didn't do things like this."
"Other priests, maybe, but not here," murmured Sephil. "I can hear them through the walls sometimes."
Adeja licked his earlobe. "Is that why you want me, because it makes you hot?"
"I try to meditate and forget all such things—" Sephil grasped his left hand and moved it up his thigh to
cup his buttocks. "Sometimes I feel nothing, and it  is  so  easy  to  not  want,  but  then  I  see  you,  hear  your
voice and then it seems I am not doing such a good job at being a priest."

Hands moved  over  his  naked  skin,  lips  traced  his  collarbone  down  to  his  left  nipple.  Adeja  gasped,
aware of that hot, moist tongue and the erection bulging against his loincloth, the only clothing he still wore.
If only the  bed  was  not  so  narrow.  In  the  prince's  apartments  in  Shemin-at-Khul  there  had  been  a
feather bed large enough for three to lay comfortably, furnished with silken pillows, coverlets and a golden
canopy that trembled like a web in the evening breeze. Such luxury  Adeja  craved  at  this  moment,  for  as
they could not lay side by side it seemed he must push Sephil onto his back.
Sephil solved the dilemma by shifting onto his side, his back pressed to the wall. There was just enough
room for Adeja to lie facing him. Still, the bed was too narrow, offering few options for pleasure. Had it not
been so hard, and the night so cold, the floor would have been preferable.
"How do you want to—?" It was difficult to think with Sephil's lips tracing the line of  his  throat,  and
that pointed little tongue darting out to tease his collarbone and send currents of sensation to his groin.
The fingers that undid his loincloth and slid inside to grasp his cock provided him with answer enough.
Adeja bucked his hips, grunting, quickening his pace until he shuddered and came in his partner's hand.
Sephil hovered beside him, lightly kissing his damp brow and rubbing a moist hand over his belly. From
Sephil's subtle thrusting against him and the urgency of his kisses, Adeja remembered that his was not the
only need. "Climb on top of me," he grunted.
"You are not hard." Sephil sounded wistful, while his fingers ghosted over Adeja's groin as though  to
tease his cock back to fullness.
"I don't need to fuck you to make you come," grunted Adeja. "Pull your leg over me. This bed is too
small for anything else."
Once Sephil straddled him, Adeja ran a hand down his firm buttocks to slide up and over his thighs to
caress him. Touching a young man in this way was not something he did often, for when a Tajhaani  man
made love to a youth, he did it strictly with his own pleasure in mind. Tender  passions  were  reserved  for
women  like  the  soldier's  widow  Adeja  had  comforted  on  his  way  north  from  Rhodeen,  and  whatever
satisfaction his male partners had during sex usually came from their own efforts.
Sephil, neither woman nor male prostitute, fell into that gray nether region where Adeja rated sex with
him as making love. For all that the prince had tarnished his military career  and nearly gotten him killed for
the sake of his own pleasure, Adeja did not  know  why  he  cared  so  much.  It  isn't  as  if  I  can  take  him
away  from  here  and  set  up  house  in  Bhellin  or  anywhere  else  with  him  as  my  wife,  he  thought.  I
should have moved on the moment I found him here. Staying doesn't do either of us any good.
Adeja gripped his lover's slender cock and stroked, rubbing him the way he liked to be  touched.  The
moans he received in response, and the way Sephil's  tight  buttocks  clenched  over  his  groin,  were  almost
enough to make Adeja hard again. Sephil leaned over to kiss him passionately, muffling his cries in Adeja's
mouth, and in the warm rush of fluid that spilled over his hand Adeja forgot how insatiable and difficult to
satisfy Sephil could be.
Wrapping himself in his discarded robe, Sephil went to the basin and brought back a moist cloth with
which he cleaned Adeja. "Perhaps we should not have done that," he murmured.
"Now isn't the time to be saying that." Adeja took the cloth from him and wiped the drying semen from
his hands.
Sephil sat on the edge of the bed next to him. "It was not something I planned," he said.
Adeja thought hard. Conversation was not something he usually pursued with his lovers. Most of  the
time, he simply threw on his clothes and left. "Neither one of us planned this," he explained, "but here  we
are."
"Adeja, I was not trying to seduce you into staying. It was simply something I wanted to do."
For now, that made for a good enough explanation. Adeja, closing his eyes, shivered. Since he was not
quite ready to leave, he shifted his body until he could  get  under  the  blanket.  "It's  cold  and  you're  barely
covered," he said. "Get under here with me."
Sephil appeared to hesitate a moment before extinguishing the lamp, dropping his robe and clambering
over Adeja to take the side nearest the  wall.  Adeja  pulled  him  close.  "I  will  have  plenty  of  lonely  nights
once you are gone," he murmured.
"Are you trying to make me feel guilty?"
"No, not that." Sephil nuzzled against Adeja's chest. "I was just stating a fact."
"I don't have to go—"
"But I know you want to," said Sephil.
Adeja was no longer certain what he wanted to do, except sleep. "Maybe, but spring is still a long time
off," he mumbled.

Chapter Two
Adeja found a ready ear in Obiru, the man who guarded the gate. "Why do you stay here if you want a
wife so badly?" 
Although he spoke Khalgari fluently enough now to carry on a conversation,  Adeja  knew  he  did  not
always  phrase  his  words  correctly.  It  was  the  same  dilemma  he  had  faced  years  earlier  when  he  first
arrived in Rhodeen.
Obiru laughed, showing a mouthful of large yellow teeth. "Have to go to the nearest town to get one,
and can't bring her back here. And who wants to stay in town and work, eh?"
In a proper stronghold, Obiru with his potbelly and slovenly ways would not have been considered fit to
scrub the barracks midden. As for guarding the sanctuary gate, he did more sleeping  and  scratching  than
patrolling. Should the Turyar or any other enemy approach, Obiru's head would roll in the dirt long before he
ever realized the threat.
Adeja thought it best not to mention that he was a trained soldier. There  was  no  need  to  antagonize
one of the few people who made life in the sanctuary bearable. "Hmm, that's wise," he agreed. "Now if I
wanted a woman, where is this town?"
Obiru not only gave him  directions  but  suggested  by  name  one  or  two  girls  who  would  satisfy  him.
"Not  much  here—"  He  motioned  to  his  head.  "But  here—hah!"  Cupping  his  hands  over  his  breast,  he
indicated precisely which quality he valued most in a woman.
For his part, Adeja would have preferred a wife, a good-natured,  sensual  woman  to  keep  his  hearth
and welcome him home at night, but the priests frowned on women in the sanctuary. Adeja did not point out
that in Rhodeen there were priestesses of Abh, or ask why it was different here. They would not welcome
a wife, so he would have to venture out in search of prostitutes.
Adeja noted the information for future use and returned to work, a new project just outside the  main
chapel. Soon he would make the trip to Ivrish. For now, his own hand sufficed to relieve his need, and on
nights when neither he nor Sephil wished to be alone, Sephil reminded him just how skilled he was.
Winter loomed over Ottabia's barren hills, bringing overcast skies and a bite to the morning air that did
not dissipate as afternoon approached. Mist often blanketed the grounds,  and  when  drizzle  dampened  the
stones, Adeja could no longer work on the chapel walkway. Seneth, the priest who oversaw all labor in the
sanctuary, gave  him  a  new  task  filling  in  hairline  cracks  left  over  from  fifty  years  of  earth  tremors,  but
made it clear that soon there would be no more work. Adeja would either have to find another way to make
himself useful or go elsewhere.
His  father  found  steady  employment  working  on  the  High  Prince's  monuments,  and  from  what  he
heard, the Khalgari  king  sponsored  similar  works  to  glorify  his  name.  Because  he  could  read  and  write,
skills his father insisted he learn, Adeja thought he might be able to get work chiseling the texts that adorned
Khalgar's temples, statues, and tombs. First, he needed to improve his grasp of the language, reason alone
to delay his going until spring.
Adeja had not counted on winter's first threatening clouds and the restlessness they would bring.
Where  rainfall  scarcely  touched  the  landscape  the  rest  of  the  year,  Ottabia  rivaled  Rhodeen  in  its
damp winters. Downpours that lasted days turned courtyards into ponds and dry gullies into  raging  rivers.
Adeja  worked  by  candlelight,  his  senses  lulled  by  the  patter  of  rain  in  the  overflowing  gutters,  and  his
memories took him back to his childhood in Tajhaan, where spring brought six weeks of rain, little sunlight
and strained tempers.
"This  weather  makes  me  sleepy,"  murmured  Sephil.  Stretched  out  on  his  bed,  naked  but  for  a  thin
blanket, he presented a languid picture at odds with his apparent desire to renounce the world. Making love
with him gave Adeja some ease, but not enough to sate his nerves.
"I need sunlight," he growled.
Sephil smiled and held out his arms. "Rain can be nice," he said. When Adeja sat down and embraced
him, his tongue flicked out to tease Adeja's ear, promising more delights to come.
Adeja, however, was in no mood to play. His agitation craved relief, and he was ready to take it fast

and hard. What he could not articulate he indicated through his rough caresses, until Sephil, understanding
his need, obliged him by turning over on his hands and knees.
Positioning  Sephil  over  the  edge  of  the  bed,  Adeja  rubbed  his  oiled  cock  between  his  buttocks  and
pumped him hard from behind. Afterward, realizing Sephil had not climaxed, he was contrite. "If you want
me to do something for you—"
"No, it is not necessary," murmured Sephil, pulling on his robe. He said no more, and Adeja knew that
in his haste he had smothered his partner's desire.
In the third week he recalled Ivrish and the brothel Obiru had described to him, and knew that if ever
there was a time to visit, in spite of the weather, it  was  now.  Adeja  still  had  the  money  given  to  him  by
Zhanil, enough on which to reach Bhellin and live while he sought employment. While he had no intention of
squandering it, he figured an hour with a woman would only cost him a few coppers.
Ivrish was half a day's journey northeast along a road that led to Bhellin. Adeja could easily traverse
the distance, and a little rain would hardly bother him. He weighed his options, and knew he would go mad
if he stayed pent up in the sanctuary until spring.
Sephil encouraged his visit. "Go if you must," he said, "but be careful. I have heard the priests say the
roads have turned to mud."
Just before sunrise, his belly full of hot porridge and wrapped in a warm cloak, given to him in payment
for his work, Adeja left the sanctuary. Knowing thieves plied their trade  even  in  a  small  town,  he  armed
himself and took only enough coin to buy what he needed, leaving the rest in Sephil's keeping.
The gate, which Obiru neglected in favor of his warm bed, stood barred. Adeja debated going to wake
the man before deciding to get a priest to unlock the heavy access  door that stood off to the side. He gave
his request to a novice near the chapel, where the household, minus Obiru, gathered  for  morning  prayers,
before returning to the gate to wait in the mist and light drizzle.
From the mist appeared a bent figure. An elderly priest hobbled down the path on his cane, a key ring
clasped in his talon-like hand. Adeja rolled his eyes, unable to guess how this man was going to assist when,
it seemed, he could scarcely see the door, much less move it.
"Patience," said the priest, his voice so soft Adeja strained to hear  it.  As  he  drew  near,  he  tilted  his
face to squint at Adeja. "Quiet your young blood, and return quickly."
Adeja all but snapped at him to hurry up. "Are you going to need help with that door?"
A wistful smile appeared on the priest's face.  His skin, as paper-thin as an onion's,  was  crisscrossed
with fine lines. "Do not stray too far from he whom you love," he said. 
Stomping his feet in the cold air, Adeja glared at him. "Do you need help?"
Somehow, the priest managed to push the thick oak door  open  unaided.  Adeja  murmured  his  thanks
and slid past, never giving answer to the old man's prying. Those soft words, however, left him with a chill
of doubt he quickly pushed aside as he hiked up the road leading northeast from the sanctuary.
* * * *
Darkness came early with the season. Afternoon faded into a sunset that, through the clouds,  cast  a
barely discernable smear of orange on the horizon. Before Adeja knew it, twilight descended on the  land.
Ivrish was a healthy distance behind him, the sanctuary on the hill before him dark except for the handful of
lanterns indicating the life within.
With his exhaustion came the first flickers of apprehension. Not until now did it occur to him that the
gate would be closed, the access  door locked and no one on duty to admit wayfarers. Spring and summer
saw supply wagons bringing beer, flour and cloth from the surrounding countryside and pilgrims traveling to
various shrines throughout Khalgar. Only couriers and the occasional cart visited in winter, and by sunset all
were safely indoors.
I shouldn't  have  lingered  as  long  as  I  did.  Ivrish  was  larger  and  more  prosperous  than  Adeja
thought it would be. The town's one brothel served the sour beer he had come to expect in Khalgar, and the
prostitutes were plain and tired-looking, but after an entire morning on the road he had no complaints. After
a meal and drink, he spent an hour with the youngest in a narrow room, sucking her nipples while she rode
him and made the rehearsed noises all prostitutes made.
Adeja hardly cared what sounds the woman uttered as long as she gave him pleasure, and three times
she managed to arouse him. Each time he took her in a different position, sating his restless hunger, yet as
he thrust into her he could smell other men on the girl's skin, in her hair and even in her kiss. Not that  he
had never shared a woman, or thought a prostitute exclusively his—only a fool or a naïve  boy  in  the  first
flush of love ever believed such a thing—yet what he never noticed before he now found distasteful.
Love was not what Adeja sought in Ivrish. A prostitute's mouth was best  when  wrapped  around  his
cock, not plying him with false endearments or compliments. This one did her job well  enough,  and  as  he

appreciatively slapped the girl's buttocks in farewell, he did not ask her name and she did not offer it.
Spending  the  night  in  the  cold  was  not  a  prospect  Adeja  relished.  As  he  came  up  the  road  to  the
sanctuary, he drew a deep sigh of relief to see a lamp burning in the gatehouse. In the darkness he found
the bell, rang it and waited. And waited, stamping his feet on the threshold as his breath turned to smoke.
A thickset priest peered out from a window to ask his business. Recognizing Adeja's voice, the man let
him in through the access  door. "At least you didn't get caught in foul weather," he said. "We had another
traveler pass through before, though I daresay he's gone now."
Adeja paid no attention to his chatter. All he cared about now was hot food and a warm bed.
Supper  had  been  served  an  hour  before  in  the  communal  hall,  but  he  was  able  to  wheedle  some
leftovers from the cook, a dour man who fed him disapproving glances with his stew.
"For your fleshly indulgences you should go without," said Tham, "and spend tonight considering a more
spiritual path."
From what Sephil told him about what the priests did together in the darkness, Adeja nearly choked on
his bread at the irony. "If you'd let me keep a proper wife I wouldn't have to go out of my way for a casual
fuck, would I?"
Tham grew red at the insult, yet held his tongue. Adeja was able to finish his meal in peace.
His belly full and his body weary from traveling, Adeja craved sleep.  Before  he  returned  to  his  cell,
though, he thought it best to let Sephil know he had returned safely and reclaim his money.
Taking a lantern from the kitchen, he threaded his way along the empty halls and colonnades toward
the priests' sleeping quarters. As a novice, Sephil should have slept in the dormitory with the other novices,
but as a prince he rated a private cell. With a chuckle, Adeja reflected that making love to him in the former
would have been impossible.
As  he  rounded  the  corner,  movement  in  the  shadows  made  him  pause.  Holding  up  the  lantern,  he
peered into the darkness that blanketed the colonnade and discerned a figure pressed up against the  wall.
Instinct  and  common  sense  told  him  something  was  amiss.  A  priest  or  novice  would  have  simply  kept
walking.
"Who's there?" he asked.
Rather than step forward  or  answer,  the  figure  darted  away.  Setting  down  the  lantern,  Adeja  gave
chase. He raced down the colonnade through an archway leading to a  small  courtyard  that  led  nowhere.
His quarry, whoever he or she was, obviously knew nothing about the sanctuary.
Without the lantern, it took Adeja's eyes a moment to adjust to the shadows. Then, crouched behind a
pillar, realizing his or her mistake and trying to sidle past, the figure became visible.
"Show yourself," said Adeja. "I'm not going to hurt you."
No  answer.  Adeja  feinted  to  the  right,  abruptly  turning  back  to  the  left  and  lunging,  grasping  the
intruder by one arm as he or she tried to escape; he felt solid muscle, and knew he dealt with a man.
The other arm came up, holding a knife that shone in the faint light, and slashed. Adeja ducked away
from the blow, caught the man around the middle and tackled him to the ground. Whoever he was, the man
was neither a priest nor an ordinary wayfarer.
Adeja tore away the man's hood before pinning him down. In the chaos he saw only a distorted face.
Hard breathing and curses muttered in his native tongue. He's Tajhaani. Grasping the man's wrist, Adeja
slammed it down hard against the pavement, forcing him to release the knife.
Priests, alerted by the noise, came running with lanterns. As the man tried to shove him off  and  run,
Adeja seized him from behind and wrenched  his  head  back.  Bone  cracked,  and  the  man  slumped  to  the
ground at Adeja's feet.
"What is going on here?"
Adeja recognized the voice of the high priest, who strode over to survey the scene. Bedren drew his
mouth into a tight line upon seeing the discarded knife and the man's broken neck. "Why did you kill him?"
Breathing hard, Adeja bent down and turned the corpse over to study the man's  face.  In  the  lantern
light, he saw the man was dark, with features that matched his Tajhaani accent. "I didn't intend to, but he
attacked me," he said, then explained everything that happened from the time he encountered the  intruder
along the colonnade.
One priest volunteered that Obiru earlier admitted a  traveler  who  ate,  rested,  and  left.  As  he  gazed
down at the corpse, the priest's brow furrowed at the realization that the man apparently had not departed.
"He had a foreign accent."
"Like mine?" asked Adeja.
"Yes, like yours."
Adeja looked from him to Bedren. "This one's a long way from Tajhaan." His gaze fell on Sephil, who

had  come  out  with  everyone  else  and  now  stood  clutching  his  robe  around  him.  "He  was  looking  for
something, or someone."
Bedren possessed enough sense not to question him in public. Quickly he sent a novice to wake Obiru
while ordering three others to take  the  body  away  for  burial.  Everyone  else  was  to  return  to  their  cells.
When  Bedren  instructed  Adeja  to  walk  with  him,  Adeja  seized  the  initiative  and  motioned  Sephil  to  join
them.
No one  spoke  on  the  walk  from  the  courtyard  to  the  high  priest's  office.  Only  when  the  door  was
securely closed did Adeja voice his suspicions. "This man might have been sent to kill the prince."
"How can you be certain?" asked Bedren.
"I  can't  think  of  any  other  reason  why  a  Tajhaani  wayfarer  would  be  skulking  around  the  living
quarters in the dark with a knife."
Sephil sat frozen in shock. "Why would anyone attack me?"
"Why do you think?" asked Adeja. "Like it or not, you have enemies."
Looking away, Sephil anxiously chewed his lip. "How could they or anyone else possibly know where
to find me? Only Zhanil knew about my being sent here."
"And  whoever  he  assigned  to  accompany  you,"  answered  Adeja.  "Any  one  of  them  could  have
betrayed you to the Tajhaani."
"You are making a serious accusation," said Bedren. Disapproval  dripped  from  his  voice.  "No  priest
under my supervision would ever do such a thing."
"How else do you explain a man lurking in the shadows near the prince's room with a  knife?  We  all
know his cousin's taken refuge in Tajhaan and laid claim to the throne." Adeja felt his blood racing, chasing
away his earlier exhaustion; he would get little rest tonight. "If Dashir sent an assassin to kill his cousin,  I
wouldn't be surprised." If only he had not killed the man straightaway, he might have been sure.
As Bedren started to speak, Sephil interrupted, "Dashir has no reason to kill me. My father struck my
name out of the succession years ago. I do not even want the throne."
"Does he know that?" asked Adeja.
Sephil hung his head. "I do not think he cares."
"Brasidios  never  made  public  his  decision  regarding  Sephil,  so  doubt  might  exist  as  to  who  is  the
rightful king. He did adopt Dashir as his son and appoint him Crown Prince when Zhanil died," said Bedren,
"but again, from what I understand, he did  not  know  his  younger  son  was  still  alive.  Whether  this  would
have made any difference, no one can say. Whatever doubts he may have, Dashir has strong supporters in
Tajhaan and should not have to resort to murder."
"Unless  he  thinks  I  mean  to  come  out  of  hiding  and  claim  the  throne,"  said  Sephil.  "If  I  could  just
communicate with him—"
"That would not be advisable." Bedren opened a cabinet, withdrew a decanter containing a clear  red
liquid and a glazed cup, which he filled and handed to Adeja. "Drink this. It is Mittosian wine and will calm
your nerves."
Although it could not seem to produce a palatable beer, Khalgar was famous for its wines, a reputation
borne out in the richly flavored liquid in the glass. After the first taste, Adeja stared at it, amazed. Any wine
he drank was the cheap kind soldiers could afford, but this was a good quality vintage that went straight to
his head and made his nerves tingle.
Bedren poured a second cup for Sephil. "As I was saying, corresponding with Prince Dashir would be
most unwise. I am certain he knows you do not intend to challenge him, but you could potentially become
the pawn of a powerful rival. Simply by being alive you are a threat. Now that an attempt has been made
on your life, you may not be safe here."
The cup quivered in Sephil's hands; he had not yet drunk from it. "What do you propose I do?"
"We could move you to another sanctuary," said Bedren.
"Dashir found him once," said Adeja, "and he'll find him again no  matter  how  many  times  you  move
him. I still believe somebody here is sending information to Tajhaan. You don't send an assassin out to do a
job without telling him where his victim is, and this man was  too  close  to  the  prince's  cell  for  it  to  be  by
chance."
"None of my priests—"
"Not all of the priests here have been under your authority," said Adeja. "You've got ten priests who
came from Rhodeen with the prince, and who knows who they spoke to or what  orders  they  were  given
before they left Shemin-at-Khul? I imagine Zhanil gave them instructions to evacuate his brother and look
after him, but with the Turyar advancing I doubt he had time for much else."
"Prince Zhanil had time enough to write to me describing his brother's condition and ask me to shelter

and train him in the priesthood," said Bedren. "Sephil already knows this. I showed him the letter as soon as
he was well enough."
Going back to the cabinet, Bedren unlocked a drawer and drew out a small wooden box. "There is one
other option." He set the box on the table and placed the key beside it. "In here are letters and tokens from
Prince Zhanil. They were sent with his brother in the event they should be needed. The documents are all
stamped with the royal seal. One is addressed to the king of Khalgar, the other to a maternal uncle a day's
ride from here." 
Sephil peered at the box, plain but for its sturdy lock, but did not try to open it. "Are you suggesting that
I go to Bhellin?"
"It might be wise," said Adeja.
"Your brother clearly felt you might need to do so," added Bedren.  "All  I  know  for  certain  is  that  if
your cousin intends to kill you, we cannot protect  you  here,  and  you  will  find  no  refuge  with  your  uncle.
Only the king can assure your safety."
Adeja drank from his cup again. "Something isn't right," he said. "Laban saw the man leave. How did
he get back in with the gate closed? I don't think Obiru would have let him in."
His thoughts raced. Rope left outside to be used after dark, after the man studied the sanctuary, or a
traitor  from  within  who  admitted  the  man  through  the  access  door.  Tomorrow  morning,  assuming  the
weather held, Adeja resolved to go outside and examine the walls for traces of the former, while admitting
he could do nothing about the latter.
"Laban did not have the  watch  the  entire  day,  and  Obiru  is,  I  admit,  not  much  of  a  sentry,"  replied
Bedren. "I will have you assist him."
"He won't take kindly to it."
Bedren gave the slightest hint of a smile, the most Adeja had ever seen from him. "If we tell him that
we have noticed his boredom and flagging spirits, he will welcome the company."
Whether Obiru  would  be  so  gullible,  Adeja  had  no  idea,  and  decided  he  did  not  care.  He  had  kept
watch with surlier men, and Obiru was more likely to fall asleep at his post than give him trouble.
"Sephil," Bedren was saying, "if you will accept my advice, I think you should seriously consider going
to Bhellin to seek the king's protection. He is kin through your mother, and would not turn you away. This
time  you  were  fortunate,  but  there  may  be  more  attempts  on  your  life.  Next  time  you  might  not  be  so
lucky."
"Ampheres will think I mean to announce my right to the throne," answered Sephil. "He will either kill
me or use me as a pawn."
"That's ridiculous," said Adeja. "A kinsman is bound to shelter and protect you—"
Sephil slammed the cup down on Bedren's desk, sloshing wine onto his hand. "Dashir  is my kinsman,
too, and look what he has done!"
Bedren placed one hand on his shoulder while motioning Adeja to fetch a cloth from the cabinet with
the other. "Calm yourself," he said. "Your cousin is an unscrupulous man who abandoned his family to death
and capture—"
"I did the same!"
"That's different," said Adeja. "Zhanil sent you here for your own protection."
"Dashir has allied himself with powers who will not hesitate to use political assassination to their own
ends," finished Bedren, "but you cannot  assume  this  is  the  situation  everywhere.  Ampheres  is  a  just  and
ethical man, and your brother apparently thought highly  enough  of  his  assistance  to  write  to  him  on  your
behalf."
"You do not know what the letter says," Sephil said sullenly. 
Adeja gritted his teeth. By now, a sensible man would have been on his horse and well away from the
sanctuary. Sephil would hesitate so long that his cousin would not have to try very hard to have him killed,
unless that was what he wanted; there was no telling whether or not his suicidal cravings had been excised.
"Why should I need to read the letter? If Zhanil wrote it, he did it to protect you. Do as Bedren tells you,"
he urged. "He's giving you good advice."
Sephil looked at him. "It is still my decision."
"You're being stubborn."
"I do not wish to leave this place," replied Sephil. "I desire only a quiet life. If Dashir cannot see that I
am no threat, then he is a fool."
"The only fool is you," said Adeja. "As a prince, you should know by now that you can't always have
what you want."
Sephil clenched his jaw. "Do not speak to me as though I were a child," he hissed.

Adeja fought the urge to slap him. "Then stop behaving like one. Your cousin doesn't care  what  you
want, and if he was here he'd kill you himself. If you want a long, peaceful life, you'd better start thinking
sensibly and find yourself some powerful allies. Otherwise, I hope you're prepared to die."

Chapter Three
Sephil understood that Adeja and the high priest were impatient with him, and why, but held his tongue
when it came time to explain his stubbornness. Never eloquent, he could not convey his need to live without
the burden of his princely rank. If he left the sanctuary to appeal to Ampheres, he would find cold welcome
in Bhellin. Surely his father corresponded with his wife's kinsman, and had spoken as poorly of his younger
son as highly as he praised the elder. No matter what Zhanil wrote, Sephil knew Ampheres would despise
him as weak and unfit to bear a royal title. As Brasidios had done, Ampheres would either lock him away
or use him as a pawn in some vast political game.
Such thoughts filled him with despair. Death by an  assassin's  blade  would  be  preferable  to  life  as  a
royal prisoner. 
It did not surprise him that his cousin attempted his life. If  anything,  Dashir  would  do  it  again.  From
Sephil's  earliest  memories,  Dashir  had  always  been  malicious,  shoving  and  teasing  him  whenever  Zhanil
was  not  looking.  Maturity  brought  neither  kindness  nor  wisdom,  for  when  Sephil  emerged  from  his  long
exile from court Dashir approached him and made his sentiments known.
"All these years we thought you dead," he drawled. "It is such a pity to find out otherwise."
Now that Sephil had time to consider Bedren's advice, he saw that writing to Dashir in Tajhaan would
accomplish  nothing  except  to  confirm  that  he  was,  indeed,  hiding  among  the  priests  of  Abh  in  Ottabia.
Bedren mentioned transfer to another sanctuary, but with a potential traitor selling information to Tajhaan,
this option offered no guarantee of success.
Sephil grew wary, searching the faces around him for signs of treachery. As the days brightened with
the approach of spring, he found it hard to  dispel  his  personal  gloom.  Uncertainty  dogged  his  meditations
and studies as he tried to guess who among the Rhodeen priests would want to betray him.
At last, he decided Adeja must be mistaken,  for  there  had  also  been  several  laymen  on  the  journey
from Shemin-at-Khul, men whose whereabouts were now unknown.
It is not fair, he thought. No matter what progress he  tried  to  make,  his  family  always  managed  to
thwart his efforts. Just because his father was dead and his world upturned did not mean release from old
constraints. More than once, he lapsed into petulance, sulking until both Adeja and Bedren told him to stop
behaving like a child.
"A holy sanctuary is no place for a tantrum," said Bedren, "and such behavior does not become your
station, either as a prince or a novice. If you aspire to be a priest, you must rise above this."
Sephil struggled to correct his behavior, but would not relent on the subject of going to Khalgar. Adeja
and the high priest could accuse him of being petulant until the moon fell out of the sky, and perhaps they
were right, but in some small way he needed  to remain, to defy his enemies by insisting on his own  path,
even if it meant his death. All he wanted was for those closest to him to understand and let him be.
He also wanted to peer into the small box Bedren showed him and view the letters and tokens Zhanil
sent with him, for although they were not meant for him, these were the only remaining mementoes of his
brother.
I have  not  one  word  from  him,  not  one  relic.  Adeja  told  him  that  from  the  moment  the  Turyar
entered Rhodeen, Zhanil was preoccupied with the defense of the capital and  outlying  regions.  He  would
have had no time for personal correspondence. "A good soldier focuses on what he has to do, not on being
afraid or worrying about his loved ones," explained Adeja. "I doubt Zhanil  even  saw  much  of  his  wife  or
children in those last days."
And yet, Zhanil found time to write not only to Ampheres and their mother's brother, but to compose a
lengthy missive to Bedren explaining the situation. More than once,  Sephil  pored  over  the  letter,  trying  to
pull from its formal language a personal message that did not exist. Zhanil spoke about him, but not to him,
and he did not understand why.
That he had not known Zhanil better made Sephil's heart ache with regret. The most time they spent
together were as children in the schoolroom, but Zhanil  was  seven  years  older,  which  meant  he  was  far
advanced in his lessons just as Sephil began his, and had his own tutors. Still, he was gentle, encouraging but

clearly  disappointed  when  he  realized  his  younger  brother  would  not  match  him  in  prowess  or  intellect.
Their father demanded perfection from his sons, and he ruthlessly criticized Sephil for being a pale moon to
Zhanil's bright sun.
Sephil spent his afternoons sitting under the shelter of the colonnade, his book forgotten in his lap as he
watched  the  breeze  stir  the  budding  apple  trees.  His  mind  drifted,  lingering  over  grim  matters.  The
assassin's corpse had been taken away outside the walls and buried in an unmarked  grave.  While  his  life
remained in danger, he need think no more on that particular man, yet the image of Adeja standing there in
the darkness stayed in his head. Knowing Adeja had snapped the  man's  neck  and  expressed  no  remorse
afterward made him afraid.
Why this surprised him, he did not understand,  for  as  a  soldier  Adeja  had  killed  many  times  before.
Sephil told himself he was unnerved only because this was the first corpse he had ever seen.
But no, there was something more, and when he realized what it was, his apprehension only grew.
This time, he killed for me.
* * * *
"I am not trying to be difficult," murmured Sephil.
Adeja  stretched  his  legs.  Even  with  the  blanket  under  them,  the  floor  remained  hard  and  the  early
spring evening was colder  than  he  preferred,  but  the  bed  simply  did  not  accommodate  their  lovemaking.
"Difficult, foolish—it's the same thing."
"I will not be a pawn or prisoner of the Khalgari king."
"Your only other option is a corpse."
"I would prefer dying here than having to endure a living death in Bhellin," said Sephil. "Ampheres will
be just like my father, and will shut me away or have me strangled in some dark corner to keep peace with
Tajhaan. I want my last days to be happy ones."
Adeja found such fatalism foreign, even though part of him understood Sephil's desire to remain free.
"You don't know that he'd do any of those things. Bedren told you he was a good man with a large family,
and he's publicly expressed grief over the deaths in Rhodeen."
"What men do in public is different than what they do when others are not watching. I am sure people
thought my father was a good man, too." Turning on his side, Sephil began to stroke Adeja's chest, drawing
circles around his nipples with an idle fingertip. "Please, I do not want  to  talk  about  it  anymore,"  he  said.
"Do you know it has been nearly a year since we first met?"
Women  marked  occasions  like  that.  Men  only  noticed  when  their  women  shrieked  at  them  for
forgetting. Adeja wondered how a twenty-year-old prince could remain so sentimental and naïve after all he
had been through. I should've  thrown  him over  the back  of  a horse  three months ago  and  ridden  for
Bhellin.
To avoid a scene, Adeja grunted acknowledgement. I hope  he doesn't  expect  me to give him a gift.
Women always wanted trinkets or flowers, and it would not have surprised Adeja to find Sephil desired the
same. "Should priests be thinking about such things?"
Sephil kissed the skin just above his nipple. "I am just a novice, and the servants of Abh do not have to
remain celibate."
Adeja squirmed as his lover began flicking his nipple  with  a  pointed  tongue.  "Ah,  so  that's  why  you
chose this god instead of some other!"
"You know that is not true!" laughed Sephil.
He knew all too well how to rouse a man's spent desire, a dubious quality in an aspiring priest. Under
his skilled hands and mouth, Adeja quickly grew hard. In a very short time he had Sephil pinned to the floor
and was entering him.
"And to think," gasped Sephil, wrapping his legs around Adeja's  waist,  "you  were  so  reluctant  in  the
beginning."
In response, Adeja thrust harder into him. More  fuck, he thought, less talk. He spent so many nights
sleeping in Sephil's cell that he hardly saw his own bed anymore. Bedren did not wholly approve, for while
the priesthood of Abh did not mind occasional intimacy, they frowned on anything that could be construed
as cohabitation. Not that Adeja cared what they thought. He  was  no  priest,  he  liked  sex,  and  as  long  as
Sephil was willing so was he.
He took no more trips to Ivrish, instead spending his days watching the gate with Obiru, patrolling the
outer walls  and  observing  anyone  who  entered  the  sanctuary.  With  the  arrival  of  spring,  supply  wagons
were once again regular visitors, as were couriers bringing correspondence from Bhellin and other parts of
Khalgar.  The  latter  he  watched  carefully,  noting  which  priests  interacted  with  them,  and  who  received
letters or sent them.

In yet another show of disapproval, Bedren claimed these activities were intrusive even  when  Adeja
explained that the assassin had not climbed over the wall but had help from within.
"You are making the brothers nervous," said the high priest. "I will not have it."
Adeja remained unflustered. "If they're nervous they may think twice before trying anything."
"This sanctuary is a refuge from such cares," Bedren said stiffly, "and it will not do to encourage this
behavior. A far better course would be to remove Sephil to Bhellin or another sanctuary. Since you share
his bed at night, I assume you also have influence over him. While you are pleasing yourself, you might take
the opportunity to convince him."
Apparently  he  did  not  understand  how  naïve  or  self-absorbed  Sephil  could  be,  and  Adeja  never
explained  to  him  how  their  meeting  came  about  as  a  result  of  the  prince's  selfishness.  One  could  only
speculate how different Sephil might have been had he received  more  responsible  guardians,  or  not  been
locked away and ignored for three years.
Nor did Bedren realize that while Sephil might enjoy talking during sex, Adeja found it interfered with
his pleasure. When he was hard he was more likely to silence his partner with a rough kiss than continue
the conversation, and when he was done he usually fell asleep.
He climaxed into the shuddering body under him, panting into the lips that sought his. Sephil groaned,
clasping him tightly as he writhed through his orgasm, then releasing him with a drowsy  smile.  "That  was
good," he murmured.
Adeja rolled off him. "No more, or I won't be fit for duty in the morning."
As Sephil rose from the blanket and moved toward the wash basin, in the darkness he stumbled over
the sword Adeja left on the floor beside them. He hissed, cursing softly. "Can you not put this somewhere
out of the way?"
"An assassin is hardly going to wait while I go looking for it."
Water sloshed in the basin. "I do not know that anything is going to happen."
Adeja sat up and took the cloth Sephil brought him. "A man doesn't try to kill his enemy and give  up
after the first attempt unless he didn't have much nerve to begin with." He tossed the cloth aside, fumbled
for the sword and stood, wincing at his stiff joints. "I'm going to  the  bed  if  you  want  to  come.  This  floor
makes my back ache."
Once  bundled  into  bed  together,  Sephil  resumed  the  conversation.  "You  never  told  me  why  you
became a soldier."
"Because I make a lousy stonemason," answered Adeja.
Sephil lightly punched his arm. "I am serious. I want to know. Why does a man choose to live such a
hard life?"
"I was being serious. I can work with stone if I have to, but all the time I was in my father's house I
wanted more, and the only way I could get it was by joining the army," said Adeja. "The problem was that
the army in Tajhaan isn't what it used to be. There were no great wars to fight, no spoils to be won. I got
tired of patrolling city streets and breaking up drunken brawls between neighbors, so I left. I hired  myself
out as a mercenary in Dhahar, and when I got tired of breaking debtors' arms for the moneylenders, I went
to Rhodeen."
"You broke arms?"
"Yes, and  kneecaps,  when  I  had  to.  I  was  a  debt  collector,  squeezing  unscrupulous  merchants  and
clerks for money they claimed not to have. I was rather good at it, too."
Sephil rolled over and peered down at him. "You enjoyed the work?"
"If you knew the kind of men  I  had  to  deal  with,  you  wouldn't  ask.  Yes,  I  beat  them,  broke  a  few
bones  and  told  them  I'd  come  back  if  the  money  wasn't  paid,  but  I  never  threatened  their  women  or
children, not like some men did," said Adeja. "Go to sleep, Sephil. I'm not half the animal you think I am."
In the small hours  before  dawn,  Adeja  roused  to  the  faint  turning  of  the  latch.  On  occasion,  Sephil
climbed over him to use the privy at the end of the colonnade; the jostling elicited grumbling from Adeja and
threats to return to his own bed, which he never carried out. But no, his lover still lay  pressed  against  his
back, snoring softly.
Someone else was entering.
The door opened a crack. Adeja's hand crept down to the floor and quietly slid the short sword from
its scabbard. Lying very still, every nerve poised to strike, through slitted eyes he studied the dark form that
slid into the room and shut the door; it lacked the robed silhouette and unobtrusive movements of a priest.
Three months was long enough for someone in the sanctuary to communicate  with  Tajhaan,  and  for
Dashir to send a second assassin.
As the shadow moved forward, it took on mass. Adeja heard muffled breathing, and could smell wool

and leather. Closer it came, apparently not realizing that two occupied the bed rather than one, until in the
thin moonlight coming in through the narrow window Adeja discerned the gleam of metal.
Throwing off the blanket and lifting his sword, Adeja sprang up from the bed with a shout that startled
both the intruder and the sleeping Sephil. The man, cursing in Tajhaani, stumbled back into the wall. Behind
Adeja, Sephil cried out as he bolted upright in bed.
"Adeja, what—?"
There  was  no  time  to  answer.  When  metal  jarred  against  Adeja's  sword,  he  knew  someone  had
warned this intruder that his intended victim was guarded. Compounded by the darkness and narrow space,
Adeja could already see this would be no easy fight.
"Sephil!" he shouted. "Get your robe on and get Bedren—anyone!"
Behind him, he heard panicked  breathing  and  shuffling.  As  Sephil  bounded  off  the  bed,  the  intruder
lunged to the left to catch him. Adeja heard a cry half a second before he slammed his body into the man
and sent him crashing into the wall.
No light to see and no time to ask if Sephil was hurt. The intruder lunged back to his feet, his sword
swinging up in an arc that caught the moonlight. Adeja ducked and parried.
Off to the side, the door wrenched open and Sephil stumbled into the night, crying out the alarm. Once
again, his attacker went for him, reaching the doorway before Adeja caught him. His sword came up, the
flat of the  blade  striking  the  man's  head  with  enough  force  to  drop  him  to  the  ground.  The  man's  blade
clattered to the threshold after him.
Lanterns appeared along the colonnade. Roused by Sephil's alarm, priests emerged from their cells and
novices, bleary with sleep, ran up from their dormitory.
In the light, Adeja saw the figure sprawled on the ground before him. The man was neither dead nor
senseless, but moving, trying to crawl toward the priests. Stepping over him, Adeja smashed the hilt of his
sword into the knuckles of the hand reaching for the fallen blade, and with his toe nudged it safely beyond
reach.
He bent over the man and tore off the scarf the would-be assassin had worn to muffle his breathing.
Jerking  the  man's  arms  behind  his  back,  he  bound  his  wrists.  Seizing  his  prisoner  by  the  hair,  he  then
dragged the man groaning into the courtyard.
Not until a priest threw a blanket  around  him  did  he  realize  he  was  naked.  As  Bedren  approached,
Adeja  turned  to  acknowledge  him  and  saw  Sephil  at  the  high  priest's  elbow,  wrapped  in  his  robe  and
clutching his arm. Blood seeped through the wool. Shock painted his face white, but it seemed more from
events than actual injuries.
"I've got him," said Adeja, "but I'll need a room to keep him." When his captive began to  squirm  and
curse, Adeja kicked him.
After dispersing the gathered priests and novices, Bedren directed Adeja to a storage room far  from
any living quarters. Whatever was to occur, the high priest apparently did not want his household to be part
of it. Sephil trailed along, until Bedren ordered him to go see about his wound.
Glancing  down,  Sephil  noticed  the  blood.  Bedren  caught  his  other  arm  before  he  could  faint  and
flagged down a passing priest.
"Go with  Darinthes,"  said  Bedren.  "He  will  take  you  to  the  infirmary.  Adeja,  the  storeroom  is  this
way."
Once inside the storeroom, Adeja flung his prisoner into a corner and told Bedren to shut the door.
"If you intend to torture or otherwise hurt him," said the high priest, "you will have to do it outside the
sanctuary grounds. The priesthood of Abh does not approve of such measures."
Adeja was in no mood to humor sanctimonious drivel and, binding the captive's ankles together with a
length of twine, immediately ignored Bedren. "Well, dog," he said to the man in Tajhaani, "are you going to
tell me what I want to know or do I have to hurt you?"
"Fuck you," the man hissed. He did not have  the  look  of  a  soldier,  but  rather  a  back  alley  cutthroat
whose knife was sharper than his wits. Such men exuded bravado, while true courage eluded them. A few
blows, some threats delivered in the proper tone, the press of a blade against an artery at the right moment
and the man would tell Adeja everything he wanted to know.
Adeja teased his jaw with the tip of his sword. "You might want to think about being a bit more polite,"
he said. "Tell me, how are things with the royal family in Tajhaan these days? I've been away such a long
time."
When his query elicited no answer, Adeja jammed a fist into the man's stomach. Bedren blanched at
the prisoner's gasping and retching. He moved toward the door. "I will not stay for this."
"He's not  as  tough  as  he  wants  us  to  think.  It's  not  going  to  take  much  to  get  him  to  talk,"  replied

Adeja, "and I think you'll want to be here for whatever he says."
"You will not cut him."
"Not in here, no, but what I do with him outside the sanctuary is my business, and if he doesn't give me
what I want, I'm going to take him out and start  carving  him  up."  Turning  his  attention  back  to  the  man,
Adeja lapsed once again into Tajhaani. "Now that we've made it clear that you're going to talk, why don't
we start by you telling us your name?"
"Dhavi," growled the man.
"A nice name, Dhavi," said Adeja, "though I doubt it's your real one. No matter, though. I suppose you
already know who I am."
Dhavi bared his teeth. "You're the soldier who fucks the prince."
"A pity you didn't remember that when you stole into his room," said Adeja. "Now tell me, how is the
cutthroat business in Tajhaan? It mustn't be very good, if you have to look for victims all the way north in
Khalgar."
"Why the fuck do you care?"
Adeja caressed his cheek with the sword. "Now, how are we to be friends if you keep cursing at me
like that?"
"Why don't you just hurry up and kill me?" hissed Dhavi. "You're going to do it anyway."
Holding the sword tip steady over the pulsing artery in Dhavi's throat, Adeja smiled. "Ah, but there are
ways of killing you, and then there are other  ways, if you understand my meaning. I used to work for the
moneylenders in Tajhaan, so believe me, I know all about pain. Now let us talk about the royal family, and
the people who helped you."
* * * *
Though he did not want it, Sephil drank the  syrup  Darinthes  handed  him  and  let  numbness  overtake
him as  his  wound  was  laid  bare,  washed  and  dressed.  He  winced  and  tried  to  jerk  away  as  the  healer
applied a stinging ointment, but in his lassitude offered little resistance. Once the discomfort subsided, he felt
nothing  at  all  except  the  pressure  of  the  dressing  Varol  wound  around  his  arm.  He  could  not  even
remember where he was or why.
As  he  lolled  against  the  pillow,  trying  to  remain  awake,  Darinthes  stayed  beside  him  to  offer
encouragement. "It is but a scratch, Sephil. In a few weeks it will be completely healed and you will never
know it was there."
Muffled in the distance, Sephil heard the bell calling the sanctuary to morning prayers; he managed to
open his eyes long enough to see weak daylight coming in through the window. But it was night when I lay
down, he thought. Darinthes patted his hand, murmured something and left his side. A door closed, but like
everything else it seemed very far away.
Sephil  drifted  in  the  heavy  place  between  consciousness  and  sleep,  heedless  of  the  passing  time.
People moved in the background, going about their business, and unraveling threads of conversation which
he could not follow for very long.
"…you give him so much for just a little scratch?"
Recognition made him stir, but he could not put a name to the male voice floating nearby.
"Vanol thought it best after last night's events."
Sephil forced his eyes open. The large room with its multiple beds momentarily confused him, until he
recalled the word infirmary. Tightness around  his  arm  reminded  him  why  he  lay  in  this  bed  and  not  his
own.
At the foot of his bed stood a handsome, dark haired man, and next to him a tall priest. "Adeja, what
are you doing here?"
The first man nodded. "How do you feel?" he asked.
His arm throbbed when he tried to move it, and for a moment  he  could  not  quite  recall  how  he  had
been injured. Memory conjured darkness, a faceless  attacker  lunging  at  him  before  he  could  escape  and
raise the alarm. Another image came to him: Adeja standing  naked  over  the  man,  pinning  him  down  and
binding him with his own scarf.
Sephil swallowed, licking dry lips. "What happened?" he rasped. His voice felt thick in his throat.
The  mattress  dipped  as  Adeja  sat  down  beside  him.  His  hair  was  damp,  and  he  smelled  freshly
washed. "Someone tried to kill you again, of course."
Bedren hovered over Adeja's shoulder. "You are no longer safe here, Sephil."
"The brothers are getting your things together," said Adeja. "We leave for Bhellin in the morning."
"No, I do not—"
"You don't have a choice.  Your  enemies  aren't  going  to  stop,  and  I  can't  keep  killing  assassins  like

this."
The appearance of  a  novice  healer  with  food  and  drink  brought  an  abrupt  end  to  the  conversation.
Both Adeja and Bedren stayed while Sephil choked down the porridge and ale. Vanol came over, inspected
the bandage and pronounced him fit to leave the infirmary, which he did, wobbling on Adeja's arm. "I wish
they had not given me so much medicine," he murmured.
All he wanted was to return to his cell and sleep, but instead Adeja led him to Bedren's office, where
the high priest opened the cabinet, withdrew the wooden box and set it on the desk before him.
Inside were two sealed packets and a cloth-wrapped object. The high priest held up the packets. "One
is addressed to your uncle Olmor, the other to King Ampheres. Zhanil said they are identical, and ask  for
support and protection. Your brother did his best to prepare for whatever needs you might have, Sephil. He
could not foresee your cousin taking refuge with Tajhaan instead, and trying to kill you."
Bedren undid the velvet to reveal a golden seal ring. "Prince Zhanil sent this to help you. I am told it
was his."
Sephil picked up the ring. The royal Sun of Rhodeen etched into the ring's sapphire cabochon mirrored
the image impressed into  the  two  wax  seals  on  the  packets.  Although  he  had  seen  the  ring  many  times
before, he was never allowed to hold it. "This is the seal of the Crown Prince," he said softly. "Why would
Zhanil send this with me when he needed it?"
"I don't know,"  answered  Adeja,  but  his  tone  suggested  otherwise.  "You'll  have  to  present  it  to  the
Khalgari king."
"I will have to accompany you," said Bedren. "Should you go alone, a young man and Tajhaani soldier
traveling without an escort, I doubt you would make it through the palace's first gate, much less be received
by Ampheres."
"How many priests do you intend to bring along?" asked Adeja.
"Seven of us will be sufficient, I think."
Bedren took back the seal and placed it with the letters in the box. Sephil wondered if he would ever
see it again.
Able to  walk  unaided  now,  Sephil  attended  evening  prayers  before  Adeja  escorted  him  back  to  his
room. No evidence of last night's struggle remained. "What did you do with the man?" he asked.
"I questioned him."
If that meant torture, Sephil preferred not to know. "Did you kill him?"
"Not yet."
"But you will?"
Adeja sighed. "What do you think, Sephil? I can't let him live."
Hearing the impatience in his lover's voice, Sephil felt foolish. After all, he himself was no innocent in
such matters, having sent a previous lover to the forlorn stronghold of Mekesh where a Turya arrow ended
his  life.  In  his  meditations,  Sephil  spent  hours  revisiting  his  transgressions,  and  though  he  could  not  say
whether he consciously intended for Bedez to die, he knew must accept responsibility for that life lost.
How Adeja could kill without remorse, he did not understand. The military life seemed to strip men of
their qualms. "Will you stay tonight?"
"I have business to finish before we leave. There are no strangers in the sanctuary now, and the gate
will be watched through the night. You'll be safe enough."
"I did  not  think  there  would  be  another  attempt  tonight."  Sephil  swept  the  colonnade  with  his  gaze,
knowing tonight  was  the  last  night  he  would  ever  spend  in  the  sanctuary.  He  could  have  easily  spent  a
lifetime here, quietly studying, meditating and attending to the small tasks the priests gave him, but it was not
to be. "I wish we did not have to go."
Adeja made no answer. It was not necessary. Sephil knew he would not miss this place.
* * * *
Adeja wiped the knife clean on  the  tarpaulin  and  returned  to  the  access  door  where  Obiru  awaited
him. "Nasty business, eh?" asked the guard.  While  Adeja  hauled  his  prisoner  to  the  gate  and  outside,  an
anxious Obiru stood  aside  for  them.  For  all  his  talk,  he  had  no  stomach  for  violence,  and  did  not  watch
Adeja slit Dhavi's throat.
When Adeja did not reply, Obiru filled the silence with more questions.  "Are  you  just  going  to  leave
him out there?"
"For  the  night,"  grunted  Adeja.  Sensing  his  companion  was  about  to  speak  again,  he  gestured  for
silence. "I'll send someone to bury him tomorrow."
After  packing  his  few  possessions  and  looking  in  on  the  sleeping  Sephil,  Adeja  considered  his  next
move.

From the beginning he knew it was a priest who opened the gate for  both  assassins.  Now  he  had  a
name. That the man was from Rhodeen did not surprise him, or his proximity to Sephil, but the betrayal left
a foul  taste  in  his  mouth  nevertheless.  Bedren  must  be  told,  though  how  to  tell  him  was  another  matter
altogether. The high priest gave no weight to Adeja's suspicions, preferring to rely on the  sanctity  of  holy
vows to keep his priests honest.
Anyone, even a priest, could be bought for the right price, reflected Adeja.
He dozed for a few hours, and rose at dawn to wash and eat. Sephil met him outside the chapel, his
belongings in a leather bag slung over one shoulder; his other arm he carried in a sling. "Vanol said I should
wear this when I ride," he explained. "It seems a lot of fuss. My arm does not even hurt much."
"It will in the saddle," said Adeja.
A novice approached them with a message: Bedren awaited them in the outer courtyard by the gate.
The high priest wore trousers and boots under a short, belted robe, and the  six  priests  accompanying  him
were  similarly  dressed.  Three  of  the  four  horses  carried  saddles.  The  other,  a  sturdy  Khalgari  pony,
patiently bore the bundles two novices slung to its back. Most of the party, it seemed, would go on foot, an
arrangement Adeja did not like at all.  Priests  were  not  soldiers.  They  were  not  used  to  marching,  and  it
would take days longer than it should to cover the distance to Bhellin.
Bedren instructed a novice to take Sephil's bag and led him to the smallest mount. "She is  old  but  fit
and extremely docile," he said. "Adeja, you will ride the chestnut. I will take the black."
From the pensive look Sephil gave the mare, Adeja could see he was unaccustomed to riding. "It isn't
as hard as it looks," he said.
"I know," answered Sephil, "but I have not ridden in five years."
Gazing past the mounts, Adeja studied the six priests. Against his advice, they included two men from
Rhodeen. "Not them," he said, pointing.
"Kalion and Lathian are trusted—"
"Not this one." Before Bedren or anyone else could protest, Adeja crossed the distance separating him
from the two men, seized Kalion by the collar and shoved him up against the nearest pillar.
Everyone in the courtyard paused. By now, he wryly reflected, the sight of him manhandling an enemy
should have been commonplace.
"Adeja, let him go," ordered Bedren.
Adeja pretended not to hear. He did not have leisure to exercise tact.
Tightening his grip on Kalion,  he  asked,  "Tell  us,  how  much  did  the  Tajhaani  pay  you  to  betray  the
prince?"

Chapter Four
"Adeja," Bedren said sharply, "I ordered you to stop."
"I don't take orders from priests, especially when there are traitors about."
Standing close enough to feel the heat of Adeja's anger, Sephil did not know what to think. That Kalion
would betray him to his cousin was outrageous, but the sight of the  priest  shoved  up  against  a  pillar  with
Adeja's knife at his throat cowed him into silence.
Kalion appealed to Bedren with desperate eyes. "I-I am not—"
Adeja slammed him into the pillar hard enough to elicit a groan. "That's not what our Tajhaani  friend
told me. Why don't you tell us all how you let him in the gate after dark and told him which way to go?"
"He lies, I-I swear."
Sephil  winced  as  Adeja  sliced  the  top  of  Kalion's  nose  with  the  knife.  Not  here,  please.  "Let  him
down, please. You are hurting him."
"Let him down, Adeja, and put your weapon away," ordered Bedren, his voice filling the courtyard. "I
will not let you treat one of my priests in this manner."
For all the acknowledgement Adeja gave, Bedren might as well have not spoken at all.
Blood streamed down Kalion's nose and chin to soak the collar of his robe. The terror in his eyes, and
the cold fury with which Adeja threatened him with the knife tempted Sephil to run. The lover who held him
with such care and passion could not be capable of such violence, though common sense told him it was so.
And Kalion, who watched over him in the worst days of his illness and nurtured  his  spiritual  growth,
could not possibly betray him. No, he could not believe that.
Swallowing his  fear,  Sephil  took  a  step  forward.  "Adeja,  why  would  Kalion  hurt  me?  He  has  done
nothing but look after me."
From  the  corner  of  his  eye,  he  saw  other  priests  and  novices,  who  apparently  caught  word  of  the
commotion, running up to watch. He heard their murmurs, then their exclamations at the sight of the knife in
Adeja's hand.
"Traitors  are  found  everywhere,"  Adeja  said  sharply.  With  the  back  of  his  hand,  he  struck  Kalion
across the face. Blood droplets flew onto the pavement. "How did the assassin know your name? Should I
cut you again, or are you going to tell us?"
"I-I tended him when he came in. He—"
"Try again! He left before sunset, when somebody let him in. Are you going to tell us, or should I kill
you here and search your corpse for the money the Tajhaani paid you?"
I have  to stop him, thought Sephil, but the more he heard the harder he found it to move. Adeja  did
not invent tales, and someone from within had helped both assassins. That it might be Kalion made him ill.
Bedren moved forward to confront Adeja. "Enough of this," he barked. "I have said before that I will
not tolerate bloodshed in the sanctuary. Unless you can prove these accusations, take your hands off him."
"Then search him, search his cell and his belongings," answered Adeja. "You should find at least three
hundred menar somewhere among his things."
"Do it," said Sephil.
Bedren  must  have  heard  him,  or  wanted  his  own  answer,  for  over  Kalion's  protests  he  ordered  a
search.  Two  priests  forced  a  trembling  Kalion  to  strip  down  to  his  loincloth  and  his  traveling  bag  was
emptied onto the pavement, while two others went to search his cell.
Sephil watched with growing anticipation, praying nothing would be found, but when a priest noted how
heavy Kalion's discarded clothing was and tore open the seams to pull out the coins carefully sewn inside,
doubt no longer remained, and no explanation Kalion gave could take away the sting.
"Was that all my life was worth to you, three hundred menar?" he cried.
"I meant no harm to you," said Kalion.
"You  have  a  strange  way  of  showing  it."  Adeja  shoved  him  to  the  pavement  and  kicked  him  so
savagely that Sephil thought he could hear the man's ribs breaking. "What do you want done with him? I've
got  a  corpse  outside  that  still  needs  to  be  buried.  I  say  let  him  dig  the  grave,  and  we  can  bury  them

together."
Whether the question was meant for him, Sephil did not know, and did not trust himself to answer.
"You will not shed blood here," said Bedren.
"Then I'll take him outside and do it."
"No, he is under my jurisdiction and I will punish him." Bedren brushed past Adeja and, seizing Kalion
under the chin, forced the man to meet his gaze. "Answer the prince's question: was money all that his life
was worth to you? He trusted you. You betrayed him, and worse, you betrayed his brother who trusted you
to look after him. Why in the name of the god would you do such a thing?"
Clutching his side in pain, Kalion gasped for air. "In Rhodeen, there were men who  wanted  to  know
where the prince was being sent. I saw no harm in telling them."
His words ended in a grunt as Adeja kicked him again. "And you saw no harm in opening the gate for
a few assassins as well, is that it?"
Kalion  hung  his  head  and  did  not  answer.  Sephil  wanted  to  grab  him,  shake  him  and  demand  an
explanation, but was trembling so hard he did not trust himself to move.
Rather than force the issue, Bedren released Kalion. Turning and raising his voice so everyone present
could hear, he announced, "Kalion will bury the dead with his own hands. Afterward he will be confined to
a solitary cell for a period of three months, and until such time as we deem his penance done, he will keep a
vow of silence. Kalion, get up and dress yourself. Your life belongs to the god now, and no man or priest
may touch you."
With those words, Adeja sheathed his knife and moved aside. Obiru pushed his way through the crowd
to lead Kalion back into the sanctuary while Bedren quickly made arrangements for another priest to take
his place.
Sephil stood frozen until Lathian, another Rhodeen priest, took him by the arm and gently steered him
to a place where he could sit down. A short time later, Bedren came to inquire after him. "I do not blame
you for being upset, Sephil. I know what a betrayal this is for you."
"You should have made him tell you why he  did  it,"  said  Sephil.  "Three  hundred  menar  is  all  I  was
worth to him?"
Bedren laid a gentle hand on his shoulder. "I will look into the matter when I return. Perhaps solitary
confinement and enforced silence will persuade Kalion to speak."
At midmorning, they departed the sanctuary. Sephil averted his eyes from the barren patch of ground
under the walls where Kalion, working under the watchful eyes of Obiru and four priests, scratched in the
dirt with a shovel to bury the dead assassin. The sight merely reminded Sephil how wrong he was to place
his trust in anyone.
I should ride off alone, he thought, and  find  a place  where  no  one  knows  me or has  ever  heard
of Rhodeen.
It was a wild notion which he quickly dismissed. He was no Zhanil, capable of finding his own way in
the world when he could not properly wield a sword and had not ridden  a  horse  in  five  years.  The  mare
Bedren assigned him was docile, but he  had  never  been  an  expert  rider  and  was  ashamed  to  admit  that
horses made him nervous.
Sephil spent his first journey through Ottabia lying semi-conscious in a covered wagon and saw little of
the landscape. Now he marked the green shoots thrusting through the earth along the hills, transforming the
countryside. Tiny  flowers  appeared  amid  the  brush,  and  small  streams  followed  the  bending  road.  More
than  one  priest  told  Sephil  that  other  parts  of  Khalgar  were  as  lush  as  Rhodeen,  and  that  the  sweetest
grapes were grown in the lands east of Bhellin.
"What  a  marvelous  city  it  is,  Bhellin,"  said  Shemil,  who  walked  beside  his  mare.  "There  are  grand
temples and markets where you can buy anything you want, and everywhere it is so clean."
"Are  you  implying  that  other  cities  are  dirty?"  Sephil  recalled  what  little  he  had  seen  of
Shemin-at-Khul, which amounted to little more than the gleaming palaces, temples and pyramid platforms.
Others told him about sprawling tenements, dusty streets and lively markets, but in his isolation, Rhodeen's
ordinary people remained beyond reach.
Shemil nodded. "Some cities are filthy, yes. Your friend will take offense, I'm sure, but I found Tajhaan
rather loud and dirty. Maybe I simply don't care for the desert."
"Have you been there?" If the priest could weave tales of his travels, Sephil would not have to dwell
on the morning's events or how physically uncomfortable he was. Adeja was right to warn him about riding
with his injured arm. The wound, which he initially thought  was  no  more  than  a  scratch,  required  twenty
stitches, and would leave a thin scar once it healed. Under the bandage, soreness spread through his upper
arm, but Varol assured him that as long as it did not become infected, the discomfort would pass.

Shemil did not disappoint him. "I was a cloth trader before I was a priest," he said, "so I've been many
places. I did business for merchants, traveling with  caravans  and  dealing  wholesale  in  foreign  markets.  I
visited Rhodeen many times to purchase silks and brocades from the warehouses there. I've been south to
Akkil to buy fine Juvan linens and east to Thales for their cottons. I've been just about everywhere except
Shivar and the Turya-lands. I don't know anyone who's been to the horse country and come back to tell of
it."
Sephil would have liked to hear more about the Turyar than the biased fragments Adeja gave him. All
anyone knew was they were persistent and merciless in battle, but surely any people who could harass the
civilized world for centuries and conquer a kingdom like Rhodeen must be  more  than  a  mere  bloodthirsty
horde. Who were their kings and gods, he wondered, and what were their cities like?
In the early afternoon the party arrived at Ivrish. Because the day was pleasant, the party did not enter
the town, but stopped to eat and rest under a stand of oaks overlooking the town and its fields. "Tonight we
will stop in Yalaca," said Bedren. "It is only another five or six hours from here."
With his stiff muscles and bandaged arm, Sephil had difficulty dismounting. Adeja helped him from the
saddle, but they did not speak to each other and the air between them felt awkward.
Adeja  stayed  long  enough  to  make  certain  Sephil  could  walk  unaided;  he  spent  the  remaining  time
tending to the  horses  and  patrolling  the  hill.  Sephil  claimed  a  place  under  an  ancient  oak.  With  his  good
hand,  he  smoothed  down  the  grass,  and  started  at  the  brown  snake  that  coiled  and  slithered  out  at  his
movements.
"It is harmless," said Bedren, seizing the reptile and tossing it aside as he approached. "In the House of
the Snake Mother they keep deadly vipers for the oracles, but you will not find them in places like this."
In warmer weather, garden snakes sometimes crept onto the sanctuary grounds, where Sephil avoided
them. He was more afraid of the rodents that scuttled about in dark  corners,  chewing  everything  in  sight
and leaving droppings that he and the other novices had to sweep up. Varol warned him that such creatures
spread disease, and a bite from one could bring madness and death.
Bedren stayed close, sharing his bread, dried  meat,  and  ale.  Sometimes  he  spoke,  but  it  was  a  long
time before Sephil felt like talking.
"Why did he do it?" he murmured.
"If you are referring to Kalion, I do not know," admitted Bedren.
"But why would a priest need all that money when there is nothing to spend it on? Kalion spent all that
time teaching me to renounce worldly things, and yet he could not even live by his own precepts."
"Men find it easy to preach, Sephil, but difficult to follow a virtuous path. We all have our temptations."
Sephil looked across the millet and wheat fields toward  the  town  with  its  neatly  laid  out  houses  and
streets. "I never did anything to him. Why should he want me dead?"
"I suspect Kalion harbored some ambition that drove him to betray you," answered Bedren. "If it is any
comfort to you, I do not think there was any malice on his part. When I return, I will speak with him  and
see what I can discover. By then, Kalion will have had plenty of time to contemplate his actions."
"If my enemies could attack me in a sanctuary, how much worse will it be in Bhellin?" Sephil caught
his lower lip in his teeth to avoid articulating his greatest fear: that Bedren was taking him to the Khalgari
capital to sell him to his enemies.
Bedren nodded. "I cannot promise you that you will be safe in Bhellin. I only know what would have
happened had you remained with us," he said. "Ampheres has not publicly stated where his sympathies lie,
so we will go cautiously."
"And if he sides with Dashir?" asked Sephil.
"Then we will find some way to change your identity and hide you so no one ever finds you." Bedren
paused, took a swig of ale from the jug next to him, and continued, "I would not be surprised if you told me
you cannot trust anyone, even me. I do not blame you. However, there is still one person whom you know
you can trust."
On the opposite side of the hill, Sephil spied Adeja sitting with Shemir and two other priests. "I do not
like seeing him as he was this morning."
"That is what a soldier does, Sephil," answered Bedren. "Such violence is part of his world, and what
he did yesterday and this morning was necessary."
"I thought you disapproved," said Sephil.
"I do  not  condone  bloodshed  within  the  sanctuary,  but  what  happens  outside  the  walls  is  another
matter. Sometimes a man must walk a dark road to achieve a greater good."
"Eharideos states that a man cannot sacrifice his principles for his own benefit."
"Philosophy  does  not  always  mirror  life,"  said  Bedren.  "Other  gods  are  more  exacting,  but  Abh

understands that a man's morals may be fluid according to the situation if he acts without malice.  Adeja's
actions this morning were violent, but they were not evil because they were meant to protect others.
"I do not wish to belittle you, Sephil, but the truth is that you are still young and impressionable. When I
was your age, I devoured books on philosophy and theology,  and  I  thought  I  knew  best  how  men  should
live. I thought I was pious,  when  in  reality  I  was  merely  arrogant.  Even  now,  I  do  not  pretend  to  know
everything. 
"You must remember that scholars like Eharideos and Ulishban were old men when they wrote about
the nature of the human soul and renunciation of all desire, and that it took them  a  lifetime  of  experience
and contemplation to set down what they learned."
As Sephil pondered this, his thoughts turned to the circumstances under which he had been studying.
Kalion  had  tutored  him,  and  now  Sephil  wondered  if  everything  he  had  learned  was  suddenly  rendered
invalid. Bedren could be playing the same game with him, pretending to mentor him while secretly preparing
to betray him.
Once again, his eyes fell on Adeja, who realized he was being watched and acknowledged Sephil with
a nod. Perhaps he is the only one in the world who can be trusted. The thought so depressed Sephil that
he banished it at once.
"Let  me  caution  you  that  once  we  reach  Bhellin,"  continued  Bedren,  "you  will  have  to  be  very
circumspect in your dealings with Adeja."
Realizing  the  high  priest  was  watching  him,  Sephil  flushed  and  looked  away.  "I  know  you  do  not
approve of the time I spend with him."
"If that were so, I would not have allowed him to stay as long as he has. I think his presence has done
you much good." answered Bedren. "However, Bhellin is not the sanctuary. It may be that you will have to
become a prince once more, and a crown prince at that. If so, your conduct must be beyond reproach."
"I have not led an exemplary life," said Sephil, "and Dashir knows that. He will slander me no matter
what I do."
"I imagine that all princes and public figures must endure slander, even your cousin,"  replied  Bedren.
"All I can suggest is that you forget what happened in the past and remember what you have learned as a
novice. I find that people respect priests even  when  they  do  wrong,  and  those  who  did  not  know  you  in
Rhodeen will find it hard to believe such rumors if you behave as though you are still in the god's service."
Sephil privately thought the Khalgari court would see through the façade. They would point and titter
at him as his father's courtiers had done. Taking their cues from their king, who ignored his younger son in
public and openly criticized him in private, the Rhodeen nobles  had  compared  Sephil  unfavorably  with  his
brother  and  cousins;  they  even  jested  that  the  late  queen  must  have  slept  with  one  of  her  husband's
catamites to produce such a pretty, but useless prince. Brasidios had stifled the gossip about his  wife,  but
offered no word in defense of his son.
When  the  hour  passed,  the  party  resumed  its  journey.  They  passed  through  Ivrish  rather  than  skirt
around  the  town,  where  the  presence  of  so  many  priests  drew  a  few  murmurs  but  no  hostility;  Shemil
quietly explained to Sephil that the townspeople assumed they were on pilgrimage. A frail man on crutches
limped  alongside  Bedren's  horse  to  touch  his  robe  and  ask  his  blessing,  which  the  high  priest  gave  by
wordlessly brushing his fingertips over the man's head; the scene repeated itself a few more times before
the party left the town.
Unaccustomed to riding, Sephil preferred to walk with Shemil. Neither Bedren nor Adeja, who argued
that it would be difficult to escape should an enemy attack, approved  this  move.  Sephil  thanked  them  for
their counsel and insisted on walking.  However,  by  the  time  they  reached  Yalaca,  he  regretted  being  so
stubborn.  At  the  inn  where  they  would  stay  the  night,  he  shared  a  hot  footbath  with  two  other  priests,
ignoring Adeja's good-natured barbs when the man brought him his supper.
That night, Sephil slept soundly. The next morning, after Lathian helped him change his bandage, he did
as he was told and climbed up onto the mare.
Once they were out of Yalaca, Bedren rode up alongside him and Adeja to explain what would happen
once  they  reached  Bhellin.  "We  should  be  safe  in  the  temple  there.  I  know  the  high  priest,  and  he  is
trustworthy.
"Since  we  do  not  know  where  the  king's  sympathies  lie,  you  cannot  risk  announcing  yourselves
outright. Sephil, you will be Velath, a  novice  who  has  gone  to  Bhellin  to  seek  further  training.  If  anyone
asks, you are riding a horse because you  were  injured  climbing  a  tree,  and  you  have  an  accent  because
your mother was from Rhodeen. Adeja, you will be Shamuz, a guard from the sanctuary who traveled with
us for protection. We will keep it this way until we are certain it is safe. I do not think I need to point out
that you should not be seen together."

At noon, they stopped for lunch along a shallow stream. Sephil used his free hand to splash water on
his face, while Adeja led the horses to drink. A few priests took off their shoes to soak  travel  worn  feet,
while others looked for a suitable place to sit and eat.
Once he was refreshed, Sephil climbed back up the embankment to sit beside Adeja, whose hair and
neck were damp from the water he sluiced over his head. "Should I start calling you Shamuz now or should
I wait until we get to Bhellin?" he asked.
Adeja shrugged. "As you like," he said. "I've used my father's name so many times I'm almost as used
to hearing it as my own name." He took the flat bread a passing priest gave him, tore  it  in  half  and  gave
some to Sephil.
Sephil gazed at the bread in his hand before biting into it. "Why did Zhanil send his seal with me? As
Crown Prince, he would have needed it."
"I don't know," Adeja answered through a full mouth.
"Tell me the truth. Now is not the time to spare my feelings."
Adeja swallowed and said, "Zhanil wouldn't have needed it  if  he  thought  the  city  would  fall.  A  man
can't look at a Turyar horde coming at him and not think about dying." He drank from the jug of ale beside
him. "Even outnumbered, they can be deadly. Their tactics keep changing, and they have weapons no one
else has been able to duplicate: bows that can punch arrows through armor, and knives they wear over their
hands and wield like swords. If I never see another Turya again, I'll die happy."
When Adeja handed him the jug, Sephil wiped the rim with the hem of his tunic before drinking. Adeja
chuckled at his mannerisms. "You never told me how many times you faced the Turyar."
"Five times," said Adeja. "I was still in Tajhaan. We were sent north to keep the trade routes open. For
what we put up with, the pay was lousy, and that's when I decided to quit the army once my term was up
and look elsewhere. After Dhahar, I enlisted in Rhodeen and got a post in the capital. Even then,  I  knew
the kingdom's defenses wouldn't hold if the Turyar decided to launch a full-scale invasion. Why your father
neglected places like Mekesh, I don't know. He fought the Turyar thirty years ago, so he should've realized
the mistake he was making."
Sephil shook his head. No one ever discussed military matters with him, which  came  as  no  surprise.
What little he knew would barely fill a scrap of paper. "You never told me what happened at Mekesh."
"I didn't want to upset you."
"Was it really that horrible?" asked Sephil.
"I wouldn't want to repeat the  experience.  We  did  what  little  we  could  to  hold  the  fortress,  but  the
Turyar attacked in the dark, throwing scorpions, snakes and burning  arrows  over  the  walls.  I  don't  know
how many there were," said Adeja, "but once they started coming over the walls I ran for my life. I'm not
ashamed to admit it. I'm no coward, but I'm not a noble fool either."
"You do not mean to imply that Zhanil was a fool, do you?"
Adeja  frowned.  "Sephil,  don't  put  words  in  my  mouth  that  aren't  there.  I  think  his  honor  was  very
important to him, but he must've known how foolish it was to ride out against the Turyar the way he did."
Why Zhanil chose to end as he did, Sephil could not say, and had no answer for Adeja. "I still do not
understand why he would send his seal with me. It could not be because he wanted me to be king." Sephil's
throat closed around that last word, as inevitably it brought the mental image of his father. He wondered if
Ampheres would be like him. "Surely he must have known that I did  not  want  the  throne,  and  would  not
make a good king."
"Wanting has nothing to do with it," said Adeja.  "Princes  have  to  do  things  they  do  not  want  all  the
time. As for not being a good king, with the Turyar entrenched in Rhodeen, all this business between  you
and Dashir about who has the greater claim to the throne doesn't matter. I don't know that either one of you
is ever going to see home again."
* * * *
On the fourth day, the travelers left the hill country for a flat green plain  dotted  with  woodlands  and
farms. In the distance, shadowed against a hazy horizon, loomed Bhellin. Three more days  passed  before
the travelers reached its gates.
Bhellin was an immense city whose ten-foot thick walls  stretched  a  length  of  fifteen  miles.  "On  the
royal estate are farms which can  grow  grain  in  time  of  siege,"  said  Bedren,  "and  there  are  underground
cisterns that store enough water to supply the city for a year."
Every  quarter  of  the  city  radiated  bright  color:  bands  of  azure  and  ochre  striping  whitewashed
tenements, statues painted to look alive, and gleaming tiles set into the city's many gates. As the travelers
passed under the arch of the massive Arvatates Gate, Sephil craned his neck for a closer look at the glazed
blue-green tiles glinting in the sun.

Shemil  had  been  right  in  praising  Bhellin's  cleanliness.  As  they  passed  through  the  city,  the  priest
elaborated  on  the  city's  complex  drainage  systems,  and  explained  the  lucrative  business  in  public
bathhouses.
Bedren took them through a walled park into the temple district. As in Rhodeen, Abh was but a minor
figure  in  the  pantheon,  so  the  temple  presented  a  modest  face  among  the  larger  edifices  and  religious
complexes, and only a few worshippers were on hand when the travelers rode in through the gate.
Having been briefed early that morning, Sephil anticipated what would happen next. Bedren gave their
names to the porter, who arranged for their mounts to be stabled. A steward found them accommodations.
As a layman, Adeja was restricted to the gatehouse, while Sephil was assigned a bed in the dormitory with
the other novices.
Upon leaving his companions, Sephil saw a physician, who informed him that his  wound  was  healing
nicely and that he no longer needed to wear the sling.
"When it begins to itch," said the man, "rub this salve into the scab."
Sephil took the jar of ointment and followed a novice to the dormitory, where he set his small bundle of
belongings on his cot and sat down. His escort pointed to a wooden chest next to the cot where he  could
keep his things, and the communal wash basin at one end of the dormitory.
"The privy's  down  the  corridor,"  said  the  young  man.  "I'm  Orin,  and  there  are  five  others  who  live
here. They're all at their lessons now. You'll meet them later."
Orin looked no older than sixteen. From him, Sephil learned that the other novices ranged in age from
thirteen to seventeen. In Ottabia, everyone knew his name and why he received special treatment, but here
it would be different.
"The steward says I have to take you up to the high priest's office." Orin gave him a suspicious look.
"You seem awfully old to be a novice."
Sephil  gave  him  the  tale  he  had  rehearsed  on  the  journey.  "My  father  would  not  let  me  enter  the
temple. He died several months ago when the Turyar  invaded  Rhodeen  and  took  our  estate.  The  temple
was the only place left that could take me in."
Orin smiled. "You were a nobleman? I knew there was a reason you talked so stiffly."
"Not a very important one," replied Sephil.
"Then why does the high priest want to see you?"
For this question, Bedren had assisted with the answer. "Because I became a novice so late, and I am
so far behind. The high priests want me  to  receive  some  private  tutoring  so  I  do  not  hold  everyone  else
back."
Orin led him across two courtyards and up a flight of stairs to the high priest's office.  "Do  you  think
you can find your way back when you're done? You'll find it's not a very big place."
Sephil nodded and thanked him before rapping on the door. Inside, Bedren and Adeja waited for him in
the company of a short, vigorous man Bedren introduced as Avorim, high priest of Abh in Bhellin.
"Welcome to our humble establishment, Prince Sephil," said Avorim. "Bedren and your Tajhaani friend
here have been telling me about your situation. Rest assured that we will do whatever we can to help you."
"Avorim has connections in this city I do not possess," added Bedren. "As Sephil  knows,  one  cannot
simply approach a king."
Avorim nodded. "There have only  been  two  official  announcements  from  the  palace  on  this  matter:
one  condemning  the  violence  of  the  invasion,  and  the  other  expressing  sympathy  for  the  lives  lost  in
Rhodeen.  Neither  one  gives  any  indication  where  Ampheres  stands  regarding  possible  claimants  to  the
throne. I know that he has been approached by Tajhaan and certain displaced Rhodeen nobles seeking his
support, but thus far there has been no word.
"The first thing we must do is make discreet inquiries through the Rhodeen embassy to discover where
they stand on the matter. Their officials have access  to  the  court,  and  if  sympathetic,  they  can  ease  our
way. Above them are officials who control access to the royal person. We may have to bribe a great many
people in order to gain an audience with the king."
"And how do you intend to do that?" asked Sephil. "You will need money and gifts. I do not think the
temple can spare either."
"You are right," said Bedren, "and you will not like the solution we propose. However, we must  take
advantage of whatever opportunities the god grants us." From his saddlebag he produced a  canvas  pouch
which he opened to reveal a mass of gold coins. "Three hundred menar is a goodly sum in Khalgar."
Sephil did not grasp his meaning until Adeja burst out laughing. "If only your cousin could see this," he
said.
"What do you mean?"

"Dashir's going to pay your way into the king's protection and he doesn't even know it."

Chapter Five
"This is blood money," protested Sephil.
"And if anyone is entitled to it, it's you," said Adeja.
Personally, he thought Sephil was being far  too  particular,  especially  when  the  prince  had  very  little
practical knowledge when it came to money. "These men have to be  bribed  and  the  money  has  to  come
from somewhere."
"I know that," replied Sephil, "but I do not like being reminded where the money came from."
"Actually, I think it's rather quite funny."
Sephil stared at him. "How can you say such a thing? They tried to kill me, and—"
"They tried to kill me, too, remember?"
Bedren gathered up the coins and dropped them back into the pouch,  which  he  placed  into  a  locked
box alongside the royal seal and letters. "It is not sinful to bend evil works to good," he said.
Other than this, Bedren showed too much common sense to be sanctimonious about the matter. Adeja
already regretted not slitting Kalion's throat. The only  worthwhile  traitor  was  a  dead  one,  and  he  did  not
believe the strict penance Bedren imposed would do any good.
Because  he  could  not  enter  the  inner  temple  after  sunset,  Adeja  spent  his  nights  in  the  musty
gatehouse with only a dour sentry for company. During the day he visited with Bedren and the other priests
under  the  guise  of  receiving  orders,  and  went  through  the  motions  of  worship  and  meditation  that  were
expected of a temple guard. Otherwise he had nothing to but wait and  grow  restless,  especially  when  he
learned that he could not visit the local brothels.
"Your movements may be watched," said Bedren.
"Who in this city knows who I am unless somebody told them?"
Bedren  remained  unmoved.  "For  your  friend's  sake,  curb  your  appetite.  Until  it  is  safe,  you  must
behave like a temple guard."
"And you're telling me that temple guards never have sex?"
The only answer he received was a raised eyebrow.
"I made inquiries today," continued Bedren. "The Rhodeen embassy has declared  for  Dashir.  As  for
the exiled nobles, some favor Dashir,  some  are  undecided,  while  most  support  the  claims  of  a  nobleman
named Melin Wesares, who evidently has some royal ancestry."
Adeja glanced toward the door to make doubly certain they were alone. "Sephil has no chance against
either of them. I say we get him out of here and find him a quiet place where he can live his life in peace."
Lifting one finger, Bedren indicated that he was not yet done. "That does not, however, mean the king
acknowledges  these  claims,"  he  said.  "He  is  said  to  have  doubts  about  both.  This  is  a  promising
development."
"Promising for whom?" It seemed the best option at the time, but Adeja increasingly regretted urging
Sephil to come to Bhellin. "You know he doesn't want any part of this."
"As a prince, Sephil knows he has certain duties. Even now, he is not a private citizen," replied Bedren.
"He is an unlikely king, but he is capable of fathering sons who could be raised to the throne."
All Sephil wanted was protection against his cousin, not to be used as a dynastic pawn. "I don't like this
at all," said Adeja. "Dashir is bad enough.  We  don't  need  two  or  three  other  factions  hiring  assassins  as
well."
Bedren nodded. "Which is why we are being exceedingly cautious. Believe me when I say I mean to
keep Sephil from those who would do him harm."
That  evening,  Avorim  examined  the  seal  ring  and  Zhanil's  letter  to  Bedren  before  reiterating  his
assurances that all precautions would be taken. "This business with the embassy is a disappointment, but we
are not yet defeated. I have a few contacts at court who can help us circumvent the Rhodeen ambassadors
and approach the king more directly," he said to Sephil. "Just be aware that I cannot promise anything."
"We have been making subtle inquiries without mentioning your name outright," added Bedren.
Over the next week, Avorim made small bribes to certain viziers at court while telling them he knew of

a Rhodeen nobleman attached to the royal household who had crucial information for the king. "Of course,
they are skeptical," he explained. "So many expatriates desire the king's time and money that he is weary of
the business. If we wish to proceed any further, we will have to disclose the prince's name."
Bedren turned to Sephil. "It is your decision."
"Have I any other choice?"
Adeja found his listlessness irritating. "Yes," he said sharply. "We can flee now."
Sephil looked at him. "You were the one who urged me to come."
"I changed my mind. All this hiding and skulking about doesn't reassure me."
"I would prefer to leave," agreed Sephil, "but I do not think I would be safe anywhere, even with you to
protect me. Whatever happens, it must be now."
Avorim placed a reassuring hand on his arm. "As I said before, we will do whatever we can to keep
you safe."
"Words aren't strong walls or an army of loyal men," said Adeja.
Sephil shook his head. "You are a soldier.  You  put  your  faith  in  walls  and  weapons  and  men,  but  I
cannot rely upon those things. I do not know where or what to trust, only that I cannot flee as you would
like. If you want to leave, I will ask Bedren to give you a portion of the three hundred menar and you can
go as you please."
Adeja grumbled, toyed with the idea of leaving the prince, and did nothing. Sephil represented a knot of
contradictions, willful one moment and insecure the next, yet something about him compelled Adeja to stay.
"This is madness," he grumbled, and said no more.
Within a few days, Avorim returned to court, sought out an influential vizier upon whose discretion he
could rely, and communicated his need to secure  safe  passage  for  a  member  of  Rhodeen's  royal  family.
Although the vizier could not accuse a high priest of lying, when Avorim gave the prince's name as Sephil
Brasides, younger son of the dead king, the man refused to accept it as truth.
Avorim  returned  to  the  temple  with  a  full  account,  which  he  readily  shared  with  Sephil,  Adeja  and
Bedren. "'Surely you have  been  misled,'  Cileil  told  me,"  he  said,  "'for  if  this  young  man  is  truly  a  crown
prince then why does he not come openly with a full entourage and gifts for our king?' What he meant, of
course, is why did I not offer him more money?"
"Did you explain that I am in hiding for fear of my enemies?" asked Sephil.
"I told him as much as was necessary for him to know: that you had come to Bhellin to seek the king's
protection, and that you bore tokens and letters meant only for him. Of course, right away Cileil wished to
see them—to verify their authenticity, as he put it."
Adeja snorted. In his experience, viziers and other courtiers occupied the same treacherous  niche  as
eunuchs. None of them could be trusted. "For all we know, he'll burn the letters and conveniently lose the
seal."
Avorim nodded agreement. "I told him he could not see what was not meant for his eyes, but to soften
the blow I offered him more coin and a bottle of fine Besarian wine from the cellar."
Bedren widened his eyes in mock horror. "Surely you do not mean to let him have one of the temple
offerings?"
Avorim appeared no more concerned over this ritual lapse than his subordinate. "It is all in the service
of the god, my friend. Cileil at court has quite the  taste  for  Besarian  white.  I  have  already  sent  him  one
bottle, with the promise of another to follow if he drops a word in the king's ear and something comes of it."
He sighed and spread his hands on the table. "Short of publicly appealing to Ampheres and possibly risking
the prince's safety in the process, it is the best I can do."
What influence the vizier Cileil wielded at court, or whether he ever approached the king, no one could
say. No word came from the palace, and Avorim kept his second bottle of wine.
As Velath, Sephil lived in the dormitory with Orin and seven other novices, among whom he  studied,
prayed and worked undetected. While he  appeared  to  enjoy  the  experience,  Adeja  preferred  that  he  not
mingle so much with the novices, who  might  learn  more  than  they  should  and  sell  the  information  to  the
Rhodeen embassy or some duplicitous noble.
Even  when  Bedren  explained  that  separating  Sephil  from  the  others  would  arouse  suspicion,  Adeja
remained unconvinced. As he saw it, the situation called for armed guards and strong defenses. Bhellin was
no more secure from potential assassins than Ottabia, and in many ways it was even less so.
Another week passed. During the day, Adeja stationed himself in the second floor window overlooking
the main gate to watch the flow of traffic in and out of the temple compound. Since he took his meals in the
kitchen,  he  recognized  the  servants  making  their  daily  rounds  to  the  market.  Worshippers  entered  with
offerings  of  wine,  cloth  or  sacrificial  animals.  Among  them  came  supplicants  visibly  afflicted  in  mind  or

spirit who came to ask the god for healing.
Because  the  novices  took  instruction  in  accepting  offerings  and  ministering  to  worshippers,  Sephil
could  not  avoid  interaction  with  the  outside  world.  Adeja  cautioned  him  to  say  as  little  as  possible,  and
forbade him  to  accompany  the  other  novices  on  their  occasional  excursions  to  the  bazaar.  Anyone  who
inquired was to be told that he could not leave the temple until he mastered all his lessons and earned the
privilege.
Sephil made a face when he heard this. "Back in Rhodeen, I  would  not  even  have  to  lie.  My  tutors
never let me do anything amusing  until  I  finished  my  work,  and  then  it  was  always  too  late.  I  enjoy  my
lessons, and tending to the people who come here, but still, I would have liked to see some of the city."
"You would not have liked the bazaar anyway," said Adeja. "Such places are often quite loud and dirty,
and attract cutpurses and other low people."
As Adeja continued to watch the traffic from above, one man carrying a leather satchel slung across
his chest caught Adeja's attention. The deep red of his livery and the serpent badge  on  his  arm  identified
him as a courier belonging to the palace.
Adeja crept downstairs to follow the man. The courier did not stay long, delivering a letter for the high
priest  and  leaving  without  waiting  for  a  response.  Whatever  the  message  entailed,  it  apparently  did  not
involve sending for Sephil, and Adeja returned to the gatehouse to resume his vigil.
There were many reasons a royal courier might deliver a message to the high priest  of  Abh,  he  told
himself, reasons which had nothing to do with a fugitive prince of Rhodeen.
That evening, Avorim shared the letter with him and Sephil. Word had come from the palace, but while
the message confirmed Adeja's suspicions, it also provoked confusion.
"Ampheres is aware of your plight," Avorim told Sephil, "but he has not announced his intention to send
for you, nor does he acknowledge your place in the succession. He says only that you are not to leave the
temple until further notice."
Sephil  looked  at  the  letter,  then  at  Adeja.  Anxiety  drew  worry  lines  across  his  brow.  "I  do  not
understand what he means to do."
"No, it is not clear," answered Bedren, "but we should not assume the worst based on this vague reply.
This is a delicate matter, and the king must proceed carefully. Granting you a royal audience, even in secret,
implies his support. Ampheres will want to be certain before he takes this step."
"Then why restrict my movements?" asked Sephil.
Silence pervaded the room as  the  priests  considered  this  question.  Adeja  tackled  the  matter  from  a
different  perspective,  knowing  that  the  best  way  to  protect  something  was  to  confine  it.  He  shared  his
thoughts with the others. "This isn't necessarily the right answer, just the one that makes the most sense."
Since he did not know the Khalgari king, only that the man was Sephil's kin through marriage, he could only
guess what Ampheres intended.
His assurances did little to ease  Sephil's apprehensions. "Then why does  the  king  not  say  that  in  his
letter? Perhaps he wants me confined here simply so he can get rid of me without anyone knowing."
"Sephil," said Avorim, "letters can be intercepted. Ampheres would not commit anything to writing that
he fears his enemies might read. And he may not wish to be specific about protecting you, since that would
imply support for your claim."
"If he wanted you dead, he wouldn't do it here," added Adeja. "A temple is no place to shed blood."
Sephil glared at him. "Dashir had no problem sending assassins into a sanctuary."
"Your cousin is an unscrupulous bastard."
Bedren  cleared  his  throat.  "Strong  terms,  but  I  agree  with  Adeja.  Ampheres  respects  the  holy
precincts, and he is your kinsman, Sephil. The importance he places on family bonds is widely known."
"I will make some discreet inquiries and see what I can learn," said Avorim, "though I must caution you
that if he is acting in secret there will be little information to be had."
As Adeja expected, the high priest's sources  had  nothing  to  offer.  Whatever  the  motives  behind  his
peculiar instructions, the king kept his own counsel. Avorim  took  pains  to  reassure  Sephil  that  Ampheres
might simply be acting from a need to keep his Rhodeen petitioners from learning of the prince's existence.
Sephil turned to Adeja. "What do you think?"
"I don't  like  the  secrecy  or  waiting,"  answered  Adeja,  "but  I  also  think  if  he  wanted  you  dead  he
would've seen to it already."
That  evening,  Bedren  accompanied  Adeja  from  the  outer  temple  back  to  the  gatehouse.  Along  the
way, the high priest  drew  him  into  a  shadowed  corner  and  dropped  his  voice.  "I  did  not  wish  to  further
distress Sephil, but I have reason to believe we are all being watched."
Adeja was not surprised. "How do you know this?"

"I suspected something  two  days  ago,"  replied  Bedren.  "I  did  not  tell  you  sooner  because  I  am  not
certain that this is such an evil thing. I believe the king wishes to learn more about Sephil before  deciding
what to do about him."
"Or someone else might be trying to identify him among the novices before killing him," said Adeja.
Bedren shook his head. "The servants  and  priests  have  already  had  weeks  in  which  to  observe  the
novices. Sephil is the only one who is the correct age, and the only one with Rhodeen blood.  As  for  rival
claimants, from what Avorim tells me about them  I  do  not  believe  they  would  trouble  themselves  with  a
young man quietly living as a novice under an assumed name."
"Dashir didn't see it that way."
"Sephil threatens his position as legitimate heir, and you must also consider that he is living under  the
protection of a Tajhaani prince who has no trouble murdering rivals, no matter how unassuming they seem,"
explained Bedren. "As for the other claimants, Avorim has been giving them a close ear. He tells me their
debates over their claims to the throne do not include any mention of Sephil. I think they either believe he
died in Shemin-at-Khul, or they have simply forgotten his existence."
Adeja was not ready to trust in that. "Do you want me to watch the servants?"
"Your movements would stir suspicion, and we cannot risk that," replied Bedren. "I will observe them
myself, and restrict their comings and goings if I feel their dealings are with anyone other than the king, but
I do not think it will come to that. However, as we are being watched, I must caution you not to do anything
that would compromise Sephil."
"You know we haven't been together since before we left Ottabia."
"Then continue as you have been doing, and be certain that you do not make reference to any relations
you have had. We do not know what information the king has, or what he may suspect, but we do not wish
to give him any cause for concern."
Adeja retired to the gatehouse, uncertain whether or not to be insulted. Bedren ought to know by now
that he was shrewd enough to realize his lover's precarious position, and that he had the decency to respect
it. Still, being so close without being  able  to  touch  or  speak  openly  to  Sephil  enflamed  his  desire,  and  he
spent many a night stroking his cock in the darkness. A tryst was out of the question, or Adeja would have
already had his lover in some dark, isolated storeroom.
Perhaps Bedren realized the difficulty. A week later he called Adeja aside and gave him two menar
and directions to the temple of Shalath. "Now understand that I am  not  sending  you  to  slake  your  lust  at
some mere brothel," he said. "This is a place of worship, and when you submit to the priestesses they will
make certain demands of you."
This was all Bedren would say, and Adeja was not about to waste the opportunity by asking too many
questions. He already knew from  comments  made  by  the  other  guard  that  unmarried  priests  and  temple
guards were not permitted to consort with common prostitutes. Any sex they had must  come  through  the
sacred prostitutes of Shalath, the Khalgari goddess of love and fertility.
Given that temple guards were also not allowed to gamble, curse or drink strong liquor, Adeja could not
see why any man would elect to take such a job. As for the priests, he knew they bent  the  rules  to  their
own whim by copulating with each other in secret.
When he presented his coin and explained to the temple officials that he was a newcomer to Bhellin,
Adeja received such thorough instruction on the rules and procedures of the  temple  that  he  briefly  forgot
where he was. The priests assumed he desired a woman, for they did not offer a choice and not until later
did Adeja think to ask if boys were also available.
First he was taken to a series of subterranean tiled chambers and  told  to  strip  down  to  his  loincloth,
after  which  he  followed  a  priest  into  a  sweating  room  where  he  was  ordered  to  sit  on  one  of  the  tiled
benches that lined the wall.
"You will purify and prepare yourself," said the priest. "Should you feel faint, this will help you."
Adeja  looked  at  the  bundle  the  man  gave  him,  brought  it  to  his  nose  and  recognized  it  as  sage.  A
servant  came  in  to  add  glowing  stones  to  the  brazier,  beside  which  stood  a  basin  and  ladle.  The  priest
dipped the ladle into the basin and poured water over the stones. The brazier sizzled, releasing  a  cloud  of
steam into the already-humid air.
"I will leave you," said the priest. Bowing, he closed the door, leaving Adeja to wonder how long  the
purification was to last. Sweat beaded on his forehead; he swiped it away with moist fingers. So much fuss
for  a simple fuck, he thought sourly. I should  have  just  taken  the money, found  an  ordinary  brothel
and bought some good wine and two girls for the afternoon.
Even with the sage bundle, he soon grew lightheaded. Memory failed him, and when the priest came to
offer him a  fresh  towel  and  led  him  from  the  room,  he  forgot  who  the  man  was  and  why  he  had  been

sweating in the first place. He wobbled  out  on  the  priest's  arm,  into  a  second  chamber  where  a  servant
waited to guide him into a plunge pool. The cold revived him, and when he waded out the servant toweled
him dry and anointed him with oil.
From there, the priest escorted him into another series of chambers where he lit an incense stick as an
offering  to  Shalath  and  received  yet  more  instruction  from  a  middle-aged  priestess  whom  he  seriously
hoped was not going to be his partner.
"In the next room awaits the avatar of the goddess," she said, in so somber and sanctimonious a tone
that  Adeja  had  to  restrain  his  laughter.  "To  achieve  ecstasy  and  spiritual  renewal,  you  must  focus  your
efforts upon the avatar and bring her to bliss before you may claim your reward."
If this is how priests have to go about getting a woman in Bhellin, it's no  wonder  they fuck  each
other, he thought. Adeja cursed his ill fortune as he reviewed the instructions he had been given. He was
not accustomed to using sex as a tool to achieve greater spirituality, he did not like to wait for his pleasure,
and he did not like to go about it with so much ceremony and fuss.
The chamber into which the priestess ushered him was windowless, illuminated by glass lanterns that
enfolded the space in a warm amber glow. From a nest of silken  cushions  rose  a  woman  who  undid  her
sheer linen robe, let it spill to her ankles and took his hand, urging him without words to lie down beside her.
She was young and comely, and the sweet scent of her skin was enough to make him hard.
Had she been any ordinary prostitute, he would have pushed her to her knees and fed her his cock. I
would have given her pleasure afterward. It was rare that he left a brothel without entering his partner,
and the girls he always tried to please.
With an eager tongue, he kissed her and let his hands roam her supple curves. His fingers rolled and
pinched her nipples until she gasped; he bent his head to suck on them, while letting his hands  slide  down
over her belly to the moist slit between her thighs.
Not once did she speak, but with her fingers  she  showed  him  the  hidden  pearl  that  made  her  moan
when he rubbed it, and how to  use  his  tongue  to  give  her  pleasure.  These  arts  he  already  knew,  having
learned in the embrace of a Tajhaani widow who, but for her reluctance to marry a young soldier, he would
have made his wife.
Adeja did what pleased his partner while trying to curb his impatience. Her climax was not, the priests
warned  him,  license  to  mount  her  and  rut  as  he  pleased.  Any  release  he  had  must  come  through  her
agency, when and where she deemed it appropriate.
She spent considerable time teasing him, licking a trail from his nipples to the head of his cock, which
she suckled without taking the entire length into her mouth. The stimulation maddened him, especially when
it became evident that she knew a trick to keep him from coming. No one, not even Sephil, had ever been
able to do that to him. Until now, he had not even thought it possible.
Without words, he could not comprehend why she made him wait when he had already pleasured her.
An answer presented itself when, still licking his cock, she turned so she was straddling his chest. From his
position he could touch and taste her, and as he let his tongue slide into her wet slit he realized he would not
be able to enter her until she was ready for him.
From the noises she made and the way she moved upon him, he sensed she was close, but just short of
her orgasm she drew away from him. Turning to face him, she guided his cock into her until he was fully
sheathed. Slowly she began to ride him, meeting his thrusts, and when he placed both hands on her hips to
steady her, she pressed his fingers to her slick folds.
Between his fingers he rubbed and flicked her pearl, drawing out the stimulation even when she began
to squirm and shudder. Sensing his moment had come, Adeja rolled her over onto her back and thrust hard
into her, neither knowing nor caring if this was permitted. As far as he was concerned, he had waited long
enough.
When he climaxed, it was not the orgasm he experienced with a good healthy fuck, but an awkward
mix of pleasure and pain that seemed torn from him. He rolled away  from  his  partner  and  lay  exhausted
among the cushions, trying to regain his wind until a servant entered  with  his  clothes  and  told  him  it  was
time to leave. As he sat up, he saw that the young priestess was already gone.
Exhausted, he emerged from the temple into the mid-afternoon sun. He returned to the gatehouse and
lay dozing on his cot until the bell rang for supper and  evening  prayers.  Afterward,  he  met  Sephil  on  the
stairs  leading  up  to  Avorim's  office.  To  allay  suspicion,  he  carried  a  temple  guard's  pike  and  adopted  a
sentry's pose, but anyone who ventured within earshot would have seen through the ruse.
Sephil gave him a playful wink. "Did you enjoy yourself today?"
"Too much fuss for a good fuck," mumbled Adeja. "Next time  I'll  leave  the  uniform  behind  and  find
myself a simple brothel."

Upstairs, Avorim awaited them with two packets, the seals of which had already been broken.  "You
have messages," he told Sephil.
"One is from Ottabia," added Bedren. "Kalion writes to you."
"I thought he was still confined," said Adeja.
"Yes,  but  he  is  permitted  books  and  writing  materials."  Bedren  slid  one  packet  across  the  table  to
Sephil. "He wishes to make amends for his ill deeds."
As Sephil read the letter, his expression darkened and became strained. When he was done, he passed
the letter to Adeja, who scanned the first few lines. I do  not know  what evil made me do  what I did. At
first  I  saw  no  harm  in  giving  information,  for  I  did  not  know  who  would  receive  or  evil  they
intended, but later when they offered money I confess I grew weak—
Adeja snorted and held the letter to the candle. "He should've saved himself the trouble and just said
he did it for the money."
Sephil snatched the smoldering parchment from him  and  put  it  out.  A  thin,  pungent  smoke  filled  the
room. "I did not say you could burn it."
"Why would you want to keep it?" asked Adeja. "He doesn't mean a word of it."
"How do you know?"
"When you've lived with nine siblings, you  just  know.  My  brothers  used  to  push  and  shove  me,  and
when my father told them to apologize, we all knew it was just words. It was the same with  my  younger
sisters. I used to slip lizards into their skirts and set fire to their dolls. I had to say sorry, but they were so
annoying I never meant it," explained Adeja. "I suppose Zhanil never did such things to you."
Sephil shook his head. "No, never," he murmured.
"Kalion sounds like a priest dictated the letter to him. If he regrets what he's done, it's only because he
was caught."
"I did not order him to write to you, Sephil," said Bedren. "As I said before, I will look into the matter
on my return."
Avorim held up the other packet, turning it so the royal seal was visible. "I had word this afternoon that
there is to be an audience. The four of us are to present ourselves at the palace tomorrow before noon."
"All of us?" asked Adeja.
Sephil reached for the letter and read it. "There are only three lines of text here, with our names and
directions. Was there nothing else?"
"I am afraid not," replied Avorim. "Whatever the king intends, we will not know until tomorrow."
Adeja  gazed  over  Sephil's  shoulder  at  the  letter,  which  consisted  mostly  of  the  king's  titles  and  the
formal salutations of the court. "I don't any of us is going to get much sleep tonight," he said.

Chapter Six
After breakfast and morning prayers, Sephil followed Avorim  upstairs  to  the  high  priest's  office  and
took the seat that was  offered  him.  Adeja,  freshly  washed  and  dressed  in  a  clean  uniform,  awaited  him
there.
Bedren, the fourth member of their party, was strangely absent. "He has gone to the bazaar to fetch
something," said Avorim, "but he will return in time to accompany us."
"Whatever  it  is,  could  it  not  have  waited?"  asked  Sephil.  Since  he  was  not  permitted  to  attend  his
lessons  with  the  other  novices,  he  had  nothing  to  do  in  the  close  silence  of  the  office  but  wonder  what
ordeal the audience would be.
"Bedren assures me his errand is essential to your success," replied Avorim, "and he has promised not
to dawdle. Once he returns, we can leave."
Sephil felt Adeja's hand warm and heavy on his shoulder; he tried to draw comfort from  the  gesture
but  could  not.  Half  the  night  he  lay  awake  trying  not  to  imagine  the  worst.  The  only  other  king  he  had
known had been his father, and the few times Brasidios received him were memories better left unvisited.
Their last meeting, which recalled Sephil  from  his  long  exile  for  political  purposes,  bore  the  cruelest
sting of all.
"I have done my best to forget your existence," his father had said, "but  political  considerations  have
made recalling you to court an unfortunate necessity." Brasidios gave his appearance a long,  disapproving
glance. The dark robe Sephil wore lacked the severe cut appropriate for court, and with his long hair  and
lack of beard, he did not present an image worthy of the royal house.
"You have been keeping low company, I hear," Brasidios continued,  "and  I  can  see  your  effeminate
ways have not improved. What the Tajhaani ambassadors will say when you are inflicted upon them, I do
not relish hearing."
Intimidated  by  his  father's  presence,  Sephil  did  not  bother  to  point  out  that  he  had  dismissed  the
dissolute young noblemen who frequented his household and tried to mend his ways. At this point, however,
nothing he said would have made any difference.
The thought that another king might treat him thus was unbearable. As he dressed that morning, Sephil
appraised himself in the little looking glass that hung over the dormitory wash basin, and did not entirely like
what he saw. Although he had cut his hair to shoulder length and wore a novice's plain robe, he imagined
his father standing at his shoulder to criticize his girlish appearance.
When he heard footfalls coming up the steps outside, it took all his nerve to remain in his chair and not
rush to the door like a child.
Bedren entered, carrying a small parcel which he handed to Sephil. "This is for you."
Sephil  fumbled  at  the  ties  with  nervous  fingers  and  drew  back  in  confusion  at  the  objects  he
uncovered. "You bought jewelry?"
"You  will  want  to  wear  these."  Bedren  picked  up  one  of  the  silver  cuff  bracelets  and  fastened  it
around Sephil's wrist.
Adeja picked up the second bracelet and looked  at  it  before  handing  it  to  Bedren.  "This  is  Tajhaani
work. My mother had a bracelet like this."
Sephil needed no explanation for why Bedren thought the  bracelets  necessary.  They  would  hide  the
scars on his wrists.
From the temple, they headed out into the city, skirting the bazaar at whose colorful stalls Sephil gazed
longingly before turning onto the main thoroughfare that would take them to the palace.
Half  a  mile  ahead,  the  street  terminated  in  a  gate  whose  deep  red  and  blue  tiles  dazzled  the  eye.
Officials,  priests  and  petitioners  passed  through  under  the  watchful  eye  of  guards  who  stopped  all
newcomers. Avorim produced the royal summons for inspection. A guard inspected the document and seal,
then waved the four visitors along.
The  scene  was  repeated  at  a  second,  inner  gate  and  twice  more  inside  the  palace  before  the  four
found  themselves  in  an  antechamber  off  the  main  hall.  Sephil  recognized  the  room  as  the  sort  of  place

where visitors  might  wait  for  an  audience.  On  more  than  one  occasion,  his  father  had  kept  him  waiting
among  the  petitioners  and  lesser  officials  either  out  of  spite  or  simply  because  he  had  forgotten  he  had
summoned his son in the first place.
Sephil could not help but wonder if the scene would be  repeated  here.  No  sooner  had  he  claimed  a
bench near the wall, however, than inner doors opened and a vizier emerged to escort them inside.
Beyond acknowledging them as the king's guests, the man did not speak. Following his lead, the four
moved through two more antechambers and a short hall before coming to a room floored in green marble
and thick carpets. Tall windows looked out onto lush gardens, but the desk and book-lined cabinets indicated
that this was an office.
The vizier paused before the heavy desk, bowed to the man who sat there and announced the visitors.
Sephil chanced a look at the man before lowering his eyes once more. This was a king, he knew.
Dressed  in  a  robe  of  deep  red  wool,  with  jeweled  rings  upon  his  fingers,  the  king's  dark  hair  bore
threads of gray. Although  he  lacked  the  height  and  breadth  that  made  Brasidios  so  imposing,  Ampheres
conveyed a stately air nonetheless.
With  a  gesture,  Ampheres  indicated  the  vizier  should  remain.  Once  again,  the  man  bowed  and
withdrew to a corner of the room.
"I have received a petition from the high priest of Abh stating that a son of the late king of Rhodeen
seeks my protection." Ampheres possessed a regal, quietly authoritative voice. Here was a man who, unlike
Brasidios, had no need to shout.
"That is correct, my lord," answered Avorim. "I have with me letters and tokens sent with the prince
by his brother, the late Crown Prince Zhanil Brasides."
"And I assume you have also brought Prince Sephil?" The slight lilt with which Ampheres voiced  his
question implied he already knew the answer. Sephil felt the king's eyes on him and cringed. 
"Yes, he is here also."
"Then let us see the letters and the tokens you claim to possess."
The vizier stepped forward to take the seal ring and packet from Avorim. Sephil lifted his eyes to see
Ampheres break the wax seal with a stylus, stand and walk over to the window where the light was better.
Whatever  Zhanil  had  written,  it  covered  more  than  one  page,  and  Ampheres  spent  considerable  time
reading and reviewing the words. With the seal ring he did  the  same,  holding  the  jewel  up  to  the  light  to
study the engravings.
At last, he returned to his desk, sat down and looked directly at Sephil. "Delav,  bring  a  chair  for  the
prince so he may sit. The rest of you will wait outside."
Sephil chanced a backward glance at Adeja and the two priests as the vizier ushered them to the door.
As they exited, a servant in red livery entered and pulled forward a chair upholstered in green brocade.
"Sit down," said Ampheres, "and kindly remove those unsightly bracelets."
With shaking hands, Sephil fumbled with the  pins  until  the  servant  stepped  forward  to  help  him.  He
turned his wrists downward and concealed his hands in his lap while the king examined the bracelets.
"Cheap Tajhaani work," commented Ampheres. "Now let us see why it should be necessary for you, a
prince and novice priest, to wear such ill-fitting ornaments."
Sephil dared not refuse. He sucked in a deep breath, turned his wrists over so the king could see his
scars, and waited for a curt remark such as his father would have made.
Ampheres nodded, as though this was precisely what he expected to see. "Your  brother  indicated  in
his letter that you bore such marks, and why," he said gently.  "You  may  conceal  them  now,  if  you  wish.
Were you aware that I knew your father?"
"No, sir."
"Brasidios and I fought together at the Irrend Pass some thirty years ago, when I had just become king
and  he  was  still  the  Crown  Prince  of  Rhodeen.  We  expelled  the  Turyar  from  the  western  fringes  of
Khalgar, and to cement our friendship he  married  my  kinswoman."  Leaning  back  in  his  chair,  Ampheres
appraised Sephil for a long moment. "I see much of your mother in you, though not so much of your father."
"Yes, sir."
"For  a  prince  in  your  predicament,  you  have  remarkably  little  to  say,"  observed  Ampheres.  "Do  I
intimidate you, or is it that you do not know what I intend to do with you?"
Sephil swallowed hard. "Both, sir."
"Brasidios occasionally mentioned you in his letters."
Now at last it would come: the cutting remarks, the criticism and rejection. Sephil swallowed hard. "He
did not think highly of me, sir."
"No, indeed he did not. However, he had very exacting standards which I think few would have met,"

said Ampheres. "In time, I will judge for myself whether his opinion of you was accurate."
Sephil did not bother to point out that, strict standards or no, Zhanil pleased their father in every way.
"Yes, sir."
"For now," said Ampheres, "you will remain here until I decide what to do with you. Your  father  did
not see you often, but we will have many visits, and I expect you will improve your conversation."
Sephil viewed the promise of future interviews with apprehension. Ampheres would not waste his time
without sufficient motive, and Sephil preferred not to contemplate what that might be.
"I suppose you would like to know what your brother wrote?" asked Ampheres.
Rather than offer him the letter, the king unfolded it and began to read sections of it aloud. "'Sephil is
young  and  impressionable,  having  had  incompetent  guardians.  He  has  not  been  groomed  for
kingship and would, if raised to the throne, wear the crown with much difficulty.  However,  he has  a
good heart and should be allowed to live a quiet life, if you will but grant him your protection.'"
Hearing these words brought a knot to Sephil's throat, so when Ampheres asked if this last thing was
what he wanted, all he could do was nod.
"I have been watching you in the sanctuary  and  can  see  you  have  as  good  a  heart  as  your  brother
says," said Ampheres. "Had it been otherwise, I would not have received  you.  For  your  blood  ties  to  my
house and the love I bore your late father, I will extend my protection to you, but you must understand that
this comes with a price.
"Until now, I have managed to keep this matter quiet, but your presence here will eventually become
known. By harboring you, I announce to the world that I am taking your part. That I have no intention  of
raising you to the throne makes no difference."
"I have  no  wish  to  be  king,"  said  Sephil.  "I  will  say  it  before  a  thousand  witnesses.  I  will  sign  a
document stating it to be so."
Ampheres slowly shook his head. "Words are hollow things in politics," he said. "Had your father taken
greater care with your education, you would understand that  actions  are  what  matter.  As  I  have  not  yet
acknowledged  your  cousin  as  the  legitimate  Crown  Prince,  my  relations  with  Tajhaan  are  somewhat
strained. Should your presence here become known, High Prince Armajid will regard my actions as hostile."
"Then do not tell anyone who I am," replied Sephil. "Send me to some remote, quiet sanctuary and let
me live under some assumed name."
"If such a thing were possible,  I  would  do  it,  if  only  to  keep  Khalgar  out  of  this  diplomatic  muddle.
However, your cousin and his protector already know you are alive, and it would not take much searching
on their part to learn you had come to Bhellin. No matter where I house you, they will continue to search
for you; that is how great a threat you are to them. And it is not only Dashir's claim that  is  at  stake,  you
realize. His wife is with child."
It  took  Sephil  a  moment  to  realize  Ampheres  meant  Terreh,  whom  Dashir  had  spirited  out  of
Shemin-at-Khul and  married.  Despite  the  wordless  disdain  she  showed  him,  Terreh  had  briefly  been  his
betrothed. It now felt odd to hear she bore another man's child. "No, I did not know this."
"The child is due later this year. Should it turn out to be a son, you may be certain that his grandfather
the High Prince will oppose any perceived threat, which includes you," said Ampheres. "It is better that you
remain  here,  openly  under  my  protection.  As  my  guest,  you  may  continue  your  spiritual  studies  under  a
tutor."
"I cannot return to the temple?"
"No, you will bid farewell to the priests and your bodyguard."
"I trust my guard."  Sephil  tried  to  suppress  the  emotion  from  his  voice.  "He  saved  my  life  twice  in
Ottabia."
"And for that we are grateful, but you will agree that it is prudent he not remain." The look Ampheres
gave him implied things Sephil knew he could not possibly know. There has  been  nothing  been  us since
before  we came here,  not a touch,  not a  word.  How  could  he  know?  "I  will  assign  you  a  bodyguard
from my own household, a man in whose loyalty and discretion I place the highest trust. Delav, come here."
Ampheres  gave  orders  to  the  vizier,  who  left  the  office  to  bring  the  man  the  king  requested.
Meanwhile, the servant brought wine  and  refreshments  for  which  Sephil  had  no  appetite.  All  he  wanted
was to return to the temple with Adeja and the priests, resume his quiet life of meditation and ministry, and
forget this visit to the palace had ever taken place.
At length, Delav returned with a tall, broad-shouldered man dressed in red leather armor over his tunic
and  leggings.  His  only  weapons  were  a  dagger  and  short  sword  hanging  from  his  belt.  He  saluted
Ampheres, paying no attention to Sephil until the king indicated the prince was to be his new charge.
Ampheres  turned  to  Sephil.  "This  is  Melwas.  He  will  stay  by  your  side  until  death  claims  him  or  I

release him."
Sephil looked up at Melwas, and did not like what he saw. The man's face was hard and blank, with
none  of  Adeja's  lively  intelligence.  Having  him  about  would  serve  more  as  a  reminder  of  his  vulnerable
position than as a comfort.
Once Ampheres gave him  leave,  and  with  Melwas  shadowing  him,  Sephil  went  into  the  hall  where
Adeja and the priests waited to say goodbye.
"I cannot  return  to  the  temple,  but  the  king  will  allow  me  to  continue  my  studies,"  he  told  Bedren.
Melwas stood at his back like a bulwark, prompting him to keep his voice low.
Bedren glanced nervously at the bodyguard. "That is good, Sephil."
Dropping his voice still further, Sephil asked, "I am very sorry I have to leave you like this. Is there any
money left?"
"Yes, there is some."
"Will you give some of it to Adeja? I have no money of my own with which to pay him for his services
and I—"
Bedren stopped his anxious flood of words with a reassuring hand. "Do not worry, Sephil. Avorim and
I will see to it before I return to Ottabia."
Avorim offered a few words and a smile, nothing that prepared Sephil for the agony of facing Adeja.
At that moment, he wanted nothing more than to fling himself into Adeja's arms and hold on, to pull his lover
close and kiss him until they were both breathless, but mindful of the king's words and fearing Melwas  at
his back, he dared no more than a few colorless words and the promise of payment.
I am saying all the wrong  things! He could see it by the way Adeja tensed and his eyes narrowed.
This is not my idea. I do not want you to go at all!
"Then I suppose this is goodbye," Adeja said stiffly. "I wish you well, my prince."
Before Sephil could say more, Adeja turned and walked away, joining the priests and vizier who came
to escort them back to the main hall.
Sephil's heart rose to his throat as he watched Adeja disappear around the corner.  Footfalls  receded
against the marble floor. A distant door opened and  closed,  and  with  the  sound  came  the  realization  that
Adeja was gone from his life.
When  Melwas  addressed  him,  he  did  not  acknowledge  the  man's  rumbling  voice,  or  the  hand  that
gently prodded his elbow even when the man began to steer him toward another exit where Delav waited.
Sephil moved numbly between them, hearing the vizier speak yet not listening.
Finally, they stopped in a corridor decorated with murals featuring lush water lilies and lotuses. Delav
moved in front of Sephil, peered into his face and shook his head. "You have not been listening to a single
word, my prince," he said. "I realize this is all very sudden for you, coming from a quiet sanctuary into the
royal palace, but there is a strict etiquette you will need to master. The sooner you begin, the better it will
be."
At the end of the corridor, Delav opened a door and ushered Sephil through. "Today we can leave off
with formal instruction, but tomorrow we must begin in earnest. These will be your lodgings. Hauto will see
to it that you have all you require."
Sephil  followed  him  into  a  suite  of  apartments  furnished  in  silks  and  dark,  polished  wood.  Hauto,  a
heavyset man whom Delav introduced as his steward, bowed and uttered the usual assurances of comfort
and exceptional service. Both he and the two servants who stood at the end of  the  foyer  wore  the  same
bland expression as Melwas, which did not inspire confidence.
All Sephil wanted now was the unadorned quiet of the sanctuary, and Adeja.
Dinner came in on silver and porcelain dishes, with two wines and a generous selection of sweets. In
another  room,  the  servants  prepared  a  hot  bath  and  fragrant  oils  for  massage.  Sephil  hesitated  at  these
luxuries, though he had known them most of his life. That such things were reserved for him alone seemed
wasteful.
What he did not eat, he offered to the servants, who declined his gesture. He bathed and donned the
clothes the servants laid out for him, while making sure they did not discard his temple robes.
That night, he lay down on a feather mattress in a bed hung  with  pale  brocade,  but  sleep  would  not
come. Such splendor felt cold, renewing his old fears of the dark.
For  nine  months  he  had  freedom  from  his  princely  station  and  the  constricting  etiquette  that
accompanied it. For the first time in  his  life  he  had  been  content,  finding  purpose  among  the  brothers  of
Abh, working with the destitute and hopeless, who taught him that he was not useless after all.
More than anything, it was a life to which he yearned  to  return,  and  his  greatest  fear  was  that,  like
Adeja, it was gone forever.

Chapter Seven
Sephil set aside his book to gaze down at his wrists. The inexpensive Tajhaani-work bracelets Bedren
gave  him  at  the  bazaar  were  replaced  by  gleaming  silver  chased  with  little  moons,  a  play  on  his  name.
Ampheres presented them to him two days after his arrival, and to please his  host  Sephil  had  worn  them
ever since.
The bracelets framed his wrists like manacles. In dark moments, Sephil thought of them as such.
Outwardly, he had no cause for complaint. His apartments were luxurious, and he had greater freedom
than  prior  experience  taught  him  to  expect.  Though  his  movements  were  restricted  to  the  inner  palace,
where  he  would  not  risk  being  seen  by  the  public,  he  could  walk  in  the  gardens,  visit  the  king's  private
chapel and talk to anyone he wished. Melwas, however, discouraged socializing, so Sephil passed his days
with little company.
Each morning, Delav came to instruct him  in  palace  etiquette.  A  tailor  brought  fabric  swatches  and
measured him for new clothes. When Sephil demurred, stating he preferred his temple robes, Delav pointed
out that on certain occasions he would have to dress more appropriately. "Lean toward somber shades of
gray,  dark  blue  and  brown,  with  a  severe  yet  elegant  cut,"  he  said,  nodding  at  the  tailor.  "You  have  a
youthful face, my lord. Our efforts will enhance your maturity."
"Are these clothes meant for court?" asked Sephil.
Delav fingered a swatch of drab green velvet. "The king has not summoned you, but when you go out
you should project the image of a prince."
"I am a novice priest."
"Yes, but you are not living in the temple and, as I understand it, you have not taken any binding vows,"
replied Delav. "One of the king's sons is a priest, but when he leaves the temple to visit his family, he does
not wear his robes."
Several outfits were  ordered,  along  with  linen  underthings,  shoes  and  cloaks.  As  the  tailor  matched
swatches with sketches, Delav picked at the sleeve of Sephil's robe, fingered a swatch of fine ecru wool,
and ordered a new robe as well.
Afternoons brought a priest offering instruction in theology and philosophy. While Sephil enjoyed these
lessons, it was not the same as being able to work in the sanctuary. A priest of Abh's true work was among
the  poor  and  afflicted,  and  Sephil  had  taken  comfort  in  the  hours  he  spent  ministering  to  the  faithful.
Isolation  meant  he  could  not  follow  the  correct  path,  an  argument  against  which  his  tutor  had  no  easy
answer.
Once a day, he spent an hour with the king. Ampheres offered him liqueur and delicacies, and spoke to
him while  browsing  through  the  correspondence  his  viziers  deemed  was  worth  his  attention.  Mindful  of
what Ampheres instructed at their first meeting, Sephil did his best to uphold his  end  of  the  conversation.
Mostly  he  listened,  and  learned  things  about  his  father  that  he  never  knew.  He  also  learned  about  his
mother, whom no one at court had mentioned after her untimely death.
"She was a lovely woman," said Ampheres. "I would have offered him a princess with  closer  ties  to
my house, but Brasidios would have no other but her. It was a sad day  when  he  wrote  to  tell  me  of  her
death."
As  his  mother  had  died  giving  birth  to  him,  Sephil  had  nothing  to  add.  Once  or  twice,  Zhanil
commented that Sephil favored her in appearance and demeanor. These qualities, while desirable in a wife,
were apparently unacceptable in a prince of Rhodeen.
Ampheres sipped  his  liqueur,  a  cinnamon-flavored  concoction  which  Sephil  found  too  strong  for  his
palette.  "I  met  Zhanil  three  years  ago  when  he  came  to  Bhellin  on  a  diplomatic  mission.  He  was  an
impressive young man, and it saddened me to learn of his death. Had he not been married already, I would
have offered him one of my daughters. It  is  unfortunate  that  your  father  did  not  realize  how  exceptional
Zhanil was."
"I think he knew," murmured Sephil. Such talk of Zhanil pained him not only because it reminded him
of what he had lost, but also because it pointed out what he had not been able to achieve.

To his surprise, Ampheres laughed. "No, it was unfortunate  that  he  did  not  see  that  neither  you  nor
anyone else could be like Zhanil. I have six sons. Some excel in statecraft, others in theology, business or
warfare. None are alike, yet I love them all equally."
As  Sephil  had  not  yet  met  the  members  of  the  Khalgari  royal  family,  he  could  not  comment.  "My
father also thought highly of Dashir and his brothers."
"I am certain your cousin can ride and wield a sword, but what I have heard about him thus far does
not encourage me to acknowledge him as a potential king. A king must be ruthless when the occasion calls
for it, yes, but he must also know how to be temperate and willing to compromise. This is not a quality I see
in Dashir.
"I have said nothing to the Tajhaani ambassadors. Although you have not appeared in public, they are
aware of your presence here. It will not be long, I think, before we must make an official announcement."
What that announcement would entail, Sephil neither knew nor wanted to know.
Nights brought old feelings of uselessness and desolation. Alone in his great bed, Sephil curled into  a
tight ball and tried not to think about the arms that had once held him and kept him safe. He did not want
sex, although the king intimated that partners were available and would be discreet if he so wished it. Life in
the sanctuary merely affirmed what Sephil already knew, and had known from the time he was old enough
to confuse physical desire with his hunger for love; he did not need the former, but could not endure without
the latter.
Fate conspires to take away those  who  mean anything  to me, he thought. Is it so much to ask  to
have one person—just one—to love?
In the third week, Ampheres began to introduce Sephil to his family, beginning with his eldest son and
heir, Ettarin. With each introduction, Sephil became more firmly convinced that Ampheres intended to use
him for  political  gain.  No  doubt  Ampheres  expressed  true  sentiments  in  welcoming  him  as  lost  kin,  but
Sephil needed no explanation to grasp that his value rested in his proximity to the throne of Rhodeen, not in
his tenuous blood ties to the Khalgari royal house.
Family gatherings eschewed politics. The  king's  two  brothers,  both  influential  members  of  the  ruling
council, his sons and nephews welcomed Sephil into their circle.  "Soon,"  said  Ampheres,  "I  will  introduce
you to my wife and daughters."
For  the  Feast  of  the  Summer  Solstice,  which  was  a  major  religious  holiday  in  both  Khalgar  and
Rhodeen, Sephil remained at the palace while the royal family went in procession to the House of the Snake
Mother. Delav explained that the omission was deliberate yet not malicious. "Appearing  in  the  procession
would  put  you  on  public  display,"  he  said,  "and  the  king  will  not  risk  that  yet.  However,  he  sends  an
invitation for you to join him and his family for supper after the ceremony."
Sephil took the invitation, read it through twice, and sighed. Even before his exile, his father excluded
him from public rituals as often as  possible,  explaining  away  his  absence  with  the  excuse  of  frail  health.
Once banished, he received news only through the servants or rare visitors. When Zhanil's sons were born,
he received no word, no invitation to the name-day feasts, or any inquiry when he did not send a gift.
Although he understood why Ampheres could not include him, the invitation in his hand did not entirely
erase the sting.
On  solstice  morning,  breakfast  came  with  the  gift  of  golden  bracelets  etched  with  sunbursts:  the
emblem of Rhodeen's kings. Sephil studied the gift and the card that came with it until Delav urged him to
try the bracelets on.
"You behave as though you have never seen jewelry before."
"I am not used to receiving gifts," he murmured.
Delav made a disbelieving noise and placed the bracelets on the night table to be worn  that  evening.
During  the  day,  as  the  distant  sounds  of  festival  reached  him,  Sephil  walked  in  the  gardens  to  remind
himself  that  he  was  no  longer  a  prisoner  in  his  own  apartments.  Thoughts  churned  through  his  mind,
returning often to the bracelets and the king's plans for him. Gifts came with attachments,  and  Ampheres
had yet to reveal his ambitions.
That  evening,  he  wore  the  bracelets  to  the  private  supper  Ampheres  hosted  in  the  inner  palace,
thanked the king for his gift, and afterward locked them away with his misgivings.
A  week  later,  Delav  interrupted  his  religious  studies  with  a  message  that  he  must  attend  the  king
immediately. Behind him trailed a servant bearing a robe of dark blue brocade. Sephil reluctantly dismissed
the priest and allowed Piras to help him into the garment with its many fastenings.
When Delav brought him the golden bracelets, he balked. "Not those," he said.
"Forgive me, my prince, but the king  specifically  stated  you  were  to  wear  them."  Delav  handed  the
bracelets  to  Piras,  who  removed  the  silver  bracelets  Sephil  wore  and  fastened  the  golden  ones  in  their

place. "He also indicated you were to wear this."
Over Sephil's head he draped a heavy object on a gold chain. Sephil  caught  up  the  blue  stone  in  his
hand, and recognized it as Zhanil's seal  ring,  which  Ampheres  had  retained  with  the  letter.  "Why  must  I
wear this?" he asked.
"The king does not say," answered Delav, "only that you must." With a guiding hand, he nudged Sephil
to turn toward the looking glass. "If you will permit me to say, my prince, you look very regal."
Regal was not  a  word  Sephil  would  have  used  to  describe  himself.  However,  the  deep  blue  of  his
raiment, the sunburst bracelets and seal ring gave the impression of regalia. For whatever reason Ampheres
summoned him, Sephil knew that a public display would be part of it.
He followed Delav downstairs to a gilded chamber where Ampheres awaited him on a throne under a
crimson canopy. With a gesture, the king indicated Sephil should take  the  chair  to  his  left.  Crown  Prince
Ettarin already occupied the seat to his right.
"We  are  about  to  receive  petitioners  you  will  find  most  interesting.  You  may  be  tempted  to  speak
during the interview," said Ampheres, "but say nothing unless I instruct you."
Sephil  swallowed  the  urge  to  ask  what  was  going  on.  His  father  showed  impatience  with  such
questions, and Zhanil admonished him to be silent and  observe  before  speaking.  He  could  only  pray  that,
whoever the petitioners were, Dashir was not among them.
When the doors opened, the herald called out several names. The six men  who  approached  the  dais
wore  Khalgari  dress,  yet  by  style  of  their  names  and  their  lighter  coloring  Sephil  knew  they  were  from
Rhodeen.
As  a  group,  they  bowed  to  Ampheres.  The  king  inclined  his  head  and  gave  their  leader,  a  stout,
middle-aged man, permission to speak.
"Great King," said the man, "I thank you for your graciousness in hearing my petition."
"Given the noise you have been making these last two months, Lord Wesares, we thought it prudent to
hear your case," answered Ampheres.
Gathering himself with what Sephil read as considerable self-importance, Wesares  began his speech.
"With the unexpected and most unfortunate fall of Rhodeen's royal line to the Turyar, those of us who have
been displaced from our estates thank you for your generosity in these dark times. However, as we mourn
our loss, practical considerations must prevail. Namely, in the absence of any direct heir, with reluctance I
must  draw  attention  to  my  own  noble  ancestry.  My  grandmother,  daughter  of  Ardahir  III,  provides  me
with—"
"I  have  viewed  your  genealogy,  Lord  Wesares,  and  as  substantial  as  your  claims  may  be,"  said
Ampheres, "descent through the female line is not recognized in Rhodeen."
"These are exceptional times, Great King."
"Still, there are  those  yet  living  who  are  closer  to  the  throne,  or  have  you  forgotten  the  claimant  in
Tajhaan?"
Wesares made a dismissive gesture. "Prince Dashir Serrides is unwilling to give aid to the many exiles
who have taken refuge here,  he  makes  no  assurances  of  future  support  in  reclaiming  our  lost  estates  in
Rhodeen, and worse, he has allied  himself  with  Tajhaan's  royal  family  to  the  point  that  he  has  chosen  a
Tajhaani name for his unborn son. He is the High Prince's creature, with no loyalty to his own people."
Ampheres nodded. "This may be true, but a claim exists that is even stronger than his."
Sephil tightened his grip on the arms of his chair, dreading the moment when this nobleman, who had
thus far ignored him, became aware of his presence.
Wesares dropped an unctuous bow.  "Then  you  will  have  to  instruct  us,  Great  King,  for  we  are  not
aware of any such claimant."
"While we have no doubt that your mourning for the royal family  is  genuine,  it  seems  that  you  have
forgotten that your king fathered two sons, the younger of whom is still alive."
Wesares answered with a perplexed look. Nevertheless, he recovered his poise  and  within  moments
had a response. "Forgive my seeming ignorance, but we have had no word of the other prince.  Surely  he
died some time ago, or perished with his brother's family in Shemin-at-Khul. Prince Dashir would not claim
the throne if he owed allegiance to a surviving cousin."
The 'other' prince, thought Sephil. He does not even recall my name.
"You  are  mistaken,"  said  Ampheres.  "As  a  distant  but  beloved  member  of  our  royal  house,  Prince
Sephil Brasides escaped Rhodeen just before the invasion and has been our guest for some time."
Sephil did his best to project an air of regal calm as Ampheres gestured to him, but beyond a moment's
surprise and a slight flaring of the nostrils, Wesares did not acknowledge him. Instead, he bowed to the king
and restated his case. "Forgive us for taking your valuable time, Great King," he said, "but nevertheless we

urge you to consider  our  petition.  Much  effort  will  be  required  to  reclaim  Rhodeen  from  the  Turyar.  Its
people,  beleaguered  and  dispossessed,  want  strong  leadership,  and  in  the  absence  of  Prince  Zhanil,  our
influence over Rhodeen's many expatriates is considerable. Our claim is a worthy one."
"No petition worth hearing goes without consideration," answered Ampheres, "but given the  situation,
the answer you receive may not be what you most desire."
As  the  noblemen  left  and  the  doors  closed,  Sephil  could  not  decide  what  stung  more:  being  thrust
without warning into public view or the complete lack of recognition from one of his  own  people.  "I  wish
you had not done that," he murmured.
Ampheres displayed little sympathy. "What we do  is  out  of  necessity.  As  a  royal  prince  you  should
understand that."
Sephil  rose  with  the  king  and  accompanied  him  and  the  Crown  Prince  into  an  adjacent  gallery.  "I
cannot play the part of royal prince either," he said, "if the very people who should acknowledge me do not
do so."
"As  your  father  kept  you  from  public  view,  it  is  an  unfortunate  reality.  Melin  Wesares  desires  the
throne for himself, and as such will not acknowledge you. This will not be  the  first  time  you  are  slighted,
Sephil, and I suspect that in time vicious slanders will be part of it," said Ampheres. "You have not always
led a blameless life."
"You do not need to remind me."
"Whether  you  like  it  or  not,  I  do.  Perhaps  now  you  will  understand  why  I  have  permitted  you  to
continue your religious studies. Wesares may not have acknowledged your presence, but be assured that he
noticed you. He will spread rumors that you are immoral and have led a dissolute life, and that you fled for
your  life  out  of  cowardice  while  your  father  and  brother  died  defending  Shemin-at-Khul.  You  will  say
nothing, but respond by showing yourself in the public areas of the palace and wearing the habit of a novice
priest as you have been doing. We will counter any slander by demonstrating that you are very spiritual, that
you were not in Shemin-at-Khul at the time of the Turya invasion because you were in retreat in Ottabia."
"That is not a lie," said Sephil.
Ampheres paused by a window.  "It  does  not  require  a  lie  to  bolster  your  reputation.  An  exemplary
public image is a valuable commodity. Had your father not been so bitter over your mother's death and your
failure to excel in the military arts, he would have realized the benefits of having a son in the priesthood."
From comments his father made over the years, Sephil knew he harbored a low opinion of priests. For
that reason, and perhaps others, Brasidios would have scoffed at the idea of his younger son trying to lead a
virtuous life as a priest of Abh.
"People always remember what they see as opposed to what they hear," said Ampheres, "and the sight
of you as a proper novice visiting hospitals and shrines will bring you much credit."
Sephil found the idea of turning a genuine vocation into political opportunity distasteful. "You told those
men I had a stronger claim to the throne than they, yet all along you have said you would not back me as
king. If so, then why would you publicize my existence, or even take such pains to improve my image?"
Ampheres fixed him with so a hard look that for a moment Sephil regretted having asked. A moment
later, the king's expression softened and he smiled, as though he found the question amusing. "In time you
will understand these things. For now be assured that both your place in the succession and the image you
present are important."
"Lord Wesares  is already styling himself as king  of  Rhodeen,"  said  Ettarin.  "He  has  taken  the  royal
name of Ardahir to remind people of his ancestry."
"He  makes  noise,"  said  Ampheres,  "but  in  the  end  his  posturing  will  come  to  nothing.  Rhodeen's
military is scattered, either dead or paying allegiance to the Turyar. He will not be able to scrape together
enough support to present a legitimate threat. Tajhaan will not back him, and he will find no aid here."
Sephil listened, absorbing whatever information he could before returning to his apartments.
His tutors gone and the servants quietly occupied elsewhere, he sat by the window with a book in his
lap, unable to concentrate on Eharideos' treatise on correct thought and action. For all the threat he posed,
Melin Wesares  and his spurious  claims  could  easily  have  been  ignored,  yet  Ampheres  chose  not  only  to
grant him an audience but use the occasion to divulge Sephil's presence at court.
What purpose this served, Sephil did not know. Ampheres insisted his claim was significant, yet in the
same breath refused to make him king. Why go to such trouble validating  one's  right  to  the  succession  if
nothing was to come of it?
Sephil looked out the window, and spied a young man and woman walking along a nearby garden path,
their  chaperone  following  at  a  discreet  distance.  As  he  watched  them  and  pondered  the  etiquette  of
courtship, an answer suddenly came to him.

His  claim  mattered  because,  even  if  he  did  not  take  the  throne,  his  right  of  succession  would  pass
through him to his sons. And if he married into the Khalgari royal house, Ampheres would have a claimant
worthy of support in the person of his own grandson.
No, he thought angrily, I will not be manipulated.
A moment later, he calmed down enough to reflect on the reality of his situation. Thus far, Ampheres
gave no hint that marriage was on his mind. The possibility existed, however, and  Sephil  occupied  such  a
precarious position that he could not  risk  alienating  his  protector  and  benefactor  by  refusing  an  arranged
marriage.
Unlike Terreh, the Khalgari royal princesses were all pleasant young women, any one of whom would
make an agreeable companion. Sephil understood this, yet the truth was he simply had no interest in either
women or marriage.
* * * *
Neither an inability to swim nor his bodyguard's insistence that he  remain  onshore  could  keep  Sephil
from wading out into the surf after his companions. Strange and vast, the ocean drew him with its crashing
waves and salt-tinged air. This, combined with freedom from the restrictions of court life, compelled him to
pull off his shoes and follow the royal princes into the water.
Water surged around him, soaking his linen trousers to the knees. Despite his pleas to slow down, the
two princes raced ahead of him, flinging themselves through the rising waves to reach deeper water. Sephil
would never catch them.
Melwas followed like a shadow, his boots tramping through the salt water. "My prince, you must return
to shore."
Sephil wished he would go away. "The water is only knee-deep."
"Yes, my prince, but it is not unknown for the sea to play tricks, to drag a man off his feet and under
the water. Please, return to shore where it is safe."
With a last, longing glance at the two princes who waved to him from a distance, Sephil waded back,
but did not leave the water entirely. Carrying his shoes in one hand, he walked along the shore, letting the
surging foam play around his ankles as he pulled shells out of the sand with the other.
When he first arrived, one of the princesses showed him how to listen to the ocean by putting a shell to
his ear. "Acoustics and air, my lord," said Delav.
"You did not have to tell me," Sephil replied sourly. An acoustic trick or no, the sound comforted him,
and he liked the variations in shape, size and color among the shells he found. So did others, he realized, for
in the summer palace were many objects decorated with shells.
Three large pavilions stood on the sand dunes above the beach: one for the men, another for the royal
ladies, and a third where both  sexes  could  mingle  in  the  shade.  Servants  brought  fruit,  sweet  bread,  and
chilled  wine  in  addition  to  towels  and  ointments  to  protect  against  sunburn,  a  precaution  Sephil  ignored
earlier in the week. Piras rubbed cooling aloe  onto  his  reddened  face  and  arms  three  times  a  day,  while
assuring him that his burn was not as severe as it might have been.
"In a week or two it will peel, my lord," he said, "and in a month you will not notice it at all."
High above the sand dunes, on a broad cliff overlooking the ocean, stood Adenna, the king's summer
palace, where the royal family retreated when the heat in the capital grew unbearable. Messengers arrived
each day with dispatches from Bhellin and other parts of the realm, but nobles and petitioners were barred
from the residence. Unless the matter was urgent, Ampheres tolerated no interruption while at his leisure.
Here  Sephil  met  the  queen,  a  frail  but  good-natured  lady  whose  many  pregnancies  had  ruined  her
health.  She  made  Adenna  her  permanent  residence,  where  the  physicians  believed  the  sea  air  and  the
waters at the nearby shrine of Abh would invigorate her. Whenever Ampheres came to visit, he showered
her with attention and many gifts.
As he continued his studies with his tutor and the local priests, Sephil  accompanied  the  queen  to  the
shrine and watched over her from a bench beside the mineral spring. She enjoyed conversation, a pastime
which  often  left  her  out  of  breath,  and  took  pains  to  introduce  Sephil  to  her  daughters,  an  unnecessary
gesture he graciously accepted nonetheless.
While  at  the  shrine,  he  tried  the  waters  himself,  as  all  novices  and  priests  were  encouraged  to  do.
Wearing a linen shift, he stepped into the pool and waded to one of the submerged shelves where patients
sat during their treatment. The water was warmer than he expected and, as it flowed around him, revealed
a magical quality, stirring life into his limbs. For a moment, he thought of Adeja and how pleasant it would
have been to share this with him.
For  a  moment,  he  smiled,  then  grew  sad.  However  much  he  tried  to  achieve  spiritual  consolation
through renunciation, he found it difficult to let Adeja go.

At sunset, servants brought torches down to  the  pavilions,  and  as  the  tide  rolled  in,  the  royal  family
dined upon mussels and fish caught that morning. Music and dancing followed the meal. Sephil did not know
any Khalgari dances, and so had to rely upon the princesses to teach him.
Ampheres brought three unmarried daughters from Bhellin, with a fourth joining him  at  Adenna  with
her husband and infant son. "I would have liked to marry her to Zhanil," he said, "but he had already taken a
wife. The gods were wise, it seems, for had things gone as I wished I would have been mourning her along
with your brother. To this day, I do not understand why he did not send his wife and sons out of Rhodeen
with you."
Sephil had no desire to revisit the tales of atrocities committed by the Turyar, and was grateful when
Ampheres changed the subject.
With the king encouraging his attentions, Sephil spent time with the three remaining princesses. Though
he was not a good rider, he rode with them along the beach, accompanied by Melwas and their chaperones,
a  middle-aged  lady-in-waiting  who  did  not  know  how  to  smile.  With  apologetic  looks,  the  princesses
endured her company and seemed to enjoy spending time with their cousin from Rhodeen.
Lissan,  the  eldest,  taught  Sephil  how  to  dance,  patiently  correcting  his  steps  when  his  feet  became
entangled in hers. Ketalya, the next-eldest, taught him to play cards, a  game  unique  to  Khalgar  which  he
quickly grasped and learned to enjoy. The youngest princess, sixteen year old Naulia, had a lively sense of
humor, but an annoying tendency to giggle when she saw him trying to dance with Lissan, who was taller
than he.
Sephil could not guess which princess Ampheres preferred for a dynastic marriage, should it come to
that. Naulia was too young, but both Lissan and Ketalya were pleasant. For a prince who desired a  royal
bride, either one would have been acceptable.
He might leave the choice up to me, thought Sephil. Zhanil might have found it an intriguing prospect,
but for one who did not desire a wife, choosing a  bride  would  be  a  grim  task.  All  three  were  interesting
companions, though Naulia was too young for marriage. The more time he spent with them, the more Sephil
realized how little women had been part of his life. His only female relations, now captives of the Turyar,
were a middle-aged aunt who regarded him as a nuisance and a cousin whose name he could not recall.
Having  female  friends  was  a  notion  both  strange  and  intriguing.  The  princesses  did  not  excite  his
sexual curiosity, but fascinated him in other ways, and it saddened him to realize marriage would ruin that.
"You are stepping on my feet again," murmured Lissan.
Coming out of his reverie, Sephil realized he had trod once again on his partner's feet. "Forgive me," he
said.
"Your brother was the more elegant dancer, though Naulia complained that he was too old."
"Zhanil was better at everything, and your sister thinks anything over twenty-five is too old."
The next dance he gave to Naulia, who returned blushing to her mother's side as Ketalya claimed her
turn.
While Naulia had been too bemused to say anything, Ketalya made conversation as easily as Lissan;
the  princesses,  like  most  of  the  Khalgari  royal  family,  were  social  creatures,  bred  to  the  rhythms  and
intrigue  of  court  life.  At  times,  they  left  Sephil  grasping  for  a  suitable  reply.  This  evening  proved  no
exception.
"Must  a  novice  priest  wear  his  robes  on  holiday?"  she  asked.  "I  thought  Father  had  been  quite
generous in providing you with a wardrobe."
Sephil viewed such  talk  as  a  prelude  to  seduction,  except  in  this  case.  Ketalya  enjoyed  teasing  her
companions,  whether  they  were  dancing  or  playing  cards.  "I  wear  them  because  I  am  accustomed  to
them."
"I know you visit shrines and spend several hours a day studying, but did not think you had a genuine
vocation."
"I like to think I do," he answered. "Why would you think otherwise?"
"There are those at court who say you do this to show a pious face to your  enemies  so  they  cannot
slander you," replied Ketalya.
Sephil smiled weakly. "It was your father's suggestion. Had it been my decision, I would have stayed
in seclusion."
"Was the priesthood a path you chose for yourself," she asked, "or did your father dedicate you to the
god?  Two  years  ago,  Father  dedicated  Teilan  to  the  Snake  Mother,  but  only  because  Teilan  asked  to
become a priest."
"My father did not care much for priests or their teachings," said Sephil. "I went into retreat without his
permission, and  when  the  Turyar  came  Zhanil  sent  me  with  several  other  priests  to  safety  in  Ottabia.  I

decided then to dedicate myself to Abh."
At  a  pause  in  the  music,  Ketalya  drew  back,  her  playful  smile  subdued.  "I  would  not  say  this  if  I
thought it would offend you," she said, "but I thought your brother just a little too perfect."
Sephil could not recall ever hearing that criticism about Zhanil. "What do you mean?"
Ketalya's  reply  only  added  to  his  bewilderment.  "They  say  one  who  stands  too  long  in  the  sun  is
burned, and cannot be seen for the brightness."

Chapter Eight
The work was hot, dusty, and  monotonous,  once  again  prompting  Adeja  to  wonder  why  he  had  not
simply walked out of the quarry the first week and applied at the nearest barracks. For  a  kingdom  not  at
war, Khalgar paid its soldiers well, and Adeja heard the rations were decent.
Too late now, he realized, and cursed his inability to act.
Bedren gave him twelve menar, what remained  of  the  three  hundred  taken  from  Kalion.  Combined
with  the  money  Adeja  had  brought  out  of  Rhodeen,  he  had  enough  to  live  comfortably  for  some  time.
Leisure, however, did not suit him, and the same afternoon  he  left  the  House  of  Abh,  he  headed  for  the
nearest stonemason guild to apply for work.
The masons to whom he spoke laughed outright at his presumption until they noticed his hand inching
toward the sword he wore at his belt. Clearing his throat, the eldest mason took Adeja aside and explained
that  in  order  to  do  the  elaborate  carvings  and  inscriptions  on  monuments,  one  had  to  spend  a  lifetime
working with stone, beginning with an apprenticeship under a master.
Because he had some training, Adeja was able to find work dressing the limestone blocks  hewn  and
dragged out of the quarry. Although  the  job  paid  less  than  he  would  have  liked,  the  foreman  right  away
noticed his intelligence when he broke up a fight between two laborers. At the noon break, the man drew
him aside  and  engaged  him  in  conversation.  Adeja  revealed  little  aside  from  the  fact  that  he  was  from
Tajhaan, had been a soldier and was literate.
Unfortunately, he also made the mistake of revealing that he had left the military because he wished to
settle down and start a family.
The  next  evening,  the  foreman  invited  him  to  supper.  Expecting  a  casual  meal  at  one  of  the  many
shops near the public bathhouses, Adeja accepted. Lakhun, however, had other ideas and took him  home,
where a press of women greeted him with caresses and food as though he was a long-lost relation.
Adeja did not know what the customs  of  hospitality  were  in  Khalgar,  but  he  suspected  Lakhun  had
more in mind than a simple meal. As he ate the food the women set before him, he studied them.  Unless
going to a festival or wedding,  no  woman  he  knew  ever  wore  such  brightly  colored  raiment  or  so  many
ornaments.  And  the  way  Lakhun  was  looking  at  him  suggested  a  possibility  Adeja  would  have  found
amusing were it not so startling.
What man brings  home a husband  for  his  sister  or  daughter  when  he's  only  known  him  eight
days?  Adeja shrugged, continued eating and enjoying the attention,  and  waited  for  Lakhun  to  broach  the
topic.
The  foreman  did  not  disappoint,  directing  Adeja's  attention  to  his  daughters  in  a  painfully  obvious
manner that almost made Adeja laugh. "You see my girls there, eh? Such lovely little flowers, but Lahis, she
is very special."
Considering how plain the young woman in question was, Adeja suspected  her  father  did  not  regard
her so much as special as he was desperate to marry her off. He grunted, nodded and waited for Lakhun to
say more.
"She's a good cook. You liked the food, yes? She keeps house very well, and keeps her tongue, too,"
said Lakhun. "So she is not as pretty as other girls. A man is only asking for trouble when he takes a pretty
girl for his wife."
Adeja again nodded, but said nothing. He would let Lakhun's tongue run itself dry and then see what
he could make of the situation. The room he rented in the tenement block near the spice market was small,
but he could not keep it himself.
Alternately anxious and encouraged by Adeja's lack of response, Lakhun continued,  "You  know,  I'm
not so young anymore, and  a  man  could  do  worse  than  to  have  a  son  who  can  manage  a  crew  and  do
figures. It's very profitable, this quarrying business, if a man has the right head  for  it,  and  you've  told  me
already that stone is in your blood."
Soldiering is in my blood,  or I would  have  stayed  home and  learned  the trade. "The quarry is a
big place," said Adeja. "You could pass the right man by and not even know it."

"Precisely!"  Either  Lakhun  understood  and  chose  to  overlook  the  remark,  or  he  misread  it  entirely;
Adeja thought the latter. "Most men who work the quarry are dull, and too rough for a good girl like Lahis."
And you think a soldier is gentle? Adeja suspected the man wanted an ignorant foreigner desperate
to make a good living in a new city, who would neither notice nor mind that his bride was formerly a widow.
Lakhun had not mentioned this, but the women with their loose tongues let it slip while praising  Adeja  for
being much handsomer than Lahis' previous husband. "Then perhaps you should look outside the quarry?"
Lakhun slapped his knee in agreement. "Exactly, my friend! I had no idea Tajhaan bred such fine men.
I must marry all my girls to foreigners."
"But would you want a soldier for a son?"
"Ah, but you aren't in that business anymore, and who wouldn't  want  a  son  who  can  defend  such  a
worthy wife?" answered Lakhun.
Even worthier was the money Lahis' husband had left her. It was not a large sum, but when added to
her small dowry and Adeja's own savings, it made the deal more  attractive  than  it  otherwise  would  have
been.
The  wedding  was  celebrated  on  the  next  rest  day.  Lakhun  led  the  procession  to  the  neighborhood
temple, where a priest of the Snake Mother joined the couple in marriage. A priestess rolled a scarlet egg
over the bride's womb while chanting a fertility song whose words  Adeja  could  not  follow.  Lahis  glowed
under her faded red shawl. Adeja drank more than usual. When she smiled, Lahis was almost pretty, but at
that moment Adeja only hoped that under her voluminous skirts her body was not as thin as her face.
After a bridal feast at Lakhun's house, a second procession wound its torchlit way through the streets
to Adeja's tenement, where the landlady and several neighbors complained about the noise. Adeja took his
bride by the hand and led her up three flights of stairs to her new home.
"You'll cook and clean," he said, gesturing to the boxes  and  bundles  Lahis'  relatives  brought  upstairs
that morning. "I expect everything kept orderly."
Their first night together was not memorable. Lahis knew what was  expected,  but  she  was  nervous
and could only lie there with her legs spread while Adeja went into her and did his business.
Before dropping off to sleep, he patted her thigh and grunted, "It will be better next time." Whether or
not she heard him, he did not know.
Lahis spoke so little he initially wondered if she was mute.  Through  their  interaction,  he  learned  she
was shy and had been taught to be deferential. About the latter he had no complaints, for a temperamental
wife would have driven him insane, but he would have liked a more passionate bedmate.
She kept the house as he ordered, and each night had supper ready for him when he returned from the
quarry. As the wedding feast resulted in copious leftovers, she did not have to cook for three nights, so  it
was not until  the  fourth  and  his  first  mouthful  of  stew  that  he  realized  Lakhun  had  duped  him  over  one
crucial matter: his bride could not cook.
"Woman," he grumbled, shoving the bowl away from him, "if I wanted to eat slop I would have gone to
the  local  midden."  In  Tajhaani,  he  added,  "I  wouldn't  be  surprised  to  learn  your  first  husband  died  of  a
stomachache from eating this poison."
Tears leaked from the corners of her eyes, and she pressed both hands to her mouth to keep her sobs
from escaping. She could not  have  understood  that  last  part,  he  knew.  His  angry  tone  and  gestures  had
sufficed.
Almost at once, he felt remorse. "Who cooked the wedding feast?" he asked. "Come, woman, I know
you have a voice. Tell me who prepared the feast. Was it your mother?"
She nodded haplessly.
"Tonight we eat out," he said, "and then tomorrow you'll go to your  mother  and  have  her  teach  you.
When you do as I tell you and cook me a good meal, I'll buy you something pretty in the bazaar." Lifting his
hand, he touched her cheek. "That would please you, yes?"
Upon later reflection, Adeja wondered if he should have bought her a trinket then, but decided it was
better to be frugal. She did not know how much money he had, as each morning he gave her only enough to
buy foodstuffs and other necessities from the bazaar; the rest he kept hidden in a hollow space in the wall
behind the bed.
Lahis was still distraught when they returned, so that night Adeja took special care in his lovemaking.
She did not climax, but he sensed she enjoyed his touch more than she had.
She must have told her mother the entire story, replete with tears, for two days later Lakhun greeted
him with a hard look that conveyed his displeasure. Rather than apologize and try to ingratiate himself back
into his father-in-law's good graces, Adeja stood his ground. Lahis was his wife, her father was not going to
dictate what went on in his household, and there was to be no further discussion about it.

"I expect certain things from my wife," he said. "She will have to learn."
Lakhun frowned and grunted, but said nothing more on the subject.
As summer turned to autumn, Lahis improved her cooking to the point where Adeja kept his promise.
On the next rest day, he took her to the bazaar and let  her  choose  a  new  shawl.  Purchasing  trinkets  for
women was not something to which  he  was  accustomed,  but  when,  perhaps  fearing  to  displease  him  by
spending too much, she tried to choose a sober black, he stepped in and insisted she take the deep blue that
originally drew her eye.
Domestic life was not unpleasant, yet there were times when Adeja  missed  being  a  bachelor.  Some
nights he preferred not to go home. To spare Lahis worry he sent a message telling her he would be late.
Of course, he did not say he intended to have a drink at the corner wine shop, or wander down to the local
brothel to enjoy the attentions of a comely boy or maiden, as she would not understand that, while he was
not displeased with her in bed, sometimes he desired more variety than she could provide.
It  was  not  yet  dark  when  he  entered  the  wine  shop.  Several  men  from  the  quarry  sat  together,
including two who did not hold their alcohol well and would be next to useless tomorrow. Upon seeing him,
they invited him to  join  them  at  their  table,  but,  desiring  solitude,  he  took  his  drink  and  claimed  a  corner
booth.
After a few moments, he noticed a certain  festival  air  in  the  shop.  While  it  was  not  uncommon  for
patrons to toast each other over family births, weddings  and  other  special  occasions,  Adeja  rarely  saw  a
celebration  carry  across  multiple  tables.  Curious,  he  tapped  a  man  on  the  shoulder  and  asked  what  the
occasion was.
"A royal wedding," answered the man. He took a drink and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand
before continuing, "One of the king's daughters married the Crown Prince of Rhodeen."
Adeja took his drink to the corner and brooded. There could be only one Crown Prince of Rhodeen in
Khalgar, which meant it was Sephil's wedding everyone was celebrating. Why this disturbed him so, Adeja
could not say. A wedding was a festive occasion, and from what he had heard of the Khalgari princesses,
Sephil was very fortunate indeed.
"You should be toasting his health," he muttered to himself. He  lifted  his  cup,  but  abruptly  drained  it
before he could get the words out. Filling his cup again, he drank until he passed out.
He woke, fuzzy-headed and nauseous, in an alley behind the shop. His hand crawled to the pouch at
his belt. The three coppers he brought with him were gone. You drank  it all  away.  Turning,  he  vomited
onto a pile of refuse.
Not knowing how late it was, he wobbled back onto the street and tried to recall what made him drink
himself senseless. Then he remembered: it was Sephil's wedding day.
Staggering, his stomach roiling, he slumped against the side of the building, covered his face with both
hands and wept.
* * * *
Sephil wanted it to be over: the endless ceremonies,  the  attention,  and  most  of  all,  the  ordeal  of  the
wedding  night.  Although  it  lasted  only  a  week,  he  had  not  forgotten  his  first  betrothal  to  Terreh,  the
humiliating blunder  at  the  ceremony,  or  his  bride's  reaction  when  she  realized  Dashir  was  not  to  be  her
husband.
May  she find  happiness  in her choice.  More  than  a  year  later,  Sephil  found  he  could  reflect  and
wish Terreh well. She would have little happiness as Dashir's wife.
The prospect of consummating his marriage compounded his anxiety, for while he understood the basic
principles of making love with a woman, he had neither tried it on his own nor had any desire to do so. 
For his first betrothal, Zhanil had attempted to rectify the situation by sending a  courtesan  to  instruct
him. The tactic might have helped had the woman not told him that his bride, being a virgin, would not know
what pleased her, and that he must be careful not to hurt her.
Thus far, it seemed this union would not echo the first. As a father, Ampheres desired a good marriage
for his daughter, and was more considerate about the matter than he might have been otherwise. On their
return from Adenna, he drew Sephil aside and explained the situation in plain terms.
"You must marry," he said. "I think you understand this."
Sephil nodded. "What do you intend to do?"
"At this early stage, one cannot build empires on sons that have not yet been born or shown promise.
What is certain  is  that  Dashir  and  his  Tajhaani  alliance  must  be  countered.  Your  bloodline  is  a  valuable
commodity, and your ties with our royal house must be strengthened."
"No," said Sephil. "I want to know what you intend to do with me once those sons are born."
Such was his surprise that, for a moment, the  king  could  not  speak.  At  last,  he  found  his  voice  and

answered, "I do not know what worries torment you, but I mean to give my daughter a husband, not make
her a widow. Now if you prefer Lissan, you have my blessing, but I have watched you with  Ketalya  and
believe that you are well suited for each other."
Sephil lacked the nerve to voice his objections, so he meekly  nodded  his  head  and  sat  down  to  wait
while Ampheres summoned his daughter. I do  not care  for  women. My  heart  belongs  to someone  else.
Ketalya deserved better than to be disappointed.
When she  arrived  and  heard  her  father's  decision,  Ketalya  turned  to  Sephil,  smiled,  and  kissed  him
upon the cheek. Her easy acceptance led him to suspect the matter had been decided beforehand, and that
his consent was simply a formality.
That evening, the  family  toasted  the  prospective  couple  over  supper,  and  later  in  the  drawing  room
kissed and embraced both parties. A complete reversal from the reception Sephil received in Rhodeen, for
then his father had offered no words of congratulation, only a stern warning that the alliance with Tajhaan
must be honored. From his cousins and aunt, there was only laughter.
Zhanil alone rejoiced, embraced him, and sent the gift of a jeweled dagger, which Sephil later used to
end his ordeal. He did not know what Ampheres had told his daughter about her future husband, but he did
not  think  she  knew  about  his  suicide  attempt.  All  she  saw  was  a  novice  priest  who  studied  and  visited
hospitals and shrines to tend the afflicted.
The  next  afternoon,  as  they  walked  in  the  gardens  followed  by  Melwas  and  a  female  chaperone,
Sephil asked Ketalya her true opinion. "I imagine you would prefer a more impressive husband."
"Someone like your brother, you mean?" she answered. "You already know my thoughts about him."
"He was a good husband and father," said Sephil.
"That does not mean I would have been happy with him." Turning to him, Ketalya smiled. "Whenever
you mention Zhanil, you always put yourself at a disadvantage. Perhaps he was a brave fighter and capable
statesman, but that does not mean you are less than him, or that you would not also be a good husband or
father."
At this, his heart grew heavy. It  was  clear  she  did  not  know  him,  and  he  could  not  explain  without
revealing all.
In Rhodeen,  the  wedding  of  a  princess  would  have  been  a  small  affair,  celebrated  within  the  inner
circles of the court but scarcely noted beyond that. Not realizing how the Khalgari seized every opportunity
to  stage  a  festival,  pageant  or  procession,  Sephil  assumed  his  wedding  to  Ketalya  would  be  an
inconspicuous affair until, with much good-natured laughterAmpheres told him that there would be no such
thing.
On a brittle autumn morning, the bridal couple rode in procession from the palace to the House of the
Snake Mother for the marriage rite. Ketalya presented a radiant image in her gilded red silk veil and jewels,
while Sephil wore the deep royal blue of Rhodeen. Zhanil's seal ring glittered on his right hand. It  felt  too
heavy, and the golden circlet he was obliged to wear pressed against his temples, giving him a headache.
His recollection  of  the  ceremony  blurred  into  the  long  reception  that  followed  afterward.  A  second
procession  took  the  wedding  party  back  to  the  palace,  where  in  a  large,  many-pillared  hall  Sephil  and
Ketalya sat in state to receive the gifts and congratulations of the court. Sephil did not know many of  the
guests, but did his best to appear intelligent and interested.
Halfway  through  the  reception,  Melin  Wesares  appeared  at  the  head  of  the  Rhodeen  delegation.
According to the king's informants, he continued to assert his claim to the throne while denouncing Sephil as
an incompetent pretender. He honored the bride with a deep bow, yet acknowledged Sephil with  only  the
briefest nod, and placed nothing on the dais alongside all the other bridal gifts.
Ampheres, seated on a throne at his daughter's left hand, answered Wesares  with a curt  nod  before
gesturing him to move along.
At sunset, a lavish wedding banquet awaited the couple in an adjacent hall. When Zhanil married, the
festivities had culminated in a feast considered grand by Rhodeen standards,  but  fourteen  year  old  Sephil
saw little of it, and what he did remember did not match the silver-and-gilt splendor Ampheres had arranged
on his daughter's behalf.
When the time came, Sephil had no appetite for the dishes the servants set before him. Not wishing to
draw attention to his nervous state, he choked down just enough to satisfy custom, yet when he would have
reached for his wine goblet, Ampheres cautioned him against it. "I do not think it will help you tonight," he
said quietly. "A man should have a clear head on his wedding night."
Sephil did not need to be reminded of the night to come. He tried to focus on the few lessons he had
learned from the courtesan in Rhodeen, but as Ketalya was a virgin he had no idea how he would  please
her. Making love with a woman felt so different. What he liked, she would not, and he did not want to hurt

her.
At the height of the banquet, Ampheres toasted the  couple,  hailing  the  wedding  as  a  union  between
two kingdoms whose bonds of blood and friendship had always been strong.
Midnight came with dancing and revels, and at last with an announcement that it was time to put the
bridal couple to bed. Sephil assumed that at a certain point in the evening, he and Ketalya would gracefully
retire. Instead, the royal princes roused him from his chair, separated him from his bride and led him  to  a
suite where they divested him of his wedding finery and dressed him in a plain linen shift.
Good-natured  teasing  and  merrymaking  accompanied  him  into  a  second  suite,  furnished  with  an
elaborate curtained bed where Ketalya already awaited him. Her sisters  and  ladies  of  the  court  attended
her, while off to the side Sephil saw the king standing with a priest and priestess of the Snake Mother.
The  priest  directed  him  to  climb  into  bed  beside  Ketalya  and  lie  down.  Sephil  tried  to  cover  his
embarrassment by avoiding the gazes of the onlookers, especially when the priest folded the coverlet back
over his knees.
A tiny  brass  bell  tinkled,  bringing  a  hush  to  the  bridal  chamber.  The  next  thing  Sephil  heard  was  a
woman's voice chanting in a language he did not understand. Turning his head, he saw the priestess of the
Snake Mother take swaying steps toward him, a red object cupped in her hands. When she bent over him to
roll it over his belly, he realized the object was an egg, and when the priestess crossed to the opposite side
of the bed to repeat the ritual over Ketalya, he understood that this was a fertility rite.
As  the  priest  and  priestess  withdrew,  the  court  took  this  as  their  cue  to  depart  as  well.  Ampheres
kissed his daughter on the cheek, followed by her ladies and other family  members.  Sephil  received  hand
clasps and words of encouragement from his new brothers-in-law. Servants extinguished all but two lamps
as they trailed out after the guests. The doors closed, the sounds of conversation and laughter dwindled, and
at last Sephil and his bride were alone.
Ketalya sat up, drew the coverlet up to her lap, and heaved a great sigh. "I did  not  realize  until  now
that it is better to be a guest than the bride."
"I have not been to many weddings," Sephil said quietly. He  tried  very  hard  not  to  think  about  what
was supposed to happen next.
She smiled, then frowned as her eyes dropped to his lap. "Sephil," she murmured, "do you always wear
your jewelry to bed?"
Sephil did not know what she  meant  until  he  followed  her  eyes  and  realized  she  was  looking  at  his
bracelets. "I always wear these."
"I have been wondering why," she said. "They do not belong to a priest of Abh's regalia."
Please, do not let her ask me to remove them. "They were a gift from your father."
Ketalya laughed softly. "I do not think he will be offended if you take them off tonight."
Had he simply refused, or pretended to be vain, she might have let the matter be, but when he tried to
fold his hands under the coverlet, it only aroused her curiosity.
"Sephil," she asked, reaching for him, "what is the matter?"
"You would not understand."
Still, he did not resist when she drew back the coverlet, gently took one hand in hers and  unfastened
the golden bracelet. "I do not see what the fuss is about," she said.
Seeing there was no other choice, Sephil reluctantly turned his wrist over so she  could  see  the  scar.
Then he undid the other bracelet to show her the matching scar.
Ketalya stroked the skin above and below the scar on his left wrist. "How did this happen?"
No one in the sanctuary or temple of Abh who saw his scars had ever asked him that question. Clearly
she did not understand, and he did not know what else to say. "I did this," he murmured.
"Why would you do such a thing?" she asked.
"Your father told you nothing about me. I am not half the prince you think I am. I am nothing next to
my brother. I was such an embarrassment to my family that my father wished I had never been born. I was
very unhappy living in Rhodeen." Sephil sucked in a ragged breath, telling himself that he was not going to
cry, not tonight, and not in front of his bride.
Ketalya lifted a hand to his cheek. "I do not believe that about your father, and I have told you before
that you should not compare yourself with Zhanil."
"I am not exaggerating or trying to be dramatic," he said. "My father really did say that  to  me,  more
than once. I know he loved my mother, but I took her away from him by being born, and I brought him no
joy in the bargain.
"I could not ride or fight, my tutors all thought me slow, and I did foolish things." Sephil glanced away
to study the flickering shadows cast by the lamps before fixing his gaze on his lap: anything to avoid looking

at Ketalya. "I-I do not know how we will do this. I have only been with a woman once. When I was to be
married the first time, Zhanil sent a woman to show me how, but I did not enjoy it as much as he thought I
would.  She  was  a  courtesan.  I  imagine  he  considered  her  very  refined  and  beautiful,  but  I  thought  her
vulgar."
"Well, I am not a courtesan," said Ketalya. "I am your wife. I imagine as a priest you prefer celibacy,
but those who serve Abh are not expected to forgo sex."
Sephil shook his head. How am I ever going  to explain  this to her?  She  will think  I am unnatural
and  horrible. "I did not say I was a virgin. What I  mean  to  say  is  that  I  am  different—that  is  the  only
word I know to describe it."
Ketalya  made  a  show  of  looking  him  over  before  answering  with  a  soft  laugh.  "You  seem  normal
enough to me. I do not see what the problem is."
Her easy manner did not reassure him. "It is what I prefer in bed that makes me different."
"You prefer males?"
Sephil nodded. "From the time I was eleven, I had a guardian who did not want  to  be  bothered  with
me, so when I was old enough to be interested in sex, he sent a boy to teach me and let me do as I pleased.
I learned to enjoy making love with another male, or perhaps I was simply born that way. I do not  know.
Your father knows all this. Why did he not tell you?"
"Perhaps he did not think it such an impediment as you believe," she said.
Either she thought she could change him, or she truly did not  understand.  Sephil  took  a  deep  breath,
wondering even then if he should say anything at all. "My guardian should have explained certain things to
me, but perhaps he just assumed I knew. When I was sixteen, there was a man in my household, a guard,
who was very handsome. I invited him into my bedchamber and let him do things with me that I  was  not
supposed to allow."
Her indrawn breath told him that she had  finally  grasped  his  meaning.  "Why  are  you  telling  me  this
now?"
What he heard was the now, as in: why did you wait until we were married and  I could  no  longer
refuse? "Maybe I should not have said anything."
"Well, now that you have, you had better tell me the rest," answered Ketalya.
"I told you because my enemies slander me," said Sephil, "and I wanted you to know what is true and
what is not. My father was so angry with me for what I did that he shut me up in my apartments for three
years, and the only reason he let me out was because he needed a son to make an alliance with Tajhaan."
"Did he really do that?"
"My family is not as forgiving as yours," he said. "I am sorry that you did not know. If you wish me to
sleep in one of the chairs—"
"Do not be ridiculous, Sephil." Ketalya leaned forward and dropped a kiss on his forehead. "We have
to consummate this marriage, or everyone will think something is wrong. Perhaps if we put out the  lamps
and take off our gowns and just lie here touching each other, it will come to us naturally. Surely we cannot
be the first bride and groom to have had this problem."
"I do not want to hurt you when we—that is to say, when I go inside you."
She laughed softly. "Even if you were your mighty brother, you would hurt me the first  time.  Did  no
one explain to you that that is how it is with women? In the dark you can pretend I am a boy, and then you
will realize it is not so terrible."
"I could not pretend with you," he said. "There are differences."
"I do not mean you should enter me like a boy."
Sephil could not believe what he heard. "I thought you were a virgin."
She rolled her eyes. "Only because I have not lain with a  man,  not  because  I  am  ignorant.  I  do  not
know what they do in Rhodeen, but here in Khalgar women do not  send  their  daughters  or  sisters  to  the
marriage bed without telling them  exactly  what  to  do  or  expect.  Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  live  with  six
brothers and not know something about their lovers. Come, put out the lamp on your side and let us try."
Not knowing what else to do, Sephil let her direct him. He put out the lamp nearest the door while she
extinguished the other, and in the near-darkness fumbled his way back to the bed to  pull  off  his  shift  and
burrow under the coverlet. The mattress shifted, and he heard the rustle of fabric as Ketalya climbed back
into bed beside him.
When she touched his bare skin, he flinched.
"Does it bother you?" she whispered.
"No," he lied. Her hand felt soft and warm as it slid up along his arm, and she smelled pleasant, but he
could not forget how much importance was attached to this one deed. If only  it did not matter so much,

he thought. "It is nice."
"Then stop breathing so hard and touch me back," she said. "You are not going to hurt me."
Ketalya proved far more brazen than he, wrapping her arms around him and, finding his lips with her
fingers, kissed him soundly until he forgot to be amazed. Sephil touched her where her hands directed him
to touch, and guided her when she asked what he most enjoyed in bed. How much she knew about men, he
did not  know,  but  he  felt  uncertain  about  showing  her  how  to  suck  his  cock.  Adeja  once  told  him  that
women did not always like it or do it properly, whereas other men just seemed to know.
Instead, he drew her hand to his groin and showed her how to stroke him, which she did, rubbing his
burgeoning erection into fullness.
That night, she pushed him onto his back and mounted him, breaking the seal with her own body.  So
aroused was he by the tight heat that enveloped him that he forgot his fears, grasped her hips and arched up
into her until he climaxed. Afterward, he was abashed by the thought that she had not enjoyed it as much as
he.
"It is all right," she murmured, hushing him with a kiss. "We have time."
"Zhanil did not tell—"
Ketalya stopped his words with another kiss. "Sephil," she said sternly, "the next  time  you  utter  your
brother's name, you will sleep in the chair."
* * * *
"Sephil, I would not have you enter into your married life with such misconceptions as you now hold,"
said Ampheres.
They sat at the table in the king's salon, leisurely eating lunch. Ketalya spent the morning away from
her new husband's side, overseeing the removal of possessions and servants to  their  new  joint  household,
while Sephil remained with his father-in-law, discussing politics and domestic matters.
"I do not understand," he replied.
Ampheres carefully set down his fork and  removed  a  sheet  of  parchment  from  the  correspondence
through  which  he  had  been  leafing.  "You  believe  your  father  cared  nothing  for  you.  Perhaps  it  would
surprise you to learn that you are mistaken."
Sephil could only wonder when Ketalya had found the time to pass this information to her father, and
what else she might have told him. "I am not mistaken," he answered. "More than once he told me how he
wished I had never been born."
"What men and women say in anger, they do not always mean," said Ampheres.
"He kept me confined for three years," Sephil replied tightly, "and expressed no remorse afterward. If
he said he wished me dead, he meant it."
Ampheres nodded, but did not concede the argument. "I have here your father's last letter to me, sent
to me just before he died. Since the messenger had to smuggle it out of Shemin-at-Khul, most of it concerns
the Turyar, but your father mentions you as well. Would you like to hear what he said?"
Not particularly, though Sephil knew that  would  not  stop  his  father-in-law.  "I  doubt  he  had  anything
kind to say."
Holding the parchment to the light, Ampheres cleared his throat and read: "'Among other  sorrows,  it
grieves me to tell you of the death  of  my younger  son  at his own  hand.  I have  little time in which  to
write, so I will not burden  your  ears  with the sad  tale except  to say that he should  not  have  ended
this way.  Zhanil has  reproached  me many  times  for  my  harsh  treatment,  as  have  others,  including
you, yet not as I have reproached myself. I often wondered why I withheld my affection  from Sephil.
Some have  said that it was because  he was the living image of  his  mother  who  died,  yet  for  that  I
should have loved him with a whole heart.
"'Now in this gray hour, as I mull these dark thoughts  and  bid farewell  to Zhanil, who  rides out
against the Turyar—and whom I may never  see again—I  have  come to understand  that perhaps  the
gods never meant for me to grow old and cherish either son.'"
Ampheres carefully folded the letter and set it aside. "It seems that your brother neglected to  inform
him that you were  alive  and  safely  on  your  way  to  Ottabia.  The  knowledge  that  one  child  survived  him
might have eased his last hours."
As Sephil listened, he distanced himself from the words, unwilling to believe they were anything more
than a fabrication designed to allay old wounds. My father would never say such things. He would never
regret my death except to complain that it had  not come sooner. "It is easy to speak kind words of the
dead," he answered, "when they can no longer disappoint or embarrass you."
"Your father did not mince words, but when he spoke he was sincere," said Ampheres. "When a man
knows or believes he is about to face death, he does not lie. Had I known how heavily this matter weighed

upon you, I would have shared this letter with you earlier. I know what you are thinking, but rest  assured
that my daughter told me only what she felt I must know. Otherwise, I would not pry into the private affairs
of a husband and wife."
Once again, Sephil greeted his words with skepticism. From now on, whatever he said, did, or thought,
there was no question his father-in-law would know about it.

Chapter Nine
When he entered the tumult that was his new household, Sephil learned that the first thing Ketalya had
done that morning was dismiss his steward, Hauto.
"I do not find him trustworthy," she explained. "Varen has been my steward for years, and whatever
he sees or hears he will not repeat to my father."
Sephil did not quite believe this, but for the moment he preferred not to cause  strife  by  disputing  her
choice.  Hauto  had  been  as  cheerless  as  Melwas,  who  even  now  hovered  in  the  background  like  an
unwelcome shadow. At least Ketalya did not dismiss Delav or Piras, both of whom Sephil liked.
As he wandered the apartment, he tried to assist Ketalya in directing the servants until she explained
that as a Khalgari noblewoman it was her duty to manage the household. She would order the servants and
keep the money, for which he was grateful since he had no head for practical matters. In Rhodeen, Nakhet
had managed whatever funds his father allotted him, and in Ottabia he had no need of money.
The household encompassed two separate suites, yet in the first few weeks  of  their  marriage  Sephil
and Ketalya shared the same bed more nights than he could count. This came as a surprise, for after that
first, awkward night Sephil could not comprehend why Ketalya would wish to repeat the experience.
"How else will we have children?" she asked. 
Sephil repressed the shudder of distaste he felt at this remark. He did not ask whether she spoke from
a genuine maternal desire or as a mouthpiece for her father's dynastic ambitions; he preferred not to know
the answer. "We do not have to have them right away."
Not  only  did  Ketalya  stay  with  him,  filling  the  autumn  evenings  with  her  conversation  and  gentle
caresses, but showed an unwavering desire to explore lovemaking with him.
Ketalya  was  soft  where  Sephil  preferred  hardness,  and  curvaceous  where  he  was  accustomed  to
sleek muscle, yet she did not repel him as the courtesan had. Her scent and even her taste pleased him, to
the  point  where  he  wondered  if  he  avoided  women  simply  because  he  had  never  really  learned  to
appreciate them.
Fearing her disgust and believing it should no longer have a place in his life, he did not confide in her
his continuing desire for male partners, or rather, one male whom he tried hard to forget. As  much  as  he
wanted Adeja, and dreamt of him on those rare nights when he slept alone, Sephil knew that passion could
never again be.
I would have liked one last moment with him. He quickly pushed the thought away. Ketalya told him
outright that she would tolerate young men when she could not fulfill her husband's needs herself, and even
admitted preferring that option to female concubines who might become pregnant by him. Had she known
about Adeja, however, she never would have accepted him.
It is better this way, he thought. I cannot  cling to him like  a child, and  he deserves  his own  life.
Perhaps he has even found a wife by now.
One late autumn morning when Ketalya did not  appear  for  breakfast,  Sephil  made  inquriries  only  to
learn from the servants that the princess was unwell. Alarmed to learn she was vomiting, he left the table
and headed for her suite.
Despite his efforts, he got  no  farther  than  her  bedchamber  door.  Amarno,  the  chief  lady-in-waiting,
stopped him with her considerable bulk. "The physician has been summoned, my lord," she said loftily, "but
as the lady has no fever I do not think it is cause for concern."
Muffled  retching  from  the  direction  of  the  privy  told  Sephil  otherwise.  Squeezing  past  Amarno,
snapping at her when she would not move aside, he entered Ketalya's green-and-gilt bedchamber. Amarno
followed, haranguing him as he entered the bathroom, and finally the marble privy where Ketalya, sweaty
and haggard in her night shift, knelt over a chamber pot. A lady-in-waiting  hovered  anxiously  at  her  side,
bathing her brow with a damp cloth.
"What is the matter?" he asked.
She looked up at him, unable to speak before she turned and retched once more.
Sephil rounded on Amarno. "Why have you not called a physician?"

The good humor with which the woman answered him was intolerable. "My lord," she said, "I told you
before there is no cause  for  concern.  The  princess  has  missed  her  monthly  courses,  and  now  we  know
why."
"What are you talking about?"
Ketalya lifted her head from the chamber pot and groaned, "She means I am with child."
He could not quite believe what he heard. "But you are sick!"
"Morning  sickness  is  normal,  my  lord,"  said  Amarno.  With  her  hand  on  his  arm,  she  firmly  guided
Sephil back to the sitting room where his breakfast was already growing cold.  "I  have  already  sent  for  a
physician. He will explain everything once he arrives." With that,  she  retreated  to  her  mistress'  suite  and
shut the door, leaving Sephil to fret in stunned silence.
"How can she be with child?" he asked, fixing his gaze on Delav. "It has only been a few weeks."
"Such things can happen, my lord."
"Are women really supposed to be that sick when they are pregnant?"
"It seems so," replied the vizier, "though do  not  ask  me  why.  The  gods  have  not  blessed  me  with  a
wife."
The  physician,  a  kindly,  middle-aged  man  who  introduced  himself  as  Ghanis,  presently  arrived  and
spent a half-hour closeted with Ketalya. When he emerged, Sephil was aghast to see him smiling.
"I hear your wife's ladies have already told you she is pregnant," he said. "From your reaction, my lord,
I can see this will be your first child. Let me assure you that the princess is in excellent health,  so  at  this
stage I do not foresee any complications for her."
"I do not call what I saw before an example of excellent health," answered Sephil.
"Nausea is normal for an expectant mother at this stage," explained Ghanis. "As the seed takes root in
the womb, the woman's natural functions are disrupted. The princess may be somewhat uncomfortable  in
the morning hours, but her nausea should abate by afternoon. Once the child quickens, her symptoms should
disappear completely."
"You do not sound certain."
"Each woman is different, my lord, as is each pregnancy. The best thing you can do is remember that
all of this is completely natural and remain calm."
It was good advice, yet difficult to put into practice. Sephil relaxed only when he was able to return to
his wife's bedchamber and see for himself that she felt better.
Ketalya, bathed and dressed in a clean gown, greeted him with a tolerant smile. "Ghanis tells me I am
to expect this condition in the mornings."
Sephil sat down beside her. "I am sorry."
"I do not see what you have to do with it."
"It is my child," he said.
"Yes," she sighed, "and sadly you cannot  share  in  the  joys  of  childbirth  or  letting  out  one's  clothes."
Then she laughed and patted his hand. "This was not unexpected, Sephil. My courses did not come as they
ought, so I suspected it might be a child."
"Why did you not say anything to me before?"
Still smiling, Ketalya shook her head. "I wished to be sure. I will rest for a while and then see if I can
eat anything. Meanwhile, you should go to the temple as you planned."
Sephil did no such thing. Through Delav, he canceled his afternoon appointments,  sent  a  message  to
his father-in-law, then retired to the sitting room to await the king.
Ampheres arrived within the hour, visited with his daughter and  congratulated  Sephil.  "Soon  you  will
have to prepare your household for a son," he said.
With a polite smile, Sephil thanked him for the compliment, while secretly praying for a daughter.
* * * *
With his fair coloring and light brown hair, the youth resembled Sephil  enough  that  when  Adeja  saw
him, he paid for two hours in advance and took him upstairs.
Lahis was away tending a female relative in childbed, so the apartment stood empty, supper remained
uncooked, and Adeja did not wish to be alone. He did not see why his  wife's  mother  or  sisters  could  not
have gone in her stead, but as she seemed to want to go, he allowed her.
Winter brought rain to Bhellin. Building projects went on hiatus and all work in  the  quarries  stopped.
Adeja found temporary employment as a prison guard. Although less strenuous than finishing stones in the
quarry, it was a grim task. Not only did he guard the  cells  and  escort  the  menials  who  brought  prisoners
their meals, but he also had the job of accompanying the condemned to the scaffold.
Work and the wet weather made him sharp-tongued. On more than one occasion he found himself in

the bazaar purchasing a trinket for Lahis, who bore the brunt of his ill temper, so when she wanted to visit
her relatives he was not surprised.
After  eating  with  other  guards  from  his  shift  at  a  shop  near  the  prison,  Adeja  braved  the  chill  and
drizzle to venture down to the nearest brothel. He did not know what he wanted, other than companionship.
As  he  walked  into  the  establishment,  he  let  his  eyes  adjust  to  the  lamps  and  roam  the  main  room,
perusing the workers. Sometimes whores were so filthy or otherwise unappealing that he turned around and
left, but so far that was not his experience in Bhellin.
Perhaps it would have been better if it had been. The moment the young  man  locked  eyes  with  him
and let his fingers trace an enticing path from his lower lip to his groin, Adeja he knew what he wanted.
Once the transaction was made, the young man twined an arm through his and led him  upstairs.  For
his generous payment, Adeja rated a flagon of wine and a chamber with an actual bed, and the bedding was
clean.
His partner lit a lamp on the table beside the bed. "If you prefer," he said, "I can put it out."
Adeja loosened his belt before pulling the young man into his arms. "What is your name?"
"Minare, or anything else you like."
In the half-moment it took Adeja to consider that option, he dismissed it. Minare resembled Sephil, with
his  enticing  purr  and  promiscuous  pout  promising  delights  beyond  anything  a  wife  could  provide,  but  the
resemblance remained superficial. Adeja would not soil the prince's name by attaching it to this act.
As leaned in to kiss Minare's neck, his nose twitched at the overpowering scent the young man wore;
it was cheap, and too much. "Wash this off," he said, sliding his fingers along Minare's throat.
At a corner basin, Minare dipped a cloth in the water and sponged his neck and shoulders, turning the
motion into a slow, seductive act that could not fail to capture Adeja's attention.
Adeja came over, took  the  cloth  from  him,  and  bathed  his  throat  and  face,  wiping  off  the  kohl  and
henna that seemed to mark every prostitute he had ever fucked. "You're pretty enough without all this," he
said. "You shouldn't cheapen yourself so."
Minare licked at the stray water droplets with a tongue that said he would do no less to Adeja's cock.
Time enough for that later. For now, Adeja wanted to taste his mouth, slowly peel away his clothes and feel
that slight, supple body against his.
"What is your pleasure?" murmured Minare.
Adeja slipped his tongue between those parted lips. "Don't speak," he  growled.  "I'll  show  you  how  I
want it."
He spent his seed twice that night, letting Minare fondle and suck him to full bloom before spreading
the young man over the bed and mounting him hard. Orgasm blunted his ache, but did not close the wound.
Through the dark streets he found his way  home,  climbed  the  three  flights  of  stairs  to  his  darkened
apartment and fell into bed. Lahis still had not returned.
Tonight confirmed in his mind a thought that had been growing for many weeks. When spring came, it
would be time to consider leaving Bhellin and putting distance between himself and what he could not have.
Other cities in Khalgar held plenty of other opportunities, either in the stone trade or as a guard. Of course,
Lahis would not like leaving her family, but he only knew that he could not continue as he was.
* * * *
Sephil relished the quiet of the sanctuary of Abh. Avorim welcomed him back, reintroduced him to the
priests and novices, and helped him resume his studies.
"Bedren has written to me," said the high priest. "All is well in Ottabia. Kalion continues to atone for
his actions."
"Unless he does it with a whole heart," answered Sephil, "he should not bother."
Perhaps Avorim conveyed these words back to Bedren, for Sephil heard no more about the matter. If
Kalion repented, that was between him and the gods.
Sephil  took  his  place  once  more  among  the  novices,  greeting  old  companions  and  weathering  their
amusement as they learned his true identity. At first, they addressed him by his royal titles, and expressed
horror when he began ministering to the faithful as he had done before, but this treatment lasted  no  more
than  a  few  days.  Although  Melwas  and  another  guard  accompanied  him,  they  remained  at  a  discreet
distance, enabling Sephil to work unhindered.
These quiet hours in the sanctuary, sitting beside the afflicted and destitute, serving them with his own
hands  and  listening  as  they  described  their  hardships,  offered  Sephil  the  sense  of  purpose  he  lacked
elsewhere. He made one concession to his rank by wearing the royal Sun of Rhodeen on the  lapel  of  his
robe. Ampheres took interest in his visibility for political reasons, but to Sephil it seemed more important that
those he tended understand that he was both prince and priest, a living example that the royal house  truly

did care for those under its protection.
Ketalya took pride in his vocation. Oftentimes she asked  what  books  he  read,  and  wore  around  her
neck a little silver reliquary filled with water  from  the  Adenna  shrine.  She  also  wore  the  silver  bracelets
Sephil  gave  her  to  celebrate  her  pregnancy.  With  Varen's  help,  he  found  a  jeweler  to  etch  little  moons
around the bands, and presented them to Ketalya with much ceremony.
"In Rhodeen," he explained, "the king is the Sun, but the queen is sepha rian, the Moon."
Ketalya held out her wrist as he slid  the  bracelets  onto  it.  "Then  why  did  your  father  call  you  'little
moon?'"
"For my mother," answered Sephil.
With  the  announcement  of  Ketalya's  pregnancy,  relations  grew  strained  with  both  Tajhaan  and  the
Rhodeen faction represented by Melin Wesares; the latter cast such aspersions on the baby's paternity that
he alienated the very king upon whose generosity he counted. Ampheres cautioned him to mend his words,
which  Wesares  did  only  so  far  as  the  princess  was  concerned.  Sephil,  however,  was  fair  game,  and
slanderous broadsheets continued to circulate in the city.
However  much  the  family  tried  to  prevent  it,  Ketalya  saw  several  of  these  publications,  with  their
crudely executed wood-cut caricatures of her husband  in  compromising  positions.  Sephil  preferred  not  to
look at them at all, instead taking his father-in-law's advice and treating the slanders as beneath his notice,
even as he continued to visit hospitals and shrines.
"This is such tripe," said Ketalya, handing the latest broadsheet off to a servant to burn on the hearth.
"Why anyone would believe such things, I do not know."
"I have not always had such a shining reputation," replied Sephil.
"Perhaps, but anyone who knows you can see these stories are false."
For his part, Sephil did not care to correct her by elaborating on how much of the slander was true, and
how much was simply a distorted version of the truth. 
Tajhaan provided a more substantial threat. Sephil sat beside his father-in-law in the audience chamber
when  the  Tajhaani  ambassador  delivered  stern  words  from  the  High  Prince,  who  chided  Ampheres  for
endangering diplomatic relations between the two kingdoms by not recognizing the rightful king.
"Your  prince  addresses  us  as  a  brother,"  said  Ampheres,  "yet  in  his  message  we  do  not  hear  the
language of a brother."
In his demeanor, Sephil saw that the  ambassador  plainly  desired  to  be  elsewhere.  "Great  King,"  the
man answered, "my prince speaks only out of the highest regard and love for your person, and urges you to
remember that brothers may occasionally exchange harsh words for good purpose."
When  he  would  have  continued,  Ampheres  cut  him  short  with  a  gesture.  "Spare  us  your  mincing
words. Do your  duty  and  convey  our  displeasure  to  Armajid.  Tell  him  if  he  desires  a  better  answer,  he
would do well to remember our position. We are not subordinate, and will act when and in  what  way  we
see fit."
Sephil  noted  that  in  all  this  political  wrangling,  the  princes,  diplomats  and  statesmen  of  both  lands
continued to behave as though the Turyar did not exist. No official word had come out of Shemin-at-Khul,
yet other sources confirmed that the Turya lord who had led the invasion had taken one of the captive royal
women as his queen and was now consolidating his power, seizing estates from Rhodeen nobles who would
not surrender and giving them over to Turya chieftains upon whose loyalty he could count.
Conquest did not involve decimating the general population, as commoners seemed unaffected by the
change.
Ambassadors  could  pass  back  and  forth  as  they  liked,  treaties  could  be  signed  and  discarded,  and
insults doled out on both sides until  Khalgar  and  Tajhaan  stood  on  the  brink  of  war,  but  nothing  short  of
military action would dislodge the Turyar. Sephil, whose only concern at this point was his wife and unborn
child, removed himself from the situation insofar as he was able.
Though  two  more  months  remained  before  the  child  quickened,  Ampheres  scheduled  a  visit  to  the
oracle of the Snake Mother. Ketalya did not relish a visit to the oracle, and tried to persuade her father that
it was not necessary. Without explaining further, Ampheres insisted and ordered her to prepare.
"I have no great love of serpents," she confessed to Sephil, "and do not wish to see some poor woman
suffer simply to look into my future."
"What does the ritual entail?" he asked.
"Father  will  put  a  question  to  the  oracle,  and  she  will  go  into  a  trance  after  taking  the  bite  of  a
poisonous snake." Ketalya visibly shuddered at her  description,  even  as  Sephil  tried  to  picture  the  scene.
"Her prophecies are supposed to be very reliable, but I do not want to see her ordeal. They say the oracles
are chosen young, and die before they are thirty because they are bitten so many times."

She need not have worried. On the day before the visit, a priestess of the Snake Mother came to the
palace to explain the ritual, as Sephil sat beside her to provide reassurance. "The holy oracle will place her
hands on your womb and go to an inner chamber for the serpent bite and sacred trance," said the priestess.
"Prophecy is the Mother's mystery, where even kings may not trespass."
When Ampheres came that  evening  to  visit,  he  offered  additional  assurances.  "All  will  be  well,"  he
said. "After your meeting with the oracle, you may return here and rest. Sephil and I will remain to await
the outcome."
Had Sephil any say in the matter, he would have canceled the trip altogether. Ketalya clearly did not
want  to  go,  and  he  empathized  with  her  reluctance.  Whether  the  child  was  a  son  or  daughter  made  no
difference to him, and from what little Ketalya said on the topic, either gender would suit her as long as the
child was healthy.
Late the next morning, they departed for the House of the Snake Mother. Due to her condition and the
weather,  Ketalya  rode  in  a  covered  litter,  while  Sephil  and  Ampheres  rode  alongside.  Twenty  guards
accompanied them, with Melwas riding behind.
Rather  than  approach  the  temple  through  the  grand  plaza,  the  royal  party  entered  through  an
inconspicuous side gate and proceeded up a path that took them into a dimly lit vestibule. Sephil wrinkled his
nose at the smell of mildew and old herbs, and Ketalya swaying, visibly nauseous.
Sephil placed a  hand  on  her  arm.  "Do  you  want  to  sit?"  he  asked  softly.  "There  is  a  bench  by  the
door."
Gritting her teeth, Ketalya shook her head. "I want to go home," she whispered back.
Two priestesses emerged from an inner room and, after bowing to the king, approached Ketalya. For
the occasion, her ladies had dressed her in a loose-fitting bodice and full skirt, which the priestesses undid
just enough to expose her belly under the linen chemise.
"All mothers know the blessing of the Snake Mother, who sheds her skin and renews the world," said
one  priestess,  a  formidable-looking  crone  who  placed  a  hand  over  Ketalya's  womb.  Too  early  for  the
roundness that was the telltale sign of pregnancy, Sephil could not understand what the priestess expected
to find.
As she spoke, four more priestesses appeared. In their midst stood a woman clad in white, small and
on the gaunt side of slender. When she stretched forth her hands to lay them on Ketalya's womb alongside
the crone's, old puncture marks stood out like bruises against her pale skin.
Ketalya said nothing during the examination, but Sephil sensed her discomfort.  The  woman's  strange
mannerisms did nothing to reassure him. Under her breath she hissed softly, and when Ampheres presented
her with the gift of chalice filled with myrrh, her gaze passed through him. She was blind, or the effects of
serpent venom made her appear so.
Once the oracle finished her examination, the priestesses rearranged Ketalya's  clothing  and  released
her. Ampheres nodded, and she left the temple with Melwas and and ten of the guards.
Temple servants brought food, drink and coal for the braziers. Ampheres did not appear impatient, for
as he sat down on one of the cushioned benches, he confided to Sephil that he consulted the oracle about
political  matters  he  deemed  especially  important.  "When  the  Turyar  appeared  on  the  borders  of  your
father's realm," he said, "I put my question to the Snake Mother and learned that the head and star would
fall, but not the body."
"That makes no sense," said Sephil.
"You might think so, but a prophecy bears much thought," said Ampheres, "and one must look outside
the  bounds  of  literal  interpretation  for  an  answer.  Very  often,  one  does  not  understand  the  truth  of  the
Snake Mother's words until after the event has occurred. As king, your father was the head of state, and
your brother's name meant 'little  star.'  Both  have  fallen  as  the  oracle  predicted,  but  the  body,  the  actual
kingdom, has remained intact."
If the truth could only be known after the event, then Sephil saw no practical value in oracles, prophets
or other fortune tellers.
"It will take an hour or two for the oracle to finish her reading," continued Ampheres. "The viper they
use for the ceremony is extremely deadly. The poison takes effect within moments, but I am told that the
Snake Mother's message must be transcribed by the priests into a form we can understand."
Sephil wrapped himself in his fur-lined cloak and settled in to wait. Even with two braziers burning, the
vestibule was cold and too dark for reading, so he put his book aside, concentrated on the sound of the rain
falling outside and meditated. Time melted away, so it surprised him when when a priestess appeared in the
doorway. Flanked by two priests, she swayed as she uttered the words of prophecy: A son  will ride forth,
the sun at his back, the moon on his left and the stars on  his right. Darkness  wraps  her cloak  about

him, war bathes him in blood, a crown of stars sits upon his brow.
This was not the hissing oracle who had appeared earlier, but another woman  whose  words  seemed
rehearsed. Until now, Sephil had assumed the messenger would be a priest.
"These  are  the  words  of  the  Serpent,"  she  intoned.  "They  may  not  be  altered,  they  may  not  be
circumvented. All shall come to pass."
Ampheres bowed his head to her. "We thank the Mother for her wisdom, and  her  servants  for  their
tribulation."
While the king appeared satisfied, Sephil did not like what he heard at all. He wondered what gibberish
the oracle had actually uttered in her venom-induced agony, and how much of it had been  tailored  by  the
priests  to  suit  the  ambitions  of  their  royal  patron.  No  matter  what  the  truth;  Ampheres  would  use  the
prophecy to shape his dynastic plans, and Sephil did not need such contrivances to know what that  would
entail.
A guard met them on the path leading down to the courtyard. Splashed with mud and droplets of what
appeared to be blood, the royal escort did not recognize him as one of their own until he sank to his knees
before Ampheres and blurted out his unit and rank.
He was one of the ten soldiers who had been assigned to guard Ketalya, and his condition told Sephil
something was very wrong.
"What is the matter?" demanded the king. "Why are you not with the princess?" From his tone, Sephil
knew he realized the danger also.
"Sire," gasped the guard, "we were attacked in the streets."
Sephil noticed how hard the young man was trembling and stepped forward to help him up. "Where is
the princess now?" he asked.
The guard turned to look at him. A knife or other weapon had cut him above the left eye, leaving that
side of his face covered in blood. "There were several of them, sir, maybe eight or ten—I  couldn't  count,
they struck so fast. They cut down Melwas and overturned the litter. I heard the princess scream and went
to help her, but they fell on us. The captain ordered me to come back here and bring the other guards."
Ampheres did not wait for the rest of the story. Shouting for his horse and his remaining bodyguard, he
raced down the path ahead of Sephil, who instructed the priests gathered in the vestibule doorway to see to
the injured man.
A  crowd  swarmed  the  street  where  the  attack  had  occurred.  Palace  guards  were  already  on  the
scene, dispersing onlookers while Ampheres dismounted his horse, shoved men aside, and bellowed orders.
Still in the saddle, Sephil saw the wrecked litter and bodies strewn across the pavement. Melwas lay  in  a
pool of blood  beside  the  litter,  his  severed  arm  still  grasping  his  sword.  Sephil  gagged  and  looked  away,
scanning the other corpses for Ketalya but seeing only guards and men wearing nondescript clothing.
Where is she? Fighting nausea and growing panic, he motioned to one of the captains supervising the
scene. "I do not see the princess," he said. "I was told she was attacked. Where is she now?"
"Sir, I am not authorized to release information—"
"She is my wife, soldier!" 
Saluting,  the  captain  cleared  his  throat  and  answered,  "Forgive  me,  sir.  I  didn't  realize  you  were  a
prince.  We  arrived  to  find  the  princess  bruised  and  disoriented,  but  otherwise  unharmed.  She  was
conducted back to the palace a short time ago."
Sephil breathed a sigh of relief at the news. "Who did this?" he asked.
"We don't know yet, sir." The captain gestured to the ruined litter and the nearby bodies not wearing
the royal livery. "They were killed before they could be questioned. The guards took them down, and those
that escaped them were cut down by citizens who heard the lady's cries and ran to help. Right now, we're
doing all we can to find out more."
Seeing there was no more for him to do at the site, Sephil asked his father-in-law's permission to return
to the palace. Ampheres dismissed him with an escort of five guards. "Go see to your wife," he said. "I will
investigate this matter."
Chaos reigned in the household. The guard had been doubled, yet with Melwas gone there was no one
to command them. Ladies and servants ran back and forth, carrying linens, smelling salts, and gossip, their
frenzied activity unnerving the mistress who lay trembling in her bed. Sephil paused in the doorway, took in
the scene, and ordered at everyone but the physician to leave.
Ketalya flinched at his commanding tone, which was harsher  than  he  intended.  Seeing  this,  Amarno
attempted to evict him until he seized her by the wrist and shoved her out the door. "You are upsetting the
princess," he said. "I will not have it." Before the woman could  protest,  he  slammed  the  door  shut  in  her
face.

"I am sorry," he said, crossing the room to the bed. Ketalya's eyes, wide and dark in a pale face, never
left him as he sat down. Scratches and a deep bruise marred her cheek, but Ghanis, who sat on the opposite
side, assured Sephil that she was more stunned than hurt.
"She tumbled out of the litter," he explained. "When it toppled over, it shielded her from the brunt of the
attack, and Melwas pulled her assailant off her before he could cause serious injury. However, she tells me
that she witnessed much carnage, so it is understandable that her nerves are strained right now. I will give
her something to sleep, but not too strong in view of her condition. As far  as  I  can  tell,  the  child  has  not
been harmed."
Sephil stayed with Ketalya, holding her hand as she took the sleeping draught and  slowly  drifted  off.
Ghanis stayed a while longer, gently applying a poultice to the bruise and scratches, and prescribing rest.
Twilight  darkened  the  gardens  outside  when  Sephil  rose  from  his  wife's  bedside.  He  tucked  the
coverlet around her, extinguished all but one lamp and stepped outside, softly closing the door behind  him.
All at  once,  the  ladies-in-waiting  accosted  him,  clamoring  for  information  until  he  sharply  gestured  for
silence.
"The princess is sleeping," he said, "and she is not to be disturbed.  Amarno,  you  or  one  of  the  other
ladies will sit with her through the night should she wake. I will not have all of  you  in  there  upsetting  her
with your noise."
Leaving the matter in Amarno's hands, Sephil retired to  the  sitting  room  where  the  servants  offered
him a meal he could not eat, and sent for Varen. "Until the princess recovers, you are  entrusted  with  the
daily operation of the household," he told the steward. "I will receive your reports in her place."
What he would do with those reports, Sephil had no idea. Management was not part of his upbringing,
and he was content to let others delegate work and handle the budgets and endless paperwork. However,
he knew he could not project incompetence and expect the steward to take him seriously. Necessity taught
him that giving in to the panic he felt would only give his enemies the satisfaction they craved, and it would
not help Ketalya.
"I will do all I can, my lord," said Varen.
As the steward was about to leave, Sephil  suddenly  recalled  something.  "Varen,  who  will  command
the household guard now that Melwas is gone?" he asked.
Varen turned from the door. "The appointment has not yet been made, my lord, but I am  certain  the
king will appoint someone first thing in the morning."
That decided it. "No," Sephil said firmly, "this time I will make the appointment."

Chapter Ten
"My lord," protested Varen. "I am not quite certain this is permitted."
Sephil ignored him. "In the morning you will send messengers to the city's  stonemasons  and  quarries
and inquire after a man named Adeja ked Shamuz. When you find him, bring him here."
"Sir, if this man has some complicity in today's terrible events, the king should—"
"He is a soldier, not a suspect," answered Sephil. "Should he ask, tell him I wish to offer him a job."
Varen hesitated. "My lord, the king will want to make the appointment."
"As much as I appreciate the king's assistance, this is my household. The princess is my wife, carrying
my child, and I will see to her safety," answered Sephil. His voice sounded harsh even to his own ears, but
he did not soften his tone. "Is that understood, or do I need to dismiss you?"
Nakhet had not gone when ordered, and  Sephil  remained  uncertain  about  dismissing  a  steward  who
belonged more to Ketalya than him. He softened his tone and added, "You do your work well, Varen, but
right now your concern must be for the princess."
"Yes, my lord," replied Varen, "but there are certain protocols that must be observed."
Sephil took a  chance,  stepped  forward  and  draped  an  arm  about  the  steward's  shoulder.  Weeks  of
watching Zhanil interact with court officials and palace staff told him that self-assurance, not rank, was the
key. Otherwise, the steward would never obey him. "You know I  have  only  the  best  intentions,"  he  said,
"and the man I wish you to find is both exceptionally loyal and intelligent. Of  course  one  must  be  proper
about these things, but sometimes necessity dictates otherwise. You are simply following orders. Should the
princess or the king express their disapproval, I will explain the situation to them."
At this point, Varen offered no  further  resistance  and  began  making  inquiries.  Sephil  did  not  inform
Ampheres about his intentions, allowing the king to appoint a commander that, when circumstances allowed,
he would dismiss.
Once alone, Sephil sat down and tried to focus his thoughts. The reality of the situation, bodies lying in
the street and bruises on his wife's face, were too much to comtemplate. More  than  anything,  he  needed
Adeja to place a hand on his shoulder and reassure him that everything would be all right.
I have overstepped my role, he thought. The king will scold me for doing this, but what else can  I
do? In their few weeks together, Sephil had watched Zhanil with his heavily pregnant wife and understood
that a husband's role at such times was to offer support and protection. How can  I sit here  and  let others
do everything? Everyone will think I am an incompetent fool.
The investigation into the attack continued. Ampheres could offer little information, explaining how the
officials charged with identifying and apprehending the perpetrators did not even know who  the  deceased
assailants were. "They appear to be local men," he said, "but no one will come forward to claim the bodies
and the witnesses say nothing."
"Why not interrogate them?" asked Sephil.
Ampheres  gave  him  a  questioning  look.  "Only  a  tyrant  employs  torture  in  that  manner.  Would  an
aspiring priest of Abh truly have us do such a thing to those who committed no crime?"
Abashed, Sephil said no more. That the perpetrator might escape  punishment  was  a  bitter  reality  he
realized he would probably have to accept.
Putting a gracious face on the situation, he went down to the  street  where  the  attack  occurred,  met
with the shopkeepers who had  intervened,  and  thanked  them  for  coming  to  his  wife's  aid.  That  evening,
Ampheres approved his initiative, though Sephil did not seek such praise. He wished to atone for his earlier
callousness, and hoped that his appearance would put a human face on the inquiries and prompt someone to
come forward. On that point, his effort proved fruitless.
What time he could, he spent with Ketalya. Once she slept through the first night, she seemed calmer,
but once in a while Sephil saw her stare at the wall, her eyes losing focus as though she was trying to recall
something.
"Why would anyone want to harm me?" she murmured.
Sephil took her hands in his. Whenever he spoke to her, he tried to sound warm and reassuring, using

the same tones he employed with those he tended in the sanctuary. "I felt the same when my cousin tried to
kill me, and when the priest betrayed me in Ottabia," he said. "You know you were not the target."
"The baby has not even quickened," she answered. "It is not right."
"You will be safe here."
Ketalya leaned back against the pillows. Rain drummed against the windowsill and gutters outside. It
was an afternoon for lingering inside with a warm fire and no servants. "What did the oracle say?"
"That it will be a son," he said. "I suppose we must decide on a name."
"I would prefer to wait, but if it amuses you, then go ahead."
Sephil  sprawled  atop  the  coverlet  beside  her.  "Do  you  think  he  would  like  a  Khalgari  name  or  a
Rhodeen  one?"  Sitting  up  on  one  elbow,  he  drew  the  cover  down  just  enough  to  expose  her  belly,  and
addressed the occupant within. "Well, what would you prefer?"
Ketalya gently pushed him away. "Stop that," she said, smothering a  giggle.  "The  child  has  not  even
quickened."
Propping his chin on his hand, he looked up at her. "Personally, I would rather have a daughter, but if it
is a  boy,  I  think  he  should  have  a  Rhodeen  name,"  he  said.  "Or  we  could  wrap  him  in  pink  swaddling
clothes, give him a girl's name, and fool everybody."
Ketalya took interest in neither his joke nor the business of naming. Her apathy baffled him, so when
Ghanis made his next scheduled visit, Sephil drew the  physician  aside,  explained  the  difficulty,  and  asked
what was amiss.
Ghanis listened to his concerns. "I would not worry," he said. "I have observed with some mothers that
they begin to take greater interest once the baby quickens. With the princess, it may simply be too early, or
she may be preoccupied with what has just happened. Give her time, my lord, and all will be well."
Sephil decided to let the matter alone for now, especially with other, more  pressing  concerns  to  deal
with. As the second day drew to a close, Varen still had no success in locating Adeja.
"My prince," he said, "I assure you I have sent out men to find  him,  but  the  stonemason  shops  have
never heard of him and the quarries are closed this time of  year.  My  men  are  currently  making  inquiries
among the quarry foremen to see what they might know, but it is possible this man has found employment
elsewhere, or left the city altogether."
"Keep  looking,"  said  Sephil.  Should  Varen's  inquiries  among  the  quarry  foremen  prove  fruitless,  he
would have the steward widen the search to the city's barracks, for if Adeja did not go into the stone trade,
he would probably return to the military.
Above all, Sephil did not want to contemplate the possibility that Adeja had left Bhellin.
On the fourth afternoon, a  raging  storm  kept  Sephil  from  the  temple.  As  he  read  by  the  fire  in  the
sitting room, Varen entered and announced his success. "I have brought him as you wished, my lord. He is
waiting in the foyer."
Sephil nodded. "Bring him in."
Varen ushered in a man wearing an ill-fitting guard's uniform and an irritated  look.  Sephil  looked  up,
recognized Adeja, and smiled. "Thank the gods you have come.  I  have  been  searching  for  you  for  days.
Varen, have someone bring him a towel and something warm to drink. Adeja, please sit down."
Adeja  took  the  cloth  the  servant  handed  him  and  wiped  his  face  and  dripping  hair,  but  remained
standing. "What do you want? I've no time for a social visit. If I don't work, I don't get paid."
"I would not ask you here if it was not important, and I will compensate you for any work time lost,"
replied  Sephil.  "My  wife  was  attacked  on  her  way  from  the  temple  of  the  Snake  Mother.  I  need  your
assistance."
As he listened, Adeja's face changed. "I had no idea."
"She is pregnant, and I fear she will be attacked again," said Sephil. "Adeja, will you please sit down? I
imagine you do quite enough standing wherever it is you work."
"I've taken a job in the local prison." Unpinning his damp cloak, which he let fall to the floor, Adeja sat
down in one of the sitting room's velvet chairs. "I didn't know your wife was with child. Was she hurt?"
"She was more startled than injured, but most of her guards were killed," explained Sephil. "The  king
has already replaced them, and appointed a new captain. They are loyal, but I do not trust them to protect
her or the child against whoever wishes them harm."
A  second  servant  entered  bearing  a  tray  with  goblets  of  mulled  wine.  Sephil  took  one  and  offered
Adeja the other. "I called you here because I want you to take a post here in my household."
Adeja set the goblet down without drinking from it.  His  jaw  tightened,  and  when  he  spoke  his  reply
was a growl. "I'm not your fucking lapdog to come and go as you please."
"Mind your tongue," warned Varen, observing from the corner.

Sephil stilled his protest with a gesture. "Adeja, I would not have bothered you if I did not truly  need
you. You would be well paid, I assure you."
"I have a wife now," said Adeja, "and I'm certainly not  about  to  leave  her  just  so  I  can  watch  your
door."
Smiling, Sephil offered his congratulations, but his joy was mingled with a disappointment he could not
quite fathom. "I see no reason you cannot bring your wife with you," he said. "Many of the servants here
are married and live together, and  I  am  sure  your  wife  would  be  pleased  at  the  promotion.  Work  in  the
prison cannot be all that appealing."
Adeja threw back his head in frustration. "I can't just—"
"Who is this man?" asked a voice from the doorway.
Ketalya stood there, a velvet dressing gown thrown over her chemise, her hair loose and  disheveled.
While Varen quickly voiced his apologies, Sephil rose and went to her side. "Did I wake you, my lady?" he
murmured.
"I heard an unfamiliar voice," she said. Peering around him, Ketalya looked apprehensively at  Adeja.
"Now answer my question: who is this rough-looking man and why is he here?"
"He is a guest. Come, I will introduce you." Sephil took her by the hand and, with some reluctance on
her part, led her into the room. "My lady, this is Adeja ked Shamuz, my guard in Rhodeen and Ottabia. He
is a man of considerable loyalty who saved my life more than once. I asked him here to offer him a position
in our household. Adeja, this is my wife, Princess Ketalya kéya Ampheres."
Adeja made a short little bow. "He has offered, my lady, but I haven't yet accepted."
Even though Ketalya was courteous, Sephil could tell that she disliked both Adeja and the impromptu
interview. Contrary to what he expected, her disapproval increased as he described Adeja's credentials. A
moment later, he discovered why.
"Husband," she said, interrupting, "it seems this man is not a member  of  the  royal  establishment.  Sir,
you  will  have  to  forgive  the  prince.  He  means  well,  but  it  seems  he  does  not  yet  fully  understand  our
customs.  In  Khalgar,  certain  protocols  must  be  observed  in  appointing  guards  or  servants  in  royal
households. You do not possess the proper credentials."
"Assassins care nothing for protocol," Sephil said tightly. He did not care for her patronizing tone, and
would not suffer it in front of others. "Adeja has a long record of satisfactory service, as well as letters of
credential from my brother. While I respect the customs of the royal household, I should also point out there
are  circumstances  when  one  must  go  beyond  what  is  proper.  I  do  not  see  why  our  safety  should  be
compromised simply because it is against protocol."
Adeja, now more amused than irritated, glanced from one to the other. "My prince," he said, "it seems
you called me here without asking your wife first."
Sephil glared at him. "I did not wish to distress her anymore than she already has been."
"It is our task to appoint servants," said Ketalya. "We thank you for your trouble, but at this time we do
not require more guards."
Tilting his head slightly to one side, Adeja drew a long breath and held it while he studied her. "I take it
my lady  knows  who  did  this?"  he  finally  asked.  With  one  finger,  he  motioned  to  her  bruised  cheek.  "In
Tajhaan, we respect royal women. Any man who did that to a princess would be hunted down and killed at
once."
His brusque, informal manner flustered Ketalya, who shakily repeated that an additional guard was not
needed before withdrawing.
Sephil walked Adeja to the door. "I still want you for this position," he promised. "I will speak to her."
"Save your words," answered Adeja. "I wish you luck in catching whoever did that to your woman, but
if the king and his entire royal guard can't help you, then I don't see what one lowly Tajhaani soldier is going
to do."
"Why is it that we never part on good terms?"
"Because  you're  a  prince  and  I'm  a  soldier,  and  when  you  don't  need  me,  off  I  go  like  so  much
baggage."
"That is not true," said Sephil. "I have never sent you away."
Adeja donned his cloak. "You're right, but I doubt I'd be of much use to you."
He took the money Varen gave him, nodded farewell to Sephil and followed the steward out.
Sephil  went  to  his  wife's  chamber  and  dismissed  her  ladies.  Ketalya  sat  before  the  looking  glass
brushing her hair, which she continued to do even as the door closed.
"You were rude to him, and to me," he said. "I will not be humiliated that way in front of others."
Ketalya set down her brush and looked at him. "And you embarrassed me by insisting I meet that man

when I was not properly dressed. Appointing servants is my duty," she answered. "Had you consulted me
before bringing him here, there would have been no difficulty."
"You have no trouble allowing your father to appoint guards," he pointed out. "As your husband, I have
the right to do the same. Why should I stand idly by while men threaten your life and the life of our child? I
mean to pursue this."
"That man has not been trained by the royal establishment. He is not qualified to serve here."
"I do not see what that has to do with anything. I do not pretend to know much about these matters,
but Adeja has served in a legitimate army and learned proper military discipline. I do not see what makes
him different from any other soldier, except that he was born elsewhere." Sephil claimed the window seat
recently vacated by one of the ladies; it was still warm. "Adeja has a long, satisfactory service record. He
is capable, intelligent, and I trust him far more than I ever trusted Melwas."
"I am not going to make him captain in Branag's place."
"I never said anything about making him captain. Place him under Branag if it suits you," said Sephil. "I
do not care as long as he is here."
Ketalya sighed. "I will think about the matter, but I am not promising you anything."
He rose, kissed her cheek, and left her to  her  toilette,  informing  the  ladies  on  his  way  out  that  they
could return to their mistress' side. There was still time to send a messenger after Adeja, but when Varen
approached him with a missive bearing the royal seal, he saw he would have to postpone  the  matter  until
later.
'Come at once  to the audience  chamber.  Wear your  royal  robes.  Ampheres  ké  Eramen.'  Sephil
read the message twice, showed it to Varen, and sent for Piras to dress him. Within the hour, he sat at the
king's left hand in the audience chamber, with Ettarin and an unknown chamberlain on the right.
"I do not expect you will find this a pleasant  meeting,"  murmured  Ampheres,  "but  it  is  one  we  have
anticipated for some time. The Tajhaani ambassador  will  undoubtedly  wish  to  address  you,  and  you  may
reply, but I would not say too much."
Flanked by four attendants, the ambassador who entered was dark-skinned and as richly dressed as a
prince. He offered a dramatic bow to each man on the dais, lingering on Sephil. "It is a pleasure to at last
meet the royal cousin and pretender," he said. "Allow me to introduce myself as Fallaz ked Arbanu, envoy
and humble servant of His Highness the High Prince, Armajid ked Jahzarin, may the Father keep him and
bless him with a thousand sons."
Sephil answered this verbiage while overlooking the subtle insult the man had just dealt him.
"As you have journeyed a long way," said Ampheres, "no doubt you wish to deliver your message. We
much desire to hear what our brother the High Prince has to say."
Fallaz dropped another deep bow. "Great King, our prince currently celebrates the birth of a grandson,
Prince Ninarsha ked Dashir."
Sephil held his breath. So Dashir had a son. As his family increased, so, too, would his ambitions.
"Prince Dashir claims the title of Crown Prince of Rhodeen for his son," continued Fallaz, "and as such
demands the return of the royal seal." His gaze darted to the ring on the chain around Sephil's neck. "This
humble servant has been charged with carrying out that duty."
"An interesting choice," commented Ampheres, "giving a Tajhaani name to a prince of Rhodeen."
Fallaz smiled. "Our prince wishes to strengthen his ties with the royal house of Rhodeen."
"Nevertheless," said Ampheres, "as we have stated in our earlier correspondence, Prince Dashir does
not  hold  the  strongest  claim  to  the  throne.  It  would  not  be  in  our  interest  at  this  time  to  lend  him  our
support."
"That  is  unfortunate,"  answered  Fallaz.  "You  may  perhaps  recall  that  Prince  Dashir's  claim  was
recognized by the late king Brasidios, who adopted him as a son after the tragic death of Prince Zhanil." He
glanced sidelong at Sephil, his lips curling into an oily smile. "As your brother, Prince Dashir bears you and
your progeny no ill will, provided that you are agreeable in this matter."
Sephil  found  it  inconceivable  that  Dashir,  who  spent  more  than  a  decade  tormenting  him,  would
suddenly express such sentiments. "As we are not sons of the same mother," he answered coldly, "Prince
Dashir is not my brother. Go back and tell my royal cousin that had he not attempted my life in Ottabia, we
would not have come to this situation, and I might have believed in his assurances of goodwill."
Fallaz's  smile  evaporated  for  the  moment  it  took  him  to  regain  his  composure.  "That  was  an
unfortunate misunderstanding, I assure you. Prince Dashir has come to regret his hasty action. He desires
peace with the royal house of Khalgar and to see his son prosper.  A  gift  of  the  royal  seal  would  greatly
reassure him that, as you say, you mean him no threat."
"And so Prince Dashir would make a gift of the seal to his son," finished Ampheres, "but that does not

grant him a kingdom. The last we heard, the Turyar still hold Rhodeen and have made no offers to restore
the royal house. Does the prince mean to raise Tajhaan on his infant son's behalf, or does he simply hope
that the Turyar will plunder  Rhodeen,  retreat  beyond  the  mountains  to  their  own  lands,  and  conveniently
leave the throne to him?"
Fallaz shook his head. "Great King, the prince has not stated his intentions in this matter."
"Then this matter of the seal ring is a moot point," answered Ampheres.
"Consider it a symbolic gesture of peace and reconciliation."
"As my son-in-law has stated, it is a gesture that comes somewhat too late."
Turning  to  Sephil,  Fallaz  pressed  his  hand  to  his  heart  and  molded  his  expression  into  a  perfect,  if
insincere, mask of contrition. "The choice rests with you, Prince Sephil."
"I have already made my decision," said Sephil. Or rather, his cousin had made it for  him  by  making
two attempts on his life and, for all he knew, the attempt on Ketalya and their child. "Should Prince Dashir
ever manage to cast the Turyar out  of  Rhodeen  and  make  himself  or  his  son  king,  then  he  may  put  the
question to us again. Until then, the royal seal belongs to me and my heirs."
* * * *
Adeja scowled at the prisoners through the iron grille. It was just like Sephil to intrude when he wanted
something, never mind that Adeja had a life and ambitions of his own. Lahis might not care for his working
in the  city  prison,  but  the  last  thing  he  wanted  was  to  join  the  royal  household  to  work  for  a  capricious
prince who sent him away whenever he was not needed or for some snobbish princess whose only concern
was that he did not have the proper credentials.
Fuck that, he thought. I could take their guards and break them over my knee.
A  moment  later,  he  admitted  that  Sephil  was  right.  Nakhet  had  sent  him  away  the  first  time,  and
Ampheres the second; the prince had no say in the business. And he's got no say about it now,  no  matter
what he claims. They might let me stay long  enough  to catch  whoever  tried to  kill  his  woman,  then
dump me in the street again once they're done with me.
Still, it irked him to see bruises mar the face of a beautiful royal woman. In Tajhaan, a man such as he
would never be allowed to gaze upon a princess. Anyone who injured her in such a manner would meet a
cruel death: flayed alive or impaled. When his anger cooled, Adeja agreed  that  Sephil  should  take  severe
measures to ensure his wife's safety, as her specially-trained guards obviously could not protect her.
In fact, Adeja  took  private  pleasure  at  the  change  in  Sephil.  No  longer  a  timid  or  spoiled  child,  the
prince  had  handled  the  situation  like  a  man,  even  if  Adeja  left  the  palace  smarting  at  his  preemptory
dismissal. In Tajhaan, no wife would  have  gainsaid  or  embarrassed  her  husband  in  such  fashion,  but  the
Khalgari did not even have the wisdom to impose the veil upon  their  noble  wives  and  daughters,  or  keep
them safely sequestered in a harem. It was no wonder their women were attacked in the street.
* * * *
"Lahis," said Sephil, taking the young woman's hand and gently steering her to an overstuffed chair by
the fire. "What a lovely name. Here, sit down and I will have  the  servants  bring  you  something  warm  to
drink."
Lovely as her name might be, Sephil was surprised to find Lahis plainer than he imagined. In her quiet,
pliable manner, however, he could guess what drew Adeja to her. She said nothing unless directed to do so,
and was clearly intimidated by her lavish surroundings.
Sephil decided that he was not disappointed but jealous. As he complimented Lahis on  her  dark  blue
shawl, he wondered how this could  be  possible.  She  may  be  plain  and  simple,  but  she  has  Adeja, he
realized. What right do I have to be jealous, when he was never mine to keep in the first place?
Tonight he would meditate on the futility of possessiveness and strive harder to  renounce  his  longing
for Adeja. For now, he would do all he could to make Adeja's wife feel welcome.
Although Ketalya agreed to consider placing Adeja among the household guards, she made it clear that
she was not going to make an effort to persuade him to take the  post.  And  Adeja  would  not  ask  for  the
position however much he might desire it. Neither would risk losing face before the other.
Had Adeja not mentioned his wife, Sephil would have been at a loss on how to mediate between him
and Ketalya.
When he smiled, drew her attention to his priestly robes and  mentioned  his  vocation,  Lahis  began  to
relax. She found her voice long enough to tell him that she and Adeja had been married since summer, but
froze again and turned pale when Ketalya entered the room, followed by two of her ladies.
"Piras  tells  me  that  you  wish  to  see  me,"  said  Ketalya.  Her  eyes  darted  to  Lahis,  who  nervously
clasped her hands in her lap. "I was not aware we had company."
Sephil introduced them. "My lady, this is Lahis kéya Lakhun, the wife of Adeja ked Shamuz. Lahis, this

is my lady wife, Princess Ketalya kéya Ampheres."
Judging from the withering look she gave him, Sephil realized that his wife was not pleased, yet could
not understand why. Surely as a woman, warm and lively with her sisters, attendants and servants, Ketalya
would warm to Lahis where she failed to welcome Adeja.
Ketalya seemed not only displeased at finding a common woman in her sitting room, but appeared to
be under the assumption that Lahis came to plead her husband's cause. "If he desires the post," she said to
the woman, "he may have it, but he must ask himself."
Seeing that Lahis did not understand, Sephil moved to reassure her. He took a porcelain cup from the
tray, filled it with tea, and pressed it upon her before sitting down in the  chair  oppsite  her.  "I  fear  I  must
apologize," he said. "I did  not  tell  my  wife  you  were  coming.  My  lady,  I  asked  Lahis  here  so  she  might
persuade Adeja to reconsider the matter."
Ketalya sat  down,  while  one  lady-in-waiting  covered  her  lap  with  a  velvet  comforter  and  the  other
handed  her  silk  floss  and  her  embroidery  hoop.  "The  man  should  not  have  to  rely  on  his  wife  to  do  his
speaking for him."
Sephil thought it unwise to point out how she occasionally  did  that  very  thing.  Instead,  he  turned  his
attention to their guest, who watched them both in bewilderment. Adeja clearly had not told her  about  his
recent visit to the palace or the proposed job.
"Lahis,"  said  Sephil,  "we  brought  you  here  because  we  wish  to  offer  your  husband  a  position  as  a
guard here in the royal household."
She  stared  at  her  lap.  "He  works  in  the  city  prison,  sir,"  she  murmured,  "and  for  my  father  in  the
quarry."
"Yes," said Sephil, "but this position would  pay  very  well,  and  you  would  be  able  to  live  here  in  the
palace. You would like that, would you not?"
Her eyes widened in amazement, exactly as he had hoped. "Live here in the palace?"
Sephil grinned at her. "Of course," he said. "Adeja was our loyal bodyguard in Rhodeen and  Ottabia,
and we desire his service again. There is no one we trust more than him."
"But…live here in the palace?" she repeated. "We're simple people, sir."
"Our servants live here with us, Lahis. This household has more than fifty rooms." At one point, Varen
mentioned the number, but Sephil did not recall. He appealed to his wife. "Is that not so, my lady?"
"Fifty-six rooms," replied Ketalya, intent on her needlework. Sephil wished she would say something to
the woman, but the princess seemed determined to ignore her.
Lahis gaped at the number. Sephil seized upon her wonder and added, "Most of those rooms  are  for
our servants and their families. You would find living here quite pleasant, and I am sure your husband would
be happy to have a post where he does not have to work under the hot sun or in a prison."
"What would I do, sir?" she murmured.
Ketalya echoed the question in the look she gave Sephil: what would  the woman do? Palace servants
underwent the same rigorous training as guards.
"We  will  see  what  work  best  suits  you,"  replied  Sephil.  "Can  you  weave?"  He  knew  that  the
ladies-in-waiting passed their idle time embroidering, while some of the servant women wove linen and wool
for everyday use. What they did not use they sold or bartered for other household goods. Perhaps a place
could be found for Lahis among them.
Lahis softly confided that she spent her days shopping in the bazaar for food, doing laundry, cleaning,
spinning and weaving. Sometimes she also watched children belonging to neighbors or relations.
Before Sephil could question her further, Adeja stormed into  the  room,  followed  by  a  hapless  porter
who protested that all guests must walk behind.
"What is the meaning of this intrustion?" demanded Ketalya, half-rising from her chair. The comforter
slid from her lap and the embroidery hoop dangled from her hand.
Adeja stopped, placed his hands on his hips, and glowered at her. "Maybe you should tell me, princess,"
he said. "I came home  to  find  a  guard  at  my  door  telling  me  my  wife  has  been  taken  to  the  palace  for
questioning. Lahis is harmless. What could she have done that you'd need to haul her out of our home?"
"Mind your manners, soldier."
"I'll mind my manners when you tell me what all this is about."
In the coiled tension rippling through Adeja's frame, Sephil sensed a man prepared to do far more than
violate etiquette if his wife was threatened.
With a smile, he rose and placed a reassuring hand on Adeja's arm.  "I  see  the  guard  I  sent  to  ease
your fears has only increased them. Lahis has done nothing wrong. She has been my guest this last hour."
Adeja narrowed his eyes. "Your guest?"

"I confess," said Sephil, "when I heard you had a wife, I could not resist the urge to meet her. She has
been telling me about all the things  she  does  for  you,  and  we  have  been  telling  her  about  the  marvelous
opportunities life in the palace can afford a family."
Adeja glanced over at his wife, who anxiously twisted her fingers in her lap, and glared at the servant
who started to offer him a cup of tea; the man retreated to the sideboard. "Manipulating my wife won't do
you any good," he replied. "I make all the decisions  in  the  household,  so  if  you've  a  proposal  to  make  or
anything else to say, you deal with me directly."
Ketalya arched an eyebrow at his commanding tone. "The position is yours if you desire it," she  said
coldly, "although I cannot fathom what my husband sees in you."
In the way Adeja clenched his teeth, Sephil knew he was swallowing a potentially cutting remark. "My
service record speaks for itself, lady," he growled. "I can bow, spout 'my lord' and 'my lady,' and obey just
as you please, but beyond that I was trained in a real barracks, with real soldiers. If all you care about is a
guard with proper credentials, a pretty uniform and no brains to speak of, then by all means hire someone
else."
"We may do that," said Ketalya.
Now deathly pale, Lahis drew a sharp breath.
Sephil lifted his hand to stop the argument before it could escalate. Though he was not accustomed to
acting  as  a  mediator,  and  dreaded  stepping  into  a  quarrel,  he  knew  that  if  he  did  not  try  the  tensions
between  the  two  would  make  a  compromise  impossible.  "Please,  there  is  no  need  for  unpleasantness.
Adeja, please soften your manners. My wife does not know what ordinary soldiers are like."
"Then you'd better educate her, my prince," growled Adeja.
Glaring at him, Sephil turned to his wife. "My lady, I realize that he is somewhat rougher than what you
are accustomed to, but allow him the chance to demonstrate his competence."
"Husband, I was willing to give him the opportunity, but now that he has opened his mouth, I will not
tolerate a boorish, insolent foreigner--"
"My lady," Sephil said sharply, perhaps more so than he had intended, "might I remind you  that  I am
also a foreigner? My one concern is your safety and wellbeing, and that of our child. It is clear the guards
the king  has  appointed  cannot  manage  the  task  alone.  Adeja  has  proven  that  he  is  a  loyal  and  obedient
soldier, and I see no reason why he should not continue to do so."
"He does not seem all that obedient to me."
"Under Branag's command, he will do as he is told."
"Since you are so intent on this course of action," said Ketalya, "do as you wish. As long as peace is
maintained in this household, the foreigner may take the post if he wishes. However, if he does not do  as
ordered, he will be dismissed at once and there will be no more discussion."
Sephil cringed at her  tone,  and  the  uncomfortable  scene  that  had  already  ensued;  he  dared  not  say
more. Turning to Adeja, he tried to  put  a  conciliatory  face  on  the  offer.  I beg  you,  say  yes.  "It  is  your
decision. Will you take the post?"
* * * *
Adeja stalked down the street, Lahis silently trailing behind. With his hands balled into fists at his side,
he itched to hit something. The nerve of that bitch, insulting his honor and calling him an insolent boor when
she knew nothing about making martial appointments, grated on him, as did coming home  to  find  his  wife
taken to the palace for questioning. At least, that was how the guard phrased it, even if it turned out not to
be so.
"Did they treat you all right?" he asked Lahis.
Wide-eyed, she nodded. "The prince was nice to me," she said softly.
"That's because he wants something." Priest or not, Sephil still knew how to manipulate others. Adeja
wanted to throttle him for bringing Lahis into the matter. Some things a man just should not do, and playing
upon a simple woman to get to her husband was among them.
"He wants us to live in the palace," murmured Lahis.
Adeja  grunted,  but  said  nothing  more  as  they  turned  the  corner,  approached  their  tenement  and
climbed the stairs to their apartment. Because Lahis had no time to prepare a meal, they would have to eat
out tonight.
On the stairs, Adeja sensed questions brimming on his wife's lips. She knew almost nothing about his
military service, as before now she had taken no interest and he had not seen fit to enlighten her. Any other
woman  would  have  spent  the  walk  home  haranguing  him  about  his  connections  to  royality  and  foolish
reluctance to seize such a  promotion.  With  Lahis,  as  long  as  he  worked  hard,  brought  money  home  and
treated her gently, she was content.

Now, however, something awakened in  her  that  had  not  been  present  before,  and  he  knew  who  to
blame for it.
Damn you,  Sephil. Adeja paused on the landing, turned and sighed. "You want to live in the palace,
don't you?"
Sephil knew precisely what he was doing. Between him and Lahis, Adeja realized that he stood very
little chance of escape.
* * * *
The  double  strain  of  insecurity  and  her  pregnancy  was  making  Ketalya  waspish.  In  public,  she
behaved as she had always done, yet in private, she alternated between irritability  and  inexplicable  fits  of
weeping. Ghanis assured her that this was normal. Sephil did not see how this could be so, but he followed
the physician's advice and tried his best to be patient and humor Ketalya during her outbursts.
Her behavior this evening, however, strained his patience to the limit. "That could have gone better," he
commented.
"Then you should have thought more carefully about bringing that man here. He is  the  most  uncouth
creature I have ever met," she complained. "How could you even think  of  allowing  him  a  position  in  our
household?"
Sephil leaned against the back of her chair. "I would rather have a slightly rough, honest soldier watch
over my family than some useless guard with perfect manners. And contrary to what  you  think,  Adeja  is
not a boor."
Ketalya ran the brush through her hair once before placing it back on the  vanity.  "He  was  rude  and
defiant with me. A properly trained guard would never dare behave in such a manner."
Sephil was not about to point out that Ketalya provoked Adeja's temper by being short with him. "So
he does not have credentials here. He still knows what he is doing. As for his manners, I am sure he seems
rude because he is not accustomed to taking orders from women, but you saw how gentle he was with his
wife. Obviously, he is not completely lacking in manners.
"You should not concern yourself with him. He will be under Branag's command, so whatever orders
you wish to give, instruct Branag and he will see to it that Adeja does as he is  told."  He  bent  to  kiss  her
temple. "It will be all right, you will see."
"But why do you insist on championing him so?" she asked. "There are plenty of competent, loyal men
in my father's service. Why choose him, and not any of them?"
Sephil  could  not  fail  to  miss  her  petulant  tone.  If  this  is  what  pregnancy  does  to  women,  it  is  a
wonder they want children at all. After this, no  more babies. "Because Adeja is one of the few people
who has ever been honest with me," he explained. "Had I the same loyal and loving people in my childhood
as you had in yours, one soldier would not matter so much to me, but I can count on one hand those who did
not criticize, tease or lie to me."
"You should have told me you were going to invite his wife," said Ketalya. "I have no idea what I am
going to do with her. She is not a trained servant, and I certainly cannot make her a lady-in-waiting. To tell
you the truth, I find her somewhat simple-minded."
"Yes, but I am sure there are things she can do. I am sure she can weave and help carry goods from
the bazaar  and  watch  the  servants'  children.  If  you  like,  I  will  speak  to  Varen  about  it  in  the  morning."
Sephil dropped another kiss on the top of her head, anything to console her. "You will see that I am right,
and then you will thank me for being so brilliant."

Chapter Eleven
"I do not question your good intentions in the matter," said Ampheres, "only your good judgment. The
man does not have the proper credentials."
Sephil  took  a  sip  of  liqueur  to  fortify  his  nerves.  "No,  he  has  not  been  trained  to  serve  in  this
establishment,  but  elsewhere  his  service  record  and  letters  of  credential  would  have  been  more  than
sufficient."
"Yes, I have reviewed those letters," said the king. "He has moved around quite a bit, never staying in
one place too long. One has to wonder about that."
"I know  his  history,"  replied  Sephil.  "He  completed  his  service  in  Tajhaan  and  chose  not  to  reenlist
there. He spent time in Dhahar and then enlisted in Rhodeen, where he spent several years. I know all of
this, and as I told my wife, Adeja ked Shamuz is both loyal and intelligent, precisely the sort of man I want
guarding my family."
Ampheres nodded. "That may be, but I am told that he is  also  uncouth  and  defiant.  For  a  man  who
once worked as a hired thug, it does not surprise me."
Sephil was not surprised to discover that Ketalya had complained to her father about the arrangement.
"You make it seem as though he uses foul language, has disgusting manners and  is  habitually  rude  to  my
wife," he answered. "His manners are better than you might think, and if he has snapped at  Ketalya,  it  is
only  because  he  does  not  take  orders  from  women.  I  have  placed  him  under  Branag.  So  far,  the
arrangement has proven satisfactory."
"So you say, though I would caution you not to put too much faith  in  this  one  man,"  said  Ampheres.
"Perhaps you would care to tell me how is it you believe he can do what our own specially trained guards
cannot?"
"Adeja saved my life twice in Ottabia, and kept me from harm on several other occasions," answered
Sephil. "I trust him to look after Ketalya and our child, however much she might not like it."
Nodding again, the king's lips curved in a smile hinting at things that Sephil would  rather  not  discuss.
"Yes, I have been wondering about his role in those two assassination attempts in Ottabia. Did you not tell
me that in the second attempt, the would-be assassin actually entered your room and came as close as your
bed before he was tackled? How would Adeja ked Shamuz know you were in danger, and yet not stop the
assailant before he reached your room, unless he was actually with you at the time?"
Sephil stared blankly at him, his resolve crumbling, yet before he could find the words to  counter  the
insinuation, Ampheres continued, "There are only two possibilities, and I very much doubt this man, Tajhaani
though he is, was helping the assassins.
"That  leaves  the  other  possibility.  Your  father  wrote  to  me  on  more  than  one  occasion  about  your
proclivities. Now before you try to defend yourself, let me state that what you may have done with this man
in the past is not my concern. It is your judgment now that I question."
"I did not bring him into my household to conduct an affair with him,"  Sephil  said  weakly.  If  only  he
sounded more confident, but apprehension stunted his nerve. "He is a married man, and so am I."
"Marriage does not always guarantee fidelity," said Ampheres. "Of course, I have not said anything to
Ketalya, as she does not need the strain at this time."
"You want me to dismiss him, or you will tell her, is that it?"
Ampheres slowly shook his head. "You misunderstand my intentions. Blackmail is not a game I choose
to play. Should you dismiss this  man  too  hastily  from  your  household,  Ketalya  would  become  suspicious.
Therefore, keep him in his current position if you wish, but be assured that I will be watching."
* * * *
"Sir, I had not thought to say anything, but—"
Considering how unusual it was for Branag, a middle-aged man with the imagination of a walnut, to be
so flustered, Sephil immediately took notice. "What is it?"
"It  is  the  new  guard,  sir,  the  foreigner,"  said  Branag.  "When  he  is  on  duty,  he  stops  everyone:  the
servants, the stewards, messengers, anyone he has not seen before. Of course, I told him that anyone who

is carrying the proper credentials or in uniform ought to be let through, but he does not listen."
Sephil  set  aside  his  book.  Earlier  in  the  day,  one  of  the  servants  had  complained  about  Adeja's
activities, which Sephil had not investigated because he knew there must be  a  perfectly  legitimate  reason
for the man to behave so. "Have you asked him why he does this?"
"Yes, sir," replied Branag. "He told me that anyone could get a uniform or forge credentials in order to
enter and do you or the princess harm." His brow furrowed, as though the idea was either utterly foreign,
ridiculous, or both.  "I  explained  to  him  that  all  precautions  have  been  taken,  and  that  such  things  do  not
happen here."
"And yet the princess was attacked."
"Yes, sir, but that attack took place outside the palace."
"Neither the assailants nor their source has been identified," said Sephil, "which means another attack
may occur at some point. I assumed you would have taken this into consideration."
"The princess has not left the palace since then, sir, and my unit is familiar with all those coming in and
out. It is only the foreigner who has difficulty."
While Branag was not as dense regarding the situation as Sephil had initially thought, his adherence to
protocol in the face of common sense remained less than satisfactory. "When the evening shift begins," said
Sephil, "I want you to return and bring Adeja with you. We can discuss the matter then."
* * * *
Why Sephil permitted his wife to be present, Adeja did not know except to speculate that the woman
had  either  beguiled  or  browbeaten  her  way  into  the  sitting  room.  More  likely  the  latter,  he  thought,  for
although  Sephil  insisted  his  wife  had  a  calm,  generous  nature,  Adeja  knew  simply  by  watching  the  two
together who gave the orders in the household.
At least the princess did not insist on sitting among the men. Instead, she occupied a chair nearest the
fire with her embroidery, with a lady-in-waiting to keep her company and attend to her needs.
"I realize you wish to perform your duties well," said Sephil, "but I should point out that there is a rather
rigid protocol in place here that did not exist in Rhodeen."
That  argument  again.  Adeja  prayed  that  his  time  under  the  king's  tutelage  had  not  made  Sephil  as
immune to common sense as the rest of the palace population. "Guard duty is the same no matter where it's
served," he answered. "My job is to watch the door and protect the household. I've been doing that in one
way or another for the last ten years."
Sephil nodded. "Your diligence is appreciated. However,  there  has  been  some  concern  that  you  are
being overly vigilant."
Adeja did not have to think very hard to know who had complained. "With an active threat, there's no
such thing as being too cautious," he replied. "Now you and the princess might know everybody, but I don't
yet.  Branag's  introduced  me  to  the  servants  and  staff,  and  I  know  well  enough  to  leave  viziers  and
members of the royal family alone, but it's the others, the messengers and  servants  from  elsewhere,  who
need to be checked."
"If they are wearing the correct livery," said Branag, "you can let them through."
Adeja distinctly remembered explaining his position, not once or twice, but enough times that it should
have  hammered  a  fist-sized  hole  in  Branag's  skull.  "There  have  been  attempts  on  both  the  prince  and
princess,  and  there  are  likely  to  be  again.  An  assassin  does  not  simply  walk  up  to  you  and  announce
himself; he—or she—will hide in plain sight as a guard or servant and strike when least expected.  Livery
can be stolen, credentials forged."
"He makes a worthy point, Branag," said Sephil.
Branag remained unconvinced to the point where Adeja knew it would either take a royal command or
an assassin's knife between his ribs for him to  see  sense.  "There  are  strict  checkpoints  at  all  gates,"  the
captain said. "If an assassin tries to get in, he will be stopped."
Stopped by whom, wondered Adeja, your incompetent guards? "An enemy doesn't necessarily need
to get in to do harm. He or she can bribe someone within."
"That is inconceivable," said Branag. "All who work here are loyal."
"Don't be so certain of that."
"I do  not  know  if  you  realize  this,  Adeja,"  commented  Ketalya,  pulling  her  needle  through  the  linen
garment on which she worked, "but every word you say casts aspersions on your own loyalty."
Adeja dared not hope that Sephil would  banish  his  meddlesome  wife  to  her  chamber.  "Perhaps,"  he
answered, "but should anything happen to you, princess, I as a foreigner would be the first one questioned
and probably the first one executed, whether or not I was guilty. Why would I take such a risk and ruin a
promising career? I assure you, I have far more to gain by keeping you alive than seeing you dead."

Her silence satisfied him more than any insincere praise she could have heaped upon him. 
"Even here," said Sephil, "we are still in danger. I would rather be overly vigilant than ignore the danger
and suffer for it later."
On sleepless nights, Adeja had lain beside his  wife  contemplating  what  should  be  done,  as  he  knew
that with the impending birth of Ketalya's child, another attempt was imminent. "When I served in Tajhaan,"
he said, "I once had to take a message from the barracks to the palace. I wasn't allowed to speak with or
even see the vizier who was to get the message."
"What does that have to do with anything?" asked Ketalya.
"Patience, my lady," he answered. "You will see in a moment. As I was  saying,  my  captain  told  me
this was common practice. He also told me that a servant would open the message, or any parcel that was
sent. Poison is a favored method of death in Tajhaan. Sometimes a man's enemies can be very creative in
using it. Since the prince has enemies among the Tajhaani court, perhaps he wishes to hear more?"
"Go on," urged Sephil.
"No stranger should be allowed near  the  prince  or  princess.  Any  unfamiliar  person  who  is  admitted
must be searched for hidden weapons. Should—"
Branag started to interject that such precautions were absurd. In turn, he was cut short by Sephil, who
gestured for Adeja to continue.
"Should  any  letters  arrive  that  aren't  marked  with  known  seals,  such  as  from  the  king,  it  must  be
opened by a servant. The servant doesn't need to read it, only to make certain that the parchment isn't laced
with poison."
"I did not know such a thing was even possible," said Sephil.
Adeja  nodded  at  him.  "It  isn't  only  possible,  but  I've  seen  it  with  my  own  eyes.  In  Tajhaan,  new
soldiers are often sent out to keep the peace in local neighborhoods. What one sees among ordinary people
in a  week  would  amaze  you.  One  can  soak  parchment  in  poison  so  that  when  the  reader  does  this--"
Licking his index finger, he pantomimed turning a page. "When he does this, he will lick the poison. I've also
seen letters or bundles of cloth laced with powders that will choke a man."
Branag turned a shade paler. "What else?"
"Should any gifts arrive, they must also be opened by servants, for the same reasons. You don't know
how many tales I've heard of venomous snakes or scorpions hiding in chests or jewel boxes."
From  the  corner  of  his  eye,  Adeja  saw  Ketalya  had  stopped  embroidering;  she  and  her  attendant
stared at him in horrified disbelief. "If an attack in the street doesn't work,"  he  told  Sephil,  "your  enemies
will find surer means to harm you."
Sephil  looked  over  at  Branag,  who  sat  grim  and  silent  in  his  chair,  then  at  Ketalya.  "We  would  be
foolish to ignore this sort of advice," he said, "especially as the instigators of the most recent attack have not
been found."
Branag slowly nodded, and Adeja saw the  princess  do  the  same.  Reaching  across  the  table  for  the
decanter, Adeja poured a cup of wine for his captain and a second for Ketalya, only to pause when Sephil
explained that her pregnancy barred her from drinking alcohol.
"Would the lady prefer to leave?" Adeja made the inquiry without malice. A woman had no business
discussing such matters, and a pregnant woman doubly so.
"It is her decision," said Sephil. His voice conveyed a weight suggesting that he would like to command
her, but lacked the authority to do so.
Ketalya refused to leave, just as Adeja predicted. "This concerns me and my child," she said. "I intend
to hear it all."
Leave this to the men and go back to your women's quarters. Had she been his wife, Adeja would
have gotten up, seized her by the arm, and forcibly led her back to her chamber. I won't be blamed if you
become  upset  and  miscarry.  Instead,  he  shrugged  and  turned  back  to  Sephil.  "I  thought  the  men  who
attacked your wife were all killed."
"They were," answered Sephil, "but we do not know who ordered the attack. No one has even come
forward to claim the bodies, and the men were locals. Some say it was the Turyar, others that it was Dashir
and the High Prince. Still others point to rival factions here in Khalgar."
Adeja drank from the cup he had meant for Ketalya. "I've never heard of the Turyar hiring assassins.
They always attack openly."
"So you would discount them?"
"They've no need to kill a woman and child who don't threaten them," replied Adeja. "I saw the force
that came to Shemin-at-Khul. It was the biggest army I'd ever seen, and I'm sure by now more men have
come in from the Turya lands. I don't know if it's even possible to expel them from Rhodeen at this point.

They wouldn't have bothered with you or your wife, and I've got my doubts about your cousin and the High
Prince, too."
"Dashir tried to kill me in Ottabia," said Sephil, "and he is the sort of man who would attack a woman
and child if he saw profit in it."
Adeja did not disagree with him. "In Tajhaan, there's a very old tradition that says when a prince takes
power, he kills his male relatives to secure his throne. You're an easy target, and I don't doubt that Dashir
would strike at you, but he relies on his father-in-law for support. In fact, I don't think the man can take a
piss at this point without Armajid's permission."
Branag cleared his throat. "Watch your language in front of the princess."
"You asked my advice and I'm giving it. Dashir isn't the source of your troubles, not now anyway. The
High  Prince  controls  things  in  Tajhaan,  and  he's  going  to  think  twice  about  attacking  a  pregnant  royal
woman whose father is a powerful king. He isn't going to risk going to war with Khalgar with the Turyar
sitting on his northern border, especially when he isn't even sure the child will be a boy."
Chancing a quick glance toward the fireplace, he saw the princess had given up all pretense of doing
her needlework and now listened intently. In another moment, she would probably get up and join them at
the table.
"And when the child is born?" asked Sephil.
"If it's a boy, Armajid might consider doing away with him then," replied Adeja. "There's no prohibition
against  killing  royal  male  children,  only  women.  I  know  it's  not  my  place  to  say,  but  if  I  were  you  and
wanting to avoid bloodshed, I'd pray for a daughter."
The wistful look Sephil gave him suggested the prince desired that very thing. I hope  the gods  hear
your prayer. Adeja anxiously cleared his throat. "I'm sure your father-in-law's officials know everything I
just told you," he said.
Sephil  poured  himself  a  second  cup  of  wine.  "If  they  do,"  he  said,  "they  have  not  passed  the
information along to me." He looked over at  his  wife,  who  shook  her  head  as  if  to  say  that  she  had  not
heard anything either.
"Do you have any other enemies?" asked Adeja.
"Yes," answered Sephil. "There is a strong Rhodeen faction which has tried to discredit me. It is led by
a dispossessed noble named Melin Wesares. He is descended from Ardahir III through the female line, and
is using his ancestry to lay claim to the throne."
"Has he been questioned?"
"I am sure he has." Sephil rolled his eyes and sighed heavily. "Gods, I have no idea. I know that people
have  been  questioned,  but  their  names  have  not  been  released  to  me.  I  doubt  the  king  would  overlook
Wesares.
"Adeja, I think I have heard more than I want to hear tonight, unless Ketalya wishes  to  know  more.
But before you go I have been wondering about that cut on your lip. Were you in a fight?"
Adeja looked over at Branag, who pretended not to notice. "Some of the other guards decided to test
me," he replied, "so I did the same to them." He did not add how the two guards had harrassed his wife for
marrying a troublesome foreigner, prompting him to confront them after their shifts ended.
With the long end of a spear, he had pinned both men against the wall and reminded them that Lahis
was a good and honorable woman who deserved better treatment than she received. When released,  one
guard had answered with a blow that cut Adeja's lip. Adeja slammed the butt of the spear into the guard's
belly and informed the man that in any other situation, he would be lying in an alley with a knife in his gut.
Branag shifted in his seat and brusquely assured the prince that such altercations were not uncommon,
and order had been restored.
Palace guards worked six days, and rested two. Adeja rose an hour later than usual, ate breakfast in
the household kitchen with another guard, and greeted his wife in the weaving room before deciding upon
his course of action.  Donning  a  plain  gray  tunic,  he  applied  for  a  chit  allowing  him  back  into  the  palace
compound and walked down to the street where the attack had occurred a month earlier.
Sephil had not asked for his help, but Adeja saw no harm in investigating on his own.
Consisting of  a  narrow  thoroughfare,  sparsely  populated  and  lined  with  shops  rather  than  stalls,  the
street seemed an unlikely place to stage an attack. Had he been asked to plan a public assault, Adeja would
have selected a venue  in  which  he  could  stalk  his  prey  unnoticed,  strike  quickly,  and  merge  back  into  a
crowd whose numbers would cover his escape. This lack of forethought, coupled with their  clumsiness  in
dispatching their target, confirmed Adeja's suspicion that the would-be assassins were amateurs.
Stepping into a wine shop, he bought a pitcher of Akkian red and a platter of flat bread and  yoghurt,
and sat near the counter where he could observe the owner. She was a pleasant woman once she saw he

would not make trouble, and though she was too old for his taste, Adeja put on his best seductive smile and
introduced himself as Shamuz, an employee from the local morgue.
"It's  been  an  unpleasant  morning,"  he  said  mournfully,  shaking  his  head,  "and  not  likely  to  get  any
better. My only consolation is good wine and a friendly ear."
Right away, the woman responded to his purring appeal. Such a handsome man, she said, and what an
unpleasant job, working with the dead. She told him her name was Vanira and, leaning over the counter to
flash him her wrinkled cleavage, urged him to tell his story.
"We've this body from a month ago," said Adeja. "His tag says he was killed right here on this street or
thereabouts, but nobody's claimed the body. It's worse in summer, of course, but  winter  isn't  much  better
with all the damp."
"Oh, you don't have to touch those awful corpses, do you?"
Adeja gave her a hapless look. "When we're shorthanded, yes. I wanted to become a  carpenter,  but
my father made me get into the business. Said there was nothing shameful about working with the dead. He
only had to bury them. I have to talk to the families when they came  to  claim  the  bodies,  and  try  to  find
families when nobody comes." Wrapping both hands around his cup, Adeja gazed into its depths and sighed
forlornly. "Gods help me, I'm past thirty and too old to find a new trade."
Vanira twined a strand of his hair around one finger and leaned even closer. "Is there anything  I can
do to help?" she asked.
The guffaws and comments behind him told Adeja that he had an audience, which was the last thing
he wanted. Clearly the woman wanted him to bed her, which he could easily do. It would not be the  first
time Adeja had slept with a lonely wife or widow  in  exchange  for  something,  but  this  time  felt  different.
Lahis entered his mind and lingered, smothering his libido.
"I don't know," he sighed. "My boss wants the corpse gone  by  tomorrow  and  you  can't  just  dump  a
body  into  a  common  grave  without  forms  upon  forms  so  we  don't  get  sued  later  if  the  family  comes
forward. I tell you, we never had this problem in Tajhaan; after two weeks, we just dumped them in a hole
in the desert. I mean, if the family hasn't claimed the body by now, they aren't going to, but that's not good
enough for the boss. Either I find a relative to sign off or it's a pile of forms."
Glancing up  at  her,  he  offered  a  sheepish  smile.  "Look  at  me,  boring  you  with  all  this  talk  of  dead
bodies  on  my  rest  break.  I  can't  ever  seem  to  get  away  from  corpses.  Why  don't  you  tell  me  about
yourself?"
Adeja continued to smile and make encouraging gestures as Vanira described her life as a shopkeeper.
Twice a widow, she brazenly hinted she was more than willing to accommodate a third husband under the
right circumstances. Adeja complimented her on her good looks and excellent establishment, but  indicated
that his break was nearly over. "I hate to leave so soon," he said, "but the boss'll give me no mercy if I'm
not prompt."
Before he left, Vanira offered him an invitation to return after closing, as well as a name and address.
"I'd hate to think of you slaving  away  under  all  those  bothersome  forms,"  she  said,  "but  these  are  good
people, you understand, and no troublemakers. With so many soldiers and officials asking questions, they've
been too afraid to come forward. You'll make it easy for them, won't you?"
Assuring her that he would, Adeja leaned over the counter and offered a long, deep kiss as consolation
for the return visit he would not make.
That evening, he put on his uniform and sought out Varen for permission to deliver a message to the
royal couple. "It concerns the recent attack on the princess," he said. "I have information for them."
Sephil  and  Ketalya  sat  together  by  the  fire,  he  reading  and  she  working  at  her  embroidery.  The
princess ignored him, while Sephil expressed his bewilderment at seeing  Adeja  in  uniform.  "I  thought  this
was a rest day for you."
"It is, my prince," answered Adeja, making a little bow to Ketalya which she barely acknowledged. "I
thought it might be better to dress the part when coming here."
"Varen says you have a message," said Sephil.
Adeja described how he spent the day, leaving out his flirtation with the shopkeeper. "I got an address
and name, and went to investigate. Of course, the wife didn't want to talk to me at first, but when I assured
her I worked for the local morgue she had a lot  more  to  say.  She  told  me  how  in  the  weeks  before  the
attack a strange man often came to talk  to  her  husband.  She  remembered  overhearing  several  names  in
their conversation: Ardahir and Rhodeen."
Sephil immediately sat up in his chair. "Did she tell you who this man was?"
"I wrote the name down for you." Adeja passed him a rumpled slip of parchment, which he inspected
before showing to Ketalya.

As  expected,  the  princess  expressed  her  skepticism.  "Officials  have  combed  that  neighborhood
questioning individuals and turned up nothing. How are we to believe that you could do in a single afternoon
what they could not accomplish in a month?"
"Because I wasn't wearing a uniform, my lady," he answered. "When people see a uniform, they stop
talking.  I  mean  no  disrespect  to  you,  of  course,  or  to  the  king's  men.  Khalgar  has  a  strong  army,  and
everybody knows that, but the problem is that everyone here is so clean  and honest. But you see, even the
most honest Tajhaani is underhanded when he has to be."
Ketalya raised an eyebrow. "And you do not believe that my father's men can be clever?"
"I didn't say clever, my lady. I said underhanded, as in, without morals or honesty," said Adeja.  "The
first thing a child learns in Tajhaan is that if he doesn't  learn  to  use  his  wits,  he  isn't  going  to  survive.  A
Tajhaani soldier learns the same lessons. You have good soldiers who know their trade, my lady, but they
aren't prepared to take off their uniforms and do a bit of lying or arm-twisting."
"He used to work for a moneylender," added Sephil.
The princess nodded, but if anything, she appeared more uncomfortable than before. "Torture is not a
legal means of acquiring information here in Khalgar."
"I didn't have to torture anyone, my lady," replied  Adeja.  "The  shopkeeper  was  more  than  willing  to
help me, and the widow was very gracious once she saw I meant no harm."
Sephil stared at him. "Adeja, you did not—?"
"My  prince,  I'm  a  married  man,  and  not  without  some  scruples,"  said  Adeja.  "I  don't  dally  with
shopkeepers or widows anymore, no matter how buxom or accommodating they might be." 
"Please, we do not need to hear about your sexual escapades." Ketalya took the note from Sephil and
studied it. "The king will wish to verify this information. It is a serious allegation."
"It makes sense," said Sephil. "Wesares has opposed me from the moment he  became  aware  of  my
presence  here.  He  snubbed  us  at  our  wedding  and  published  ugly  rumors  about  my  character  and  our
marriage, so it does not surprise me in the least."
* * * *
The courtyard was the last place Sephil wanted to be. A narrow space enclosed on all sides by  high
walls, it felt claustrophobic enough on an ordinary day, which perhaps was the reason the king chose it now.
A  scaffold  dominated  what  open  space  existed,  and  alongside  it  was  a  cordoned  area  for  the
witnesses. Ampheres would watch the proceedings from a balcony high on the north wall. On this occasion,
he ordered Sephil to accompany him.
Sephil's attention strayed from the grim scene being played out below to the square of clear blue sky
overhead. It was a beautiful spring day, one that should have  been  spent  walking  through  the  gardens  or
riding in the countryside around Bhellin. Now it represented the culmination of  ten  dismal  days,  beginning
with the arrest and arraignment and ending with the execution of Melin Wesares.
For seven  of  those  days,  Sephil  had  observed  the  trial  from  the  gallery  overlooking  the  Great  Hall.
Delav sat beside him to  explain  the  monotonous  proceedings,  while  Sephil  tried  to  curb  his  frustration  at
having to be present. "If this is all," he complained, "a secretary could have sent me a summary at the end
of the day."
"I regret the inconvenience, my lord," said Delav, "but as this man is accused of  doing  injury  to  your
wife and unborn child, and challenging your right to the throne, you must be seen to be present."
"Then why am I not seated down below next to Prince Ettarin?"
"Your brother-in-law is one of the judges," answered Delav. "Therefore he must sit near the king. As
you  have  not  had  the  requisite  legal  training  and  are  not  objective  in  this  matter,  you  cannot  sit  among
them."
Sephil countered his boredom by bringing a book to read whenever the proceedings stalled. However,
he took note when Wesares was questioned, and when his wife was escorted into the chamber to give her
testimony. Her appearance prompted him to summon Delav for an  explanation.  "Why  did  anyone  not  tell
me she would be called?" he asked. "I would have accompanied her myself."
"I apologize for the omission, sir, but if you will notice," said Delav, "there are many Rhodeen nobles in
attendance, and your presence would cause tensions the king wishes to avoid. As you can see, trying Lord
Wesares for treason is proving difficult enough."
Ketalya did not look up, and spoke in such quiet, measured tones that Sephil strained to hear her. Her
injuries had faded, but as her pregnancy had just begun to show, she presented a sympathetic image to the
court.
Adeja was not called as a witness, nor was his role in identifying the perpetrators mentioned, but the
woman whose husband had been one of the assailants did speak.

Wesares did not stand trial alone. Four other men, labeled as his accomplices, were charged with him.
Early in the proceedings, Delav had predicted that they would turn  on  their  employer.  "Men  who  commit
such acts have so little moral backbone that betrayal comes easily for them. Observe and you will see for
yourself."
As Sephil watched, each man shifted the blame onto Wesares and the other men, downplaying his own
culpability in the incident.
For his part, Wesares  did not deny instigating the attack. Instead, he attempted to use the court  as  a
political platform. "Through my ancestry, I am the rightful king of Rhodeen," he said, "and I am only on trial
because I refuse to recognize the inferior claim of a pretender  who  has  insinuated  himself  into  Khalgar's
royal house."
Ampheres allowed him to finish speaking before giving his answer. "Your political views are irrelevant
in this matter, Lord Wesares. You have been charged with treason solely for your unprovoked attack upon
a member of our royal family."
"As a nobleman of Rhodeen, the court of Khalgar has no right to try me," said Wesares.
"The  crime  was  committed  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Khalgar,"  replied  Ampheres,  "and  Rhodeen  no
longer exists as a state except in the person of its legitimate heir, whose wife and unborn  child  you  stand
accused of assaulting. You may protest all you wish, but your arguments are pointless. By Rhodeen's own
laws, your claim is invalid, and as such we do not recognize it."
When  announced,  the  verdict  came  as  no  surprise.  All  five  men  were  condemned  to  death,  the
sentence  to  be  carried  out  the  following  day.  Only  Wesares  would  receive  a  private  execution;  as  a
nobleman, he had the right to be dispatched by the headsman's sword. The others would be publicly hanged,
drawn, and quartered.
Just before the execution, Ampheres received the condemned man's son in the salon overlooking  the
courtyard. Attended by Rhodeen's former  ambassadors,  Stavon  Melines  formally  declared  that  he  would
not seek vengeance for his father's death, and renounced all further claims to the throne of  Rhodeen.  He
seemed genuinely mortified by his father's actions as he acknowledged Sephil and asked his pardon.
"We wish health and long life to you, your lady wife, and heirs,"  he  said.  The  ambassadors  followed
suit, each one bowing his head and murmuring similar platitudes.
Not  knowing  what  to  say,  and  apprehensive  about  the  events  yet  to  come,  Sephil  received  these
felicitations gracefully, bestowing the kiss of peace on  Stavon's  cheek.  Later,  Ampheres  issued  a  decree
requiring all expatriated Rhodeen nobles to renounce all claims to the throne or forfeit the right to dwell in
Khalgar. Only a few families left Bhellin for other lands.
Melin Wesares went to his death impeccably dressed and groomed, and was allowed to bid farewell to
his attendants at the scaffold steps. Less than thirty people came to watch him die. His son stood among his
guards and servants, and the officials who had presided at his trial; the ambassadors did not stay.
Delav,  who  stood  at  Sephil's  elbow,  quietly  explained  that  noblemen  were  granted  certain  rights  in
death. This included addressing the  crowd.  On  this  occasion,  however,  Wesares  said  nothing,  but  simply
undid his collar and knelt in the straw.
Silence fell over the courtyard. Sephil held his breath and glanced away at the final moment. He knew
the headsman, specially trained for the task, did his  work  in  one  stroke,  for  he  heard  the  faint  crunch  of
bone, a thud, and squelch.
Had Ampheres not nudged him, he would not have looked at all, and when he did, it was a moment too
soon. As he took another steadying breath and gazed down at the scaffold, a macabre sight met his eyes:
the headless torso kneeling in place as blood continued to pump through the severed arteries and spurt out
onto  the  straw.  Slowly,  the  trunk  sagged  and  slumped  over  beside  the  head,  which  the  dead  man's
attendants quickly covered with a black cloth.
Sephil felt his stomach roil. Suddenly the air was too close and rank, urging him to flee. Delav took his
hand and squeezed it, while urging him to take deep breaths. "It is over, my lord," the vizier whispered. "He
did not suffer."
Once the body  was  carted  away,  Ampheres  withdrew  from  the  balcony,  signaling  Sephil  to  follow.
Leaving the salon, they strode down a long gallery, neither speaking to the other, until they came to an airy
room where servants waited with cool cloths and liqueur.
The king took a glass from the tray and handed it  to  Sephil.  "Drink  this,"  he  said.  "It  will  calm  your
nerves. I can see that you have never witnessed an execution before."
Sephil  sipped  at  the  golden  liquid,  letting  it  spread  warmly  into  his  belly.  His  trembling  gradually
subsided, although the horrible images would not leave his mind. Tonight I must pray, and ask the gods  to
grant me peace and him forgiveness. "And I never wish to see another."

"Dispensing justice is the business of ruling," said Ampheres. "A king must be somewhat ruthless if he
is to survive. Your father understood that, and so did your brother, but you have not had much experience in
these matters. Remember the injury the men put to death today sought to do and be grateful. Go see your
wife and spend the day in the gardens, or visit the temple and meditate. It will ease your mind."
"Does it not trouble you?"
Ampheres took his glass  from  the  tray  and,  in  a  rare  gesture,  offered  another  to  Delav,  who  stood
behind Sephil's chair. "It troubles any man who has a conscience."
Once Sephil felt ready, he returned with Delav to his apartments. Ketalya  had  refused  to  attend  the
execution, but knew from the moment the trials began what ordeal awaited Sephil. "When  I  was  fifteen,"
she  told  him,  "I  saw  a  man  hanged  for  trying  to  poison  my  father.  Father  made  me  attend  so  I  would
understand how serious a responsibility it is to rule."
"But you were a girl," said Sephil. His father had never allowed him access  to the ruling council, much
less included him at public functions. Until that morning, he had never realized how traumatic an experience
an execution truly was.
"In Khalgar, women can rule," replied Ketalya. "Father told me that one day I would become the wife
of a prince or king, and I might need to govern on his behalf. I would need to know such things."
Before the tall double doors, Sephil spied Adeja on duty. Rigid stance, pike in hand, just as he had been
in  those  early  days  in  Shemin-at-Khul.  Sephil  paused  beside  him,  opened  his  mouth  as  if  speak,  but
remembered the eyes watching them. What he wanted to say, he could not confide in a mere guard.
Adeja did not turn his head; he did not seem to move at all save for the rise and fall of his breathing.
Sephil started to look away when he caught the shift of dark eyes sliding toward him. Their gazes met, and
worlds passed between them.

Chapter Twelve
Afternoon banished the fog, enabling Sephil to view the broad horizon beyond the shore. Salt filled his
nostrils, and above the crashing surf he heard the cries of gulls. Spring at Adenna could be cold, misty and
wet, but as summer approached and the household prepared to receive the  royal  family  from  Bhellin,  the
weather grew fair.
Sephil welcomed the reprieve from the capital, and knew that Ketalya,  with  her  increasing  girth  and
difficulty walking, was grateful that she would not have to give birth in Bhellin at high summer while the rest
of  the  family  was  away.  Now  she  could  rest,  visit  with  her  mother,  and  take  the  waters  at  the  nearby
shrine.
Once  the  baby  quickened,  Ketalya's  interest  in  its  development  and  birth  increased.  While  still  in
Bhellin, she oversaw preparations for a nursery, wet nurse and attendants  with  an  energy  that  belied  her
physical  discomfort.  Her  mother  wrote  to  her  twice  a  week  with  advice,  and  her  siblings  all  suggested
names.
Sephil laughed at her enthusiasm. "If it is a daughter," he said, "you should name her. If it is a  son,  I
would prefer a Rhodeen  name.  He  might  need  it  one  day."  Other  than  this,  he  made  no  mention  of  the
Snake  Mother's  prophecy,  any  possible  threats  to  the  child's  life  or  any  dynastic  plans  Ampheres  might
cherish.
Ketalya threw up her hands. "I would not know where to begin. There are so many suitable names I
do not know what to do."
"If it is a boy we could call him Charnil. It is a royal name meaning 'little sun.'"
"Charnil ké Sephil?" she replied, trying the name on her tongue. "That sounds rather odd."
"Only  if  you  say  it  in  the  Khalgari  fashion,  as  you  just  did.  In  Rhodeen,  you  would  say  Charnil
Sephides."
She nodded. "It seems I know nothing about Rhodeen  names,  so  you  will  have  to  choose  one  for  a
boy. I will try to decide on one for a girl."
With all the preparations, there was one detail Ketalya overlooked, and it weighed on Sephil's mind as
they  made  the  journey  to  Adenna  for  the  birth.  She  would  not  like  what  he  proposed,  and  Ampheres
certainly would not approve, but Sephil saw no other way.
"Not too close," he said to the man walking on the sand behind him.
Adeja, in uniform, stood two feet away. Branag and the other guards remained behind at the  palace,
leaving Sephil and his escort alone on the beach. "You want me to accompany you," he said, "but then you
don't want me to walk too close. I hope this isn't some game you're playing."
"Adeja, it is impossible to have you under the same roof and not think about you."
"You said that to me once before, you know."
Sephil  was  surprised  by  the  recollection.  "Yes,  but  then  I  was  trying  to  seduce  you.  This  is  not  a
game," he said. "We are being watched. The king knows about us."
"Did you tell him?"
"No, but he is no fool. I told him how you stopped that second assassin in Ottabia. I did not tell him you
had  been  in  my  bed  at  the  time,  but  he  already  knew  about  my  sexual  proclivities  from  my  father  and
guessed the truth."
"Perhaps you should have another guard accompany you."
"I needed to talk to you," replied Sephil. "Tell me, are you happy serving in my household?"
Leaning against his pike, Adeja sighed impatiently. "You didn't bring me out here just to ask me  that,
did you?" he asked.
"No, but you can still answer my question."
"It's better than working in the prison or breaking rocks in a quarry,"  replied  Adeja.  "Now  what's  so
important that you had to have me to follow you out here and couldn't tell me inside?"
For days Sephil had labored over what he would say, how he would explain his position to Adeja, then
Ketalya  and,  last  of  all,  to  his  father-in-law.  All  would  object  in  some  way,  regardless  of  how  ideal  an

arrangement it was. "If the baby is a boy, he  will  need  a  protector.  Ketalya  has  arranged  everything  for
him, even his toys and linens, but she neglected to appoint a nursery guard. Perhaps she feels the household
sentries are enough."
Adeja frowned. "Are you asking me to watch the wet nurse change dirty diapers?"
"I wish you would not make light of this," said Sephil.
"Well, that is what you're asking me to do, isn't it?"
The words, so carefully rehearsed, fled Sephil's tongue. "No, it is not. Ketalya knows  I  would  rather
have a daughter, because if it is a son there will be attempts on his life. His grandfather will do whatever is
necessary to protect and educate him, of course, except I do not necessarily trust the king.
"He tells me he intends to wait, to see if the boy shows promise, before deciding which course to take,
but I know he will begin grooming my son to take the throne of Rhodeen as soon as he is able."
Adeja nodded at this. "I am sure your son will have an excellent education. The king fought the Turyar
in his youth, and has several generals with similar experience."
"I am  not  concerned  with  my  son  learning  how  to  fight,"  said  Sephil.  "Most  boys  learn  to  do  that
without much help. No, I need someone to teach my son how to survive.  I do not know anyone better at
doing that than you."
What Adeja thought, he did not reveal. "Your  wife  will  hate  the  idea,"  he  said,  "and  you  don't  even
know if it will be a son."
"More and more I think  it  will  be,  regardless  of  what  I  want."  Sephil  hugged  himself  under  his  thin
cloak, warding off a chill that went beyond physical. "The oracles have all said it will be a son who will ride
into battle against the Turyar. Even if he does not, he will have enemies. Do you see now why I need you?"
* * * *
Adeja  would  not  commit  himself  to  the  proposed  post,  leaving  Sephil  alternately  frustrated  and
relieved. It struck him as inconceivable that Adeja could not realize how badly his services were needed.
At the same time, appointing him to a position that would bring him into the royal apartments, into daily
intimate contact, made Sephil wonder what he thought he was doing. At best, it is foolishness,  at worst a
disaster.
Having Adeja at the door, so close  and  not  being  able  to  talk  to  or  touch  him  was  difficult  enough.
Now that he slept alone again, not a night passed that Sephil's thoughts did not wander  to  him.  Oh,  to  be
able to turn back time, to retrieve just an hour from those quiet, contemplative days in Ottabia, be held by
strong arms and make love once again! Bittersweet memories led to furtive fondling under the blanket, but
his own hand did not satisfy him the way Adeja could.
Those who knew might say otherwise, but it had never been about sex.
Ketalya sensed his unease, even if she did not understand the true  reason  for  it,  and  arranged  for  a
young man to come to his bed. Ceyath was lithe and lovely, a pleasure slave kept by the palace to entertain
visiting  dignitaries  or  nobles  high  in  the  king's  favor,  and  for  a  few  hours,  his  skilled  hands  and  mouth
brought comfort.
"Does something trouble you, my lord?" he asked, gently kissing the hollow above Sephil's collarbone.
"If I do not please you, perhaps I could help you find another partner?"
Sephil found the tie that held Ceyath's robe closed and undid  it,  peeling  the  silk  off  the  young  man's
shoulders. "No, I am not displeased with you."
He  performed  twice  that  night,  and  enjoyed  the  experience  enough  to  summon  Ceyath  again,  but
bedding him was not the same as making love with Adeja.
Ceyath did not accompany him to Adenna, and once at the seaside palace Sephil tried to turn his mind
to other things. In this, the king unwittingly provided assistance.
Upon  being  introduced  to  the  Khalgari  royal  family,  Sephil  had  neglected  to  inquire  after  his  living
maternal  relations,  who  lived  quietly  on  their  estate  in  Ottabia.  While  they  did  not  warrant  an  annual
invitation to the summer palace, and had not attended Sephil's wedding, Ampheres  arranged  for  his  uncle
and grandmother to come to Adenna for the birth.
Sephil was embarrassed by the oversight. He had not written to his relatives, and did not even  know
their names, while they welcomed him with gifts and praise. In  particular,  his  grandmother  Amenia  could
not stop hugging and kissing him, and exclaiming how much he resembled his mother.
Once she was introduced to Ketalya, his grandmother found a new outlet for her affection in fussing
over the mother-to-be. "To think I am finally going to be a great-grandmother," she told Sephil. "Your uncle
Olmor keeps promising to find a wife, but he  is  now  so  old  the  only  thing  he  produces  is  gray  hairs  and
flatulence."
Neither she nor Olmor mentioned Zhanil and his children, and Sephil did not have the heart to remind

them.
While Amenia remained indoors with Ketalya and the queen, Sephil went riding with his uncle. Olmor
projected a taciturn air. He  was  an  able  administrator  of  the  family  estate,  but  confessed  to  being  more
interested in philosophy and obscure texts than marriage. "Your mother did not care for book learning." he
said.  "She  found  words  too  dry,  and  your  father  had  no  patience  for  esoteric  ideas  or  religions.  I  am
surprised to find you so unlike them."
"I came to my vocation purely by chance." Sephil let his  gaze  slide  down  the  grassy  dune  on  which
they stood down to the foaming surf. A cool breeze stirred his hair. He had left Adeja back at the house in
favor of Branag, who rode a discreet distance behind. When Olmor inquired about the need for an escort,
Sephil explained the attempts on his life and Ketalya's, but there remained certain things he did not want his
relatives to know.
"Zhanil sent me out of Rhodeen before the Turyar struck," he continued. "I took refuge with the priests
of Abh in the sanctuary in Ottabia, and found much comfort in their teachings."
"Is this the sanctuary near Ivrish?" asked Olmor.
"Yes, I stayed there for several months. Do you know the place?"
"Our  estate  is  only  a  day's  ride  east,"  said  Olmor,  "and  I  have  visited  with  Bedren  on  numerous
occasions. Had we known you were there, we would have taken you in at once and spared you the threat
of your cousin's assassins."
Sephil nodded. "Zhanil wrote to you," he explained, "but by the time Bedren decided it was best for me
to leave the sanctuary, it was no longer safe for me in Ottabia."
Two weeks after the solstice, the king  and  his  family  arrived  from  Bhellin.  The  palace  bustled  with
activity. Ketalya participated in  the  planned  leisure  activities  insofar  as  she  was  able,  taking  short  walks
along the beach, attending music and poetry recitals, and dining in the torchlit tents, where she lamented that
her girth prevented her from dancing. She played cards with her mother while  Sephil  danced  with  Naulia
and Amenia, who at eighty-two was as energetic as a woman thirty years younger.
Time passed swiftly. Each day, Ketalya urged Sephil to place his hand  on  her  belly  to  feel  the  child
kicking in her womb. He did not know if one could tell sex by such movements, but they felt so vigorous it
seemed they could only come from a boy. 
A cradle stood in the room the queen set aside as a nursery, piles of swaddling linens and diapers had
been prepared, and a wet nurse and midwife were ready, yet each day that passed without Adeja's answer
heightened Sephil's doubts.
He will never answer, or if he does,  he will say no. Sephil cursed the hierarchy restricting Adeja's
potential. In Rhodeen, where men could join the military and  rise  no  matter  what  their  birth,  Sephil  could
have made the appointment without having to defend his candidate's qualifications.
I brought  him into my household  once  before.  No one  asked  questions,  and  they  should  have.
After the debacle resulting in his exile, Sephil still did  not  understand  why  his  father  failed  to  monitor  his
guards beyond appointing the uncomely but loyal Eumos. Perhaps Brasidios had no  longer  cared  what  he
did, as long as it did not become a public embarrassment.
With  the  king  and  royal  family  present,  Sephil  could  not  approach  Adeja  as  he  wished.  No  more
chance  of  solitary  walks  on  the  beach,  or  summoning  him  into  a  quiet  office  without  arousing  his
father-in-law's suspicions. As even he did not trust his urges in a room alone with Adeja, the latter  would
have been out of the question.
Sending a written message would prove too risky. In his experience, messages were either intercepted
or Adeja never wrote back.
In  the  end,  with  less  than  a  month  left  before  the  birth,  Sephil  braved  his  wife's  displeasure  by
confiding in her.
Her morning sickness gone, and stimulated by exercise and the sea air, Ketalya's mood improved. She
also developed an appetite for exotic foods, which the cooks did their best to provide. Sephil  took  note  of
her preferences and set a scrumptious table on a terrace overlooking the ocean.
Once her moodiness abated, Sephil felt secure in teasing Ketalya about her cravings. "If you continue
to stuff yourself, men will start saying I have two wives."
Ketalya  made  a  face  at  him  across  the  platters  of  oysters,  crab  cakes,  stuffed  mushrooms  and
pastries. "It will spare you the  trouble  of  keeping  a  harem.  I  hear  your  cousin  has  taken  a  second  wife,
another of the High Prince's daughters. It seems  Armajid  will  keep  Dashir  so  busy  breeding  that  he  will
have no time to plot against you."
Much  to  her  amusement,  he  began  nibbling  at  the  delicacies  alongside  her.  "Have  you  given  any
thought to who will guard the nursery?"

"There is no such post, dear."
"Perhaps we should create one," said Sephil. "Our enemies will not wait until our son grows up before
making an attempt on his life."
Ketalya rolled her eyes. "Why must you spoil a lovely meal with such talk? You have already seen to it
that no one can go in or out of our apartments without enduring the scrutiny of that insolent boor. We will
be fortunate if the wet nurse can get through the door."
"When our son outgrows the nursery, he will need someone to watch his back."
"You do not even know if it is a son." Ketalya set down her fork and narrowed her eyes. "You do not
seriously intend to appoint that man as our child's bodyguard, do you?
Sephil sipped his wine. "He is the most qualified man for the job."
"No, he is not. My father's generals will teach our son whatever he needs to know, and the household
guards will keep him safe. Provided, that is, that we have a son."
"And who will teach him how to use his wits and survive?" asked Sephil.
"Adeja is more likely to teach him how to swear and scratch himself. The boy will come home insisting
that his mother cover her head with a veil, hide indoors and keep her mouth shut."
"My dear, Adeja has never used foul language in front of you, and he only made that comment about
wearing the veil once," said Sephil.
Ketalya speared a mushroom on her fork and bit into it. "It was insulting," she muttered.
"He meant to be respectful."
"I cannot imagine how."
Ignoring  his  wife's  irritated  look,  Sephil  helped  himself  to  another  crab  cake.  "He  told  me  that  in
Tajhaan men hide what is precious. They do not want strangers looking at their wives  and  daughters  and
thinking unclean thoughts."
"If anyone is thinking unclean thoughts, it is him," grumbled  Ketalya.  "He  is  the  most  insolent  man  I
have ever met, and it does not help that you are so fixated on him." She started to sip from her glass, then
suddenly  set  it  down  and  stared  at  Sephil.  "Did  you  not  tell  me  once  that  your  father  punished  you  for
carrying on an illicit affair with a guard in your household?"
Sephil froze. While at some point he expected to have to answer the question, he did not think it would
be now. "That was not him," he answered lamely. "I was sixteen, and I do not even remember the  man's
name."
"And you had no other lovers since then?"
"I had three other men, two of whom are dead. What I did  with  them  before  I  came  to  Bhellin  has
nothing to do with any appointments I make now," said  Sephil.  "Adeja  has  a  wife,  and  I  would  never  do
anything to—"
Ketalya drew a sharp breath. "I want him gone."
"Be reasonable."
"I have been reasonable," she hissed, "but you keep shoving him under my nose. It is intolerable."
"I am not going to dismiss him." Sephil realized he might not have a choice when Ampheres found out
how distressed his daughter was, but for the moment he had no intention of backing down. "This is my child
as well as yours. I have the right to appoint the guard of my choice."
"I will not share the same household as your lover."
"Adeja is not my lover," answered Sephil. "I brought him here to guard you and our child, and like it or
not, that is what he is going to do."
"I will find—" Grimacing, Ketalya sat back in her chair, waving Sephil  silent  when  he  started  to  ask
what was wrong. "Call Amarno in here," she gasped. "We can discuss this later."
Sephil  hesitated,  until  she  bit  her  lip  and  threatened  to  box  his  ears  if  he  did  not  comply.  "Is  it  the
baby?"
"I do not know," she replied, yet her hard breathing indicated that  she  was  in  pain.  "Something  feels
wet."
"Are you bleeding?" Sephil knew he should send one of the servants for Ghanis and the midwife, but
he could not seem to make himself move.
"I think it is my water—oh, will you just go already?" Ketalya shooed him away with a frantic gesture.
"You are no use sitting there like that!"
* * * *
Adeja had a distant memory of his mother giving birth to his youngest sibling, a girl who had later died.
His  father's  household,  smaller  and  far  more  cramped  than  the  palace,  swarmed  with  relatives,  mostly
female, who evicted the men into the tenement courtyard. Uncles had arrived with strong beer, and Adeja's

father endured the long, uneasy wait by getting drunk. Adeja himself had spent the afternoon playing with
his brothers and cousins, and slept that night at a relative's house.
Had he the freedom to leave his post and mingle with the royal family, he would have plied Sephil with
alcohol to soothe his nerves. Instead, he watched from the doorway, amazed that neither the king nor any
of the other men present had  sense  enough  to  get  the  expectant  father  a  drink  or  whisk  him  away  to  a
corner of the palace where he could not hear his laboring wife's groans.
Lahis was not among the serving women going in  and  out  of  the  princess'  chamber  with  water  and
clean cloths. Provision had been made for the guards and ladies-in-waiting to accompany the royal couple
to  Adenna,  but  all  others  had  to  stay  behind.  Before  leaving,  Adeja  had  soothed  his  wife  with  tender
assurances  that  he  would  return  safely  in  four  months,  and  in  a  nearby  town  he  bought  her  a  pretty
necklace. Such trinkets, however, were small consolation for the child she truly wanted and could not seem
to conceive.
Several  times,  Sephil  cast  a  desperate  glance  in  his  direction,  but  Adeja  did  not  acknowledge  the
gesture.  Nor  had  he  given  the  prince  an  answer  regarding  his  proposed  promotion.  Guarding  the  royal
offspring was a responsibility other sentries might  covet,  yet  not  him.  If  Sephil's  child  turned  out  to  be  a
daughter, a bodyguard  would  not  be  necessary.  If  it  was  a  son,  threats  to  the  young  prince's  life  would
make  the  post  no  sinecure,  from  the  assassins  who  would  inevitably  strike  to  the  mother  who  would
thoroughly loathe the idea.
Sunset deepened into a long twilight, and servants brought lamps into the  sitting  room.  Night  brought
the changing of the guard. Adeja relinquished his pike to his replacement, went downstairs for supper, and
then retired. For a brief time he lay awake on his cot, his thoughts lingering on the drama being played out
upstairs, until he convinced himself that it was not his concern and closed his eyes.
Morning brought news to the kitchen that the princess still had not delivered her child but that it  was
expected soon. "I daresay the prince hasn't slept all night," said the cook.
After breakfast, Adeja relieved himself and went upstairs to take his post. From the foyer, he saw the
doors to the princess' chamber standing ajar. Beyond that, he could not see through the press of attendants
crowding the doorway.
Neither night shift guard left, instead joining the crowd in the sitting room. The silence was so palpable
that Adeja wondered if something had gone wrong with the birth.
A moment later, he heard muted applause and  sighed  in  relief.  Everything  was  all  right.  The  crowd
parted, forming a ragged aisle down which Sephil shuffled, escorted by the other princes. Shadows bruised
the prince's eyes, and a vacant smile hung on his lips.
As he approached the door, he stumbled. Adeja put out a hand to steady him. "Are you all  right,  my
prince?"
Sephil lifted his head. His drooping eyes focused and, recognizing Adeja, his smile broadened. "I have
a son," he said.
* * * *
Exhaustion dogged Sephil throughout the labor. Once the waiting was over, Olmor and two attendants
helped  him  to  his  chamber  and  put  him  to  bed.  He  woke  hours  later,  still  partially  clothed,  to  a  room
darkened by twilit shadows. Faint, jubilant sounds reached him from a distant part of the palace.
As he wobbled out of bed and tried to flex stiff joints, a servant entered bearing a lamp. Sephil threw
up his hands against the sudden glare until the man covered the light.
"I did not know you were awake, my lord," said  Piras.  "Everyone  is  downstairs  celebrating.  Do  you
wish to join them, or would you like to take your supper up here?"
"How is my wife?" Alertness gradually returning to him, Sephil recalled Ketalya, bathed in sweat and
exhausted by her long labor, smiling up at him. Ghanis assured him that the delivery had gone well, but he
wanted to be sure.
"The princess is resting, my lord, and  the  little  prince  thrives,"  replied  Piras.  "I  will  help  you  change
your clothes if you wish to go down."
Sephil wanted to ask where Adeja was, for he had a vague memory of stumbling into the man at the
door, but found it difficult to speak. Instead, he let his thoughts wander as he washed his hands and  face,
combed his hair, and changed his rumpled clothing for a robe of gray brocade.
I have a son. What his father would have said, he did not know. The teachings of Abh taught him to
relinquish  all  regrets,  which  included  his  lifelong  yearning  for  his  father's  approval,  but  it  was  difficult.
Instead, he did his best to focus on his new family, whose joy on this day sustained him through his doubts.
"Piras," he said, "bring me the seal ring."
Opening the velvet-lined box, Sephil carefully slid the ring off its chain and onto his finger.  The  band

was too large for him, and the stone too heavy to be worn by anyone but a prince whose  hand  knew  the
weight of a sword and could defend his people.
I am not the true Crown Prince.
Slowly, he removed the ring, placed it with its chain back into its box, and closed the lid. The revelation
did not sadden him, only confirmed what he knew from the beginning. He could not take Zhanil's place.
One day, he thought, handing  the  box  back  to  Piras,  my  son  might  wear  this  ring.  But  I  will  not
wear it again.
He  walked  alone  down  the  palace's  grand  staircase  and  onto  the  terrace  where  the  royal  family
gathered to celebrate. As people noticed, they stopped to greet him. A brother-in-law pressed a  goblet  of
chilled wine into his hand, while Olmor inquired if he had eaten anything.
"No, I only just awoke," replied Sephil. In truth, he could not remember when he last ate.
Olmor sent a servant to fetch a plate of food as Ampheres, tapping his glass with a spoon, called for
everyone's attention. Sephil exchanged glances with his uncle and braced himself for the inevitable speech.
"Now that our beloved son is able to join us," said the king, "we may begin this celebration in earnest."
Sephil  drank  very  little,  and  stayed  long  enough  to  mingle  before  retiring.  A  detour  to  his  wife's
chamber  yielded  a  visit  with  Ketalya,  who  mumbled  she  felt  fine  even  as  she  drifted  off  again.  Her
exhaustion did not surprise him. His own weariness might have led him to curl up alongside her had Amarno
not insisted that the princess needed to rest unhindered.
Before the woman evicted him altogether, Sephil managed to look in on his son, sleeping peacefully in
his cradle. The wet nurse dozed on a cot nearby. Adeja was not present. That would change, regardless of
Ketalya's objections, and Sephil meant to see it done before they returned to Bhellin.
The following day he called Adeja into the sitting room and, with Branag as a witness, appointed him
the young prince's bodyguard.
"My prince," said Adeja, "you offered me the post before. I never said I—"
"Soldiers are not supposed to question their orders," Sephil said sharply. "They do as they are told. You
hesitated because you did not know if the child would be a boy. Now you know. I have a son, and he needs
a protector. You will assume your post  tomorrow.  You  will  also  work  with  Branag  to  select  and  train  a
guard for the night shift."
Adeja covered his surprise with a crisp salute and returned to his post. Sephil spent the afternoon with
his wife and son. Amenia and the queen were also present, directing the servants while Ketalya rested.
"My dear," said Amenia, "you must hold your son."
Sephil recoiled from the swaddled infant his grandmother offered him. "I do not want to drop him."
"Do not be absurd," she laughed. "You will not drop him."
Rising from her chair, Amenia approached Sephil and directed him to hold out his arms. "Now  when
you hold him on your lap, you support his head with one hand like this, and his body with your other arm like
this." She demonstrated, having Sephil imitate her until she was satisfied enough to ease  the  baby  into  his
arms.
He froze in terror at the warm weight in his arms. His son seemed so small, so fragile, and should he
move, Sephil knew he would surely drop him.
For  some  reason,  the  women  found  his  dilemma  amusing.  "One  can  always  tell  a  new  father  by
frightened he is of the newborn," said the queen. "It took Ampheres two months to hold Ettarin, he was so
anxious, but when Naulia was born he wanted to dandle her in his arms before the  midwife  even  cut  the
cord. Sephil, child, relax your arms before you get a cramp. You are not going to drop him."
He did as told, cautiously adjusting his hold until he found a more comfortable position. Right away, the
baby began to bawl, his red face screwing up in displeasure. This, too, the women found amusing, while it
mortified Sephil to think that his own son did not want to be held by him.
"Babies cry when they want something, my lord," explained the wet nurse. With an apology, she took
the infant from him. "Maybe he is hungry, or needs to be changed."
"Or he does not like me," Sephil murmured, as he watched the woman carry his son out of the room.
"Nonsense!" said Amenia. "All he knows is that he is tired, hungry, or has a wet diaper, and as for not
liking you, as long as you are warm or have a nipple, that is all that concerns him."
That  evening,  the  king  hosted  a  banquet  in  the  palace's  formal  dining  hall.  Ketalya,  having  been
admonished to remain in bed for one more day, did not attend, but Ampheres had food and  rich  red  wine
sent up to her chamber, and announced that she and Sephil would be his guests of honor at a second, more
lavish banquet to be held in Bhellin upon their return.
During the second course, Ettarin's wife politely inquired what name Sephil  intended  to  give  his  son.
No one had asked after the birth, which Sephil found strange until Ampheres explained that naming was not

done right away. "This will sound crude, I am sure," the king  explained,  "but  announcements  cost  money,
and  we  must  make  certain  that  the  child  will  survive  before  committing  ourselves  to  such  expenditures.
However, the little prince seems to be in excellent health, so I see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  release
news of his birth to the court by next week."
Revealing the name to his immediate family was  not,  as  Sephil  viewed  it,  an  official  announcement.
Smiling at his sister-in-law, he replied, "His name is Zhanil Sephides."
Although the name was one among many he had considered, Sephil knew the moment he had placed
the seal ring on his finger what legacy his son should bear. This Zhanil would be strong and wise and brave,
as perfect a prince as his lost uncle, and all that his father could not be.
All eyes at the table turned to him, and Ampheres laughed. "Zhanil Sephides, it is then," said the king,
raising his glass. "Here is to the young prince. Long may he thrive."
After supper, Ampheres drew him aside into  his  darkened  study  for  a  private  talk.  "Your  choice  of
name does not surprise me," he said, closing the door.
Sephil  refused  the  drink  Ampheres  offered  him.  He  had  drunk  more  than  he  intended  the  last  two
days, and felt lightheaded. "I could not give him any other."
"There are some who will not care for your choice," said Ampheres. "You may think it premature, but
it might be prudent to proclaim Zhanil Crown Prince of Rhodeen as soon as possible."
In a box upstairs sat a ring the size of a newborn's fist, and far heavier. He will wear  it when  he is
ready, not before. "I disagree," said Sephil.
"Do you, now?"
"You once told me that you would not build empires on sons who had not been born or who  had  not
shown their promise. Zhanil is only two days old. For all you know he will turn out like his father: dull-witted
and inept with a sword. Would you rest your ambitions on a potential weakling?"
"You make a valid point," said Ampheres.
"I will not have my son burdened with the title unless he desires it and is worthy of it."
Ampheres raised an eyebrow. "Desire has nothing to do with political necessity."
"The Turyar are entrenched in Rhodeen. They are not going to step aside so my son can assume the
throne," answered Sephil. "Make no mistake: I am grateful to you for all you have done for me, but Zhanil is
 my son and I will not have him forced into a role he might not want. Train him for war if you must, but if
later he desires a peaceful life, I mean to see that he has it."
Staring  into  his  glass,  Ampheres  took  his  time  about  replying.  "Your  father  thought  you  weak  and
effeminate," he said softly. "Regardless of what I told you,  you  still  cling  to  these  notions  about  yourself.
However,  you  possess  far  more  backbone  and  intelligence  than  you  believe.  I  do  not  think  your  father
would be displeased with you today.
"Having said that, I am not pleased by all the decisions you have made regarding this matter. For one,
it remains to be seen whether you have shown sound judgment in appointing Zhanil's bodyguard."
"I have confidence in the man's abilities," said Sephil.
Ampheres answered with a long, probing look. "We will see how  well  he  proves  his  worth.  Ketalya
does not care for the appointment. We both know why. I have assured her that your conduct in this matter
has thus far been beyond reproach, and that you will continue to ensure it remains so.
"For now, we will respect your wishes and delay passing the title of Crown Prince to Zhanil until he is
ready to bear it. However, you would do well to remember that your son was not born into a time of peace,
and your enemies care nothing for your wishes or his. Like it or not, he must prepare for war."

Chapter Thirteen
"What's  the  matter?"  asked  Adeja.  "Don't  you  like  the  necklace?"  Women  were  such  strange
creatures, passionate one moment and crying the next. Earlier in the day, Lahis had flung her  arms  about
him and kissed him in enthusiastic welcome, but now in the dark, when he draped the jasper beads around
her neck, she burst into tears.
Touching the necklace, Lahis chewed her lip and kissed his cheek, yet she was still crying. Then she
took his hand and placed it over her belly.
Adeja  felt  roundness  where  he  did  not  remember  any,  just  enough  to  make  him  draw  back  in
amazement. "When did this happen?"
Four months ago, just before his departure. Lahis seemed reluctant  to  say  more,  as  though  her  next
words would be that the child was not his. Adeja, however, knew that was not so. "Why didn't you tell me
earlier?" he asked. "This should make you happy."
"I wanted to be sure," she said, sniffling. "I didn't want to lose it like the others and make you angry."
"What others?" asked Adeja.
Lahis dropped her head so he could not see her face. "The ones I had before, with Chalak."
Had she possessed a sense of humor, Adeja might have made a jest about her first husband's lack of
virility, but she was so distraught that he held his tongue. "Crying isn't good for the baby," he said. "Come
now, dry your eyes, put a smile on your face and let me see how pretty the necklace looks on you."
* * * *
Ketalya showed two faces  with regard to their son. In private, she was a loving mother, yet  when  it
came to all official matters  her  smile  vanished.  She  said  nothing  when  Adeja  assumed  his  post  near  the
nursery, but her cold demeanor told Sephil that she did not accept the appointment. Sephil did not press the
issue, trusting that in time she would see how suitable the arrangement was.
However, he could not contain his surprise when  she  revealed  how  much  she  disliked  his  choice  of
name. "Why did you have to call him after your dead brother?" she asked. "I thought you wanted to call him
Charnil."
"I did," he said, "but when I finally saw him the name did not seem to fit. Why do you find my choice
so objectionable? My brother was a good and honorable man."
"You do not understand," said Ketalya. "In Khalgar, mothers do not name  their  children  after  people
who have died horrible deaths. I assumed you knew our customs. Do you think I want my son named after
a man who rode out against the Turyar and came back staked to a pole without his head?"
Sephil was stunned that she would so explicitly remind him of his brother's fate when she scrupulously
avoided all other mention of Zhanil. "I am doing all I can to ensure that our son does not suffer  that  fate.
Why do you think I insisted on appointing Adeja as his bodyguard? I want him to have at least one protector
who does not answer to your father, and who can teach him how to survive.  My  hope  is  that  Zhanil  will
decide that he does not wish to pursue the throne."
"I do not see that he will have much choice," said Ketalya, "and by that I am not referring to whatever
ambitions my father might have. What happened last week will happen again."
Somehow, the anonymous gift of a stuffed toy had found its way into the nursery, where on his daily
inspection Adeja noticed movement under the plush velvet. Calmly instructing the nurse to take Zhanil out
of the room, he speared the lion with his sword and bore it into the sitting room where  he  cast  it  into  the
fireplace.
Ketalya and her ladies, irritated by the interruption and the stench of burning velvet, scattered in horror
at  the  dark  shapes  that  writhed  out  of  the  burning  pile.  Adeja  crushed  two  with  his  boot  and  speared
another while calling for a guard to make certain the floor was clear.
"Scorpions,  princess,"  he  said,  without  looking  at  Ketalya.  "It  looks  like  a  present  from  the  prince's
relations in Tajhaan."
An  hour  later,  the  entire  household  overheard  Adeja  berating  the  woman  responsible  for  bringing
parcels and messages into the household. She ran to the princess in tears, her cheek red from where Adeja

had slapped her, but Sephil, who came straightaway from the temple of Abh  upon  hearing  the  news,  had
stern words for her.
"I do not care how harmless or cute it seems," he said. "Anything that comes for Prince Zhanil must go
through the bodyguard."
Still weeping, the woman knelt before him. "But he shouts, my lord, and he struck me!"
"He will do much worse to you if this happens again, and I will not stop him."
Ketalya, still in shock, had nothing to say. She acknowledged Adeja's deed by formally thanking  him,
but  did  not  warm  toward  him  or  Amset,  the  guard  he  had  selected  and  was  training  for  the  night  shift.
Sephil meditated on the situation, and concluded that she did not like the perpetual threat to her son that both
men represented.
"What happened will happen again no matter what name Zhanil bears," he said.
Naturally,  the  Tajhaani  ambassador  expressed  horror  at  the  incident  and  assured  the  king  of  his
prince's good intentions. "After all," said Fallaz, "the gift came  anonymously.  Everyone  knows  the  Turyar
employ scorpions and venomous snakes in battle, so who is to say they have not done so this time?"
"The  Turyar  do  not  concern  themselves  with  infants  who  represent  no  threat  to  them,"  answered
Ampheres, "nor do they attack by such underhanded means. We know Tajhaan's reputation for poison and
other  nefarious  means  of  death,  and  your  custom  of  eliminating  all  male  rivals,  even  the  very  young.
Therefore, you would do well to hold your tongue and tell your  prince  that  should  such  an  incident  occur
again, he will not like our response."
Fearing another attempt, Ketalya insisted that Zhanil's cradle be moved to her chamber  at  night,  and
would not be deterred  even  when  Sephil  pointed  out  that  the  baby's  crying  would  keep  her  awake.  Her
solution was to have the wet nurse sleep on a cot in the corner.
Some  nights,  Sephil  slept  beside  her.  Ketalya  displayed  no  interest  in  lovemaking,  which  Ghanis
assured him was natural following childbirth. "Give it time," he said, "and her desire will return."
Sephil  knew  his  wife  took  herbs  to  suppress  her  milk,  yet  her  scent,  discernable  even  through  the
fragrant oils her ladies poured into her bath, aroused in him a fierce urge to protect her and the baby. Often
he woke to find himself spooned against her back, his arms wrapped around her. Ketalya softened during
these moments, when their world seemed no larger than the room, the bed in which they lay, and the infant
she lifted out of the cradle and set on the coverlet beside her.
"He is such a beautiful baby," she said. "I almost wish he could stay like this forever."
"He will be tall," murmured Sephil, reaching across her to  fondle  Zhanil's  tiny  fingers,  "and  dark  like
you. And if he has your temper, his enemies had better beware."
She smiled and closed her eyes. "He will turn out as stubborn as you."
As autumn deepened and turned cold, Sephil called for Ceyath once more. Ketalya encouraged these
visits, and even took a maternal interest in the young man, insisting that he eat and don a warm cloak before
leaving. Sephil flushed with embarrassment at how easily she inquired  if  Ceyath  satisfied  him.  She  never
asked  about  his  life  in  Rhodeen  or  mentioned  Adeja,  yet  beneath  her  solicitous  interest  he  sensed
unresolved tension simmering.
Could his desire be so transparent? He took care not to interact with Adeja without a senior member
of the household present, and when  he  did  the  conversation  was  strictly  impersonal.  How  could  Ketalya
know of his longings when he did his utmost to put them out of his mind?
One  gray  afternoon,  Ketalya  dismissed  her  ladies,  instructed  the  nurse  to  bundle  Zhanil  in  warm
clothes, and announced she was taking him to visit Ettarin and his wife.
"Take Adeja with you," said Sephil.
Ketalya settled her mantle upon her shoulders. "Amset will accompany me."
Sephil started to protest that Amset was not on duty. Ketalya turned, spearing him with eyes that said
she wanted Adeja to stay behind with him.
Even as he grasped her intention, he shook his head. "His place is with you and Zhanil."
"Whatever happens here while I am gone," she said coldly, "I do not want to know about it."
"I do not intend to—"
"I want this matter settled, Sephil. Do what you must, but I want it finished today."
Ketalya left the room, the nurse following with Zhanil. Sephil could not speak, and did not know what
he would have said had he been able. How can  she  expect  me  to  do  this  when  I  have  spent  so  long
trying to denying these desires? For all I know, once I touch him again, I will not be able to stop.
From the foyer, Sephil heard two male voices. One belonged to Amset. The other….  Only  when  he
tried to swallow did he realize his throat had gone dry.
Adeja,  wearing  his  red  leather  corselet,  filled  the  doorway.  Across  ten  feet  their  eyes  met,  an

exchange brimming with confusion and longing. No words passed between them.
She  arranged  this,  just  as  she  might  have  arranged  an  evening  with  Ceyath.  A  wild  thought,
racing so chaotically through Sephil's head that he could not quite grasp it. At the same moment,  memory
took him back to the day when he first set eyes on the handsome foreign guard he had Nakhet procure for
him, when he felt his heart race and desire stop his voice.
"You  look  like  I  just  sprouted  horns,"  Adeja  finally  said.  He  turned,  closed  the  door  and  stepped
forward.
Sephil blinked, and shook himself out of his trance. "Do you know why you are here?"
"Your wife told me just now. She thinks there's still something between us."
You say that as if it is not true. "Did she really say that?"
"Not in so many words, but I understood her meaning."
Adeja unbuckled his corselet, tossed it onto a chair and approached, so confident and  delectable  that
Sephil yearned to embrace him, but the situation was so contrived it felt unnatural, very much like what he
imagined a tryst in a brothel would be. "I am not so sure we are not being watched," said Sephil.
"She's dismissed everyone."
"The king also has spies."
Adeja smiled. "Yes, and I know who they are, too. They're also gone."
Drawn  together  by  the  heat  of  their  attraction,  their  lips  met.  Sephil  drank  in  the  kiss,  the  tongue
exploring his mouth and the hands running down his back to cup his buttocks and pull him close. All those
lonely nights, this was what he wanted, needed, and he still could not quite believe that Ketalya was simply
allowing him to have it.
His  fingers  found  the  hem  of  Adeja's  tunic  and  drew  it  up,  tugging  at  the  cloth  until  Adeja
acknowledged his need by removing the garment and tossing it aside.
Now able to touch his lover's bare skin, Sephil knew his desire should have intensified. He should have
been pulling off his own clothing, fumbling at the laces of Adeja's leggings, drawing out his cock to fondle
and take it in his mouth, all in a frenzy of passion. But the heat was not there, no matter  how  fiercely  he
tried to coax it.
Finally, he pulled away. "I cannot do this. It is not right."
With a sigh, Adeja released him. "Neither can I," he admitted.
"I do want you, but—"
Adeja bent to retrieve his tunic. "I know."
As he started to put the garment back on, Sephil spied an unfamiliar tattoo on his left bicep. Putting out
his hand, he stopped Adeja so he could touch the design in blue ink. "This is the royal sunburst," he said. "I
have never seen this before."
"I had it done a year ago."
A year ago, Adeja was working in the city prison. For all either of them knew, they had seen the last
of each other. "Why would you do this?"
Adeja shrugged. "I don't know. It just seemed like something I wanted to do." Laughing, he pulled the
tunic over his head and belted it. "It's a good thing I ended up in your service and not someone else's."
"You serve Zhanil now, Adeja, not me."
Adeja retrieved the corselet from the chair and buckled it on. "Lahis is pregnant," he said.
Of all the  things  he  might  have  said,  Sephil  never  expected  this  to  be  among  them.  "When  did  this
happen?"
"Just before we left for Adenna," replied Adeja. "The baby's due at the end of winter."
"She is six months' pregnant and only now you think to tell me?"
"I only found out when we returned, and even then Lahis waited half a day to tell me. Besides, I had
no idea you were so interested in the lives of your lowly servants."
His lighthearted tone and comical eye-rolling took the barb out of the comment. Sephil could not help
but laugh.
"This means we have to celebrate." In a cabinet, he found a decanter of red wine and two glasses.
"I'm on duty," said Adeja.
Sephil handed him a glass nonetheless. "If  you  were  on  duty,  you  would  be  with  Zhanil.  One  drink,
Adeja, and then you can return to your post."
Adeja stared into its contents before drinking. "Your wife will want to know what happened."
"Then tell her the truth," said Sephil.
Once Adeja was gone, Sephil again became aware of the silence. This time, it was not oppressive, but
serene, encouraging him to reflect. If she asked, Adeja would tell Ketalya nothing happened between them.

It was not entirely true.
Something had ended between them, yes, yet when Sephil closed his eyes and saw again in his mind
the sunburst tattoo, he knew something far more profound had begun.
Facing the window, he raised his glass before drinking. "To you, my protector," he murmured. "And to
you, my son, the most fortunate of princes."

About the Author
L.E. Bryce was born in Los Angeles, California and has never lived anywhere else. She has a Masters in
English Literature from California State University, Northridge, and currently works as an English teacher.
Her Jewish mother, two dogs and passel of cats help her keep her sanity.  She  is  a  regular  contributor  to
Forbidden  Fruit Magazine, and is the author of three other books, Dead  to the World, Snake  Bite  and
Other  Dark  Homoerotic  Fantasies  and  Those  Pearls  That  Were  His  Eyes.  She  maintains  a  blog  at
http://granamyr.livejournal.com.

If you enjoyed this title, may we recommend…?
Morningstar, by Jade Falconer
ISBN 1-59426-601-8, $6, available in eBook format
In a future where the human race struggles to survive, the only elite are the hunters laying their lives on the line every
night to defend their own kind against the undead  predators. But one man stands  above them all. Morningstar.  Can
the most feared vampire hunter find solace and passion  in the arms of  his  sworn  enemy,  one  of  the  undead?  In  an
environment  of  oppressive  laws,  designed  to  help  the  human  race  survive  a  massive  population  collapse,  the
attraction between Daniel and Scott  is  blazing  and  instantaneous...  and  outlawed.  But  how  will  they  overcome  the
obstacles they face, when one is sworn to kill the other? 
Elements: M/M 
Midwinter's Night, by Michael Barnette
ISBN 1-59426-568-2 $2, available in eBook format
This is a yaoi (M/M) release.
Aerdyn is a Seelie Knight exiled for a murder he didn’t commit. Alone, his magic dying, all he has are memories of the
past, memories of his lost love Ellian. Then a stranger arrives. A stranger who turns  his lonely world upside down and
shows him that true love never dies.
Now available at www.Phaze.com!

The hottest romance, the most memorable heroines,
the most gorgeous heroes…
Welcome to the next PHAZE in erotic romance!
Join us online for author chats, writing workshops,
and big prize contests with our FREE newsletter!
www.phaze.com
groups.yahoo.com/group/PhazeChatters
eBooks available at Fictionwise.com, CyberRead.com,
and AllRomanceeBooks.com,
print titles available at Amazon.com, BN.com,
BooksAMillion.com and on the shelves of Borders
bookstores!

