Scanned and initially proofed by unknown person
Converted to html, reproof and reformatted by Highroller.
Jinx High by Mercedes Lackey
CHAPTER ONE
Buffie Gentry pounded the steering wheel of her brand-new Kiata, and
cursed—though what she really felt like doing was crying her eyes out
like a little kid. It couldn't have stalled. Daddy had just picked it up
today. There was nothing wrong with anything, it had a full tank of
gas—
But it had died way out here on 101st, and now it wasn't responding at
all.
And this was a spooky place to get stranded past midnight. You might
as well be in West Texas instead of less than twenty miles from
downtown Tulsa. There wasn't anything out here but cows and
cicadas, mysterious shadows, and an awful lot of dark.
Visions of the Rainy-day Rapist and the Southside Strangler kept
popping into her head, making her look over her shoulder as she tried
to get the damn car started one more time.
No luck. And now the tears did come; she sobbed in what she told
herself was frustration but felt more like fear. God, this is like the
classic slasher-movie setup, girl stuck out on a deserted road at three
a. m. —next thing I'll see is a guy in a hockey mask—
She shivered and told herself not to be stupid. There was a gas station
not a half mile behind her—it was closed, but there was a phone there.
She could call the auto club. That was why Daddy had a gold card with
them.
Resolutely—though it took every bit of courage she had—she left the

protection of the car and started the long trudge back toward the
Kerr/McGee station. But she kept seeing things out of the corner of
her eye, things that vanished when she looked straight at them, and
before long she wasn't walking, she was running.
She'd never been so grateful to see a gas station in her life.
She fumbled the last quarter out of her purse—this was one of those
phones where you couldn't use a charge card, and you had to put a
quarter into it even to call 911. She was just glad she hadn't dumped
all her change, back at the mall, when Fay Harper had sneered at her
for putting cash in the liver-transplant box. Fay had made her so
damn mad—just because she'd beaten the senior out on the Teenage
America finals, that was no reason for Fay to imply she'd gotten that
far by sleeping with one of the judges—
Well, neither of them made it to the regionals, so there.
Buffie just wished Fay hadn't said what she did, when Buffie had
retorted with the truth nobody ever said out loud.
"You should know, Fay Harper. You get everything you want by
sleeping around and passing out nose candy.”
And Fay had said something horrible, whispered it in Buffy's ear. So
horrible Buffy couldn't remember exactly what it was— just some kind
of threat.
Or promise. Because it had ended with—"And when you see what's
coming for you, remember I sent it."
Buffy shoved her coin into the slot with hands that shook so hard she
could hardly dial the number, and prayed for a quick answer.
—
"God damn it." Sharon LeeMar looked at the phone resentfully. It

would ring, now, when she'd just gotten a new coat of polish on her
nails. It was probably nothing; some drunk, like last night, wanting
the auto club to pull the car out of the ditch where he'd put it. Or some
stupid kid who'd missed her ride home from some rich-bitch party,
and wanted them to provide her with one.
Well, there was a way around that. It wasn't like she hadn't done it
before. She hit the button with her elbow. "Big A Auto Club," she said.
"Will you hold?"
And before the caller could say a word, she hit the hang-up button.
—
Buffy stared at the phone in gut-wrenching shock, unable to believe
she was hearing a dial tone. "No—" she whispered, a panic that she
knew was irrational starting to take over. "No, you can't—"
She scrabbled desperately in her purse, hoping for one more quarter.
Nothing. With a sob, she upended the whole thing on the pavement,
pawing through a tangled mess of makeup,  jewellery, credit cards,
and odd bits of paper, praying for a quarter, a dime, anything—
Then she heard the sound; a kind of growl. And looked up.
And the scream died in her throat before she could utter it.
—
"What?"
Derek Kestrel half closed his lids against the wind that was drying his
eyes, and gathered breath for another bellow. "I said," Derek yelled,
trying to make himself audible over the bellow of the Trans Am's
engine and the painfully howling guitars of Motley Crew, "I can't hear
you!"

Fay Harper shook her head, her blond shag whipping wildly about her
cheekbones. Her hair looked like spun frost under the fluorescent
street lamps, her pale skin glowed in the moonlight, and her eyes were
turned to crimson embers by the reflections from the panel lights. "I
can't hear you!" she screamed back, turning the volume up another
notch until the Trans Am's floor panels shook from the bass.
Derek sighed and gave up, leaning back into the padded headrest of
his seat. It was custom-leather upholstered, of course, in deep
burgundy to match the rest of the car; Fay Harper was never seen in
less than the very best. Nothing was going to compete with those
speakers. Nothing natural, anyway. A B-52 at full throttle, maybe.
Hanging out with Fay was hazardous to the eardrums. He wished now
he'd brought earplugs or something. First had been the concert,
front-row seats, now it was Fay's ass-kicking stereo; he was going to
be deaf before the night was over.
Then again, hanging out with Fay Harper was hazardous to a lot more
than the eardrums.
The Trans Am tore down Memorial, Fay daring anything to pull into
her path. Derek squinted against the headlights of the oncoming cars,
assessed his blood-alcohol level by how fuzzy they looked, and came
up with an answer the Parental Unit wouldn't like. It was a good thing
his dad couldn't see him now. Hell, it was a good thing his dad hadn't
seen the concert! While Derek hadn't shared anything but the bottle
Fay had brought, grass had been the mildest of the recreational
Pharmaceuticals making the rounds tonight. Funny. Dad may have
been a wild-eyed hippie back when he was Derek's age, but he didn't
know the half of what went on these days. Derek said the word
"concert,” and he could almost see nostalgic visions of Woodstock
drifting through his dad's mind in a sunshine-golden, artistically
backlit haze. The Summer of Love. Peace, pop. Like, it's a happening.
Oh, wow.
He laughed out loud, and Fay gave him a funny look, then cranked the

stereo up the last notch. His whole body throbbed and vibrated with
the song. He could feel the amplifier overheating—
Or maybe the heat he felt was the effect of her hand sliding up his leg.
There was a drunken howl from the back seat, and Sandy Foster,
football bohunk extraordinaire, leaned forward and handed them both
cold beers, after throwing his own empty through the open T-top.
"Kick ass, Fay!" he shouted, as Fay gave him a smile that dazzled in
the hellfire glow from the instrument panel, and a long, wet kiss in
exchange for the beer. She never once took her foot off the gas, but she
never swerved, and she hadn't missed a light yet.
There was a flash of headlights in the left lane as a couple of
hopped-up metal-heads in a chop-top Cougar pulled alongside. The
driver shouted something, lost in the howl of engines and the screech
of feedback. Fay tossed back her head in laughter, rapped on the horn
once, contemptuously. Then she gave them the finger, and blew the
doors off their pitiful poser-custom.
Derek wondered if his spine was going to have a close encounter with
the back seat. The speedometer was in three digits by the time his
stomach caught up with the rest of him.
Sandy howled again, and another bottle hit the pavement behind
them.
Derek looked back at the Cougar eating their dust. For a minute, the
guy on the passenger's side looked a little like his buddy Alan.
He bit his lip, and wondered what Alan was doing tonight—, then
looked at the bottle in his hand. His conscience awoke, and sanity
reared its cold, ugly head.
What in the hell am I doing here? How did I ever get mixed up with
Fay's crowd?

Sandy was screaming along with the Cr; the simpleminded lyrics of
any popular song were all he needed to cover his questions.
Yeah, but Sandy's got three answers to deal with everything he runs
up against—drink it, screw it, or tackle it. Every Bud's for him.
Jillian Mc lver, Fay's best friend, was nuzzling Sandy's neck like a
toothless vampire. The rest of them pretty much match Sandy. Jill's
got no life outside the mall. Fay's got anything she wants. I'm the
oddball here. So what the hell do they want with me?
He glanced over at Fay; she smiled and licked her lips, and her hand
reached the Promised Land. Questions began to seem pretty
immaterial…
However, Fay's luck with the lights ran out at just that moment. She
pulled her hand away as the light changed from yellow to red. She
might have tried to run it—but there was a little something bearing
down on the intersection.
Derek wasn't so gone that he couldn't see the semi—and his reactions
weren't too blown to grab for the "aw-shit" bar on the door as Fay
cursed, locked all four wheels, and put the Trans Am into a sideways
drift, stopping just short of the intersection.
And as the front swung around, the headlights glared right into the
eyes of the metal-brains still trying to race them. They didn't see the
semi, or the red light—and if their music was as loud as Fay's, they
couldn't hear the air horn blasting at them, either. They headed
straight into the free-fire zone.
The Cougar flagged against the side of the semi's cab in a slow motion
shower of glass and plastic, fibreglass pelting down like
candy-apple-red hail—the impact inaudible over the hellish guitar.
Fay wasn't fazed in the least. She bared her teeth, mouthed
something, and down-shifted; gunned the car, and fled the scene in a

cloud of tire smoke.
Smiling.
Jill and Sandy were in a heap somewhere on the floorboard, mingling
with what was left of the cold case Fay had brought to finish off the
concert.
All that Derek could think of for the first, shell-shocked minutes,
was—Sandy's probably enjoying the hell out of himself.
Derek pried his fingers off the bar, one at a time. Fay's hands were on
the wheel and the shifter, giving him a moment of thought unclouded
by raging hormones.
He looked back at the wreck, and in a break between songs yelled,
"What about them? Aren't you gonna—"
"They weren't fast enough, " Fay shouted back, interrupting him.
"They got what they were asking for. They weren't good enough, and
they weren't fast enough.”
She gave him a long, sideways look, measuring him against some
unknown standard. Her eyes narrowed, and she licked her lips, the
barest hint of her tongue showing between them. "So how about it,
Derek? Are you fast enough?"
Shit. He looked back at the wreck; Fay shoved the stick up into fifth
and slid her hand over to his leg. Again.
Christ. She's crazy! I think that wreck made her horny! Or—
hornier— Derek suppressed a wince.
"Fay!"
Jillian Mclver had a voice like a ripsaw, but the harsh whine was
music to Derek's ears about now. Fay pulled her hand away. "What?"

she snarled over her shoulder. "What the hell were you doing?" Jill's
dishevelled head rose over the seat back, her dark curls falling over
one eye; her lower lip was swollen and cut a little, and she sucked at it
petulantly. Derek watched as Sandy's hand came up and made a grab
for her, and she elbowed him away. "I about broke my neck, Fay, " she
complained, raking her hair out of her eyes with talon like fingernails.
"An' I cut my lip. It's gonna be a mess for a week. What do you think
you're doing, anyway?"
My God. The guys in that Cougar could be dead, and all she's
worried about is her lip!
"Livin' life in the fast lane, girl, " Fay replied with poisonous
sweetness. " 'Smaller? Can't you take the pace?"
"But my lip—"
"Sandy'll kiss it, and make it all better, " Fay cooed. "Won't you,
honey?"
"You bet, " Sandy said thickly, from somewhere below the level of the
seat back, and Jill vanished in the direction of his voice with a muffled
yelp.
Derek hunched his shoulders and tried to become part of the
upholstery. Yeah. Life in the fast lane. And me a Yugo. Neep, neep.
Oh well; the wreck wasn't that bad. At least those guys walked away
from it.
Fay had just hit a bad stretch of road on the winding back way into
Jenks, and she needed to keep one hand on the shifter, one on the
wheel, and both eyes in front of her. Fay was a foot-lo-the-wall driver,
but she wasn't suicidal. Even this late at night, you never knew when
some drunk cowboy was going to pull out in front of you from one of
the kicker bars around here.
Trees and bushes blurred past, sparked with the occasional flickers of

fire that were animal eyes staring, mesmerized by their speeding
headlights. Derek blinked.
So Fay caused a bumper-bender. Big deal.
As he watched the shadows blur past, The memory slowly faded from
his mind. All he was thinking about was the speed, the night, and Fay.
Seems like there was something I should remember… Aw, hell.
Forget it. It's a damn good thing I'm not the one driving, he thought
muzzily. This road's right out of Grapes of Wrath. God only knows
why Fay's using it. Your county taxes at work. What was it Alan
said? The difference between Chicago and Tulsa County is that
Chicago politicians steal the money after the roadwork's paid for?
Yeah. Then Dad laughed and said that was why we live in Jenks.
Good ol' Jenks, Oklahoma. All the benefits of Tulsa, none of the
drawbacks.
Twenty years ago, Jenks had been Hicksville, and Tulsa wouldn't give
the residents of Jenks the time of day—now it was the bedroom
community that Tulsa would love to incorporate, and Jenks wasn't
having any part of the idea.
Now Jenks was the haven for some of the area's wealthiest
professionals—doctors, lawyers, top management—who didn't want to
give up their well-maintained roads or their autonomously funded
school district, thank you. Jenks money stayed in Jenks. Because of
that money, the Jenks schools were as good as the private academies
over in Tulsa, and a far cry from the Tulsa public school system. That
was a big selling point; yuppie parents believed in expensive
education. From computers in the classroom to Olympic pools, what
Jenks High didn't have wasn't worth having.
And a mere fifteen minutes up the interstate from your job. Shit, I
sound like a real-estate ad.
A yuppie paradise. Every acquisitive dream come true, and no slums

to mar the landscaping; no low-income housing, no porno rows, no
bag ladies, no "undesirables.”
It harbored those who lived a sheltered, pampered life. The kids who
went to Jenks were used to living their parents' fine life-style to the
hilt, used to the goodies that came without asking.
Like Fay, Sandy, Jill. More money than they knew what to do with,
and parents too busy clawing their way to the top to pay too much
attention to what their kids did with that money. They'd had expert
nannies as babies—the finest shrinks money could buy to get them
through their early teens—and once they reached sixteen or
seventeen, most Jenks parents figured their kids could take care of
themselves. Sort of the ultimate latchkey children. So long as they
didn't bring the law down on them, so long as they kept their grades
up and looked like they were straight, everything was cool.
Parents seemed to rely a lot on appearances in Jenks.
In Fay's case, there were no parents at all. Daddy was long gone to
wherever dead oilmen went; Mummy was sucking up tranks in the
loony bin at Vinita. All Fay had was some guy in a bank making
Mummy and Daddy's trust-fund dollars produce baby trust-fund
dollars, and a "guardian" who spent all her time watching the soaps,
making herself invisible whenever Fay wanted to party.
Derek felt more than a twinge of guilt about that. Dad knew Aunt
Emily existed—and assumed she was keeping an eye on the
proceedings every time Derek was over at Fay's. Tonight was no
exception; he'd said something about it being nice that this aunt didn't
mind hanging out with the kids.
When all the time Aunt Emily was not only letting them do damn near
anything they pleased short of burning me place down, she was the
one who'd bought the booze.
It's a good thing Mom's in Japan. She's got radar, I swear she does,

she knows every damn time I get shit-faced. I bet she's the one that
put Dad up to giving me that grass and making a video of me
making an ass out of myself. He blushed, glad mat it wouldn't be
visible in the scarlet lighting from the dash. I've never been so
embarrassed in my life. God. I wanted to die.
He couldn't even imagine Aunt Emily doing what Dad had done. No
way anybody's ever done that to Fay. No way anybody'd dare do
that to her. She gets what she wants, and that's it. What the hell am I
doing with her, anyway?
Back to the same old question. It didn't make any sense. It hadn't
made any sense when she asked him if he wanted to go with her. Fay
Harper, head cheerleader, a senior, the prom queen, and the hottest
roll in the sheets in Tulsa County—and she wanted him! Derek Kestrel,
a junior, a guy who wasn't even on the basketball team for Chrissake, a
guy who didn't even have a sports car, just a Chevy Citation? It didn't
make any sense at all. And that she'd stuck with him for two whole
months was way outside probability.
He couldn't figure out what Fay wanted, what land of prestige she was
getting in going with him. It couldn't be his family-Dad was a pretty
high-fee architect, but no Frank Lloyd Wright. Mom was as far up in
the hierarchy as she was ever going to get—or wanted to get—with
Telex. Fay had more money now than Mom and Dad put together,
and when she hit eighteen—it was no contest.
And it wasn't like his parents gave him any extra on his leash, either.
Fay didn't need him to do whatever she wanted; she just did it, and
got away with it, just like tonight. The concert party had been her
idea; the whole evening was her little treat. She'd wanted to raise
some hell, and nothing was going to get in her way. She'd bought the
tickets from a scalper, prices that had made Derek blanch; now she'd
haul them all home with her, there'd be more booze, and she'd hinted
she had some really hot videotapes.
All without a single word of opposition from anybody. Anytime Fay

wanted anything, good old Aunt Emily okayed the credit card charges,
bought the damn booze, and wouldn't poke her nose out of her room
from the moment they all came in through the front door.
Aunt Emily doesn't give squat what Fay does. So long as she's got her
soaps and Fay's trust fund keeps her life cushy, she's happy. She
sends so many excuse notes to the principal's office you'd think Fay
cranked 'em out on the Xerox. Shit, sometimes I think Fay only
shows up at school 'cause cutting is more boring than going to class.
Damn if I know how she stays head cheerleader. Or how she keeps
from getting flunked out. Not that Aunt Emily would care.
God, how am I going to stay out of the doghouse? Derek suddenly
realized that his dad would probably still be up when he came
home—Mom and Dad were both night owls, given the chance—and he
began trying very hard to think of a way to sneak in without Dad
finding out he'd been putting a few down. It wasn't like Dad would say
anything, or even do anything. He'd just give Derek that look—
The one that says, "I thought you had more brains than that. " The
one that says, "I still have that video, remember?" Christ. Good old
straight-edge Dad. You'd think he never got fucked-up in his life.
You'd think giving me that dope and letting me get shit-faced and
making that tape was legal. So I put down a few, so what?
So I figure I'm making an ass out of myself, that's what. Worse; I'm
being a shithead. We should have stopped at that wreck—
Fay caused the wreck. I let her get away with running out. I was too
blown—or too scared—to stop her. And Dad doesn't have to tell me
what a chickenshit I am.
He sighed. He really didn't belong in Fay's crowd; they didn't care
what their parents thought of them. He really kind of wanted his folks
to—to respect him.
He just didn't fit in, no matter how hard he tried.

But Fay wanted him anyway.
I like the way the other kids look at me. Like I'm some kind
of—of—superstar, to get Fay. I want to keep her—but what's the
attraction? he asked himself, sneaking a look at the devastating blond
out of the corner of his eye. I don't think I'm that good in bed. "
She seemed to sense his eyes on her, and gave him a sideways glance
of her own, a proprietary look that made him feel very uncomfortable,
even though he grinned back at her.
One of those stoned cowboys pulled out right in front of them, and
Fay cursed, pulled her attention away from Derek, and skidded
around him. Warm, wet wind slapped Derek in the face as they rolled
past the jacked-up pickup so fast it might just as well have been
parked.
Derek slumped down in his seat, his hands clenched around the
warming bottle of beer. For a moment, he'd been mesmerized by those
eyes, but the minute she took her gaze off bun, his mood sank again.
When she looks at me like that, I feel like a boy-toy, some kind of
prize she can show off in front of everybody. Like a piece of meat.
And I still don't understand why me. Why not Bob Williams? Shit,
Mr. Touchdown, big-time quarterback, Senior All-Star. He's more
like her speed. More than a match for her in the looks, too. Muscles
all over, including between his ears, blond—shit, guy looks like a
recruiting poster for the Hitler Youth.
He turned away, brooding out the window at the shadows in the fields
and the vague hints of outbuildings going by. They were past the
Jenks "downtown" now, all two blocks of it, and everything but the
bars locked up tight; out in the country, heading for Fay's place. Warp
Factor Four, Mr. Sulu.
It ought to be Bob sitting here. No, that's backwards—it'd be Bob in
the driver's seat, Fay over here; in his Porsche, not her Trans Am.
Bob doesn't take the back seat for anyone.

Bob's old man was the basketball coach—one reason why Derek had
never even bothered to try out for the team. He got all the exposure he
wanted to the Williams family just avoiding Bobby-Boy and his idea of
what constituted a joke. Bob had a way of finding exactly the most
humiliating thing to say or do to you, and he liked picking on what he
called "brains." Derek had gotten dumped on a couple of times by
Bobby-Boy. He didn't need to put up with Coach and the Gestapo
Method of Basketball Training.
He runs that team like a concentration camp. Hell for the outcasts,
paradise for the Chosen. And a raise every year, even when the
teachers don't get one. Not that Coach Big Bob needs the job, or the
money. Mrs. Bob has enough loot for twelve. And Bobby-Boy spends
it like it's Argentinian pesos, throws it around, makes like
hundred-dollar bills were pocket change; just the kind of guy you'd
think Fay would dig.
More than that, Bob's parental leash was as long as Derek's was short.
Big Bob let him get away with literally everything, with rule-breaking
that would get any other kid bounced from the team for the rest of his
school career. In fact, Bobby had gotten a girl from Union pregnant
last year—Big Bob got the pregnancy hushed up, then got the family
lawyer to scare the girl into an abortion.
Then had the balls to sit front-row centre at the Mabee Chapel over at
ORU every Sunday, and campaign for Right-to-Life.
Derek had overheard his parents talking about the story one
night—Mom had been ready to fry nails, she was so hot. Seems that
Big Bob had been boasting about his boy's "prowess" over at the dub
bar, and Mom had overheard. And given him a piece of her mind,
right in front of his cronies in the bar.
Which makes for another good reason not to try out for the team.
Thanks, Mom.
Derek rubbed his thumb along the wet side of the beer bottle.

Bobby-Boy's mom would never have dared do anything like mat.
Derek kind of admired his mom's guts, but he wished she'd found
some other way to take Big Bob down. One that wasn't so public.
No, that would never have happened to Bobby-Boy. Not good old
Bobby Williams, apple of his mother's eye, pride of his daddy's stable,
master of all he surveyed.
Maybe that's why Fay didn't move in on him. She doesn't like to take
second seat to anybody, any more than Bobby-Boy does.
Still… sometimes, it seemed like it would be nice to have a dad a little
like Big Bob. Derek would lay odds that when Bobby-Boy came home
shit-faced, not only would his dad hand him a beer, he'd want to know
how many notches Bobby'd carved on his gearshift that night.
Fay was taking the long way home tonight. Derek stared up at the full
moon pouring pale light down through the T-top, and wondered why
she'd decided to tour the county. Not that it mattered. The end of
tonight's ride was as predictable as the full moon. Fay's house, Fay's
living room, Fay's movies; then Fay's bedroom, Fay's bed.
Life in the fast lane.
And somehow, some way, he was going to have to figure out how to
cope with it all—Fay, money, life-style. Before he said or did
something that would make it all fall apart and turn her against him.
Because if she turned on him—he might as well try to talk his parents
into getting a transfer for him, because life at Jenks would be
unbearable. Fay would see to that.
You can't go back, isn't that what they say? I sure can't, not now. I'm
doing stuff now I never even dreamed about.
Used to be, though, weekends would be over at one of the guys'
houses, often as not. Either George Louis's place, or Alan's. If
George's, they'd listen critically to the band; give George their two

cents' worth. Sometimes he'd even take then-advice, like when he got
rid of the third Fender and picked up a Gibson. If Alan's, they'd do
some computer stuff—Alan was too together to be a nerd, but he knew
his micro like most guys knew their cars. Some of the games he'd
come up with were pretty incredible.
Used to be, when he went out with a chick, the farthest he got was
some really heavy petting.
Used to be, he knew who his friends were. Now—well, since he'd taken
up with Fay, George wouldn't even talk to him. George hated Fay,
though he'd never say why, exactly. But he didn't let that show—he
just avoided her like she was contagious. And since now Derek was
constantly in her company, he avoided Derek, too. The only time
Derek ever saw him anymore was at dances.
Alan was still his good buddy—except—
Except he figures Fay is Trouble. Keeps bugging me to drop her.
Even when he doesn't say anything, it's like with Dad, like I can hear
what he's thinking. That she's gonna get me in deep. And that when
she does, she'll bail out on me, leaving me stuck up to my ass.
Derek grimaced. Hell with it. They don't have a clue. Because, God, it
was worth it—Alan couldn't even guess. His life was so exciting… Fay
had done things with him he hadn't even fantasized before he got
involved with her. Some things he hadn't even known were
anatomically possible! She was incredible, insatiable, a real sexual
athlete—
Takes the gold in the water-bed races, not to mention the pole vault…
In short, so far as Derek understood the meaning of the word, Fay was
a genuine nympho.
There was only one problem. He was beginning to have trouble
keeping up with her.

—as 'twere—
The real problem was, when he failed to come through with the goods,
she really knew where to put the knife, and how to twist it to make it
hurt the most. Her standards, and her expectations, were high. All the
time. No coffee breaks, no vacations, no sick leave.
And when Fay didn't get what Fay wanted, there was hell to pay.
Oh hell. No pain, no gain. Right? Maybe more vitamins.
Derek could see the lights of the cars on the interstate beading the
horizon; that meant the turnoff to Fay's driveway wasn't too far away.
He began to hope, desperately, that Fay did have some video-porn
planned. Between the bottle that made the rounds at the concert and
the beer he'd drunk in the car, there wasn't much rising tonight except
hope.
I'm going to need all the help I can get, he thought unhappily.
A sudden lurch threw him against the door and broke into his
preoccupied thoughts. Fay was weaving pretty badly, though she
hadn't slacked up at all, speed-wise. Derek knew that the steering on
her car was touchy, but this wasn't touchy steering, this was DWI. Her
foot was still right down against the firewall, and she was taking up
every inch of her lane, and then some.
Fay was pounding out the tempo on the steering wheel, just a hair off
the beat, nodding her head in time to the music. She never did that
except when she was well and truly polluted.
Derek closed his eyes and hoped that the driveway wasn't too far
away.
"Fay!" Jill shrieked, five inches away from his ear, startling him so
badly that he lost his grip on the beer and dropped it.

Oh, great, he thought, groping for it. Terrific. In the morning, when
she smells beer all over the car, she's going to have my ass far a rug.
Fay just laughed at nothing, and took another swig from her brew.
"Fay!" Jill howled, her hair blowing into her wide, alarm-filled eyes as
she leaned forward over the back of the seat.
"What?" Fay shrieked back, still laughing wildly.
Jill waited until the pause between songs. "I think you've had too
much, Harper, " she screamed, gesturing at the beer in Fay's hand.
"You oughta let somebody else drive before we—"
Fay flung the empty out the top of the car, her face twisted with an
anger Derek knew only too well.
Oh, shit. She's going to have a tantrum, right here and now, at warp
speed.
She'd had a few of those tantrums at him, when he didn't bow to
whatever whim of the hour she was embracing. They were not among
his most cherished moments.
He usually wound up feeling like he'd been skinned and dipped in
boiling lead. He'd rather have been skinned and dipped in boiling
lead. It would have hurt less.
"It's my goddamn car, " Fay screamed, twisting the wheel viciously as
they rounded a curve, throwing both Jill and Derek against the
right-hand side. "I'll drive it any way I fuckin' want!"
Jill clawed her way back up to her position between Derek and Fay.
"Yeah, " she wailed, "but we're gonna get stopped!"
Exactly. But he didn't let that show—he just avoided her like she was
contagious. And since now Derek was constantly in her company, he

avoided Derek, too. The only time Derek ever saw him anymore was at
dances.
Alan was still his good buddy—except—
Except he figures Fay is Trouble. Keeps bugging me to drop her.
Even when he doesn't say anything, it's like with Dad, like I can hear
what he's thinking. That she's gonna get me in deep. And that when
she does, she'll bail out on me, leaving me stuck up to my ass.
Derek grimaced. Hell with it. They don't have a clue. Because, God, it
was worth it—Alan couldn't even guess. His life was so exciting… Fay
had done things with him he hadn't even fantasized before he got
involved with her. Some things he hadn't even known were
anatomically possible! She was incredible, insatiable, a real sexual
athlete—
Takes the gold in the water-bed races, not to mention the pole vault…
In short, so far as Derek understood the meaning of the word, Fay was
a genuine nympho.
There was only one problem. He was beginning to have trouble
keeping up with her.
—as 'twere—
The real problem was, when he failed to come through with the goods,
she really knew where to put the knife, and how to twist it to make it
hurt the most. Her standards, and her expectations, were high. All the
time. No coffee breaks, no vacations, no sick leave.
And when Fay didn't get what Fay wanted, there was hell to pay.
Oh hell. No pain, no gain. Right? Maybe more vitamins.
Derek could see the lights of the cars on the interstate beading the

horizon; that meant the turnoff to Fay's driveway wasn't too for away.
He began to hope, desperately, that Fay did have some video-porn
planned. Between the bottle that made the rounds at the concert and
the beer he'd drunk in the car, there wasn't much rising tonight except
hope.
I'm going to need all the help I can get, he thought unhappily.
A sudden lurch threw him against the door and broke into his
preoccupied thoughts. Fay was weaving pretty badly, though she
hadn't slacked up at all, speed-wise. Derek knew that the steering on
her car was touchy, but this wasn't touchy steering, this was DWI. Her
foot was still right down against the firewall, and she was taking up
every inch of her lane, and then some.
Fay was pounding out the tempo on the steering wheel, just a hair off
the beat, nodding her head in time to the music. She never did that
except when she was well and truly polluted.
Derek closed his eyes and hoped that the driveway wasn't too far
away.
"Fay!" Jill shrieked, five inches away from his ear, startling him so
badly that he lost his grip on the beer and dropped it.
Oh, great, he thought, groping for it. Terrific. In the morning, when
she smells beer all over the car, she's going to have my ass for a rug.
Fay just laughed at nothing, and took another swig from her brew.
"Fay!" Jill howled, her hair blowing into her wide, alarm-filled eyes as
she leaned forward over the back of the seat.
"What?" Fay shrieked back, still laughing wildly.
Jill waited until the pause between songs. "I think you've had too
much, Harper, " she screamed, gesturing at the beer in Fay's hand.

"You oughta let somebody else drive before we—"
Fay flung the empty out the top of the car, her face twisted with an
anger Derek knew only too well.
Oh, shit. She's going to have a tantrum, right here and now, at warp
speed.
She'd had a few of those tantrums at him, when he didn't bow to
whatever whim of the hour she was embracing. They were not among
his most cherished moments.
He usually wound up feeling like he'd been skinned and dipped in
boiling lead. He'd rather have been skinned and dipped in boiling
lead. It would have hurt less.
"It's my goddamn car, " Fay screamed, twisting the wheel viciously as
they rounded a curve, throwing both Jill and Derek against the
right-hand side. "I'll drive it any way I fuckin' want!"
Jill clawed her way back up to her position between Derek and Fay.
"Yeah, " she wailed, "but we're gonna get stopped!"
Fay's teeth were bared in a snarl. "I never get stopped!" she countered.
"Yeah, but-"
"You callin' me a liar, Mc lver ?" Her eyes glittered, hard and cold, and
it seemed to Derek that not all the red in them was due to reflections
from the dash lights.
"No, but-"
That was one "but" too many. Fay whipped around to face the girl, her
expression a distorted mask.
"All right!" she screamed. "You drive!"

And suddenly—there was no one behind the steering wheel.
Derek couldn't move. He tried; tried to grab for the wheel, tried to
vault the shift into the driver's seat. He could not move; something
outside of him was holding him in place.
Jill screamed and bailed over the back of the seat, grabbing
desperately for the wheel. The wheel wrenched to the left, just as she
got her hands on it.
By itself.
It was enough to make his breath stop and the hair to rise on the back
of his neck. Derek watched the wheel actually fighting her, like the car
was steering itself.
The last obstacle on the way to Fay's place loomed up in front of
them—an overpass with a little county road running underneath. The
motor roared as the car impossibly accelerated.
Jill screamed, still clawing at the wheel.
The tires echoed her screams, in terrifying harmony.
Derek tried to break the paralysis holding his body as he realized they
weren't going to make it past the overpass—
The left side of the car dropped sickeningly as the wheels left the road.
"Fu— " was the only sound from the rear seat, indicating that Sandy
had at least noticed they were all about to die.
—
It was the phone call every parent is afraid he'll get anytime his kid
goes out.

"Mr. Kestrel? This is Officer Ridelle of the Tulsa County Police.
There's been an accident—"
Larry Kestrel's hand spasmed on the handset; his heart stopped
beating. He stared at a single pale-beige Art Decor rose on the kitchen
wallpaper. And in his mind only one thought was clear. Not Derek.
Dear God, not Derek—
"—your son's all right, " me stranger's voice continued. "But you'd
better come on down to Hillcrest and pick him up. He's cut up and
bruised, and—real shook up. It was a pretty bad wreck, and one of the
other kids was killed, one of the girls in the car.”
His heart started again, leaping with relief and something shamefully
like joy. His eyes blurred; his knees went to jelly. He wanted to laugh
and cry at the same time. One of the other kids. Not Derek. Not My
son.
He stammered something to the police officer on the other end of the
line; it must have been all right, or else the cop was used to incoherent
parents. Probably the latter. Whatever, the cop told him he'd get all
the details when he got Derek from the emergency room, but no, the
kids weren't in trouble and there weren't any charges being filed; it
was just a hideous accident.
Somehow he got out to the car, he didn't notice that he was driving
until he was already rolling past the Jenks downtown district. It was a
damned good thing that the bars hadn't closed yet; if he'd had to play
dodge-'em with a bunch of drunks, he'd have been wiped out before he
got past Seventy-first Street. Shook up as he was, the drive to Hillcrest
passed in a blur. He began to notice, but only after he'd passed them,
that at least half the lights he hit were red. He slowed down a little,
tried to relax by telling himself that the cop had to have been telling
the truth—if Derek was at Hillcrest he couldn't be too badly hurt. He'd
have to have been coherent enough to tell someone to take him there;
otherwise he'd be someplace closer to Jenks rather than the hospital
Larry had told him to ask for if he had a choice.

The parking lot was nearly empty, but lit up like a tennis court; Larry
pulled the BMW across two spaces, flung the driver's door open, and
raced for the emergency room without bothering to lock it—
He hadn't expected an automatic door; it had been years since he'd
been to an emergency room. The double glass panels suddenly gaped
wide for nun, like the doors of the Starship Enterprise. He found
himself in the anteroom, people turning to stare at him, most of them
dressed in white, while he stood there blinking stupidly in the
fluorescent lights.
Movement to his left; a dark tan-and-brown shape. He blinked again.
A portly security guard approached him, a man obviously past
retirement age, moving slowly, cautiously. Larry wondered what it was
in his expression that made the man walk toward him so carefully, as
if he was dangerous.
"I'm—" He coughed. His throat was too dry to talk easily. He
swallowed, and tried again. "I'm Larry Kestrel. The county police
called, an Officer Ridelle. My son—"
The guard's anxious expression cleared. He nodded a balding,
age-spotted head. "No problem, Mr. Kestrel, " he said. "Your kid's
okay; he's all patched up and ready to go home. We've got him over
here. " He gestured that Larry should follow him down the blindingly
white corridor to his right, a corridor lined with closed and open
doors. Larry glanced inside one of the open doors, looking for some
sign of Derek. There were curtains on ceiling runners, some open,
some making little partitions around waiting Gurneys, some entirely
closing off little alcoves. Examination areas?
Probably; from beyond one of those curtained-off alcoves he could
hear voices, fragments of conversation. One, female, young but tired
sounding: "… Christ, they oughta call it Jinx High, there's been so
many accidents. That's the second one tonight, and three DOA…”
Not my boy. Thank you, God. Not my boy.

There was a cop—a real cop, in a real Tulsa County uniform—waiting
outside one of those closed doors.
"This's the boy's father, " the paunchy old man said, and shoved him
slightly in the cop's direction when he didn't move.
The cop took his elbow—this was a middle-aged man, maybe a little
younger than Larry, but as lean as the rent-a-cop was paunchy. And
he knew his business. Larry dazedly discovered himself being gently
steered toward a bench and pushed down on it. The cop eased down
next to Larry with a weary groan. Larry looked at him anxiously, and
found himself staring right into a pair of tired, but friendly, brown
eyes.
"Okay, here's the scoop, " the cop said, the weariness that showed
plainly in his eyes making his voice a little dull. - "I'm the guy that
called you; I'm the guy that got called to the scene. I'm the guy who's
writing this up. I've stayed with these kids the whole time. First of all,
your kid is fine. He had a scalp cut that took about three stitches, and
he might be concussed. What he is, he's scared, he's shocking, and
he's pretty well shook up. One of the two girls took a header through
the windshield, practically in his lap, and—well, that's the one I told
you about on the phone. The doctors are with her folks.”
The man shrugged, but the look in his eyes told Larry everything he
needed to know. It hadn't been pretty. And the girl's parents wouldn't
want to see the father of one of the survivors.
"The other girl, the driver, she says the steering went out on her. Right
now we don't see any reason to call her a liar. Things are a real mess
under what's left of that sun of bitch. " He shook his head. "Things
pretty well tally with what she told us. You can figure we ran blood
and Breathalyzer tests on all of the kids, anyway. That's SOP for a case
like this, that's part of why we couldn't call you right away. We were
waiting for the results. All three kids came out straight. Nobody was
doin' anything, no drugs, no booze. So, no charges. Not like the other
one-two private-school kids out drag racing on Memorial, stoned to

the gills. Glad the town boys got that one, I hear there wasn't much
left.”
Larry let out the breath he had been unconsciously holding in, and
inhaled a lungful of harsh antiseptic. He hardly noticed as it burned
his throat.
So Derek's not only okay, he wasn't fucked-up. "Then—what
happened?"
The cop sighed, and rubbed his eyes with the back of his hand. "I don't
know; the kids weren't real coherent. The other boy, Sandy, he can't
remember anything after they left the concert—doc says it's traumatic
amnesia, and he probably won't ever get that memory back. The other
gal says her girlfriend was probably unbelted; she was leaning up
between the front buckets to talk, anyway. You know kids—all over the
damn car, yakking, and no way to convince 'em to stay belted. The
other three were buckled up, but not the Mc lver kid. My guess is she
was half over the front seat when the steering went out. Odds are they
were probably speeding some, but since there's no skid marks, there's
no way to tell for sure, and after this—hell, I may file a report, but I'm
not gonna book 'em.”
"But Derek's all right?" Larry wanted that reassurance again, though a
part of him reflected on the irony of a former flower child begging for
reassurance from The Man.
"As all right as he's going to be, " the cop said, men hesitated. "Look,
I'm no psychologist, and it's none of my business, but your kid just
had a friend die, about as ugly a death as you can think of, and within
inches of him. It was real messy. I don't think you want to know how
messy. Go easy on him, okay? Give the kid some space.”
"What I'm going to give him, " Larry said slowly, "is the most
convincing hug I've ever given him; I'm going to tell him I love him,
and that I'm thanking God he's okay, and that anything else doesn't
matter squat.”

The cop grinned, his tired face wrinkling with smile lines for a
moment, and he slapped Larry on the back lightly. "You're a good dad,
Mr. Kestrel, " he replied with sincerity. "You go in there and take your
kid home."/p>
They both rose and started for the examining room, the cop reaching
the door a little ahead of him and opening it for him. Larry stepped
inside; Derek was sitting on the edge of a green plastic chair, slumped
over. For the thousandth time since his son hit puberty, Larry was
struck by the incredible likeness he and Derek shared. Same bone
structure, same wavy hair—only the green eyes were Miri's. For Larry,
looking at Derek was like looking into a time-reversing mirror. He
wondered if Derek realized.
The boy looked up quickly at the sound of the door opening, his face
white, his eyes like a pair of hollows in a snowbank. His doming was
torn, mud and blood splattered, and there were bruises on his
forehead and neck. Under the harsh fluorescent light the kid looked
like a corpse himself.
Then the blank, strained look Derek wore vanished as he realized who
was there. "D-dad?" he faltered. And threw himself into Larry's arms.
Legacy of the sixties; Larry and Miri Kestrel had taken no small
amount of pride in the fact that they'd raised a boy who thought it no
sin to show how he felt. Now Larry was deeply grateful they'd been
able to do that. As the cop closed the door of the tiny cubicle to give
them some privacy, the two of mem shivered and cried together, and
held each other tightly.
Derek couldn't speak at all for a long time, and Larry wasn't in much
better shape. His throat was knotted with conflicting emotions, and he
was trembling just as much as his son. Finally the tears seemed to ease
something inside his boy, and the young body began to relax. "Dad—"
Derek sobbed. "Dad, I'm sorry, I'm sorry—"
What it was he thought he had to be sorry for, Larry had no idea. At
the moment it didn't matter. All mat really mattered was that Derek

was safe—
—for the moment.
The thought came out of nowhere, unbidden. As if it wasn't his.
A chill threaded Larry's spine at that alien, unguarded thought. A chill
he hadn't felt for years.
Until now.
He held Derek a little tighter, and he stared over the boy's shoulder at
the cold, blank, antiseptic wall. There was nothing there. Nothing that
could be detected by the five senses.
But Larry Kestrel was not necessarily limited to five senses. He closed
his eyes, and let his mind open, just a little.
Danger.
The feeling was unmistakable; as clear and acrid as the metallic,
chemical scent of disinfectant permeating the room.
Something was threatening his boy. He let himself relax a little
farther, hoping to identify it.
Hunger.
A deep, insatiable hunger; an old hunger.
Something wanted his boy. Something that did not operate by the
laws and rules of the so-called normal world, the world Larry had
lived and moved in exclusively for the past seventeen years.
But not always. Before that—before he and Miri had moved to
Tulsa—he'd had no few encounters with another world altogether.
And that feather-light brush of cold down his back that had just

alerted him had always been the signal that he was about to have
another such meeting. The other feeling, the feeling of danger—that
wasn't exactly new, either. But he hadn't felt it in years, and it had
never been this strong before.
It had never been aimed at anyone but himself before.
He stiffened—and the feeling faded, leaving behind it only bone-deep
weariness, and the even deeper relief of a parent whose child is safe.
For now, said something, a certainty deeper than thought. For now.
"Come on, son, " he said, quietly. "Let's go home.”
CHAPTER TWO
Ann Greeley surveyed the twenty-four pupils of her Honours English
class and grimaced. And not because they were wearing clothing she
couldn't afford unless she won the Publisher's Clearing House
Sweepstakes—which they were. Not because in general they spent
more on one haircut than she spent in twelve months; she'd gotten
used to that over the past three years. Not because she knew that the
"allowance" most of them got from their parents every week equalled
or bettered her salary.
It was because she felt as if she was facing a class full of trendoid
zombies.
One and all, with very few exceptions, they hung over their reading
assignments listlessly. They were not acting as if they were-distracted,
but as if they were too emotionally burned-out to care about the
assignment or comprehend it. And that was not the norm for this
class, a class that a kid had to earn his way into.
The empty desk in the third row was the reason; Man Mc Iver's seat.
Oh, it didn't have her name on it, but it might as well have. That had
been her favourite desk for most of the year— she'd even come to class

a minute or so before everyone else just to secure it. Now it shouted
her absence, the rest of the kids so studiously averting their eyes from
it that they might just as well have stared and gotten it over with.
The funeral had been on Wednesday, but the kids were still in
mourning, and Ann was desperate for a way to wake them up. She'd
tried anything and everything—she'd taken a risk that the principal
might find out and object to her playing anything more controversial
than Bambi, and brought in her own videotapes, showing them The
Breakfast Club and asking them for reviews and analysis. She'd tried
asking for reports on their favourite Judy Blume novel. She'd had
absolutely no results, and no luck. Response was automatic and dead.
Jillian's seat was empty, and that emptiness ate at the whole class like
a cancer.
It was ironic that Ann hadn't wanted the girl in her class; despite high
grades in English (though never anywhere else), to her way of
thinking Jill had been just another mindless mall bunny. The principal
and Jill's counsellor had both prevailed against Ann's better
judgment. "She needs to be motivated and challenged, " they'd said.
"She's not getting any challenge that she recognizes as such anywhere
else.”
The latest buzzwords, had been Ann's disgusted thought. The latest
excuse for why a spoiled kid doesn't give squat about school, when
her parents don't care what happens so long as she graduates or gets
married, whichever comes first.
But for once her superiors had been right. Much as Ann hated to
admit it. She was of the cynical, if unvoiced, opinion that guidance
counsellors were failed teachers who were too inflexible to find a job
outside the school system. And that principals were inept teachers
who'd been bumped upstairs to keep them from ruining any more
kids.
The fall term traditionally began with drama, working in no particular
order, anything from modem to classic to Greek. Ann confidently

expected Jill to wither under the onslaught of The Lady's Not for
Burning, and capitulate with The Seagull. But that scenario never
developed.
Jillian Mc lver encountered classic literature and freedom of thought,
and blossomed. Much to Ann's astonishment (since she hadn't
expected that the girl would even be able to read without moving her
lips) Jill devoured Johnson, raced through Chekhov. And then she
went on to gobble Moli, Ibsen, and Schiller.
Then they'd hit the section on comedy, and Jill had really shown what
she was made of. She'd done a synopsis of Aristophanes' The Wasps in
ValSpeak that had even Ann rolling in the aisles. The girl was a
natural comedian, which may have accounted for her popularity.
Despite a voice like a whining saw, she could convulse either a listener
or a reader. And Ann had cherished hopes of nurturing that gift. There
was no reason why the girl couldn't become a real comic, or a comedic
writer. She had the wit, and the talent.
But not the drive.
Gradually Ann had become aware of a curious metamorphosis. Inside
the class Jill was one of the shining stairs, bright, articulate, witty.
Outside that classroom door, Jill was the same vapour-brain she'd
always appeared to be.
Inside, she held her own with the Brain Trust.
Outside, she trailed around with the Trend Set, and never opened her
mouth except to second someone else's ideas.
It had been, all things considered, rather like watching a
multiple-personality case switch personas. It had also been
maddening to witness, because the girl was only interested in using
her comedic sense to amuse her classmates. She had no ambitions
otherwise.

It was the waste of intellect that had troubled Ann the most. That, and
the switch to air-head she pulled whenever she hit the door on the way
out of Ann's classroom.
Dear God, it was like watching Segovia pump out guitar backups for
Muzak tapes.
The kids in the class didn't seem to be bothered by the fact that Jill
was one person to them and another to the social crowd. In fact, they
seemed to have expected it, and there was a kind of unspoken accord
among them not to approach Jill in any way outside the class, unless
she approached them first. As if they were all obeying some kind of
tribal laws of conduct Ann hadn't been made aware of.
It had annoyed the hell out of Ann; among other things, Jill could
have been a bridge between the academic and the social cliques. If
she'd chosen to do so…
But she wasn't interested in being a bridge to anything. Once that kid
passed the threshold, she had no life outside of shopping and parties.
As far as Ann could tell, she never even opened a book outside of
school.
Ann could not imagine a life without books, especially for someone as
bright as Jill proved she could be.
A life without books… There was a book locked up in Ann's desk right
now that was Jill's—I, Claudius. She'd brought it in under her
notebooks and asked Ann to keep it for her so she could read it
between assignments.
Presumably because if she'd been seen with it, she'd have had the
stigma of being a Brain.
Well, it was all an academic question now; the girl was as dead as last
year's leaves, and all her ambitions—or rather, lack of them—were
dead with her.

And the kids, ranging, from freshman to senior, were taking it much
harder than she would have dreamed. The life was gone from the
class.
She wasn't just the star pupil with a gift for comedy, Ann thought,
watching Derek Kestrel turn over the last page of the assignment, then
brood out the window. She was their passport into the In Crowd, if
only by proxy. And it isn't just that she's dead, it's the way she died.
The accident had not only been freakish, but there were some strange
rumours circulating about it, rumours that had reached even the
teacher's lounge, that things weren't the way the official story had
them.
According to the police reports, Jill was the only one of the four kids
in the car not wearing her seat belt. And that, given that Ann had
personally heard Fay Harper boast of having no less than
twenty-three warning tickets for not wearing her belt ("It scrunches
my clothes"), was very odd indeed. So was the way Jill had died. She'd
been catapulted over the front seat and partially through the
windshield. But not completely through— and it wasn't the impact
that had killed her.
She'd bled to death, her throat slashed open to the spine by the broken
windshield. When Jill's head went through the windshield, the glass
had fragmented into knife-edged shards that had closed around her
throat like a collar of razors.
Yet none of the blood had fountained into the interior of the car.
Neither Derek nor Fay had so much as a single drop on them.
There were rumours mat Fay had been moving in on Jill's steady; mat
Fay had told Jill not to object or tell Derek Kestrel, or Fay would "take
care of" her.
Yet Fay wasn't acting like a teenager who'd gotten her way over a rival;
and Ann hadn't met a kid yet who could convincingly cloak gloating

triumph or fake grief. Fay was acting "normally, " just as distraught as
anyone would expect. She hadn't been overly hysterical, nor cold and
distant. She'd wept exactly as much as one would predict for a girl
whose best friend had just died.
Even more telling, to Ann's mind, she wasn't zeroing to on Sandy that
Ann could see, which would have been the next move for a girl whose
rival was out of the way. At least, she wasn't going after the boy
publicly, and teenagers, in Ann's experience, were just not good at
subtlety or strategy.
There were other contradictions, though. There were rumours and
eyewitness accounts that the quartet had been drinking heavily at the
concert and afterwards.
According to the doctors' reports and a dozen lab tests, mere hadn't
been a trace of alcohol or drugs in the kids' systems. Even Jill, who'd
been the first tested. Of course, it had been pretty easy to get a blood
sample from what was left of Jill… The official story was that Jill had
unbuckled her seat belt to talk to Fay, because the music on the car
stereo was too loud for her to be heard from the back seat. That would
certainly account for why the girl went headfirst through the
windshield when the others were only cut by flying glass, or bruised.
Fay's story was that the steering went out, cause unknown. According
to the police, there was no way of telling what had happened, because
the undercarriage had been destroyed when the car went off the
road…
Enough already, Ann told herself sternly. You aren't Miss Marple,
and there's no way any of this could be anything except a
particularly bizarre accident. Life goes on. You have a class to teach,
and they've already lost a week to this. You have to get them
motivated again. That's your job. Not trying to make an episode of
"The Twilight Zone" out of this.
She watched the kids finishing their assignment, one by erne. Finally
the last one turned over the final page, and Ann stood up. Twenty-four

pairs of eyes turned listlessly toward her.
"You've all finished C. J. Cherryh's essay, " she said. "It might interest
you to know that Ms. Cherryh is a very prominent science fiction
writer and lives here in Oklahoma.”
And used to teach in Oklahoma City, poor thing, Ann thought wryly.
No wonder she went into writing. They ought to issue machetes and
Uzis, and award combat pay over there.
Some of the kids did look interested, as if they hadn't imagined that a
real writer could come from anywhere they recognized. Ann smiled in
satisfaction.
Now that they've got that idea in their heads, maybe I can install the
notion that they could realty become writers. Then I get them to deal
with what happened to Jill through fiction. If I can get these lads to
put their trauma in writing, it'll help them a lot. That's what all the
teaching magazines say, anyway.
"I'm telling you this, " she continued, "because I want to prove
something to you. I want to prove to you mat the people who write
books are just like you and me. I want to prove to you mat any of you
could be one of those people, with enough work and talent. And
believe me, the work is more important than the talent.
She paced back and forth, slowly, in the little Demilitarized Zone
between her desk and theirs. She watched their expressions as she
spoke, hoping for the spark of interest that would tell her that she was
motivating them again.
Because mis class was her reason for continuing to teach. Without it,
she'd have gone slowly crazy, like so many other teachers she knew.
And if she couldn't get this class going again, she'd lose her
motivation, for this year, and maybe for good.
If that happened, she might as well take that job over at that

advertising agency. The pay was much better and the grief factor
bound to be less.
"So, what you're going to be doing for the rest of this quarter is this:
you are going to learn how to write fiction yourselves. First you're
going to see how to write, which is why I chose 'Arms and the Writer'
as your first reading assignment, so you can understand the
importance of choosing the right words.”
She smiled at them, noting that the new girl in the back, the transferee
from Colorado, was looking particularly bright and eager.
Ann had high hopes for that one. Normally she didn't warm much to
the pretty girls—they tended to be as bad as Jill, if not worse. And this
girl was spectacular—creamy-brown, perfect skin, green eyes, bronze
hair, and petite face and figure. But she had been genuinely interested
and talented, and Ann found herself directing at least half her
remarks to the newcomer.
Maybe she'll replace Jill… "Mark Twain also said something of the
same thing: 'The difference between the right word and the
almost-right word is the difference between lightning and a lightning
bug. ' Here's your homework assignment: I'm going to give you each a
different picture. I want you to write one paragraph about it; choose
exactly the right words to describe it. Make it not just a description of
the scene, but try to describe what seems to be happening, as if you
were writing a tiny story. You are absolutely forbidden to use the
words 'almost' and 'nearly. '“
She began passing out the pictures, culled from a dozen, different
magazines she'd gotten at the Salvation Army, carefully matched to
her students' individual interests. The only things the pictures had in
common were that each contained two people, one old man, one
young woman—and it appeared that the old man might be teaching
her or offering advice.
"While I'm distributing these pictures, I'd like to ask your help.”

Derek Kestrel took his picture listlessly. Ann was particularly worried
about him. He'd gone as uncommunicative as a mute.
Not that she blamed him. It couldn't be easy to have a friend
beheaded, particularly not when it was virtually impossible to have
saved her.
"I need to know, " she continued, passing the glossy bits of paper
down the row of desks, "if any of you or your parents know a real,
professional writer who would be willing to come in and help me show
you what you need to do to become a writer. " She smiled
encouragingly. "The only ones that I know have full-time jobs too;
they cant take several weeks off just to come in and teach a class.”
A couple of the kids roused up enough to look surprised. Ann
responded to that surprise as the first genuine reaction she'd gotten
from them in a week. "That—having to hold down a 'real job, ' or as
those writers call it, a 'day job'—is part of becoming a professional
writer. Some people never make it to full-time, self-supporting
authordom. I'd like to have someone here who has, who can tell you
what it takes and give you a taste of what his nuts-and-bolts world is
all about.”
She looked around the classroom; to her surprise it was Derek who
raised his hand.
"My dad knows someone, " he offered tentatively. "There's a lady he
used to go to college with. She's a full-time writer; she writes
romances.”
Two of the boys snickered; half a dozen of the girls looked truly
interested, though, and the little girl from Colorado positively came
alive. Her green eyes glowed and her cheeks flushed with excitement.
"That's exactly the kind of thing I was hoping for, " Ann said quickly,
to counter the snickers. "Romance writers are very business-oriented
people, and there are quite a few men writing in that genre under

female pseudonyms. I'm not interested in someone who's been
spending the last twenty years trying to write the Great American
Novel. I want to bring in someone who can tell you and show you
what it's like to work at the craft.”
"Okay, " Derek replied, looking a little more in tune with the rest of
the universe than he had a few minutes ago. "I'll ask my dad tonight.”
—
Derek slumped over the leather-wrapped steering wheel, with the
engine running and KTHK blaring from the radio. There was no use in
trying to move until the last of the aspiring Indy drivers had cleared
the school parking lot. He wasn't in the mood to fight their flashy
muscle-cars with a Chevy Citation; it was sort of like taking on a
bunch of F-15s with a Piper Cub.
With a lot of imagination, balls, and skill it could be done— in fact,
he'd bet Jackie Stewart could do it in a Yugo; he'd heard a story about
him trashing Porsche drivers in a rented Lincoln— but Derek wasn't
feeling that magical. Magic seemed to be in pretty short supply, lately.
Gray clouds bulked lethargically overhead; the air smelled like rain,
but so far nothing had fallen.
It would be just my luck to have it start pouring the minute I pull out
of the parking lot.
He was beginning to wonder if he'd used up his entire lifetime quota of
luck the night of the accident.
Nobody'd been wearing a belt, but only Jill had taken a header. The
car hadn't rolled, though by all the laws of nature and physics, it damn
well should have.
But that had only been the beginning of the weirdness.

Because Fay had vanished from the front seat before the stewing went
crazy. Derek remembered that, with all the clarity of something that
had happened a few minutes ago.
It gave him a queasy feeling just to think about if, made him feel a
little dizzy. Or maybe that was because of the concussion. Sometimes I
wonder if that hit on the head made me see things…
But no, he hadn't been concussed then, or even all that drunk. He was
remembering right. One minute Fay had been cussing Jill out. The
next, she'd disappeared.
But when the car came to a stop, hitting the abutment of the overpass
with enough force to throw Derek against the dashboard and total the
front end of the Trans Am, she was back. She was cut up a little,
bruised a little, and totally hysterical—but back in the front seat.
And she was buckled in.
And so were Derek and Sandy.
He fingered the buckle of his own seat belt now, and eased the
shoulder strap away from the side of his throat. I wasn't belted, I
know I wasn't. So how did I get fastened in?
The cops had appeared out of nowhere—on a road they never
patrolled, since there was a dispute on between the County Mounties
and the Jenks Police as to who "owned" it. Somewhere in the back of
his skull, in a part that wasn't gibbering about Jill's twitching body
right in his lap, a little piece of his mind figured that they were
doomed. The cops were going to see all the bottles, and they'd end up
in the Juvenile Home for the night, then up in front of the court in the
morning, and they'd get it in the teeth for drinking underage—even if
he and Sandy hadn't been the one in the driver's seat, they'd still be
lucky if any of them got their licenses again before they were
twenty-one, and Dad-Dad would hit the roof. Probably send him to
military school.

But there wasn't so much as a single beer bottle anywhere in the car.
Not even a shard of glass.
The back of his neck crawled. The whole night was right out of
"Twilight Zone.”
The cops had searched, too, and hadn't found a thing. What was
more, when the doctors pulled blood samples at the hospital, there
wasn't anything in them, either.
That had totally weirded him out. Though at that point he'd felt as
sober as a Baptist preacher, Derek couldn't believe what they told him.
But they'd run the tests twice, and every single one of the doctors
insisted. All four of them, including what was left of Jill, were clean.
So when the cops and the docs tried to ask him what happened, he
stopped himself before he could blurt out the truth. Truth that the
evidence denied. He'd just sat there with his mouth open, unable to
think of any story at all.
The doctors put down his stunned inability to answer their questions
to shock. Well, that was okay. He figured he'd just let Fay give her
version and keep quiet. And when Sandy woke up, they'd probably
figure he was hallucinating. After all, what good would telling the
truth do now? It wouldn't unmake the accident, or bring Jill back, or
even make Jill's parents feel any better. All it would do would be to get
him in trouble, maybe ending up with having to see a shrink.
But things got even stranger. When Sandy came to, his un-coached,
unprompted version of the night's ride tallied exactly with Fay's—and
ran completely counter to what Derek remembered.
Fay admitted, tearfully, to speeding "just a little. There wasn't
anybody else on the road. I kind of forgot to watch the speedometer. I
can't believe the steering and the brakes went out; my God, I just had
my car inspected and worked on!"

Then she coughed up a real fairy tale, the sanitized Walt Disney
version of the night's outing; sans booze, racing, and sex.
And there was something else he felt he should have remembered, but
couldn't. Something about a drag-race?
If it hadn't been that he knew Fay, and knew that the innocent,
playful joyride she described was about as typical of her as finding the
president of Exotic Furriers in a Greenpeace meeting, he'd have
figured he was going nuts.
Maybe I am going nuts, anyway, he thought, watching the last of the
losers in the exit race rev their engines to make up for their poor
showing. I could believe that he was just covering everything up
really well, but Sandy still doesn't remember what actually
happened.
He pondered that a while longer, staring at his hands on the steering
wheel and wondering just what the signs were of someone going
bonkers. Was it really true mat if you wondered about your sanity you
were probably still sane?
A spatter of rain bit the windshield; Derek looked up, startled, and
realized that the lot was empty. He looked at his watch, swore, and
threw the Citation into reverse. He backed out of his slot with a shriek
of abused tires, threw her into drive, and burned as much rubber as
any of the other rocket jockeys getting out of the lot.
Once out on the street, though, he cooled his jets. Be pretty damn
stupid to get a ticket after all he'd just been through.
The rain was just drooling down; barely enough to make him put on
his wipers. He knew better than to trust these streets, though—some
of those muscle-cars leaked oil pretty fierce. Add oil buildup to enough
rain to float it above the asphalt, and you had more trouble than he
wanted to take at speed. Hydroplaning was no fun, and he didn't need
another wreck right now. So he took his time getting home, watching

for slick spots.
And remembered, suddenly, about the English class, and what he'd
promised Ms. Greeley.
That was something he hadn't much thought about when he'd
volunteered—how he was going to approach his dad about this
business with that writer friend.
He began to feel a bit more cheerful with the change of mental track.
He flicked on the headlights; it was getting pretty gloomy and it didn't
look like this storm was going to die out anytime soon.
When Ms. Greeley had made her pitch, he'd just shot his hand up,
because he'd been wanting to. meet this Diana Tregarde for ages.
Mostly because of the runny way his folks acted whenever they talked
about her.
First of all, they didn't talk about her when they knew Derek was
around, and men it was like by accident. He'd gathered that his mom
had met her when Mom was going to college in New York, at about the
same time that Di Tregarde and Dad were Yale classmates. Which was
odd, because you wouldn't think that somebody would know people at
Yale and NYCU, much less get them together. The other hint he'd
gotten was that there was something really funny about the way that
his parents had met and that the meeting involved Di Tregarde.
Kit they wouldn't talk about it. Or not much.
"Di introduced us, " Dad had said once, with a funny, sly sort of grin at
Mom. "I thought I was seeing things—"
"No doubt, " she'd retorted—then they'd both broken up, for no reason
that Derek could see.
Granted, they were probably all hippies together back in the sixties;
he'd seen a couple of pictures of them and their friends. They'd looked

like the cast of Hair; beads, headbands, Indian-print shirts and
granny dresses, wire-rimmed glasses. He'd hardly recognized his
mom; she'd had crinkly Art Nouveau hair down to her waist, a flower
behind one ear, and was wearing a miniskirt so short he wondered
how she ever sat down. Hell, her hair was longer than her dress!
He grinned, thinking about it. Mom didn't look bad in that mini,
either. Don't blame the old man for jumping her.
His mom had taken one look at the photo, blushed beet red, and asked
him if he didn't have better things to do than look at a bunch of old
pictures of people he didn't even know.
That's when he'd tried to get them to talk about when they were his
age. And they avoided his questions as neatly as a diplomat. Now that
was crazy; when his friends asked their folks to talk, you couldn't get
them to shut up, especially about when they were in college.
But Dad wouldn't talk about college, and neither would Mom.
It was like there was this four-year gap in their lives that they didn't
want anyone to know about. A gap that was somehow tied in with this
Diana Tregarde.
Probably it was something along the lines of the wild stuff Alan said
his parents used to do—psychedelics, Mazola-oil parties, that kind of
thing. And they didn't want him to know the kind of trouble they used
to get into.
Derek had always been pretty good at deciphering Parental Codes.
Spelling hadn't held him for long, pig Latin baffled him for less than
four months, and when they used French it only forced nun to become
bilingual at ten. But the cryptic references the folks used when they
did talk about Diana completely threw him. And the way they acted
about her—like they didn't. want him to talk about her to
anyone—you'd have thought she was a CIA agent, or a rock star
incognito, or something.

He was thinking so hard that he was startled to notice that he was on
his own street, and practically in his own driveway. He thumbed the
garage door opener hastily, and pulled the Citation into his side of the
garage, just clearing the slowly rising door.
He checked the answering machine for messages, but the only ones on
it were the disconnects of "robot calls" and one intrepid siding
salesman.
He hunted through the refrigerator for something to eat, but nothing
looked good, so he settled for some microwave popcorn to tide him
over until his dad got back from the downtown office.
When the corn was popped, though, he suddenly didn't want it. The
first bite was fine, but after that it was dry and tasteless.
Because he kept seeing Jill—
Derek dumped his snack down the garbage disposal and plodded up
the stairs to his bedroom, where he threw himself down on his bed
and beat his pillow into submission with angry fists.
"I'm not going crazy, " he said aloud, fighting back fear and tears. "I'm
not. Somebody's lying, and it isn't me!"
Finally he rolled over on his back and stared at the ceiling, at the little
constellations of glow-in-the-dark stars his folks had put up there
when he was eight.
He wanted, with a desperation he couldn't admit aloud, for his mom
to come back from Japan. Things never seemed right when she was
gone, this time especially.
But—Well, when she was gone, Dad was a bit more talkative. And he'd
been moping around a lot himself. Maybe if this old college buddy
came out, it'd pick Dad up.

And I can see if I can't figure out what the big deal is about her,
Derek promised himself. That'll give me something to think about
besides seeing Jill lying across the dash—
He shuddered, and turned over on his side, burying his face in his
pillow.
—
Dinner was Kentucky Fried—Mom would have had a cat. No veggies,
no salad, just chicken and double potatoes and biscuits. Derek and his
dad grinned at each other in delicious guilt over the bones. It seemed
an auspicious moment to broach the Question.
"Dad—" Derek said as they cleaned up after themselves and disposed
of the evidence, lest Mom find it. "You know that writer you used to
hang out with? The romance lady?"
Larry Kestrel stopped shoving bones down the garbage disposal and
looked at his son with a very strange expression. "Di Tregarde? Funny,
I was just thinking—why? What about her?"
Derek plunged straight in. "Ms. Greeley wants us to try writing and
she wanted one of us to find a real writer to come in and help for a
couple of weeks and I said you knew a writer and she said to ask you if
you could get her.”
It all came out in one sentence, without a pause for breath. Larry
pondered him with a puzzled frown for a moment; then his face
cleared. "Is that all?" He was so relieved that Derek wondered what on
earth he had been thinking. "Well, I can't promise anything, but…
come on back with me to the office; I'D make a few phone calls and
we'll see what happens.”
Derek followed his father into the inner sanctum—the "den of
iniquity" was what his dad called it. Actually it was just a home office
where Dad worked on his private projects. It held nothing more

sinister than the usual office furnishings and a drafting table and a
microcomputer, and the all-important speaker phone. Larry picked up
the handset, though, flipped through the Rolodex, and lifted an
eyebrow at his son, who was hovering at the threshold.
"Let me talk to your teacher a minute, kiddo.”
There was a low-voiced exchange on the telephone, while Derek stood
uncertainly beside the door. Finally Larry hung up and nodded to his
son, who edged over into the pool of light around the desk.
"Ann seems to like the idea—now I'll see if Di is free. Have a seat; this
is going to take some time.”
Derek picked a comfortable-looking chair, then sat on the edge of it
while his father thumbed the Rolodex again, and punched buttons. A
long-distance call from the sound of it.
"Mark?" Dad said, the sound of his voice very loud in the quiet of the
office. Derek jumped in startlement. The phone on the other end
couldn't have rung more than twice. "It's Larry Kestrel. " He listened,
then chuckled. "Yeah, I know, long time, no hear. How's the job
treating you? Oh, really? Sonuva—"
He flushed, and glanced belatedly at Derek. "—ah—gun, " he finished,
ears flushing. "Listen, I've got a favour to ask. I've got DT's address,
but not her phone, and I know she keeps her number unlisted. Could
you—?"
He grabbed a pen and scribbled something down on the blotter of the
desk set. "Great, old buddy! Thanks! I owe you one—" He listened for
a moment more, then laughed out loud. "Okay, so we're even, have it
your way. I gotta go, they're an hour ahead of us on the Coast.”
He hung up and dialled again. This time when the phone was
answered, he frowned for a moment. "Excuse me, but I was trying to
reach a Miss Diana Tregarde—is this the right number?"

Derek ran his thumbnail nervously along the seam of his jeans, while
his father listened cautiously to the reply.
"Well, I'm an old friend of Diana's, from college. Larry Kestrel. "
Larry's face brightened then. "So you're Andre Great, Mark Valdez
told me a little about you. I don't suppose the Lady ever told you about
the Squad, did she?"
The Squad? What the hell is that? Dad wasn't in ROTC; he'd rather
have died! If there's anything more frustrating than listening to one
side of a phone conversation, Derek thought, squirming in the chair,
trying to find a comfortable position, I can't think of it.
His father seemed to be taking an awfully long time, just listening. But
finally his face lightened. "Terrific—I'm really glad to hear that. Carte
blanche, huh? Well, I'd say we all earned it at one time or another.”
He listened again for a minute, and laughed. "No, no, I promise, this is
mundane. My kid's English class is looking for a writer to come talk to
them and I wondered if there was anyway I could lure her out.…”
While Derek watched, an expression of incredulous joy flickered
briefly over his father's face; then, after his eyes met Derek's, the
expression vanished, replaced by casual cheerfulness so quickly that
Derek figured he must have misread it.
"Kansas?" Larry said, and chuckled. "No, really? I'll be darned. That's
practically next door! Listen, let me ask you something, has she got
anything urgent she needs to take care of back there? Do you suppose
she'd be willing to take a detour and a little vacation?"
Suddenly Derek's father lost all the cheer he'd been projecting; he
looked as if what he was hearing was entirely unexpected.
"Oh, " he said faintly. "Oh, God. God, I am really sorry to hear about
that, I really am. I never met Lenny, but she used to write about him
so much it feels like I know him. He sure was a good friend to her

when she first moved to New York, I remember that. The last time she
wrote, she said he was sick, but I had no idea—"
Derek bit his lip to keep from interrupting.
"—yeah, it might be a real good thing for her to have a break, I agree.
And I'll do my best to keep her distracted. Listen, I can pull some
strings, I know a few people; I could get him into one of those
experimental programs, the ones that aren't giving out a placebo
run… Oh. He is. No improvement. Shit.”
Larry's expression was angry and frustrated, and the tone of his voice
was bitter. It wasn't the first time Derek had ever heard his father
swear—but it was the first time he'd ever heard him put quite so much
feeling into it. He wondered what it was that was making him feel so
strongly.
"Yeah, give me the number, please.”
Larry reached for one of his drafting pens, and jotted down a number
in careful, neat little numerals.
He repeated it back to the other person, and nodded. "Thanks,
Andre". Yeah, you too. Do you want me to say anything about-okay, I
won't mention him unless she does. And if there's anything I can do,
you let me know. And I mean right away. I'm not just making noises,
I'll help if I can. You know our crowd— we tend to make some oddball
contacts—I could even get him some of that Mexican stuff if he really
wants to try it. I don't advise it, but I'm not in his shoes. Thanks again.
I'm only sorry I'll be stealing her away from you for a month. " He
listened again, and smiled at the reply. "Yeah, I suppose so. You take
care.”
Derek slouched back in the chair as his father dialled this new
number; he couldn't help wondering if this was ever going to get
anywhere.

His father's face lit up again. "Di? Larry Kestrel. Yeah, the real thing!
Same to you, Spooky—"
There was something really odd about the way his dad looked as he
listened to his old friend on the other end of the line-something that
made Derek feel strange and uneasy. He wasn't sure he understood
the sparkle his dad's eyes were taking on, or the way he seemed to be
getting younger with every minute.
"Whoa there, milady, " he interrupted at last, laughing. "Let me put
you on speaker phone. I've been on the horn half the night trying to
track you down, and my ear's getting tired. Besides, I want my son to
hear this; he's the one that got me to track you down in the first
place.”
He laughed again at something she said, and thumbed the speaker
switch.
"—and your yuppie techie toys!" said a young-sounding female voice.
"Honest to gods, Larry, I swear you've been hanging around in bad
company! Weren't you the one who refused to own more than two
pairs of jeans, because anything more was conspicuous
consumption?"
"I got corrupted by easy living. " Larry chuckled, looking far more
amused than the comment warranted, or so Derek thought. "Besides,
the more I buy, the more jobs I create. So what in hell are you doing in
Kansas?"
"Oh ye suffering gods, " she groaned feelingly. "Signings. That's
'autograph parties' to you. Bee-lyuns and bee-lyuns of them, or it sure
seems that way. If I never see a mall again, it'll be too soon.”
"In Kansas?" Larry said incredulously.
"In Kansas, " she replied. "Believe it or not, they can read in Kansas.
My publisher found out that I was going back to Dallas to pick up a

car Mark Valdez found for me, and he decided that since I was going
to be driving it back to New Haven, I might just as well stop at every
godforsaken shopping mall between Dallas and Kansas City and sign a
few thousand books. After all, I don't have anything better to do,
right?"
"Do what Nancy Reagan says. Just say no, " Larry replied, his mouth
twitching as he tried to keep from laughing. Derek was grinning
himself.
"He bribed me, the skunk, " Diana protested. "He bribed me with
something I could never afford on my own—a state-of-the-art laptop.
With more software than anyone has a right to own. And a built-in
modem. So I didn't even have the excuse mat I couldn't work on the
road. How could anyone say no to mat?"
"Jeez, Spook, you have no room to twit me about my techie toys!"
If he grins any harder, Derek thought, he's going to split his head in
half.
"So why did you have to go halfway across the country just to get a
car? And why from Mark? Don't they have cars in New England?"
"Not ex-highway-patrol interceptors, they don't, " she replied, her
tone no longer light. "Not with less than ten thousand miles on the
engine and tyranny; not with both the engine and the tyranny rebuilt
and retimed until they sing the 'Halleluiah Chorus. ' And not with
most of the goodies still on it—and you did not hear that from me,
laddy-buck.”
"I hear you, " Larry replied.
"Good. Mark pulled some real strings to get it for me, KK. I've needed
something like this a long time, and the offer was too good to pass up.
You know why—"

"Yeah, " Larry interrupted her. "Yeah, I know—listen, like I said, my
kid's here, and we've got a big favour to ask you. Can I talk you into
backtracking a little? If you'd be willing to come on back down here,
I'll treat you to a month's vacation as my houseguest. I just talked to
Andre", and he thinks you need the break. Granted, Tulsa isn't exactly
the pleasure capital of the universe, but as I recall, you were into
culture, right? We've got a couple of decent museums, and a pretty
good opera and ballet company—"
"I know about the ballet company, " she interrupted. "I saw them do
that Ballan chine revival in New York. You're damning them with faint
praise if you think they're only 'pretty good. ' I'd do a lot to get a
chance to see them again—" she continued, sounding wistful. "And not
just because they're good; they're also darned scenic. It's too bad
Jasinsky Junior's married, he's really slurry. But I don't know,
Cosmic. It's going to take a lot of convincing to get me to drive back
down through Kansas again. What's this got to do with your kid?"
Derek was back on the edge of his chair and bouncing. For some
reason—for some reason he couldn't even define—getting this lady to
come visit was important. He didn't know why; he just knew that it
was.
His dad seemed to feel exactly the same way; he was talking to Diana
as if he'd forgotten Derek was still in the room. It felt like
eavesdropping—and Derek wanted to eavesdrop. He tried very hard
to think like a leather armchair.
"Ann Greeley—that's Derek's teacher—is doing a section with her
Honours English classes on creative writing, and she wants a real
full-time author to come in and show them the ropes. Not just
critique, but the day-to-day stuff. Watching the markets, revisions,
tailoring to suit a particular editor, that kind of thing. Thing is, there's
more to it than that. It's not just that she wants the kids to get an idea
of what it's like to write for a living, she wants 'em—I don't
know—distracted, I guess. Derek and three of his buddies were in an
accident this weekend, and one of them—well, she didn't make it.”

"Ah. So the kids are taking it pretty hard?"
"Yeah, " Larry replied. "She was pretty popular, with this class in
particular. Ann's hoping bringing you in will be enough of a novelty to
get them all going again. Right now they're all pretty much in shock.”
That was news to Derek, who tried not to move, for fear his dad would
remember he was mere.
"Yeah, I can see that. You say Derek was one of the kids in the
accident? Am I thinking what you're thinking?"
"Probably, " Larry replied cryptically. "So what's it going to take to
lure you down to glorious Oklahoma?"
"Just that you need me—and clean air. Right now—definitely clean
ah", " she moaned. "You don't have any stockyards down there, do
you? I think they park a stockyard next to every damn motel in
Kansas. I am never going to get the smell out of the back of my
throat!"
"No stockyards, " Larry promised. "You—you don't want to arrange
any more of those signing things down here, do you?"
"No!" she exclaimed. "Great Jesus Cluny Frog! These women are
crazy! They think I'm like one of my damned heroines—they think I
write this stuff from experience!"
Larry bent over in a spluttering, choking, laughing fit. The laughter
was infectious—and besides, Derek didn't think he'd get to overhear
any more stuff about what Ms. Greeley had told his dad. So Derek
joined in.
"Oh, right, Cosmic Kid. Go ahead and laugh! You aren't the one
they're descending on, with their books clutched to their all-too-ample
bosoms. You aren't the one they're asking for advice on their love
lives. You aren't the one with the groupies—"

"Groupies?" Larry chortled. "You have groupies?"
"Every romance writer has groupies, laddy-buck. Most of 'em
thirty-nine going on thirteen. And they want me to solve all their
personality problems with a wave of my magic wand. Kee-rist. If I
could do that, I wouldn't be hacking out bodice rippers, I'd be making
a fortune as a Hollywood shrink.”
"I'll buy that. Okay, no signings, and to sweeten the pot, we just put in
a six-man Jacuzzi.”
"Uncle!" she cried. "For a Jacuzzi, I'd emeritus a class full of gorillas!
And since I just did my last spot in the barrel, I'll be there by late
afternoon tomorrow.”
Derek and his dad exchanged triumphant grins. "Okay, sport, " Larry
said. "Looks like this is a done deal. I'll call your teacher as soon as I
get off the phone with Di. How about if you go take care of that
homework, hmm?"
Obviously he was not going to be allowed to eavesdrop anymore. He
capitulated. "Okay. I guess I'd better.”
He slid out of the chair, while his dad switched back to the handset
and began talking too quietly for Derek to make out what he was
saying without making it plain he was trying to listen.
Very obviously he wasn't going to be allowed to eavesdrop.
But he couldn't help wonder, as he headed back up to his room and a
dismayingly long history assignment, what it was that a romance
writer did that would call for owning a former police car…
CHAPTER THREE
Derek pretended to read his history text, and peered through the
half-closed door of his room at his father. Larry Kestrel was pacing

again, and Derek was beginning to wonder if this business of having
Diana Tregarde come out here was such a good idea after all.
Ever since she'd agreed, his dad had been acting like—like Derek, with
a hot date coming up. Diana had told them that she expected to be
there'"late afternoon, " which Derek interpreted as between four and
seven tonight. Larry had hardly eaten his supper; he'd parked himself
in the family room, and when he wasn't pacing, he was pretending to
read a book. This after rushing Derek through his own meal and up to
his room "to work on homework. " But Derek could see him easily
enough from his desk—and he didn't like what he saw.
Larry flung himself back down in the corner of the beige velvet
pit-group, and reached for the book again. Derek wasn't fooled. For
one thing, Derek could tell his dad was only pretending to read. He
hadn't turned a page in the last ten minutes.
Besides, somehow I don't think Dad's the Danielle Steel type…
And he spent more time pacing than staring at the book, anyway. Miss
Tregarde was due any minute now, and Larry was getting increasingly
fretful.
So was Derek.
I don't know, he thought worriedly, drawing aimless little scribbles on
the blotter. Maybe I made a big mistake. I mean, there's all kinds of
"old friends. " Maybe this lady used to be a real hot item with Dad,
and Mom didn't know. And Mom's clear the hell over in Japan. And
it's not like Dad's taken a vow of celibacy or anything. As far as I
know, he's still got all his hormones and everything…
Derek chewed on the end of his pencil and wished he'd thought about
this a little more before he'd gone and opened his big mouth.
But maybe I'm getting all worked up over nothing. Yeah, I probably
am. Miss Tregarde's a year older than Mom, at least that's what Dad

said; there's got to be a good reason why she hasn't gotten married.
Besides, all she does is write—I bet she never goes anywhere.
Probably she's still stuck in the sixties, no makeup, straight hair,
granny glasses, patched-up bell-bottoms, and Earth Shoes. Either
that or she's about twenty pounds overweight, maybe getting a little
gray in the hair. Sort of like Ms. Greeley. Even if Dad is kind of
expecting something to happen, I bet he's thinking she looks the way
she did in college. I mean, he told me himself he hasn't seen her since
he and Mom got married.
Derek chewed his lip a little, feeling a bit better when he pictured this
Tregarde lady as looking a lot like his English teacher—a little
matronly, certainly nobody's idea of a sex fantasy.
Just as he reached this conclusion, he heard the sound of a car pulling
into the driveway—a car with a big, powerful engine. Of course it could
be someone using the drive to turn around—
But the engine stopped, and Derek saw his dad leap up from his seat
on the couch and head for the door.
Derek abandoned his own pretense at study and bounded out of his
room, taking the stairs two at a time and winding up right at his
father's heels.
Larry Kestrel pulled open the front door of the house before the driver
of the car now taking up a good portion of the driveway in front of
their garage could even make a move to get out. The vehicle had had
its driver's and passengers' doors primed, but it was going to be hard
for even the gaudiest Earl Scheib paint job to hide the fact that this
used to be a cop car. Brake-vented hubcaps, extra heavy sway bars,
and most especially the skid plates underneath gave its history away
to anyone as car-crazy as Derek. You just didn't see Crown Vies out on
the street with mods like those. Like all cop cars, the beast was a
four-door, and Derek had the shrewd suspicion that there was a roll
bar still in the door pillar.

Sunset painted the sky behind the car in exotic shades of purple and
gold, and the interior of the vehicle was so shrouded in shadows that
Derek couldn't make out what the occupant looked like. For a
moment, while the driver was still involved in getting extricated from
the seat harness, Derek's attention was on the car. He itched for a
chance to get under that hood and poke around. He had no doubt,
given the way the engine had sounded, that this thing was exactly
what Diana had claimed—a police interceptor, capable of catching just
about any commercial vehicle on the road.
And even more than getting under the hood, he wanted a chance to
drive it.
But then Diana Tregarde opened the car door and slid out into the last
light—and Derek's worst fears were realized. Jee-zus, he thought in
dismay. She's a babe! She was willowy and supple, and looked athletic
without looking like an athlete. In fact, Derek had the startling
impression that she was in better physical shape than Fay. About five
feet tall, she had an overall build like a dancer, and she moved like a
dancer, too. Instead of the holdover hippie outfit of peasant skirt and
baggy blouse, or patched jeans and ratty T-shirt he'd been picturing
her in, she was wearing a leotard that might as well have been a
second skin and chic designer jeans nearly as tight as the leotard. She
was wearing makeup; subtle, just enough to make her look model-like
and a touch exotic. Her waist-length chestnut hair was caught in a
pony tail, and hadn't even a trace of gray.
She sure doesn't look Dad's age, Derek thought unhappily. She looks
more like a college student.
She bounded over to his dad (she ran like a dancer; she hardly
touched the ground) and flung her arms around him, an embrace that
Larry reciprocated, much to Derek's discomfort. And the warm and
enthusiastic kiss she gave and got didn't make Derek any happier.
She finally let go and backed off a pace, looking Larry up and down
with a strange smile. The sunset glow haloed her as if Ridley Scott

were directing the entire scene. Derek wanted to be sick; this was a
setup, and it was all his fault. The next thing she'd say was "Oh God,
Larry, I never realized how much I missed you… " And they'd clinch
again, and then they'd hustle him out of the way, and then—
"Why, Cosmic Kid, " she said, laughing, "you look positively
bourgeois! Where's the wild-eyed revolutionary I used to know and
love?"
Well, that certainly wasn't in the script! Cosmic… Kid? Wait a minute,
she called him that before. What is this, a comic book?
"Know, I'll admit, Fearless Leader, " Dad replied, shoving his hands
into his pockets and grinning back. "But love? Hardly. Not from the
way you used to abuse me. Oh, I'm doing what you told me I should
do, way back when. I got tired of beating my head against monoliths.
It's guerrilla warfare now; real subversion. I'm being the thorn in the
foot.”
"You mean 'pain in the ass, ' don't you?" She chuckled, her grin
spreading still wider. Derek couldn't help but notice that she stood,
not like a dancer, but like a martial artist, balanced and a little wary.
And that those designer jeans had the special little inset piece that
would let you do a sidekick without tearing the crotch out.
This is a romance writer?
Larry clapped the back of his hand to his forehead theatrically.
"Crushed! How could you?"
"I couldn't crush you with a bulldozer, " she retorted, tossing her tail
of hair over her shoulder. "So answer the question already—what's
with the yuppie rig, and where'd the rebel go?"
"Undercover. " Larry put his arm around her shoulders and pushed
her gently back toward the car, leaving Derek to trail along behind
them, sneakers stubbing along on the concrete of the driveway. Next

to this "old lady, " he felt as awkward and ungainly as a bull calf. Larry
continued, oblivious to his son's reactions. "When I'm not separating
the wealthy from their ill-gotten gains by translating their vague
notions of one-upmanship into their homes and buildings, I'm
designing low-income housing, and doing it for a lot less than anyone
else will. " They exchanged conspiratorial looks. Derek bit his lip. "It
drives my accountant crazy.”
She raised one eyebrow, like Mr. Spock. Derek wondered how she did
it. He'd practised that for hours in front of the mirror without getting
it right.
"I'll bet, " she said sardonically.
"I keep frying to tell him that money isn't everything, but he keeps
tearing his hair out."
"Did it ever occur to you that an accountant is probably not the kind of
person who is going to believe that little platitude?" They all reached
the car, and Diana freed herself from Larry's arm and turned to give
Derek a very penetrating once-over, quite unlike the examination
she'd given his father. It gave Derek a very funny feeling,
uncomfortable and a little scary. It felt like he was being tested in
some way, but it wasn't any test he recognized.
Finally she held out her hand with a cheerful smile, one that somehow
didn't seem superior, the way most adults smiled at kids. "Hi. You're
obviously Derek. I'm Diana Tregarde, as you've probably figured out
on your own. Di, to you. I can't say I know a lot about you, but what I
do know, I like.”
Derek shook her hand gingerly, a bit taken aback by her
forth-rightness and frankness.
Her smile turned into a grin full of mischief; the corners of her
enormous, velvety-brown eyes crinkled up. That was the first sign he'd
seen that she was anywhere near Dad's age. Mom took pains to hide

her crow's-feet and never smiled that broadly as a consequence; Diana
Tregarde didn't seem to care.
"I should warn you now, " she told Derek in a confidential tone.
"You're going to have to put up with a lot of nonsense while I'm here.
We're likely to start reminiscing about our romantic, wild youth at the
drop of a poncho.”
"Hey, man, " Larry drawled—the accent he was using sounded vaguely
Valley, but not quite. Derek couldn't place it. "Is that, like, a real
poncho, or is that a Sears poncho?"
It sounded as though he was quoting something, but Derek didn't
recognize what. Then, as they started to giggle, for Chris-sake, he
identified it as a quote from one of Dad's Frank Zappa records.
"Camarillo Brillo, " whatever the hell that meant.
Jeez, he thought, half in dismay and half in disgust, as they both
looked at his expression and went from giggling into gales of laughter,
am I going to be sitting through reruns of "The Wonder Years" and
Hair every night?
They finally calmed down, Di leaning against the fender of her car and
wiping her eyes with the back of her hand. "Lord, " she said weakly.
"I'd honestly forgotten how dumb we all were. At one point mat really
meant something, Derek. If you didn't wear a real, honest-to-gods
poncho, handwoven either by some poor Guatemalan peasant or
somebody named Moonflower—if you had some kind of polyester
fake, you were what we called a 'day-tripper' or a 'plastic hippie. '“
Gods? Plural? This is a romance writer? But she was looking at him
expectantly, waiting for a response. He tried to sound intelligent.
"Like a poser?" Derek hazarded.
"Yeah. " She nodded vigorously. "A real nowhere man, a plastic flower
child. Some suit who came out to the campus on the weekends to get
high and get his brains balled out by hippie chicks so he could boast

about it to his suit buddies during coffee breaks. Or some deb who
came looking for Sexual Liberation in easy, one-screw doses.”
"Di!" Larry exclaimed, looking shocked.
She gave him a wry look. "Come off it, Cosmic. Kids these days have
twice the sex education we did by the time they're Derek's age. I'll lay
you odds eighty percent of his female friends are on The Pill.”
"More like ninety-five, " Derek admitted, deciding, however
reluctantly, that he was beginning to like Di Tregarde. She didn't talk
down to him, and she didn't pretend to be a buddy, either.
"See?" she said. "You can't shelter 'em, KK. Not any more than our
parents could shelter us, or Yale could. I've told you before; if they've
got brains and a drop of sense, your best bet is to give kids all the
facts. Then when they've had a chance to absorb the facts, throw 'em
my theory of Teenage Evolution, and ask them the One Big Question.”
"What's that?" Derek asked, curious against his will. "The question, I
mean.”
Di leaned back against the hood of her car, a dark silhouette against
the fading sunset. "I know your mom and dad, and they're no hung-up
born-agains, so I'm going to assume you do know all the facts,
including the ones about AIDS—"
"That you only get it with exchange of mucus and semen and blood,
and that it isn't just a gay disease, " he offered. "That anybody can get
it; that the only known protection is a rubber."
She nodded soberly. "Right on; that Sums it up. " Derek sneaked a
look at his dad; he looked like somebody'd hit him in the middle of the
forehead with a two-by-four. Stunned. I can't tell if it's 'cause of what
Di's talking about, or because I already know what she's talking
about. We had the Big Talk years ago, but we never got around to
AIDS.

"Okay, here's my theory of Teenage Evolution. You know why
we—human beings, I mean—start to fall apart when we hit forty?"
He shook his head.
"Because, revolutionarily speaking, we aren't meant to last beyond our
reproductive years. I mean, that's what evolution really
means—survival of the fittest means reproductive survival; the one
that spawns the most wins, not the one that lives the longest. Nature
favours quantity of life, not quality.”
Derek scratched his head. He'd never quite thought of it that way. 7
guess that sure explains cockroaches, mosquitoes, and linebackers.
Di nodded, and smiled a little, as if she had heard his thoughts.
"So—given that, the best years for the human being to reproduce are
its youngest fertile years, so that you've got a chance to raise and teach
the young. Basically, in these days of improved nutrition, that's
thirteen to twenty-four, or so. Which means, kiddo, that right now
your hormones are screaming at you to get out there, establish a
territory of your own, grab you some wimmen, and raise you some
babies. Like, now. Lots of wimmen, and lots of babies. Have you
figured out what that means to you, personally?"
"Uh-" he replied brightly.
She didn't laugh at him, though he'd half expected her to. "Okay. One,
establishing your own territory means aggravating the hell out of your
old man, so he'll throw you out of the cave and force you to go fend for
yourself. Two, grabbing you some women means just that, which is
why all the peacock stuff everybody does as soon as they figure out the
opposite sex is pretty neat—from fancy cars to fancy clothes. And
that's the whole rival thing too, so that all you young bucks start
locking antlers to figure out who's top dog. I mean, you're supposed to
have a harem of about two or three—that means knocking off some of
the excess competition. Establishing your territory kind of goes along
with that. Three, raising you lots of babies means your hormones are

going to have you screwing anything that'll let you. Now the Big
Question, Derek.”
At some point during this astonishing discussion, Di had scooted up
on the hood of the car, where she now perched with her legs neatly
crossed. She didn't look like an adult, or even, oddly enough, like a
kid. What she did look like was ageless, as if she was some kind of
modern incarnation of the Delphic oracle, perched on a weird
substitute for a tripod.
The Fordid Oracle?
Larry looked more than stunned, he looked paralysed, with his mouth
hanging half open.
This is a romance writer?
"Which is?" Derek managed.
"You aren't a mindless tomcat surrounded by queens in heat, and you
aren't a caveman, kiddo. " The "kiddo, " didn't even come out
sounding patronizing, just earnest. "You're a human being, and you
have brains as well as glands. So tell me, what are you going to let run
your life—your head, or your hormones?"
Now it was Derek's turn to stand there with his mouth hanging open.
He'd never heard—things—put quite that way, or that bluntly, before.
"Well, " Larry managed to choke out, before the silence drowned diem
all. "You sure know how to get a kid's attention. I hope you aren't
planning on delivering this same lecture to Derek's class.”
She grinned, and blinked innocently. "I might. If the situation calls for
it.”
"In that case, I may have to protect you from a lynch mob. " Larry
swallowed twice, and managed to get his jaw back in place.

"My brains, " Derek said, at the same time.
"Good choice, Derek, " Di replied, sliding down off the hood of the car.
"Keep that in mind next time your libido goes into overdrive. Your kid
is smarter than you were, KK.”
"Before or after I met you?" he retorted. "I have the feeling some of
those escapades you got us into cost me more than a few brain cells,
milady.”
She just snorted, but reached for Larry's shoulders and gave him a
hug. It looked to Derek like an apology for the teasing. "Listen, I've
been thinking about that Jacuzzi you promised me for the last
hundred miles. My shoulders are killing me.”
"The boiling pot is ready and waiting, Spooky, and if it can't cure your
shoulders, nothing will. " Larry seemed to have gotten over his
previous shock.
"So what are we waiting for?" she asked, skipping around to the rear
of the car, popping the trunk just as the automatic floodlights over the
driveway came on. "Let's get this junk into the house and get
cooking!"
Derek's dad grinned. "Your wish is my command, milady, " he said
mockingly—but he reached into the trunk and pulled out a trio of
purple ripstop nylon bags. Derek grimaced. Prince had a yard sale?
She looked at him, grinned, and shrugged, as if to say, "It was cheap,
what can I say?" Buried in the sea of purple were a black ripstop case
and a corner of a briefcase. Di took the former out gently.
"My new toy, " she explained to both of them. "Sorry, Derek, no
games. The IRS won't let me deduct it if I put games on it.”
"The things we do for taxes. " Larry sighed, looking just as
disappointed as Derek felt.

Derek found himself loaded down with gear, all of it purple nylon.
Now this, I'd expect from a romance writer. This, or rose pink. His
dad got his fair share, though, and to her credit, so did Di, including a
beat-up leather briefcase; that case looked heavy. Very heavy. Derek
had avoided reaching for it on principle; it looked like it held an entire
IBM mainframe. Di hefted it easily; another surprise. Larry led the
way into the house and up the stairs to the guest room. Di was close
behind, leaving Derek to trail forlornly in their wake. His dad and
their guest were chattering away at high speed now; their
conversation was full of cryptic little references to things he couldn't
even guess at.
That was quite enough to make him feel like the one on the outside,
but besides that, they kept making sidelong glances at Derek.
I'm not that dense, he thought. I know when I'm a third wheel. He
dropped the luggage beside the bed and started to leave.
Di touched his arm as he passed her; he stopped, startled.
"Derek, " she said quietly, "I had a reason for the lecture. I don't want
you to think that I think you're some kind of idiot. I—I'm trying to
save people. I'm losing somebody I really care about. To AIDS. I don't
want to lose anybody else, okay?"
Suddenly that entire conversation Larry had held with the mysterious
Andre" made sense.
"Okay, " he said weakly, blushing. "Really, it's okay. I understand.
And—thanks.”
She smiled faintly in reply, and he escaped before he could make a fool
out of himself.
But he still wasn't comfortable leaving them—Di and his dad-alone
together. He really wished his mom was back from Japan.

Diana Tregarde was entirely too attractive to trust with his father.
Especially alone.
—
Di didn't even bother to hide her sigh of relief when the kid finally left.
Nice kid, but—Jesus Cluny Frog! She just shook her head, strolled
over to the bedroom door, shoved it shut with her toe, and gave Larry
a look she knew he could read.
He grimaced apologetically.
"Ye gods, Cosmic, " she groaned, lacing her hands across the top of
her head. "How in hell did you and Miri manage to give birth to such
a—a—" Words failed her, and she shrugged.
"Square?" Larry suggested, sitting astraddle a chair, after turning it
wrong way around. "Three-piecer? Young Republican? Budding IBM
rep? Corporate Clone?" He tilted his head sideways and waited for a
reply, blinking with mild expectation.
There was a little gray in that lovely, wavy hair, and he was wearing it
shorter these days, but otherwise he was about the same as when she
last saw him, and definitely in good shape.
Like all the kids in the Squad. Makes me feel like I did something
right, anyway—they're fabulous as adults. Mind and body alert and
sharp. And damn fine role models.
"Something like 'all of the above, ' " she replied. She dropped her
hands, headed for the dresser, and began transferring neat stacks of
clothing from suitcase to dresser drawers.
The guest room was just as impressive as the rest of the house—which
was saying something. If this was an example of Larry's handiwork,
he'd fulfilled his promise of talent. If it was an example of his income,
it was in the high six figures. This room had a skylight, its own bath,

and dry sauna, was paneled in what looked like white birch (and
probably was), and was furnished with some truly lovely pieces
finished in white lacquer. The gray rug was thick enough to lose
change in. But the effect was warm and airy, not sterile; by day it
would be like living in the sky. On a practical note, there were lots of
dresser drawers, and a very generous walk-in closet. Evidently Miri
was over the box-and-milk-crate phase.
"Except the Corporate Clone, " she amended. "If we can just get your
boy's spine a bit stiffer, he can think for himself. The hard part is
going to be getting him to want to. Which brings me back to the
question; how'd a pair of bone-deep rebels like you produce a kid like
that?"
Silence. A pregnant silence. She stowed the last of her leotards and
turned back to face him, leaning against the edge of the dressing table
on one hand.
"I have no idea, " he said, as she took in his expression of bafflement.
"Maybe it's karmic, much as I hate to put any stock in mat. It sure
would serve me right, given my misspent youth.”
"More like it's Jenks, " she observed. "Gad. More top-shelf European
cars than in Europe. This town looks like Yuppie Central. Capital of
expensive bland—no guts, no passion—Jeez, Lar, even the damn
houses are pastel. And the people—cut 'em and they'll bleed tofu.”
He shrugged. "The choice was here, or subject him to the Tulsa school
system. He'd have come out of there being able to find the nearest
muscle-car, count to first-and-ten, and figure out exactly how much
cash or coke would keep him from getting beaten up this time, but
that's about it. Di, we average forty kids to a classroom over in
Union—even if Derek wasn't psi, that'd have driven him nuts, and
he'd never have gotten the kind of attention a kid with his brains
deserves. He does here—they have a special course load for the bright
kids, and he's on it. And over in Union, his life expectancy wouldn't be
too high in some crowds. The car-crazy kids in Jenks tend to hover

over basket cases in the garage. Kids from Union drag-race into the
sides of semis.”
She paid scant attention to the last sentence. It was the remark about
Derek being psychic that caught her attention. "So he is psi? I thought
so, since you had shields all over him, but that could have just meant
Miri's paranoia was acting up. What's his Talent?"
Larry draped his arms over the back of the chair, then rested his chin
on them. "No real idea, " he admitted. "We bottled him up too fast. We
had to shield him back when he was nine-he was picking up
everything within a five-foot range. I was kind of hoping he'd grow out
of it at puberty, but he didn't.”
Di considered that in the light of what she knew about
early-developing psychic gifts. "A five-foot range, huh? Not bad, " she
said thoughtfully. "Not a superkid, but not bad. So why didn't you do
more than bottle him up? Or were you trying to keep him out of your
business—"
"None to keep him out of.”
Di looked at him measuringly. "Are you still into
hot-and-cold-running esoterica at all?"
Larry shook his head slowly. "No, not since we moved here. Tulsa is
about the most psychically null spot you'd ever want to see. Didn't see
any reason to keep up the old skills; there was no use for them.
Besides"—he nodded in the general direction of Di's shoulder—"this is
the home of Oral Roberts University; the Pare Tar is right behind
you.”
"The what?"
"The Pare Tar. That's 'Prayer Tower' to you non-Okies.”
"I saw the supposed-to-be-hospital, I didn't see that.”

"You have to be on the campus to see it; it only looms subjectively.
Anyway, Miri and I figured we'd be better off keeping our heads down
and our profiles low.”
Di licked her lips, stowing that data away for further examination.
"Good move, " she said finally. "Probably what I'd do in the same
situation. Dear gods, I wish I didn't have to cart all these signing
clothes… " She shoved away from the dressing table, and stood
hipshot halfway between the bed and Larry's chair. Watching him, his
face in particular. She was, after all, still an empath—and she hadn't
lost her knack of reading him.
There's more here that he's not telling me. It's got to do with the kid.
She hooked her thumbs through her belt loops and rested her
knuckles on her hips. "So, " she said, after waiting fruitlessly for him
to broach the subject. "Talk. You really didn't bring me out here just to
lecture for a month to a bunch of rich-brat pseu-do intellectuals. Or to
reminisce about old times and keep you company while Miri's gone.
You know better than to detour me for no better reason than that.”
"You needed a vacation, " he ventured. "That's what Andre" said,
anyway.”
"Uh-huh. " She continued to stare him down, and eventually he
capitulated.
"I've—got a bad feeling. Just a kind of hunch. " He looked sheepish.
She gave him the patented look of Exasperation. "Cosmic, back in the
Squad days your hunches were better than most people's certainties.
So what's this so-called bad feeling centred around? Derek?"
"Yeah. " She waited. "This could just be normal parent stuff. Parents
are supposed to worry about their kids; it's part of the job
description.”

"Uh-huh. And I'm the Pope. Cough it up, Cosmic.”
Problem is, his precognition was always vague, she thought, waiting
for him to find the right words. And he used to be pretty sensitive
about that. As if it was his fault that he couldn't pin things down.
After watching him grope around for what he wanted to say, she
decided to prompt him a little.
"So how long has this feeling of yours been going on?" she asked.
"Days? Weeks?"
"Really strong—about a week. Before that, vague, a couple of months.
Before that, everything was fine.”
He chewed on his lower lip and looked up at her, his expression
worried and absurdly young-looking.
"Could all this be normal paranoia?" she asked, knowing that it wasn't
but wanting to get him to admit the fact. "Or could it be because of
that accident you told me about on the phone? If you were picking
that up, but not that Derek would come through it all right, you'd have
been itchy.”
"No… " he replied, slowly but firmly. "No, it was going on before that,
and it's worse since. If what I had been picking up was a premonition
of the accident, I wouldn't be feeling anything anymore. And—"
"And?" she prompted. Now we're getting somewhere.
"It's not a mundane threat, " he said firmly. "I realized that right after
the accident, when I got him at the emergency room. I don't know why
I didn't figure it out before, but now that you're here, I'm sure of it.
But that's as specific as I can get. And damn if I can figure out what it
is, or even where it's coming from.”
She shifted her weight from her left to her right foot, but otherwise
didn't move.

"It's like—" he began, then stopped.
"Goon.”
He grimaced. "It's not like anything we ran into as the Squad, okay?
So I'm just getting little hints around the edges.”
Di kept her mouth shut this time; she could sense desperation and
fear.
"Di, " he said in a near-whisper, "Di, it's like there's something really
hungry out there, and it wants my boy. And Miri isn't here to help me
protect him.”
He never was any good at combative magics, she recalled. That was
Miri's specialty. I remember he had precog, but Larry's biggie was
the Sight and clairvoyance. Hell, that's why we named him Cosmic
Kid—he was always Seeing things. Things I had to strain to even get
a hint of.
"Do you suppose that's a coincidence?" she asked.
He shook his head. "No, I'm beginning to think it wasn't. Whatever
this thing is, it seems like it was waiting for Miri to leave for Japan
before it went after Derek. I don't dare contact her; this is very
hush-hush negotiations with the Japanese, they're paranoid as hell,
and she isn't allowed to talk to anybody in the States except superiors
in the company. They're so paranoid she told me before she left that
the only way I could get to her would be a real emergency, because the
Japanese would be checking, and she could lose her job. There's no
doubt in my mind why it waited for this trip—she's secluded, and half
a day away at the very best, and twenty-four hours is more like it.”
Di nodded. This was beginning to make very nasty sense. "In our line
of work, twelve hours can be all it takes…”
"Exactly. " He sighed, and massaged his temples. "You know the other

factor here—Derek's age. He's never going to be stronger than right
now, when he's got youth and energy and a fluid mind and all that
burgeoning sexuality just looking for a place to go.”
Di nodded, her lips compressed. "And I'll wager that it wasn't too long
ago that he lost the protection of innocence, too. He's got that
look—like he's started knowingly violating laws and rules, and doing
it in a way he knows is going to hurt people if they find out.”
Larry nodded his head unhappily. "Yeah. And that makes him a legal
target, doesn't it?"
"It does. We'll just have to hope he hasn't hurt anybody badly by what
he's done—and we'll have to hope he's feeling appropriately guilty
about it, " Di sighed. "If he's getting his kicks—"
"Not Derek, " Larry told her. "I'd stake my life that he's not happy
about breaking the rules. He knows we don't lay down the law
arbitrarily. And I'm equally sure that he wouldn't hurt anyone on
purpose, much less enjoy doing it.”
She sagged down onto the edge of the bed. "I hope you're right, Lar. I
just hope you're right… because you know as well as I do what could
happen if you're wrong.”
For unmentioned, but not unremembered, was the reason she had
answered his call so promptly. The reason she owed him, beyond
friendship and the help any teacher owed a student.
Melinda Dayton. Unchildlike child, who'd done more than break the
rules—
Di did not even need to close her eyes to see Melinda; the one and only
time they'd come face-to-face was all too vivid in memory.
Melinda, cowering against the wall of the kitchen of the abandoned
shack. Not pretty; Di would have suspected a child that was too

pretty, too clean, in that situation. Melinda was plain, a tattered
little brown sparrow, with big frightened eyes. Vulnerable, and
helpless.
She'd put on a very convincing little act.
Melinda Dayton, who looked so pathetic, had been dismembering
kittens at seven, torturing and intimidating her playmates at eight,
and at nine had learned how to bring in outside allies to help her do
the same to adults.
She'd very nearly gotten Di.
Melinda Dayton, demon-child, who even before puberty had learned
the pleasures of cruelty and pain.
Willingly, with full knowledge of what she was doing. Enjoying it.
Granny had claimed that there were kids like that, born absolutely
evil, wrong, twisted. Who knew the dark and chose it. Di had been
sceptical. After Melinda, she believed.
If it hadn't been for Larry, who'd seen past the little-girl-lost eyes to
the alien mind behind the eyes—who had spotted the things Melinda
had brought in through the gate she'd constructed into the world of
nightmares—
I might not have been toast, but I sure would have been hurting.
Some of the traditions she had worked in claimed that once there was
a life between two people, they were karmically linked for all time.
Maybe that's true, she thought soberly. Maybe it isn't. But Melinda or
no Melinda, Lar was one of mine, and I take care of my own.
He was watching her closely, as if trying to follow her thoughts. He
looked worried to Di; well, that wasn't too surprising. He tended to
think in terms of debts and balances—and maybe she owed him one

by those terms. But he'd owed her just as big a debt; maybe bigger, in
his eyes.
She'd kept him from killing himself.
That memory was nowhere near as immediate—she remembered
more of what she'd picked up from him, and what she'd done; she
really couldn't remember exactly what she'd said to him that dark,
windy night. Not the way she recalled every second of that nightmare
encounter with Melinda.
Not that it really mattered.
The bleak, hopeless despair, that's what had caught her attention;
the kind of despair that saw no way out. The kind of hopelessness
that drove home to her why the. Catholic Church considered despair
to be a mortal sin. Emotional trauma that profound could not be
ignored—especially not when it carried the overtones of someone
with a strong psi-talent.
She'd looked wildly around, using all her senses. The roof of the math
building—
She remembered dropping her Coke and sprinting for the door,
thanking all the gods that the math building wasn't one of the ones
kept locked at night.
She'd caught him ready to throw himself off the top of the building,
convinced that he was going crazy because he was "seeing things.”
Except mat she could See what he'd been Seeing.
Poor, pathetic thing, it had been trying to hold him off the edge with
hands that could no longer grasp anything material. It was a ghost,
of course, the ghost of a classmate who had managed to get some
bad acid and take a header out the window the week before. The
poor guy didn't even know he was dead.

All he knew was that no one seemed to be able to see him except
Larry. He didn't understand what was going on; his mental
processes were still scrambled from the bad trip. All he understood
was that Larry represented his only hold on the reality that he'd
known, and he wasn't about to let him get away.
The revenant had been haunting Larry for two days, turning up
anytime, whether he was alone or not. Larry had thought his mind
had finally snapped, that the pressures of school and political activism
had gotten to him. After all, he was a rational, modern guy, who didn't
believe in spirits.
Which meant that he had to be going crazy.
The thing hadn't let him sleep, hadn't left him in peace for most of
those two days—and an hour before he'd run up the stairs of the
math building, his roomie had quietly dialled the medical centre to
get them to come haul him away. Larry'd overheard that, and was at
the end of his rope. He'd often said he'd rather die than go nuts—just
the idea of being locked up in a little white room was enough to make
him shake.
Di kept her smile strictly mental. Poor Lar had his share of quirky
phobias back then—well, they all did; phobias kind of came with the
territory of being psychic.
So when Di had pounded up those stairs, Larry was seconds away
from proving he'd meant that statement.
Except that she didn't let him. And before the night was over, she'd
put both spirits to rest.
"Well, " she said finally, "I'm here now. Anything that wants Derek is
going to have to go through me to get him.”
Larry grinned with real relief. "God, Di, I was hoping you'd say that. I
didn't want to ask—"

She crossed her arms over her chest. "No kidding. You never did. If
you had a failing by the time I got through with you, it was that.”
"—but I was hoping. So I'm not overreacting?"
She put out mental feelers. All quiet on the Western Front, but that
doesn't mean a damn thing.
"The truth is, I don't pick up anything now, but that doesn't prove a
thing. You know that as well as I do. No, I don't think you're
overreacting. I think there's something going on. And one more
thing—I think your kid is overdue for an evaluation and maybe some
lessons in psi, before he winds up doing a soft-shoe on a ledge.”
Larry grimaced, but nodded. "I was hoping he'd never have to deal
with it.”
She snorted. "Fat effin' chance, as you well know. If you don't deal
with power, it deals with you. Now about that Jacuzzi you promised
me…”
"With or without bathing suits?" he asked puckishly. "It doesn't look
to me like you've got anything to be afraid to show, even at our age.”
Di chuckled. "Lecher. Wouldn't you just like to know—and what would
Miri say?"
"She'd say, 'I've always wanted to reenact the murder of Agamemnon.
'“
Di laughed. "She probably would. Well, much as I hate wet spandex,
in the interests of saving your life, and to avoid traumatizing your
child, I guess we'd better use suits. I wouldn't want to shock poor
Derek.”
"I hate to say this, love, " Larry said mockingly, "but I'm afraid you
already have.”

CHAPTER FOUR
THE KITCHEN WAS HOT, AND SMELLED LIKE FRESH GARLIC.
"Keep grating that cheese, " Rhonda Carlin told her daughter. "Your
hands and mouth can work at the same time.”
Monica made a little wiggle of impatience, but picked the grater and
ball of mozzarella back up, and resumed her assigned task. It was
better than setting the table, anyway; she hated setting the table—she
couldn't talk to her mom while she was setting the table.
Let Dan set the table.
“So, anyway, I saw Derek out in the court and he was sort of sitting
kind of slumped over, so I went over to him and asked, like, what was
wrong. " She grated away vigorously so that Rhonda wouldn't
interrupt her again, and picked a curl of the cheese out of the bowl to
nibble on.
"And? What was wrong?" Rhonda frowned at the lasagne noodles, and
Monica immediately felt guilty about asking her mother to make
dinner tonight. After all, Rhonda was putting in a lot of overtime at
her new computer programming job, and it wasn't really fair to ask
her to do something that required more effort than setting the
microwave.
"It was, you know, the accident. " Monica felt a little chill go up her
back when she mentioned it. Everybody at the school seemed to be
affected that way—like if they talked about it, they might be next.
"He's really down about it.”
Rhonda nodded, her black hair curling in the steam from the noodles.
"I'm not surprised. So, he was down. And?"
"Well, I said I didn't think he ought to be alone if he was that
unhappy, because all he'd do would be to keep thinking about it and

getting unhappier. " The cheese was done, and Monica handed the
white glass bowl to her mother. "And then I said, why didn't he talk
about it, because that might help him feel better, and he said with
who? And I said, with me. So he did. Or he started to, anyway. " She
giggled, and her mother raised a sardonic eyebrow at her as she
drained the noodles.
"And then what happened?" Rhonda asked, deftly putting the lasagne
together, layer by layer. Her sable-brown hands moved like a dancer's,
graceful even in performing such a simple household task.
"Well, he started asking me questions, like about Colorado, and what
did I like to do, and what did I think of Tulsa." Monica giggled again;
she couldn't help it, it just bubbled up out of her. "I told him some
stuff, and then I told him I thought the guys in Tulsa were pretty lame,
'cause I've been here a month and nobody's asked me out yet.”
Rhonda laughed. "Why didn't you just hit him with a brick with your
phone number on it?"
"Mom, " Monica protested indignantly. "Anyway, he had to go to class,
but he said the guys in Tulsa are just slow, and that maybe
somebody'll get the idea. And he said I was the sweetest girl he'd ever
met, and he kissed my cheek.”
"But did he ask for your phone number?" Rhonda asked shrewdly,
putting the pan of lasagne carefully into the oven.
"Well, " Monica admitted with reluctance, "no.”
Rhonda shook her head. "Lame. Just like the others. And what about
Alan? Yesterday you were all excited because he'd asked you if you had
a boyfriend yet!"
"He's still okay, " Monica replied coyly, following her mother into the
living room. "He wrote me a note in class today. He's a hunk, too.
They're both hunks. Besides, Derek knows all about that writer lady

that's going to teach us on Monday. She's a Mend of his dad's, and
she's staying at his house. " That was almost as exciting as having
Derek notice her. "He says she's real nice.”
"Did he say anything about whether he thinks she'd be willing to help
you?" Rhonda asked, as Monica flung herself down on the couch,
upside down, her legs draped over the back, her head dangling down
the front.
"He says she might, " Monica said happily, examining her nails. "He
says I should ask her after class.”
Not even her father knew how much Monica wanted to be a
writer—not, she reckoned cynically, that he'd care. He was too busy
with his new girlfriend to worry about his ex-wife and the two kids
he'd gladly shed. Rhonda was the only person who knew; who knew
about the boxes full of stories she'd written and never shown to
anyone else. Not even her teachers knew.
But she had no idea how you became a real writer; did you just send
things to magazines and book companies and see what happened? The
writers' magazines, with their articles on marketing and agents and
equally bewildering topics, only confused her.
And anyway, she had no idea if she was any good. Certainly Rhonda
seemed to think she was, but that was her mother—the same person
who'd framed her crayon drawings and hung them on the wall. She'd
long ago decided that what she needed was the opinion of a real
writer, a stranger, someone with no prejudices on her behalf.
And now it seemed that she was going to be able to get just that. And
maybe, if this lady said she was any good…
I'll worry about that when—if—she does, Monica told herself, then
chuckled. Besides, wanting to know about her makes a good excuse
to talk to Derek some more.

"So what are you going to do this weekend?" Rhonda asked, breaking
into her thoughts.
"I don't know, " she admitted. "Rent a movie, I guess. And I've got a
lot of homework."
Her mother shook her head, but didn't say anything. Monica knew she
worried about her kids—she'd been pretty reluctant to transfer to
Tulsa in the first place; she hadn't been too thrilled about being a
divorced black woman anywhere in the South, and she was even more
uneasy for the sake of Monica and Dan. "Being black in a mostly
lily-white profession can cause enough problems just for me, "
Rhonda had confided to her daughter. "But you kids—going to a place
like Jenks, and not only being black but having a dad who's white—I
don't know.”
Still, there hadn't been any problems so far, except the ones Monica
usually had—jealousy from the other girls because she was pretty. The
same thing had happened in Colorado. Monica couldn't help her
looks, and she didn't intend to act like a nun or a Brain just because
other people felt threatened. The only difference between Colorado
and here, so far, was that the guys just couldn't seem to get their acts
together. That, and Tulsa was pretty boring most of the time.
Privately, Monica thought her mother worried too much.
"I wish you'd get some friends, honey, " Rhonda said, in that
concerned tone of voice Monica was hearing a lot lately.
"It's okay, Mom, " she said quickly. "It's just, you know, coming in-like
in the middle of the semester. Everybody's got their friends and it
takes a while. But Harper was even nice to me today; she told me I
ought to try out for pom-poms in the fall. If Harper's nice to me,
everybody else will start being nice.”
Rhonda's eyebrows climbed halfway up her forehead. "What brought
that on?" she-asked. "I thought she was trying to freeze you out.”

"So did I. I don't know; all I know is she's not anymore. " Monica went
back to checking her nail polish for chips, examining it minutely.
"Maybe she changed her mind. Maybe she's figured, you know, people
are going to think she's racist if she keeps getting on my case. Maybe
now that I've been here for a month she figures I'm not a threat.”
"How could you be a threat?" Rhonda asked sardonically. "The guys
around here are too lame to bother with!"
Monica snorted her agreement delicately. "Anyway, she's going to be
graduating in a couple of months; maybe she figures that she doesn't
have to worry about competition at this point. She should, though. "
She grinned at her mother. "It isn't prom time yet. I could still end up
going with Derek. Or anybody else, if I decided to work at it.”
Her mother laughed at her. "Girl, you are so vain!"
Monica made a face at her. Rhonda still got plenty of looks from guys;
more than enough to make her daughter a little jealous. And maybe
Dad was a jerk, but he was also a studly hunk. Monica had a mirror; as
far as she could see, she'd gotten the best of both sets of genes.
Daddy's hair and eyes, Mom's face and build, a blend of both for
complexion. I don't even need to work at a tan, she thought smugly.
I've got one built in.
And she didn't see where there was anything wrong with being aware
of the fact that she was hot.
"Derek was being real nice to me, " she told Rhonda, playing with the
fringe on one of the sofa pillows. "When he figured out I wanted to
know, he told me lots about that writer. And he didn't have to, either.
He could have gone off with some of his buddies, but he stayed to talk
to me. I think he just wanted to talk to me, that's what I think. And I
think he likes me, so Harper better watch out, or she will have to get
somebody else" to take her to the prom.”
The oven timer chimed, and Rhonda pulled herself up out of her chair

to go take care of the lasagne. Dan appeared out of nowhere, sort of
materializing in his chair.
He's as bad as Garfield, Monica thought in disgust. All he does is eat.
And he never gains any weight. It's just not fair]
She followed her mother into the kitchen, and Rhonda glanced at her
with a funny expression as she got the big bowl of salad to carry out to
the table.
"You know, you'd better watch out, " Rhonda warned her. "Harper
could be a lot bigger threat than you think she is. She's got money,
she's the most popular kid in the school, she's a pretty big frog in that
pond.”
Monica shrugged. "What could she do to me, really? She can't get me
in trouble, and she can't put me on the outs with people who don't
even know me.”
Rhonda lifted the lasagne pan out of the oven and shook her head.
"Sometimes it isn't a matter of what somebody can do on her own, and
more a matter of what and who you know. It sounds to me like this
Harper chick has more than her fair share of both.”
—
It's show time—
Ann Greeley finished her introduction, making Di sound like the next
Pulitzer Prize winner. Di had been waiting inconspicuously at the rear
of the class, using just a touch of magic to make sure no one noticed
her lurking back there. Now she chuckled to herself, and while Ann
took her place at the rear of the class, Di strolled to the front of the
uncrowded classroom to face the first of the two Honours English
classes she would be teaching. She'd gone over her pitch very carefully
with Ann first. She was wearing her usual working togs: blue jeans,
boots, and leotard, with her long hair knotted into a bun at the nape of

her neck.
She very nearly laughed at the surprised expressions most of the kids
wore.
"Hi, " she said, half sitting on the edge of the teacher's desk, leaning
back a little on her hands. "I'm Diana Tregarde, and I write romances
for a living. " She smiled, surveying the young, astonished faces
around her. "It's a tough job, but somebody has to do it.”
The eighteen assorted pairs of eyes stared at her, and she stared back.
They looked absolutely incredulous, and Di knew why. She waited,
and finally one of the girls, a trendy little redhead, blurted out,
"But—you don't look like a romance writer!"
Di did laugh this time. "What did you expect?" she asked them all,
spreading her hands as she met each set of eyes in turn. "Lace and
ribbons? Silk negligee? Torn bodice, with handsome hunk clinging to
my ankle?"
She turned back to the redhead. The girl shook her head wordlessly.
"These, " Di told them, taking in the ensemble with a gesture, "are my
working clothes, mostly because they're comfortable. When I have
meetings with my agent or publishers, I do the 'dress for success'
thing, gray suit and all, but when I'm working I need to wear
something that won't distract me— because I may be sitting at my
desk and pounding away at the keyboard for eight to twelve hours at a
stretch. Sometimes more. It's never, ever less than eight.”
One of the boys raised his hand. "Why never less than eight?" he
asked. "I thought writers could do whatever they wanted to."
She leaned forward a little to emphasize her earnestness. "Because
this is a job, and I treat it as such. My office may be another room of
my apartment, but I go there to work, and I give that work the
attention it deserves, just as if I were working for a bank, an oil

company, or anywhere else.”
Now was the time to be a little more casual. She scooted up on the
desk, and crossed her legs. "So, let me tell you what it's really like to be
a writer—the way I live my life. It starts out around nine in the
morning, because I'm a late sleeper…”
She had them now, and she gave them a precis of what her working
day was like.
They seemed fascinated, not the least because her life was so
ordinary.
Once she started in on this part of the lecture, she had more than
enough attention to spare for other things. And now that she had
Derek out from under the shields Larry and MM had put on their
house, she could see if there was anything targeting him.
There wasn't, no matter how carefully she looked. Not that the
absence of anything malevolent meant that he was safe—hi fact, quite
the opposite. If there was something after Derek, but it was willing to
take its time and use a long-term plan, the smartest move would be to
leave no telltales behind. After all, the kid was hardly invisible; he had
a set schedule to keep whether he liked it or not. And he was quite
visible from a psychic point of view; the shields on him were anything
but subtle.
So the absence of telltales only meant that anything after Derek was
smart.
She did notice one other thing out of the ordinary about the class,
though. There was one other kid with psi, one of the girls in the back
row. Unshielded, she glowed with it, though not nearly as brightly as
Derek did through the shields. So it wouldn't be enough to give her
any trouble, unless there was something out hunting kids with
psi-potential, or unless there was a lot of activity in the area.

Now that's worth checking out— Di made a quick scan of the
immediate vicinity. And came up with nothing. Absolutely nothing;
like dead air. Exactly as Larry had told her, the immediate area was
psychically null.
And that was strange.
But she really didn't have time to explore that at the moment; she was
getting into the part of her lecture where she might start getting some
questions.
She turned all of her attention back to the kids, and pointed out that
she spent more actual time working than most of their parents,
because there was never a break in her work, and in a "regular job"
there would be times when there was nothing to do. At that point
Derek asked, "What do you do when you've got writer's block? Sit
there and stare out the window?"
She laced her hands around her knee and leaned back a little. "This is
probably going to sound like heresy—but I don't believe to writer's
block. And neither does any other. genre writer I know. And you know
why?"
Derek shook his head.
"Because we can't afford to be blocked. We have bills to pay, and
deadlines to meet. We can't afford to be prima donnas, we can't take
the time to nurse neuroses. I do one of several things if I'm having
trouble with a book. I can go work on another project, because I
generally have one book in outline, one being written, and one being
revised at any one tune. Or I can talk the problem over with one or
two friends—and usually, just the act of discussing the problem gives
me the solution for it. Or I can go back to the outline, see where I
started having trouble, and see if there's an alternate way the plot
could go. All sounds terribly businesslike, doesn't it?"
Heads nodded all over the classroom. This was not the way any of

them had pictured the craft of writing—and having taught this kind of
class before, Di was quite well aware of that. They'd all pictured the
inspiration, then the jump to finished product, without a single
thought for all the work in between.
She was slowly destroying that illusion.
"That's because it is, " she said. "This is a business. I have a
product—stories. And like any other product, what goes into it is far
more work than creativity. That's why I laugh when people come up to
me and say, 'I've got this great idea for a book—all you have to do is
write it and we'll split it fifty-fifty. ' I mean, just think about it. Think
about the simple act of typing one hundred thousand words—that's
about 400 pages. Not composing them, not revising them—just typing
them. It takes me five minutes to get an idea, about a month to outline
the book, and then another three just to write it. And some fool wants
me to do all that work and split fifty-fifty with him? Five minutes
against four months? Give me a break!"
The kids chuckled; some of them looked sheepish.
And there go about half a dozen more offers for so-called
collaborations, no doubt.
"I'll tell you what I really think writer's block is—it's reluctance to sit
down and do the damn work. When you tell people, 'I'm not writing
right now because I don't feel like it, ' you're not going to get any
sympathy. But tell them you've got writer's block—you get plied with
wine and cheese and all the 'poor babies' you can handle. Okay, since
Derek started it, anybody have any more questions?"
"Yeah, " one of the kids in the back said. "If ideas are so easy to get,
where do you find them?"
She was tired of sitting, so she shoved herself off the desk and moved
into the space between her desk and theirs, a kind of no-man's-land.
"If I was being really snide, I'd tell you that I belong to the Idea of the

Month Club; it's run out of Pough-keepsie, New York, and you get the
regular idea, the alternate idea, and a selection of six featured ideas—"
The kids were all smart enough to see through that, and laughed.
"The truest answer would be that it's easier to tell you where I don't
get ideas from. Life is full of them, especially for a romance writer. I
can go downtown and people-watch, and see a dozen possible stories
go by me. All you have to do is to start noticing things around you, and
then ask the really important questions—'what if, ' followed by 'what
then. ' What if that model mat passed you was in love with some
photographer but thought he was gay? What if that worried-looking
businessman thinks his wife is cheating on him—and why would she
be, if she was? The ideas are there; you just have to open yourself to
them."
"Do you ever try and write something the way you think an editor will
like it?"
That was the young girl in the back of the room, and Di blinked in
surprise. That was one question she hadn't expected.
"Of course I do, " she replied. "And I'm sorry if that disappoints you,
but it's true. I'd be a fool not to. They're expecting a certain kind of
product from me, and I've signed a contract promising to deliver it.
Once again, a genre writer can't afford to have feelings of sensitivity
about his deathless prose. It's not deathless. It may—hell, probably
will—be changed before it hits the bookshelves. So when you're a
genre writer, you develop a very thick skin, and you learn to be
flexible. Not that my editors haven't, on occasion, driven me up the
wall with stupid revisions"—she grinned wryly at all of
them—"because they have. But that's life. They pay me for the things,
and besides, I usually manage to give them what they asked for, but
the way I want it done.”
"So why do you do this?" another girl wanted to know. "I mean, if it's
like that much work, and people drive you nuts with what they want,

why don't you go do something else for a living?"
"Mostly because I love writing, " she answered. "Truthfully. I like
telling stories, I like doing it well. In any other job you get people who
drive you nuts, too—just ask your parents, or Ann Greeley, here. And
I'll tell you something else—most people find themselves in the
position of working at a job they're good at, but that they don't enjoy.
It isn't too often that a person gets to work at something they really
love. And I promise you all, from my Own personal experience, if you
ever find a job that you love to do, go do it, and damn the
consequences. You'll live longer—but more than that, you'll be happy.
And what you don't spend on ulcer medication and psychiatrists will
more man make up for a pay difference.”
She could see by the expressions on the faces in front of her that she'd
gotten about half the kids in the class to think with that last
statement. Good. In five or six years they're going to be out there
making a living—and the more people in the world there are that like
what they're doing, the better off the world is going to be.
She checked her watch; she had just enough time left to give them
their first assignment.
"All right, now let's get down to business. " She hooked her thumbs
into her belt loops and moved over so that she stood directly behind
the desk. "The reason I'm here is to give you all a start on learning to
write. I say 'a start' because if you're any good, you never stop
learning. Some of you will decide that you don't like it; some won't be
much good at it. That doesn't matter, and what's more, you won't be
graded down for it. As long as you try, that's all I care about. But
believe me, I will be able to tell whether or not you're trying. So. Right
now, everyone starts out with a B and you won't go any lower.”
There were stifled gasps all over the class. She'd just violated every
precedent for classwork they'd ever heard of, and most of them
weren't sure how to handle it.

"What does matter in this course, " she said, following up on her
advantage, "is that you'll have gotten a chance to try your hand at this
stuff. And you'll know whether or not you've got the particular
combination of skill and persistence this takes. You'll never have to
say 'if I'd only'… because you will have tried. And that is the single
most important thing I'll be able to give you.”
While they were still in shock, she gave them their assignment. "Now,
I want one page of dialogue and description from you tomorrow. A
simple scene; a girl and a boy having a fight. You choose what it's
about. Don't allow them to make up at the end of the page. That's
basically it. We'll read them all aloud and see how they work
tomorrow.”
The bell rang less than ten seconds after she finished speaking, and
she congratulated herself not only for completing the lecture on time,
but for keeping them so engrossed that none of them had been
watching the clock just over her shoulder.
The kids filed out slowly, in clumps of two and three, all of them
talking animatedly.
And that's one more gold star in my bunny book. I've got 'em going
again.
The bell that had just rung was the one for lunch, so Di was a bit
surprised when one of the girls lingered behind the others, hovering
right near the door. She'd thought the lot of them would vanish.
It was the girl that had asked several of the better questions, a pretty,
delicate child with a café-au-lait complexion and blond hair.
Obviously a mixed-race girl, and Di envied anyone who'd been handed
such a perfect combination of genes. Model material if ever I saw it…
especially in Europe.
"Miss Tregarde?" the girl said shyly. "I wonder if I could bother you
for a minute?"

"Sure, " Di replied automatically, "though it isn't a bother. What can I
do for you?"
Ann had moved unobtrusively to the front of the classroom. "This is
Monica, " she offered quietly. "She just transferred in from Colorado.”
"I wondered if you'd look at some things I wrote, and tell me if they're
any good or not. " The girl wouldn't look at her; kept her head down
and her eyes on the floor between them.
Now Di understood the intensity, and the look on the girl's face. This
was one who wanted, badly, to be a writer.
The question was, did this girl have it in her to do what she had to, or
was she just a "wannabe"?
"Sure, " she replied. "I'D take a look, provided you're ready to handle
criticism.”
"I-" the girl began.
Di interrupted her. "The fact is—Monica?—the fact is that I can be
kind, or I can be honest. I can't be both. " That usually deterred the
wannabes. "I'm not going to be nice, because an editor wouldn't be
nice. It's an editor's job to pick the good stuff out of the crud, and to
do that she—or he, my editor's male, though a lot of them
aren't—can't afford to waste his time being nice to every poor soul that
sends in an unsolicited manuscript. And I'll do one thing that she
won't; I'll tell you what's wrong and why. She'll just send you the
standard 'This does not suit our purposes at mis time' rejection
notice.”
"That's great, Miss Tregarde, " the girl replied earnestly. "It really is. I
want you to tell me if it isn't any good, really I do. I—I just finished
reading Heart of the Wolf last night, and I thought it was really
terrific. I think I could learn an awful lot from you.”

Di gave her two mental points. Bright girl; read up on me to know
who she was going to be dealing with. Okay, she says she's tough.
Now we'll just have to see if she really is. "Fine, if you're really sure.
Would you like to take care of this tonight? I don't have anything I
need to do.”
"If you could—I mean, you know, it would be really great!" The girl
looked about ready to kiss her feet.
Di thought-quickly. I'd better pick a public spot to meet her, public
enough that if it turns out she can't take criticism, it'll be too
embarrassing for her to make a scene. The last thing I need is an
hysterical teenager-She did a quick take, and recognized the girl from
her scan of the class earlier, looking for clues to Derek's hunter.
—make that hysterical, psychic teenager having an emotional
tantrum at me.
"I could meet you at the library, " she suggested. "The one next to
Woodland Hills mall. That could be at about seven if you're up to it.”
"I've got a lot of things all ready—I really do. That would be fine—that
would be great!" the girl exclaimed breathlessly. She didn't even wait
for Di's reply; she just clutched her books to her chest and ran for the
door.
Di chuckled and shook her head, looking at Ann with a raised
eyebrow. Ann shrugged, and smiled, and began pulling out the next
class's assignment from her desk. "Kids, " Di said to no one in
particular, and followed the girl out.
She couldn't help but notice that Monica seemed to have picked up an
escort once she hit the hall. And there was no mistaking who it was,
either.
Well. Well, well. Dear me, Mr. Kestrel, Ida seem to remember your
father saying that you had a steady—and I also recall that it wasn't

Monica.
Still, it might just be that Derek was discussing the assignment with
the girl. Or that she was asking him about Di. It might be innocent.
Then again—they weren't holding hands, or even touching, but there
was no mistaking the way they were leaning toward each other,
oblivious to everything else.
Partially that's psi-attraction. And partially hormones. Derek, you're
flirting with trouble if your steady finds out… Di stayed behind them
all the way to the outside door, trying not to grin at the romantic glow
Derek was emitting. Once outside the door, they headed for one of the
concrete benches surrounding the front entrance, presumably to share
confidences and lunch.
Di, on the other hand, was not a student—so she wasn't stuck on
school property. She also wasn't a teacher, so she wasn't limited to a
half-hour lunch. With Lunch Monitor duty. That was the benefit of
doing this without pay. Ann simply arranged for her to be a "guest
speaker, " and since she wasn't contracted to anything, she wasn't
obliged to follow rules. The principal and school board had been so
flabbergasted at having her run her "seminar" for nothing that they
hadn't balked at any of her conditions.
She could go have a leisurely lunch in a restaurant, far away from
babbling kids.
She took a quick look back at Derek and Monica, who were being very
attentive to each other, and chuckled again. "Young love, " she said
aloud, "or is it young lust? What the hell, at that age they can't tell the
difference!"
As she turned back toward the parking lot, though, she caught sight of
someone else, someone in a fancy red sports car, pulled up at the foot
of the sidewalk, very obviously staring in her direction.

At her?
No—behind her. And the only people directly behind her were Derek
and Monica—
At that point, whoever was driving the car pulled out in a splatter of
gravel and a shriek of tires; the car had been too far away from Di for
her to even see what sex the driver was.
Peculiar, she thought, making a mental note to find out who drove a
car like that. Very peculiar.
—
Barbecue—pronounced, or so Larry had told her,
"bobby-cue"—seemed a good option. It was one of Tulsa's three
specialties, the other two being chili and "deep-fried everything.”
Since the latter choice sounded pretty vile, she opted for "bobby-cue.”
Tulsans, it seemed, barbecued everything, too. She blinked in
amazement at the barbecued baloney, and wondered what her old
friend Paul Lazinski would say about the unholy concept of barbecued
kielbasa.
He'd probably call the Pope and get them excommunicated, she
decided, and opted for something a bit less—exotic.
And just a touch of caloric sin. "And cold potato salad, " she told the
waiter.
"Y'all want that Easterner potato salad?" he asked, making it sound as
if it were toxic waste. "Or good Oklahomey potato salad?"
"What's the difference?" she asked, just a little apprehensively.
"That Easterner potato salad, they put in the mayo, an' the mustard,

an' the relish, " he told her, "but them potatoes, they's cut up in
chunks.”
"Okay, " she responded. "So?"
"In good Oklahomey potato salad, they's mashed!"
He grinned as if he had just revealed that their cook was a Cordon
Bleu chef in disguise.
Di swallowed. "I'll settle for french fries, " she told him faintly.
She took the moment of peace before her "feast" arrived to arrange
her facts in order.
One, Larry thinks his son is being stalked. Nothing to support that at
the moment, but nothing to contradict it, either.
She played with the edge of her napkin. Assume he's right; whatever
is after him is leaving no fingerprints. Okay, that's not a problem,
particularly if it's noticed he's shielded and has decided to move in on
him slowly. What that means is that he, she, or it is probably more
than just adult age—probably fifty at least. It takes age and
experience to be that subtle.
Which left out any of Derek's classmates playing at magick. Unless
one of them happened to be an apprentice to somebody older and
wiser. Even then, it was a virtual certainty 'that an apprentice would
have blundered somewhere along the way. And that would leave
traces.
One way to be sure; call Fred and ask him if there's anybody that he
knows of operating in Tulsa. Anyone working dark side that has
taken apprentices usually devours or ruins them, and that would
show up in Guardian telltales.
She stared at the water beading up on the side of her glass. Two, Tulsa

is absolutely psychically null. Frankly, I wouldn't want to operate
here. I'm going to have to figure out the boundaries, and figure out
why. And how long it's been this way. It may or may not have any
bearing on this case.
Rolls arrived; warm, but obviously mass-produced. She ignored them.
Three, Derek is a legal target. He's obviously flirting with that little
black girl, and that means he's knowingly violating the implicit
promise made to the chick he's going steady with. That makes him an
oathbreaker, and puts him on the negative side of the karmic ledger,
which in turn makes him open to subversion, or even attack. Even if
he'd been protected up until now, he isn't anymore. Which leads me
to number four—he's hiding something. It's something he's afraid to
tell anyone else. And I don't know him well enough to judge whether
it's mundane or psi-related. It might even be both. She bit her lip.
With teenagers, nothing's ever simple.
Her order arrived, and she ate it quickly, without tasting it. As soon as
she was finished, she headed for the bank of pay phones near the rest
rooms, and dialled a Kansas City number from memory.
"Guardian Plumbing and Heating, " said a tinny voice, faint Eastern
Seaboard accent tingeing the words. "Fred Hunter here.”
"Fred, it's Di, " she said, laughing in spite of herself. "You know, one of
these days that name is going to get you in trouble!"
"What, 'Fred'? How could that get me in trouble? When are you going
to let me fix that furnace of yours?"
"Fred, you moved to Kansas six months ago. Is business so bad that
you're willing to make house calls to Connecticut? Besides, there are
perfectly good heating contractors in New Haven—"
"The boys in New Haven are a bunch of crooks, " Fred interrupted, as
she bit her lip to keep from laughing anymore. "They wouldn't tell you
if you had a transdimensional portal to hell in your humidifier.”

"Why would I want a transdimensional portal to hell in my
humidifier?" she asked. "It's easier to take the Greyhound down to
Newark. Listen, I've got a serious question. I'm on a personal case. Is
there anybody operating in the Tulsa area that I should know about?"
"There's nobody operating in the Tulsa area at all worth talking about,
" Fred replied. "At least, not according to my sources. Never has been,
likely never will be. Even the Indians won't work there. Can't tell you
why, it's out of my territory. Let sleeping dogs lie, I always say. No
news is good news. Curiosity killed the cat-"
"Okay, okay, I get the idea, " she said hastily. "But I'm the one that's
down here. I could sure use some local information.”
"Sorry, " Fred said, sounding sincere. "Wish I had some. But you know
how thin we're spread. Hell, we didn't have anybody down in these
parts till I moved here after that Dallas mess you got yourself into.
Good thing you were able to handle it alone. Now about that furnace
of yours—"
If I'd had anybody available, I wouldn't have tried. "Fred, you're
incorrigible. But thanks.”
"No problem, " he said. "Call me if you need a hand.”
"I'll try to stick to smaller guns, " she told him. "I don't intend to pull
you out of your territory unless it's a screaming emergency.”
"I don't know what you'd call a screaming emergency, Di, but I do
gotta admit I got a tricky little problem of my own up here. I'd kind of
prefer taking things in order, if you know what I mean.”
"Is this the disappearing kids?" she asked. "That sounded pretty
mundane in the papers.”
"Yeah. I think it was supposed to. Not sure I'd have picked up on it if I
hadn't been doing a furnace installation in the neighbourhood. Bad

feel, Di. Bad feel. Think I got a handle on it, though. Just gonna take a
little more time.”
Just what I need. Working two juggling acts a state apart. Still—
"Are you going to need me?"
"No; just think it's a job for a professional. I can handle it.”
She closed her eyes and tried to invoke her own limited pre-cog. The
little she got said he'd be all right.
And after all, he was, indeed, a professional. "All right, Fred. Good
luck. Thanks again.”
"Same to you, Di. " She started to hang up, and thought she heard him
say something else. But by the time she'd gotten the receiver back to
her ear, he was already gone, and all she got was a dial tone.
Had she heard him say, "You'll need it"?
CHAPTER FIVE
Fay Harper clutched the steering wheel of her brand-new Dodge
Shelby and lifted her lip in a delicate snarl. Even as she did so, Derek
leaned across the concrete bench and oh-so-casually brushed the
black girl's cheek with his hand.
If she'd had the energy to spare, Fay would have called down a
lightning bolt to fry them both then and there.
And it would take a purely physical attack to get through those
damned shields Derek had on him—at least given the energy level Fay
was at right now.
Miserable bitch! Double-timing twit!
In complete disregard of school rules that stated no student was to

leave the school grounds until classes were over, Fay pulled her car
out of the parking lot in a gravel-scattering, tire-smoking show of
anger.
How could she have so misjudged that new girl? After the little bitch
had failed to get a single date in the first month since she'd moved
from Colorado, it seemed as if, despite the undoubted fact that she
was disgustingly cute, she wasn't going to. be any kind of threat. Fay's
ascendancy at Jenks High was going to remain unchallenged.
So Fay had turned her attention elsewhere, to taking care of other
competition, to beginning the tiniest moves toward ensnaring Sandy
and parting him from Jill—and as soon as she turned her back,
disaster had struck.
A stray dog started across the street in front of her, and Fay hit the
accelerator, hoping to ease some of her anger by killing something.
Unfortunately, the cur saw her coming, and managed to dive out of
the way before she could run him down. It hid between two parked
vans, completely protected.
This was not her day.
And it was all Derek Raymond Kestrel's fault.
He was letting that sugar-sweet little bit of fluff haul him in like a
hooked fish; he was falling for her just as quickly as he'd fallen under
Fay's carefully controlled fascination.
It just wasn't fair.
She pulled the Shelby into one of the local Sonic drive-ins; this one
was franchised and run by a bunch of born-again bigots, and it always
gave her a little thrill to eat there. After all, here she was, the Scarlet
Woman, the Enemy, smiling and feeding her face right under their
noses. They took her money, and never guessed what she was. And she
would use the money to carry misfortune to them, making certain that

something went wrong after she was ready to leave.
It was too pathetically easy, really, but it was such fun—they were
opening themselves to her so thoroughly that she always had an
opportunity to make them miserable. Their karmic balance sheets
would be constantly in the red if only for the way they treated their
employees. That they cheated on their taxes and quietly hated their
fellow man (in the form of anyone who didn't belong to their little
fundamentalist sect), all the while professing to love their
neighbours—that only made it easier. Hypocritical liars that they
were, they were ripe for her tampering. And then there was his
mistress, and her secret alcohol binges-Lovely. They played right into
their hands.
She ordered from a named-looking middle-aged woman whose
red-rimmed eyes testified that Mrs. Bigot had been browbeating the
staff again and threatening cuts in hours.
That was wonderful; that alone would justify something satisfymgly
expensive. Perhaps an invasion of cockroaches and a surprise
inspection from the Health Department?
It had occurred to her, as she'd watched and ground her teeth in
frustration, that Derek was playing into her hands exactly the same
way, by taking up with little Rosey Tush. Unfortunately, it wasn't
something she could take advantage of; that kind of leverage didn't fit
in with the plans she had for him.
Her plans were more complicated than that, because the little twit was
exactly what she'd been looking for over the last two years. Perfect, in
fact; callow as hell, easily manipulated, good-looking, amusing in bed,
and a walking power plant of magical potential.
And she did not intend to turn him loose, "I have thee, Derek Kestrel,
" she muttered, "and yet I cannot take thee.”
"Pardon?" said the startled carhop, tray in hand.

"Nothing, " Fay said, smiling sweetly. "That was how much? And take
the tray, dear. I won't need it.”
She paid the woman, including a big tip—half of which Mrs. Bigot
would confiscate, thus increasing the feelings of rancour the staff had
for her.
The woman retreated; Fay contemplated her problems with Derek.
There didn't seem to be any simple solution, and she bit savagely into
her hamburger. There was no hope for it; she couldn't counter his
shields and haul him back to the fold. She just didn't have the time or
the resources to deal with Derek and his little Juliet right now. Not
with the current project she had going.
In a few more days the rivalry between Sandy and Bob would be
finally out in the open; ripe and ready to harvest. She'd been playing
one against the other for some time now, working them both into a
fine froth of jealousy over school status. Now it was time to add sex to
the picture. It wouldn't be too long until the lust-spells she'd cast on
both of them had them literally at each other's throats. She'd have
added Derek to that emotional stew, except that his parents had
shielded him too well, and too long ago, to make the shields easy to
subvert.
Ah, well. She licked ketchup off her fingers daintily. Red, and thick, it
could have been blood. A hundred years ago, it likely would have been
blood. The rivalry between the two football heroes would have been
resolved at gunpoint, in a duel of some kind, or in an ambush, A case
of winner-takes-all, where Fay was the only true winner.
She'd instigated more than a few duels in her time. Death and spilled
blood were such fine sources of power.
Fine, and satisfying. She finished her fries and sighed with nostalgic
resignation; it was too bad, but she'd just have to make do with the
power surge she'd accumulate when Sandy and Bob finally confronted
each other, fought—and hopefully beat the pulp out of each other.

Time to go. And time to visit retribution upon the Sonic drive-in. She
considered and discarded several minor disasters, and finally settled
on an irreparable leak in the hot water heater, and several more in the
plumbing in the Bigots' house. She set the spells on the money Mrs.
Bigot had taken from the carhop; they would activate as soon as the
old bat touched the handle of a faucet.
That accomplished, she started the car and threw it into reverse, not
being too careful about whether there was anyone in the way. There
were compensations for living in this age. This vehicle was certainly
one of them. She'd considered replacing the Trans Am with a Firebird,
but the salesman had put her off; he'd acted as if he was immune to
her looks, and he himself had been far too ordinary to bother with. In
contrast, there had been the young man who'd sold her this T-top
Dodge Shelby—he'd been more to her taste… and a tasty little morsel
indeed, once she got him home.
Vehicles like this one meant no more dealing with horses, stupid,
smelly beasts that they were. She never could abide animals, and the
feeling was mutual.
She pulled out into traffic, cutting off a senile old lady who nearly had
a heart attack on the spot. The old biddy slammed on her brakes, and
was rear-ended by some nerd in a metallic gold VW Beetle. Fay smiled
and continued smoothly on her way, casting a glamour on her own
license plate so that, should anyone think to note the number, it would
in no way match the one registered to her.
As she passed Sooner Federal, she noted that the bank sign said 1: 47.
She was already late for class—but the sun was shining and it was
much too nice a day to spend further indoors. And besides, that last
little-pair of indulgences had cost her; she felt a little weak, and was
starting a moderate headache. Suddenly she had no wish to return to
school; basking on the sun deck, with a strawberry daiquiri in hand,
was much more attractive.
This business of "school" was such a bother, anyway. Not like in the

old days…
—
As Fay roared into her immaculate driveway, the garage door opened
silently without her having to raise a finger. This was, of course, as it
should be; it meant her Servant was properly anticipating her needs.
As usual, she parked across two spaces; she hated having her car too
close to another to get the door open completely, and hence having to
squirm to extricate herself from her vehicle. It was undignified; it
rumpled her clothing and her temper. Besides, there was plenty of
room; this was a four-car garage and there were only two cars in it,
hers and the Mercedes.
The Merc reminded her, as always, of Wes. Wes, who'd chosen the
stodgy little Merc over the Ferrari he could easily have afforded. Who
had never understood why she drove the Porsche. Dear, stupid Wes,
no taste, no zest for living, who had asked her plaintively why she
needed a garage big enough for four cars when they only had two.
"But what about Fay, dear?" she'd said sweetly. "She'll be old enough
to drive soon, and she'll surely want her own car.”
She certainly did, Wesley. She certainly did.
She waxed nostalgic over the Porsche for a moment. It had been a
lovely car until she'd wrapped it around a tree. And, matters being
what they were, she'd had to walk back home and have Aunt Emily
report it as stolen. Too bad; no car since had possessed quite the elan
of the Porsche.
The garage door closed. The Servant was waiting silently for her,
holding open the door to the house, as always. As it should be. Fay had
returned to her kingdom, where she alone ruled.
As she passed the Servant, Fay took a moment to' give it a minute
inspection, and was satisfied that it was holding up. If anyone had

bothered to examine it closely—which nobody ever did—they'd have
been struck by how closely it resembled her.
Well, it was supposed to be her aunt, after all, and so close a
resemblance wasn't unusual in near relations. And there was no
reason for anyone to take that second look and see that "Aunt Emily"
was Fay's double—if you aged Fay fifty years or so.
Not that anyone would ever see her aged sixty-eight.
"The doctor called, " the Servant said, when Fay had finished her
examination of it. "He wants to know when you plan on visiting your
mother. He'd like you to come by as soon as you can.”
Fay laughed, throwing her head back and baring her teeth in a feral
smile. "Why? The last time I showed up, she had to be tranked
afterwards. He surely doesn't want that to happen again. It looks bad
on his record.”
The Servant bared its teeth in an identical smile; it tended to mimic
her expressions when she was around, since it was an extension of
herself. Of minimal intelligence, of course; enough to answer
questions and direct the other, flesh-and-blood servants. Building it
had taken all the power Fay had left after the transfer. But she'd
discovered some time ago that having a Servant during her minority
was well worth the cost, especially these days. Modern laws did not
permit thirteen-year-old children to govern themselves and a sizable
fortune; did not even permit them to live without adult supervision.
"The doctor said that your mother is asking to see you, " the Servant
replied. "He believes his new therapy is working, and he wishes to put
it to the test. He feels that if your mother remains calm when
confronting you, it will be a sign that her recovery is near.”
"He's an old fool, " Fay said scornfully, starting up the rust-coloured,
wool-carpeted, oaken staircase to her room.

"You pay him very well to be a fool, " the Servant replied from the base
of the stairs behind her.
That was so unexpected and so intelligent a response that Fay
stopped, and turned to look at her simulacrum thoughtfully.
It occurred to her that the thing had been saying some clever things
lately. Perhaps… too clever. And it had ben acting as if it disapproved
of some of her recreations, especially the pharmaceutical ones. The
problem with a Servant was that if you left it alone too much, forcing it
into a position of making too many decisions, it could develop an
independent intelligence. And when that happened, you could lose
control over it.
That would be a disaster, for other than life, Fay had no hold over the
thing. It was oblivious to the pain of psi- or levin-bolts, and she dared
not injure it in a way that would show. And, like Fay, because it was a
part of Fay, it was convinced of its own immortality.
Fay tightened her lips; another annoyance in a day of annoyances. If
that was what was happening, she'd have to destroy this Servant and
make another. She could reuse the raw materials, of course, which
would make the energy expense minimal, but it would still take
energy, and time—and she could ill afford either at the moment.
"I'll go in the morning, " she told the Servant. "Call and make the
appointment, then call the school and tell them that I'm going out
there. And while you're at it, tell them I went home with a migraine at
noon.”
The Servant bowed slightly, and moved on silent feet to Wes's den and
the nearest phone. Fay continued up the staircase to the master
bedroom.
Something was going to have to be done about Monica Car-lin.
Something to keep that obnoxious little creature occupied with
something other than hauling in Derek.

She stopped again on the top step, and smiled as a thought occurred
to her. By knowingly encouraging Derek, who was going steady with
Fay, Monica had opened herself to retribution.
She was poaching, in short. And poachers deserved punishment. After
all, as far as that little tart Monica knew, Fay was truly in love with the
twit. If this were an ordinary affair, Fay would be devastated by his
loss.
Now what would throw her off balance—yet be so bizarre that she
would be unwilling to tell anyone about it?
Fay bit her lip, and continued on her way to her room. This was going
to call for some careful planning. The poolside and that daiquiri were
definitely in order.
* * *
Derek wasn't paying much attention to his homework; not with Alan
on the phone, with one of the best pieces of news he'd heard in a
month.
"—so Coach gets the guy in his office, and before he even gets a chance
to start name-dropping, the guy tells him he's the DA, and the old
crow Bobby-Boy rear-ended is his grandmother!" Alan gloated.
Derek cradled the handset between his chin and shoulder, and typed a
few more words on his micro. "Jesus, I bet that took him down!"
"The best is yet to come, my man, " Alan chortled. "Seems like she had
two of the professors from ORU with her. Bobby-Boy didn't see 'em, I
guess, or else he didn't think they were important."
Derek stared at the screen, but wasn't really paying any attention to
the words on it. "Or else he was too drunk to care, " Derek put in.
"Could be. Basically, she had two witnesses to the way he cussed her

out, and then cut and ran. One of 'em was taking down the license;
that's how they caught him.”
Derek chuckled heartlessly, and took a pull off his can of Coke. "Kind
of makes you believe in God, doesn't it?"
Alan laughed. "Amen, brethren and sistern. Dork should never have
taken off like that; they're gonna have his license for sure. Of course, if
he hadn't cut and run, he'd have had a DWI underage.”
"Probably, " Derek agreed. "I've never heard of Bobby out dragging
when he wasn't stoned. So then what happened?"
"I don't know. About then Coach saw that the door was open and
closed it. I cut out before anybody could see me lingering and tell
Coach I was dropping eaves. God, I'd love to know what's going to
happen to Bobby-Boy, though.”
That hint's about as subtle as a lead brick, Derek thought. He knows
damn well that Fay's gonna find out, and she'll tell me when she calls
tonight.
"I'll probably be able to tell you tomorrow, " he began, when the "call
waiting" signal beeped at him.
"I heard that, " Alan told him. "I'll catch you later.”
"Okay. " He let the incoming call through as Alan hung up from his
end.
"Derek?" The coyly seductive voice turned his knees to jelly.
"Uh, hi, Fay. " He gulped. "Whatcha doing?"
Boy, is that ever a dumb question. She's calling me, of course. Wake
up, Kestrel, and start sounding like you know what day it is.

"Did you hear about Bobby yet?"
"No, " he lied. "What's up?"
She was only too happy to tell him. Funny, though, although she
sounded upset about it, there was a faint undertone of something else
in her voice. Like she was kind of gloating about it.
"He and Sandy were like, you know, racing a little. And this senile old
lady pulled right out in front of him. He kind of tapped the back end of
her car. I guess he yelled at her for being such an asshole, and then he
pulled around her. But I guess she's the DA's mother or something,
and besides, she had two of the religion professors from ORU with
her—anyway, he's in a hell of a lot of trouble.”
He scribbled a couple of notes while she talked. Alan was going to
want to know about this—and how Fay's story differed from the one
he'd overheard. "Like how much?"
"Reckless driving, leaving the scene of an accident; the insurance
company is gonna nail his ass to the wall, I guess, and the DA came up
with some law about cussing out old ladies, because they got him with
that, too.”
Derek managed to keep from laughing. "Gee, that's too bad. What's
Coach doing?"
"It's pretty awful. They already took Bob's license; Coach took the car
away from him, and he's grounded for a month.”
We'll see how long that lasts, Derek thought cynically, saving down
his homework. Bet he's out partying Saturday.
"Is this gonna make any difference to those recruiters?" He already
knew the answer to that one. They weren't calling the UO athletic
dorm the "Knife and Gun Club" for nothing.

"I don't think so. Bob says not.”
Which meant she'd been getting her information straight from
Bobby-Boy. If that didn't figure…
He flopped down on his bed and stared up at the ceiling. "Well, he's
pretty lucky, I guess. What about Sandy?"
"I guess nobody saw him, so Bob didn't squeal on him.”
Besides, it wouldn't have made any difference. What could Coach do,
drop him from the team? The season's over, and he's graduating.
Derek bit his cheek to keep from chuckling. Bet that really scrolled
Bobby's nurd!
"What were you doing?" she asked.
"Homework. And thinking about you. " Good touch, Derek. "I'm
always thinking about you. " Even better.
"You're so sweet. " How come she made that sound like something
she'd have said about a cocker spaniel? "You know how much I love
you.”
"Me too, " he said awkwardly, feeling his mind start to go to jelly along
with his knees. How did she do that to him, anyway?
"Why don't you come on over here, hm? You could do your homework
over here.”
"I can't, " he said hastily. "I've got this assignment for English and I
can't get a handle on it. It's a creative writing thing, and… I just can't
work on it and be around you, you know? You're too distracting,
lover. And it's due tomorrow.”
And we go through this every night, a small part of his mind that
hadn't gone to guacamole thought. Every night you want me to come

over there. What was she trying to do, get him to flunk out?
"You're no fun. " Again, it was like he was hearing two conflicting
things in her voice. On top—that she was pouting. But underneath was
something else. And he just couldn't make up his mind what it was, or
even if he'd heard it at all.
"I can't help it, you know what my dad'll do if I mess up my homework
and he finds out about it. And I can't get away with saying I forgot; it's
for that writer that's staying here.”
"Well, okay. This tune. Better not make a habit of it, though. I might
get tired of you. " Definitely a hint of threat there.
"I won't, " he replied hastily. And spent the next five minutes placating
her, without really understanding why he suddenly felt like he was in
the wrong.
—
Monica flipped on the headlights and pulled carefully out of the
parking space; her mother waved good-bye from the door of the
apartment, then turned and went back inside, closing the door behind
her. There was at least one thing Monica liked about living in
Tulsa—the apartment complex they'd moved into. The complex itself
had anything you could want; two swimming pools, a sauna, an
enormous Jacuzzi, an exercise room, a club-room. The apartment was
bigger than the house they'd rented in Denver, and it was
cheaper-Rhonda said that was because the Tulsa economy was
depressed and rental places were cheap. Monica had no idea; she was
perfectly willing to believe whatever her mother said.
She waved at the guard at the gate and pulled out onto the" main
street. They'd never lived in a place that had a guarded entrance
before. It was pretty intimidating at first. In fact, once she'd seen the
situation and had figured out the kind of life-style they'd be having,
Monica had been all for the move. Between the lower cost of living out

here and the substantial raise Rhonda had gotten to come here, the
family was living higher on the hog than Monica had ever dreamed
they would—
—until she'd seen her fellow classmates.
And at that point, she realized that these luxury apartments were
Jenks's version of low-income housing, and far from being the envy of
her classmates, she was going to be considered strictly middle-class.
These were kids who routinely got foreign sports cars for their
sixteenth birthdays. Kids who thought nothing of dropping five or six
hundred dollars on a date. Who spent more on clothing in a weekend
than she did all year. Who flew down to Dallas for a day the way she
used to drive over to Colorado Springs— and who flew out to New
York, or London, or San Francisco to do their Christmas shopping.
It was not at all what she'd expected.
She headed the car in the direction of Memorial and Woodland Hills
Mall. Kind of funny name; no hills, and no woods— but then again,
right down the street was "Shadow Mountain, " all one hundred feet of
it. There were rocks in Colorado taller than that.
It was all pretty much in keeping with the way people thought of
themselves around here; like the whole world was centred in Tulsa. Or
at least, that was the impression Monica had gotten.
That alone was a good enough reason to want to show the rest of the
kids up, at least a little. If Miss Tregarde says I'm good enough—they.
can't look down their noses at me anymore. And it won't matter how
much money they've got. Money won't buy talent. Money won't
make them writers. I'll have something they can never have.
Rhonda understood; when Monica told her the root of her problems
and why school was making her kind of unhappy, she'd been both
concerned and relieved. Concerned because she didn't want her kids

unhappy—but relieved because the problems could have had other
causes.
"We could move, " she'd suggested that very night. "I'd rather not;
Jenks is so much better than the Tulsa school system it's pathetic, but
we could move—"
Monica was not inclined to take her up on that offer. "I'm not going to
let them beat me, Mom, " she'd said stubbornly. "I'm not. I'm going to
have something that's going to make them want to be my friends.”
In the back of her mind she had no doubt what would happen if she
actually got published. She'd be a celebrity, like the prom queen, only
better. The kids would be impressed because the money she got for a
book would be hers, and they'd all want to be in her next book…
And, practically speaking—it sure would help pay for college. Rhonda
was the one who'd mentioned that, when Monica had come bursting
in with the news that Miss Tregarde was willing to look at her work.
And it had been Rhonda's idea that the girl should take the car herself
over to the library. They'd have two hours before the library closed at
nine. That ought to be enough time for Miss Tregarde to get a good
look at her work and critique it, too.
Monica squinted a little; the headlights of the cars in the opposite lane
were bothering her, and she was cold. She'd just gotten her license a
month ago, and she hadn't driven much at night. And her mom's old
280-Z might not be a Porsche, but it was a bit more to handle than the
Pontiac Bonneville the driver's-ed class used.
So she was nervous; nervous enough that when she turned off onto a
side street rather than fight the mall traffic anymore, she was going
about five miles under the speed limit. Since most of the other cars on
the road were trying to do ten miles over the limit, she'd been getting a
lot of tailgaters and horn-blowers. It was a real relief to get away from
them.

"Jerks, " she muttered, as she took the right-hand turn too slowly to
please the last of them, and he roared past her, nearly taking her tail
off in the process. "Jenks jerks. " She turned the car heater on and
rolled her window up, wishing she'd brought a jacket.
The street she chose wound through a half-built subdivision, with
empty fields stretching for several hundred yards on both sides of the
asphalted road. There was no traffic at all here, which was fine, but
there weren't any streetlights, either. After the dazzle of the
sodium-vapour lights and the car headlights out on the main drag,
Monica felt like she was half blind. The nearest sources of illumination
were the lights of the houses hundreds of yards away. She slowed still
further, fumbling for the high beams.
She couldn't find them. Wherever they were, they weren't in the same
place as on the Pontiacs. She looked down for a moment at the
steering column.
That was when the thing hit the windshield.
It was only there for a moment, but that was more than long enough.
She got a fleeting glimpse of something horrible, twisted, wrong—
The eyes were what she saw first—evil, yellow eyes, eyes that glowed.
Then, under the eyes, a round mouth full of sharply pointed teeth.
She tried to scream, but the sound was stuck somewhere in her throat.
The awful thing flattened itself against the windshield. She could see
long spindly arms and legs now; the thing seemed to be all head with
the arms and legs just attached wherever there was room. It slavered,
pressed its face into the glass, and the talons at the ends of those
skinny arms clawed and clutched hungrily at her.
She did scream then, and jerked the steering wheel sideways, trying to
shake it off. It grinned at her and mockingly ran a tongue that was at

least two feet long all around its fur-covered face. It clawed once more
at the glass.
Then it was gone, leaping off the hood of the car, into the darkness. At
that moment the car ran off the road.
She shrieked again, this time in surprise, when the car jolted over the
concrete curb. It wound up with its nose buried in the weeds. If she'd
been going any faster, she could have had a serious accident.
She took her foot off the clutch, the car jumped, and the engine
coughed and stalled.
There was dead silence except for the ticking of cooling metal under
the hood. After a while, Monica could hear the sounds of traffic off in
the distance, even though the windows were closed, but other than
that she couldn't hear anything. Certainly nothing—strange. In the
glare of the headlights she could see the bank of weeds immediately in
front of her; when she looked away and gave her eyes time to adjust to
the dark, she could also see that there was nothing in those fields
except more dead, weather-flattened weeds.
There was no sign, absolutely no sign, that what she thought she had
seen had ever existed—outside of her own mind.
She put the gear in neutral and tried to start the car, her hands
shaking so hard she had trouble turning the key—and her knees were
so weak she had trouble keeping the clutch down. Once the engine
caught, she found she couldn't move; she just huddled in the front
seat, trembling all over.
It took a while before she was able to think. When thought came, it
was a denial of what she thought she'd seen. I didn't see that. It
wasn't real. It was never there. It can't have been there. Things like
that don't exist. But if it didn't exist, what made her think she saw it?
I'm going nuts. I'm going nuts, just like Gramma. I'm seeing things
just like she did before she died.

That was a thought almost as horrible as the notion that she had seen
something.
The wind blew a piece of newspaper into and out of the cone of light
from her headlights. She jumped and screamed—and then laughed,
when she realized what it was. And that gave her a rational answer.
It was just an old movie poster or something. Yeah, that's what it
was; somebody's poster, the wind blew it into the windshield.
She kept telling- herself that, over and over, until she stopped shaking.
Until she began to laugh at herself.
Stupid! she told herself. Getting all shook up over a dumb piece of
paper. She was sure now that she hadn't seen the thing move or make
faces at her, that it had all just been her overactive imagination.
I'm not going crazy like Gramma; Mom told me that was senile
dementia, and you can't catch it, and you can't get it unless you're
real old, like forty at least.
She even managed to get up enough courage to get out of the car and
check it over for damage. There wasn't any, to her immense relief.
Like, what would I tell Mom? Gee, I'm sorry, I wrecked the car 'cause
I thought I saw the bogeyman ?
She climbed back into the driver's seat and carefully backed the car
up; she would have preferred to pull forward and around, but she was
afraid of something more normal than the bogeyman—what might be
hidden under those flattened weeds. Gaping holes that could break an
axle, concrete blocks to take out the undercarriage, or sharp pieces of
metal that would slash up the tires.
Mom would really kill me if I messed up the car just being stupid. She
could forgive an accident, but stupidity would get me grounded for
the rest of my life.

The car lurched sideways as first one rear tire, then the other, went
over the concrete curbing and hit the asphalt. She held her breath and
niched it the rest of the way out, hoping that ridge of cement wasn't
high enough to scrape the bottom of the car.
It wasn't, and she let out the breath she'd been holding as the front
tires met the curb, and she had to gun the engine a little to get them
over it.
She sat there for a minute, with the car heater drying the sweat on her
face and scalp. Then, trying not to feel nervous, she took a deep
breath, put the car in first, and took her foot slowly off the clutch.
At exactly that moment, the thing came back.
This time it landed with a splat on the driver's side door, and Monica
screamed at the top of her lungs.
There was a second splat, and another of the things landed on the
hood. It sat there for a fraction of a second, then leapt at her and was
stopped only by the windshield.
She and the things stared at each other for a paralysed eternity. Then
they moved.
She screamed again, as the things rocked the car, gnashed their teeth
at her through the fragile protection of the windows, and tried to claw
their way through the glass to get at the front seat and her.
The car hit the curb again, but this time only lurched halfway over it
before the engine died. She kept shrieking and waved her hands
uselessly at the things, and they grinned and slavered at her. They
seemed to be enjoying her fright.
She was still screaming a moment later, when they vanished as
abruptly as they'd appeared. She couldn't stop screaming, not until
her voice was gone.

Then she started crying.
She curled up in a tight little ball on the front seat; unable to move,
unable to do anything, except to cry, and to think the same thought,
over and over.
I'm going crazy. Oh, God, I'm going insane…
CHAPTER SIX
There's something about a library.…
Hey, that's a good line.
Di paged back in the scene to the point where Claire first entered Lord
Burton's library, and inserted the new text. "There's something about
a library, the masculine scent of leather bindings.… " She grinned.
Oooo, I just looove leather. Don't look now, Claire, but Lord Burton's
about to insert something other than text. How did I ever manage
before I got a computer? She paged back to the end of the chapter.
Never mind, I know the answer to that. I did a helluva lot of
retyping.
She contemplated the screen, and decided that this was a good place
to close the chapter down. Claire was just about to be ravished. Little
does Lord Burton know what he's in for. Heh, heh. Very good place
to stop. Make the reader anticipate what's next.
I wonder if I should get a little kinky in the next chapter? Yeah, I
think Claire ought to get out the honey and brandy… Surprise,
Burty-baby. You—ahem—bit off more than you could chew. I'm
going to have a hard—you should excuse the expression—time
convincing people you're up to Claire. So much for macho bullshit.
She chuckled. My mind's right in the gutter tonight. Not even the
gutter, the sewer. Less than a week of vacation, and already I'm
feeling better. And feistier. More feisty? Whatever. Boy, is Andre

going to be in trouble when I get back home.
Still, there is something about a library.
Di saved down the chapter, and stretched, easing that ache just under
the shoulder blades that every writer she'd ever met complained
about.
I must have spent half my life in libraries. Granny's library in the old
place, the reading library and the stacks in college— those wonderful
libraries in New York— She stretched again and " settled back in her
chair. This is an unusually good branch library, though. Tulsa
County must have a pretty decent library system. Glad I picked this
one, and not the one in Jenks proper.
She'd found a quiet corner where the steady clicking of keys wouldn't
bother anyone, but close enough to the door that she'd be able to see
Monica as soon as she arrived. There weren't too many people here to
bother, which was a plus. One woman and a set of three kids, all of
them loading up and probably about to reach the max limit on their
cards, if not their arms—that was an immensely cheering sight. There
was one old man over in the corner; he looked like part of the
furniture. And there were four teenagers scattered at tables, stacks of
reference books beside them, three with notebooks, one with a laptop
identical to Di's. From the hot outfit and hair that cried out "mousse
abuse, " Di figured him for a denizen of Jenks, out slumming.
Well, maybe not. There were a couple of very pricey sections in Tulsa
proper; the Shadow Mountain condos weren't that far from here.
Within—perish the thought!—walking distance, in fact.
The kid looked up, saw her, and smiled before turning back to his
book. I'm being snide, she thought, a little ashamed of herself. There
are an awful lot of really nice people in this town. Like that cop
outside.
When she'd turned off into the library parking lot, she noticed that

there was a car following her. When she got out of the car, it pulled up
beside her—
An unmarked fuzzmobile, with a uniformed cop at the wheel. Oh shit,
she'd thought, what'd I do!
"Hi, " she'd said, trying not to sound resigned. "What can I do for
you?"
" 'Scuse me, ma'am. " The cop opened his door, and rose—
—and rose.
"My God, " she'd said involuntarily, stepping back a pace. "There
certainly is a lot of you!"
"Yes ma'am, " the cop had answered. "I've been told that before.
Ma'am, I'd like to ask you—that an interceptor?"
"Well, it was, " she'd replied, very glad that it was too dark for him to
see some of the things that were still installed in the dash. "I got it
from a friend on the Dallas PD. I have to drive in New York City a lot,
and he thought I needed something with more acceleration and
protection that the Hyundai I was going to buy. So Mark got this for
me from the Texas Highway Patrol when they surplused her.”
The cop's long face lit up. "Gee, ma'am—that's kinda what I thought.
Can I—look under the hood?"
"Sure, " she'd told him. "There's something under there. I'm not sure
what, but Mark Valdez said it was legal. Barely, but legal. Big, mean,
and nasty, and it makes a lot of noise. Mark called it a 'rat. ' With a
temper, he said.”
Evidently that meant something profound to him. "If you don't mind,
ma'am, I know a tad bit about engines. Dad useta run Pontiacs at
Kaney Valley Speedway. I could kinda make sure you're street-legal.

And if you aren't, well, I don't see how just givin' you a verbal warning
would hurt. Not like a lady like you is gonna go out drag-racin.”
He was dying to get under that hood; it didn't take an empath to figure
that out. "Be my guest, " she'd said.
She'd moved the car under the light, so he could see better; he wasted
no time in popping the hood and diving in.
From time to time appreciative noises echoed out of there. She was
baffled; while she was a damn fine driver (even Mark said so), the
innards of cars were a mystery deeper than the Quabala to her. Only
one recognizable comment emerged: "Ma'am, " the fellow had said in
tones she normally associated only with worship, "I cannot believe
they surplused this baby.”
"Marie said he had someone work on it for me, " she'd said
diplomatically.
Afterwards, he'd been kind enough not only to tell her that the car
was, indeed, street-legal—"barely, " he'd grinned—but to give her a
rundown on good restaurants within fifteen minutes of Jenks—and
his dad's garage.
Praise be, there was even an Uno's Pizzeria and a sushi place. "Yes
ma'am, " hey teased. "They got your barbecue sushi, your deep-fried
sushi, your okra sushi—you know what most people call sushi 'round
these parts?"
"Besides ?"
"Bait. " And they'd both laughed.
I don't think I could stand to live here, but Tulsa has its moments.
She glanced down at her watch; it was past seven. Funny, as eager as
Monica had seemed at school, Di would have expected to see her

coming through that door by seven at the very latest. What on earth
could be keeping the child? Di was a Guardian; she had resources
most occultists couldn't imagine. Her alarms were sensitive to the
brush of power passing by, even if she wasn't the target. The alarms
went off. What the hell?
There were certain habits she did not break, no matter how safe she
thought she was; full shields and alarms went up and stayed up at all
times unless she was deliberately taking them down.
In the time it took to frame that startled thought, she had already
determined that she wasn't the target, and was tracing the passing
surge of power back to its source.
Whoa! She juggled shields, catalogue the overtones, and searched for
telltales, all at the same time. She felt like an F-15 pilot with a hundred
things to do and a MIG on his tail. I thought Larry said this whole
area was psychically null—hell, I didn't find anything either! She
wasn't fast enough.
Like the opening and closing of a portal, an arcane "door" in the void
that was the Tulsa area; one moment the sullen scarlet beam of magic
was there, the next, gone.
It couldn't have been more than a couple of minutes at most. Just not
long enough to do anything, especially not when taken so completely
by surprise. She blinked and stared at the bookcase on the opposite
wall, not really seeing it. Damn. I wonder what that was all about.
It hadn't felt good, whatever it was. It had been familiar, though;
old-fashioned, Western-style sorcery. As opposed to witchcraft, of
course. A witch worked with natural balances, rather like a tai chi
master in that way. If you attacked a witch, if the odds, power levels,
and skills were equal, chances were you'd find your own attack turned
back against you.
Maybe it's too bad it wasn't me that it was after. Like sensei keeps

telling me, there are times when the first to attack has already lost
the battle. And I've assisted a few people into a wall in my time.
A sorcerer ignored those balances. A sorcerer worked with or against
the grain; it didn't much matter. Partially that was because an awful
lot of the kind of people who became sorcerers were pretty weak in the
psionics department. They couldn't sense the natural flows in the first
place.
And the kind of person who became a sorcerer also tended to be a
manipulator. That wasn't in and of itself a bad thing, provided your
motives were reasonably unselfish. Sorcery was a matter of
dominance; your will over the material world, your mind over the wills
of others, and ultimately, if the sorcerer was skilled enough, the
dominance of the master over slaves created or invoked. Again, that
wasn't of itself a bad thing; some magical critters were only under
control when they were enslaved, and the sorcerer in question did not
need to be the one who had invoked them to be the one who
controlled them.
You could—as Di had—control them right back to where they came
from.
Di, as a Guardian, was both a witch and a sorcerer; although by
preference, she tended to favour the former. But she knew sorcery in
all its various forms and flavours; knew it well enough to recognize
even when she only "saw" it for a fleeting instant. She stared hard at
the blank screen of her laptop, using it as a focal point of
concentration. Works as well as a crystal ball… huh. That's a hoot. A
techie witch. Cyberwitch? I'll have to pass that one on. Since she
couldn't trace the power back to its source, she began delicately
questing for the signs that would lead her to the target.
She wasn't expecting the second power surge, any more than she had
been expecting the first.
She managed to stay with it long enough this time to get the

"signature, " the characteristic shape and flavouring of the power that
was individual to every mage. It wasn't anyone she'd every
encountered before; that much she knew before she was cut off again.
It was stolen power; there was no mistaking that. Though
incorporated into a skilled and controlled whole, the individual
threads of the work could be identified, and they were all from sources
other than the signature. Each had the faint traces of the personality
that it had been reft from, and the strong colouring of the emotions
that had invoked the energy in the first place.
Nasty emotions, for the most part; fear, pain, loveless lust, anger,
hate, envy, and jealousy. Which told Di quite a bit about the sorcerer.
Okay, you, she told the unknown. Third time's the charm. Poke your
nose out again, and I'll have you.
She waited, ready to pounce the moment that portal opened and the
sorcerer used his power—
Nothing.
Until the library door swung open and shut again, letting in a blast of
cold air that scattered the papers of the students behind her. And the
echoes, the traces, of that same power Di had been waiting for (faint,
but near at hand) made her look up sharply.
Monica.
Shaking, green, with all the signs that she had been the sorcerer's
target.
What in—Monica? She's just a kid! Why would… There is something
very weird going on around here…
Di shut the laptop down and shoved her chair away from the table.
Monica jumped at the sound of the chair bumping across the carpet,

and turned white-rimmed, fear-glazed eyes in her direction.
The girl blinked several times, and finally seemed to see her.
"M-m-miss Tregarde?" she quavered.
A few feet to Monica's right, the librarian looked up sharply at the
sound of her voice and evidently recognized the same symptoms of
fear and shock that Di had. She emerged from behind her microfiche
reader and the massive desk, and headed straight for the girl.
Shit, I hope she isn't going to cause me a problem. Di took her
attention off Monica for a fleeting instant, just enough time to "read"
what the librarian was projecting. And felt with relief a solid
grounding of worry, with overtones of protectiveness and desire to
help. No wonder there's all these kids studying in here. She must be
mother-confessor and trusted adviser to half the neighbourhood. Bet
she bakes a mean chocolate-chip cookie, too.
Di and the librarian converged on Monica wearing nearly identical
looks of unprofessional concern. The girl reached involuntarily toward
Di as the other woman said, in unmistakably maternal tones, "Honey,
it isn't any of my business, but. y'all look like you're gonna pass out.
Looks to me like something just shook you up pretty bad. Why don't
you come back to my office and sit yourself down.”
The woman gave Di a sidelong glance of inquiry. "I'm one of Monica's
teachers; I was waiting for her, " Di explained. "Let me get my things,
and I'll be right with you.”
This is weirder than snake shoes. Why would anyone target a kid like
this for a sorcerous attack? Jesus Cluny Frog, she's not even
high-psi!
Di gathered up her laptop and her notes, stowed them all in her
briefcase with practised efficiency, and followed in the wake of the
librarian and her temporary charge.

The librarian was just as efficient as Di; within two minutes she had
Monica ensconced in a comfortable chair, her feet up and half a glass
of cold water and two aspirin inside her. At that point, she gracefully
bowed out of the picture, telling Di that if they needed anything, she
would be at the front desk.
"What happened?" Di asked quietly.
"I—I almost wrecked the car, " Monica stammered, twisting the paper
cup nervously in her hands.
"How?"
Monica just stared at her, her lower lip quivering, the tears in her eyes
starting to spill over.
Di took a firmer tone of voice. "Monica, there's something wrong—and
you 'almost wrecking the car' is just the smallest part of it. Tell me.
People don't look the way you did when you walked in the door unless
something really horrible has happened to them.”
The paper cup was a shapeless wad, and two tears were tracking down
Monica's cheeks.
Di sighed, and patted her clenched hands. "Monica, when I said 'really
horrible, ' I meant it. From the way you're acting, you'd rather die
than go back outside right now—and I somehow don't have the feeling
that you'd react that way to a simple accident, much less a
near-accident.”
She leaned forward, projecting sympathy as subtly as she could. She
had to be careful around this one; as wired as Monica was, even
though she wasn't a psychic powerhouse like Derek, she'd be much
more sensitive than she usually was. If she picked up on what Di was
doing, after being attacked once tonight by magic, she might assume
the worst, and panic.

"You—" the girl began, then shook her head and scrubbed the back of
her hand across her cheek.
"You can tell me, Monica. I've seen some pretty bizarre and nasty
things in my time.”
"You—no, you won't believe me!" Monica cried—then burst into
hysterical tears.
Di thought about hugging the kid for a split second, and then rejected
the notion. She was pretty much a stranger to this girl. She could try
to convince Monica to trust her, but this was not the time to use
physical contact.
"How do you know I won't believe you?" she asked. "All you know
about me is that I'm a writer. But writers see and hear more strange
stories than you'd ever imagine. I'm always getting people telling me
their life history in the grocery store. If there's one thing I've learned
over the years, it's that the strange and true sniff is a lot odder than
what's in the supermarket tabloids, but it never shows up there;
mostly because it is true and the people it happened to are like
you—they figure that either other folks will think they're crazy, or that
they are crazy.”
There was a tremor of stronger emotion from the girl when she said
that. Di followed up on her advantage.
"This may sound like I'm spitting platitudes at you, but it's been my
experience that the old saying is true; people who think they're nuts
usually aren't. It's the ones who are convinced that they're sane and
the rest of the world isn't that you have to watch out for.”
Monica buried her face in her hands. "What about people who think
they've—seen something?" she replied, her words interrupted by
strangled sobs.
"Well, if you think you've seen something, there's usually a cause. Like

drugs. Some folks are allergic to drugs in odd ways; some prescription
drugs have side effects doctors don't always know about. I have a
friend who hallucinates on penicillin, and another who talks to God
whenever she's given something with caffeine in it.”
Monica peeked out from behind her hand. "You aren't BS-ing me?"
Di shook her head. "Straight up. I could even give you their . numbers
and you could talk to them if you wanted. Have you been taking
anything you don't normally?"
Monica shook her head woefully. "N-no, " she stammered. "Not even
an aspirin until just now.”
"Okay, that shoots that one. I have more. There's the weather angle;
under the right conditions you can get reflections of things that may
be hundreds of feet or even miles away, often very distorted.”
She pretended to think for a moment, waiting for the girl to say
something.
Monica shook her head. "It wasn't anything like that. It wasn't a
reflection.”
She nodded. "It's just as well. I didn't think that would fly; you have to
get a combination of fog and hot and cold spots and pressure changes
to get really convincing fata morgana in the middle of a city, and it's
chilly and damp, but not foggy, tonight. So, there's always the idea
that you were set up. Have you got any enemies at school, or friends
that like to play nasty jokes?" She smiled grimly. "I had that one
played on me. I made the mistake of letting it be known I believed in
ghosts. Some kids in my high school thought they'd haunt my house
for me. Trouble is, even then I knew more angles on faking those
things than a stage magician, and I caught them at it. Then I scared
them— and afterwards, I made sure everybody else at school knew I'd
made fools of them by turning the tables on them.”

Amazing what anger will do for your ability to project. I wonder if
they ever figured out why they ran out of my place screaming at the
tops of their lungs?
Monica gave that one careful consideration. Finally she answered
slowly. "I—don't think so. It would take a real techie to—do what I
saw. The Brains aren't like that at Jenks. I mean, they wouldn't go
after anybody who hadn't gone after them first. I like all the techie
kids, and I think they like me.”
Di leaned back in her chair. Making her think had forced the kid to
calm down. Good. Now for the move. "All right, then. That just leaves
one other possibility. You did see what you thought you saw.”
Monica's lower lip started to quiver, and her eyes brightened with
tears about to spill. Di pointed a warning finger at her. "Hey—that's
enough. You were doing fine a minute ago. I told you, 'I've seen a lot of
bizarre things in my time. Remember what Sherlock Holmes told
Watson: if we've eliminated everything else and all we've got left is the
impossible, then the impossible is the only answer.”
"But-"
Di interrupted her ruthlessly. "All that the word 'impossible' means is
that nobody's been able to prove something yet. Hell, Monica, there
are people in this town convinced that men never walked on the
moon, that it was all faked in a movie studio!"
"But-"
"So why don't you tell me what happened? Maybe I can help.”
"But-"
"I sure know I want to try. " Di let her expression harden a little. "If
there's one thing I can't stand, it's somebody that gets his kicks by
scaring the shit out of people.”

Come on, kiddo. I'm not allowed to stick my nose into your problems
unless you ask me to. And I can't help but wonder if this has
something to do with what Larry thinks is after Derek.
Di held her breath as the girl visibly wavered between mistrust and a
desperate need to confide in someone.
Desperation, and the aura of sympathy and trustworthiness Di was
projecting, won out.
"I—saw—these things, " Monica began, and then the words spilled
from her the way her hysterical tears had a few moments before.
There were a few more of those tears, too, before she was finished.
Di kept a tight hold on her anger, aided in part by bewilderment.
Whoever that sorcerer was, he'd played one of the nastiest little mind
games Di had ever seen pulled on a kid. For an imaginative kid like
Monica, one who knew she had an active imagination, this must have
been a nightmarish experience.
And why Monica? That was the part that made no sense at all. There
was no sign that she understood or recognized any of what had
happened to her. She wasn't even marginally involved in the occult.
Who it was had to be inextricably tied in with that question of "why.”
But "what"? That was no problem.
"Wait here a minute, " she said, as Monica sniffled into a fist-sized
wad of Kleenex from the box on the librarian's desk. The girl started to
say something, but Di was already out the door.
There was something to be said for a lifetime spent in libraries. Di
knew the Dewey decimal system the way most people knew the streets
of their own neighbourhoods. Of course, there were some categories
that held special interest for her…

She came back in that promised minute with a history book, a colonial
history of New England, lavishly illustrated. She was flipping through
the section on witch-hunts as she came through the office door and
shut it behind her, looking for a particular woodcut. Most histories
that covered witch-hunts and trials other than the ones in Salem used
that particular picture.
Sure enough, there it was; good old sanctimonious "Barry-man
Deaton, Witchfinder. " Crude though the picture was, Di always
thought she could tell a lot about the man from it—the self-satisfied,
smug set of his mouth, the cruel enjoyment in his eyes, the stiff spine
showing certain knowledge of the righteousness of his cause.
Of course, she could just be reading into the picture what she knew
already about the man from family tradition.
Idiot never actually caught a single real witch, she thought cynically.
Only poor fools with bad taste in neighbours. Harmony Tregarde
even managed to get the midwives and herb doctors out of Newton
before he could accuse them.
The thing about this picture was that in this one case (as she also
knew from family tradition), for the only time in his career as a
witchfinder, Deaton had caught someone who'd deserved to be
caught.
Not a "witch, " though, or at least not when Hardesty was caught;
Dimwit had caught a magician of another ilk altogether. The
Pennsylvania Dutch would have called Hardesty a Hexen-meister, the
not-altogether-Episcopalian Tregardes of the time had called him a
warlock. That did not mean "male witch, " the way current popular
literature had it, but "oathbreaker. " Hardesty had been both a
sorcerer and the Green Man for another coven, but he had broken the
Prime Law of the Wiccans. Harm none. His first victims (before he
moved to Newton) had been his old associates…
None of that concerned Di at the moment; she was more interested in

the creatures surrounding old "Dimwit Deaton" and his victim.
"Familiars, " the caption called them. Each of them had a little scroll
apparently coming out of an ear or a mouth, each scroll ornately
lettered with some bizarre name or other: "Thrudsnifter, "
"Lemdoodle, "
"Fryestappen.”
I suppose Dimwit made those names up himself; they sound about
like his speed.
She flopped the book down on the desk in front of Monica, and
pointed to the critter crouched down in the far left-hand corner of the
illustration. The only supernatural manifestation Dimwit ever saw in
his life. What a jerk. And he had no idea what it was he had seen.
"Does that look like something you've seen before?" she asked Monica.
The kid's eyes were like saucers. Di wasn't much surprised. The
depiction was incredibly accurate. Dimwit had gotten an eyeful when
he'd come to take Black Hardesty, and he'd made sure to relate the
tale in grand and glorious detail to anyone who'd listen. He'd been
more than happy to spend several days with the author of this
particular treatise on "The Fouls and Unnatural Practices of Witches,
" telling the story several times, with special emphasis on his own
bravery in "facing the demon and conquering it.”
And a five-year-old with a stick in his hand and courage in his heart
could face an imp down. They live on fear, but any show of guts
sends 'em screaming back to Mommy.
It scared the bejesus out of Dimwit, though, and sent him back to
Mommy; it took sixty-two-year-old Glory Fenwick to "disperse the
demon and subdue the heretic. " Poor old Glory-Be-To-God; at least
he was sincere. Good thing Harmony managed to get a psi-bolt
through Hardisty's shield and knock him out before poor old Glory

came storming in there with nothing but a Bible for protection.
Well, nobody ever knew about Deaton chickening out but the
Tregardes and Dimwit, and Glory. Glory was too modest, Harmony
wasn't about to blow his cover, and Dimwit sure wasn't telling.
Gods. What a jerk; what an appropriate way for him to go, too;
getting drunk two days after he talked to the chronicler, falling
down the stairs of the local alehouse, and breaking his stupid neck.
"Come on, " she said finally, "let's get out of here. I'd like a burger, and
we need to talk.”
She picked up her briefcase, and reached across the desk to close the
book. Monica stared at the cover, then looked back up at her.
"That—" she said faintly, "that's what I saw.”
"I know, " Di replied. "I'm hungry. Let's get going.”
She took Monica's wrist and tugged her to her feet. The girl followed
her obediently out to the car—
—which, not so incidentally, was very heavily shielded. Not a bad
notion at the moment.
There was a burger joint less than a block away; while the kid sat in
stunned silence on the passenger's side Di ordered food for both of
them from the drive-through window and drove them back to the
library parking lot.
"French fries and chocolate, " she told Monica, who was still staring at
nothing. "I don't have a lot of vices anymore, but I to keeping those
two. I love french fries. Combine them with a chocolate shake, and I'm
a contented woman. " She handed Monica the paper bag full of burger,
fries, and Coke.
"That thing in the picture—" Monica stammered, staring at the bag in

her hands as if she'd never seen anything like it before. "That
thing—that was what I saw. Exactly what I saw.”
"Well, that's not too surprising, all things considered, " Di replied,
examining the burger to make sure nobody'd put any mayo on it.
Tulsans seemed to put mayo on everything, the way Midwesterners
put ketchup on everything. "If you've done something to piss a
sorcerer off, he's going to use the smallest guns he has on you, and
those little guys are barely popguns. They make a really good burger
here in Tulsa, have you noticed that?"
She was keeping her tone deliberately light. After just proving to the
kid that she'd been attacked by a supernatural agency, it would be a
good idea to remind her that the mundane world of hamburger joints
was still the greater part of her life. There was absolutely no use in
letting the girl know how worried Di really was. It wouldn't do Monica
any good.
"How can you sit there and eat a hamburger and talk about— things
like that monster?" Monica cried, clenching her hands on the paper
sack.
"Really easy, " Di replied matter-of-factly. "First, I'm hungry. Second,
I've seen those things before, and they're small potatoes. Thirdly, I'm
not just a romance writer, I'm also a practising witch.”
Monica's eyes got big again, and she started to wriggle away; she was
stopped by the car door. The locks were all controlled from Di's side.
That was one of the police modifications that Mark had left on; pretty
useful at a time like this.
Di put her hamburger down and sighed dramatically. "Jesus Cluny
Frog, Monica, do I look like one of the bad guys to you? I thought you
had a little more sense than these Oklahoma hicks. 'Witch' is just a
religion, okay? No baby-sacrificing, no Black Masses, no sending imps
out to scare the dog-snot out of kids, trying to make them think
they're crazy. We don't do things like that. Our number-one law is

'Have fun in this lifetime, but don't hurt anybody. '“
Nice little paraphrase of "An it harm none, do as ye will, " if I do say
so myself.
She deliberately picked up her burger and took another bite. Monica
stopped trying to find the door lock.
"But if you didn't—"
"Who did?" She stirred the shake on the dashboard with her straw. "I
don't know. I'm psychic—you don't have to be, to be a witch, but a lot
of us are. I picked up on the fact that something was going on just
before you came in, but I couldn't tell who or what, and I didn't know
you were the target until you came in. " She met Monica's eyes; they
weren't quite so big anymore. "I'm pretty good, kiddo, but I'm not as
good as I'd like. You feeling better?"
Monica licked her lips nervously. "I don't know, " she admitted. "I
don't understand what's happening…”
"Neither do I, " Di said bluntly. "I came here to teach creative writing
and I find myself in the middle of a magical attack. I promise you, you
aren't crazy, what you saw was real. Those critters really couldn't have
hurt you, no matter how impressive they looked; they're all bluff. The
worst they could have done was give you a few bruises. If you'd yelled
at them, they'd have split. Remember that if they show up again. What
worries me is that this means that somebody in this town is practising
traditional sorcery, and that person wants you to be upset. I don't
know why. You're not involved in the occult; I could tell if you were.
So this is a very bizarre situation. I would like to help you, if you'll let
me.”
The kid straightened up. "How do I know I can trust you?" she asked.
Good girl. Keep that skepticism; that's sound sense if there's
somebody with a grudge on gunning for you. "You don't, " she

replied. "You don't know me—hell, you never even had any hint of
trouble before I showed up in town. All you can go by—if you decide to
trust me—is who my friends are.”
She fished in her purse and hauled out her wallet. "Look here, " she
said, flipping it open and holding it under the light from the
parking-lot lamp. In the first pocket was the photo-ID that the New
Haven police had given her, with "special investigator" printed in red
beside the picture.
"This could be a fake, " Di said. "It isn't, but I'll be happy to drive over
to the nearest cop shop and prove it. I've worked for the New Haven
cops a bunch of times—here's my permit to carry a concealed weapon
in Connecticut. Here's another one for Texas; last year I did some
work down in Dallas. This car is something I was able to get because
of some friends down there. It used to be a high-speed police car—"
She flipped the switch Mark had hidden under the dash, and the
police scanner came on with a squawk and a crackle of static. "If you
know anything about police scanners, you'll know it's not legal to have
them in your car. Mark's making sure I get the right permissions to
keep this one. " She turned it off again.
Monica bit her lip; she still didn't look quite convinced, although she
did look as though she wanted to be convinced.
"You need something closer to home? Derek's dad and I have been
real good friends since we were in college together, and his mom and I
go back almost that far. They both know what I am—in fact, they used
to help me a little. So, I've got friends in two different police
departments, and some solid citizens right here in Tulsa. Can you
trust somebody with friends like that?"
Monica nodded, slowly but not reluctantly.
"Great. You want me to help you?"

"Yes, " Monica said. "Please. With the writing too—"
Di laughed. "Right on! Okay, kiddo, start in on that hamburger, and
while you're eating, take it from the top. You were over on that side
street, and it was dark. Tell me everything that you can remember,
and I mean everything—”
—
Derek finished reading Alan's assigned story fragment, and put the
last page down on the desk. He restacked the papers neatly, then
swivelled his desk chair around to face his friend, handing them back
to him.
"So, " Alan said, fidgeting a little in Derek's armchair. "What do you
think?"
"I think, " Derek replied, shaking his head sadly, "that you'd better
stick with what you know, like computers. It's pretty lame, Al. Pretty
lame.”
Alan sighed. "That's what I was afraid of.”
Ms. Greeley had two sessions of the Honours class this year, one in the
morning, one in the afternoon. Alan was in the afternoon session;
they'd tried to get in the same class, but it hadn't worked out.
Although Alan was primarily a techie whiz— he'd told Derek that he
identified strongly with the Val Kilmer part in Real Genius—he
generally breezed through all his classes. And Derek knew he'd figured
on doing the same with this one.
He'd done just fine as long as they were analysing someone else's
work—but he'd lost it as soon as they started this creative stuff.
The one-page argument scene had been bad enough, but now Ms.
Tregarde had upped the ante.

Derek had been expecting a totally new assignment. He'd been a little
surprised by what Di had told the class.
"Okay, " she'd said, after all the pages were read aloud and picked
over. "Now we're going to do what a professional writer would do with
that scene. We're going to pretend that this is the climax of a story or
even a book. That means that you're going to revise and expand on
what you wrote.”
She'd turned to the blackboard and begun making a list. "I want a
lead-in to the argument; how the fight starts in the first place, maybe
even how the two protagonists meet before the fight. If you haven't got
a root cause of the fight, I want that in there, too. Lastly, I want a
conclusion to the fight.”
"How long?" Jennifer wanted to know.
"Minimum of three pages, maximum of ten. Oh, and some of you were
swapping viewpoint even in the one-pager; that means you kept
getting inside both protagonists' heads so that the reader could see
what both of them were thinking at all times. Don't do that; there's a
way to handle it, but you're not ready for that yet. Pick your viewpoint
character and stay with him—the boy or the girl, I don't care which.
Remember you can only show what's in that character's head; your
reader will have to guess what's going on in the other character's head
from the way you describe his or her expressions. Got that?"
Well, Derek had gotten that all right, but it sure didn't look like Alan
had. His two characters just walked up to each other and started
fighting for no apparent reason, then shook hands and walked off, also
for no apparent reason. And the fight, predictably enough, was about
the girl claiming the boy had stood her up.
"It's a yawners, Al, " Derek said honestly. "Like, they're bored actors in
a bad existential play; they're just walking on, reciting lines they don't
understand and don't care about, and walking off. It was bad before,
but it's worse now.”

Alan sprawled across the arms of the overstuffed beige chair, and
picked at his thumbnail glumly. "Yeah. Man, I don't know what I'm
gonna do about this quarter, this 'creative' shit. " He leaned back and
stared at the ceiling. "I'm acing everything else. I gotta ace this; I
gotta get into MIT or Cal Tech or Rose Poly—I can't do that unless I
ace everything. What am I gonna do?"
"Hey, " Derek objected, "I don't know what you're so worried about.
It's not like you're going to flunk out. Di gave us a B to start with, and
she said she wasn't going to grade anybody down unless they didn't
try—"
"But a B just isn't good enough, " Alan insisted stubbornly. "And I
don't want her giving me an A just 'cause she feels sorry for the poor
computer nerd.”
Derek threw his hands up, conceding defeat. "Okay, okay, have it your
way.”
"So what am I gonna do? You gotta help me, man. You're doing okay
at this stuff—what am I doing wrong?"
Derek thought about the problem for a minute. "Look, let's take this
thing from the top. Remember what Di said? About how if something
doesn't work, she goes back and changes things until it does?"
"Yeah, " Alan replied. "So?"
"So this isn't working for you. Try something else, from scratch. Write
what you know. Like when Tracy came after you in the hall and just
about took your ass off for what you did to her computer in lab? Di
said an argument—she didn't say about what. You're just assuming
that since she's a romance writer, it has to be like what she does.”
"Isn't that, like, cheating?" Alan said doubtfully. "I mean, that stuff
with Tracy really happened.”

Derek shrugged. "I don't see how it could be cheating. I dunno about
your class, but most of the guys in mine pretty much rewrote the last
breakup fight they had.”
"Good point. " Alan mulled it over for a while. "Real good point. Okay,
I'll do it. Can I leave out the part where Tracy dumped her Coke down
my pants?"
"Hey, it's creative, right?" Derek grinned. "Make it come out any damn
way you want to. Make the Tracy character come out looking like a
fool. Make her start the fight 'cause she really wants to screw your
brains out and can't think of any other way to get at you. Whatever.”
Alan's answering grin was bright enough to light up the whole room.
"Yeah, " he said, in a contented sigh. "Yeah. Hey, can I see yours?"
"Sure, I printed it before you came over. " Derek took the little stack of
paper off the printer. "Haven't even had a chance to strip it.”
"That's okay. " Alan left the papers in their virgin, fanfold state, and
began flipping through them. Derek was rather pleased with his
version of the assignment. It started out calmly enough, with his two
characters meeting in the hall between classes—but then the girl
started cross-examining the guy, and making like the Spanish
Inquisition when he didn't give her immediate answers. Before long
the guy had taken about all he was willing to, and the last two pages
was him getting pretty hot about how possessive his girl had been
getting. It ended with him telling her he'd had just about enough, and
leaving her open-mouthed and shocked speechless in the middle of
the hallway when the bell rang.
"A little more of Art replicates Life, huh?" Alan said archly, as he
turned over the last page.
"Say what?" Derek said, startled by his response.
"Well, this shit about Danny here being Marcia's boy-toy— strikes me

like that's awful close to the way Fay treats you, ol' buddy.”
"What would you know about it?" Derek retorted; stung, but
determined not to let Alan know.
"I've got eyes, Derek. I've got ears. She does some pretty cold things to
you, and you just sit there like a dog and take it. " Alan put the stack of
paper down on the coffee table, and swung his legs back down to the
floor. "I'll tell you, man, you could do a lot worse than what old Dan
here did. Tell the bitch off. Give her a little hell right back the next
time she gives it to you.”
Derek found himself in the uncomfortable position of having nothing
he could say. If he said Alan was right, he'd look like a wimp. If he said
Alan was full of shit, he'd be lying through his teeth. If he told Alan it
wasn't any of his business and to butt out, he might lose the last of his
old friends.
Maybe if I just tell him I'm in love with Fay…
"I suppose, " Alan said sarcastically at that very moment, "that you're
going to try and tell me that it doesn't matter because you're in love.”
What actually jumped into his head at the moment Alan said that
wasn't Fay, but Monica. How sweet she was, how gutsy, standing right
up and not letting any of the moneyed kids shove her around.
It's too bad I didn't meet her before I started going with Fay. I'd
probably be going with her instead…
But he couldn't let Alan sit there and get away with that last remark.
"A lot you know, " he retorted, throttling down his feelings of guilt.
"Half the time, I don't think you even know-women exist! If they had
hard drives or monitors, maybe. As it is, there's no way you could
relate to a guy with normal hassles—"

Alan arched an eyebrow. "Yeah, well, maybe you haven't been paying
too much attention to what I've been up to lately. It doesn't take an
engineer to figure out female couplers. And I never forget I'm the one
with the hard drive.”
Oh, you poser—"Oh, yeah, right, " Derek retorted. "Sure. And when
have you ever been with a girl? Have you ever been with a girl? Third
base? Home plate? All the way?"
"Maybe, " Alan replied, looking unreasonably smug. "At" least I've got
a girl that thinks with something besides her—"
"Hey—" Derek said warningly.
Alan shrugged. "Have it your way. But I've got a chick with more than
two brain cells."
"Oh yeah?" Derek replied, suspicion heavy in his voice. "So who is it?"
"Nobody you know. Now that you're flying with Fay's crowd, you don't
notice lesser mortals much. " Then Alan grinned, and laced his hands
behind his head, leaning back in the armchair. "Your loss, old buddy.
She's a hot little number.”
"So who is she?" Derek persisted.
"She's in my math class, " Alan taunted, "which should tell you
something about her brains.”
"So who is she?"
Alan wouldn't say, which just left him frustrated and annoyed when
his old friend left to rewrite his homework.
And it didn't help matters when he called Fay, and she proceeded to
get on his case for doing homework with Alan instead of coming over
to her place.

Shit, he thought in disgust—at himself, at Fay, at Alan, at the whole
damn world. He held the receiver a couple of inches away from his ear
and let her rant on until she wound down.
Finally she seemed to sense he was on the verge of finding an excuse
to hang up, and her voice softened. She even apologized.
"I'm sorry, lover, I know how your dad is. I guess I'm just jealous of
everything that takes you away from me, " she cooed, the honeyed
words pouring over his bruised ego and taking the sting out of Alan's
taunts. "And it's really nice of you to help Alan out. You know, I think
it's real nice of you to keep him around. Somebody ought to find him a
social life, or he's going to wind up chained in some cubicle someplace,
drooling over computer parts.”
Yeah, he thought, basking in the warm glow she was casting over him.
Yeah, what does Alan know, anyway? He probably wrote this chick
up on his micro.
But… I wish we didn't have to go through this every time I call. If I'd
been calling Monica, she wouldn't have started out by ragging on
me…
CHAPTER SEVEN
Diana closed her eyes for a moment, and sent a tentative probe
around the house. Not a full probe; she wasn't going to expose herself
like that, not even in friendly territory. Nor did she take her shields
down. Not after last night.
She touched three presences in the building besides herself.
Immediately below her, which meant in his office, was Larry, easily
identified by virtue of long familiarity. Two more together, one heavily
shielded—Derek—one very bright, simple, and young. A stranger,
about Derek's age.
Derek must have a friend over again. Probably Alan; the poor boy is

having some real problems with phase three of the argument
assignment. Good. That'll keep him occupied. I need to talk to Larry,
and I don't want to be interrupted.
She slipped out of her room, moving like an assassin; closed the door
of the guest room behind her without a sound. Every time she'd tried
to closet herself with Larry, the kid had found some reason to be there
or to interrupt. Not this time; it was mildly funny before, but not now,
not when she figured she needed to have a serious talk with his dad.
I'm not sure yet what he thinks we're up to, but I may be able to take
a good guess…
Thank the gods for thick, expensive carpeting; that made it a lot easier
to move quietly.
The bitch is that the kid's room is right at the head of the stairs. If he
comes out at the wrong moment, I've got no reason for being out in
the hall. If I say something like that I'm hungry, he'll go all helpful
and follow me.
She froze for a moment, right outside Derek's door. She could hear
Derek's voice, and that of his friend, fairly clearly. They were talking
about their homework assignment. Her own name had just come up in
the conversation. They were talking about how different her style was
from Ann's. It seemed to surprise them that Ann was backing
her—giving advice, but not direct help, nor offering any sympathy for
the perplexed who couldn't figure out what combination of gimmicks
would glean them an A. Alan in particular was looking for
gimmicks—well, it worked in other classes…
Lord and Lady—they're not going to come pounding on my door
looking for help with their work, are they? I don't even have the
excuse of looking for the bathroom, not with the Tulsa Water Festival
attached to my room.
But Derek was well trained; the idea evidently didn't even occur to

him. Di was a guest, and besides, she was (supposedly) working. You
didn't disturb guests in the Kestrel household; you especially didn't
disturb working guests.
She slipped down the staircase as quickly as she could, and headed
down the back hallway to Larry's office.
She found the door closed; evidently he didn't want to be disturbed,
either. Too bad. She placed her palm lightly against the door and sent
out the probe again, just to be sure.
Nobody home but Larry. Good.
She opened the door silently, slipped inside, and closed it behind her
just as silently. She waited for a moment with her back against the
wood of the door, letting her eyes adjust to the darkened room.
The track lighting was dimmed way down. The only bright
illumination was from the light-table; Larry was bent over it with his
back to her, hard at work, the warm orange of his aura showing her
that he was concentrating.
In that case, better not startle him. I'd hate to ruin several hours'
worth of work by making him jump. She reached out with a mental
"hand" and gently stroked the edge of his shields.
Funny; he still has the habits I drove into him, even though Tulsa is
apparently a null zone, and he's inside his own house shields. She
examined the edges of his shielding critically; he might need those
habits, now. The edges were a little ragged, a bit uneven; heavier
around the head, hands, and heart, weak in the back and around the
feet. A little sloppy, but no holes. Good.
When his aura began to lighten to yellow, indicating that he'd noticed
her subconsciously, she tapped lightly on the doorframe.
He looked up, squinting, waiting for his eyes to adjust to the difference

between the brightness of the light-table and the dimmer light of the
rest of the room. In a few moments, his expression changed from
minor irritation at being interrupted to surprise and concern.
Evidently I look like a bearer of bad tidings.
He reached for the left-hand side of the light-table and snapped the
switch off. Di blinked; the loss of light was as startling to her eyes as
the sudden flood of it would have been if he'd snapped a bright light
on.
With a second smooth motion, he reached for a remote control on the
table, and dialled the rest of the lights back up to a comfortable level.
Not bright, but bright enough to see everything without straining.
"What's up?" he asked quietly.
She made certain that the door was closed. "I’ve been trying to get you
alone ever since last night, " she told him, "and your offspring hasn't
been cooperating.”
He grinned. "Why, Di, I'm a married man—" Then, when her
expression didn't lighten, he sobered again quickly. "Not funny?"
"Not relevant. " She crossed to his corner of the office and helped
herself to a chair. "Got a surprise for you. Tulsa may be a null zone,
but it isn't empty. I got brushed by some high-level activity last night.
Maybe related to Derek, maybe not; definitely from someone
experienced. I wanted to tell you last night, but you were working
late.”
"What?" he asked quickly.
"Sorcery. Good old-fashioned High Magick. " If the situation had been
a bit less serious, she'd have laughed at his expression of flat-footed
surprise. "Somebody tried to throw a good scare into one of the kids
from the school—the one I was meeting at the library. Sent a couple of

hups to shake her up, make her think she was hallucinating or
something.”
She leaned back into the embrace of the chair, and found herself
surrounded by the aroma of old leather. Larry, bless him, didn't waste
any time trying to contradict her; if she said the girl had been attacked
by imps, so be it, he accepted it.
He chewed on his bottom lip, his eyes shadowed with thought.
Now I know where Derek gets that habit. Or maybe it's the other
way around; Larry didn't used to do that.
"Based on the experiences I had when I was working with you, " he
said finally, "if the scare tactics don't work, the sorcerer usually ups
the ante.”
She "fired" her finger at him. "Bull's-eye. Give that man a prize.”
He snorted. "Sorcerers and high-powered executives have a lot in
common. Arrogance, belief in their own infallibility, and a tendency to
run right over anything and anyone in their way.”
She stretched, and shifted sideways a little. "I’ve got a load of
questions that we need to find answers to.”
Larry, efficient as always, grabbed a legal pad and pencil. "Fire away, "
he said.
She'd already organized her thoughts; she knew how he worked. He'd
always wanted things in order, organized and succinct. The trait had
made him an asset both to the peace movement and the Spook Squad,
both of which seemed to operate on the Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle. "One, who is the sorcerer? Two, why stay silent so long as to
make everyone think there's nobody operating here? Three, why break
silence now? Four, why target this kid? What's so special about her? I
sure didn't pick up anything remarkable about her. Derek's high-psi;

she's only moderately psychic.”
"Good points, all of them, " Larry agreed, printing the questions
neatly. "By all rights there's no way a teenybopper could have done
something to collect an enemy like that. The ability to conjure imps,
target them, and control them at a distance suggests a lot of other
abilities I'd rather not think about. My only suggestion is that the kid's
in the way of something. Money makes a pretty good motive, and
there's a lot of money in this area. Any chance she's an heiress?"
He looked up, pencil poised.
She shook her head, little wisps of hair coming loose from the knot at
the nape of her neck. "No. Not poor, by any means, but not anywhere
near the league of most of the kids in Jenks.”
Larry sighed regretfully. "So much for that theory. Okay, I'll add my
questions to the ones you came up with. This sorcerer seems to be
targeting one kid—any chance the same guy is after my kid? What do
the two kids have in common that could make them both targets?"
"Not much, " she said. "I’ve been thinking about that myself. High-psi,
both very bright, they both go to Jenks, they're both in the same
English class. Ann Greeley's, the Honours class I'm teaching. That's it,
so far as I can tell.”
He pondered that a moment, then shook his head. "The first probable
that occurs to me is their English teacher, and I don't think it'll wash.
I can't picture Ann Greeley as a sorcerer. Not ruthless enough.”
"Unless she's putting on a good act and she's skilled enough to hide
what she is from me—no, I agree. " It was Di's turn to sigh. "I'm in the
same room with her for two hours every day, and she doesn't know
what I am. If she was ever going to work on the kids, it would be right
then, when they're concentrating on something else and under her
thumb. Pity, that would have wrapped things up very neatly. But even
if it was Ann, what would her motive be?"

"Search me. " He shrugged. "The only motive I can think of would be
that the kids are driving her loony, and if that were the case I think
both of us would have picked it up. What about it being one of the
other kids?"
Di shook her head emphatically. "Not bloody likely; it takes power
and experience to control an imp. No kid could do it, however
precocious. My best guess would be that the motive ties in with the
targets being high-psi kids. Not a lot of mem in Jenks so far as I can
tell. Last question: Why are we in a null zone? Is that tied in? My
sources couldn't tell me.”
Larry wrote that down. "The more I see, the older I get, the more I'm
convinced that there are no coincidences, " he stated flatly.
She nodded, the loose ends of hair tickling her temples. "Not when
magic and those who use it are involved.”
"Right. " He shoved the pad away and leaned back into his chair. "I
may have an answer to your next-to-last question, if my hearsay has
any grain of truth in it. According to at least a dozen people I’ve talked
to over the years, Indian legend, most notably Cherokee, says that
there's a goddess buried under what they call 'old Tulsa'; that's the
city limits as of about the nineteen-twenties or so. They say that's why
that area of Tulsa never gets hit by tornadoes.”
Jesus Cluny Frog. Not another demideity… I had more than enough
of that in Texas. "Good or bad goddess?" she asked resignedly.
Somewhat to her surprise, Larry didn't have an answer. "I don't know,
" he said, shrugging. "I haven't been able to get anyone to tell me.
Could be it depends on which tribe you belong to.”
"Yeah, I’ve run across that before. Like if you're an Aztec, Quetzalcoatl
isn't the good guy he is if you're pre-Aztec. " She tucked her hair back
behind her ears absently. "Okay, I'll buy that, just for the sake of the
hypothesis. Is she dead, or asleep?"

"Again, no consensus, " he replied. "I’ve got a logical guess, though.”
She yawned, though hardly from boredom; it had been a long two
days. "Say on.”
"Since the legends say that the reason tornadoes don't hit the ground
around here is that even the sky gods don't want to wake her up, I'd
say that the logical deduction is that she's sleeping. " He grinned. "She
sounds just like somebody I know, a real bitch before she gets her first
cup of coffee.”
She made a face at him. "Thanks a bunch.”
He contrived to look innocent. "Did I name names? If the foo shits…
Anyway, the legends say that nobody, nohow, wants to wake her up,
so they all cooperate to very carefully steer storms around her.
Interesting 'coincidence, ' if you like though. The null area quits at just
about the same place as the tornado-free zone. The 'old Tulsa' border.”
She frowned. "So this goddess—or whatever—has a high probability of
being the cause of both the null area and the no-tornado area.”
"Looks that way. I can tell you something else, " Larry continued. "I
checked, and there's never been a tornado touchdown within those
bounds in all the time that there's been record-keeping in the area. I'm
talking about going all the way back in the newspaper and military
records as well.”
"Interesting… " She played with a strand of hair, twisting it around her
finger while she thought. "I think I'm going to have to stick my neck
out. I think I'm going to have to check as deep as I can in this
area—find out if I can see below the null and figure out if there's
anything more involved than just a psychic anomaly, or a critical mass
of Fundamentalists. Now, the big question, Cosmic. Mind if I do that
here?"
Larry shook his head after a moment of thought. "No reason why you

shouldn't, so far as I know. You know what you're doing, you won't
breach the house shields, and I trust you. I'll ask you a big question:
What's the odds of this null stuff being tied in with the attack on the
girl and the thing after Derek?"
Too many red herrings. "I don't even want to hazard a guess, " she
said truthfully. "There's no way of telling. What I tracked was a real
sorcerer. You don't know what's after Derek. The Indians as a whole
weren't much into sorcery, but there were individual exceptions to
that. Besides that, a lot of colonial sorcerers picked up on their lore, so
the American version of sorcery has a lot of commonalities with
Amerind magic.”
"You're so helpful.”
She made a face. "I'm truthful. And this is not to say that it couldn't be
something else entirely. A lot of even the ultra-Christian Spiritualists
picked up on Indian medicine, or at least the appearance of having
something to do with Indian medicine. Ever go back in the old
records? An amazing number of the 'spirit guides' the old crowd used
to call on were supposedly Amerind. All chiefs, too, or shamans. It
runs to about eighty percent.”
"What about the rest?"
"Divided about equally between Wise Buddhist philosophers—which
gives you an idea of how much most of them knew about
Buddhism—and Druids.”
"Which gives me an idea of how much any of them knew about
Druidic stuff. " He half smiled. "Okay, what about this goddess,
whatever she is, being the thing that's tapped onto D-"
The door opened, without anyone knocking on it first. Both of them
jumped and turned toward the door.
Derek blinked at them suspiciously.

Speak of the devil. If I look as guilty as he does, Derek is going to be
damn sure that we're up to something.
"Alan's going home now, " Derek said, eyeing both of them dubiously.
"Do you mind if I follow him and hang out at his place for a while?"
Di had no problem picking up what was bothering nun. If it hadn't
been for his shields, the kid would have been projecting so hard Fred
in Kansas City would have "heard" him. He figures Larry and I are
either in the midst of an affair or about to start one. With Miri gone
he's got me pegged for the Old Flame Returns. And the boy is not
happy about this. I can't say as I blame him. I'll bet the divorce stats
for this area are phenomenal. I'll bet the stats on philandering are
even more impressive.
"That's fine, Derek, " Larry replied. Di could tell he was trying to hide
his irritation. To her eyes, at least, he was unsuccessful.
He hasn't figured out what his kid is thinking, she suddenly realized.
He's so used to thinking of us as working partners— and me as
essentially neuter, despite the teasing—that he can't imagine anyone
else thinking otherwise.
"Well, I guess—I guess I'd better get going. " Derek shuffled back and
forth a little; not wanting to leave them alone behind a closed door,
but unable to think of a reason that would allow him to remain.
"Fine, " Larry sighed. "That's fine. And Derek—knock next time, okay?
You have better manners than that.”
"Okay, " the kid said unhappily.
He closed the door slowly. Di waited until she could "feel" his presence
moving down the hall before continuing.
Larry and me. No thanks. Not my type, Derek, trust me. If I didn't
have André—Mark Valdez, maybe, but not anyone else who was ever

on the Squad. It's not a good idea to mix business and pleasure,
especially this kind of business.
"Whatever is on to Derek, " she said, continuing the conversation as if
Derek hadn't interrupted it, "is not leaving psychic fingerprints. That
means it hasn't done more than try to act around him; it hasn't
actually touched him yet. It could be the sorcerer, it could be this
power native to Tulsa, whatever it is. It could be a third entity,
something entirely different. It is just barely possible that we have
three different things acting here-one after Derek, one after Monica
Carlin, and the power that's been here all along. I'm not counting that
out.”
"It could also be that all three, or any two of me three, are acting
together, " Larry reminded her. "I wouldn't count that out, either.”
"I'm not. " She wedged her elbow against the back of her chair and
leaned her head against her hand. "Basically, I decided to tell you
what I'd gotten so far, and warn you that I need to do some serious
probing of the area. New territory, love. I need some maps. I also need
to put a telltale on both kids, so that if anything comes after them, I'll
have a chance to protect them. I’ve already got Monica's permission.
I'd rather not ask Derek since you don't want him involved, but since
he's a minor, your permission will do.”
"All right. " Larry grimaced. "If dial's what you have to do, then that's
what you have to do. Are you going to need my help on any of this?"
"Eventually.”
I wonder if I should tell him just what it is that his only-begotten
thinks that Daddy and the Dragon Lady are up to. The kid could
make things awfully difficult for Di, especially if she, or she and Larry,
had to do anything of a serious magical nature. This attempt at
chaperoning them for instance—
No, she decided reluctantly. No, I don't think it will help. If Larry

comes down on Derek like a load of rocks, it'll make him go
uncommunicative. If he tries to give him the "there there, baby,
everything's okay" routine without being specific, Derek will resent
it, and figure we have to be up to something. On top of that, Larry
won't be able to tell the kid how he figured out what Derek's
thinking. It's pretty obvious that Larry doesn't want to tell Derek the
truth about me or what we're really up to, and anything less than the
truth will be an evasion Derek will recognize as such. And if
anything is going to be the wrong move with Derek, it would be
evasion or outright lying.
In spite of everything, she had to grin at the sour expression Larry was
wearing. He had never much liked having a psychic gift; he'd only
used it because people needed it. She figured he'd been rather pleased
to discover how null the Tulsa area was.
"I think you ought to seriously consider giving Derek lessons, " she
said slowly. "The shields you have on him are all right—but what if
something busts through them? You can't be there all the time. And
eventually he's going to leave the nest, KK. He's got the Gift—"
"But he's not comfortable with it, " Larry replied quickly. "I know, I
know—in theory I agree with you. But not now. Not while he still has
unbalanced hormones and he might be tempted to use what he's got.
And not while Miri's half the world away.”
She shook her head, but only replied, "He's your kid. I think you're
making a mistake, but he is your kid, not mine. Now about what I plan
to do—"
"Ritual, or what?" he said finally.
Her grin widened a little. Besides being reluctant to use his powers,
the Larry she knew had been very uncomfortable with ritual of all
kinds, from Catholic mass to her own. In fact, her Wiccan magics were
among the few rituals he found barely tolerable, and that, she
suspected, was because they were considerably cut down from the

originals that Granny had taught her. She preferred to travel light,
arcanely as well as otherwise.
"Or what, " she replied. "Pretty basic stuff. It's just mat I'm going to
have to go real deep, and real far, and that makes it a bit more
dangerous. How's your Earth magic these days? If there's such a thing
as 'easy' in this business, it'll be tracing the sorcery. Assuming there's
traces to read—if the sorcerer has cleaned up after himself, I'll be on a
cold trail. The tricky part is going to be reading this goddess. I don't
know what it is, and I'm going to be very careful. If the business about
not wanting her awakened is true, there's probably a damned good
reason, and I don't want to be the one to find it out.”
Larry growled a little. "Caught me, didn't you?"
"Huh?" she replied, startled.
"I am still doing a little magic now and then, and it's all Earth magic.
That's why I'm such a good architect, and why I’ve got the rep I do.
My buildings all fit their surroundings, and I make sure nobody pulls a
fast one while they're going up. I’ve caught more than a few
subcontractors trying to skimp on me, and weakening the building in
the process.”
"Oh really?" She gave him a wide-eyed look of respect. "That's one
application I never thought of. Good thinking, Cosmic.”
He shrugged uncomfortably.
"So—since you're still sharp in that department, let's figure out when
it's going to be safest to do this—"
Sometime when Derek is off with his friends again. Safe from
interference from outside—and from your nervous and ever-vigilant
kid, old friend.
—

Fay stretched luxuriously, smoothed down her silk negligee, and
sipped at her fresh-brewed gourmet coffee. She had decided on a
leisurely breakfast in bed this morning, since she wouldn't be going in
to school. Across the room from her, the Servant was on the telephone
to the principal, making excuses.
"—well, Dr. Powell told us last night that her mother started asking for
her. He thinks that she really should come out to Vinita now, before
Rowena moves out of this phase or slides back to the old one. " Aunt
Emily's face was an absolute blank; unnerving when you heard the
whining anxiety in her voice.
Fay nibbled a croissant, hot and dripping with butter.
"Yes, sir, he thinks it should be today. " The Servant sounded
completely sincere and entirely human. The performance was truly a
marvel.
If I do say so myself.
"Yes, sir, she's getting ready to go right now, but I can put her on.
She's very anxious to see her poor mother.”
Fay finished the last bite of croissant, and licked the butter from her
fingers. Then she put her coffee cup down on the breakfast tray with a
sigh of regret, and picked up the radio extension.
Now, let's make this convincing. "Mr. Daniels?" she said, pitching her
voice a little higher, so that it sounded strained and anxious. "I'm
really awfully sorry about missing a day of class like this, but Dr.
Powell was, like, really insistent. He said if I came out right away, it
might make Momma a lot better—and if I didn't it might"—she broke
her voice a little, in a convincing imitation of a suppressed sob—"it
might make her a lot worse.”
She heard Roger Daniels, the principal of Jenks High, clear his throat
awkwardly. She'd just put him on the spot, in an indefensible position.

The best he could manage now would be some appropriate posturing.
"I realize this is very important, Fay, but you've been missing a lot of
classes this year.”
And last year, and the year before that, you old fool. ' 'I know, Mr.
Daniels, " she replied, pitching her voice a tiny bit higher and adding a
breathy quality to it. "I really do know. But I've been sick an awful lot.
Every time Momma gets worse, I get these, like, migraines. It gets so
bad sometimes I, like, throw up.”
And I've been very careful that nobody credible ever caught me at
playing hooky, Roger. I've been careful that no one has caught me at
anything the teachers or you would really disapprove of. And I've
been oh-so-repentant whenever someone tagged me with so much as
a minor slip, like not doing homework or skipping a test.
"I know that, Fay. For the most part you're a model student, a credit
to Jenks. But all these absences aren't doing much for your grades. "
She could hear him leafing through papers; probably checking her
records.
If one quarter of what I've done the last three years showed up in
those records, she thought with a little smile and a repressed giggle,
I'd have been turned over to the juvenile courts by now.
"Frankly, Fay, " he continued, "I'm rather amazed that UO accepted
you. They don't usually accept anyone with grades mis low.”
You'd be amazed what a quarter-mil grant would make them
swallow. They'd have taken me with an IQ of sixty.
"I know, sir, " she said, speaking so low that she was a short step away
from whispering. "Believe me, I really appreciate it. They talked to Dr.
Powell, and he explained everything, and I'm really not going into a
terribly hard course, anyway.”
Crocheting and Creative Swimming. Which is exactly what you, you

old fool, think that all girls should do. You really never have
approved of higher education for women. You think we should all
become wifies and mommies right out of high school. You aren't
fooled, are you? You know this is just a smoke screen so I can catch a
husband, about like half the other little tarts in my class.
"I can understand that, " he said paternally. "And I'm sure they do too.
and I'm sure that once the excitement of senior year is behind you,
you'll settle down.”
"And once Momma is well—" she prompted, to keep him reminded of
why she needed this excused absence.
"I hope she'll be recovering very soon, " he said, sounding sincere.
"Well, I'll write this in as an excused absence, Fay. But please, do try
and keep these to a minimum for the rest of the year, will you? There
isn't that much of it left.”
"Oh thank you, sir, " she bubbled, trying not to laugh at the
transparent old goat. "Thank you so much! I really can't tell you how
grateful I am—"
"That's quite all right, Fay, " he said hastily. "Now if you're going to
reach Vinita before noon, I expect you'd better get on your way. Don't
forget to bring me a note from Dr. Powell.”
"Yes, sir, I will, " she said. "I won't forget. Thank you, sir. Good-bye,
sir.”
She hung up. "And fuck you very much, sir, " she said mockingly to the
handset as she put it down on the tray.
The coffee was cold, though, and so were the croissants. She surveyed
the remains of her breakfast with disapproval. "Idiot kept me talking
longer than I intended, " she said, half to the Servant, half to herself.
She looked up; the Servant was still where it was supposed to be,
perched on the edge of the couch across from her bed.

"Take this away, and bring me a fresh cup of coffee, " she ordered. "I
suppose I'd better get ready. When is the appointment?"
"One o'clock, " the Servant replied, picking up the tray so that Fay
could slide out of the king-sized bed. "You have plenty of time.”
"Good. " Fay pulled the straps of her negligee off her shoulders and let
the garment fall to the carpet. She strolled nude into the bathroom,
thinking about a nice hot shower with sensual anticipation.
And the only flaw of this entire day is that I couldn't convince Derek
to come over last night. The little ninny really is taking his training
well. He's becoming quite a skilled lover. Much better than Wes was.
But then, I did get Wes rather late in life. Thank God I didn't have to
put up with him for more than four years. Thank God the gardener
was adequate, even if Wes wasn't. I'd have lost my mind within the
year.
The shower was preset; she turned it on with little more effort than a
flick of the finger, and stood under the pounding of the massage
setting.
This business of school is such a damned nuisance. Such a boring
waste of time. I can certainly think of better ways to spend my
afternoons and evenings…
The Servant was waiting with a towel when she emerged, and handed
her a hot, fresh cup of coffee to drink while the Servant styled her hair
and applied her makeup for her.
The outfit awaiting her approval was a disgustingly demure and girlish
knitted sweater and skirt. Fay frowned at it, but waved to the Servant
to assist her in putting it on. Awful as it was, the clothing was the
appropriate sort of dress for a seventeen-year-old visiting her mother
in the hospital.
Even if the seventeen-year-old was the one really in control of the

situation. And even if the hospital was Vinita, institution for the
criminally insane.
And the mother had tried to kill her own, dear daughter.
—
A couple of years ago, Fay would have had to stop just outside Vinita
to switch places with her bogus Aunt. The law did not permit
fifteen-year-old drivers to handle sports cars, particularly without a
license. Now she no longer had to engage in that little touch of farce;
she was able to pull her Shelby-Z right into the parking lot without
anyone thinking twice.
If they thought twice about why a woman with as much wealth as
Fay's mother was in the state loony bin rather than an expensive,
discreet, private hospital, they never voiced the question.
Fay swung her long legs out of the car and emerged to the appreciative
glances of several of the guards and attendants. One or two even dared
to whistle, and her mood was good enough mat she flirted her hips at
them and gave one a come-hither wink.
The fact was, she reflected, as she led the way up the cracked cement
walkway, that this situation was as nearly perfect for her as was
possible in this day and age.
It's too bad they don't lock loonies up to rot like they used to, she
thought wistfully, waiting as one of the guards scurried to hold the
glass door open for her. That would have been perfect. And it's too
bad this isn't back in the fifties, when they used to use the criminally
insane as experimental subjects. I could have gotten a lot of mileage
out of shock treatments, if I could have convinced the doctor to try
them on Rowena with me there. She sighed. Oh, well. This will
certainly do.
The staff at Vinita, as at any state-run facility, was overworked and

underpaid. Most patients never saw a therapist more often than once
a week unless they had families that could pay extra for it. And
therapy was a joke even for those who could pay. The doctors, besides
being years behind the times, were working from inaccurate
information, and treatments were based on speculation at best.
The staff, including the doctors, tended to be shell-shocked and
incurious; aides and nurses were frequently the dregs of their
professions.
For those under state-paid care, there was only one question— if they
hadn't committed an act of physical violence, could they be bullied
into a simulacrum of health so that they could feed, clean, and clothe
themselves? Because as soon as they could, they went out the door, to
be "mainstreamed, " or "normalized into society, " as Dr. Powell liked
to put it. If they had committed a crime of violence, the question was,
could they be coached or bullied into a state in which they could
convince a probations board that they were recovered and wouldn't do
it again? In that case, it was out the door as soon as the ink was dry on
their release papers. Only a few, notorious criminals were the
exceptions.
And for those whose care was being paid for privately—
"You get what you pay for, " Fay murmured to herself, smiling, as she
chose the least damaged of the plastic chairs in the institutional-green
waiting room. "Exactly what you pay for.”
Dr. Powell emerged from the door at the end of the dingy room after
she and Aunt Emily had been waiting for about five minutes.
Looks like he's halfway together this time, Fay observed, noting the
key to Rowena's room in his hand. It's just as well. I don't feel like
sitting around for an hour while he tries to remember where he left
the damn thing.
She noted with amusement that his hands were shaking.

Silly man, can't you even get your own scheduling right? Must be
time for your snootful, or you wouldn't be so wired. You should have
snorted up in your office and made us wait a little longer. If I didn't
want you incapacitated, I'd be very suspicious of you right now.
She made a mental note to check with Powell's pusher. If he was
getting too heavily into coke, it might be time to think about replacing
him.
If he gets caught, it'll be an inconvenience at best, because I'll have to
find another incompetent in a hurry. At worst—all his patients and
treatments are going to come under examination, and someone may
put Rowena in the hands of a real doctor for a while. What a pain
that would be…
"She's a lot more lucid, " Powell said, blinking his bloodshot eyes
rapidly. "I think we're on the right track with the lithium therapy.”
Fay hid a smile, and contrived to look awed and overwhelmed.
What an idiot! Even I know that lithium is for manic— depressives,
and does nothing for anyone else. Whatever they're calling Rowena
now, it's not manic-depressive!
"Oh, Dr. Powell, " Fay breathed, looking up at him with sweet, round
eyes. "That's wonderful". How much longer do you think it will take?
I'd so love to have Momma back with me!"
She could see the calculations going on behind Powell's eyes; cocaine
was an expensive habit to maintain, and Fay's trust fund was paying
nun very, very well. If he lost Rowena Harper as a patient, his income
would drop by a fourth. She was the only private client he had.
"Now, Miss Harper, " he said soothingly. "Your mother's problem isn't
like pneumonia, where we can tell exactly when she'll get better. The
treatment of mental illness is a science, but it isn't an exact one, yet.”

Here comes the platitude.
"She has to understand that she's sick, and truly want to get better. "
He turned to Aunt Emily; telegraphing desperation, if he only knew it.
She was the other—supposed—beneficiary of the Harper largess. If
Rowena Harper was "cured, " theoretically Aunt Emily would be out
the door too. "You understand, don't you, Miss Baker?"
"Of course, Doctor, " the Servant replied, showing all the submission
any doctor could ask of a lay person. "Fay, dear, you mustn't get your
hopes up. The doctor isn't going to be able to make your mother better
in a single afternoon, not when she's been ill for five years.”
Fay allowed her face to fall. Same song, new verse, she thought
smugly. Same game we play every time I visit. I really did pick you
well, didn't I, Dr. Powell?
"But that doesn't mean that your being here isn't important, " he
added hastily. "She really has made some significant progress, and if
we can just cement that progress today, it will make an enormous
difference in her prognosis.”
Buzz, buzz, buzz- "Sound and fury, signifying nothing. " All empty
prattle and platitudes. You're a marvel. Dr. Powell.
"As I told you on the phone, she has been asking about you for the
past few weeks now. It was my judgment that this would be a good
time to bring you in. I'm hoping it will give her the boost of reality she
needs.”
Time for inflating his ego. Fay gave him the same look of submissive
adoration that Aunt Emily was wearing. "Anything you say, Doctor, "
she cooed. "Aunt Emily and I have faith in you.”
And if by some chance the authorities ever turned her loose, I'd
probably take her over to the faith healers at ORU. She'd have as
much chance of "getting well" as she does with you. The only reason

I haven't suggested that is because they might believe her. I can't risk
that.
Dr. Powell stood a tiny bit straighter and preened under that look. Fay
had it down to an art; it was, after all, the same look that had
ensnared Wes Harper—and others before and since him.
He led the way past an attendant who did not even bother putting his
girlie magazine away or taking his feet off the desk, down the
institutional-beige corridor lined with closed and locked doors, all
solid, with little viewing hatches at eye level. Fay knew that the
attendants were supposed to check on the occupants of these little
cells about once an hour. She wondered if they ever got around to it
more often than once a day.
Dr. Powell stopped at one of those doors, one Fay knew by heart by
now. He opened the viewing hatch, and took a quick look.
"She's fine, " he said with satisfaction. "I'll let you in now. This time I'll
stay outside. Don't forget, though, I'll be right here the whole time. If
you need me, I can have that door open in a minute.”
"Thank you, Dr. Powell, " Fay replied, managing a credible imitation
of someone subdued and a little frightened. "I—I hope you won't need
to.”
"So do I, Miss Harper, " he replied, and unlocked and opened the
door.
Rowena Harper sat on her iron-framed cot, staring out the
mesh-covered window. Unlike a good many of the inmates here—and
unlike the first two years of her tenancy of this cell-she was neat,
clean, well groomed; her hair trimmed tidily, her hospital-issue dress
clean and unwrinkled. She ignored the opening and closing of the
door, continuing to stare out at the clouds.
Fay frowned. This was a new development, one she wasn't sure she

liked.
"Mother?" she said tentatively.
Rowena ignored her.
"Mother, " she repeated, sharply now. No reaction. "Rowena, Dr.
Powell said you’ve been asking for me.”
Rowena turned slowly. Her face was fairly expressionless, but her eyes
showed her hostility. She still did not speak.
"Rowena, I had to take time off from school for this. You might at least
tell me why you wanted me to come.”
The eyes blazed and the hands crooked involuntarily into claws.
"Why do I always ask you to come?" she hissed. "I won't give up,
Mother. Damn you, I want my body back!"
CHAPTER EIGHT
"OH, mother, " Fay cried in mock dismay, clenching her hands at
chest level to add verity to the performance. "Dr. Powell said you were
so much better—"
She bit her lip as Rowena's face spasmed; Rowena could guess what
she was thinking; probably fairly accurately at the moment. But can
you realize how relieved I am to discover you haven't gotten any
wiser since last time I was here ?
"Better?" Rowena exclaimed, laughing bitterly, holding tightly to the
edge of her thin institutional mattress. "He's giving me lithium. I can
read, I see TV programs—even I know how stupid that is! I wouldn't
send my dog to a quack like him!"
"Mother, that's not nice, " Fay replied, pursing her lips in disapproval

and keeping clear of the door so that the doctor could open it if
Rowena rushed for her. The woman seemed to have learned that
much since last time, though; she stayed where she was, seated on the
edge of the bed. Fay smiled tremulously for the benefit of the camera
in the corner. "Dr. Powell has been doing what's best for you; I'm sure
you realize that. And he said you'd been doing so well—"
"I don't fight him anymore. That way he can't have me tranked, "
Rowena retorted. "God damn you, I want my own body back!"
Fay shrank in on herself, and clasped her arms across her chest. You
can't have it, dear. I'm enjoying it very much, thank you.
"Mother, this is stupid. You know what Dr. Powell says, " she replied
for the sake of the doctor and any other listening ears—and recording
tapes. "He says that's just a fantasy. He says you couldn't face getting
older, so you made up this story about ray stealing your body.”
She smoothed her skirt over her hips, in what could be taken for an
ordinary gesture of adolescent nervousness—unless you knew what
Fay and Rowena knew. "It's all in your mind. And you're going to have
to face facts, Mother. You're in that body, and I'm in this one, and
nothing is going to change that.”
Rowena's eyes narrowed, and her fingers bit into the mattress. "You
bitch, " she whispered.
Fay pouted a little, and tossed her head. "And it isn't very nice to call
your daughter a bitch.”
"You—aren't—my—daughter. " Rowena ground the words out from
between her clenched teeth.
"There you go again, " Fay sighed dramatically, and sniffed. "Mother, I
don't understand you! Don't you realize that if you'd just face the facts
you could be out of here anytime you wanted to leave?"

Rowena loosened her grip of the mattress and clasped her hands on
her lap. "And what?" She turned away again to look out the window.
"Go home so you could find some way to kill me?"
For a moment Fay was taken aback. So she's figured that out, has she
? I'm impressed. I hadn't expected her to be thinking that clearly yet.
"Mother, " she whispered, pretending shock. "How could you say such
a thing?"
"Very easily, " Rowena said, turning back and lifting her chin in
defiance. "I've had a lot of time to think since that phony started me
on lithium. I'm talking to the woman who murdered my father. Why
should you worry about getting rid of me?"
"Grandfather Harper died in a factory accident, " Fay said with the
patience one displays with a retarded child. "And Grandfather Baker
died in Korea. When you were two.”
It wasn't too hard to engineer the accident, Fay chuckled to herself,
given the miserable conditions at all of Harper's plants. Maybe if
he'd paid a little closer attention to the rate at which his workers
were getting hurt and a little less to the bottom line, he might have
survived a little longer. It was a tad harder to arrange Gary's death;
but I'd gotten back up to full ability by then. It's amazing what can
be hidden in a combat zone.
"You know who I mean, " Rowena growled. "Your husband. Wesley
Harper. Remember him?"
"Daddy— Fay quivered her lower lip, just a little. It wouldn't do to
overact on this one. Fay had only been three when she'd gotten rid of
Wesley. "Daddy was killed when he ran off the road. You know that,
Mother.”
That was even easier to set up. When you're driving a dark country
highway, late at night, and a thing out of your worst nightmares
pops up in the seat next to you, it's somewhat difficult to keep your

mind on the road. Another benefit cars have over horses. Horses
have a habit of trying to save themselves and their driver—but a car
is mindless, and a collision with a tree at seventy miles per hour
never leaves a survivor.
"You killed him, Mother, " Rowena replied stubbornly. "I don't know
how you did it, but you killed him. I bet you killed Granny Baker, too.”
She freaked when she found herself in Maria's body. It was so
convenient that we happened to be on the yacht at the time. "Granny
Baker drowned when you were thirteen, Mother. You know that,
too—you were there. " Fay was increasingly pleased with the way this
interview was working; Rowena was beginning to look like a classic
case of paranoid delusion.
"Did you do to her what you did to me?" Rowena cried, pounding on
the bed with both fists. "Is thirteen the magic age? Can't you steal
their bodies until then? Did you think I'd kill myself the way she did?"
It's partially because sexual maturity makes you corruptible, dear. I
have had to wait as long as sixteen years. "Mother, please—" Fay
held out her hands coaxingly. "Please, stop saying that. It's only going
to make Dr. Powell want to keep you here longer.”
She was thinking over the ramifications of this interview even as she
spoke. I'd just as soon she stayed here for another three years. And if
I can get her as hysterical as she was when she woke up in that old
hulk, Powell will probably go for that. In three years I'll be legally
adult; plus by then I should have all my power back. At that point I
can arrange for her to drop dead some night when the attendant is
drunk or stoned.
But Rowena didn't look as if she was going to oblige Fay this time. She
sagged back, slumped over her knees, hair hanging down limply over
her face. "There's no point in even trying to fight you, " she said. "I
can't win. " She sobbed hopelessly. "Why do you do this? How long
has this been going on, Mother? How long have you been stealing

other people's bodies?"
Longer than you imagine, child. "Mother, I don't know what you're
talking about.”
"It's got to be great, " Rowena said dully, ignoring her protest. "I’ve
been thinking about it a lot, at night. I mean, you party down for a
while, till you're maybe thirty and you're wearing the old bod
out—then you go find some poor little girl, and get her stoned, and
you're all set to party down for another twenty years. " She looked up,
her eyes glaring at Fay through the curtain of hair and angry tears.
"Does it have to be your daughter, Mom? Or can it be anybody?"
"Mother, " Fay replied, putting just a little scorn behind her words,
"you sound like a bad horror movie.”
It has to be my blood-daughter; I've tried others, and all I did was
kill them. But you can't know that, can you?
God. It's still so clear; most of the others have blurred in my
memories, but not the first.
The first transfer—it had been totally by accident.
She'd settled in Virginia only the year before, she and her very nubile,
attractive—and quite corrupt—daughter. There had been one too
many close encounters with church officials in London, officials who
had been suspicious of her simply on the grounds that she was a
wealthy widow with no interest in remarrying. They'd suspected her of
immoral behaviour, no doubt; they had no idea how immoral. The
colonies had seemed like an attractive venue—she could buy herself a
remote homestead, staff it with slaves, and practice the Arts free from
interference. Purity had been equally eager for the move, sensing,
doubtless, that she would be trading the jaded and soft deminobles for
virile and eminently seduceable men of the frontier. Unpolished
perhaps, but also unspoiled…

All started well. She found exactly the kind of place she had been
looking for, and at an attractive price. The owner had been eager to
sell and return to England. Too eager. She'd assumed he was one of
those gentleman-adventurers, more fop than man, who had thought
to find gold in the colonies, and discovered that the only fortunes to be
made required distasteful hard work.
But it hadn't ben hard work that had frightened the man off. It had
been the Indians. They survived one attack, but at the cost of half the
slaves. Fay (she'd been "Cordelia" then) had been determined she
would not be driven off.
Up until mat moment, Purity had no notion of what it was her mother
did, not really. Cordelia had carefully kept that part of her life from
her daughter; there was always the chance that she would need a
bargaining chip, and if Purity had known just how choice a counter
she was…
My dear, debauched daughter. It was so easy. All I needed to do was
wait until you were finished with that young farmer, and sleeping
the sleep of the sodden. Your cooperation was not essential to my
plans. Your body was.
She'd tried a most ambitious sorcery, the invocation of one of the
Greater Abysmal, using her unconscious daughter as the proffered
sacrifice.
Then a mouse ran across one of the lines of protection surrounding
her and erased a fraction of an inch of it.
The Prince of Darkness being notoriously ill-tempered about being
summoned and coerced, the creature had gone for her—
She could still feel the fear of that moment, as she scrambled
backwards and flung all the power she'd gathered over the years in a
single frantic attempt—not at defence, for she had sensed somehow
that defence would be futile—but escape.

There had been a moment of pain and disorientation.
When I could see again, I watched the Prince devouring myself—and
I was my daughter. She shook her head; she hadn't thought of that in
years… decades.
Rowena was watching her with her eyes narrowed, as if she could see
something of Fay's thoughts. "How long?" she insisted. "How long
have you been doing this?"
"Mother, don't be a drag. " Three hundred years and more, child. If
you knew that, you'd know you have no hope at all, and only such
life as I feel like granting you.
Rowena must have seen something in Fay's expression that frightened
her. She scooted back to the centre of the bed, tucked up her knees,
and hugged them to her chest like a small child. "You know, " she said,
her voice quavering, "I’ve been wondering, ever since Powell stopped
Training me. Like, if you have to do this to a daughter—that's pretty
cold, Mother. That's, like, pretty heartless. I mean, you get yourself
married, and then you have a kid, and then you do this to her. That's,
like, worse than a Nazi.”
"Mother, " Fay said, carefully aghast, "that's—that's sick!"
Actually, you haven't even guessed most of it. I choose my husbands
very carefully; rich and handsome—and not overly bright. Not
necessarily young, either—just so (hey were handsome in their youth
and are fertile now. It's easier if they aren't young; that way I don't
have to go to the trouble of getting rid of bothersome parents. And
occasionally I've been able to drive one to death without resorting to
arcane aid.
"You probably built Aunt Emily in the cellar or something, " Rowena
continued, a little sob catching in her throat. "That's why I never
heard of her until she showed up with you.”

"Mother… " Fay shook her head with sorrowful disbelief. "I just don't
know what to say to you. I can't believe you're making these things up!
Are you"—she let her own voice quaver a little—"are you trying to hurt
me? Why do you hate me so much?"
You're a lot smarter than I imagined, child. I'd like to know how
much else you've figured out. Did you guess that the transfer and the
creation of a Servant takes all the power I have? Do you know how
weak I am now?
"Trying to hurt yow?" Rowena laughed wildly, tossing her head back
and leaning it against the wall behind her. "Christ, Mother, you're a
hoot! Me, hurt you! You haven't got a heart; you’ve got nothing inside
you but stone!"
So you don't know. Time to end the farce. "Mother—" She backed into
the wall and hid her face in her hands. "Mother, I can't believe you're
saying things like this. Nobody's going to believe you, nobody will ever
believe you! You're never going to get out of here, never! I'm going to
spend the rest of my life knowing my own mother is locked up in a
loony bin! You're going to rot in here—"
Rowena snarled, going into a crouch, hands and lips twitching—
Because when Fay parted her hands, very carefully, Rowena. could see
what the camera and the doctor couldn't.
That Fay wasn't sobbing, she was laughing.
"You're never, ever going to get out of here, Mother! They're going to
keep you so tranked you won't even know what day it is! And there's
nothing you can do about it—"
That last was too much for Rowena—she screamed and lunged at
Fay-But Fay and Dr. Powell were ready; the door snapped open,
admitting two burly attendants who, if they'd been less
Neanderthal-like, could have taken top prizes in body-building

contests. The two of them pushed Rowena back down onto the bed,
ignoring her screams and her attempts to wrestle free of them. Dr.
Powell entered a few moments later; he was sniffing a little, and his
hands were no longer shaking.
Finally got your toot while you were waiting out in the hall, hm,
Doctor? I wondered why you hadn't interfered by now. It's because
you didn't know; you were off snorting your nose candy.
He was carrying a syringe; Gorilla Number One held Rowena's arm
still long enough for him to give her the injection. Within a few
moments she was so sedated she couldn't even mumble a protest
when they put her to bed.
"I'm very sorry about that, Fay, " the doctor said insincerely. "I really
thought she was making progress. But it's partially your fault. I wish
you hadn't said those things to her. You practically drove her into
relapsing. I'm going to have to keep her sedated for the next three
months at the absolute minimum.”
He glared at her as if he suspected her of engineering the "relapse.”
He probably did, Fay reflected. Coke tended to make people paranoid.
She decided she'd had enough for one day, and burst into a flood of
orchestrated tears.
—
"My God, " Fay said, stretching to relieve the kinks in her shoulders.
"What a farce. It seems now like such a waste of time. " She'd turned
the wheel over to the Servant; for once she felt like being the
passenger.
"Hardly a waste, " the Servant replied from the driver's side, parroting
what Fay had already said half an hour ago. "There's no chance she'll
convince anyone that she's cured if she keeps that up.”

There were times when talking to the Servant felt like talking to a
mirror. Or a tape recorder. "But I can think of a lot better ways to
spend my afternoons than on a fiasco like that one, " Fay said
petulantly, watching the eternally boring landscape of Oklahoma
rolling by. "In fact, I can think of any number of ways I'd rather be
spending my time than wasting it the way I am now. School, for
instance. Bloody nuisance, that's what it is. Having to dance around
the asinine laws they have hedging in so-called minors—like
compulsory schooling. And if that wasn't bad enough, having to waste
more time in college just to find a suitable man if Derek doesn't work
out—" She gritted her teeth. "Up until this transfer I could get away
with having my own governess to teach me. I didn't have to cool my
heels in a classroom. I could be spending the time getting my power
back. I could be spending the time enjoying myself. Instead I spend
most of my time being utterly bored, and the rest trying to get around
that old fart of a trustee just so I can get some use out of my money! I
don't dare use magick on half the people I need to—if they act out of
character, other people will notice.”
"You should be thinking about your demons, " the Servant reminded
her. "They need feeding.”
"I know, I know, " she snarled, having forgotten. "You don't have to
keep telling me!"
"As you wish, " it replied passively. Fay looked at its bland face and
wondered what, if anything, was going on in its mind. Was she
imagining things, or had it really seemed earlier as if it was beginning
to act on its own?
She turned away and stared moodily out the side window of the
Shelby. Finding inconspicuous victims had been getting harder lately.
She'd already taken as many of the kids from Jenks as she'd dared.
The ones she'd fed to her allies had been punks or druggies, mostly.
Kids nobody would miss—
And nobody was surprised when they turned up dead. But it's

starting to get noticed. I heard that a couple of people are saying
that there's more problems than usual this year at Jenks.
So that left the kids out. Which meant that she was going to have to go
hunting.
"Downtown?" she said aloud.
The Servant shook its head. "You hunted downtown three months
ago. You told me to remind you that you might be recognized if you
went there again.”
She tried to think of other well-stocked hunting grounds. "How about
the Fifteenth Street Bridge?"
"The police cleared it out last week. " One of the Servant's jobs was to
keep up with the news, which was why it spent so much time watching
TV.
"Shit, " she said in disgust. "The campground?"
The Servant shook its head. "The rangers aren't letting anyone camp
there for more than a week anymore; too many vagrants were living
there. And the abandoned house at the airport burned down a month
ago.”
"What does that leave me?" she asked it.
The Servant was silent as it checked its memory for her. "Across the
river, or out near Sand Springs, " it offered. "One of the other high
schools. Or serendipity.”
She didn't like any of the choices. All offered hazards she didn't want
to deal with, not as low on energy as she was. "Next time you see a
place to eat, pull in, " she ordered. "I want to think about this a while.”
She hadn't had time to blink before the Servant was slowing the car

and pulling into the parking lot of a Ken's Pizza right on the edge of
the Tulsa city limits.
There was actually a city limits sign right on the weed-covered verge.
The pizza parlour was so close to the edge, Fay realized, that while the
restaurant itself was within the city boundaries, the line stopped at the
edge of the parking lot.
The Servant parked the car smoothly, and as Fay emerged from the
air-conditioned interior, she could hear voices, angry voices, from the
trash area behind the building.
Her interest piqued, she turned and shaded her eyes against the last
rays of the sunset.
Two uniformed Tulsa police, both female, were giving a young
teenager on motorbike an unnecessarily hard time. One was
examining his license so carefully Fay wondered if she was checking it
for wear or fly specks; the other was reading him a lecture on traffic
safety at the top of her lungs, to the vast amusement of a group of his
peers in the next block.
Both of them looked distastefully butch, so far as Fay was concerned.
She might have passed them by altogether, except for the look of sly
self-satisfaction on the face of the one delivering the lecture.
Fay prided herself on being unusually deft at reading people. As she
followed the Servant into the restaurant, the reason for that
self-satisfaction dawned on her.
They're bullies, both of them, she decided with a surge of delight.
Bullies who put on badges just because it gives them an excuse to
push people around. Which means they're not likely to do things by
the book. Which also means that they're very likely to actually break
the law they're supposed to be enforcing just for the sake of their
own ego-tripping.

Which makes them fair prey.
How marvellous! I begin to believe that my Servant is prescient!
While they ordered, Fay was watching to see if the pair entered the
restaurant. They did. A few moments later, the manager came over
and spoke with them in a low, urgent voice. The second of the two, the
one with dark, curly hair, responded in tones that could be heard all
over the dining room.
"Look, I don't give a fart if my jurisdiction ends at the edge of the lot.
If I want to bust somebody's ass, I'll bust his ass, and they can argue
about it in court.”
Good, Fay thought with satisfaction. So they know. That will make it
all the easier.
The manager left, his ears and neck flushed, and glanced at her out of
the corner of his eye as he passed.
Probably hoping we didn't notice, she thought, and yawned,
pretending that she hadn't overheard the woman.
When their meal arrived, Fay ate quickly, which forced the Servant to
do the same. By the time she was finished, the policewomen were just
being served.
Good. Being interrupted at dinner will make them irritated. They'll
want someone to pay for their irritation.
"I'm going to the rest room, " she said quietly to the Servant as she
toyed with the remains of her meal. "When I'm inside, go without
paying for our dinner. Take the car, drive about two blocks back the
way we came, and wait for me. Keep the engine and the lights off.”
The Servant's eyes flickered to the police and back, and it nodded.

Fay got up and flounced off to the women's room, swaying her hips
aggressively. She wanted the women to get a good look at her, and to
get the impression that she was a spoiled, rich-kid punk. She gave the
Servant just long enough to move the car, then emerged, going
straight out the door without stopping to pay for the meal either,
making sure to choose a moment when the manager's back was turned
so that he wouldn't stop her before she left.
Darkness had already descended. She walked quickly in order to be
beyond the edge of the lot by the time the two police came out of the
restaurant. She noted as she watched for them out of the corner of her
eye that the area was half developed at best. That was in her favour. In
fact, at the moment everything seemed to be in her favour.
Once she was one step beyond the city line, she slowed, sauntering
along, waiting.
She heard them coming; they walked so noisily she could have heard
them half a mile away.
"Excuse me, miss. " There was a heavy emphasis on the word "miss"
that made a mockery of the apparent politeness.
Fay smiled slyly as she turned. Right on time. And we're all standing
on county property. "Yes?" she replied snidely. "Just what's your
problem?"
"Did you just leave without paying?" the blond woman said.
"I don't think so, " Fay said, in tones that implied she knew very well
that she had. She started to turn away, and the first one reached out
and grabbed her arm.
"Where do you think you're going?" the woman snapped.
Fay looked at the hand on her arm with a lifted eyebrow. "To my car,
of course. Would you mind removing that? You're getting grease on

my sweater.”
Oh, you fools. You played right into my hands. If you'd just stopped
the minute I crossed the line, you'd have been safe. Now, by
knowingly violating the law, you've given me carte blanche to do
anything I want with you.
"I think you're going to hustle your expensive little rear end back into
that restaurant and take care of your bill, " the dark-haired woman
said nastily.
"I doubt it, " Fay answered, with a sneer that was more than a match
for hers. "I'll take care of it after I get to my car. I'm in a hurry. Of
course, I don't imagine anyone like you would understand mat, would
you? After all, the only thing you types do is sit around in pizza joints
and hassle kids.”
They weren't expecting a show of defiance from anyone as young as
she was. The woman's grasp loosened for a moment, and Fay pulled
her arm away and started walking toward the car. She allowed them to
catch up with her just beyond a stand of overgrown bushes and young
trees, growth that would effectively conceal what was about to occur—
The dark-haired one caught up first and grabbed her arm again,
yanking her around with completely unnecessary violence. "All right,
you little tart, " the woman snarled, "that's about enough crap out of
you! Let's see how you like your ass being thrown in jail!"
Come to me, my friends, my companions… She twitched the magick
in her mind, the spell that called her allies in to feed. Here is proper
meat for you.
Fay smiled as the Abyssal Creatures rose up behind each of the
officers. They materialized silently, giving no hint of their presence.
I do so enjoy a good farce.

"I really don't think you're going to have time for that, " she said
gently. At about that moment, the blond evidently noticed that Fay's
eyes were going to something considerably above her head, and
turned.
The Creature smiled as she started to scream.
I do so enjoy a good farce.
Fay leaned back against the trunk of a tree, folded her arms, and
prepared to enjoy the show.
—
They took an artistically long time about things.
Fay could not "feel" the power flow, but she knew from experience
that it was there in abundance. She cast the small magick that enabled
her to gather it in, and waited, watching her allies at their task with
detached curiosity.
This is going to be quite profitable, she thought, moving a little
deeper into the gloom beside the trees. These two were better than I
thought. They truly enjoyed exercising their petty authority on the
least provocation; it was probably their only pleasure. That kind of
petty tyrant always produces a gratifying amount of energy when
trapped and helpless. There's going to be enough for my allies and
plenty left over for me. Delightful.
The demonics had the women reduced to quivering rags just as her
feet began to hurt a little. Stupid shoes, she thought in irritation. This
was getting rather entertaining. I suppose I'd better get them to
finish up. A pity. I love watching someone that enjoys his work.
"I think that's enough, children, " she interrupted them gently. "It's
time to put your toys away.”

The larger- of the two looked over at her with sulfurously glowing
eyes, and grunted.
"And don't forget to clean up after yourselves, " she reminded them as
she walked back toward the restaurant.
The spring breeze was comfortably cool, and touched her cheeks like a
caress. She savoured the sensation, and the faint hint of peony scent
carried with it. She noticed with a feeling of gratification that the
squad car was still where she'd last seen it, parked unobtrusively
behind the restaurant, where no one would notice it for an hour or two
at least.
Lovely; no one will wonder where they went until after I'm long
gone. And by the time my friends finish, there won't be a single trace
that they ever existed. It's quite likely they won't even be missed until
shift change. The department may well spend weeks looking for
them. I wonder what they'll finally decide?
Her grin widened as a thought occurred to her. I could see that
someone gives the authorities a story about seeing them in that little
porn store on Eleventh, buying little toys together. And then see that
someone else reports seeing them abandoning the squad, getting into
a car and driving off west. What fun! Especially if I see that the press
gets the same stories…
The Tulsa Police Department won't be in quite such a hurry to find
out what happened to them, once those rumours start flying. They'll
be very happy to let the mystery fade into obscurity.
But it wouldn't do at all for the people at the restaurant to remember
the unpaid dinner, or the fact that they'd sent the police off after her.
Or, really, for them to remember the police at all.
Always tidy your loose ends, she reminded herself. That's why you're
the success you are today.

She arranged her expression in a carefully calculated mix of chagrin
and distress, and entered the restaurant, rushing up to the fake-wood
counter and the girl behind the cash register.
"Oh gosh, I'm so sorry, " she gushed to the startled cashier. "I had to
visit the—you know—and I thought my aunt had taken care of dinner,
and she left, thinking I was going to take care of it—I'm really sorry.
We were halfway home when we both realized—"
She extracted a pair of twenties from her wallet, babbling the entire
time and carefully weaving a spell of forgetfulness as she did so.
All she needed was the key phrase to get into their minds…
The manager obligingly gave it. "Didn't you see the cops?" he said.
There was the briefest moment of hesitation; an instant in which
everyone who was involved froze while the magick flashed into their
minds and worked Fay's will.
"Cops?" she said innocently. "What cops? Oh no, heavens, keep the
change, I owe you that much, at least.”
The manager blinked uncertainly. "I could have sworn—"
He glanced over at the table where the policewomen had been sitting,
but there was nothing there to show who or what the customers had
been; just the clutter of half-eaten pizza and used utensils.
"Never mind, " he said, shaking his head. "I don't know what I was
thinking about. Thank you, miss, it's a pleasure to run across
somebody as honest as you.”
"Oh, I have my moments, " she replied, laughing, and exited the door
he held open for her.
The Servant was waiting just as she'd told it to, in the dark and silent

Shelby. In the passenger's side, which pleased Fay. Now she was in the
mood to drive again.
"You did well?" the Servant asked.
"Very well, " she replied, gunning the motor and pulling away with a
satisfying screech of tires.
Very well indeed. Now I have a bit of power to spare. Enough to
throw a better fright into that Carlin bitch.
CHAPTER NINE
Monica took her time stowing her books away in her locker,
eavesdropping shamelessly on the conversation a few feet down the
hallway.
"So anyway, from what I heard from Janet, Harper's mom said she
was like, a witch, and had put some kind of curse on her. In front of
the shrink and everything.”
A bitch is more like it, Monica thought acidly.
"God, I'd die. So then what?" the walking Bloomingdale's
advertisement standing next to the speaker asked.
"Well, then Mrs. Harper, like, jumped her. Janet says it took three
guys to get her off. " The speaker, a tribute to tanning machines,
shuddered dramatically. "I mean, can you imagine it? Your own mom
going after you like that?"
"She's a nut-case, " the Broomie's display said laconically. "You never
know what a nut-case is going to do.”
"Well, yeah, but still… You'd think she'd be embarrassed or
something, you know? I mean, even a nut-case ought to have some
pride. And I'm surprised Harper told Janet.”

That's Jenks, Monica thought. Never mind your poor mother is so
crazy she attacks you. Imagine what people will say.
"She didn't. Jan was on the switchboard when Harper's aunt called
her in sick. Anyway, Fay's got a migraine from it. So no practice
tonight.”
"Not much point to it right now; what are we doing cheers for? The
wrestling team? Tennis? Golf?" The third member of the little group, a
chick Monica suspected of wearing glasses only because they made
her look like Molly Ringwald, emitted a high-pitched cackle that made
Monica's teeth ache. "Shit, give me a break!"
"Oh, right, " the bronzed one laughed. "I can just, like, hear the golf
cheers. They'd probably make us do 'em in mime!"
That set the Ringwald clone off on a series of gestures that started like
boy-scout flag signals and ended obscene. The other two went into
gales of laughter and all three migrated in the direction of their next
class.
So that's why Harper wasn't here today or yesterday, Monica
thought smugly. Her loss. She's not gonna keep Derek much longer at
this rate.
She grabbed her notebook for the English class and started down the
hall herself, feeling very much in tune with the universe. Because in
the inside pocket of her purse were three notes from Alan and five
from Derek.
Just ahead of her she caught sight of Joy Harris, one of the Brains, a
skinny, long-legged kid who devoured science and science fiction with
equal enthusiasm and wore glasses because she needed them. "Hey,
Harris!" she called. "Wait up!"
Joy looked back over her bony shoulder, spotted her waving from
behind a bulwark of freshmen just getting out of French 2, and

grinned, showing braces like a Chrysler grille. She stopped and got
over to the side to let the crowd move around her, and ignored the
push and shove until Monica reached her.
"Hey, I'm glad you caught me before I forgot, " Joy said without
preamble. "Carrie said to tell you that if you're really interested she'll
sell you the Cabri for four. She wants that Pure-bird real bad, and
they'll only give her three on the Cabri.”
"Okay, " Monica said happily. "I'll tell Mom, and she'll tell Dad that
she thinks it's a bad idea, and that'll make him cough up some cash
just to make her look like a jerk. So what's the verdict on contacts?"
she finished.
Joy sighed. "No way. My eyes are changing too fast. The optometrist
says to wait another year. And besides, I wanted extended-wears and
he won't give them to kids. He says we don't follow instructions.”
Monica made a face. "He ought to talk to your chemistry teacher. Like,
Alan says you're the only one in the class that always gets the results
like in the book.”
"Yeah, I know, but he's an old fart. Mom got a little disgusted with
him this time, though—he wanted to know why she wanted a pair in
every colour, and what did she think she was, a movie star? I might be
able to get her talked into going to the guy at the mall—you know, the
one you went to—just taking the 'scrip from our regular guy but
getting 'em made up over there. If she does that I bet I can get her
talked into 'em for me. " Joy gave Monica a wistful sideways glance.
"I'd really die to have green eyes. Although why I bother, with all this
barbed wire in my mouth—"
"I think you'd look cute with green eyes, " Monica reassured her, "and
the braces aren't as bad as you think. Lots of the kids have "em.”
"Yeah, but not with enough metal to make a DC-10 on their fangs."
Joy fished a mirror out of her purse, grimaced at herself, put it back,

and kept walking. Monica ignored the gesture; Joy complained about
her braces at least twenty times a day.
"So what's this about Harper's mom?" Monica brought up her real
reason for catching up with Joy. "I heard some kid talking about her. I
didn't know she was, like, locked up. " Joy Harris was the unofficial
school historian. Not a gossip; she didn't indulge in speculation or
rumours—but if it had happened in Jenks in the last ten years, Joy
knew about it, every last detail.
"What, the nut-case? Oh, right, I keep forgetting you don't know." Joy
shifted her books over—a huge volume on the Etruscans (whoever
they were), topped by three fantasy books with dragons on the covers,
and her English Lit stuff. "Harper's mom's in Vinita.”
"Isn't that the nuthouse for murderers and stuff?" Monica said
doubtfully.
"Yeah, except that it used to be, like, just the state loony bin, and
that's what it was when the shit happened and they put Harper's mom
in there. When the Bitch-Queen turned thirteen something really
weird happened over at this cottage where they kept Harper's horse. "
Joy's notebook slithered off the top of the pile, and she caught it just
before it hit the floor.
"Like what?" Monica asked, taking the notebook away from her.
"Thanks. Like her mom went—blam!—off the deep end. Real sudden,
for no reason. It was a good thing this aunt of Harper's had shown up
for a visit, or God only knows what would have happened. " She
paused dramatically. "It was bad enough, you know? She, like, passed
out or something, and when she came to, she ran all the way down to
169 and tried to flag cars down, yelling about how Fay was a witch and
had stolen her body."
"Oh, God. " Monica managed to feel a flicker of sympathy for the
bitch. "I bet she wanted to die.”

"Well, that's not the worst, either—right after that, when they were
making Vinita into the max-security loony bin, and they had to move
all the regular patients out, they were, like, making all the relatives
show up to take 'em away. Well, Fay and her aunt showed up, okay,
with her mom's shrink? And her mom started in again, about how Fay
was a witch, only this time she'd gotten hold of a knife and she went
after Fay with it and cut her up. So they left her there, 'cause she'd just
proved she was violent, you know?"
"Wow. " Monica was awed. "That's pretty gross. I mean, there's that,
and there's the way Jill croaked—like Harper sort of attracts disaster,
doesn't she?"
"Makes you kind of feel sorry for her. She's almost got a reason to be
such a pain. It's like she's the one with the curse on her. Even if she
wasn't the Bitch-Queen, I wouldn't want to be her friend, " Joy said
emphatically as they reached the door of the English class. "Around
Harper, seems like if you don't go crazy, you get hit by lightning or
something.”
"Or else Harper gets tired of you, " Monica whispered nastily. "And
then you wish you were dead or crazy.”
They both took their seats, choking on giggles.
—
Derek passed her another note halfway through the class. She smiled
sweetly at him, but Diana was watching, and while Monica didn't
think Ms. Tregarde would be mean enough to make her read it out
loud, she didn't want to make any trouble, either. So she tucked it
inside her notebook for later.
Alan had already given her a note earlier, so that made two today, and
it wasn't even noon yet. This is getting kind of fun, Monica thought,
enjoying just a little snicker at their expense. Derek doesn't have any
classes with me and Alan and I bet they don't know I've got classes

with both of them. 7 bet neither of them knows that the other one's
been coming on to me. The idea was rather exciting, really; her own
little secret.
I think maybe I'll just keep it that way as long as I can. I don't think
they know that I know that they're best friends. So when they find
out, I can just act surprised that they know each other. It's a whole
lot more fun this way.
She tried to pay attention to Bart Young reading his assignment aloud,
but his scene wasn't very good. The original argument itself was pretty
stupid, with one character saying nothing but "Oh yeah? Prove it!"
And poor Bart, a gawky guy who looked like a hockey stick with hair,
hadn't improved it any since the last time.
Her attention wandered. 7 can think of one good reason not to tell
them about each other—they'd be ready to kill each other, the way
Bob and Sandy are. I wonder if that's over football, or over Harper?
Probably Harper, from what Joy says. Bob's been playing Footsie
with her forever, and I know I saw her making kissy-face with
Sandy in the hall after school a couple of days ago. God, Derek must
be the only person in the whole school who doesn't know about the
way she sleeps around on him. He still thinks Harper's playing by
the rules.
She wondered if she should tell him. Or did he really know, and was
just pretending not to?
It occurred to her for a brief, guilty moment that she wasn't exactly
playing by the rules either, but she shrugged it off. I'll tell Alan and
Derek as soon as one of them makes up his mind. I can't tell Derek
about Fay—he'd think I was just being bitchy. It was too bad he didn't
spend more time with his friends—the ones Alan hung out with.
Instead, from what he'd told her, he spent most of his time either
hanging out with Fay's crowd, or at home. Alan was about the only
one he saw anymore.

And I bet Fay has a lot to do with that, too.
Her writing assignment was the confrontation she'd imagined
between Derek and Harper if he ever did find out that Harper was
fooling around.
But when she'd read it aloud, he didn't seem to make the
connection—although a couple of gasps and snickers told her that
everyone else in class had. And maybe it was a good thing Jill wasn't
around anymore; she'd have gone straight to Harper with the dirt.
He just didn't see what I was trying to say. Unless he was pretending
not to. I mean, it's gotta look pretty lame, her running around on
him all over town. Maybe he figures it doesn't look so bad if he
doesn't act like he knows. Boy, that's dumb. Everybody has him
figured for a real dope this way. But maybe he'd rather look like a
dope than a wimp.
But he had to know something was wrong; she'd recognized the
subjects of his assignment right away, and from the way everybody
else looked, the rest of the class did, too.
Him and Harper having it out, except that he wins and walks out on
her, which he never does in real life. Come on, Derek you only wish!
Yeah, and I wish he would, too.
Bart finished droning, and she woke up to the feet mat he was the last
one to read his piece as Diana nodded and hitched herself up onto the
top of the desk. She seemed to like to sit up there.
Maybe it's because she used to be a hippie.
The writer scooted herself back and folded her legs up, lotus-style.
"Okay, remember I said I wasn't going to grade anybody down as long
as it was clear that you were trying. You all have been, and if there's
any reason why some of you guys that aren't comfortable with this

need something higher than a B come talk to me and I'll see what we
can arrange, okay? Because by now it's pretty obvious that some of
you were better than others, am I right?"
Monica could see a couple of the other kids, Bart among them,
nodding vigorously.
Diana grinned. "It's also pretty obvious that the two best were Monica
and Derek. Now what stands out in your minds about those two
scenes that makes them good?"
Diana led them all in a spirited discussion of what made the scenes
work, and what was lacking in the ones the rest of them had done.
"And just to keep you two from getting swelled heads, " she finished,
just before the bell rang, "Monica, you repeated yourself too much and
I got the feeling you were padding the thing out to make it ten
pages—and you had some really choppy sentences. A sentence needs
to be more than three words long, folks; if you have a lot of three-word
sentences, it's more than time to think about combining them. Derek,
your protagonist was pretty unrealistic. There's no indication to me of
why he ever started dating this chick in the first place. There's no way
you'd catch me going with a bitch like her if I was a guy.”
Monica saw him flush beet red out of the corner of her eye, but Diana
had turned back to the blackboard and missed it.
"Okay, gang, here's the next phase. It's time to put in some action'and
a third character. " She was writing all this down in a series of two-
and three-word notes. Monica thought her eccentric style of printing
was kind of neat, like calligraphy. "Follow your viewpoint character
right after the fight; bring in that third character and make him or her
an ally. After all, some of you just trashed your v. p. character; now it's
time to give him somebody sympathetic. But not too sympathetic; this
is an ally, not a yes-man. And for those of you whose viewpoint
character won—what if he's really in the wrong? He needs to get taken
down a peg. Even if he's right, there's two sides to every argument,
and somebody should point out the other side. For the sake of making

things interesting, let's not make it the v. p. character's best friend,
okay? Somebody who's maybe a friend, maybe a teacher, but
somebody who can give him a little grief along with the sympathy."
Diana turned away from the blackboard, and by then Derek had
gotten his blushing under control. "Have fun with this, gang. That's
what we're all about in this business.”
At that moment the lunch bell rang. "See you tomorrow, kids. Monica,
can I talk to you a minute? I got a chance to read your stuff last night.”
"Sure. " Monica gathered up her things; her stomach felt fluttery and
uncertain. She was no longer quite so certain about the quality of her
work. Sure it was all right for class, but—Diana was a real writer, and
she'd asked for a real writer's kind of critique.
"Monica, " Di said, pulling a manila envelope out of her briefcase and
handing it to her, "I'm pleased and surprised, on the whole. I won't
kid you. You've got real, honest-to-God potential. You have a genuine
flair for characterization and a solid grasp of the way conversation
works. But—"
All through this Monica's heart had been lifting—now it plummeted
into her shoes. "But?" she replied doubtfully. "You might as well tell
me the worst.”
"Your plots are weak, " Diana said, with a touch of reluctance. "You
make things entirely too easy for your characters. Think about it; a
story where everything goes right and your character is perfect from
the beginning is boring! Even in fairy tales things start out rotten for
the heroine, get worse, and only at the very end does she 'live happily
ever after. ' You’ve got to make your character work for her happy
ending. And making her wonderful, sweet, understanding, no faults at
all—what is she, Mother Teresa? If she's that fabulous, she should be a
saint. You've got to make her interesting; give her warts, make her
human.”

"Like how?" Monica asked weakly. "I mean, what should I do?"
"Give her faults; make her impulsive, oversensitive, something. Give
her PMS, for heaven's sake. And every time your heroine thinks she's
got a clear path, throw something in her way and make her trip over
it. " Diana shook her head, and lifted one eyebrow at her. "You're
taking this very well, Monica. I’ve got to say I'm relieved—and that I'll
be happy to work with you.”
"You will?" Visions of book covers with her name on them danced
before Monica's eyes. "You really will?"
"Now don't get too excited, " Diana cautioned her, a trace of a smile
lurking at the corners of her mouth. "You may decide this is a hell of a
lot more work than you want to get into. You also have some
viewpoint problems, and you have nowhere near enough description,
but I'd like to handle all that in the next draft—after you straighten
out your plot problems.”
"The next draft?" Monica couldn't hide the tremor in her voice.
"That—sounds like a lot of work.”
"It is, " Diana replied soberly. "My guess is that once you get a good
plot going, you'll have another five or six drafts after that before it's
submittable. We're talking a year or more of work here. Just be glad
you're writing on a computer; my first books were all done on a
typewriter, and each draft had to be retyped from the beginning.”
"Oh, " Monica said faintly.
"I didn't promise you it would be easy, " Di reminded her. "But I did
say that I would tell you if I didn't think you had it in you to be a
writer. And I think you can do it, if you're willing to put the work in. "
She sighed, and looked a little sad. "So far I have had to give that bad
news to six of your schoolmates-each of whom came to me clasping
what they obviously thought was the best story of the year to their
hope-filled bosoms.”

She heaved a larger, more melodramatic sigh, and clutched a
notebook to her chest with one hand while sending the other hand
fluttering to her forehead.
Monica giggled. The fact that Diana had turned the others away—but
had just said she'd help her—cheered Monica up immensely.
Diana grinned back, but sobered again in the next instant. "Now,
about your other problem—have you told anyone else what happened.
Even your mother?"
Monica shook her head. She'd wanted to tell her mom, and she
somehow knew that Rhonda would believe her—but she also knew
what Rhonda would say about Diana. The family had some cousins in
Jamaica—and Rhonda had come a bit too close to some of the nastier
aspects of voundoun to ever trust anyone who admitted she was a
witch.
And no matter what her mother would think, Monica was certain she
could trust Diana Tregarde.
"Nothing else has happened to me, " she told Diana. "Nothing at all.
Maybe it was all a mistake or something.”
To Monica's dismay, Diana shook her head. "Not a chance, kiddo, "
she said regretfully. "I wish there was, but magic has to be targeted
very specifically to get that kind of result. Nope, somebody out there
wanted to send you screaming into next week. Have you come up with
any idea who that somebody might be? It's got to be someone you
know, or who at least knows you.”
Monica shook her head. "Everybody I know is pretty normal, " she
said slowly. "There's supposed to be some heavy-metal dudes that are
into Satanism in my class and in the senior class, but I’ve never met
any of them and I wouldn't know who they were unless somebody
pointed them out to me. Most of the kids that like metal look pretty
much alike, you know? There's even a Christian heavy-metal band.”

"Heavy-metal Satanists?" Diana said incredulously, and snorted.
"Posers. Bush league. The Dan Quayles of High Magick. Not even
close to whoever was after you. The kind of knowledge and practice it
takes just to call one of those imps is a hell of a lot more than any kid
is going to have. And the kind of control it takes is something most of
them would never even dream of. It takes the same kind of discipline
and patience it's going to take you to get that book into publishable
form, if that's making any sense to you.”
Oddly enough—or perhaps not so oddly—it was. "You're right, " she
agreed. "From what I’ve heard they aren't into anything more
complicated than lighting candles, getting stoned, and running
around naked while they play Judas Priest on the CD.”
"Pretty much what I figured. " Diana nodded. "It looks to me like
whoever sent those critters after you is an adult. Call me a kind of
magic-tracker; I can read the footprints that power leaves behind, and
everything I saw suggested a mature mind. Can you think of any adult
you've pissed off lately?"
The last time somebody yelled at me, it was for passing a note to
Alan—and before that, it was Ms. Greeley giving me a hard time for
daydreaming.
"I—no, " she said. "Not anybody, not an adult, anyway.”
Diana gave her a long, hard look, then nodded reluctantly. "I think
you'd tell me if you could. I think you’ve got the good sense not to go
playing games with me. All right, then, we're stymied for the moment.
And maybe nothing more will happen to you.”
Monica noticed that she was clutching that manila envelope so hard
her fingers were starting to ache. "Do you really think so?" she asked
hopefully.
"No, " Diana replied. "No, I certainly don't. I think whoever it is will
keep coming at you until you do whatever it is he wants you to. And

I'd feel a hell of a lot better if you'd let me put a stronger kind of
protection on you. I know you said I could help you, but every time I
do something else, ethically, I have to ask first. Think of what I gave
you the first time as burglar alarms-well, this is an electric fence.”
The deserted classroom suddenly seemed very quiet—and a world
away from the student-filled corridor outside.
"Would it—would it hurt?" Monica asked in a whisper.
Diana shook her head and reached out to pat her clenched hand. "No
chance. I doubt you'll even notice it's there. But anything that comes
after you will know it's there, big-time. They'll see it, and that should
be enough to make them go away. If not—anything that touches it is
going to get its little paw fried.”
"And nobody else is going to notice it?" Monica persisted. "I mean, I
don't want anybody to think I'm looking weird or something.”
"Not unless they're very psychic—in which case whoever notices is
going to be used to seeing odd things and keeping his or her mouth
shut about it. " Diana's little smile had a bitter cast to it, and barely
stretched her lips. "Think about it. What would you say if somebody
started telling people he saw glowing lights around one of the other
kids?"
"Yeah. " Monica could see Diana's point. "Okay, then, I guess it
wouldn't hurt…”
"Fine. I had it ready, just in case you were willing. Take this a
minute—" Diana handed her a piece of rock, not even a crystal, just a
polished black pebble. Funny, though, it felt warm— and instead of
cooling as she held it gingerly between her thumb and first two
fingers, it seemed like it was getting warmer.
"It's all ready, " Diana said, her eyes a little unfocused—or maybe
focussing on something Monica couldn't see. "Just—call it. With your

mind, " she added as Monica started to open her mouth. "Think of
wanting to be protected from those things. Want it very, very badly.”
Monica squeezed her eyes shut, after a hasty look toward the corridor.
She started this feeling foolish, but as she remembered those horrible
things-that had come after her, she stopped feeling like an idiot. In
fact, she was able to do as Diana had asked without any difficulty
whatsoever.
"Very good. " Diana's voice broke her concentration, and she opened
her eyes, startled.
"I don't feel any different—" she started to say.
Then she noticed a fault glow just out of the corner of her eye. She
turned her head to look at it directly, but it seemed to keep moving,
staying just within the barest limits of her vision.
"There's—something there, " she said, waving her hand vaguely. "But
it's only sort of there.”
"That's because you're not really looking at it with your physical eyes,
you're looking at it with your mind, " Diana replied, nodding in a
satisfied way. "You're a bit more sensitive than I gave you credit for.
When all this is over, if you want some training in how to use it, let me
know. I think you should get some kind of instruction, okay? If not
from me, there are a couple of books that should suit you fine.”
"What is this thing, anyway?" Monica peered at it sideways, but the
more she concentrated, the more ephemeral it seemed. But there was
something there; she was certain of it.
It was scary. Because this meant there was something to all this magic
stuff. Monica would have been perfectly happy if Diana had only been
cultivating a very peculiar delusion.
Or would I? she wondered suddenly. Because those things— they're

real. And even if Diana claims they can be scared away, I don't want
to have to try it.
"It's like a 'Star Trek' force field, " Diana told her. "It'll keep most
nasties off your backhand protect you long enough for me to get there
if what hits you is more than the shield can handle. Listen, it's gone
really gloomy out there, and you don't live that far from Derek. Do you
want to meet me after classes -this afternoon? I could drive you
home.”
Monica was tempted, but then she remembered that Alan had asked
her what route she usually took to get home. If she walked, she just
must might "run into" him.
"No, thanks, " she said. "Mom doesn't like me to get rides from people
she doesn't know—and I'm not sure I want you two to meet. If she
figures out what you are, she might freak.”
Diana raised an eyebrow, and gathered up her purse and briefcase. "I
take it Mom is where you get your psychic abilities.”
Monica shrugged, and flushed. "I don't know. Just we’ve got some
relatives in Jamaica that do some pretty gross things, and Mom
doesn't want to even talk about it.”
"If your relatives are doing what I think they're doing, I don't blame
her. " Diana held the door open for Monica, and the two of diem
stepped out into the deserted hallway as the door shut and locked
behind them. "Okay, kiddo; how about working on the very first story
in the bunch you gave me—turn your heroine into a human being,
screw up her life, and put some of the guts into it that you put in that
fight scene. When you’ve got about thirty pages, come show it to me,
okay?"
"Okay, " Monica said, already thinking ahead to this after-. noon, and
trying to remember if the Computer Club met after school today, or
tomorrow.

—
It was today. In a way that was good, because it meant she had a
better chance of intercepting him alone.
Maybe. If the club members all got started on something and stayed
more than the hour the meeting was supposed to take, she'd have to
start for home on foot and hope he'd drive her route.
She loitered for a while in the empty hall outside the computer lab, but
it didn't sound like anybody was ready to go home in there. It was
kind of funny how those Brains were; real quiet even in class, although
they could pull some real rude tricks if they were pushed to it. But get
a bunch of them together, and it was worse than a pyjama party.
She paced up and down the hallway; the janitor came by, pushing the
big stainless-steel floor waxer toward the cafeteria. He looked at her
curiously, but didn't say anything or even stop; he just kept right on
going, leaving the heavy scent of floor cleaner in his wake. Once he
was gone, she heard her own footsteps echoing up and down the
corridor every time she moved, and the fault murmur of voices and
occasional laughter from behind the heavy computer-lab door.
It was getting dark, darker than she expected. The corridor had
windows high up, right near the ceiling, and when she looked up she
saw heavy, charcoal-gray clouds bulging overhead. There weren't any
storms predicted when she'd gone to school this morning, so she
hadn't brought a raincoat. If it started to rain, as evil as those clouds
looked, she'd be drenched before she got a block.
She eyed the clouds dubiously, then went over to listen at the lab door.
This time she could hear one of the machines beeping, and the
muffled exclamations of the kids when it made that blat sound that
meant something had gone wrong.
They're running something, she decided finally. They could be in
there until their sponsor kicks them out. I'd better head home now.

Maybe Alan will catch up with me.
Once outside, the gloom seemed even thicker, even though it didn't
smell like rain. March had been gorgeous, with balmy temperatures in
the seventies and even eighties during the day, and no storms at all.
April was turning into a stone drag. Monica shivered inside her
windbreaker. The air felt thick and heavy, and even though there
wasn't a bit of wind, she was cold. It might not smell like rain, but it
felt like it; damp and oppressive.
It could be worse, she told herself. In Colorado there's still snow on
the ground.
But snow, even the dirty, gritty snow of April, seemed preferable to
this.
Alan was not worth loitering around for.
I wish I'd called Mom at work and had her pick me up, she thought
wistfully, as the damp penetrated her light jacket and chilled her right
down to her bones. It would have given her an excuse to get out of
some of that overtime and she wouldn't have minded. I don't think.
The street she usually took home wasn't much like Colorado. There
weren't any sidewalks, for one thing. Joy had explained cynically that
this was because Tulsa was an oil town; people were expected to drive
half a block to get a carton of milk. Houses sat in the middle of
absolutely huge lawns, acres of lawn.
Monica supposed they'd be pretty once things started growing, but
right now they were a sort of dirty brown-green. Except for the people
who had a lawn service come out. You could always tell those; the
lawn was a bright emerald.
When Joy told me how they dye their lawns for the winter, I about
fell out, she thought, giggling at the very idea. And how they have
contests for "Lawn of the Week. "Not garden, lawn— God, these

people are crazy out here. Maybe it's the Prayer Tower. Maybe it
attracts cosmic rays or something.
She walked another block, the clouds getting thicker and darker
overhead, everything getting dimmer and gloomier.
They may be crazy, she thought forlornly, but I wish I had some
company out here. God, it's dark. I don't blame everybody for being
inside, but I wish it didn't feel so deserted around here.
For the past month whenever she'd walked home those huge lawns
had been full of people: yard crews or dads taking care of their own
gardening work, little kids playing, guys from school running or
having a game of frisbee, girls working on their tans. Now, tonight, she
could have been the only person left alive in the universe.
Like that old movie Joy rented, about how everybody dies while this
scientist is down in a cave, and when he comes up he's all alone.
Even the lights on in the windows of the houses seemed cold and
distant, like there really hadn't been anybody in there to turn them on,
just a bunch of timers in empty dwellings, faking the signs of life.
And it's so dark it might just as well be dusk. God. This is creepy. She
glanced back over her shoulder, but there wasn't anything, not even a
stray cat.
So why does it feel like somebody's watching me?
It materialized, just as she turned back.
This time she saw it arrive—or rather, she didn't see it; there was
nothing but empty street one minute, and the next minute it was
there, all teeth and claws and sulfur-yellow eyeballs. There wasn't
even a special-effects-type shimmer, like in a movie— just nothing,
then the thing was there.

She jumped back a foot, and tried to scream, but all that came out was
a squeak. The thing growled and drooled at her; she remembered
Diana telling her that these monsters were cowards and easy to scare
off-No. Oh no. This thing didn't look like it was going to scare too
easily. And she didn't want to try. Those teeth were each as long as her
little finger, and the talons were even longer. And this time there
wasn't the dubious safety of the windshield between her and it.
She backed up another step. Another.
And the thing giggled, a high-pitched titter, like a dumb blond on a
sitcom. Then, before she had time to react, it jumped for her.
She squeaked again, a panicked-mouse sound; it leapt high into the
air, twice its own height, and it was coming straight at her—
But before she could move, before she could even do more than raise
her hands in a pathetic attempt to fend the thing off, it hit something
about a foot from her body. It landed, spread-eagled, in midair, and
hung there for a moment, like a bug squashed against a windshield.
She felt her heart stop, and had just enough time to register that the
thing looked very, very surprised.
Then there was a sizzling sound, the same sound a bug-zapper made
when it caught something big, like a moth or a horsefly. The thing's
eyes bugged out, and it looked like it wanted to scream, but when it
opened its mouth, nothing happened.
Then it was gone, exactly the same way it had come. One minute,
defying gravity. The next, gone without a trace. Not even drool marks
on the sidewalk.
Monica dropped her books because her hands were so paralysed and
shaking they could no longer hold them. She stared at the spot where
the thing had been, and whimpered in the back of her throat.

Then she turned and ran blindly into the middle of the street. She
didn't know where she was going, and she didn't much care. There
was only one thought in her mind at the moment, and that was to get
out of there.
She sensed, rather than saw, the approaching vehicle. Sensed it far too
late to evade it. There was a shriek of brakes practically on top of her;
and now she screamed.
The car swerved wildly around her, somehow, and came to a sliding,
sideways halt fifteen feet away. At just that moment her knees gave
and she dropped to the pavement, crying hysterically, her face buried
in her hands.
"Fuckin' Jesus Christ, Monica! I almost killed you! What in hell were
you doing, running out into the street in front of me like that?"
The voice was familiar. After a moment her numb, fright-dazed mind
put a name to the voice, just as his hands pulled hers away from her
face.
Alan.
"Hey, hey, it's okay. I didn't hit you, did I?" He stroked her hair
tentatively. "Are you hurt? Are you all right? Talk to me, Monica. Say
something!"
Alan. Familiar. Normal.
She flung her arms around his neck and hung on to him, afraid that
he, too, would disappear.
He hauled her clumsily to her feet, and coaxed her into the front seat
of his car, where she sat shivering from head to foot, hugging her arms
to her chest. After a moment, she noticed that he wasn't there, and
panicked, only to have her heart slow again when he returned carrying
her books and notebooks.

"Hang on, " he said. "Let me get this parked somewhere, and we can
talk.”
"O-okay, " she stammered, the first coherent word she'd been able to
speak.
To her immense relief, he pulled immediately into the parking lot of a
nearby church.
Oh, God, thank you. Thank you. Those things can't come near a
church. At least I don't think they can come near a church… They
can't in movies.
But this isn't a movie.
Well, the movie people had to get their stuff from somewhere. So they
probably can't come near a church.
But what if it has to be a special kind of church? She tried to
remember every horror movie she'd ever watched. It's always priests
and things in the movies, she realized. Maybe it has to be a Catholic
church…
She craned her neck around to see the lawn sign. I don't know. Does
Methodist count?
Either it did or the frying the thing had gotten had made it change its
mind about coming back. Although she waited for what seemed like
forever, with Alan way over on his side of the car, staring at her,
nothing else happened.
"Monica?" he said tentatively. "Monica, you still haven't said anything.
Are you okay?"
"Oh, God, " she wailed, finally feeling safe, safe enough to let
everything go. "Oh God, Alan—"

And that was about all she managed to get out before she started
crying and babbling hysterically.
Alan reached awkwardly for her over the gear shift, and held her
against his shoulder. Before she had a chance to stop herself, she'd
spilled the entire story to him.
Then she started crying harder. "You're going to think I'm crazy, " she
wailed. "You are, I know you are, but it's true, I swear it, there are
these things after me and Miss Tregarde believes me, and she put,
like, this force field on me and—"
"Whoa, Monica, hey, it's okay. " He held her a little more tightly and
patted her hair. She closed her eyes and started shivering again. "It's
okay. 7 believe you, too.”
She gulped, and began to throttle down the flood of tears. "You—you
do?" she said, doubtfully. "You really do?"
She felt him nod. "I really do. I mean, shit, people don't go running
out in front of moving cars just for fun! And I don't know what the hell
you'd have to gain from lying, either, or making all this up. You tell the
wrong person, and they just might get you locked up, you know? Now
why'd you tell Miss Tregarde, anyway?"
"Because she was there, I mean, I was going to meet her at the library
the first time this happened… " She told him the entire story, feeling a
heavy weight fall away just because she could finally tell somebody
about it. "So today just before lunch Diana asked me if I could think of
anybody who'd want to do this to me, and I said no. And then she
asked me if I'd let her put this thing on me to keep them away, and I
said yes. So she did. " The image of the thing, spread-eagled in midair
just at her eye level, seemed burned into her brain. "Alan, the thing
tried to get me! I don't know what would have happened if Miss
Tregarde hadn't—"
"Did it ever cross your mind that she could be the one who's doing

this?" Alan interrupted. "I mean, none of this started happening until
after she got here. None of it started happening to you until after you
met her. And both times these things have come after you when you'd
either just met with her, or were going to.”
She pulled away from him, and stared at him in shock. "I can't believe
you're saying that! Diana's been really, really nice to me! She's helping
me with my writing and everything.”
"And if she wanted something out of you, that's exactly what she'd do,
" Alan retorted. "What if she needs a virgin sacrifice or something?"
"Then she isn't going to look for one in Jenks, " Monica snapped
angrily, flushing. "And if this is a sneaky way to find out if I'm—well—I
don't think it's very funny, Alan!"
Alan blushed, starting with the tips of his ears and working down past
his collar. "Monica, I didn't—I mean—hell, I'm just trying to think
about you. I think you're putting too much trust in somebody you
don't know anything about!"
"I know enough. " She set her chin stubbornly. "She's got a special
investigator's card from the Hartford police; she showed it to me. And
she—"
She had started to say "she's known Derek's dad for ages, " but she
stopped herself just in time, "—she's staying with somebody in my
class, " she said instead. Better not let Alan know I know who Derek
is. At least not yet. "So she isn't exactly some kind of mass murderer.”
"Yeah, well, I know the guy she's staying with, " Alan replied with a
sulky frown. "He thinks Miss Tregarde and his dad are having an
affair.”
Monica burst into peals of laughter, which obviously discomfited Alan.
"So because she's hopping into bed with this guy's dad, she's got to be
Charles Manson? Come on, Alan, that's dumb!"

He glowered.
"And I don't care what you say, " she continued, just as stubborn as he
was. "I trust her. And I'm going to keep on trusting her.”
"Then I guess I'd better get you home, " he replied, starting the car
and refusing to look at her.
Two can play that game. She turned away from him and stared out
the passenger's-side window.
"Yeah, " she replied tightly. "I guess you'd better.”
CHAPTER TEN
A SHARP PAIN CAUGHT DI RIGHT BETWEEN THE EYES. THE
screen of the laptop blurred and vanished as her eyes unfocused; then
her vision blanked.
Jesus Cluny Frog—what— She grabbed the edge of the desk to steady
herself and give her a reminder of where "reality" was. She exerted
control; the smoothness of the cool, lacquered wood beneath her
palms gave her something to concentrate on. Her vision came back,
but she ignored the now-blank screen in favour of vision of another
sort.
A fraction of a second later, she knew what had happened, and to
whom, as well. Monica. Power pulse right in her lap. Hot damn—first
shunt some of that off into my shields—
The pain vanished as she took the overflow of energy and gave it
somewhere to go.
Now, let's see what's going on out there.
She closed her eyes and focussed, following the tie from herself back
to Monica. Something just bamphed in on top of her. That's what

caused the pulse. Now what is it, anyway? She "read" the energy
signature just as eddies in the power flows told her that the creature
was bracing itself to attack the girl. You little—no you don't, you
twisted bastard!
She shunted all the energy she'd drained off and plenty of her own
besides into the shield around the girl, just at the moment it impacted
against the barrier. She felt it "scream" in her mind. Then she felt it
"die.”
Good riddance to bad rubbish. Ye gods, I hate those things. Bloody
little sadists. Now, let's just follow the shock wave back to your
daddy, and find out what kind of magician it was that gave an imp
that much power to play with. Normally the little creep would never
have dared take on a shield, no matter how weak it looked.
She stretched her probe out, very carefully, very cautiously. The very
last thing she wanted to do was alert this magician to her presence.
Better to take things slowly; undoubtedly she'd miss out on some
information, but it wasn't worth the risk of having this guy decide to
rush the job on Monica. There's time. I can afford to stick around
until I've got this guy taken care of. Nothing worse has happened
than Monica getting scared out of her shorts. But if I rush him, he
may up the ante before I'm ready, and I can't be everywhere. And if
the Guardian stuff decides not to kick in, all I've got to depend on is
little old me, and maybe Larry. Her probe met resistance; a shield. A
shield with the boundaries roughened with pain. Aha. The plot
sickens. So you felt that, did you? Good. About time the threefold
retribution clause kicked in.
An old shield; layered and reinforced with decades of spell casting. It
had the slightly "artificial" feel that she had come to associate with
High Magick. It also had the "constructed, " crystalline matrix that
told her that the sorcerer had no sensitivity to energy flows at all.
Her shields, her magic, were a lot more organic. Like her psi-senses,
they were a part of her, and carefully shaped themselves to her

environment without Di's needing to think about it. That harmony
with surroundings tended to be a hallmark of Nepa-gans in general
and Wiccan in particular. Although a lot of the New Age types were
building constructs that integrated the crystalline properties of High
Magick with some of the organic properties of Wiccan traditions.
Di tended to baffle folks of all traditions; her "base" was organic, but
she built some pretty impressive High Magick constructs when she
needed to—and then there was the Guardian touch. The impression
that there was enormous power around her, but not necessarily
available to her.
Which is pretty much the case, actually, she thought ruefully. And not
something anybody but another Guardian even recognizes. Not even
the folks on the Squad ever knew. Andre's the only non-Guardian
that ever I’D me… but then Andre's different.
But although this shield was strong, it had the brittle taste of
something put together by rote.
Exactly what I was thinking. Uh-huh. And there's no hint, nothing at
all, that it's ever been in contact with worship-centred magic or
group magic. Which means that whoever this is has either never
been exposed to Wicca or any of the other neopagan movements, or
simply decided never to have anything to do with them. V-e-r-y
interesting. A pure sorcerer. I didn't think there were any around.
The edges of the shield prickled a little, like the hair rising on the back
of an animal's neck, telling her that her probe had been detected. She
withdrew quickly.
If I'm lucky, he'll think It was just some random brush-by; maybe
even an echo of what Monica did to his imp. I hope he figures Monica
did this on her own. The potential is there, if she was scared enough
to focus it. It would have been crude—but the way I fried the imp
would look the same as if it had been blasted, which is something
Monica could do. This could be a lot worse. I'm dealing with

somebody who's essentially tone-deaf and colour-blind. And if I can't
use that to my advantage, I'm going to turn in my union card.
But one thing was absolutely clear now; this was no youngster playing
at sorcery. Not with a shield like that. This was someone Di's age, or
older. Most likely the latter.
And I would dearly love to know where he—or she, actually, there's
no way I can tell through that protection, and High Magick tends not
to have sex signatures—has been learning pure sorcery. I suppose it's
possible to get it from books, if you've managed to get hold of
someone's private notebooks. You'd almost have to inherit them,
though, or you wouldn't have the keys to uncode them.
She opened her eyes slowly; they still weren't focussing quite right, but
that wasn't too surprising. Magic was always twice as hard to work
when you hadn't prepared yourself for it in advance.
She began taking deep, slow breaths, concentrating on physical
sensations—the sweet scent of the bouquet of freesia on the bureau,
the cool desk under her hands, the warm current of air across her face
as the furnace activated. When her focus suddenly sharpened, and she
could see clearly again, she let out the last of those breaths in a long
sigh, and stretched.
"Oh, my ears and whiskers, " she said to the empty room. "This gets
more interesting all the time. I think it's time to ambush Larry again.
Between doing that research last night, and this, I’ve got an earful.”
She checked the house for Derek automatically; this was becoming
second nature, watching for the kid. No muted glow surmounted by
her unobtrusive telltale, though; the kid must be over at a friend's
place, or staying late after school for something.
Thank the gods for any favours. She chuckled and popped the door to
her suite open with no attempt at silence.

"Hey, Cosmic!" she shouted down the hall. "Are you in the kitchen?"
A muffled "yes" from down the stairs and to the right was all the
direction she needed. She took the stairs slowly, still not entirely
certain of her equilibrium. That was one of the less pleasant aspects of
working magic on a regular basis; you sometimes felt as if your body
were an ill-fitting garment.
Once she reached the bottom of the staircase, her nose told her that
Larry was in the kitchen, and she followed the marvellous aroma she'd
encountered through the formal dining room, into an informal
breakfast bar, and from there into the kitchen itself.
"Will you many me?" she asked Larry, who was watching the progress
of a truly impressive pizza through the glass window of an eye-level
oven.
"Sorry, already taken, " he replied. "Besides, you only love me for my
cooking.”
"Too true, Cosmic. You certainly haven't lost your delicate touch with
spices. " She inhaled again, blissfully. "Is this for supper? Do I get to
make a pig out of myself?"
"As much as you want, and in about fifteen minutes; I timed mis to be
ready when Derek gets home—this is club night. " He cracked open
the oven door about an inch and eyed the pizza with a frown of
concentration. "I hope this thing isn't going to scorch around the
edges again… What brought you down here?"
"Monica got hit, " she said shortly. "Same source as last time.
Definitely High Magick."
"Does that extra 'k' on the end seem as pretentious to you as it does to
me?" he asked. "Seems like you ought to enunciate it. Magic-k.
Sounds like a speech defect.”

She chuckled a little. "As a matter of feet, yes, it always has seemed a
little pretentious. But then I've always figured that half of what
sorcerers did was just for show.”
"Really?" Larry dug a couple of Cokes out of the fridge and handed her
one. "But you're a sorcerer, aren't you?"
She shook her head. "Only by necessity. I'm more comfortable with
Wicca. I'm a kitchen magician, Larry. If I have to do something, my
choice of tools is pure psionics first, witchcraft second, and sorcery as
a definite third.”
"So what happened?" He sat down at the kitchen table, and waited for
her to do the same. "I'm going to assume, since you trotted down here
looking for dinner and not reinforcements, that whatever it was the
girl ran into, it wasn't serious.”
"Not very, " she replied, staring out the kitchen window at the sunset.
There was something odd about it. "Oh, it was probably pretty scary,
but at least now she knows it wasn't an accident the first time, or
something she only thought she'd seen. She's going to be more likely
to trust me now, I hope.”
"Or else, " Larry pointed out, "she's going to notice that none of this
happened to her until you showed up in town.”
Di grinned. "Too late; she already gave her permission for the shield
and telltales. She won't be rid of me until I'm ready. She can avoid me
all she wants; I'll still know where she is and what's happening to her.
Thanks for stealing Derek's worry stone for me last night, by the way.
His shield's nicely in place. Now, let me bring you up to date.”
After years of briefing sessions, Larry knew better than to interrupt
her at this point. He just leaned his arms on the table and listened
until she finished describing everything she'd picked up.
"And I’ve just noticed something else, " she concluded as an

afterthought. "Look out there—the weather's cleared up.”
She waved her hand at the kitchen window; he looked, and frowned a
little. "So?" he replied. "Happens all the time in Tulsa. Oklahoma is
the state that Will Rogers made the original joke about—you know, 'If
you don't like the weather here, wait an hour. ' We're a prairie state;
weather systems can sweep in and out in a matter of half a day
because there's nothing to stop them.”
"That may be true—but remember that this goddess thing is somehow
tied in to the weather, and I find it a real odd coincidence that
threatening rain cleared up as soon as the attack on Monica broke off.
" She looked outside again; there wasn't even enough cloud cover now
to make a decent sunset. "Now I will admit that there's another
possibility; weather-wise, this area may be naturally so unstable that
the least little upset in the energy patterns around here changes the
weather for good or ill. And the insensitive way that sorcerer was
wrenching energy around was making some interesting little eddies
and back-flows. But—" She held up her index finger in warning as he
started to say something. "But—I don't know that the area is that
sensitive. Do you?"
He shrugged.
"So, where does that leave us?"
"That we don't know if this is tied in with the goddess, whatever it is,
but that the circumstances sure make it look suspicious. " One corner
of his mouth twitched. "I assume that you're more determined than
ever to investigate.”
"Believe it, " she said firmly.
He sighed.
—

Larry slipped through the door to the guest suite as quietly as he
could. Di looked up as her host closed and locked the door behind
him. She hadn't needed to shove the furniture against the wall the way
they had back in college; the room was more than big enough for her
to cast her circle without moving anything out of place. She was
holding a small throwing knife about an inch above the pale-gray
carpet. Larry concentrated a moment, letting his Sight kick in, and he
Saw the faint line of blue light it left behind.
"I told Derek you were too wrapped up right now to eat, " Larry told
her. "That you were on a hot love scene, and you didn't want to stop.”
"That's as good an excuse as any, " she said as she finished inscribing
the last of the protective circle with a frown of concentration. "That'll
cover why I didn't come down for dinner, and why I'll go down and eat
like a spring bear when we're done. But I hope Derek didn't catch you
sneaking up here.”
"I told him I was going for a walk, " Larry replied. Di drew the knife
point up to meet the end of the circle she'd inscribed. There was a
moment when the thin line brightened; at that point she held out her
hands, and then there was a kind of half-dome of fainter light, too
faint to make out the colour, where the circle had been.
"Do you ever do that?" she asked, sheathing the knife at her side and
picking up a candle from the dresser. "Go out for a walk, I mean.”
It seemed an odd question. "Sure, sometimes. Why?"
She made a face. "Because, m'love, I think young Master Derek has
figured out something is going on, and I don't want him to try and
bust in on it.”
Larry thought about that for a moment, and nodded reluctantly. "He's
been acting kind of funny lately, hasn't he? Shit, he is sensitive. I don't
suppose even shielded I could reasonably have expected him not to
notice the kind of things you've been doing.”

Di gave him an ironic look, but went on with her preparations, first
driving anything that had been inside that protected area out, then
sealing it off, using salt and water, the candle, and incense. Larry tried
not to let his uneasiness show, but Di knew him too well. When she
finished, she wrinkled her nose at him.
"It's all right, Cosmic; that's as fancy as it gets. The floor show is
officially over.”
He laughed self-consciously. "That obvious, huh?"
"Yeah. " She "cut" a door in the dome for him to enter by, and resealed
it behind him. "You still remember how to do this? All I need is for you
to anchor, nothing fancy. I don't intend to kick any confrontations
off.”
"I think I can handle that. " She toed a pillow toward him. He dropped
down onto it and took a lotus position with an ease that probably
would have surprised the socks off his kid. She took a similar
pose—without the pillow—across from him, then picked up the candle
she'd used earlier, set it in a plain wooden holder between them, and
lit it.
Good, Larry thought. I need a focus, even if she doesn't. I haven't
done anything like this in years. Rusty is not the word.
He stared at the flame, letting it fill his field of vision, and letting
himself relax. This wasn't so much a matter of concentrating as it was
of changing his focus, ignoring everything except the flame. Shutting
the senses out of his conscious awareness, one by one, sight the last of
all.
This wasn't precisely a trance, although it was quite close to
trance-state. As Di's anchor, he didn't dare be in trance (a state of
passivity), or he wouldn't be able to haul her in if she got into trouble.
The crude EEGs of the psych lab at the university back in the early
seventies had shown his brain-wave activity in this state to be very like

the patterns when he was creating something at the drawing table.
Definitely not a trance. Refined and directed concentration, perhaps.
Except he wasn't concentrating on anything anyone else could see.
He let his eyelids close slowly. Now that he knew how to shut his Sight
off, it mostly stayed off, and he rarely thought about what he could
sense when he did use it.
For him it worked a lot like real vision, which was what had confused
him so much when it had first decided to manifest itself.
A late bloomer, Di had called him. He remembered her words clearly,
coming as they had with relief so profound he'd cried and hadn't been
ashamed to. "Gifts usually show up when you hit puberty, " she'd told
him, keeping it all very light, very offhand, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world to see tilings that "weren't there. "
"You're a real oddball, waiting this late.”
He really had no idea when he'd started to See things, because what
he Saw had the same solidity and reality as what he only saw with his
eyes. He'd had no real way of telling which was which until Di came
along.
Like now; with his eyes closed, he could still see—or rather, See—her.
She looked just about the same, except that she was very faintly
haloed with a spectral iridescence. And there wasn't anything else
"visible" except her.
Most people didn't Look like that to him; most were fairly faint ghosts
of their outer selves. Only the rest of the gang in the Squad—and a
couple of the people they'd made it their business to shut down—had
been more substantial than that.
If he really opened up, he'd be able to See that spectral radiance
around anything alive. Now, however, was not the time to do that.

Di stretched out her "hand"—he took it in both of his. Then she was
"gone, " leaving him holding the end of a glowing cord. Through that
cord he could feel things; not much, but enough. If she was in trouble,
he'd know. If she needed to be hauled back, he could do that too. As
long as nothing cut the cord.
Let's not think about that, shall we? Besides, she's got defences
against anyone trying.
He settled himself patiently. Waiting. Something he was used to
doing, one way or another, all of his life.
Wait for clients to make up their minds, wait for them to decide what
changes they want, wait for contractors to put in their bids… And
before that, waiting in ambush, waiting for clues, waiting while Di
and Miri went off and did things while I just held the fort.
Waiting for Mom and Dad to get back from their latest emergency
call. Waiting for vacations, when we could all be together without
phone calls hauling them off somewhere. That's why I decided not to
be an engineer. I wonder if they know that? I wonder if they ever
knew how terrified I was that they wouldn't come back? All those
trips to South America—and when the Texas Towers collapsed, and
all I knew was that they happened to be in Texas…
I probably ought to tell them.
This, he realized, was one reason why he hadn't done this in a long
time. The state of passive hyperawareness made for a bad case of
introspection. Every time he went under, he wound up confronting
truths he would rather not have known about.
"He thinks too much; such men are dangerous. " Boy, Julius, you
sure got that in one.
The "line" he held thinned, and thinned again—Di was going a lot
"farther" than she ever had back in the Squad days. It wasn't getting

any weaker, though, so he decided it wasn't worth worrying about.
Finally the cord of light stopped growing thinner; it remained as it was
for several minutes (insofar as anyone could judge time in a
near-trance), then began thickening again. At that point Larry knew
she wouldn't need him, and set about waking himself up and shutting
that extra "eye" down.
He began paying attention to his other five senses in reverse order:
first sight, concentrating on that candle flame, then bringing the rest
of the room back into view, then body awareness, then the rest. By the
time everything was back to normal and he was ready to stretch the
kinks out of his joints, a movement across the circle caught his eye. Di
blinked once or twice, took a very deep breath, and let it out slowly,
then sagged forward, touching her forehead to her crossed ankles.
"So, what's the scoop?" he asked. "You get anything?"
"I'll tell you in a minute, " she replied, her voice muffled. "Let me clean
up my toys first.”
She straightened slowly, turned that movement into a stretch, then
turned the stretch into an extension that gracefully pulled her to her
feet.
Larry found himself a little resentful—his feet were still tingling
because they'd fallen asleep.
"You must be made of rubber, " he said disgustedly. She threw him an
amused little glance.
"You’ve said that before, " she told him, and held out her hands,
pushing with them palm-down against the air, as if she was lowering
some invisible barrier.
The half-dome of the protective circle shrank down into a glowing trail
above the floor.

She took her knife and "uncast" the circle; Larry shivered, looked
down at his feet, and concentrated on getting himself all locked down.
There was something about the way that the light was pulled back into
the blade of the knife that made his head ache and his stomach
queasy.
When he looked up again, she had finished, and there was no sign in
the room that anything out of the ordinary had gone on.
He rose, and forced his stiffened joints to take him over to the plush,
charcoal-gray couch. She flung herself carelessly into an armchair,
draping herself across the arms of it in a way that reminded him very
much of Derek and his friends. She rested her head against the back of
it, but was not looking at him.
"So?" he said, when the silence had stretched on too long.
"So, I found something, " she replied vaguely, her eyes focussing on
some point past his shoulder. "Something quite impressive.”
"What is it?" he asked, feeling the first stirrings of unease. This
vagueness wasn't like her; she generally didn't have to be prompted
for information.
"I'm not certain, " she answered. "I'm really not certain. It's very big,
very old, and not really aware of much. That's all I can tell you.”
Something about the way she said that made him certain she was
being evasive. He'd seen her in this mood once or twice before. Like
Sherlock Holmes, unwilling to say anything until he was certain, she
would keep what she knew to herself as much as possible. She
probably wouldn't lie if he asked her a direct question, but she'd
certainly do her best to distract him, and she probably wouldn't tell all
of the truth.
And anyway, he didn't know the right questions to ask in the first
place.

"Does this thing have anything to do with Derek?" he prompted.
"No, " she answered. Too quickly? "No, nor anything to do with
Monica. Though it's been aware of the magic currents and the power
flows going on around here lately. Vaguely aware, but it's noticed. "
She sat in silence for a moment, head tilted back, staring at the moon
through the skylight. "This isn't finished yet, Larry. It isn't even close
to being finished. I just don't have all the pieces. " She pulled her gaze
down from the moon to stare at him, and he felt a little chill run up his
spine. "Look, you'd better get, before your kid wonders if you fell in a
hole or something. Do me a favour and go nuke the leftover pizza. I'll
be down in a minute.”
He got slowly and reluctantly to his feet. "Are you okay?" he asked.
"Are you going to be all right up here?" He didn't like the hint of a
green glow in the back of her eyes, he didn't like the way she was
evading his questions, and he most especially didn't like the odd,
masklike quality of her expression— or lack of one.
"I'll be fine, " she said, then suddenly shook her head hard, and gave
him a gaminlike grin. "You worry too much, Cosmic. It's okay; I just
need to sort some things out.”
He left, shutting the door quietly behind him, and slipped down the
hall and the stairs past his kid's room as if he were some kind of
intruder.
But the more he thought about this, the less he liked it. He reached
the kitchen, put the pizza in the microwave, and stared at the food
through the glass door, frowning.
If this thing she ran into is all that powerful, he thought, it could be
suckering her. She always told us you couldn't lie mind-to-mind, but
that a stronger mind can conceal things from a weaker one. This
thing could be hiding almost anything from her.
He closed his eyes and tried to recall exactly what she'd said. And

came up with an even nastier thought.
It could even have sucked her in. Power calls to power. Greater
power can dominate lesser. It could have her on a string I can't even
detect. I couldn't See anything while she was searching, and I should
have been able to. Point of fact, I wasn't even aware that anything
was there. So it's strong enough to conceal itself. Which means it's a
lot more powerful than anything I've ever dealt with before.
As in, orders of magnitude more powerful.
The more he thought about that, the unhappier he became.
Especially since he wasn't sure he could trust Di anymore.
* * *
"C'mon, Fay, " Bob slurred, leaning drunkenly over the back of the
black leather couch. He pawed at her shoulder. "Le's go upstairs.”
Fay was beginning to regret she'd invited him over tonight after the
fiasco with Monica had put her short of energy again. She was
regretting even more that she'd given him free run of the liquor
cabinet. Bob had been dry since his father had taken his license away,
and that had not set well with him.
He's a borderline alcoholic, Fay thought in disgust, and if he wasn't
so good in bed—and so easy to put in a rage—I would never have
bothered with him, captain of the football team or not.
"Not right now, honey, " she told him, pushing his groping hands
away. "Why don't you watch that tape for a while? I bought it just for
you.”
That was a patent lie, but he was too drunk to question her assertion
or even care if she told him the truth. He turned his wavering
attention back to the screen, where several impossibly blond girls,

decked out in spike-heeled, black-vinyl thigh boots and imitation Nazi
officer's caps, and not much else, were "interrogating" a "prisoner.”
Maybe not so impossibly blond, Fay thought, taking a second look as
one of the girls achieved an amazingly athletic pose. I don't think you
can dye that.
The title of this classic was Sex Secrets of the SS. Fay had bought it,
not for Bob (although he looked—when he was still capable of
focussing—as if he was enjoying it), but for Derek. And not for the
mundane sex. There were a couple of remarkably accurate depictions
of the rites of Sex Magick in this piece of tripe, and she wanted to see
his reaction to them. Would he recognize them for what they were?
Would he be revolted, or attracted? A few of her spouses in the past
had become willing participants in her rituals; as a reward she had
allowed them to live until the time of transfer. On one or two
occasions she'd even delayed her daughter's menses until the girl in
question was eighteen, in order to enjoy the benefits of having a helper
that much longer.
She'd set the tape up in the VCR this morning, anticipating that she
would be able to coax Derek over after dinner. But she hadn't
reckoned on that little Carlin bitch being able to successfully defend
herself.
When the imp's here-and-now body fried, releasing the essence of it
back to where it came from and out of her power, the energy she'd
given it was also released. Like an elastic band now held only at one
end, it had backlashed into her, knocking her to the ground before she
managed to absorb it. Then it had drained maddeningly away.
So now she was in dire need of replacement energy—and that meant
Sex Magick, and that meant Bob, since she couldn't get Derek drunk
enough not to notice what she was doing to him.
Bob had lost interest in the pseudo-Nazis again. He was out of his own
shirt, and was working his hands up her legs, trying to come at her

from the bottom instead of the top this time. It isn't worth it, she
thought angrily, pushing his hands away from under her skirt. 7
should have called Sandy instead. But it was Bob's turn… If I'd called
Sandy, he'd have figured I want him more than Bob, and he'd have
lost that edge of jealousy. Damn. This is not working out right.
Bob slouched back on the couch, defeated for the moment. Fay curled
her legs up underneath her, out of his reach, and considered the
afternoon's events. The imp had impacted on a shield, then been
blasted. It couldn't have been Monica's doing, could it? Fay nibbled
her fingernail, peeling all the nail polish off it in tiny bites. But if it
wasn't Monica, where was she getting her help? Who could it possibly
be?
It had to be Monica.
Bob reached for her again, and nuzzled at her like a toothless vampire.
She decided to let him; at least he wasn't trying to undress her at the
moment. 7 had that kind of power the first time I was her age, in my
first body, Fay thought, while Bob ran a thick tongue over her neck
and shoulder. She doesn't seem to be trained, but she could be faking
it. Even if she's not trained, I've seen natural shields that strong, and
if she was frightened enough, fear would give her the means to blast
something…
No. No, she has to be trained. The imps didn't shock her at all; she
didn't run around school the next day babbling about them or make
a run for lights and people at the time. It's too bad. She'd have found
herself either in a little padded room or in a drug rehab program. In
either case she'd be out of my hair.
Bob's hands were suddenly under her sweater, kneading her breasts
like they were pieces of dough. "C'mon, Fay, " he said, breathing fumes
into her face. "Let's go upstairs.”
At that moment certain internal alarms stirred, but did not quite go
off. Fay herself couldn't sense the stirring of power, but her allies

could, and she'd had them set up protections and detection systems
for her over the decades. As a man could not actually see radar waves,
but could view them and their reflections indirectly, so she could track
power.
Damn—I've got a line on something here.
She tried to shrug Bob's hands off, then gave in and let him feel her
up. As long as he kept his attention on her breasts, she might be able
to ignore him.
The power she was tracking was very subtle, and moving cautiously.
The origin was in a Magick Fay wasn't familiar with, so it was pretty
surprising she'd detected it at all. Only the fact that it was strong made
it possible for her to "see" it; it was damned hard to track.
Then she lost the trace entirely as Bob began pulling at her sweater,
trying to get it off over her head. He'd been taking steroids lately,
really strong ones he'd been getting on the street. Fay hadn't minded
at first; they gave him energy and a potency he hadn't had before. But
now they were making him aggressive, as well. Too aggressive, she
realized, trying to fend nun off and having no luck. She couldn't
handle him. anymore. He laughed at the surprise on her face at the
moment she came to that conclusion. It was not a pleasant laugh.
"Don't be such a cold bitch, Fay, baby, " he growled, snaking one hand
under her skirt and groping for her panties. "That's what they call you,
did you know that? The Bitch-Queen. The Bitch-Queen of Jenks
High.”
The way he pronounced it made it sound like "Jinx" High, and it
startled her. "What else do they say?" she asked without thinking.
"Plenty. They say you're a teaser—I don't take to bein' teased. I'm
ready now, girl, and you'd better be, too.”
He laughed again, perhaps mistaking the look in her eyes for fear.

Enough is enough, she decided abruptly. He's not worth the game
anymore. I can play Sandy off against Derek; I don't need Bob.
She wrapped the reins of the spells she had cast on him around her
mental hands and pulled hard.
He froze, unable to move unless she willed it, and unaware of the
passage of time.
She paused for a moment, just long enough to consider exactly what
she was going to do with him.
He was of no further use to her in the context of Sex Magick, but there
was another even more potent—the combination of Sex and Blood
Magicks.
And it was time for the Servant to eat, too.
She loosed her grip on his mind, just a little. "Wait a minute, honey, "
she said, disengaging his hands and pulling her sweater down. "You
know I don't like to be rushed. Let me get into something comfortable.
Come on up in about five minutes.”
She slid off the couch before he could grab her (the slick leather was
good for that), and twitched her hips flirtatiously at him. "You know
it's more fun with the stuff in my room, " she said. "And we’ve got all
night.”
He looked as though he might lunge up off that couch in a few
moments if she gave him the chance. She didn't. She laughed lightly,
and ran up the stairs.
And planted a compulsion to stay where he was until she was ready
for him.
She called the Servant the moment she'd crossed the threshold of her
room.

This wasn't the first time the Servant had substituted for her; nor,
probably, would it be the last. The trick was extremely useful at
parties, or on those occasions when she'd forgotten whom she was
supposed to be going out with and accepted two dates. But this would
be the first time she'd fed her Servant this way. If the experiment
worked, it might be well worth repeating.
She clothed the "old woman" in one of her sheerest negligees. It hung
ludicrously on the stringy body, making a mockery of the withered
breasts. Fay smiled; no one would ever see her that way.
I'll be young forever, she thought, the assertion bringing with it the
taste of triumph. Whatever else happens, I'll be young and beautiful
forever. I'll never have to look in a mirror and see myself like that.
Then she held her hands pressed to the Servant's face and breastbone,
and began a high, keening chant.
When she did hands-on sorcery like this, she could feel the power; she
could feel it flowing from her, taking strength with it, as if she were
bleeding from two huge wounds in the palms of her hands.
She was weak-kneed and shaky when she took her hands away, but
the effort had been worth the result. There, standing before her in her
own silk negligee was—herself.
With one important detail differing.
She gave the spell-born command of release, heard Bob stumbling up
the staircase, and directed the Servant to go meet him at the door. She
forced her own knees into a semblance of steadiness and headed for
her workroom. When the power began to flow, she would have to be
ready. And she needed this power badly.
"Take your time, you have all night," she said over her shoulder, as she
opened the door of a small cedar-lined closet in one corner of her
bedroom and tripped the switch that released the second door at the

back of it. "When you're done with him, put him in his car and crash
it.”
She pushed the few hanging wool coats and sweaters aside and eased
the door at the back of the closet open. How convenient that he put
himself in my hands by defying his parents and driving over here
anyway, without his license, breaking his curfew.
"Where?" the Servant asked. "It should be far enough away that you
are not associated with his death.”
She thought about it. "Over in Catoosa, I think. There are a couple of
long, deserted roads out there. And a liquor store that isn't too careful
about checking ids. You might as well make a really hideous wreck of
it. Oh, and elevate his blood-steroid level, and make sure he has a
stash with him. And don't let the car burn. I want his parents to react
properly; I should be able to get a line into them to siphon some of
that energy off. If all they have is an unrecognizable cinder, they won't
give me half the power they will otherwise.”
The Servant nodded. Fay slipped past the soft, heather-toned
sweaters, through the redolent closet and across the threshold of the
workroom door. She closed it behind her just as Bob shoved open the
door to the bedroom.
The light came on automatically as soon as the closet door was closed.
She surveyed her lesser Place of Power with a satisfied smile on her
lips. From black-velvet-covered walls, to black marble floor, to the
permanent altar on the north side of the room, it was perfect. Its
proportions were exact, the materials the finest, the workmanship
exquisite. Nothing but the best for Fay Harper. Of course, she hadn't
been Fay Harper then— she'd been Rowena. And this was supposed to
have been an extension to the closet. The workmen who'd installed the
marble had wondered, until she'd erased their memories. She'd rather
have fed them to her allies, but they would have been missed, and as
Rowena she could afford the energy expense. . Wes had never known
it was there.

She crossed quickly to the pentangle she (as Rowena) had inscribed by
expensive use of Magick permanently in the black marble floor of the
room; it was cut deeply into the stone and filled with white marble.
Had anyone with her training in High Magick been with her, the
hypothetical observer would have noticed immediately that it was
incomplete, lacking one side. She removed her skirt, sweater, and
panties quickly and tossed it all into the corner in an untidy heap,
then pulled off Derek's class ring and added it to the pile. The Servant
would fetch it all later when she was finished. Waiting within the heart
of the diagram were her sword and a piece of simple white chalk. She
used the latter to close the incomplete side, and waited.
And listened. Bob was wasting no time in preliminaries; she heard
him pulling his clothing off so quickly she heard his shirt tear. Then
she heard the impact of bodies falling heavily onto the bed. Then
silence for a moment.
Then the bedsprings began to creak. At first she could hear only Bob's
grunts, then moans, as the Servant brought him with hands and lips to
a complete state of readiness. Then-Thrashing; another grunt of deep
satisfaction, one she knew well.
Then a scream that spiralled up into the soprano range. She loosed
her spell and sank to her knees within the confines of the inscription.
Her strength returned, flowing into her as it had flowed out, and she
smiled as the screams continued. What a wonderful idea that was,
she mused. How clever of the Vietnamese to have thought of it. Of
course, I improved on it. It was so ingenious to put the Servant's real
mouth down there. And I do think the three rows of shark teeth were
a nice touch. She raised her head and laughed, as the screaming from
the other room devolved into whimpers.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
George Louis doodled a few notes on the back cover of his chem
workbook and tried not to listen to the ghouls behind him. Like
everyone else today, they were rehashing the accident that had wiped

out Bob Williams.
It had been pretty gory; five miles outside of Catoosa on one of the
back roads, a dirt road, no less. That Bob had taken his Porsche down
it was a pretty good indicator of how blitzed he was just before he
crashed. Stupid. It looked like he'd careened off the road at high
speed, and bounced nose-first into a ditch. The car stayed where it
was; he'd gone through the windshield and bled to death. The wreck
hadn't even been found until this morning, by some kids on their way
to the bus stop. George wasn't comfortable thinking about the number
of times he'd wished Bob into his grave. Not that the bastard hadn't
deserved wiping out— Hell, he didn't deserve the Big One, George
thought, a little disgusted at himself. He deserved to get trashed,
yeah; he deserved to get what he was used to dishing out, but he
didn't deserve what he got.
Not that he didn't go asking for it often enough. If there was ever
anybody out cruising for a headstone…
It had taken some work to get blood, but when the coroner did, it
turned out that the fool's blood-alcohol level was through the roof. So,
rumour had it, was the level of steroids and THC. George shook his
head in disgust.
Man, the guy had anything he wanted in the whole damn world, and
he blew it;, threw it all away on fast living and cheap thrills. What a
jerk. Wonder if any of the other rich jocks are thinking twice about
their life-styles today?
Realistically speaking, he wasn't much mourned, not by anybody in
George's crowd. He'd had the habit of throwing his weight around a
little too much, of bullying people a little too often, for anyone to even
pretend that they missed him.
And George could think of one little bird over at Union that might well
find the news right welcome. She might well decide to go dancing on
Bobby-Boy's grave.

And if she did, George would be plenty pleased to play her the tune to
dance to. They had a lot of friends in common, Janette and him. He
didn't know her, but he knew about the treatment she'd gotten at the
hands of Big Bob's lawyer. When they were through with her, she
hadn't a shred of rep left that wasn't bad.
His pencil point snapped as he dug it into the cardboard of the
notebook without realizing what he was doing. He started, looked at
his broken pencil in vague surprise, and traded it off for a sharp one.
No, nobody's mourning Bobby Williams, except his folks and maybe
Fay. And if you ask me, I'd say she carried on just so she could get
another so-called migraine and split from class. It's not like he was
nice to anybody even on his best days. On his worst, I'd say the only
reason nobody ever had him up on assault charges was because his
dad bought 'em off.
Still, George was getting pretty tired of hearing about the wreck. It
made him feel guilty for hating Bobby. You weren't supposed to hate
the dead. And that wreck—God, he hated thinking about it. He
wouldn't have put Manson through that. Didn't those vampires ever
get sick of it?
He tried to concentrate on what the chem teacher was saying, but it
wasn't easy, with the whispering going on behind him.
"Yeah, well, I still say he got what was coming to him, " one of the
Brains, a thin, beaky kid, said aggressively. "The time he came after
me, the only thing that saved me was that I was faster than he was.”
"Yeah, " said one of the others, a guy so quiet George didn't even know
his name. "And I hear that the only thing that saved Carol the time he
caught her alone in the team bus was that she knew karate. She
threatened to break his passing hand if he touched her. I think he got
exactly what he deserved! I think he should have had his d—"
"Shhh!" the Brain cautioned. "You're getting loud.”

"I think somebody should have cut it off a long time ago, " the other
kid replied angrily, though in a much softer tone of voice. "Only I
think they should have kept him alive afterwards.”
"But that's a pretty awful way to die, " said Alan quietly. "I wouldn't
wish that on anybody. Bob wasn't that bad. He was a real jerk off, but
he didn't deserve that.”
George had the feeling that Alan's comment had been mostly for his
benefit. Yeah, he thought sourly, but Bobby-Boy didn't make a habit
of going after you, old buddy. You didn't spend half your schooltime
trying to dodge the bastard. Not like some of the rest of us.
Shit, I may go dance on the goddamn grave!
"George?"
He jumped, and looked up at the teacher with startled eyes.
The teacher was looking at him expectantly.
"Uh, sir, I, uh—I didn't hear the question.”
The teacher looked pained and impatient, and George had the sinking
feeling that he was going to pay for his uncharitable thoughts four or
five times over in the next hour…
—
The last chord died away, and Alan was staring at George and the rest
of the band with a look of such profound disbelief that George felt a
grin taking over his face.
The astonishment didn't fade, either. Alan seemed to be frozen in his
seat, an old recliner that had been relegated to the Louis garage.
"So?" George said nonchalantly, taking an arrogant, hipshot stance, in

half-conscious imitation of every rocker he'd ever seen on MTV. "Now
what do you think?"
Alan's mouth worked for a moment before he got a word out of it.
"I—uh—wow!"
George grinned and raised his chin. "That all you can say? You, Mr.
Music Critic?"
Alan shook his head. "I don't believe it, man! You guys were okay
before, but now you're great! What'd you do, find a fairy godmother?"
George snorted. "Fairy godmother my ass. We've been working at this,
and it paid off. We just hit, that's all. We just finally started to hit on
all eight cylinders, you know? You play together enough, and you
either hit or you fall apart, and we hit. It had to be this year or next
one, buddy, 'cause if we didn't get good enough to start the circuit
before we graduated…”
He shrugged. He wasn't about to let on about the feeling of panic he'd
had when he realized that a couple months ago. Nor the feelings of
despair before the band finally began to sound like something more
than another garage band.
It seemed like we had all the time in the world—and then all of a
sudden there wasn't any time left. And that was when I knew I didn't
ever want to do anything but the band. Not college, not music
school—classical guitar was okay, but not for me. But if I couldn't get
it together, and do it fast, I'd spend the rest of my life working some
dumb job and wondering why I didn't go for it when I had the
chance.
George suddenly realized that in a way, he had Bobby-Boy to thank for
that. The bully had been at every single one of the guys, for one thing
or another; at some point they'd all decided, separately, that each of
them was going to show him, somehow. And at that point, they'd all
started to buckle down at the one thing they were good at—music.

That had helped, that and the lecture he'd given the rest of the band.
About how this was it—and if they couldn't make it, with parents
willing to back 'em, and parents with the money to get them the kind
of equipment other garage bands could only drool over, then they
were all just a bunch of posers.
Good old Bobby-Boy, he thought. And good old Dad. The ridiculous
and the sublime. Now, let's see if Lady Luck is really jamming with
us, or jiving us.
"So, what about your brother?" he said, not really hoping Alan would
have anything but bad news. He hadn't even told the other guys about
Alan's plan, because he didn't want them brought down if it didn't
happen.
But Alan settled back in the chair and started grinning, and George
suddenly found his own hopes soaring.
"It's a go, " he said gleefully. "Doug's prof is all for it; he says it's a
whole new art form. KOET said it's okay, so long as we pay for the
tapes. Doug's got permission to take the really good Minicam, the one
they used for the land-rush documentary. And the portable recording
system that goes with it. He's going to show Steve how to run the
boards, but he says it isn't much different from the mixing he's already
doing for you, so everything should be fine. Just two rules. Don't tell
him what to shoot, and nobody touches the Minicam but Doug.”
George had a flash of Steve wanting to play techie and messing up
several hundred thousand dollars' worth of camcorder and shuddered.
"No problem, " he said hastily.
Steve hadn't a clue yet as to what was going on, but he raised his
white-blond head at the words "Minicam" and "sound system. "
"But—" Steve said. "I—"
"I said, " George repeated, fixing Steve with a nasty glare, "no

problem.”
"Hey, would somebody mind letting us in on the big secret?" Paul
Bellman asked plaintively.
George turned back to his band—his band!—and let himself gloat for a
minute. They might not make it. There was luck involved with making
it in rock, as much luck and connections as talent. It might not ever
get any better than this moment. But right now, he had the world by
the tail and everything was going right.
"Alan's brother works at the PBS station, " he said. "He's there on a
theatre internship. He's specializing in video right now.”
"So?" Paul said. "What's that got to do with us?"
"Only that he's got to do a kind of TV term paper. And the station
manager likes his prof and his prof likes rock. And the station
manager told him he could borrow the best Minicam and recording
gear they've got, and shoot his term paper with us. "
"Wait a minute—" Steve was the first to put two and two together.
"We're gonna make that basement tape we’ve been talking about?"
George laughed; he couldn't help himself. "Exactly so, my man, " he
crowed. "Except—except—this is going to be a live concert, with a live
audience. I haven't seen a single basement tape yet that was done with
an audience. I know we're good, but we all know you’ve gotta have a
gimmick. Well, maybe having an audience'll be enough of a gimmick
that MTV will take a chance. Who knows? Weirder things have
happened.”
He gave them a moment to let it all sink in—then without warning
plunged into the intro to the song they'd planned on opening the open
dance part of the gig with. His enthusiasm was infectious, so much so
that the rehearsal was the best they'd had, ever, and he called it a
session when they ran out of energy, though not out of interest.

"That's a wrap, " he said firmly, when Paul protested. "We all have
school in the morning; we aren't ZZ Top yet, guys. I dunno about you,
but if 7 flunk out 'cause I was rock 'n' rollin' all night, my old man
would strangle me with my amp cord.”
"Are you still gonna take everything over to Bob Long tomorrow?"
Steve asked.
George checked his watch. "Tonight; he's still open for lessons. If we
get it all loaded into the car in the next fifteen minutes, I can make it
over there before he closes.”
"But what am I gonna do without my axe?" Paul complained. "How
are we gonna rehearse between now and Friday?"
"You've got your backup, don't you?" George replied, fixing him with a
stem eye. "Look, we can't afford any screw-ups. This gig is either
gonna make us or break us. The least we can do is make sure the
instruments are in top shape.”
"But I'll sound lousy—"
"Come on, man, chill out, " Steve drawled. "Better you sound lousy to
us than that you sound lousy up there on stage. Bob Long's an okay
guy; he'll do right by us.”
"And he promised he'd have everything working so well our stuff'’ll
practically play itself, " George pledged. "Look, I’ve been going to
Guitar House for years. They've never done me wrong yet. Bob knows
what the stakes are, and if Bob says he'll have our stuff in top shape by
Friday, you can believe it. " He grinned, thinking about how it had
been Bob who'd taken the unpromising, battered Gibson George had
found in a pawn shop and turned it into the crown jewel of the band.
"I swear, I think that man can work magic, sometimes.”
Fay stared at the ceiling of her room, tracing the subtle patterns she'd
had the Servant paint above the bed, ivory on cream. Patterns so

subtle only she knew they were there; patterns meant to collect power.
But not enough, she brooded. Not even with that fool's blood and
death added to the Sex Magick. Not if I have an enemy. I don't even
have the resources to discover who that enemy is, much less defeat
him—or her. Shit.
She played with a strand of hair, and attempted to put her thoughts in
order. It was more difficult than she'd expected.
I should never have indulged in the hashish, she thought, resisting the
urge to simply not worry about the problem. But I needed it. Between
the frustration of not knowing, and the cramps… There are times I
devoutly wish I had been born male.
At least in these modern times one can make the Curse a bit easier to
endure, The phone rang, and she reached out to the bedside table for
the extension.
It was Derek. Dear, faithful, stupid Derek. She listened to nun babble
with half an ear, thinking that perhaps she should abandon him as a
project… Was he really worth the effort she'd been putting into him?
Would he be worth cracking those obdurate shields to get at?
Surely there would be more promising material in college— and easier
to acquire. If she really wanted the child, she was going to have to
break through his shielding in order to take him over. Then she'd have
to get rid of his parents, somehow.
The mere thought of the work it was going to take made her head
swim.
Derek continued to rattle on about the Louis boy and his band. Fay
smiled; if anyone had any notion of what she had planned for the
dance, they'd have had a coronary.
And old Oral would have the PPareTar spinning like a highspeed

lathe.
Maybe I'd better give up on Derek. He's so damned dull, he'd make a
saint weep with boredom.
"… like Monica.”
The hair went up on the back of her neck, her lip lifted in a silent
snarl, and she curled the fingers of her left hand into claws. For a
moment, for one critical moment, she had allowed herself to forget
about Monica. No, she didn't know who her enemy was, but the Carlin
brat was on the top of the list of suspects. And that she had almost
forgotten that fact was in itself a telling piece of evidence.
That she had been considering abandoning Derek was another.
I wonder—could it possibly be that I am not the only sorceress to
have uncovered the secret of eternal youth and life? Could the Carlin
girl be another? After all, we have only her word for it that her
mother works for a living—that her mother is her mother. Her
life-style may simply be a form of camouflage. She certainly is not
poor; she simply does not seem to command the wealth that I do.
Does not seem… She could be new at this. Or she could be keeping a
lower profile than I. If she knew she was entering the territory of
another sorceress…
She could have been stalking me all this time, and I dozed on in
blissful ignorance!
Derek was back on the topic of the band again; she made
noncommittal sounds to keep him happy, and thought furiously. I
need more power. The dance itself won't give me that. And I need to
be rid of the Carlin girl; she may be just what she seems, but I dare
not chance the risk that she is not. But how? And where to get the
power?

"… so George took everything over to Guitar House last night, " Derek
said, as she tuned back in on him for a moment.
"Well, I'm really looking forward to hearing the band, " she replied,
when silence on his part seemed to indicate that he expected a
response out of her.
"Even with the old stuff, they sounded great this afternoon, " he
enthused. "Listen Fay, I really appreciate you putting a word in for
them. I can't tell you how much it means right now. I mean, it's all
going to come together for the guys, I just feel it.”
And maybe you do, she thought suddenly. Maybe you're what
brought that little tart here. If she's been able to get past your shields
a little farther than I have—if she's seen more potential in you than
I've already seen—
No wonder a few imps didn't frighten her off.
Fay's jaw tightened with a surge of rage. I will be damned if I will let
her have a free hand with you!
"Oh, Derek, " she cooed. "It really wasn't any trouble, not when I was
already on the dance committee. You know I'd do anything for you,
lover.”
She spent a little of her carefully hoarded energy on strengthening the
spells she had on him. Since they were nonthreatening, simple sex
spells, the shields couldn't interfere. She could work on his mind and
memories later.
She frowned a little, realizing that she would have to go back to school
to do that. What a bore. But those spells required at least eye contact.
He went into the predictable routine, verbally strutting for her like a
bantam rooster for a hen. She played him out for a little while longer,
then let him hang up when she'd exercised her hold over him to her

own satisfaction.
As she returned the phone to the bedside table, though, she was
frowning. She turned over on her stomach and stared at the
headboard, hugging her pillow against her chest and thinking
furiously.
I have to do something about that tart. And I have to have the power
to crack Derek's shields and see if he's worth my while. The dance in
and of itself is not going to accomplish what I need.
An old memory surfaced, of the May Day festivals she had sponsored
in the early days. How she, the Lady of the estate, had presided over
the licentious revels of her indentured servants, revels that would have
had the prudish authorities in an uproar, had they but known about
them; revelries imported from the English, Irish, and Welsh
countryside and homes these displaced peasants no longer had. There
was a tacit understanding between her and her peasants; they called
her "my lady, " and did not ask what went on in the House. She let
them serve out their time in relative comfort, and provided the
wherewithal for their celebrations four times a year.
That she acquired a considerable amount of power from those
celebrations of the earth and the flesh probably never occurred to
them.
Most especially in those times when smoldering rivalries broke into
open flame under the influence of a butt of brandy shared 'round.
The dance, as she had planned it (with Jill's entirely ignorant help),
would only be a pale imitation of those long-ago potent festivities.
Unless… unless I can do something to stir things up. I can't feed them
brandy—but a good half of them will be drinking or stoned by the
time they get to the dance. But how to manipulate them? In the old
days I'd supply the music by way of one of my allies disguised as a
fiddler—

The music. Yes—yes, I think that will do. Not the musicians in my
influence—but the instruments.
She rolled over and reached into the drawer of her bedside table—the
one without the "toy chest" in it—for the phone book. A few moments
of leafing through the yellow pages told her exactly what she needed
to know, the location of Guitar House.
—
It was dark enough behind the building that a casual observer
shouldn't notice the Shelby nestled in under the shelter of the
dumpster.
She hadn't brought the Servant; she was going to have more than
enough to keep her occupied without trying to watch that creature as
well. It was a bit restless since its feeding; better to keep it at home,
playing mindless video games to purge it of excess energy. It was
unfortunate that this restless energy was not something she could use.
The Servant was, sadly, an energy sink. Anything that went in never
came out again.
Too bad Bob didn't know that, she thought, smiling. - She looked
carefully about for any signs of another soul before slipping out of the
car, slinging her heavy bag over her shoulder, and closing and locking
the door behind her as quietly as she could. She found herself smiling
in spite of tension and threatening cramps; this was rather exciting,
recalling her days of riding to the hunt.
And the days of her unchallenged rule on her own lands, when the
quarry hadn't always been a fox.
She slipped over to the back door and placed both her hands over the
lock and latch mechanism, whispering the words of the Cantrip of
Unbinding. She felt the tiny outflowing of power—it wasn't, thank
heavens, a very complicated bit of Magick; mere beginner's work.
Then there was a click that she felt more than heard, what with the

traffic noise just on the other side of the building. And when she
tugged at the heavy metal door, it swung open. She paused for a
moment before stepping inside, and set the second spell in motion, the
one to short-circuit any alarm systems the owner had in place.
Then she crossed the threshold, savouring the moment. Breaking and
entering is such a special thrill… even though the only danger is from
some passer-by or too-curious police officer. I suppose I could
eliminate that as well, except that it would alert my foe to my
abilities. And I can't spare the energy. A nonspecific glamour like
that is terribly expensive… Ah, well, what's life without a little
uncertainty? There's a certain perverse enjoyment in taking risks.
She found herself in a narrow back hallway; it was too dark to see, and
she felt her way along one wall until she came to a half-open doorway.
She inched her way into the room beyond, closed the door behind her,
and conjured herself a light.
As she had hoped, it was a practice room.
She shoved all the chairs and music stands over to one side, then
opened the shoulder bag she had brought with her. The first item,
folded carefully on top, was a heavy square of virgin canvas;
underneath it were a bottle of ink made with her own blood and a
brush made with the hair from her head. She unfolded the canvas and
spread it out to cover the floor. In a few moments it had been
inscribed with the duplicate of the pentangle she had carved into the
floor of her workroom.
Only this one was meant to contain, rather than protect.
She spared a fleeting regret, as always, for the fact that she would be
unable to see, or even feel, most of what she was about to do. She had
been told by another Magick practitioner, a member of the Hellfire
Club, who had the Gifts of Sight and Sensing, that it was rather
spectacular. That was the reason so many aspired to sorcery and so
few succeeded; without the Gifts there was only the will and infinite

patience, the patience of one blind and deaf learning to pick locks,
embroider, and dance. It could be done—she was the living proof of
it—but it took so long, so much trial and error, even when one had
begun at an age when other children were just beginning to walk
about and prattle.
And this would be a much more difficult proposition than when she
had called the Abyssal Creatures, the vessels used by her allies to feed
by proxy. She needed some new servants for this task; her allies were
too powerful to constrain to anything this petty, and besides, she was
young in this body and had yet to prove herself worthy of their full aid.
Sometimes she tired of this continual bargaining and rebar-gaining,
lifetime after lifetime—but when she was at her full powers again, it
always seemed, in retrospect, that the game was more than worth the
candle.
So; the night wasn't getting any younger.
She spread her arms wide, her fingers twisted into the first of the
Signs of Power, and began to chant, holding her pitch to a perfect
440-cycle "A. " With each new line of the chant, she raised her pitch
exactly one half step, until she had covered a full octave. Then she
dropped back to the beginning "A" for the second Sign, the second
chant.
Three Signs; three incantations.
On the last note of the last chant, she reached for the little bag of
prepared powders she had put in the pocket of her robe, and cast it
into the centre of the pentangle.
There was a flash of sullen green flame; the lights dimmed for a
moment.
She was no longer alone in the room.

There was the inevitable struggle of wills as the demon she had called
attempted to wrest control from her. This was something she could
feel, as their eyes locked and she fought the urge to look away from it;
first because it tried to make her fear it, then because of an
overwhelming sensation of there being something lurking behind her.
She did not succumb to either, staring the creature down-literally; it
slouched lower and lower as she kept her eyes locked with its, until at
last it pulled its eyes away and grovelled.
"Very good, " she said aloud. "You can get up.”
It glared at her for a moment, then subsided sullenly.
It really hadn't had a chance. It was a demon, but a very minor one.
Nothing like the ones she would be calling on later; this one was
hardly a challenge.
She smiled at it to remind it of which one was the master, then laid a
strip of canvas across one of the lines of the pentangle to release it.
It crossed the line slowly; one of her allies had told her that crossing
out of the gateway of the pentangle was painful to creatures of its type.
She waited until it had abased itself at her feet, then gave it careful
instructions on how to find the three guitars belonging to George's
band. "Quickly, " she told it. "You need not be overly careful with any
of the other instruments, so long as you are quick to find the ones I
need. When you have them, bring them here to me.”
It rose and bowed to her, snarling silently, and passed through the
wall of the room. In a moment or two she could hear it thrashing
about, knocking instruments over in its efforts to accomplish the task
she had set it.
It was a bit noisier than she had anticipated, but at least she had
ordered it to confine its efforts to the back of the store.. Between the
muffling effect of the cinder blocks and the traffic noise out on

Admiral, the commotion should go unnoticed.
She didn't have time to waste worrying about it, anyway.
She shook the cloth out and relaid it, adding the strip of canvas across
the line so that the demon would be able to cross back into the centre
for dismissal. Then she prepared herself.
She emptied the carryall on the floor, picking out her Wand, tipped
with obsidian from Mount Vesuvius, then slipped her Robe over her
head and tied her Girdle (braided from the hair of as many of her
victims as she could manage) around her waist. She picked out
another pouch of prepared powder and the brush and a bottle of
thinned white glue.
Carefully she went over all the lines of the pentangle with the glue,
then the powder. In the old days sorcerers had only used the powder,
and no few of them became the prey of the demons they had called
because of an errant breeze or a scurrying insect. Fay had discovered
that the addition of the glue made no difference in the efficacy of the
spell—and all the difference in the world to her personal safety. It
made cleanup a little more difficult, but she'd be burning this cloth
anyway, and at home there was always the Servant to take care of
cleanup problems.
She would leave the line with the canvas strip across it unpainted until
after she had dismissed the first demon.
The noise in the farther rooms ceased at that moment; she
straightened just as the demon, burdened with three instruments,
kicked open the door. It could make itself ethereal, but not the guitars;
though not of a class with the next creatures she would summon, it
was bright enough to realize that. Brighter than the Abyssal Creatures,
which probably would have tried.
She accepted the instruments one at a time; sure enough, each of
them bore tags saying "Louis" and "reconditioned. " Two Fender

Stratocasters and an old Gibson with a quarter-moon pearl inlay on
the head. The Gibson rather surprised her; it was very nearly an
antique and hardly the sort of instrument she'd expect a hard-edged
group like the Persuaders to use.
Well, it didn't much matter; the instruments themselves were only the
vehicles for her power and her plans.
The demon stood beside her, its face expressionless, but she could tell
by the sly glances it gave her from time to time that it was considering
testing her hold on it again.
"There, " she ordered, pointing to the pentangle. It snarled a little, but
complied, taking its place in the centre. She didn't need to finish that
side just yet—and didn't want to take her attention from this obviously
restive creature for even the few moments it would take to paint on
the glue and sprinkle the powders—
A judgment that was reinforced when she noticed it inching toward
the scrap of canvas crossing the line that would otherwise hold it pent
inside the diagram.
She pulled the canvas out of the pentangle while the demon hissed
with frustration, and stuffed it into the pocket of her Robe.
The ceremony of dismissal was mercifully short; one line of chanting,
one Sign of Uncasting. The thing was gone, leaving behind only a faint
scent of scorched cloth and a slightly burned patch on the canvas.
She arranged the three guitars carefully in the centre of the pentangle;
this was a tricky proposition since there wasn't a lot of room to work
with, and she did not want to stack them in any way—and most
especially she didn't want to have any part of them cross the lines of
protection bounding the centre.
Finally she had them arranged to her satisfaction, and completed the
new pentangle with glue and powder.

Now for the possession.
For the guitars were to become demon-possessed, an idea that had
occurred to her after remembering she'd seen a horror movie recently
that had featured a demon-invested object. While a possessed lamp
was a fairly ludicrous proposition for her purposes, calling in demons
to take the guitars was actually an inspired notion. Once possessed,
the quality of music they played would be under her control—and
loaded with psychic and subsonic influences. Just as her demonic
fiddlers had played her peasants into a state of aggression guaranteed
to cause trouble among them, so the possessed guitars would do the
same.
Who needs Satanic lyrics, or messages you can only hear when you
play the tape backwards? she thought with a cynical smile. By the
time I'm done with them, the kids at the dance will have adrenaline
and sex hormones giving them such a rush that the ones that don't
start a riot will probably go out to their cars and screw each other's
brains out! And the beauty of it is, the only people who might suspect
it was the music that did it will be born-again fanatics that no one
sane would believe in the first place!
In some ways it was much easier to operate as a sorceress in this age;
who would believe that there really was such a thing, other than a
handful of paranoids, assorted religious crazies, and the odd real
psychic or magician? And so far, none of those had proved much of a
threat. She seemed to recall some vampire movie where the
bloodsucker had told his hunter that the strength of the vampire lay in
modem man's persistent disbelief that he existed. The same was
certainly true in her case; faced with the "impossibility" of seeing her
vanish out of the front seat of the Trans Am, Derek had chosen to
consider the entire episode a post-accident hallucination. The
community in general had chosen to consider the rash of "accidents"
that had plagued her to be a series of unfortunate coincidences, and
the deaths of students at Jenks to be sheer bad luck (with a liberal
helping of too much money and too little supervision). No one had
gone looking for an outside cause, much less a supernatural one.

So long as she kept her creatures under control, her profile relatively
low, and her involvement with the supernatural a secret, she could
operate with impunity.
Keeping her profile relatively low was harder than it could have
seemed. She needed to feed her allies; that was part of the bargain.
They needed blood and pain and the energy released with violent
death, and they needed it at regular intervals. And these days she
couldn't just lure an unsuspecting peddler or trapper into the house.
For one thing, there weren't any such equivalents; for another, these
days they'd be missed. An opportunity like the one that had occurred
with the two policewomen came along once in a year at best. The
street people who lived under bridges and in dumpsters were a
danger-free source, but even they became alarmed when too many of
their kind started going missing. As Rowena she had been able to
select single, uncommitted men and even women at the various
pickup bars, take mem home, and allow her allies to take them after
enjoying them herself. She had learned over the years exactly how to
choose the ones with indifferent families, the ones who were living
beyond their means, who would be missed only by their creditors
when they vanished. But as Fay, that entire segment of society was
closed to her. She had learned only too quickly after a couple of really
narrow escapes that the kind of person likely to pick up an underage
prostitute had, more often man not, a wife and family who would raise
the most incredible fuss when he didn't return from his "late night at
the office. " She had gone out hunting from time to time, looking for
would-be molesters and rapists—but that put her at physical risk, not
something she courted willingly.
Although it was a little ironic… the police never would find out who
had killed and buried all those hitchhiking kids along old Route
Sixty-six, nor discover why the "Rainy-day Rapist" just stopped taking
victims.
Well, none of that mattered at the moment, except that she was out of
options right now for the means of acquiring power, and this was the
safest way she could think of to get it.

She completed the diagram, stepped back as far as the wall would
permit, and raised her arms over her head. Her sleeves slid silkily
down along her arms as she began the first of the chants and Signs.
There were nine of them this time, not three, and all of them increased
in complexity from one to the next. Halfway through the diagram
began to take on a dim, greenish glow even to her eyes. Three quarters
through, and the diagram burned with a fierce green flame that
consumed nothing and gave off neither heat nor smoke. As she began
the last chant, her arms trembled with the effort of holding them
above her head with the fingers contorted into the Sign; she was
drenched with sweat, and shivering with exhaustion.
And if she stopped there, the backlash of pent-up power would very
likely kill her—if her allies didn't find a way to do it first. There was no
safe exit from this casting; the only safety lay in perfect performance
and flawless completion.
As the final word of the chant left her lips, the diagram blazed up,
creating a curtain of dark-green light that rippled like the aurora and
prevented her from seeing the centre of the pentangle. From the
centre came a sound—an electronic wail, an amplified snarl that
sounded as if the three instruments inside were being tortured.
She lowered her arms slowly, and waited. Waited until the light died
down, then died out, leaving behind only the diagram, the lines now
covered with a kind of phosphorescent slime. And the guitars, strings
still quivering slightly.
And no sign of whether or not her Magick had worked.
Fortunately she had another means of finding that out.
She pointed at the first of the two Strats, and intoned a harsh series of
guttural syllables; the spell dated back to the spell that the ancient
priests had used to make the statues of their gods speak.

"Who are you?" she demanded hoarsely, as the strings quivered.
The voice of the guitar sounded like one of those novelty records from
the late fifties and early sixties, the so-called Talking Guitar—using an
early precursor of the synthesizer to combine a vocalist with a guitar
track.
"Sehkandar, " it snarled sullenly. "What do you want of me, oh
woman?"
Trapped in the guitar as it was, it didn't have any eyes to lock with
hers, but she felt its anger and hatred in its words, and she used her
voice as she had earlier used her gaze as the vehicle of her will.
Shortly and succinctly she explained what she expected of her
prisoner. And, as she had anticipated, when the demon heard her
plan, it lost some of its surliness. It, too, would share in the power the
violence she planned to release would bring—and the more violent the
kids' reactions, the more the power. It had its own interests to
consider here.
Finally it said the words that bound it to her will. "I will obey, " it
grated; she smiled, and repeated the procedure with the second Strat,
with equal success.
Then she turned to the Gibson—
But before she could intone the ritual question of "who are you, " the
spirit in the instrument spoke up for itself.
"Oh, wow, " it said, in tones of complaint. "Oh, wow. What a bummer,
man! You didn't have to go through all that jive—"
She stood speechless for a moment, then snapped angrily, "Who are
you?"
"Moonbeam's the name, and music's the game, and what's a nice chick

like you doin' in a place like this? Like, what's your sign?"
"I'll ask the questions here, " she snarled, feeling the situation slipping
out of her control. "What are you doing in that guitar?"
"Like, I was about to ask you the same question. I don' much like this
gig that you’ve got goin', and I don't much like the one you’ve got
planned. This's the Age of Aquarius, lady. Peace an' harmony, make
love, not war, you dig?"
Fay felt her head reeling. What had she gotten herself into? Or rather,
what had she put into that instrument?
But as she glanced down at her watch she realized it was too late to do
anything about it now. In another five minutes the regular police
patrol would be by, and they might notice the Shelby. It was time to
go.
"I don't care what you like, " she spat, breaking the spell that
permitted the guitars to speak and reaching across the lines of the
pentangle to take the Gibson by the neck. She shook it a little to
emphasize her point. "I don't care what you want, or what you think.
You'll do what I ordered, or you'll find yourself inside that instrument
forever!"
She picked up the other two instruments and removed them from the
canvas; now that they'd given her their pledge, she was safe from
them. As for this "Moonbeam, " she didn't know what it was, but it
wasn't a demon. It should be no threat to her.
She stuffed the stained cloth back into her carryall, and left the guitars
in the middle of the practice room. After the mess that the minor
demon had left in the rest of the store, the owner would probably just
be pleased to find them there, and wouldn't worry about why they
were there.
She slipped out the door, and out into the hall, taking her witch-light

with her. She only extinguished it when she, reached the back door.
She took a quick look around before dashing across to her Shelby,
unlocking it, and slipping in behind the steering wheel.
So far, so good.
She pulled off a little down the street, then turned and made three
gestures and spoke five words. With that bit of Magick, she not only
cancelled the spell that was holding the alarm systems inactive, she
activated them.
It wouldn't do for the owner to wonder why the alarm hadn't gone off
in the shop.
But as she pulled off onto Admiral at a sedate thirty-five miles per
hour, she wondered, with an increasing sense of frustration, what
could possibly have gone wrong with that third guitar.
CHAPTER TWELVE
THE HISTORY TEACHER DRONED ON ABOUT THE KOREAN
WAR, a dreary subject that made little or no sense to most of the class,
Monica included. Monica chewed a nail in complete frustration,
contemplated the back of Derek's head, and wondered why in hell she
was wasting her time on anybody that dense.
He spends half his time with me on the phone, she thought, copying
down the history teacher's notes in an absent-minded sort of way. He
spends tons of time hanging around me at school. He knows I like
him. He still doesn't know Alan's after me. So why doesn't he do
something?
It made her want to scream. She hadn't been at all backward about
telling him what she thought he should do, either. She'd told him right
out just two days ago that she thought he should break up with Fay.
This, of course, right after he'd finished complaining about something
or other Fay had done to him. It had made an excellent opening.

But, as always, he'd had some excuse. This time it was that he'd
promised to be Fay's escort to the spring dance.
"It means a lot to her, " he'd said lamely, a glazed look coming into his
eyes as soon as she mentioned Fay's name. "I can't just dump her like
that. What would it look like? Besides, I still like her a lot.”
It would look like you'd finally caught on to the bitch, she thought
angrily at the back of Derek's head. It would look like you'd finally
gotten tired of getting walked on. But no— And God, I even showed
you how much I trusted you by telling you what Diana's been saying
about you and your dad, so you'd know she probably wasn't after
your old man. And you still keep acting like all I'm good for is to be
your crying towel.
This whole school was getting to be a royal pain. The kids were mostly
pretty stuck on themselves and all their money, and not even Alan had
managed to get up enough guts to ask her gut. About the only good
thing she had going was Diana T's interest in her writing.
And on top of it all, there were those two—attacks. She still hadn't told
anyone about them but Alan. He believed her; but he was still
suspicious of Diana.
The things themselves, thank God, hadn't come back again. Diana had
finally told her that she didn't think they would, but that it wasn't
likely that whoever it was that had gone after her was going to give up.
This, of course, had been wonderful news. And Alan had insisted that
this meant that Diana was planning something awful.
Monica was getting pretty tired of Oklahoma, all things considered.
I miss the mountains, she realized. I didn't think I would, but I do.
And I miss having places to go, things to do. The only things to do
around here are—well—go to the mall, go to parties, except I never
get invited to them, or go to movies at the mall.

She sighed and rested her chin on her hand. It was going to be a very
long day.
It got longer as soon as the class let out. Harper was waiting for Derek,
standing right opposite the door, wearing a hot outfit that Monica
would have died to have, every hair perfect, with a sickeningly sweet
smile on her face.
I think I hate her, Monica thought grimly, watching her greet Derek as
enthusiastically as if he had been away from her for a year. And
watching Derek return the favour, just as if he hadn't spent the ten
minutes before class complaining about her. Scratch that, I know I
hate her.
Derek strolled off arm-in-arm with the bitch, completely oblivious to
Monica's presence. Grimly she reversed her course and took the long
way back to her locker—then, because she had lost so much time, she
had to run for her next class, sliding into her seat behind Carrie Duval
just seconds before the bell rang.
It was algebra, which she hated, because she was only getting a B in it,
and she must not have been concentrating because half her homework
was wrong. Fortunately this wasn't a graded assignment, but it was
humiliating all the same. Even George Louis's grimace of sympathy
when she botched her problem on the board didn't help.
The bell rang for class change; next, thank God, was English. Maybe
she could get Derek to notice her there.
Then again, maybe not. Maybe I ought to see if Mom was really
serious about moving back to Colorado, like she said aver breakfast.
I know she's getting tired of all the overtime. And this shit is getting
old.
Then, just when it seemed as if everything was conspiring to go wrong
today, things started to go right.

Sandy's locker was right around the corner from hers, and the
acoustics in the hall were such that she could usually hear everything
he and his buddies said. Nine times out of ten, this was basically pretty
boring and not worth straining her ears over, since Sandy never had
anything more on his mind than his next beer or his next lay.
This time, however, his "next lay" proved to be pretty interesting.
She almost dropped her books when she heard Fay's voice coming
from around the corner.
The girl's voice was pitched too low for her to be able to pick out
exactly what she was saying, but Sandy's reply was clear enough.
"Shit, babe, I can't, not tonight. My grandma's coming in for Julie's
recital, and we’ve all gotta go pick her up at the airport. You know, the
whole 'Brady Bunch' thing. Then we all get to go out for ice cream
together. Then Grandma is gonna tell us all about her latest operation,
or her trip to Las Vegas, I forget which.”
"Sounds like a thrill a minute, " Fay drawled. "I think you're just
trying to avoid seeing me.”
"Give me a break, will you? Grandma's the one with the money in the
family, and she's a Reagan-mom-and-apple-pie-nuclear-family
pusher. She's still not sure she approves of Mom. I'm tellin' you, we
have to do this perfect-family shit every time she comes, otherwise
she'll leave all the cash to the Salvation Army Girls' Home. If I try an'
sneak out on any of it, I'll catch hell. They might even ground me.”
"Well, I guess it's okay, " Fay said sullenly, while Monica tried
simultaneously to look busy and not to make any noise. "But baby, I
want you. I want you now.”
Sandy snorted. "What about Derek? You're supposed to be going with
him, aren't you?"
"He's a kid. " There was silence for a moment, and Monica's

imagination ran riot. "You're a man.”
Sandy cleared his throat; it sounded like he was having a hard time
doing so. "Listen, " he said thickly. "My car's in the shop, and they let
me take the van today. You want to, like, meet me in the parking lot at
noon?"
"Van?" Fay replied doubtfully. "I don't know…”
"It's an RV. It's Dad's Boomer Sooner wagon; he takes it to all the UO
games. It's like a little living room, you know? Stereo, TV, wet bar,
carpeting, miniblinds… and the couch at the back folds down.”
"Oh, " Fay breathed. "Does it?"
"Yeah. Think that'll do?" Sandy sounded very cocky; Monica had the
feeling that he might have engineered this little coincidence, especially
if he knew that he was going to have to do this Grandma gig but didn't
want to miss a shot at Fay. It was true that Sandy never thought much
beyond his next beer or his next roll in the sack, but from what she'd
seen, he could be very persistent in making sure he got them.
"Oh yes, " Fay replied, her voice so sugary that Monica wanted to
throw up. "That will do. See you at noon?"
"At the parking lot door.”
Monica closed her locker and hurried off toward her English class. If
Fay knew she'd been overheard—it wouldn't be pretty, and Monica
would most likely end up getting the short end.
Somehow it always seemed that no matter who was in the right, when
Fay tangled with anyone, the principal always backed Fay Harper.
Now how am I going to get Derek out there to catch them? She
wracked her brains for an answer all the way to class. I've got no
reason to ask him to meet me out there. He's got no reason to be out

there.
She beat the bell by less than a second; fortunately Diana was inclined
to be generous about things like that. She scooted into her seat with
an awkward little nod; Diana replied to her half-apology with a shrug
and a grin. Then she brought the class down to business. And
ironically enough, it was Derek himself who gave Monica the answer
she needed.
They were into character development; Diana had told them all that
there was no point in trying to recreate "reality" for their main
characters.
"First of all, writing exactly what you know will be boring for all of
you; second, when have any of you ever seen a best-seller about a kid
from Oklahoma who does all his homework, never gets into much
trouble, and basically minds his own business?" The class had
laughed, and Diana had spread her hands. "See what I mean? So let
your imagination go; so what if whatever you produce isn't what I'd
call salable? You'll have fun, and maybe, just maybe, with more
experience under your belt and a good editor, someday it might be
salable.”
So Derek's viewpoint character was turning into a race car driver;
exactly what kind of driver, Monica wasn't sure—his prose was full of
things like "group B, "
"cracked transaxles, " and "oversteer. " In fact, today's pages were so
jargon-intensive that it was pretty clear he was writing for himself and
no one else.
That didn't matter. What did matter was that he knew about cars. And
Monica had been talking to Cam about buying her old VW Cabri, but
she really wanted somebody who knew about cars to look at it first.
And Cam's car was out in the parking lot just a couple of rows away
from Sandy's van…

When discussion time came, they broke up into groups of three and
four to dissect each other's pages. Monica waited until the other two
kids had given Derek a hard time for sounding like a columnist for Car
and Driver ("only without the humour, " said Mark). Then she put in
her oar when he turned to her for help.
"Well, it was a little too much, " she said as gently as she could. "I
mean, like, we're not all lifetime subscribers to Auto Week, you know?
Half of what you had in there sounded like rocket-scientist stuff. The
other half sounded like Swahili.”
His face fell. "I thought I was just making it sound like it was real.”
Mark Shepherd snorted. "You know what 7 think race drivers talk
about when they sit around? Taxes. And broads. And maybe airline
food. Not 'transaxle overcooked megafarts, ' or whatever the hell you
had in there.”
"But I had no idea you knew so much about cars, Derek, " Monica
said, grabbing her opening with both hands. "Do you suppose you
could do me a favour?"
"Yeah, I guess, " Derek said, looking a little uneasy. "Depends on what
the favour is.”
She leaned over her desk so she could look right into his eyes—and
tried to look helpless, not sexy. "I need a car. It's a real drag having to
ask my mom to drive me all over—and besides, she's putting in a lot of
overtime and she can't always. Carrie says she'll sell me her Cabri for
four grand, and Mom says that sounds okay to her, and Dad says he'll
go half if Mom goes half, and they both say it sounds like a good
birthday present, but I don't know if the car's any good. Could you
like, you know, look at it at lunch?"
"How about right after class?" Derek said promptly, perking right up.
"I know what the car looks like; I could meet you over there. Do you
know where it's parked?"

"Carrie said it's about a row down from a big RV at the edge of the lot.
" Monica smiled sweetly at him, unable to believe how easy this had
been. "I can find Carrie in the cafeteria and get her to come on out so
you can start it and whatever. If that's okay.”
"Sure, " Derek said cheerfully.
"If you two are quite finished—there's a little matter of our
assignment, " Mark said, giving them both looks.
Derek blushed, and Monica gave Mark the evil eye before returning to
more mundane matters.
To lend authenticity to her ploy, Monica intercepted Carrie in the hall
on the way to her locker. Rather than going out, once she heard what
Monica wanted, Carrie just turned the keys over to her. "Bring 'em
back after lunch, and don't take it out of the lot, " Carrie told her.
"Otherwise I could get in trouble, 'cause we're not supposed to leave
the campus and it's my car. Okay?"
"No problem, " Monica said. "This shouldn't take long.”
She thought she managed to keep most of the glee out of her voice, but
Carrie gave her kind of a funny look before she handed her the keys.
Monica waited what she thought might be a reasonable length of time
for her to have taken to look for Carrie, then waited five minutes
longer than that before heading out to the lot.
Her tuning was impeccable. The fight was already in full flower when
she pushed the door open. As she squinted against the dust, she saw
Sandy slam the door of the van and make tracks back toward the
building; then she saw Derek's back. He was gesturing wildly. She
heard Fay long before she saw her; her shrill voice cut across the
rising wind.
That wind made it hard to get the door open; she had to really fight

the door, and even then only got it open enough to squeeze through—
Do I go over there? she debated. Yeah, I said I'd meet Derek; I'm not
supposed to know about the thing with Sandy and Fay. But I'd better
just look curious.
"You were spying on me, you little geek!" Fay shrieked, as Monica
made her way slowly between the rows of parked cars.
After a moment of thought, Monica decided, given the look of rage on
Fay's face, that she'd better not head directly for Derek. Instead, she
loitered out of Fay's line of sight, pretending great interest in a
brand-new Kiata.
"I was not!" Derek spat back. "I have more right to be out here than
you do! I was coming out here to look at a car, not to climb into a
rolling bedroom and screw my brains out with some oversexed jock!"
Monica leaned down and peered into the car's interior.
Fay's expression darkened. "Since when do you tell me what to do,
Kestrel?"
"Since we're supposed to be going together, Harper! How long have
you been doing this, anyway? Ever since I gave you my ring?" Derek
sounded sick and disgusted. "Boy, I must look like a real jerk. I'll bet
the whole school knows about what's going on. Who else have you
been messing around with? Bob? Jim Glisson? The entire goddamn
athletic department?"
The wind was rising more by the minute; it whipped Monica's hair
around and blew dust into her face so hard that it stung. She shielded
her eyes with her hand and stayed right where she was. This was too
good to miss.
"What's it to you?" Harper sneered. "You don't own me!"

"Well, you've been fuckin' well acting like you own me! And I got news
for you, babe, I like to know where something's been before I mess
with it! Seems to me the only place you haven't been is peddling your
ass down on Denver!" Monica took a quick glance at Derek. He was
white; his eyes were wide and the whites showed all around the irises.
His hands were clenched into fists but held rigidly down at his sides,
as if he might be afraid that he would hit her if she took one step
closer.
Fay spluttered for a moment, unable to get a single coherent word out.
Then she ripped Derek's ring off her finger and held it up. "Listen,
asshole, I don't have to put up with this! I can give this thing back to
you anytime I want—and have somebody else's ring on this finger in
thirty seconds flat!"
Derek drew himself up to his full height and looked down his nose at
her. The wind was howling now, making it hard to hear what his reply
was. Monica moved closer; to hell with the risk if Harper saw her and
put two and two together. She didn't want to miss this. As it was, she
missed the first couple of words, though the rest was plain enough.
"—I'm not sure I want it back—unless you get it disinfected first.”
Fay snarled like an enraged beast—and threw the ring in his face.
Derek ducked, and simultaneously his right hand shot up.
And somehow he caught the thing.
Fay stared at him, then at his hand.
"You're not even a whore, Harper, " he said. "You have to give it away,
'cause nobody'd pay for what you spread around.
It's too easy to get. It's a damn good thing you're a rich bitch, 'cause
you sure couldn't make a living—"
Her hand shot out; there was a crack like a rifle shot as her palm
connected with his face.

His right hand was already in a fist clenching the ring. He started to
draw back to deck her—and then their eyes locked.
Derek froze.
And Monica felt—something—poised to strike him. She couldn't see it,
she couldn't hear it, but she knew it was there all the same. And she
knew that Fay Harper had something to do with it.
"No!" she cried, a tiny sound, lost in the howl of the wind; but she
reached out her hand as if to protect Derek, and—
Some force stretched between them; some force reached between her
and him, and interposed itself like an invisible barrier between him
and Fay Harper. Like the thing poised to strike Derek, she couldn't
see it, but she could feel it. And she remembered some of what Diana
had told her about how magic worked for the people with the Talent
for it if they just believed hard enough. She believed with all her
strength.
Fay's head snapped around; her angry gaze swept the lot and came to
rest on Monica. Monica stepped back an involuntary pace or two
before the red, unthinking rage in those eyes. Fay Harper didn't even
look human at this moment.
She held up her hand to ward—whatever—off. The menace had
transferred itself from Derek to her.
Oh, shit. Now what have I done!
The wind hit her like a middle-linebacker; she staggered and braced
herself against it. There was some force besides the wind trying to get
at her, the same one that had been targeted for Derek. She felt that
instinctively; the only thing she could think of to do was to stand and
refuse to give way to it…
She heard what sounded like a frustrated growl, only it was all inside

her head.
Then the wind whirled around her in a vortex, some kind of magnified
dust devil, and pulled at the notebook she was clutching at a velocity
of about fifty miles per hour. Her fingers slipped and the cover tore;
the loose pages of her writing assignment flew out, and the wind
grabbed them and sent them halfway to Kansas before she could even
blink.
She made an ineffectual grab after them, then turned to face Fay
Harper with suppressed fury in her own eyes.
You did that, you bitch! I don't know how, but you did that!
But Fay's own expression was not one of triumph, but of thwarted
anger. She stared at Monica for one moment more; then, as the wind
shoved at Monica so hard she had to brace herself against the car next
to her just to stay on her feet, Fay whirled and flounced off to her
Shelby-Z.
She yanked the door open, flung herself inside, and slammed it shut.
And in direct defiance of school rules, pulled out of the parking slot
and onto the street in a cloud of burning rubber from the front tires.
She gunned the engine and tore out of the lot, leaving a long streak of
black rubber on the pavement and another at the entrance to the
school. In seconds she was out of sight, leaving Monica and Derek
staring at each other; Derek accusingly, Monica with a feeling of
shock.
Derek was the first to move; he strode up to her and grabbed her by
the elbow. "Inside, " he shouted above the wind. "I want to talk to
you.”
As soon as they got inside the foyer door, he wrenched her around to
face him. She didn't recognize him. His face was contorted with anger,
his eyes glazed. She'd never seen him look like this, not even when
Bobby-Boy had been at him. He did not look like the Derek she knew.

"You set this up, " he snarled. "You set this whole thing up. You knew
she was going to be out there with Sandy. You knew what was going to
happen when I found them. Didn't you?"
Monica looked down at her feet, feeling a combination of guilt and
anger. Since she had set Derek up, she could hardly deny his
accusation with any real feeling. But she hadn't tricked Sandy and Fay
into sneaking out there!
"You little bitch, " Derek spat, the strange light outside making his
eyes look as if they were glowing red. "You jealous little bitch! I
thought you were my friend! I thought I could talk to you! I thought I
could trust you!"
"I am!" she cried, stung. "You can! I—"
"I can't believe a single word you say, " he interrupted, voice dripping
with disgust. "You're just like every other girl; you can't just be a
friend, you've got to have everything your way, you’ve got to have
some kind of collar on me, like your little puppy. You’ve just been
making up all these fairy tales about what a good friend you are. Just
like you made up all that stupid shit about how you want to be a writer
and what Ms. Tregarde's been telling you; you just did it so. I'd pay
more attention to you, so that I'd think you were better than Fay or
something! I knew you were just making that shit up, but I thought,
okay, she wants to be a writer, she just daydreams a lot. But I guess
you wouldn't know the truth if it walked up and hit you one! Probably
everything you’ve ever told me is a lie!"
She clutched her hand at her throat; that hurt. It had taken a lot of
soul-searching and guts to tell him those secrets. The only reason
she'd told him was because he'd been agonizing over finding out that
Diana and his Dad had been spending hours together in Diana's room
with the door locked. And she just wanted to give him the real reason
for them spending all that time together. Not that they were having an
affair—that they were working, helping her. She couldn't tell him what
they were really doing, but she did let him think they were critiquing

Monica's own book…
She had been thinking all this time that he believed her. After all, Alan
did, even about the magic attacks on her and that there was somebody
after her, which was a helluva lot harder to believe!
But Derek didn't. He'd been stringing her along.
She tried to think of something to say, and couldn't. She tried to think
of some scathing put-down and failed. And anger at his treachery just
built up to where she couldn't stand it any longer.
So she pulled back her hand and belted him a good one. No stupid
little slap, either; a solid blow to the chin that rocked him back, forced
him to windmill his arms to keep from falling down, and made his
eyes water.
Before he could even start to recover, she wrenched the door open
against the wind and stalked back out; back straight, eyes stinging,
throat tight.
If that bitch Harper can leave in the middle of the day, so can I,
dammit!
She didn't hear running footsteps behind her; she just sensed
someone back there, someone too small to be Derek. She kept right on
going, at a fast, stiff-legged walk.
"Monica, " Ann Greeley shouted above the wind. "Monica, wait!"
She stopped right at the edge of the parking lot and turned
reluctantly.
"What?" she asked, pouting, knowing she was pouting, and unable to
keep herself from pouting. I can't talk to anybody right now. I just
can't.

"Monica, where do you think you're going?" Ann asked reasonably,
catching her by the elbow and keeping her from going anywhere, at
least temporarily.
She'd had just about enough of being grabbed for one day. "Home, "
Monica said tightly. "I'm going home. I don't feel good. " Belatedly she
remembered Cam's keys, still in her hand. They'd bruised her palm
when she'd hit Derek…
"You can't do that, " Ann pointed out; it was hard to sound gentle
when you were shouting over a windstorm, but somehow Ann
managed. "You can't leave during the day. You have to get a nurse's
excuse, and then your mother has to—"
"My mom's working, " Monica interrupted. "And I don't feel good.
Harper left—"
"She did?" Ann said, wrinkling her brow in puzzlement. "Are you
sure?"
That was too much. "You don't believe me!" Monica cried, bursting
into hot tears of anger. "Nobody in this whole school believes me! You
believe Harper when she tells you anything, but not me! It doesn't
matter what I say, I could have the Pope backing me up and you'd all
still say I was lying!"
Ann stared at her with the wind blowing her hair into her eyes and
practically ripping her clothing right off her body. She let go of
Monica's arm and grabbed her skirt in a futile attempt to keep it under
control as it blew up toward her waist; Monica didn't even bother.
"Here, " Monica wept, grabbing Ann's wrist and shoving the keys into
Ann's limp hand. "You probably won't believe this either, but Carrie
Duval loaned me her keys so I could look at her car. Ask her yourself.
Of course, you probably think I stole them. I don't care what you all
think anymore, and I don't care what you do to me. You can all go to
hell! I feel awful, and I'm going home!"

She threw the tattered remains of her notebook at Ann's feet, and
turned on her heel, leaving Ann staring after her with her mouth
hanging open in dumbfounded amazement at her outburst.
I don't care, she told herself, hugging her arms to her chest to keep
the tears inside. It didn't work very well. Angry tears kept escaping
anyway, burning their way down her cheeks. They're all a bunch of
phonies and posers. They all hate me, and I don't care what they
think.
She walked fast, as fast as she could, trying to outdistance her
troubles.
She kept her head down, as much to keep the dust out of her eyes as to
keep anyone that might be passing by from seeing that she was crying.
It occurred to her, in some isolated corner of her mind, that she hadn't
really believed in those Oklahoma dust-bowl stories before. Now she
had to. It was as dark as twilight out here; she had to lean at a
forty-five-degree angle to keep the wind from blowing her over, and
the sun was little more than a vague disk in the sky, about as bright as
the full moon on a cloudless night. The sky itself was a dirty
yellow-brown, about the same colour as a cardboard box.
I hope I can make it home-She was getting tired quickly; finally she
had to shelter for a moment in the lee of somebody's house. Her anger
and her un-happiness were long since put into the back of her mind.
As bad as the weather had turned, they'd probably send everybody
home right after lunch. So she not only wouldn't be missed, unless
Ann snitched on her—which she probably wouldn't—she wouldn't
even get into trouble.
Of course, she thought, tightening her lips with anger, that meant that
neither would Harper.
Her legs burned with fatigue, and she wasn't at all surprised to see
that her clothes were getting to be the same dirty brown colour as the
sky.

I'm gonna have to wash these about twenty times just to get all the
dust out, she thought unhappily. She was afraid she was going to cry
some more, so she concentrated on her anger instead. And how
everything, everything, was Harper's fault. I'm gonna have to reprint
everything in my notebook. I'm gonna have to somehow remember
everything everybody said about the story and fix it. Goddammit.
It's not fair! Harper's the one that's been cheating on Derek; she's the
one that started all this shit in the first place. She drove off and she'll
have her aunt phone in some phony excuse for her, she got to drive
home and I have to walk through this shitty storm, I'm gonna be
filthy, and she probably won't even have dust in her hair.
She sounded bitchy, even to herself, and she didn't care. After a rest,
she steeled herself and walked back out into the wind. If anything, it
was worse than ever. She saw cars being rocked by it as she stumbled
past them, and massive limbs were creaking and thrashing and
snapping off every tree in sight. She finally decided to move into the
centre of the street; it was safer.
And on top of everything else, she couldn't help but remember,
Harper can basically get anybody she wants as her date for the
spring dance tomorrow night. She wasn't lying about that. And I still
don't have a date. Alan's too damn lame to ask me, and Derek's a
bastard. Damn it, it's not fair!
Ahead of her, a phone line snapped and went down, lashing the
ground like a whip. She sidestepped the whole area gingerly.
I hate this school, I hate this town, I hate this state!
She made a kind of chant out of all the things she hated, using it to
give herself the impetus to get through the storm, to cut through the
wind.
I hate the kids, I hate this weather…
Three more blocks to go, and another line snapped, practically on top

of her. This one was a power line, and it came down in a shower of
sparks, missing her by a few feet at most.
She screamed and jumped out of the way, her heart pounding with
fear.
Then, from somewhere, found the unexpected strength to start
running.
She only slowed when the wall around the complex was in sight. When
she reached the guard shack at the entrance to the apartment
complex, she was halfway afraid the power would be off. It wasn't, but
the guard at the gate cautioned her against using anything that might
have problems if there was a surge, like a computer or a VCR. "I'd
stick to the radio and electric lights, if I was you, miss, " the guard
said. "And keep some candles and matches handy. Weatherman says
this isn't going to let up until about midnight.”
"Midnight?" She swallowed. "Does this happen a lot?"
Because if it does, she thought with a kind of forlorn hope, Mom isn't
gonna want to stay in this state much longer. Tornadoes are bad
enough; she's gonna have a fit about this.
"About once every five or six years, " the guard replied, squinting
against the dust. "One of those oddball things the weather does in the
springtime.”
Not often enough for Mom to get mad about it. Damn. She nodded,
and forced her tired legs to get her as far as her own door and into it
before she collapsed on the couch in the living room. Her brother
popped out of the kitchen, his mouth (as usual) full.
"We lost power at school, and a buncha windows got broken by stuff,
so they sent us home, " he informed her. "Mom called and said they're
expecting to lose the lines over there any minute, so she might get off
early, too. And she said if you wanted something hot for supper, you'd

better either cook it now or we're probably gonna have to do hot dogs
in the fireplace. Okay?"
"Okay, " Monica replied wearily. She tried to think if the hot water
heater was gas or electric. The one in Colorado had been electric…
"Is the hot water gas, or what?" she called out.
"Gas, " her brother replied promptly.
Good, that means I don't have to hurry up and get a shower.
She let herself sink into the couch cushions; every muscle in her body
was twitching with exhaustion, even the little muscles in her hands
and feet. Every time she moved, she could feel the gritty dust that had
somehow gotten inside her clothes. It was pretty gross. And in about a
minute more she'd go get that shower. In a minute. When she wasn't
so tired…
I wish this was tomorrow. If it was tomorrow, they'd cancel the
dance until next week. Then I'd have a whole week to get a date.
Even if I had to ask Alan to go myself!
She clenched her jaw angrily. Dammit, I'll show them all! I'll go
without a date! They can all go to hell, I don't need them, I don't need
anybody—
The phone rang. Figuring it was her mother, Monica stretched out a
weary hand to the extension on the end table, and caught it before the
answering machine got it.
"Carlin residence, " she said automatically, continuing with her
standard anti-burglar response, "Monica Carlin. Mom's in the shower
right now, can I take a message?"
But the voice on the other end was young and male—and familiar.
"Monica? Uh—this is Alan.”

A quick glance at the clock showed it was only one-thirty. They did let
everybody out, was her first thought after a moment of blankness.
Alan? What does he want? was the second.
She sat up and bit back an exclamation of pain as several muscles in
her back and neck protested the sudden movement.
"Monica? Are you okay?"
"Yeah. Uh—hi, Alan. Yeah, I'm fine, I just had to walk home. Gee, I
was just thinking of you.”
"You were?" His voice rose in surprise. "Monica, I know it's kind of
late, but—I'd like to ask you something.”
"You would?" If there's a God… oh, please. Please let him ask about
the dance, please, please…
"Yeah. Uh—do you think—I mean, you don't—uh—could you possibly
be free for the dance tomorrow night?"
There is a God. Suddenly the world was a wonderful place.
"Gee, Alan, " she said flirtatiously. "I don't know. I'd love to go with
you, but I don't know what the kids at Jenks wear for these things,
and I don't know if I’ve got anything really hot, you know?" She
lowered her voice coyly. "I wouldn't want you to be ashamed to be
with me.”
As he stammered something about being proud to be with her even if
she was wearing a garbage sack, she thought about Derek. And what
his face would look like when he saw her there with Alan.
Revenge was sweet. There was a God.
—

"How in hell did I let you rope me into this?" Di muttered at Ann
Greeley in the sanctuary of the cramped, two-stall ladies room in the
teachers' lounge. She scowled at her reflection; it scowled back. Her
agent Morrie might have recognized her in her current getup from all
the writers' teas and publishers' cocktail parties he'd dragged her to,
but none of her friends would. The normally straight brown mane of
her hair had been twisted into a fashionable creation reminiscent of
an Art Nouveau print. Her dress continued the theme; flowing
cream-coloured silk and heavy lace insets at the throat and shoulders,,
in a Pre-Raphaelite style that made her appear fragile and seductive at
the same time.
"I look like one of my damn heroines, " she complained to the mirror.
"How did I let you rope me into this? I hate chaperoning!"
"But the kids think you're fabulous. " Ann chuckled. "Did you hear
what Alan said to those friends of his?"
"What, the band kids?" Di turned away from the mirror and leaned
against the sink. "By the way, they look pretty pro. I was impressed.
No, I didn't hear what he told them. What was it?"
" 'See, I told you she looked just like Stevie Nicks. '“
"Christ on a crutch, " Di groaned, covering her eyes with her hand.
"Oh, that's just what I need, a room full of adolescent males with the
hots for me because I look like Stevie Nicks. Terrific. Ann, I am not the
type to enjoy the role of Mrs. Robinson!"
"Which is why you'll make a good chaperone, " Ann had the chutzpah
to point out. "You're as hip as any of these kids, but you never forget
you're twenty years their senior—"
"Thanks for reminding me, " Di muttered. "I really needed that.
Should I have brought my knitting?"
"They figure you understand them; they respect you. They'll listen to

you.”
"You think." Ann started to remonstrate; Di held up her hand. "All
right, I'm here, aren't I? Just remember what I told you. I don't break
up clinches, I don't arbitrate in lovers' quarrels, and I don't keep kids
from smoking in the John. And I don't care whether or not what
they're smoking is legal. Unless it's heavier shit than grass. What I will
do is break up fights, keep kids from driving out of here if they're
drunk or stoned, try and put the fear of God into anybody doing
heavier drugs than grass, and keep anybody from raping or getting
raped. And that, my dear, is the' extent of my involvement.”
"You have a far more realistic view of our student body than most of
their parents do, " Ann said dryly. "Or the teachers, for that matter.”
"I can afford to, " Di replied just as dryly. "They aren't my kids. I don't
live here. I'm not dependent on their parents' goodwill for my salary
and continued employment. I can be just as blunt as I want to, and
just as realistic as the situation calls for.”
"You also must be a lot tougher than you look, if you're planning on
restraining high-flying adolescent males. " Ann gave her an interesting
look; not at all doubtful, just speculative.
"Karate. Second dan black belt, " Di said modestly. "I'd be higher,
except for two things. I don't compete, and my sensei teaches
cross-discipline stuff so we'll know how to handle martial artists from
other schools. So we don't exactly have what you'd call perfect forms,
and you have to have perfect forms to compete.”
Ann laughed a little. "You're going to play Bruce Lee in that dress?"
"That's the reason why it's so full. And silk has another advantage; it
doesn't tear easily. " Di eyeballed the paper towel dispenser, and spun
into a kata, with the dispenser as a target. Front kick, side kick, back
kick, and finishing with a second side kick; hitting the dispenser very
lightly, the kind of pulled blows that showed truer skill than

full-contact karate. She wasn't even breathing heavily, and she'd only
lost one hairpin. "My jeans are all karate cut, with the extra gusset in
the inseam. Last but not least, you'll notice I always wear flats. " She
grinned.
Ann nodded. "You'll do, my dear. You'll do. If you ever want a
teaching job—"
"Bite your tongue!" Di laughed. "I'm not that tough. You couldn't pay
me enough.”
"That's what I say every spring—and every fall I'm right back here. "
Ann said over her shoulder as they left the teachers' lounge, "You take
the punch bowl; see if you can keep the little psychotic darlings from
spiking it, will you? I'll take the stage corner and try and keep them
out of the curtains.”
Di sighed, smiled sweetly at one of her erstwhile pupils who seemed to
have been struck dumb by the sight of her in a dress, and tried to keep
a weather eye out for Monica. Fortunately the canned music wasn't
bad. She hoped the band played half as good as they looked.
But Monica, and the threatening ruin of her reputation among the
teachers, was foremost in her mind. If I can just talk to her alone for a
little, maybe I can repair some of the damage she did to herself. She's
just damn lucky the principal sent everybody home halfway through
lunch period because of the storm, or she'd be in even deeper kimchee
than she is now. As it is, nobody knows she left the campus; they're
assuming she stayed until everyone was turned loose.
Teachers are well known to have detection systems that rival Stealth
bombers and spy satellites. Within five minutes of the moment
Monica had stormed off in her cream-coloured huff, half the teachers
in Jenks had heard some version of the blowup. By the time school
was cancelled, it was the talk of the faculty lounge.
The way the current (and most popular) version had it, Monica was a

first-class troublemaker. According to that version, Fay and Sandy
were set up by Monica; Derek caught them together and came to some
unwarranted conclusions—thanks to Monica making a lot of little
innuendos beforehand.
But Di had heard part of the story from Derek himself—and the
version of intercourse Sandy and Fay had been about to engage in
when he caught them wasn't "talking. " Yes, Monica had all but
pushed him at the van during the critical time period—but she hadn't
set the pair up. They'd arranged their little't-à-t all on their own.
And everyone seemed to have forgotten that.
Yeah, well, Fay is teacher's pet for everybody except Ann and me;
Ann just basically could care less about the little bitch because she
never even tries in class, and I haven't done more then see her at a
distance since I got here. Di leaned back against a column, trying to
ignore the half-dozen moonstruck adolescent males who were lurking
in her vicinity. Jesus Cluny Frog, guys— where the hell were you
back when I was in high school? Back when I needed you? Three of
the six weren't at all bad looking, if a trifle nerdy.
They were all on edge, though, and it wasn't just because of the dance.
But before she could figure it out, she saw someone else standing a
little apart from the crowd.
There was a seventh kid who wasn't giving her puppy-dog eyes; he was
just watching her. She couldn't help but notice him; he had an aura of
vitality that practically glowed in the dark. He was something really
special—not classically handsome, not even close, but so cutting-edge
he'd stand out in New York, with wicked good humour gleaming out of
those big green eyes.
You're going to be a real lady-killer, my lad, she thought with
amusement. And it won't be long, either. These provincial posers
don't appreciate you. Just you wait until you get out in the world-He
lifted an eyebrow at her—then headed straight for her.

Lady Bright. He can't possibly have the audacity—
He did.
"Care to trip the night fantastic, my lady of the camellias?" he asked,
offering his arm. "You'd make Alphonse Mucha swoon with rapture.”
"I'm a chaperone, " she said sharply.
"Does this mean your legs are broken?" he retorted. "Come on, you're
dying to dance, I can tell. And it's too early for anybody to get the guts
to dump anything in the punch bowl. That won't happen until the
lights are down for one of the couples' dances.”
She looked at him; at the mostly empty dance floor; at the wistful
expression his broad grin wasn't quite hiding.
"Oh, come on, " he whispered. "Half the guys here want to dance with
you, but they're too chicken to ask. You'll do wonders for my rep.”
That did it. What the hell. There's no law about the chaperone not
having a little fun.
She allowed him to sweep her out into the middle of the floor, where
she proceeded to do both her't'ai chi instructor and all her
professional-dancer friends proud.
And the boy wasn't half bad himself.
They cleared the floor, drawing impromptu applause from the kids
that gathered on the edge.
"I feel like I'm in a music video, " she laughed, after the third song.
"Enough, I'm out of breath, and I’ve got to get back to my job"—she
leaned close so she could whisper—"and I don't think there's too many
girls who'd turn you down tonight, not after this little exhibition.”

The wicked sparkle in his eyes told her that she'd hit the mark, but he
escorted her demurely enough back to her station.
The kid—whatever his name was—was the only light spot in the
evening, though. Yesterday's windstorm had died down some, but it
wasn't over. The sky was the colour of a grocery sack all day; Di had
decided that it wasn't quite so hard to believe the old dust-bowl stories
of the sky being black at high noon. She was just glad that her silk
dress was washable, and that she'd changed here instead of back at
Larry's.
And that she'd brought a can of antistatic spray. There was an
incredible amount of static electricity in the air. She was wearing
rubber-soled flats and had liberally sprayed her dress, but nearly
everyone else was getting shocks when they accidentally touched
something metallic. The kids were nervy and restless; even the adults
were on edge. Di had seen just this kind of nervous tension in
California once, when she'd been around Orange County while the
Santa Ana was blowing. The experts claimed that the hysteria
generated by the Santa Ana was caused by the static and the positively
charged ions caused by the constant high wind. Whatever the reason,
it set everyone jumping like cats in a dog pound.
And there was a sense of something stirring, ever so slightly,
elsewhere. She doesn't like it either, Di thought suddenly. She's still
sleeping—but this wind is disturbing the surface of Her dreams.
Whatever She is. Definitely female, but nothing I've ever crossed
before.
Ever since Di had communed with the edges of the dreams of the One
Below, she'd been vaguely aware of what She was sensing. Di hadn't
wanted to get too close; it would be only too easy to get pulled into
those dreams, and damn hard to get out again.
She was the reason for the psychically null area here. She tended to
influence psis; either She made them uncomfortable and they moved
as soon as they possibly could—

—or they get sucked in and never come out again. Wonder why
nobody's ever noticed that an unusually high number of catatonics'
come out of the Old Tulsa area?
Di shook her head; she tried not to think about the One Below too
much. Just thinking about Her brought you in closer contact. The
dreams of the One Below were not the kind of thing Di preferred to
have loose inside her skull.
This storm, though—it had nothing to do with Her. The legends were
right; nobody wanted Her to wake up. She was dangerous and touchy,
and Di hoped profoundly that this anomalous weather didn't disturb
Her even a little.
It would take an awfully long time to brew five thousand gallons of
coffee. I don't think She'd wait.
At that point there was a squawk from one of the stage amps the band
was setting up, and Di jumped, then grinned sheepishly at some of the
kids nearest her, who'd reacted the same way.
"Static, " said one kid. "Gremlins, " said another. There was a nervous
giggle—
The amp squawked again; one of the mikes was on and did a feedback
squeal that set Di's teeth on edge.
"Shit—" said the kid on stage, the one Alan had introduced as the bass
player, unaware that the mike was live. There was a nervous laugh at
that and the rest of the chaperones glared; the kid blushed the most
spectacular shade of firecracker red Di'd ever seen in her life.
"Uh—sorry—" the kid mumbled into the mike; it began to squeal and
he turned it off before it could pierce their eardrums.
Some things never change, Di thought, looking around at the
decorated auditorium. The only difference between what we've got

here and my high school dances is the cost of the trimmings.
The theme of the dance—there was evidently a law somewhere that
high school dances had to have a theme—was "Spring Fling.”
I hated theme dances when, I was a kid, and that hasn't changed,
thank you.
Someone in his or her infinite wisdom had decided that "Spring Fling"
meant some sort of bizarre connection to medieval Scottish May Day
celebrations. There was an abundance of tartan, all inappropriate and
in ghastly colours, and an overabundance of inappropriate paper
flowers and garlands. And the Major Decoration (where is it written
that "there shall be a paper-mache Monument?") was a Maypole.
Complete with crown and streamers.
Dear gods, does anybody here really know what a Maypole means?
No. Not possible. Unless… there's a couple of teachers here that are
the right age to have been flower children. Including Miz Greeley
over there-She caught Ann's eye and nodded toward
the—ahem—erection. And raised an ironic eyebrow. Ann started to
grin and covered the grin quickly with her hand.
But the shaking of her shoulders told Di everything she needed to
know. Ann Greeley, at least, knew exactly what Maypoles meant, and
found it hilariously funny.
I wonder if it could have been her idea in the first place!
But at that moment, Fay Harper, the Spring Queen, made her
appearance on stage surrounded by her court.
And suddenly nothing was quite so funny anymore.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

There's something very strange going on up there, Di thought,
staring at the crowded stage. Somebody up on that stage is doing a
shield that's as good as Derek's. And I can't tell who. Or, most
importantly, why.
And it was impossible to tell where that shield originated. The four
members of the Persuaders were already up there, plus the assistant
principal, the Queen and King, the escorts for the six Princesses, and
the Princesses themselves.
Like trying to pick out one goldfish in a tankful.
The stage wasn't exactly crowded, even with twenty people standing
on it; as with everything else, Jenks had superior facilities for their
would-be thespians. Although no amount of bunting and tissue-flower
garlands was going to conceal the fact that this was the cafeteria by
day, and Di was just as glad she wasn't on the cleanup committee; this
place was going to be hard to get in shape after the dance was over. In
Di's time dances were held in the school gym—but apparently the
pristine condition of the precious hardwood basketball court took
precedence over convenience of cleanup.
According to Ann, that Fay would be Spring Queen was as predictable
as the coming of spring itself; there was no surprise there. But
standing on the right as her escort—though not as the Spring
King—was Derek.
Now that was a surprise. As late as just before dinner, Derek had been
swearing that Fay was a bitch and he'd rather die than take her to the
dance.
So something changed his mind in the last two hours. I wonder
what?
He didn't look too happy up there, though. He was hunched up a little,
face sullen, and he oozed Bad Attitude. The latter was hardly
surprising, since at Fay's other hand was the Spring King, Sandy, who

was doing an Attitude number right back at Derek. On the other hand,
this sulky brat didn't look much like the Derek that Di knew;
something had certainly been playing with his mind and his
hormones. Derek could be awfully easy to manipulate.
That something was undoubtedly his date. Di took an instant dislike
to Fay Harper. She was blond and gorgeous, and at the moment
looked like the proverbial cat that ate the canary. Exactly the kind of
chick that used to make Di's life miserable back when she was in
school. It was pretty obvious to Di what was going on here; Fay was
playing Derek against Sandy, and neither one of the boys was bright
enough to catch on to what she was doing.
There was more to it than that, though. Di had gotten a peculiar
feeling the moment she laid eyes on Fay Harper—a feeling as though
there was something very wrong about her. It was an uneasiness that
ran deeper than the animosity Di would have felt anyway, given that
the girl was obviously a manipulative little tart.
Di didn't get much of a chance to analyse her. The vice-principal took
over the mike to announce the crowning of the Queen, and Fay
moved, with false and simpering modesty, behind him, out of Di's line
of sight.
The static discharge from his clothing was playing merry hell with the
sound system. Every time he touched the mike, it squealed. It didn't
help that he was wearing what Di thought of as the Plastic Teacher
Suit (Ann called it the Sears Sucker Suit;
"whole herds of polyesters died to make Sears great"). The static he
was creating could have powered Tulsa for a week.
Finally he gave up, and gestured to one of the band members to try to
make the introductions and announcements. The boy (Di remembered
he'd been introduced to her as George) did his best, but the mike kept
interrupting with howls and shrieks so often that the kid just threw up
his hands in frustration, took the tinsel crowns from the

vice-principal, and did the whole ceremony in mime.
And still that uneasy feeling persisted. There's something in the air,
and it isn't static. Something's going down.
Sandy marched up to the mike and turned it back on, and Di braced
herself for another shriek from the tortured electronics.
He cleared his throat self-consciously, and the mike popped
threateningly, but didn't quite act up.
"I guess all of you know that the Spring King was supposed to be Bob
Williams, " His face looked like a plastic mask in the harsh stage
lights, and his words sounded stilted, as if he'd memorized them.
He probably did. I bet I can predict the rest of this little speech. "Bob
isn't with us anymore; he's gone to that big football field in the sky.”
"Bob isn't with us anymore. I guess somebody up there must have
needed a good team captain. " The microphone popped again. It
sounded, oddly enough, like laughter.
Give me strength. Who wrote this piece of tripe, I wonder? Just
about then Sandy hesitated, and Di saw the vice-principal's lips
moving in an attempt to prompt him.
Aha, I might have known.
"Bob always gave everything he had for Jenks, one hundred and ten
percent. He never missed a game, no matter what. He was the best
football player Jenks ever produced. " Feedback through the amp
made the speakers whine petulantly.
And the less said about his academic achievements, the better.
"We'll all miss Bob. He had a heck of a future ahead of him. It's going
to be real tough to fill his cleats.”

The vice-principal leaned forward, and Di got a good look at Fay
Harper's expression. She wasn't quite sure how she'd been expecting
the girl to look—at least a little moved, maybe. But whatever she'd
been anticipating, however vaguely, it wasn't the deadpan Fay was
wearing. Sandy cleared his throat again and prepared to continue with
his recitation, but the sound system chose that moment to break into a
screech that probably vibrated the fillings out of people's teeth.
Sandy just shrugged (looking relieved) and retired to his spot beside
Fay to the equally relieved applause of the audience. Then Fay stepped
forward.
It was only at that moment that Di saw how odd her gown was. If it
hadn't been that the thing was a very modem shade of baby blue, it
could have come straight out of a costume exhibition of the
Revolutionary War. Beribboned, ruffled, and pan-niered, with a
neckline that was just short of pornographic, all it lacked to make it
perfect was a powdered wig. Di wondered what on earth had
possessed her to buy it—and where on earth she'd found it.
Most girls Fay's age would have looked awkward in a dress like that.
Ninety-nine percent wouldn't have known how to handle the wide
skirts and panniers.
Fay carried herself as gracefully as if she were Marie Antoinette. Di
had to admit to grudging admiration for the girl. It took a certain
amount of chutzpah to wear a dress so entirely out of step with the
neon lame and hot-pastel organdy currently in fashion. And it took
native grace to be able to move in something like that.
Fay's little gratitude speech was as clear as the proverbial bell. The
sound system didn't misbehave once during the entire proceedings.
Given Fay's reputation, Di couldn't help thinking, it's probably afraid
to. So, what's next? She looked around, trying to find a source for her
feeling of impending disaster, and couldn't spot a thing. As she
scanned the crowd, identifying and dismissing every marginally

psychic kid she could spot, the six Princesses and their escorts picked
their way gingerly down the slippery wooden stairs to the stage,
heading straight for the Maypole.
That was enough to distract Di from her search. They can't be— she
thought, incredulously. They can't be. Good gods. They are.
Sure enough, each one of the twelve grabbed a streamer, and began to
sort themselves into a ring of facing pairs. Boys facing girls, boys to be
circling clockwise, girls widdershins.
Does anybody out here know what that Maypole dance really stands
for? Di spotted Ann at the edge of the crowd, trying to bury her giggles
behind a cup of punch. The fact that the cup was empty was a dead
giveaway.
Yeah, she knows what's going on, all right. Yeah. Let's hear it for
Fertility Rites in the Modern High School. Coital Rituals 101, first
door on the left. Di bit her lip to keep from giggling herself. I wonder
if Ann even bothered to try to keep them from going through with
this when she heard about it?
From the way Ann's shoulders were quivering, she probably hadn't.
And it was an odds-on bet she hadn't even tried to tell anyone what
she knew.
And the rest of the teachers are all seeing innocent little flowers of
romance performing a quaint little Victorian custom. She
double-checked the Maypole; straw crown, green ribbons, phallic
knob on top… completely authentic. Oh, my ears and whiskers, it's
about as Victorian as lam!
One of the guitarists up on stage fingered an opening passage, and the
twelve kids raised their streamers in unison, preparatory to going into
their dance.
—and suddenly Di sensed the stirring of power, and the scene didn't

seem quite so funny anymore.
The rest of the band joined the first guitar, playing something slow
and fairly low-key, while the twelve kids began weaving in and out
with their ribbons, moving at a slow walk.
Twelve… and the pole makes thirteen. It's the Sex Magick version.
Lord and Lady, somebody out there knows what he's doing! Now if
the band starts speeding up…
The band did.
… I've got potential trouble on my hands. Scratch that; I have real
trouble on my hands.
Ann Greeley? Despite having dismissed her before, Di was forced to
consider her the prime suspect now. She fit all the parameters—adult,
in contact with the kids, and demonstrably knowledgeable. She didn't
have an apparent motive, but that didn't matter; the motive could be
something Di just hadn't spotted yet. She didn't have the "feel" of a
magick-worker, but Di suddenly realized that if she wasn't at all psi,
Di would never know she was a sorcerer until she actually cast some
sort of spell in Di's presence.
Di tore her gaze away from the Maypole dancers, who were skipping
around their circuits without a single flaw in the weaving, faces set in
the blank masks of entrancement. Even more ominously, the rest of
the students had begun to crowd onto the dance floor and by their
dancing were raising more power to feed into the Maypole ritual.
Di finally saw Ann making a lateral for the punch bowl, and threw a
full probe on her, a probe which included Di's own rather limited
ability at mind reading.
And got nothing. Ann wasn't interested in power, she didn't even
realize there was anything unusual going on; Ann was making sure
nobody'd dumped anything into the punch besides sherbet and fruit

juice.
But the power was going somewhere. And there was a lot of it. Maybe,
she realized with a feeling of dread, enough to wake up the One
Below…
She was going to have to ground it, and fast. The way the ritual was
meant to go, with the power going right back into the fertility of the
earth.
She couldn't scan for the culprit, make sure the One Below didn't
wake up, and drain off the power harmlessly at the same time. She
hesitated for a moment, then sensed the unknown sorcerer pulling the
energy as fast as the dancers could generate it.
Not this time, bozo, she thought grimly. You just ran up against an
expert in Sex Magick. You should have tried something other than a
pagan ritual, mister. We're on my home turf here.
She tapped straight into the spell casting, taking the power and
grounding it the way her granny had taught her. She could tell that the
other was surprised when the energy stopped feeding into him; felt
him groping around for some way to stop her. But he didn't have any
feeling for the power flows, and he had found a way to use the pagan
ceremony either completely by accident or through a lot of study. He
couldn't tell where she was tapping in, and he didn't know how to
block her. And he didn't have time to figure out how to get around
what she was doing.
I just love being made default High Priestess with no advance
warning.
But despite the fact that she could feel her enemy nearby— was
probably close enough to touch him, in fact—she was just too busy to
try to single out which of the people on or near the stage was the
sorcerer. Sweat trickled down the back of her neck as she struggled
with the reins of power. Like controlling a horse that wanted to bolt;

she dared not take her concentration off her task or it would escape
from her. If she'd had a chance to prepare for this, it would have been
different; she'd have been in a trance of her own, and not fighting to
hold the power, stay conscious, and ward the sleeping Leviathan. The
muscles of her shoulders began to cramp with strain, and she put her
back against a pillar to keep herself upright.
The kids continued to dance, and the band continued to play, all
oblivious to the arcane fencing going on under their noses. All except
for the green-eyed kid, who had his back to the wall, his eyes
frantically scanning the crowd, his face set and a little frightened.
He feels it too—and he doesn't know where it's coming from or going
to, either. Shit, I'm scaring the hell out of a budding psi. Sorry about
this, kid. I've got my hands full at the moment.
That was when things took a turn for the worse. The music the band
was playing started to change.
Strange undertones crept into the sounds two of the guitars were
putting out. The music made the hair rise on the back of Di's neck; the
only thing she could think to compare it to was the stuff Dave's band
had done—
But this wasn't music meant to generate psychic energy. This music,
carried undercurrents of hatred and anger. This was music designed
to incite violence. None of the band members appeared to notice what
was going on with their own music—
In fact, they looked oblivious to everything around them, completely
caught up in what they were doing, paying no attention to the
audience. Up on stage, only Derek and the vice-principal were left
besides the band; Sandy and Fay were already gone.
Two of the kids to Di's left collided accidentally on the dance floor.
Five minutes ago, they'd have ignored the collision, or at worst,
grinned and gone on dancing.

Not now.
They rounded on each other, snarling, fists clenched, every muscle
tensed to attack.
One just happened to be black; the other, white.
The stage was set for disaster, the curtain was about to ascend, and
she had her hands full. Too full to even try to stop it.
Lord and Lady, I've got too many balls in the air, and if I drop any of
them—Come on, I need some help here!
She felt that little something extra that made her a Guardian finally
kick in, giving her the equivalent of one more hand—
—and with it, instructions.
She sent a surge of power at the band without knowing why she was
doing so, knowing only that she had to.
The third guitar cut across the music of the first two. Literally cut
across it; what the third one played cancelled the undercurrents of the
others completely. Peace and harmony and sheer good fun carolled
out, Woodstock and a sixties Beach Boys concert combined.
The expression of pure hatred on the white kid's face faded. Between
the music and the crowd noise, Di was too far away to hear what he
said, but it was evidently an apology. The black one looked down at his
clenched fists as if he was surprised to see them attached to his wrists,
and sheepishly nodded and backed off.
I don't know what's going on here, but I sure as hell know which side
I'm picking! She stopped grounding out the energy she'd been taking
from the Maypole spell casting and instead of feeding it back into the
earth, sent it straight at that third guitar.

Whoever that other magician was, he figured out what Di was doing
immediately. He stopped trying to find a way to pull control away
from Di, and began feeding the other two guitars from whatever stores
he had already, and whatever he could glean from the other dancing
kids.
The two enemy guitars—Di recognized them, absently, as
Stratocasters—howled like a pair of demented Sirens, and threw out
their song of destruction. And Di's ally, a Gibson probably older than
most of the kids here, reacted like Tai chi master, taking their music
and transmuting it. Picking up their riffs and purifying them; turning
their own force against them.
It was recognizably music; anything that wasn't might have attracted
attention and broken the spell the Strats were trying to weave.
Everything depended on their being able to keep the kids in that kind
of half-trance the first notes had sent them into— and keep them
dancing. The Gibson couldn't break the spell, but it could change it,
and that was exactly what the instrument—or whatever was inhabiting
the instrument—was doing.
The kids were the rope in a tug-of-war conducted by a trio of
latter-day Pied Pipers. All they heard was the music and the beat; they
were deaf and blind to the subtle manipulations of their emotions. It
wasn't fair, but there wasn't much Di could do about it. All she could
do was support the side that intended to set them free when the fight
was over.
The Gibson was going strong, but Di wasn't sure how long she could
keep this up. She wasn't sweating anymore; she was shivering with
reaction and weariness. Her knees felt so weak that it was only the
pillar at her back that was keeping her on her feet.
I need some way to end this. I need some way to overwhelm them.
Then she saw her opening. And so, she sensed, did the Gibson. It
pulled back a little, preparatory to giving its all. Desperate for a way to

finish the battle, she dropped everything she was doing and sent her
ally one last, frantic burst of concentrated power.
The Strats felt it coming, and tried to rear a wall of sound to deflect it.
But the amps had taken enough for one night.
Between the static charge in the air and the duelling magics, they
couldn't take any more.
There was a final note from the Gibson that stopped the kids in their
tracks, froze the band cold, and made even the Maypole dancers drop
their ribbons and clap their hands over their ears. And at that point,
two of the three stage amps died.
But they went out in a blaze of glory; snooting flames and smoke
everywhere, in a pyrotechnic display that rivalled anything Di had
seen name bands do on purpose.
The Gibson wasn't done yet—it still had a partially live amp, and it was
moving in for the kill. Di fed her ally one last burst, and together they
blew the circuits on the Strats—
Which was calculated to send whatever was in them back to whatever
hell they came from.
The Strats wailed as their circuits fried. The two Strat players cursed,
yelped, and dropped their instruments, frantically hauling the straps
off over their heads. The amps were still burning. For some reason the
fire alarm hadn't gone off; Di suspected it had been turned off at the
office to prevent kids turning in false alarms during the dance. She
also suspected that there would be heads rolling over that in the
morning. But for now, it was just as well.
The vice-principal and another teacher jumped up on the stage with a
pair of carbon-dioxide fire extinguishers and began spray-big
everything and everyone indiscriminately.

The first of the two Strats gave a last dying shriek as the thing
inhabiting it lost its grip on the guitar. There was a power surge that
flickered the lights. Then the guitar went up in a shower of sparks,
and the resulting short circuit blew every fuse in the building.
There were a few screams as the lights went out but not much more
than that. Di dropped her shields enough to ascertain that the kids
were all mostly dazed. There would be no lasting harm, but the shock
of being put into a trance state and then blown out of it again was
going to keep most of them a bit confused for the next few minutes.
Most of them, but not all.
"Oh, man, " came a mournful voice from the stage. "Oh, man. If we're
gonna blow amps and guitars every night, we gotta get better-paying
gigs…”
—
Derek headed straight for the can the minute the lights came back on.
He felt like he was going to be sick, even though he hadn't had much
to eat and not a thing to drink that wasn't perfectly harmless.
It had been a long day, and it didn't look like it was over yet.
First the vice-principal had called him on the carpet for fighting with
Fay in public. Then Fay had been all over him every chance she got,
pouting and trying to make up to him. And Monica had avoided him
all day, even going so far as to sit on the opposite side of the English
class from him.
And somehow, some way, Fay had managed to get him talked into
first coming over before the dance, then giving her his ring back. He
still wasn't sure how she'd done it; the entire afternoon and early
evening were lost in a kind of tired haze. When he got to the dance, he
wasn't mad at her anymore; he was mad at Sandy for making it look
like he and Fay were going to—

Going to—
Now he didn't remember what it was. But it was all Sandy's fault.
Then he'd taken Fay to the dance—in her car, not his—and all this
weird shit started happening.
First off, there was Sandy, acting like Derek was poaching on his turf.
Then there was that stuff with the sound equipment; George never
had trouble with his equipment before.
That was when he started feeling sick. He had gotten down off the
stage without Fay, who managed to vanish at some point during the
Maypole dance. He remembered her looking startled, then angry, then
completely enraged—then she was gone, about the time the music
started to go thermonuclear.
He'd had a pretty good idea where she'd gone, because Sandy
disappeared a few moments later. But he was feeling too dizzy and
light-headed to care.
Then the band blew up.
When the lights came back on, it turned out that the damage was a lot
less than it had looked like. Basically two of the three guitars were
totalled, and two of the three amps. The sound system itself was okay,
so the vice-principal grabbed George's sound guy to play DJ and told
everyone to take five; they'd start the dance back up once the stage
was cleaned off.
Derek had about had it. He'd decided he was going to confront Fay
about vanishing on him and head home; walk home if he had to. But
every time he started to track down Fay and demand an explanation,
he felt sicker.
He went to the sinks and started throwing cold water on his face. God,

it's hot in here, he thought. When the band was playing it was so hot
I thought I was going to smother. Shit. Like I couldn't breathe—no,
more like somebody was sucking the breath out of me.
The door to the Johns creaked and Derek glanced up at the mirror
reflexively to see who it was. "Hi, Alan, " he said wearily.
Alan was looking pretty smug. "Hey, what's wrong?" he asked, giving
Derek a look of concern mixed with condescension. "It's pretty early in
the evening to tie one on, buddy.”
"I didn't 'tie one on, ' " Derek replied with as much heat as he could
manage to dredge up. "I haven't had a damn thing to drink except a
Coke. I think I must be catching something.”
"Too bad, " Alan replied, messing unnecessarily with his hair. "Don't
give it to me, okay? I finally got together with that girl I was telling
you about. We just might go somewhere private. Depends on if they
can really get the sound system working again or not.”
Derek's stomach turned over, and he clutched at the sink until his
knuckles were white. "Yeah, fine, " he mumbled. "Great, nice going.
Hope you finally manage to get laid. It'll do you good.”
He looked up at Alan's reflection.
Oh shit. Boy, I really put my foot in it this time.
His friend bristled with anger and pulled himself up as tall as he could
without standing on his toes. "This is for those who don't deserve the
very best, " Alan said, holding up his fist with his little finger sticking
out of it.
Then he stalked out, leaving behind the scent of bruised dignity, Now
why in hell did I say that? Derek asked himself. God, what kind of a
jerk am I? Alan didn't deserve to be insulted. What in hell is wrong
with me?

He finally went into one of the stalls and sat with his head between his
legs until he felt a little steadier. First I take Fay back, then I dump on
Alan. It's like I'm my own evil twin or something. Maybe I am
catching something. Maybe that's what the problem is.
One of the teachers came in, making the rounds, and took pity on him
when it was obvious that he wasn't drunk or stoned. The teachers'
lounge wasn't far away; it was cool, and dim, and stocked with
everything a teacher might need to face a class full of bored
adolescents—everything short of Valium, anyway. Two Maalox later,
and his stomach settled at last, he felt ready to face the rest of the
school, and to deal with Fay. He straightened himself up as best he
could, and headed out into the hall.
And ran straight into Monica.
"Monica!" he exclaimed. "Hi! I—uh—"
"Hello, Derek, " she said coldly, in a tone so chill he could feel ice
forming on his eyebrows.
She turned away from him without another word, and started to walk
off down the hall toward the cafeteria. He looked around quickly;
there was no one else around. This was a good chance to try and
apologize.
"Monica, wait!" he called desperately. "Look, I—uh—about yesterday,
I—"
She stopped, and looked back over her shoulder at him. "Yes?" she
said, in tones of Complete indifference.
"I—uh—I was a little hot. " He flushed, and his stomach did another
flip-flop. "I lost my temper, you know?"
"Oh, really?" she replied. "Is that what you call it?"

She turned away and started to walk off again, her back stiff and
straight. "Monica, wait!" he cried desperately. "Can I talk to you later?
Please?"
"No, you can't, " she said frostily, without turning around. "I’ve got
plans. For the whole evening.”
She stalked off with all the pride of an outraged dowager, trailing
disdain behind her like a cloak.
Shit, he thought glumly, staring after her. Shit, I really screwed that
one up, too. Good job, Kestrel. Now you've got Monica and Alan
pissed at you.
Then, suddenly, he remembered something. When he'd been up on
the stage with Fay, he'd noticed Monica in the crowd below. And Alan
had been next to her. What if that hadn't been coincidence? What if
they'd been together?
But how could she have met him? She—oh shit. That math class. He's
in it, too.
He started to hurry after her, to find out who she'd come with, but Fay
intercepted him just as he got to the cafeteria door.
"There you are, " she said playfully. "Sandy and I were wondering if
you'd fallen in.”
From just behind her, Sandy glowered at him.
"They've gotten the sound system put back together, " she told him.
"They're just waiting for me to get the dance started. Sandy thought I
should do the first dance with him, but you're my escort, and I think I
ought to do it with you.”
It was all in the open now; she was playing Sandy against him and vice
versa, and loving every minute of it. And he couldn't help himself; he

took Fay's arm like some macho cowboy grabbing his dance-hall girl
in an old western. And she was as desirable now as she'd been
distasteful half an hour ago. "Yeah, " he said aggressively. "Yeah, I
think so, too. You did come with me. And you are my steady.”
Before Sandy could say anything, he hustled Fay out into the centre of
the floor. That seemed to be the signal everyone was waiting for;
somebody started a Stevie Nicks tape, and he put his arms around Fay
like he owned her…
But out of the corner of his eye he saw Monica. Dancing with Alan.
Aw hell—
—
How dare she move in on my territory! How dare she steal my
power! When I get home, and I'm alone, I'm going to break
something. Fay relaxed bonelessly—outwardly, at least—into Derek's
arms and turned up the sexual heat. She'd managed to get Derek back
under her control; and now he was so worked up tonight that his face
was white and his stomach must be churning.
Poor little boy. So easy to manipulate. But I'm still going to kill
something before the night's over.
She moved her hips in tight against his, reminding him of everything
she'd done to him on all the nights before this; reminding him of all
the things he could have from her. Promising things with her hands
under his jacket. It was hard to maintain this pose of calm, when
inwardly she was screaming with rage at the loss of all that power.
Only the coke and grass she'd done right after the demons were
exorcised enabled her to stay in control.
Body language is so eloquent. And if it could say what I felt, you'd be
short a body part or two, Derek dear.

She'd made up her mind last night, after she'd cooled down from the
fight. Derek had done the unthinkable; he'd broken free of her control.
So there was something worth digging for under that shield of his. He
was the best prospect she'd seen yet; the signs were all right. If she let
him get away, there might never be another target as easy, or as tasty.
So she set herself to winning him back. Because as soon as graduation
was over, she intended to move on him. First she'd have to get rid of
those inconvenient parents of his; then she could get him to marry
her. Derek would have a tidy little fortune by inheritance, especially if
she made certain his parents died in some kind of double-indemnity
accident. Added to her own wealth, Derek would never actually have
to work a day in his life. In his short life…
But the parents were going to have to go. Absolutely. There was no
doubt that his father had brought in that witchy female, that Tregarde
woman—and Fay had no doubts whatsoever that it hadn't been
primarily to give Derek's English class a creative writing teacher.
She was probably the one responsible for the shield over the boy in the
first place. If it hadn't been for the lines she had on him before he was
shielded, Fay would never have been able to work Derek at all tonight.
The hooks were set, though, and with Derek's tacit consent, when he'd
given her his ring right after the accident. Not even an Adept could
work a passive shield against something like that.
But this writer was a wild card Fay didn't like. A rival, a competitor, on
her carefully staked-out ground. She was certainly the one responsible
for foiling the attacks on the Carlin brat. She'd suspected the Kestrels
at first, but no more. If Derek's parents had the Gifts or the Power,
they would have used it by now for more than simply shielding their
son. They hadn't, therefore they didn't have it. But they knew it
existed; they may have even guessed the threat Fay was to their child.
That was undoubtedly why Larry Kestrel had brought the witch to
Tulsa. And once here, the potentials were obvious…
And it's why your life is going to be cut much shorter, old man, she

thought maliciously, leaning on the son's shoulder, and swaying in
place to the gentle song that was playing. Then I'll produce the next
vehicle, and dear little Derek will have a fatal accident too.
She was rather looking forward to that. Derek had cost her dearly in
the past month or so. Her nerves were fried; as scorched as the
remains of the amps now being carted away by the members of the
band.
All that power—right in my hands, and she took it away from me.
That bitch. I should have known what she was when she started
draining the Maypole. I planned that ceremony, and the power I was
to get from it. I planned everything, right down to the costume, the
copy of the one I used to wear, and that was a bitch to have sewn.
That power was mine, I earned it, I set it up, and she stole it. And I
lost even more fighting her. Fay's jaw clenched. Then she nearly gave
me a stroke with backlash. If I hadn't had shunts set up into the
Servant, I'd be unconscious. I want that power back, and I want it
back now! And I want her gone!
Her hands caressed Derek's back automatically. Her mind seethed
with anger. Sandy. He was useful as a smoke screen during the
confrontation, but not as useful as I hoped. Someone just might tell
Derek we were off necking, and I don't need that. I hadn't intended
to get rid of him quite so soon, but he's a nuisance, and he's been
worked up to the proper pitch. And I've got everything I need right
here with me.
Then home, and I drain Derek, then some coke, bennies— that's
another thing modern times are good for. Drugs. I'd have had to
make do without the boost. Coke was the only stimulant I could get
back then.
Right. A new plan. I should have set one up beforehand. Never mind,
it doesn't matter. This will probably work out better in the long run.
The dance came to an end, and Derek pulled reluctantly away from

her. She smiled up into his glazed eyes. "I've done my little duty, " she
whispered. "I'm not in the mood for dancing, or for putting up with
Sandy anymore. He acts like he's high, or something. I think we
should go home. " She licked her lips sensuously. "I can think of other
things to do tonight besides dance. You still have the keys, don't you?"
"Right here, " he said, blinking owlishly at her.
"Then why don't you go get the car. I'll meet you at the front
entrance.”
He blinked again, then turned away from her and wound his way
through the crowd. She'd had him park at the back of the lot, in a
place she knew would be hard to get out of once the lot started to fill.
And he knew if he so much as scratched the paint on the Shelby, he'd
never hear the last of it.
So that would keep him occupied for a good fifteen or twenty minutes.
Long enough to deal with Sandy.
The Servant was also here, having driven the Merc over, playing the
doting relative right down to bringing the camera and taking pictures
of her being crowned. She sidled through the crowd until she came to
its side.
"I need the drug, " she said softly.
The Servant handed her the packet, but didn't let go of it.
"I believe this is a mistake, " the Servant replied, just as quietly. "I do
not think this is a wise decision on your part.”
Fay resisted the urge to tear the tiny packet of PCP out of the Servant's
hand. "You aren't supposed to think, " she told it coldly. "You're
supposed to do as I order you.”
"You created me to see to your well-being. " The Servant's expression

was calm and serene. "I am attempting to perform that function. You
have not been acting in a wise or thoughtful manner of late. You have
been impulsive, irrational; you have been acting, if I may say so, like a
child. This unreasoning insistence on ridding your path of that
girl-chit, for instance. She is no threat to you, except that you make
her one. Perhaps it is because of the stresses on this body you wear,
perhaps the transfer was more of a strain than you had guessed, or
perhaps you have indulged too much in spirits and drugs—"
"I’ve lived over three hundred years, and I’ve made the transfer more
times than I remember, " Fay whispered angrily. "I know what I'm
doing now! And you are nothing but a puppet I created to serve me!"
"Very well. " The Servant released its hold on the packet. "I exist but to
serve you.”
"And you would do well to remember that. " Fay palmed the packet of
PCP and shook her hair back. "Wait until you see Sandy going after
that little Carlin bitch, then follow nun. I want to make sure nothing
goes wrong.”
The Servant looked as if it would like to say something, but then
shrugged slightly and nodded. Fay bit her lip angrily, and only the
sweet taste of blood made her wake up to what she was doing. I think
it's time, and more than time, to be rid of that thing. It's outlived its
usefulness. Damn. It couldn't have picked a worse moment to go
independent on me. I'll have to create a new one at a time when my
reserves are a lot lower than they should be. Then again… I did want
to kill something tonight…
She turned her back on the Servant, letting it see how angry she was
with it, and regretfully abandoned the idea of destroying it tonight.
No, I'd better be a little more careful than that. It's possible I'll have
to keep the thing around longer than I would like. Unless…
Unless I can persuade Sandy to extreme excess.

She licked her lips thoughtfully, as she spotted Sandy spiking the
punch bowl with Everclear.
Perhaps I can, she thought, fingering the little packet in her hand.
Perhaps, with the help of this, I can. And rid myself of Monica as
well.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
FAY THREADED HER WAY THROUGH THE CROWD, SMILING
AND nodding at those who made eye contact with her, but not
devoting a great deal of attention to anyone except Sandy. She reached
his side just as he poured the last of the bottle into the punch bowl and
slipped the bottle up his sleeve.
"Hey, lover, " she murmured, slipping up behind him and sliding her
arms around him from the back. He turned, a little clumsily; she
avoided his elbow and snuggled up against him again before he'd even
noticed that she'd pulled away.
"I’ve got something better than that with me, " she whispered. He
grinned and nuzzled her neck; the booze on his breath was enough to
get her high just by contact.
"Well, why don't you just work a little magic and produce it, hm?" he
mumbled, working his tongue into her ear.
"Not here, " she protested, with a little giggle. "I’ve only got enough for
the two of us. Let's go out back, okay?"
She wriggled neatly out of his grasp, and caught up his hand before he
could protest. She tugged impatiently when he blinked dully at her,
and he finally followed her, like the fool he was, through the crowd,
past the double glass exit doors and the Servant, out to the second
parking lot behind the cafeteria.
Once there, his instincts took over, and he pulled her into the shadows

beyond the lighted doorway. She allowed him to back her into a
corner, encouraging him with hands and lips and tongue. The
stiffened, low-cut bodice of her dress allowed him nearly as much
access as if she'd been bare-chested, a fact no few of the ladies of Fay's
acquaintance back in her youth were very familiar with.
When she thought he was sufficiently engrossed, she extracted the
packet of PCP from the pannier of her dress, palmed it, and placed it
against the side of his neck. Once it was in place, she used some of the
last of her magic to dissolve the gel of the packet and leach the drug
directly into the major vein in his neck.
He started a little when it first began to seep in and pulled away,
sensing that something was out of the ordinary, perhaps. He made as
though he was about to say something; she drew his head down with
her free hand and opened her mouth under his.
He took the hint.
She kept him occupied and under control until the drug had a chance
to get into his brain; then, when she could tell by his increasing
aggressiveness that it was hitting him, she let loose her second spell.
It was a hypnotic, and one she'd used on him before, though never in
tandem with PCP. He stiffened and stood up rigidly straight as the
spell took effect.
"Relax, " she ordered, and he did so. She pulled his head down against
her shoulder and stared off into the bright-and-dark patterns of
shadow and parking lot lights as she whispered her orders into his
ear…
At length he pulled away from her and went back into the cafeteria.
She waited a moment, then strolled casually around the outside of the
building until she reached the front portico, where she waited for
Derek.

It was pleasant enough out here; a little chilly, but not bad. The wind
had died down sometime during the duel she'd had with that witch.
There was dust all over everything, but she sat down on one of the
concrete benches under the portico anyway.
She wouldn't be wearing this dress again, so it didn't much matter if it
got soiled. Having it made and wearing it had been a purely symbolic
act, to accent her differences from the rest of the world and to evoke
the mood of bygone times when it had been her indentured peasants
performing the Maypole rite.
Well, that gets Sandy and that little nuisance Monica out of my life,
she thought with angry satisfaction. Even if the Tregarde woman is
protecting her arcanely, she won't be looking for a physical attack.
And when Sandy gets done with the little tan, at the very least she'll
be ready for a nice, long stay in a hospital. He might even kill her;
I'm not sure how far he'd go if she fought back. And even if all he
does is damage her, they'll put Sandy away in the juvenile home so
fast he won't even know what's happened. Even all his daddy's
money and influence won't buy him out from under a charge of rape
and assault under the influence of an illegal drug.
The Servant was presumably following him to make certain nothing
interfered until the Carlin bitch had learned her lesson. Fay folded her
hands in her lap, and nodded to herself. This was as foolproof a plan
as she'd ever come up with. Even though her primary plan had failed,
she was still able to come up with backups on an instant—and the
power released by the pain and fear of a budding mage was worth that
of all the ordinary children at the dance put together. Now all she
needed was a way to negate the Tregarde woman.
Retrench and cool off. Plan ahead. Don't let a little failure throw you
into confusion…
Yes—the Tregarde woman could wait. If she'd known what Fay was,
she'd have attacked directly, instead of working through the guitar. So
she hadn't figured out who her enemy was. She had no notion of Fay's

resources, nor would she ever be able to learn where Fay's major
Power Place was. She would probably think tonight's failure would set
Fay back enough that she wouldn't be able to counterattack for days.
Little do you know. First Monica, then you, witch. I wonder what it
is you want? Maybe I ought to let you make your offer before I shut
you down. How long were you going to string Monica along before
you used her? And I wonder what on earth the Kestrels offered you
to protect their brat…
Derek was pulling up next to the portico in her Shelby; the night was
young, and she had more plans for insinuating herself even more
deeply into his emotions.
She smiled sweetly at him as he leapt out of the car and ran to hold the
passenger-side door open for her.
She rose, and he looked at her uncertainly. "Do you—" he said
awkwardly, holding out the keys.
"Oh no, not tonight, " she murmured, caressing his arm lin-geringly as
she passed him. "No, tonight you drive, lover. I'll just sit here
and—relax.”
And she snuggled up against his shoulder as he pulled the car out onto
the street.
When I get done with you tonight, little boy, you'll never even think
about anyone else ever again.
The kids swirled past the eastern corner of the cafeteria, avoiding it,
and not at all aware that they were doing so. Di had managed to track
down the young psi who'd inadvertently found himself stuck in the
cross fire, and she didn't want to be disturbed while she talked to him.
"… so there was just some real heavy shit going down, and you got
caught in the middle, " Di told the green-eyed youngster, feeling quite

apologetic and a little defensive. "I'm sorry, but sometimes these
things just happen.”
The boy who was Spring Thing, or King, or whatever, drifted by them.
Di didn't much care for his glazed eyes and rigidly set expression, but
he wasn't doing anything out of line, so she ignored him for the
moment.
"Yeah, I guess. " The kid rubbed the back of his neck and looked
around uneasily. "Weird things kind of happen around me, always
have, but I can't say I like it.”
"I can't say I blame you. " Di shrugged. "It could be worse, trust me.
You could have my job.”
"What, writing romances? Ooo, pretty scary. " The kid seemed to be
recovering his aplomb fairly quickly. "Or did you mean cruising high
schools for wicked witches?"
She gave him a raised eyebrow. "I'm the only witch around here that
I've been able to spot—" Wait a minute, did he pick up something I
missed? Could the sorcerer be a female? Hell, why not? I'd been
thinking "he, " but there wasn't a sex signature on the spell casting,
"—and last time I looked I was on the side of the angels, " she finished
without missing a beat. "Unless you know something I don't.”
He spread his hands in a gesture of denial. "Hey, not me, lady! I like to
keep my profile low, if you know what I mean. " He glanced
significantly down past his feet. "I wouldn't want to wake anybody up,
you know? I hang around the art classes so I don't stand out… much.”
"Not much more than an anthurium in a bouquet of daisies," she
replied dryly.
"Tasteful comparison. " He smiled wickedly.
She was about to make a scathing retort, when every alarm she'd put

on Monica went off at once.
Lady Bright! She didn't even stop to excuse herself; she just whirled
and set off at a dead run for the opposite entrance to the cafeteria.
Somewhere outside that door Monica was in deep, deep trouble,
something no shield could handle—and even if Di hadn't put those
alarms on her, the emotional distress she was giving off would have
alerted Di to the emergency. She ignored exclamations and protests as
she ducked through the crowd, shoving people out of the way if
necessary. She was vaguely aware that the kid was following her; she
hoped he had the sense to know when to stay out of the way.
All her training told her that there was some serious mayhem going on
outside. And now that she wasn't juggling magic, she could and would
do something about it.
She stiff-armed the doors at top speed; they flew open and she dove
through them, then stopped dead. She peered through the dust-laden
air, trying to spot her quarry in the crowded expanse of the back
parking lot. The wind had stopped after her duel with the sorcerer, but
the dust that had been kicked up was still sifting down, making a haze
that was hard to see through when the lights from the parking lot
shone on it.
But then she spotted movement and heard an angry shriek; the
combatants reeled into the pool of brightness under one of the
parking lot lights. She took off like a sprinter, trying to identify them
as she ran. The aggressor was the Spring King, and he was making
chutney out of Derek's hacker-buddy.
Gods—what the hell is going on here? Who started what?
She noticed that Monica was not doing the expected—she wasn't
standing out of the way and screaming like a ninny. She was trying to
pull the jock off, dragging at his collar and beating on his head with
her shoe.

Good Lord…
It wasn't doing a lot of good; he was paying about as much attention
to her as he would have to a mosquito.
In fact, in the next second, he shrugged Monica off. She went tumbling
across the pavement. The hacker flung himself at the jock, and took
one on the chin that sent him down—so for the moment, the fighters
were separated by about three feet. That would be enough. Di put on
an extra burst of speed and blind-sided the jock with her shoulder,
knocking him off balance and sending him staggering into a car. She
bounced off him in a more controlled manner, and used the
momentum of her bounce to position herself between him and the
other two kids.
Before he had even begun to recover, she was in a balanced, "ready"
stance, and—
—dropped back an involuntary step as he focussed on her and the
sheer force of his rage carried the blind emotion and some of his
thoughts past her shielding.
It felt like a blow to the temple. But more startling were the images
she got. The hacker hadn't been his primary target; Monica was. The
hacker just got in the way when he went after her, and scrambled
neurons took over.
Now Di was the one in the way. And the glazed look in his eyes wasn't
from spiked punch, either. The yellowish sodium-vapour light glared
down on both of them as she tried to figure out what he was on. It was
something that was making him oblivious to pain, something kicking
his adrenaline into "high" and shutting off his reasoning processes
entirely.
He seemed paralysed for a moment, and she took her opportunity to
drop shields and "read" him quickly.

Holy— There were the magical fingerprints she'd been searching for in
vain all over his psyche.
"Lady!" She recognized the voice of the green-eyed kid. He was yelling
from behind the shelter of a parked car to her left. "Lady, watch it! I
think he's dusted!"
Now everything made some sense. Angel dust, PCP, yeah, that would
explain it. But not the tampering with his mind. Somebody was
finally a little careless, and as soon as I get a minute, I'm going to
find out exactly who… if I get that minute.
So that was the picture; the unknown had decided to go after Monica
mundanely. Sending someone else to do his dirty work.
"I'm getting the principal!" the kid shouted from the darkness, as she
heard him take to his heels. "Don't let him grab you!"
Great advice, kid. Now tell me how to keep him from grabbing me!
She concentrated on the jock, and saw the tensing of his muscles that
meant he was going to rush her; she stood her ground until the very
last minute, then danced out of the way.
And tried to remember what she knew about angel dust. PCP is going
to sharpen his reflexes; he's already a trained athlete and he
outweighs me by a bunch, and right now I could break both his arms
and he wouldn't even notice.
He bounced off the car and spun, taster than she would have given
him credit for; he spotted her again and lunged for her. She escaped
by a hair, and only by kicking the back of his knee and following that
with a punch to his kidneys. And although the contact was solid and
would probably leave a bruise the size of her head, it just barely
staggered him.
She sensed his attention wavering for a moment, as if something was

trying to "reset" him. Oh hell. Monica is over there playing Florence
Nightingale to her boyfriend. Great, just great. I'd better make sure I
keep myself between him and them, or he may go for them instead of
me.
In fact, at that same moment he spotted them, and his attention was
split between Monica and Di for a second.
Then it centred on Monica, and he took one step in the girl's direction.
Oh bloody hell. Better get him back…
She pulled a flying side kick just to wake him up a little. She connected
better than she'd had any reason to hope; he went reeling into the
trunk of a Caddy, and hit it with both forearms, with enough force to
dent the trunk lid. She came down much too close to him for her own
comfort and skipped out of his reach with adrenaline sending little
electric chills down her back.
When he turned around and spotted her again, his attention wasn't
divided at all.
His face twisted into a snarl of completely unthinking rage. Great,
Tregarde. Now he wants to kill you. Smooth move. His anger clawed
at the outside of her shields and she winced at the impact of it.
Then something occurred to her, and she took a closer "look" as she
skipped sideways to avoid his lunges at her.
Wait a minute. He's wide open. If he can affect me, even though he's
a normal, I'll be able to hit him. ' Maybe that's why his buddy used it
on him; dust must leave normals open to magic and suggestion.
"Hey!" she yelled, wanting to make sure he focussed on her entirely.
She waved her arms at him, as if he was an animal she was trying to
herd. "Hey!"

He focussed entirely on her; his whole world narrowed to just her,
and he lunged for her.
She backpedalled, gathered her strength, then let him have it with a
full-force psi-bolt; if it worked on him the way it would work on a
psychic…
It hit him just as he lurched forward.
The result was spectacular; his eyes suddenly rolled up into his head,
and he plowed face-first into the asphalt at her feet, like a stunned ox.
She stopped backpedalling, and heaved a sigh of relief. Well, that
was—
"Look out!" Monica screamed.
She glimpsed movement out of the corner of her eye, and she spun to
one side, narrowly avoiding the attack of—something.
It was human-shaped, but its aura said that it wasn't any such thing; it
was mage-created. An artificial construct.
Which didn't matter except that it was likely to be faster than she
was—and as impervious to pain as the dusted jock.
It had leapt out of the shadows and back into them so quickly she
didn't have a chance to see or sense more than that. It snarled, hidden
deeply in the shadows between two cars; a hoarse rasp that didn't
sound like anything human. Di sensed that it was going to attack
again.
All this registered in the time it took her to jump away and orient
herself.
If it's made by magic, magic will take it down. And I've been playing
High Priestess all night. I may be tired, but I've got a full charge, and

I'll bet it doesn't know that.
Before the thing had a chance to move a second time, she got ready to
hit it, this time with a levin-bolt, a torpedo of pure magical energy.
She caught it just as it sprang at her and entered the pool of light; it
spread-eagled there, caught by the force of the blast, shrieking. It
stood there for just a moment, arms thrown wildly over its head, face
twisted and contorted. Then it was gone.
Entirely.
But in mat moment before it winked out, Di had a chance to scan it
briefly, and the unknown's fingerprints were all over it, too.
Gotcha. By the gods. She slumped against the trunk of a car, her
knees going weak with reaction. As soon as I deal with the wounded,
friend, I'm going to have you dead to rights.
She looked down and to her right, at the prone body of the dusted
jock. Amazingly enough, the jock was moving, groaning; starting to
come to and actually trying to lever himself off the ground.
"Jesus Cluny Frog, " Di muttered. "I don't believe this! What's it take
to stop this guy, a tank?"
She stalked over to his side, and stared down at him. He was definitely
trying to struggle to his feet and to full consciousness.
Hang if I'm going to waste another psi-bolt on him.
She removed one of her flats, weighed it thoughtfully in her hand and
gave him a scientifically placed tap on the head with the heel—one.
well weighted with another psi-bolt. He gave a grunt, and collapsed
back onto the pavement.
She slipped her shoe back on, and walked slowly over to the other two

just as the vice-principal came puffing up in the wake of the
green-eyed kid.
She ignored both of the new arrivals for the moment; she wanted to
assess the damage to the two victims.
Though the sodium-vapour lights didn't do much for either kids'
looks, the hacker was obviously the most damaged, so Di concentrated
on him.
In contrast, Monica looked a little dishevelled, and one sleeve of her
dress was torn, but she was mostly radiating anger, not shock or pain.
Honey, you were lucky. You don't know how lucky.
Di hunched down next to the two of them; Monica was helping
support the boy in a sitting position, and holding a handkerchief to his
bleeding nose.
"I don't think anything's broken, " the girl said hesitantly, looking up
at her. "He can move everything, and he's not dizzy; he said he just
hurts a lot.”
"I'll bet he does, " Di said absently. She tilted the boy's head up so she
could see his eyes. Both pupils reacted equally, and though his nose
was bleeding, it didn't look too badly damaged. "I don't think you're
concussed, " she said. "Although I think a real doctor ought to look at
you. You're going to have a lot of bruises and a pair of black eyes that
are going to make you look like a raccoon in the morning, but other
than that, I think you're going to be okay. How are you feeling?" she
asked, turning to Monica.
The girl scowled. "I'd like to rip Sandy's head off and shove it up his—"
She caught herself, and took a deep breath to calm herself. "I'm sorry.
I'm mad, that's how I feel.”
"Good. You should be. " Di stood up slowly.

She had gotten a pretty good chance to assess the vice-principal
earlier, and she had a fair idea of what his notion of "handling the
situation" would be. Basically, he'd try to cover it up. CA, you officious
little bastard. Well, not this time.
She scowled at the vice-principal, putting everything she'd ever
learned in dealing with overweening idiots into her glare. "Well, " she
said. "You certainly have a fine school system here.”
The vice-principal was taken rather by surprise. He'd obviously been
preparing to bluster right over her, intimidate her into keeping her
mouth shut, forgetting that she wasn't one of his teachers.
"Wh-what?" he stammered.
"Just a fine school system, " she repeated acidly, "where some
lame-brained jock stoned to his eyebrows on PCP can attack two
perfectly harmless kids and then try to beat up a helpless woman.
Wonderful. Just wonderful. I really admire the level of control you
have over these kids.”
"I—uh-"
"You—" she continued, turning to the green-eyed boy, who was
obviously enjoying all this to the hilt. "Go call an ambulance. That
idiot over there should be under restraints when he wakes up. And
this poor child should see a doctor. A real doctor, in a real emergency
room.”
"Yes ma'am, " the kid said with relish.
"Don't you—uh—think it would be better if we called the students'
parents and let them handle it?" the vice-principal said weakly.
She gave him a look that made him shrink at least two inches. "No, "
she replied, venom dripping from each word. "I don't. " She turned to
raise an eyebrow at the young psychic. "What are you waiting for?"

"Not a thing, ma'am, " he said quickly, and trotted off towards the
school.
Twice more the vice-principal tried to convince Di to let him call the
parents and cancel the ambulance. Each time she withered him with a
glance. She knew damned well what he was up to; when the hospital
got hold of Sandy they'd run a blood test, and there would be no
covering up what he was on. And that would make local headlines, for
certain.
The kid was quick. The ambulance arrived before Sandy came to
again, and before the vice-principal could make up his mind to push
any harder.
Di made quite certain that the paramedics knew what she knew.
"Listen, " she said quietly as the first of them bailed out of the
emergency vehicle and grabbed his kit. "The only reason the cops
aren't here is because nobody got seriously hurt.”
That stopped him in his tracks. He took a good look at the
vice-principal hovering in the background, at the hacker, and at the
unconscious jock.
"So?" He took his time about setting up. "Why don't you tell me
more?"
Di did.
He had a quiet little consultation with his partner when she got
finished giving him the facts. She couldn't help but notice that
afterwards they were very gentle with the young hacker— and very
careful about securing the jock to the Gurney with some heavy
restraining belts…
She leaned against one of the cars, feeling every bruise, mental and
physical. Ye gods. This is more than enough for one night. And I still
have to use those little traces I picked up to figure out who's behind

this.
She blanked for a minute, lost in weariness. She shook herself awake
as the vehicle pulled away, with the jock in the back guarded by one of
the paramedics, and the hacker in the front with the other.
Monica refused treatment, and Di wasn't going to force her. The girl
stood staring after the flashing lights of the ambulance, dark shadows
under her eyes.
"Okay, kiddo, " Di said, coming up behind her. "Now what do you
want to do? You could go talk to the cops if you want to press charges.
I'm certainly thinking about it.”
Out of the corner of her eye she saw the vice-principal wince and pale.
"I just want to go home, " Monica said tiredly. "I just want to forget
this ever happened.”
"If that's what you want, I'll take you, " Di offered, before the
vice-principal could say anything. "I’ve about had enough for one
night. " She levelled one last icy stare at the man. "Tell Ann Greeley
I'm giving up, please. I'm just about chaperoned out.”
The green-eyed kid had vanished somewhere after calling the
ambulance. Just as well, she thought. I'm not up to much more
tonight. "Come on, Monica, my car's over in the front lot.”
"But—" the vice principal protested weakly. They both ignored him,
and walked off together into the darkness, shoes clicking in unison on
the pavement.
"How awful do I look?" Monica asked mournfully, when they were out
of hearing distance.
Di smothered a chuckle. "Not bad, really. I don't think that sleeve's
going to be repairable, though. If I were you, I'd just cut the other one

off too. Might make a nice little sleeveless number with some careful
tailoring.”
"I don't think I ever want to wear it again, " the girl said in a subdued
voice. "Not ever. " She glanced at Di out of the corner of her eye.
"Diana—what—really happened back there?"
Di pulled the last of the pins out of her hair and shook it loose.
"Whoever was after you went after you again, " she replied, checking
her dress for damage. There wasn't much that a good dry cleaner
couldn't handle—the one advantage of expensive materials and
tailoring. "This time he—or she, I'm not sure which—went after you
physically, probably thinking I wouldn't be guarding you against that
kind of attack. He got that meat-head stoned on PCP and sent him out
to beat you up. Your boyfriend just got in the way.”
"Oh, " Monica said, in a small and frightened voice. "I thought it was
just—I mean, everybody knows Sandy does drugs, I thought—"
"Trust me. It was deliberate, and aimed at you, " Di said firmly.
"Monica, you can't keep telling yourself that this is all just something
that isn't really happening. It is happening, and denying it isn't going
to make you any safer. Wasn't it you who warned me about that other
thing?"
Monica shuddered, and shrank in on herself. "I thought it was just one
of Sandy's buddies.”
They had reached the car, and Di unlocked the passenger's door for
her. "Did you?" she asked, holding the door open so that Monica could
get in.
"No, " the girl said unhappily. "I guess I didn't.”
"Good, " Di said, climbing into the driver's side and sighing as her
tired body sank into the upholstery. "Now we're finally getting
somewhere…”

Monica's mother—blessings on the fates—had been so worried about
Monica that she hadn't asked too many personal questions of Di, and
she hadn't wasted any time getting the child into the apartment.
That gets one child safely home. And I don't think I want to be
Sandy's parents when Rhonda Carlin gets hold of them. Assuming
she doesn't call the cops first. Thank the gods it isn't much farther to
my own bed.
Di drove up into Larry's driveway feeling weary to the bone, and all
she really wanted to do was go have a hot shower and go to bed.
Fat chance. There was still work to do.
Derek's car wasn't in the garage, which meant he wasn't home yet;
well, it wasn't even midnight, so that wasn't too surprising.
If I'm going to try tracking down this bastard—or bitch—I don't
want anyone untrained around anyway. Not even one of the targets.
She let herself in with her key. Larry wasn't obviously around, which
meant he was either buried in his office or watching a videotape in his
bedroom. She doubted he would have Felt the ruckus; that wasn't one
of his abilities. Just the Sight, and a little bit of other things. That was
just as well; she didn't want to tell him what had happened just yet.
Not until she had all the information in her possession.
So, first things first; the hot shower. She emptied her mind and let the
needle-spray wash all her weariness down the drain with the dirt and
perspiration from the fight. That was a little mental trick that usually
worked for her, at least for the short term, and it did this time, too. As
she'd thought, her dress, amazingly enough, was in perfect shape,
except for a couple of stains that would wash out. Well, perhaps not so
amazing; it was heavy silk and cost a small fortune—but was worth it,
seeing the amount of abuse it could take and bounce back from.
Think next time I make a ritual robe it'll be silk. It'll probably outlast

me.
She braided her wet hair and coiled it in a knot at the back of her neck,
slipped on a leotard and jeans, and laid out four candles in the middle
of the rug. This was the "quickie" version of a protective circle; she lit
each of the candles in turn, evoking the powers of the four compass
quarters, and then sank to the floor in a cross-legged position and
picked up the threads of magic she'd detected on the jock, and on the
construct.
She let herself drift into a light trance. Now to follow the traces back
to where and when they were created. That should keep my quarry
from sensing what I'm doing; if I invoke retro-cognition he won't
send up any alerts in the here and now.
Unless of course he's laid a trap back there for me. She acknowledged
the possibility, then dismissed it. That's the chance I'll have to take, I
guess.
She allowed all the identifying factors to sink into her mind, the way a
bloodhound would memorize a scent. Then, like the bloodhound, she
began "sniffing" for that same scent.
But this time she was sniffing about in the recent past; about two
hours ago, to be precise. Just after the duel, when the sorcerer
presumably set his compulsion on jock Sandy.
Ha! She found the "scent"; followed it back to the moment when it
was strongest, then invoked that rather wayward Talent of
retro-cognition—the ability to "see" things happening at some time in
the past.
That involved putting herself another layer deeper in trance, then
disconnecting her "self" from the here-and-now; when it worked, she
generally got a little lurch of dislocation and disorientation.
Even though her eyes were closed, she felt that identifying surge of

dizziness—and suddenly she was "there, " right outside the cafeteria
door, getting a camera's-eye view of the entire scene.
Sure enough, there was good old Sandy, putting the make on the
Spring Queen—
Or was he?
He wasn't, she realized. He was just standing there, not moving at all.
And the spell casting that was swirling around like a blood-coloured
haze about Sandy and the girl was centred on the girl.
And there were webs of power tying the girl to a woman Ann had said
was her aunt, when the chaperons were introduced to each other. She
was standing just inside the cafeteria door.
Aunt? Well, the woman looked just fine, but not to Di's enhanced
senses. The so-called aunt was the construct who'd attacked Di earlier
tonight.
And yes, constructed by that little adolescent brat.
It didn't make any sense! No eighteen-year-old girl should have that
kind of power!
Her own surprise was enough to tip the delicate balance of powers in
her own magic, and Di felt her grasp on the scene slipping. She could
try to get the vision back, but—the Talent was unpredictable. And it
didn't feel as if it was likely to cooperate again tonight.
She drifted back up out of trance, and finally opened her eyes on her
perfectly mundane bedroom, feeling stunned and a little confused.
This is crazy! No kid that age is going to have the kind of acquired
skill and patience it takes to work spells like that!
She blinked, and thought about it again. Okay, I could be wrong.

Look at Olympic athletes; at eighteen they've got that kind of skill
and patience. It's obviously a fact; I can't change it. Fay Harper is
the sorcerer.
Which explains the attack on Monica; she's a rival. She may even be
moving in on Derek for all I know. And it explains the feeling of
threat Larry had concerning Derek. That gal is a man-eater if ever I
saw one, and if she's a magician, there's more ways than one she can
take to use a guy up.
Oh, shit. They arrived together; by now they've probably left
together. Derek's with her now!
She didn't need to be in trance to check on him. All she had to do was
close her eyes and relax; the shields and alarms she put on top of
Larry's protections were easy enough for her to track. Usually.
But when she finally picked them up, they were very faint.
She's got the kid on her territory, she realized. Under her shields and
her protections. Hell. I can't go in after him. I don't even know
exactly where her territory is. It might be her house; it might not.
And five'll get you ten she got her hooks into him before I even set the
shields.
She opened her eyes again and ground her teeth in frustration. I've
got no choice, she decided. It's going to have to wait until after Derek
gets home. I don't think she'll try anything tonight. Even if she does,
he's got Larry and Miri's stuff on him. She can't kill him; consensual
hooks won't allow that. She can't even drain him dry. And I think
she's planning on something far him. Hell, she's only seventeen,
eighteen—if she was finished with her toy, she wouldn't have taken
his escort at the dance.
I hope I was a good teacher. Larry and Miri's shields have held so
far. I hope they still do.

And he's got my stuff on him. At least I know that line of work better
than she does. I don't think she can do anything to him I can't
counter. I don't think she can work any permanent damage through
those old hooks.
I hope it'll be enough.
Scratch that; I just hope she doesn't try anything. That's my best
hope at the moment. I hope she isn't thinking beyond the moment
and the Sex Magick she plans to do to him. I hope destroying her
construct gives her a migraine and she sends him home! I don't think
she could have I’D me in all that mess, so at least I'm in the clear on
that. That should buy us the time we need.
She pulled both her knees up to her chest and hugged them, staring at
the northern candle.
And I'll have to go dig up Larry and tell him the truth. Then we're
going to have to figure out what we're going to do about her. Shut
her down, obviously. If she keeps playing around recklessly with
magical energy the way she has, she'll wake up the One Below.
Good night, I don't even want to think about that.
No, this is going to take more than just me, or even just me and
Larry. I need a third set of hands. It can't be Bill, he's busy-Mark.
Mark Valdez.
She pulled herself up off the floor, blew out the four candles, uncast
the circle, then plodded wearily over to the bed and the bedside table
that held the phone.
Looked like the night had just started.
She dialled Mark's number after consulting her phone list in her
purse. It rang twice, then—thank the Lord and Lady—was picked up.

"Valdez, " said a familiar voice.
"Mark?" she said hesitantly. "I'm not interrupting anything, Am I?"
A quiet chuckle. "Di. No, though if it had been last night you might
have. Sherry's out of town doing a trade show; she won't be back until
Thursday. The grandparents have the munchkin. Aunt Nita offered to
take him, but Sherry wouldn't hear of it.”
"Sounds like things are progressing—" She made the statement into a
question.
He chuckled again. "With patience. And fortunately, most of the
designers she meets seem to be either married or gay. Or both. So,
what can I do for you?"
"You working this weekend?"
"No, " he replied. "I'm collecting some comp time and catching up on
my sleep. Or I was. I take it you have other plans?"
She sighed with relief. "I do. How soon this morning can you catch a
plane up to Tulsa? I'll make a reservation for you by phone and have
the ticket waiting at the airport…”
It was going to be a very long night.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
IT WAS THREE A. M. BY Derek'S WATCH WHEN HE PULLED HIS
car into the garage. It felt later than that; days later.
He'd barely managed to get home. He'd been tempted to stay with
Pay, and only the nagging of his conscience telling him that his dad
would worry if he didn't come home by dawn got him out and moving.
He felt as if he were running on fumes, and three quarts low to boot. It
had been one strange night.

He managed to get the car in beside his dad's Z without damaging
anything, although he did run the tires into one of the concrete
parking bumpers Larry had installed. He'd put them in all three slots
to keep the family from inadvertently shoving their vehicles into first
instead of reverse and totalling both car and insurance rates. Tonight
Derek was glad of the things; he might well have put his car's nose
right through the garage wall and never have noticed, as tired as he
felt.
He was almost tempted just to fall asleep in the front seat.
Then I'll wake up with a stiff neck. Nope. Not worth it. I want my
bed.
He dragged himself out of the car, wincing a bit as some of the
muscles he'd strained complained at him.
Keep this up, and I'll be a damned sexual athlete too. Or dead of
exhaustion. Whichever comes first.
Fay had vanished for a moment, pleading a sudden migraine, just as
they got to her house. He thought she was going to let him cool his
heels to humiliate him, but when she'd come back, pale and wan
looking, she'd been all over him. Somehow, some way, he'd managed
to give her everything she asked for. He still wasn't quite certain how.
And he'd come real close to believing in vampires tonight, what with
the way she leeched onto him, and because he felt absolutely drained
when she finally turned him loose to go home.
He didn't expect the house lights to still be on when he opened the
garage door. And he doubly didn't expect his dad's voice to call out to
him from the living room.
"Derek—would you please come in here a minute?"
Oh shit. Now what have I done? I don't have a curfew on the
weekend, and I didn't drink anything. Thank God. And I didn't do

anything out of line at the dance.
. "Dad, I'm really beat, " he called back. "Can't it wait until
tomorrow?"
"I'm afraid not. " His dad actually sounded apologetic. "Please, we
really need to talk to you.”
Oh shit. His heart suddenly sank as the fact that his dad had said "we
need to talk to you" sunk in. There was only one other person in the
house this late at night.
Diana Tregarde.
Oh shit. I was right. They've been having an affair. He's going to tell
me he wants a divorce from Mom… and that he's in love with that
Tregarde lady.
Sure enough, when he reached the entrance to the living room, they
both were there, Diana and his father. It sure looked like a setup for
the "D" word.
But they weren't sitting together. In fact, his dad was sprawled out
over the couch, while Diana, looking as dragged-out as Derek felt, was
curled up in one of the overstuffed chairs.
They weren't dressed up, either, and that was the way his friends at
school had said It Was Done.
"They always pick some weird time when you aren't expecting
anything. First one of 'em, your dad or your mom, asks you to come
talk about something. When you get there, the Significant Other's
sitting real close, and they're both dressed up, tike they want to
impress you with how serious they are. Basically they look like
they're going to a funeral. Then you get the Big Speech about how
people change, and sometimes things don't last.… " That had been
part of Jill's sarcastic little stand-up routine on "the 'D' word.”

He waited hesitantly in the entrance for a moment, until his father
gestured for him to come in.
"Come on and sit down, Derek, " he said. "This is going to take a while,
and you're going to be wanting to sit down for most of it.”
That was one of "the lines" his friends had warned him about. Oh holy
shit. He is going to tell me he's getting a divorce.
"Derek, this has been a very strange evening, " his dad began
awkwardly.
Derek sat gingerly on the edge of the sofa, positioned exactly between
the two adults, thinking, Yeah. I'll bet it has.
"I think you know that Di volunteered to chaperon for the dance…”
"Not exactly 'volunteered, ' " Di muttered. "It was more like I was
drafted.”
Derek nodded, puzzled. This wasn't exactly what he'd been expecting.
"And before dinner you were swearing that you weren't going to take
Fay—that you'd go alone.”
He nodded. Where the hell is this going?
"Derek, " Di said, "I saw you up on the stage as Fay's escort, and you
left with her early in the dance. I figure that means you’ve been with
her for most of the evening. So what changed your mind about her?"
Huh? He'd been all set for the big divorce speech; this took him totally
off guard. "I—I don't know, " he faltered. "I mean, I met Fay by
accident at the gas station. I guess it was an accident; she couldn't
have known I was going to go there. And we started talking and I just
followed her over to her house, and— and I guess she talked me out of
breaking up, " he finished lamely. "It seemed a pretty cold thing to do

to her, break up just before the prom, you know? I figured we could at
least, like, keep up appearances until we graduated. And, I don't
know, I started to like her all over again. I think she's changing…”
"Judging by the way you look, I'd venture to say that you were keeping
up more than 'appearances, ' " Larry commented dryly.
Derek felt himself blushing.
"Larry, stop it, " Diana said sharply. "Derek, think about it; that's
important. When you weren't with her, you were thinking for yourself.
But once you were, you were doing exactly what she wanted. Right?"
"Uh—I guess—" He couldn't think of a better response. "I mean, I sort
of wanted it, too—"
"That's not what you said at four o'clock this afternoon, " his father
reminded him. "Wait a minute, don't say anything yet. Di's got some
stuff she wants to tell you that is going to sound right out of Vinita, but
I 'll back her on it, one hundred percent."
Diana pushed a strand of hair out of her eyes with a tired little sigh.
"Okay, here goes. First off, magic is real, and I'm a practising witch.”
Derek started to laugh; he couldn't help himself. "Oh come on, " he
said. "You're trying to weird me out, right? Or else you're saying this
shit to see if I'm on something.”
Di shook her head. "Larry-love, you pull your shields off him and I'll
pull mine. Then we'll give him a demo. Don't worry, I've barricaded
the house already; nothing less than a deity is going to break in.”
"Christ, that's comforting, " Larry replied sarcastically. "Considering
what you've dealt with in the recent past.”
"Give me a break, " she retorted. "We're just dealing with something
human where Derek is concerned. Just do it, okay?"

Derek looked from one to the other of them, seriously alarmed.
They've gone off the deep end. Or else she was already there, and she
took Dad with her. Jesus Christ-Bat just about then was when he felt
something leave him, something he hadn't noticed was there until it
was gone, like when his ears cleared after being deadened when he
had that case of flu and all of a sudden he could hear right again. He
felt oddly naked, like his clothing had been stripped off without him
noticing.
And then, when he looked up in startlement, he saw Diana-Well, he
saw someone in the chair she'd been sitting in.
But that someone looked a lot taller. And she glowed with a bright,
hazy purple aura that haloed her entire body. Crackling blue energy
crawled over both of her hands and arced across the space between
them.
Maybe, if it had been daylight and he'd been rested, he might have
handled it better. Maybe he'd even have been able to come up with a
snappy comeback, like "Ever think about working for Steven
Spielberg?" But it was late, and he was exhausted, and he was not
prepared for any of this. Especially when the vision raised one of its
hands and pointed at him.
He yelped, and lurched violently away from the apparition, and found
himself tumbling over the back of the couch. He hit his head going
over, and saw stars for a second.
When they cleared, his dad and Diana were bending over him, helping
him to his feet, and they both looked perfectly normal. And that
"clothed" feeling was back. He was very glad.
"How in hell did you do that?" he squeaked, his voice breaking like a
kid's.
He sat down heavily on the couch as Diana and his father exchanged a
look of weary amusement. "Magic, " she said, shrugging.

He scowled. "That's not funny.”
"No. But it's true. " She went back to her chair and flung herself down
into it. "Your dad and your mom and I used to work together in
college. You know the movie Ghostbusters? Something like that, only
we mostly used ourselves rather than gadgets. When we had the
money for gadgets—which wasn't often, may I add—we used those to
catch the phonies and expose them. We, with the Talents we were
born with, did all the real ghostbusting.”
He felt his jaw sagging open and closed it with a snap. "You? Dad?
Jesus Christ—Mom. 7"
"Derek, do you remember that scrapbook your mother doesn't like to
talk about?" his dad said, leaning his head on his hand. "That was us.
The 'Spook Squad, ' we called ourselves. The reason we haven't
wanted to talk about our little adventures back then isn't that your
mother and I have bad vibes about those days—we had a blast,
actually. It's that—"
"It's that you're a psychic, kiddo, " Diana interrupted, her head on the
arm of the chair, her long hair brushing the floor beside it. "You have
psis on both sides of the family, so that's hardly surprising. You
showed real early that you have some kind of psychic Talents, and
your folks didn't want you to freak when you were little. So they didn't
talk about it, and they shielded you, so you wouldn't know. That
'shield' thing is what your dad and I just pulled off you, so you can
figure the kinds of things you might have seen without it. And later on,
well, no kid likes to be different from the other kids; it looked to them
like you were no exception. And on top of that, since you didn't seem
to want to believe in the stuff, they figured you didn't need to know
about your abilities, at least until you were older, and maybe better
able to handle having them.”
"I—I'm a psychic?" he said weakly. "I am?"
"Sure, " the writer said matter-of-factly. "Why do you think you saw

me the way you did? That's one of your Talents. It's called the 'Sight, '
or 'Second Sight. ' You know, your dad has it too; you can probably do
other things, but we don't know what they are yet.”
"I'm a psychic?" He gulped. "Does that mean I'm crazy?"
Diana gave a long-suffering sigh. "Am I crazy?"
"Well… let me get back to you on that.”
"Thanks, kid. " She grimaced, and her mouth tightened. "Now listen
up; this is deadly serious, and I mean that quite literally. There's big
danger in being psi, and you in particular have a problem right now.
That's why your dad asked me to show up here. He's been getting the
feeling that you were in danger for a couple of months now, but he
couldn't tell where it was coming from. Your mom might have been
able to, but she was in Japan. He started to really panic when you had
that accident, and the feeling only got worse instead of going away. So
when you came up with that business with your English class, it
seemed to him like the perfect opening to see if I'd come on down and
give him a hand in figuring out what the hell was going on. You know
the rest.”
This was all coming at Derek too fast. "I'm a psychic. And I'm in
danger! From what?" He looked imploringly at his dad.
"She told you, I couldn't tell. " His father shook his head. "That's not
my area of expertise. All I knew was there was something out here that
wanted you, that endangered you.”
"Oh. " He couldn't think of anything else to say.
"Okay, so I got down here, and from all the info I got, I figured your
dad was right. But the first person that 7 saw attacked magically
wasn't you. It was Monica Carlin. " Diana looked at him expectantly.
She probably wasn't disappointed by his reaction.

"Monica?" His voice broke again. "But—Monica?"
"Believe it, " Di replied grimly. "And tonight I have the bruises to
prove it. Because tonight it happened again, at the dance. And tonight
I was in place to find out exactly who was after her, and why.”
Then she proceeded to tell him a story about Monica and Alan that he
never would have believed if his dad hadn't been sitting right there,
nodding his head in agreement.
"And you can call Monica or Alan in the morning and ask them
yourself, " she concluded. "They both have physical injuries to prove
that Sandy went after them, and they both saw the thing that attacked
me after I put Sandy out. And they saw it vanish after I hit it with
magic. But don't try calling Sandy, because you won't be able to reach
him.”
"Why not?" he asked dazedly.
"Monica's mother called the cops after Di took her home, and pressed
charges, " his father said, with grim satisfaction. "So did Alan's folks.
The cops went over to the hospital, and as soon as the blood test came
back positive for PCP, they hauled Sandy over to the juvenile
detention wing.”
"But—" Derek protested, bewildered. "Sandy wouldn't do dust. He's an
athlete, they'd bust him off the team—and you know they're going to
cancel the scholarship offer they made him for UO after this. He
drinks like a fuckm' fish, but he'd never do anything that'd show up on
a blood test!"
He was a little too tired to be careful of his language, but his dad didn't
seem to notice.
"Exactly, " Diana agreed. "That's the point. The person that wanted
Monica out of the way got him stoned to the gills on PCP, and did it in
such a way that he wouldn't know she was slipping it to him. And that

very same person is the one who created the creature that attacked
me, and is the one that is posing a danger to you. Fay Harper.”
"What?" he yelped.
"You heard her, " his dad replied. "And I'm backing Di on this. It
makes everything fall into place.”
"She was after Monica because you were attracted to Monica, and she
wanted the competition out of the way, " Diana continued
remorselessly. "She used Sandy probably because she'd used him up
and he wasn't useful to her anymore, so she didn't care what
happened to him. I went over there to the hospital after I figured out
who our enemy was, and checked Sandy out. Honey, even without the
dust, there isn't much left of him but some basic reactions and
emotions. The boy's a burnout case if ever I saw one.”
For the next hour or so, until the sky outside the picture windows
began to lighten with the dawn, they alternated lucid, reasoned
arguments about Fay. And the worst part of it was, the crazier the
arguments were, the more they made sense.
Like the way I feel whenever I'm with her—like I can't think about
anything except her, he thought, when Diana described how
fascination spells ("the real meaning of the word 'enchantment' ")
worked on a guy's brains and hormones. Like how when I'm with her,
and I get bored or sick of the scene, and then she just turns and
smiles at me and all of a sudden it's okay.
And when she described, with the clinical detail of a Dr. Ruth, the way
Sex Magick worked—well, that really hit him where he lived. Except
he didn't want to talk about it. Not with his dad, for Chrissake.
And he really didn't want to admit just how deep Fay had gotten her
hooks into him. So he just sat there and listened, and felt sicker and
sicker. Then they asked him questions about Fay, a lot of which didn't
make any sense. Like whether she had a little room with just a table in

it, or owned a cabin somewhere. He answered them as best he could,
but he realized with every question they asked how little he really
knew about Fay. It was as if he never, ever saw anything of her outside
of school, parties, and her bedroom.
When they finally finished with him, and he still hadn't said anything,
they just sat and stared at him for a while, like they expected him to
explode, or turn into a frog, or something.
His head hurt, his stomach hurt; he basically felt like hell. And he
didn't even want to think about this anymore. Maybe in the morning it
would all turn out to be a bad dream. And even if it didn't—
Well, he'd deal with it later.
Right now, he felt like a burnout case. And he wanted a chance to talk
things over with Alan. And Monica.
And apologize, for real. Maybe they'd accept the excuse that Fay was
messing with his head, after tonight.
"This's all too much for me, " he said, throwing his hands up in the air.
"I'm going to bed. And after that—I'm going to stay clear of Fay.”
He waited for their reaction, wondering if they were going to jump
him and tie him up or something. At the moment, anything seemed
possible.
Instead, they just looked at each other, then at their empty coffee
cups, then at the brightening sky outside. And shrugged.
"That's probably the smartest thing you've said in a week, " Diana
opined. "I think it's time we adjourned this little session.”
"Sounds good to me, " his dad replied, climbing up out of the depths of
the couch. "Come on, old buddy. " He held out his hand to his son.

Derek took it, and his dad hauled him to his feet while Diana extracted
herself from the chair.
"After you, Alphonse, " she said, gesturing to the two of them to
proceed her up the stairs. They did; Derek's dad first, then Derek, then
Di following after she'd turned out all the lights.
Derek pulled open the door to his room and started stripping off his
clothes on the way to the bed, just leaving everything where he'd
dropped it. He had just enough strength left to pull the covers over his
head and turn out the light, but not one ounce more.
And just enough consciousness to think, before sleep descended like a
lead curtain, And to think I was afraid Dad and Diana were having
an affair. Christ. Now I wish they were.
—
The alarm went off in Di's ear. She groaned, but hauled herself out of
the tangle of blankets she'd created. It was too damn early in the
morning, and she'd gotten less than three hours of sleep-But Mark's
plane was due within the next forty-five minutes, and she was going to
have to be there to meet it. And she'd gotten by with less sleep before
this.
She turned on the light, and headed for the bathroom to put herself
into some semblance of order.
There were certain things she could do to kick her metabolism up and
stave off weariness; certain disciplines she could invoke that would
enable her to replace some lost sleep with food. They were temporary,
and she'd pay for them later, but that would be after this whole mess
was over with.
I need to move on this, and move on it fast, she thought grimly,
telling her body what she would be requiring of it while she pulled on
her clothing and brushed her teeth and hair. Before too much longer,

Fay is going to know who I am and that I'm the Enemy; she has to. I
wasn't making any pretense at hiding, and besides, I'm the only new
game in town. She's going to want my innards on a hook for
destroying her Servant last night. If I'm lucky, she'll be at low power
for the next few days and I can shut her down at a reasonable cost.
Lady Bright, she's just a kid… She was just using her power like any
other kid would if you gave them that kind of—
Hell with that. I'm not a social worker, I'm a Guardian. I don't want
to take her out, but if I can't reason with her, I'll have to. She's
screwed up at least three kids that I know of, and who the hell knows
what else she's been up to? And even if she really didn't think about
what she was doing, or hasn't figured how wrong it is, she's putting
too much strain on the local environment. Even without the One
Below to think of, she's playing merry hell with the weather systems
every time she does something major. Lady bless. These spoiled
Jenks yuppie brats are all alike; don't think past their own noses and
their own wants.
Even Monica has a touch of bitch in her, and Derek's been trampling
all over his own friends.
I hope this teaches them a lesson. I hope she's not as psychotic as
some I've had to take down.
She was dressed, clean, and out the door with her keys in her hands
within ten minutes of the alarm clock ringing. I'm going to have to do
this absolutely right, because I may not get a second chance, she
thought, as she pulled her car out of the driveway. I want this
confrontation on my terms, with me on the high ground and with my
allies around me, and while I'm at full strength. So I'd better
prioritize things before I pick Mark up, so I can give him a decent ops
plan.
There wasn't a great deal of traffic around on Saturday morning at
seven a. m. She even accelerated onto the 169 on-ramp without the

usual hassles of dealing with the local drivers, who didn't seem to
understand the meaning of the word "merge. " She cranked down her
window to get some fresh, cold air on her face. It was almost as good
as a cup of black coffee.
Number one priority has got to be to find the physical spot that this
girl is using for her major ceremonies. I've never seen a sorcerer yet
who put that where he lived. She might be the exception, but I doubt
it.
High Magick was incredibly ritualized; most sorcerers had a small
workroom where they could do simple spell casting and summoning,
like Sex Magicks and simple Blood Magicks, but for the really major
rituals, a huge room and some very specific trappings were required.
In the old days of witch finders, it was simply too dangerous to keep
that sort of setup where you lived. And in modem times, it was too
damned inconvenient. If you lived in an apartment building, had
parents, nosy neighbours, or human servants—well, people tended to
get really curious about cries and screams, strange people coming and
going at odd hours, really awful stenches and clouds of smoke… And
Di didn't even want to think about the havoc that could result if
somebody stumbled over even an innocent spell in progress. And with
High Magick, that was increasingly likely the more skilled you were at
it. The more elaborate rituals of High Magick tended to require a
series of spells that would be cast over a period of days, or even weeks.
It was much safer to have a little vacation cabin somewhere, or a
second place out in the country, out where there weren't a lot of
people. And if you had the kind of money that Fay had, acquiring that
sort of property was as simple as calling up a real-estate agent.
So she'll have her secret sanctum, and it will be someplace that she
thinks is safe, but will be within about an hour's drive. She won't be
willing to be farther away than that. It'll be some place that isn't
public, that she can secure from interlopers and snoops.
She passed a slow-moving pickup and told her growling stomach that

she'd give it a real good breakfast in about half an hour.
It didn't believe her, having heard this promise before.
I wish I could use Derek, but without training he's probably useless.
So that leaves me and Larry to trance out and triangulate, and Mark
to bodyguard and drive.
That place—wherever it was—would be the gate to Fay's main reserves
of power. When they found it, they could do two things. Di could
safely disrupt any major rituals that were in progress— and it was a
pretty good bet that there would be one, and maybe more—and Mark
and Larry could drain the power reserve while Di went off to confront
Fay while she was at her weakest.
But it would all have to be done today. Before she realized that Di
knew what she was doing. Before she had any idea that Di might go on
the offensive.
That was the one advantage in dealing with a bad apple like Fay: she'd
probably assume Di was another like her and could be bought off.
Once she knew who her "rival" was, she'd be waiting to hear the
challenge and the price Di would ask to go away. She'd never figure Di
wouldn't stand around to hear the counteroffer.
They never figure someone would have any interest but his own at
heart.
The Tulsa airport was gratifyingly easy to get to—and Mark's plane
must have been right on time. She pulled up the "arrivals" ramp to see
him waiting at curbside for her, waving.
She stopped the car right in front of him and popped the door. He
slung an overnight bag into the back and slid into the passenger's side
without a single word; she pulled the car out again so quickly that they
couldn't have spent more than thirty seconds stopped at curbside.

"Well?" he asked, as she took the on-ramp back onto the highway.
"Mark, m'love, " she replied, "there's only one thing that could make
me happier than seeing you right now.”
"Oh?" he said, raising a thick, raven-wing eyebrow at her.
"And since archangels don't make house calls, " she continued, "I
don't think you're going to have to worry about competition. Did they
feed you on that plane?"
"Feed me? On Cattle-Car Airways? Are you serious?" He laughed. "I
was lucky to get a seat that had a working belt!"
"You know, " she mused out loud, "I should have suspected something
when they told me they'd give me a discount if you could bring a giant
rubber band with you…”
"That was for the motor, " he told her. "They had holes in the floor for
the guys in back of me to stick their feet through. They got their seats
at ten percent off for being the landing gear. You know, you should
never buy a ticket for a plane that has a smiley-face painted on the
nose.”
"I'll remember that, " she laughed. "And listen, big guy, thanks for
coming. Now, how about some breakfast? I'm starved, and you should
be.”
He gave her a closer look. "You're starved? You look more like you're
running on empty. Writing IOUs to your body again, hm? It must be
worse then you told me.”
"Well, it gets complicated. " She pulled off at the Twenty-first Street
exit. She'd discovered a great place with a breakfast buffet, and at this
time of the morning it wouldn't be crowded. "I hate to tell you this, but
there's a maybe-deity involved.”

She saw his swarthy complexion go paler out of the corner of her eye.
"Tell me I didn't hear you say that.”
"So for it's okay, " she told him. "The thing's asleep. The kicker is, we
don't want her to wake up…”
—
"Okay, so what am I looking for? Larry asked. This was feeling just
like the old days— Except I'm a little stiffer, a little slower, but a lot
smarter.
Let's hope if it comes to a showdown, smart turns out to be the most
important.
"He wasn't in on the Madam Mysteria thing, Di, " Mark reminded her,
as he lounged back in one of the living room chairs. "That was about
two months before we hooked him in, remember? Mysteria was doing
her thing right at the beginning of the fall term, and we got Larry at
midterms.”
"Thanks, I'd forgotten that, " she said with a touch of chagrin. "So who
was the other sensitive? Jake?"
"Yeah. Remember, he bailed out of school and went back to Montana.
He just couldn't take all the people. Can't blame him. Heard from him
a week ago; he's still working that Forest Service fire-watch job, and
happy as a clam. " Mark didn't look as if he'd aged much more than
Di. Working as a cop must be keeping him in pretty good shape.
"So what am I looking for?" Larry asked again, before they could get
off on a reminiscence kick.
"A negative spot, " Di said. "A great big energy sink. Fay's major
workplace is going to be shielded against detection, but because it's a
place where energy goes in but doesn't come back out again, we're
going to have a kind of magical black hole out there. Not a place where

there isn't anything going on, but a place where every available bit of
energy that walks by goes in and stays there. You'll have to be in
trance to do that, with your set of Talents. That's what makes these
things a little hard to find.”
"Great, " Larry groaned. "The Zen of Magic; looking for the place that
isn't there.”
"Exactly. " She managed half a grin. "It's kind of too bad you aren't
like Jake; all we had to do was move him around until we found a
place where he was suddenly comfortable. Now the reason we need
two of us is that we're going to act as checks on each other. Partially
we'll triangulate, partially we'll just make sure that one or the other of
us isn't getting thrown off. It's easier to double-check when there's two
of you working. " Di was meticulously packing a small bag with all
manner of odds and ends that she'd brought down to the living room.
Some she'd just swiped from the kitchen, with the wry comment that
it was a good thing Miri loved him…
After seeing the bottle of asafetida in with the rest of the herbs, Larry
was inclined to agree. And that had been before they found the
hemlock.
He couldn't help but wonder if Miri'd been keeping her hand in, now
and again, all these years. She was the one of all of the Squad who had
been the most interested in witchcraft, as in the practical,
spell-casting side of Wicca.
And when he recalled the way certain chauvinistic, abusive executives
Miri had worked under had come to grief—well, it certainly gave him
food for thought.
Pleasant thought, actually. It meant that while he'd always known
instinctively that he would never have to guard his back or sleep with
one metaphysical eye open while Miri was around, he now had
evidence to prove his belief wasn't misplaced.

Di packed the last of the little bundles away and zipped the bag
shut—then looked up at him as if she had read those last thoughts.
And smiled, a brief flicker across her otherwise solemn face. "I wish
she was here, too. The gods know we could use her. But Mark and I
managed all by ourselves down in Texas, and this isn't anywhere near
as nasty an opponent.”
Always provided that "goddess" hasn't suckered you, Larry thought
worriedly. There's always that chance. And there's the chance that
Fay Harper could be working for the goddess.
"Okay, are we ready?" she asked, getting to her feet.
Mark rose unhurriedly, and looked up the stairway. "What about that
kid of yours?" he asked.
"Di put even stronger shields on him last night, " Larry said. "I
renewed mine, and we doubled the house shields. Besides, when I
looked in on him he was sleeping like two logs. He won't be going
anywhere for a while.”
"Good, " Mark replied, and ran his hand through his thick, black hair.
"Let's lock and load.”
Larry's range wasn't anything near Di's, which slowed progress down
considerably. They were hampered in the fact mat it was Saturday and
the county offices were all closed. If they'd been open, a simple check
of the property tax rolls would have shown them what property (other
than the house and surrounding grounds) Fay and Fay's family
owned. That would have narrowed their initial search down by quite a
bit.
So it was plain grunt-work; starting at the far south end of town and
moving north and east, stopping every four or five blocks to "look" for
what was essentially a black hole, something which would be revealed
only because of the distortion it left around it.

They stopped for lunch at the sushi bar Di thought so highly of. Both
Larry and Mark opted for cooked teriyaki and tempura, and watched
with awe and a little trepidation as Di devoured a small mountain of
raw fish and rice.
She took a great deal of delight in eating her raw octopus and squid
with gusto while Mark looked away and Larry winced.
Lunch over, they went back to business. The roads were getting
crowded, and the interference from all those living, active bodies cut
down on Larry's optimal range. It wasn't until late afternoon that he
finally got a "hit, " clear over on the north side of town past the
airport.
He came up out of his trance to see Mark and Di staring at him from
the front seat with expectation.
"Me too, " he said, as soon as he could talk. "I got it. That-a-way. " He
pointed east and a little north of where they were now.
"Pretty much what I got, " Di agreed, pulling open the map of Tulsa
they'd brought along. "Look, Mark, let's try this route. " She pointed at
a little county road that intersected with Mingo, the street they were
currently on. "Go about half a mile and stop, and we'll try again.”
"Okay. " Mark put the car in gear and whipped it around in a tight
U-turn, picking up the county road at the intersection a few hundred
feet back in the direction they had come. Almost exactly half a mile
later, he pulled over onto the verge beside some sorely puzzled cattle,
and Di and Larry went back into trance.
And came back up immediately. "That way, " they said in chorus,
pointing ahead and slightly to the left.
"I don't think it's more than half a mile, " Di added. "I’ve got a feel for
distance now, and I don't think it can be more than that.”

Mark consulted the map, smoothing it over the steering wheel and
squinting at the fine print as Di and Larry looked over his shoulder. "If
that's the case, this would be a good candidate, " he said, pointing. "It
looks like there's a gravel access road that intersects with this one in
about another half a mile. There's probably farms all along here, and a
farm would be a good place to put something like a sorcerer's work
base. You could bring animals out there and nobody would notice, and
if it's the first farm after the turnoff, your neighbours wouldn't see cars
going by at odd hours.”
"Let's try it, " Di agreed. "We won't lose anything by going straight
there, and let's stop and check out the very first farm along that gravel
road. We may end up saving ourselves a lot of time.”
It didn't take that long to get there; this was rural farming country,
with grazing cattle and freshly plowed fields on either side of the
county road, so there wasn't any traffic to contend with. And when
they turned off on the gravel road Mark had indicated, they found
themselves driving through a tunnel of cottonwood trees.
"This road isn't that bad, " Mark shouted over the crunching of gravel
under their tires. "What kind of cars did you say flu's chick drives?"
"Mostly sports cars, " Larry offered. "This one's a Shelby, the last one
was a Trans Am, I think; the one before that was foreign.”
Mark drove around a washout, the first bad hole they'd seen in this
road. "None of those would have any problem getting in here, " he
observed. "And if you turned off your lights as soon as you pulled onto
the road, the only way anyone would know you were here would be if
they heard you. Whoa!"
He slammed on his brakes and they skidded to a halt beside a cattle
gate that barred another gravelled road, this one a one-lane drive.
"Okay, gang, " he said, turning the engine off. "Do your thing.”

Larry didn't need to drop all the way into trance; he could feel the
place pulling at him the minute he closed his eyes and dropped his
shields. "This is it, " he said, reshielding immediately and opening
both eyes wide. "Jesus. You mean to tell me a kid my son's age is
responsible for that?"
Di shook her head. "I know it seems impossible, but there it is. For the
record, I agree, we just hit pay dirt. Okay, Magnum, now that we're
here, how do we get in?"
"That's the other reason why you asked me to come on up, isn't it?"
Mark grinned. "Just leave it to me.”
He popped the door and strolled up to the cattle gate, taking
something out of the back pocket of his jeans, a small, hard case a
little bigger than a wallet.
He reached for the padlock, then interposed his body between it and
the road—which also blocked their view of what he was doing. He
stood there a moment, then pushed the gate open wide, and came
back to the car.
"Haven't lost your deft touch, have you?" Di said, as he slid into the
driver's seat and backed the car up a little.
"It's a useful skill for somebody in my position, " he agreed. "Nothing
like being able to go where you need to. Some of the other guys like
that high-tech lock-gun, but hey, this little kit doesn't need batteries,
you know? Boy, I'll tell you, it's amazing how careless people are,
leaving their gates unlocked like that.”
"Amazing, " she agreed. "Let me get out; I'll get the gate closed behind
us.”
She hopped out, and Mark pulled the car into the gravelled drive,
stopping just past the gate. Di swung the gate shut behind them, but
did not relock it; she just secured it with a broken branch, then ran

back to the car and jumped in.
Mark continued onward, through more huge cottonwoods, this time
several deep on either side of the drive. The gravel drive took a dip and
a sharp left just past the gate—and abruptly became an expanse of
asphalt, as smooth as anything in Tulsa County.
"Even if I hadn't trusted you two, this would have told me we hit pay
dirt, " Mark said after a moment. "Either that or I would have started
looking for a big, flat, mowed field, the kind you can land a private
plane on.”
"As in drug runners?" Di asked.
Mark nodded. "Look at this, it's a perfect setup. The first part of that
county road is in great shape, but since it's gravelled, you're not going
to get too many curiosity-seekers coming down it. Then the drive; also
gravelled, and looks like it could get bad, until you go around that
curve and out of sight of the county road. And this won't even be
visible from the air because of the trees overhanging it.”
"I can't believe this is the work of a kid, " Larry said, puzzled. "I'm not
sure that I'd be able to think of things like that.”
"Let's wait until we see the house, " Di cautioned.
And at just that moment they came around another cluster of trees,
and saw it.
A falling-down, tilting derelict of a place.
It hadn't been anything spectacular to begin with; a basic two-story
farmhouse, tall and narrow, the kind of simple wood-frame dwelling
you saw all over rural Oklahoma. But now, it was a total wreck. Every
window had been broken out; the doors flapped open in the breeze,
and the right-hand porch support pillar had given way, leaving the
porch roof drooping without any support on the right-hand side. Any

vestige of paint had long since peeled away; the house was the shabby
dead-gray colour of unpainted, weathered wood.
Larry stared; he couldn't believe it. Nobody had been inside that heap
for years; if they tried to get inside, the floor would probably collapse
on them. How could he have been so wrong?
"Are you seeing what I'm seeing?" Di said quietly from the front seat.
"Uh-huh, " Mark replied calmly. "What's a brand-new pole barn doing
out here, where the house isn't fit to live in?"
"Yep. " Di tilted her head to one side, and Larry finally looked past the
wreck of a house to what lay, partially concealed by its bulk, behind it.
A relatively new barn of corrugated metal. Freshly painted, too.
"And why are the electric lines running to a barn?" she continued
calmly. "Looks like two-twenty service along with the regular line. And
unless I miss my guess, a phone line. First time I’ve ever heard that
hay had to make phone calls.”
"Good question, " Mark replied. "Want to go find out?"
"Yeah, " she said. "Larry?"
He was already opening his door. "You couldn't keep me away, " he
told her, staring at the building. "I'd like to know why it needs a
chimney. I always was too curious for my own good.”
—
"Sweet Mother of God, " Mark muttered for the fourth or fifth time, as
they stared at the interior of the pole barn.
The big double doors had never been intended to be opened; they
found when they approached the front of the building that the doors
had been welded shut, all along the edges as well as in the middle. On

the side they found a smaller, padlocked door—and an
air-conditioning unit.
Mark had quickly picked the lock on this door, too; and when they
opened it, Di had pulled a flashlight out of the bag she'd brought, and
found a light switch.
But what they saw when the lights came on was nothing like they'd
imagined.
The original metal of the walls and roof was paneled over; the building
seemed a little shorter inside than out; probably the small door at the
far end led into a partitioned-off utility and storage room. Certainly if
the place had an air-conditioning system it also had a furnace, and
there was no sign of one in this room.
The air was stuffy, and held a faint, sickly-sweet hint of incense. And
the work on the ulterior must have cost the owner several hundred
thousand dollars.
The floor was covered with a mosaic design of geometric figures; one
large, central figure, and four others in each of the comers. The central
figure was composed of several circles nested within each other. Each
circle had inscriptions of some kind around the perimeter. And within
the innermost circle was, not a pentagram alone, but a pentagram
within a hexagram.
At the heart of the pentagram was a huge slab of stone; probably
native limestone. The rough block was topped with black marble, and
there were manacles set into each corner of the slab.
Beside the altar was a reading stand, with a huge book still on it.
Beside the reading stand was a smaller table with an assortment of
objects on it, ranging from a single crystal goblet to a supple, brightly
gleaming rapier. In each of the points of the pentagram stood a
man-high, wrought-iron candle holder, with a half-burned black
candle as thick as Larry's wrist in it.

The walls had been paneled and then finished with black lacquer, and
they gleamed wetly in the subdued electric light. Lighting came from
three massive chandeliers depending from black wrought-iron chains.
And there was a veritable forest of more candlesticks, ranging from a
foot tall to man-high. All the candles were either dead black or blazing
scarlet.
"So what's going on in here?" Mark asked, having recovered from his
shock while Larry continued to stare. "Anything current?"
Di tilted her head to one side and narrowed her eyes. "Yes, " she said
finally. "An appeasement ceremony. It's due to complete in about two
months. And she wouldn't be able to build another construct here
until that's over with.”
"Anything you want us to do?" he asked.
"Not at the moment. Just stand there and let me go pull some fuses. "
She opened her bag and pulled out a jar of water and a blue cardboard
cylinder of prosaic Morton salt. "Just call me a one-woman UXB
squad.”
She pulled the spout loose and made her way carefully around the
edge of the largest circle until she came to the side opposite the
entrance. Then she stepped over the first of the perimeters, and began
walking around it in a clockwise direction, sprinkling salt before her
and muttering something under her breath.
When she got to the place where she had entered, she stepped into the
second circle and repeated her actions.
When she reached the circle containing the hexagram, pentagram and
altar, she replaced the salt in her bag and took out some of the herbs
she'd taken from her own supplies and the kitchen. These she crushed
in one hand and broadcast over the figures, then opened the jar of
water and threw it on the altar.

Both Mark and Larry jumped as something shrieked, and the altar
hissed and steamed where the water hit it.
Di didn't even flinch. She took the heavy book, threw it on the
steaming altar, and removed a square can from her bag. As she
squirted something all over the book, Larry caught the distinct odour
of lighter fluid. She emptied the entire can onto the open book,
saturating the pages, then tossed the can to one side and pulled out a
Bic.
There was a second scream as the book went up in blue and green
flames. Di watched it for a moment, then turned and took the nearest
of the heavy, four-foot-high wrought-iron candlesticks from the point
of the pentacle nearest her. She weighed it experimentally in her
hands, then smashed it down onto the mosaic pattern at her feet.
After two or three blows, the tiles powdered.
"Okay, guys, it's safe to come in here, " she called softly. "You want to
give me a hand? Grab one of these and make sure all the lines of all
the figures are broken in some way."
Mark strode over to her and took another of the candlesticks. Larry
moved a bit slower; even with his shielding he was seeing things out of
the corner of his eye that he didn't much care for.
But he noticed after a few moments that they didn't seem to be able to
move; that, in fact, they seemed to be frozen in place.
At that point Di came up beside him, still methodically hacking away
at the lines of the diagrams. She noticed him staring at one of the
things, a particularly ugly little blob of filth. Or not-staring, since he
could only view them by looking at them sideways.
"Don't worry about them, " she said reassuringly. "That's what the
routine with the salt was all about. They're stuck; I froze them halfway
between this world and theirs. They can't get out and they can't get

back. This way they can't warn Fay about what I'm doing.”
"Oh, " he said weakly. God, it has been a long time. I am really out of
practice…
And out of the habit of taking this sort of thing in stride.
"I'm taking this all very well, aren't I?" he said to Di.
She laughed. "Don't kid yourself; this is not the kind of thing I do
every day. This gal is using some powerful stuff, and there's only one
advantage that I have over her—it's all old. Real old, like three
hundred years or more. I know some shortcuts she evidently doesn't,
and some ways to nullify what she did that she evidently didn't know
to guard against. And I will be damned if I can figure out where she
learned all this.”
Just the thing to make me feel at ease. Thanks, Di.
"Are you going to just stand there?" she asked finally. "Or are you
going to help us? " Behind her the last flames were dying on the altar.
They were still blue and green.
—
"Oh, shit.”
Larry stared out at the setting sun, frozen by the realization of how
much time had passed.
"What's the matter?" Di came up beside him, emptying out the last of
the stuff in her carryall—more herbs—and strewing handfuls at
random.
"We've got a problem, " he said grimly. "There's a big birthday party
tonight for one of Derek's friends, a kid named Brad Sinor. All of
Derek's friends are going to be there—and Derek's probably left for it

already. We didn't tell him not to leave the house—we just told him to
avoid Fay.”
"So what?" Mark asked.
"So Fay has to know about it. I don't know if she was invited, but you
can bet she'll be there.”
"Oh, shit, " the other two said in chorus. Di looked from one to the
other of them, her face set and blank.
"I deliberately destroyed this stuff in such a way that she won't know
it's happened until she actually shows up here or tries to call
something tied in to what she was doing here, " Di said finally. "But
there was something else I needed you two to do—drain out her power
reserves. You both know how, right?"
Larry nodded reluctantly, as Mark said, "Yeah. Haven't done it for a
while, but I think I can handle it.”
"Good. Neither one of you is up to handling a sorcerer, even a young
one. I think she may try to blow through Derek's shields; I think she's
getting desperate enough to try whatever she wanted him for. " She
took a deep breath. "Larry, this is it. You're going to have to trust me. I
need you to do what you can here, and let me handle Fay. Otherwise
we're all going to lose on this one. Will you do that?"
Larry struggled with his paternal instincts, which were screaming at
him to go rush to his son's rescue, and finally won. "Go, " he said
thickly. "Do it. We'll hold the fort here. Brad's address is in my
Rolodex. Brad Sinor.”
She didn't wait for another second; she spun around and tore out of
the building at a dead run. And in a few seconds more, they heard the
car start up and the screeching of tires as she peeled out back down
the road.

Larry looked at Mark, who just grimaced. "Okay, old buddy, looks like
we're on our own. Let's do it.”
They walked to the ruined centre of the diagrams, and stood
back-to-back, preparing to tap into the stored energy and let it drain
harmlessly away.
"Hey, " Larry said suddenly, "she took the car!"
"I noticed, " Mark replied, "but there's a working phone in that storage
area. I know, I checked it. When we're finished here, I vote we call a
cab.”
Larry sighed. "I'm really taking this all very well, aren't I? So who pays
for this cab?"
"Who do you think?" Mark retorted, bracing himself in a wide-legged
stance.
Larry found himself grinning weakly in spite of the seriousness of the
situation. "She does?"
"Right. So let's get this over and blow this pop stand.”
"Right on, " Larry replied, and prepared to tap in.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
"Honey, " Rhonda Carlin said worriedly from the living room, for
about the fifth time, "are you sure you want to go to this party?"
Monica looked away from the mirror, sighed, and hunched her
shoulders stubbornly. "Yes, Mom, I'm sure. I'm okay. There's gonna
be a lot of rumours about what Sandy did to me-"
"He didn't do anything to you, " Rhonda interrupted, sounding even
more worried, "did he?" She pushed the door to Monica's room open

slightly, and their eyes met in the mirror.
"No, Mom, he didn't. Honest. But he probably would have if Alan and
Miss Tregarde hadn't been there.”
Rhonda still had that
somebody's-hurt-my-baby-and-she-won't-tell-me-about-it look on
her face, so Monica figured she'd better reassure her. Again.
For about the fifth time. You'd think she was the one Sandy went
after.
"Alan was right with me; Sandy just sort of came up behind us and
grabbed me, and that's when my dress tore—then Alan jumped him.
He didn't wait around to see what the hell Sandy wanted." Monica
slipped her dress over her head and continued, though her voice was a
little muffled. "Sandy beat up on him a little bit; then Miss Tregarde
came out and saw what was going on, and waded right in. She's a
black belt in karate, did she tell you that?"
She thought it was probably a good idea to leave Rhonda with the
impression that Diana had taken Sandy out with martial arts instead
of magical. Monica still wasn't quite sure what Diana had used to
knock Sandy out—she'd just stood there and pointed at him—but it
sure had been effective.
Probably more effective than karate would have been. Monica had
heard stories of kids on dust—how they'd broken and dislocated bones
and hadn't even noticed until they came down off the high. Sandy
hadn't even noticed when she'd beaten on his thick head with her
shoe.
Too bad it wasn't a spike heel, she thought vindictively.
"Well, all I can say is that it certainly is a good thing Miss Tregarde
took an interest in you, " Rhonda replied. "And if you think it'll kill
some nasty rumours to go to the party, then I guess you should do

that.”
Monica straightened the seams of her dress, and fussed with her hair a
little. "Alan's taking me, " she said. "Black eyes and all. So no matter
what anybody thinks, they're going to see both of us, and they can ask
us about what happened for themselves if they really want to know.”
"All right, honey, " Rhonda replied reluctantly. "If that's what you
want.”
What I want is a chance at whoever put Sandy up to this, Monica
thought grimly. And I can't wait to find out who that is from Diana.
And when I do… they're gonna find out that Monica Carlin learned a
few nasty tricks from her daddy before he decided Mom didn't fit his
career image.
—
"You do look like a raccoon, " Monica said to Alan as they strolled up
the walk to Brad's house. They'd had to leave the car a block away;
Brad's driveway was full, and so were both sides of the street right by
the house. "Miss Tregarde said you would, and you do.”
"Thanks, " he said sourly. "And everybody's gonna know I got bailed
out by a lady. Sandy was waxing my ass before she showed up, and
everybody in the world is gonna know mat.”
"I don't see how, " she objected. "Sandy can't talk to anybody except
his parents, I haven't said anything, and neither has Miss Tregarde.
And old Soames didn't get there until after Miss Tregarde put Sandy
out.”
"What about what's-his-name, the car nut? Tannim?" Alan wanted to
know.
"He never talks to anybody, " she replied, dismissing him with a toss
of her head. "Except about cars. And art. And rock 'n' roll. He'll

probably talk about the size of the dents Sandy put in that Caddy.
Besides, he doesn't hang out with the same people you do.”
"I guess, " Alan acknowledged grudgingly. "Maybe I won't look like
such a wimp.”
"Alan, you jumped on Sandy Foster, " Monica said in exasperation.
"He's & football player. And he was dusted. And you took him on all
by yourself! People aren't going to think you were a wimp, they're
going to think you were crazy!"
"Well, I didn't know he was dusted, did I?" Alan replied, beginning to
sound a little more pleased with himself. "Yeah, I guess that was kind
of crazy, wasn't it?"
"Yeah, " she said, grabbing his arm and snuggling up to him. "It was.”
At precisely that moment they came into view of the front entry to
Brad's house; it was a big, sprawling, Spanish hacienda-type place,
and had a front courtyard full of red pottery and plants, enclosed by a
wall pierced by a wrought-iron gate. You couldn't see if there was
anyone standing around in there until you were practically on top of
the gate, but whoever was inside the gate had a terrific view of people
coming up the walk.
Monica cursed her wretched timing, because there was Derek, along
with half a dozen other kids, watching her snuggle up to Alan.
He had a really pained expression on his face, and he grabbed
Monica's arm as soon as they passed the gate. "Listen, Monica, I have
to talk to you right now—" he began.
Then Alan pushed him off.
"Just you watch who you're grabbing, old buddy, " Alan said angrily.
"Just who do you think you're pushing around?" Derek snarled back.

"I know Monica a hell of a lot better than you do!"
"Oh yeah?" Alan retorted cleverly. "You want to make a bet on that?"
They stared at each other with the same fixed stare and stiff-legged
stance as a pah- of rival tomcats. Monica braced herself for the
explosion. They kept looking over at her out of the corners of their
eyes, and there was suspicion beginning to dawn there, as well as the
antagonism.
I think Derek just figured out I've been playing up to Alan, she
thought guiltily. And Alan just figured out I've been playing up to
Derek. Oh, God. And here I am in the middle…
"Hi, everybody!" The brittle, sharp-edged laughter and too-familiar
voice made all three of them start.
Fay Harper swept in the gate with a blithe smile for everyone. "Derek,
dearest, there you are! Let's go find something to drink, I'm dying of
thirst—"
She touched Derek on the arm as the boy started to recoil, a look
of—fear?—on his face.
Monica stared numbly. Because the minute, the very second she
touched Derek, his expression changed, just went blank, and so did
his eyes. Fay laughed at nothing, and whisked Derek off before anyone
had a chance to say a word. Monica felt sick to her stomach over how
Derek's expression turned puppylike with bemused adoration.
Why did I ever bother with him? she thought in disgust—when Fay
turned back to the group at the door and finally spotted her.
Fay's smile turned icy and poisonous, her eyes narrowed, and she
clutched Derek's arm possessively. Monica didn't need to know body
language to read the message written for her there.

I'm going to get you, you little bitch. He's mine, you tried to split us
up, and I'm going to get you for it if it's the last thing I ever do.
Fay turned away and hustled Derek out of sight inside the house.
Monica wanted to scream. She either figured out or found out I was
the one who set Derek up to find her and Sandy out in the van. That
must be what Derek wanted to talk to me about.
No wonder he was mad. And when he figured out about Alan, he was
even madder.
Her heart was somewhere down in her shoes. Jesus, I just ruined the
rest of the school year. Derek probably hates me, and I know Fay
hates me—and if Fay hates me everybody in school except the Brains
and the Nerds and the Crazies is going to avoid me just to keep off
Fay's shit-list. The only good thing is that there isn't more than a
month of school left.
And at least Alan still wants me.
She let Alan lead the way into the house; let him find a place for them
to sit, over in the big rec room by the pool, where everyone was
dancing. It was too cold to swim, but the pool cover was off and
somebody had thrown dry ice into it so it was bubbling and steaming
like something out of a George Lucas movie. It looked kind of neat,
and it gave her something to watch while Alan went off after a Coke
for her.
But Alan never came back, and after waiting for him for at least ten
minutes, Monica swallowed her pride and went looking for him.
She pushed her way through the dancers and checked all the public
rooms; the family room where four guys were playing Nintendo and
had collected an excited audience, the living room where a bunch of
people were watching a bootleg copy of Rocky Horror Picture Show
on the big-screen TV, the den where the Brains had all gathered
around Brad's father's computer—he wasn't even in the dining room

where the food was laid out.
But that was where she ran into Laura, the Saks queen; she was
talking shopping with Joy, who was going to Dallas next weekend and
wanted to know what was hot. Monica signalled Joy frantically, and
her friend broke the conversation off to wave her over.
"Hi!" Joy said, her eyes gleaming with excitement behind her glasses.
"What's this I hear about Sandy beating up on Alan? I heard they were
fighting over you!"
"Not exactly, " Monica said, her eyes searching the room for Alan's red
jersey. "Sandy was dusted, and I guess he was just looking for
something to hit. Listen, have you seen Alan? He was supposed to get
me a Coke, and he just, like, disappeared."
"Gosh, no, " Joy said sincerely. "I wish I had. Mark told me he had
two black eyes—"
"Oh, was that Alan?" Laura said, with an artificial giggle. "No wonder I
didn't recognize him! He was here just before Joy got here.”
"He was?" Monica turned to see the girl looking at her with a touch of
malicious enjoyment. "Did you see where he went?"
"Oh, yeah, I sure did, " Laura replied with relish. "He went off to the
back of the house with one of Fay's buddies from Union, one of the
cheerleaders—you know, that real fox, the one with blond hair down
to her ass.”
Brad's parents are gone for the weekend—and the back of the house
is where the bedrooms are. And if Laura doesn't know that, I'll eat
my shoes. She noticed Joy giving her a sympathetic look, and schooled
her face into what she hoped was a mask of amused indifference. "Oh,
did he finally catch up with her? He said he was supposed to meet her
here. Well, good, that means I don't have to keep watching for her.”

Laura's face fell, though she covered it up pretty well. So Fay set me
up to get humiliated, did she? Oh, fine. Just fine. Maybe I'll see if
Mom can get me transferred over to Union. Shit, I'd better see if Joy
can get me home, too—right after I go find someplace to have a good
cry. "I'll see you later, okay, Joy?" She winked, and swallowed down a
painful lump in her throat, smiling brightly. "I'll give you the whole
story about Sandy jumping us last night. Did you know the cops
arrested him?"
Both Joy and Laura looked surprised.
"I thought maybe you hadn't heard. " Monica smiled again, even
though it hurt. I'll fix him. I'll teach him to go off with some
bitch-friend of Fay's and leave me out here alone. "If it hadn't been
for Miss Tregarde, Sandy would have cleaned the parking lot with
Alan's face. Anyway, I'll tell you all about it later. I’ve got somebody
waiting for me.”
She swept off before either of the two of them could stop her, and
made her way out into the garden. Brad's parents had landscaped the
place in a major way, with all kinds of neat little gazebos and benches
with trees and things over them; there were even a couple of ponds,
one with a fountain, one with a waterfall. Monica had hoped to find
someplace out here to have her good cry, but every place she looked
there was another couple necking. She finally found a spot by one of
the ponds, right near the edge by the blue-lit waterfall; there was only
enough room for one person to sit, which was probably why nobody'd
taken it over for a petting session.
She stared into the water, keeping her face carefully averted so that no
one coming up behind her would be able to see her crying.
But she didn't even get a chance to start before she heard Alan calling
her.
He can't possibly have had time to do anything with that bimbo, she
thought, frozen with surprise. It hasn't been that long, not more than

fifteen or twenty minutes. So either he struck out—or he likes me
better.
Oh hell, it doesn't matter. I'll get even… later.
She heard footsteps behind her and turned, ready to fling herself into
his arms, relieved and grateful to the point of being ready to cry again.
Only what stood behind her wasn't Alan.
It was too dark out in the garden to see very much—only that the thing
was taller than any basketball player, wider than any weight lifter, and
very, very black. There was a little reflected light coming off the
waterfall, and what Monica could see of the thing's face in that light
made her squeak with terror.
It grabbed hold of both her arms, and not all the squirming in the
world would tear her loose. Her knees went numb and gave out; but
she didn't fall. The horrible thing held her up with hands like a pair of
cold vises, as if she weighed nothing at all.
"Hello, Monica, " it said caressingly in Alan's voice. "I'm very pleased
to find you. My mistress wants you to come to her party now.”
She squeaked again; tried to breathe, and found that she couldn't. All
she could do was stare into those horrible, sulfur-yellow eyes, too
numb to even think. Then the thing smiled at her.
And she fainted dead away.
* * *
Fay Harper wanted some heads. And she wanted them now.
That Tregarde woman's by first choice, followed closely by Monica
Carlin's and Alan's. Then Sandy's, for screwing up.

Then that goddamn Gibson guitar. I don't even know where it went.
The band did a better vanishing act than I could have, and I don't
have the resources to track it down.
Her head pounded with the backlash from the destruction of her
Servant. She ground her teeth and paced her room, occasionally
picking up a small, fragile ornament and hurling it against the wall. It
didn't do a great deal of good, actually. What she wanted was to hurt
something.
But she didn't have any pets, the Servant had been obliterated, and
the human servants had all vanished the moment the first signs of
temper appeared. And she didn't have the authority to fire the
bastardise. Only "Aunt Emily" could do that; that was the way her
trust fund and guardianship were set up. And there wouldn't be
another Aunt Emily for another few days at the very best.
She didn't even dare call up an imp to abuse. Not with the low state of
her resources and the fact that she'd have to tax her powers heavily to
create another Servant.
Oh, she wanted to hurt something!
It was bad enough that the Tregarde bitch had completely ruined the
Maypole spell. It was evident now that this little piece of sabotage was
meant to challenge Fay—the destruction of the Servant had been the
assurance of that. That spell would have given her enough power to
make up for any losses over the past few months and "pay" for a new
Servant—or several Servants. It was worse that the bitch helped
whatever was in the Gibson overpower her demons, costing her not
only the two allies but the added power that would have enabled her
to break through Derek's shielding and eliminate his bothersome
parents.
Right at the moment when Fay was about to get to Derek in a major
way, the backlash had hit her. She'd drained him the best she could,
and reinforced her controls on him, but she'd had to send him home,

and everything else she'd planned for that night was a lost cause.
And the bitch had kept Sandy from getting rid of that damned
obnoxious Carlin tart!
That was insult on top of injury; it was almost worse than the injury
itself. The more Fay thought about it, the more enraged she became.
She stopped her pacing just long enough to do another line or two of
coke, and somehow all her anger at the Tregarde woman transferred
to Monica.
It's all her fault, she snarled, hurling a crystal dragon against the wall.
It's all that little whore Monica's fault. If she hadn't gotten in the
way, that woman would never have found out about me until it was
too late to stop me!
There were no more breakables in the room; she forced herself to stop
pacing and sit, hands clenched in her lap, trying to think of an
alternate plan, the coke making her mind come alive. At least there
was no Servant here to chide her…
I've made a mistake. The little tart must be the Tregarde witch's
protegee, she decided. That must be why she's been so diligent in
protecting her. That must be why Monica showed up here before the
woman did. The Master invests a certain amount of his power in his
apprentice—if I destroy the one, I'll cripple the other.
Her lips curled away from her teeth in a savage smile.
I haven't met anyone in the last three hundred years who could best
me in an open fight. I doubt I'm going to now. All right, Tregarde.
It's war. And the first act in war is to hit the opposition where it will
hurt the most. I'm going to take out your precious little negress, your
dear little darkie apprentice.
But first—I need a clearer head.

She rose and went back to the bathroom, to the special little concealed
drawer in the vanity. It wouldn't do for the servants to find her
personal stash, after all; they'd probably give way to temptation and
help themselves.
She cut herself two more lines of coke—moderation in all things my
ass—and sniffed them delicately. The rush cleared her head and gave
her a burst of energy that left her overcharged and buzzing at the
same time.
The Servant hadn't approved of the drugs—but then, the Servant
hadn't approved of most of what she'd done, not lately.
Why should it matter? she thought dreamily. I'll be discarding this
body in twenty years, at most. The last time I was this young, I was
stuck in Traverse City, Michigan—where I didn't dare enjoy myself,
or the entire town would know. Which was precisely why I got
married as soon as I found someone wealthy and stupid enough. And
then I had to play proper society wife until I could get rid of the idiot.
And when I finally got loose, what did I discover? That I was living
in the backwoods of a hick oil town, and all my contacts to the
pleasures of life were up north. So why shouldn't I enjoy myself? I've
earned it!
She suddenly remembered just where both of her targets-Monica and
Derek—would undoubtedly be tonight. Brad Sinor's party. She hadn't
been invited—but that hardly mattered; he wouldn't dare throw her
out.
Ephemeris, ephemeris, where did I put it? She also realized belatedly
mat tonight was the night of the dark of the moon. And if it was
astrologically as good as she thought it might be—
She found the ephemeris under a pile of romance novels, and leafed
through it. Well, it's not perfect—but it's not bad. And it's better than
it's likely to be for the next couple of weeks…

Without any conscious decision on her part, she began dressing for
the party, choosing an outfit she'd invested with a very powerful
enchantment keyed to Derek.
Red for lust. You lucky boy, you. Lust. And blood. But we won't talk
about that. It won't be yours, anyway.
She hadn't intended to use this just yet, but it was time to strike, while
the Tregarde bitch thought she was off guard.
They'd never know what hit them.
Let's see. I can buy off my allies by giving them Monica to play with.
The moon phase is certainly right for that. She giggled, sliding the
smooth silk of her blouse over her head. That should give me all the
extra energy I need to deal with the Tregarde woman. But to do that,
I'll have to build up enough extra power to pay off a fiend to do the
snatch for me. And I'll have to get Alan out of the way…
She smoothed the blouse over her hips and admired her reflection in
the mirror. Wouldn't dear little Alan love to get a taste of this! I'll bet
he's never been laid in his life.
The perfect solution to her dilemma appeared like a burst of light, and
she spun on her toe in front of the mirror, laughing.
Of course! I can call up a succubus with hardly more effort than it
takes to snap my fingers! They'll perform just for the sex, which
means the energy is all mine. I'll take her with me, and get her to
seduce Alan. Then while she's screwing Alan's brains out, I can be
concentrating on keeping Derek under my thumb. Then I give Derek
to it. That'll keep him busy long enough for me to get away with the
tart trussed up in the trunk. And I can call the fiend with the energy
the succubus takes from Alan, and pay it with what I have it take
from Derek! It's brilliant!
She turned to face the mirror again, as elated now as she had been

enraged before. It's perfect. While she's draining Derek down to
nothing, my ally will be locking the little bitch in the back of my car.
Talk about poetic justice! It can't miss.
And they'll never know what hit them.
—
If it had been anyone but Di at the wheel, the car would have been
pulled over half a dozen times. But somehow the cops never seemed to
see her roaring past, bending traffic laws to the breaking point.
But there was an even more reckless driver pulling out of Brad's block
as Di came screaming in. Someone in a red sports car, driving like
they owned the entire universe. Di didn't pay it a great deal of
attention; the driver was alone at the wheel, and Di had more urgent
matters to attend to.
She pulled the car right up over the curb and parked it on the lawn;
bailed out and barged straight into the house and the party without a
single "excuse me. " In the living room she grabbed the first person
she recognized, one of the kids from her class, Terry—literally grabbed
him; seized him by the collar and dragged him down to her level.
"Urk—" he said, his eyes bulging. "Uh—Miss Tregarde, what are you
doing—"
"Alan, " she said. "Derek, Monica. Are they here? Have you seen
them?"
She inadvertently tightened her grip. He made a choking sound and
waved wildly at the room behind her. Since he didn't seem to be
signalling for help, she let him go and turned quickly.
Alan was just staggering into the room, dishevelled, glaze-eyed, and
absolutely drained. And reeking of Sex Magick and the unmistakable
overtone of succubus.

There was absolutely no mistaking what he'd been up to. And if he was
off getting his brains turned into mush, that left Monica alone.
She muttered a curse at the general stupidity of teenage boys— and
men!—who thought with their gonads, and stalked across the room,
giving him the same treatment she'd just given Terry— except that she
grabbed his shoulder instead of his throat.
"Come on, " she said forcefully, as he goggled at her. "We've got to find
Derek and Monica.”
"Uh, yeah, " he replied, following her because he'd lose his arm if he
didn't. "Sure, anything you say, Miss Tregarde.”
They hadn't gone much further than a deserted little office before they
ran into Derek. Who looked even more drained than Alan.
Jesus Cluny Frog! Isn't there one kid in this world that thinks above
his beltline?
But if Derek was here, that meant he wasn't with Fay. Di sighed with
relief—
But Derek stared at both of them, and the first words out of his mouth
were a blurted "Where's Monica?"
Oh, shit.
"How should I know?" Alan snapped back. "Janice said she'd gone off
with you!"
"Janice who?" Derek and Di asked simultaneously.
Alan ignored Di. "Fay's trendoid friend from Union!" he shouted at
Derek. "She said Fay was ripped and you left her and took off with
Monica!"

Oh, double shit. Di grabbed Alan's shoulders and shook him violently.
He stared at her stupidly, evidently not expecting that much strength
in someone so tiny. "Who's this Janice?" she growled.
"Fay's buddy. The girl I was—" Alan blushed bright red.
Di shook him even harder. "You little cretin! You left Monica alone on
the say-so of something that came with Fay? That wasn't a-"
"Hi, guys!" chirped a bright, seductive voice. "Want to party
somewhere in private?"
Di whirled and faced the owner of the voice, a blond with long hair
down to her tailbone, the face of an angel, and the body of every male
fantasy in existence. She ignored Di entirely. Not surprising. Succubi
literally didn't see the female of the human species—just like incubi
didn't see the male—unless they had been deliberately targeted that
way by their summoner. The two boys went slack-jawed and
glaze-eyed, and their poor, worn-out little bodies were probably doing
their damnedest to produce the appropriate salute.
It was fairly evident that Fay had left this "Janice" to cover her trail
and maybe work some delaying tactics with the boys. She couldn't
have expected Di to show up, or she wouldn't have left such a minor
demon as a smoke screen.
The succubus slinked a little closer, and the boys licked their lips in an
absurd echo of each other.
That might have worked if I hadn't shown up. Instead, this is going
to work in my favour. I'll bet Derek still doesn't believe in the magic
angle to all this, and I think even Alan still has a few doubts. Time to
wake them up.
She gathered her power and blasted the shell of illusion surrounding
the creature, revealing "Janice" for what she really was.

She was still a knockout—provided you didn't mind a lover with
three-inch talons in place of fingernails, teeth like a shark, a long,
pointed tail, and batlike wings that would have brushed the walls to
either side of her if they hadn't been partly furled.
The boys' eyes bugged out, and Alan gripped Di's arm in a sudden
spasm of unabashed fear. But before either one of them could do more
than gasp, Di dropped her outermost shield. The one that hid the kind
of power she controlled.
Now the succubus could see her, all right. She gasped, folded her
wings protectively around her, and vanished in a cloud of what
smelled suspiciously like Opium.
No brimstone for succubi, thank you. Lord. Little tarts always were
show-offs. It's a damn good thing they're not as interested in combat
as they are in sex…
The boys were both standing stunned, their mouths hanging open,
their faces dead white. Di could see identical thoughts running
through their tiny little brains.
We screwed that?
She grabbed them both and hauled them around to face her.
"That friend of Fay's was a demon. Derek, dammit, I told you Fay was
a—a witch of some kind! How the hell could you go and let her get her
claws back into you like that?"
"Uh—" Derek couldn't look her in the eyes.
Alan just stared stupidly at her.
Di wanted to bash their heads together. "And where's Fay?"
Derek looked confused. "She just—left. I didn't ask her why. Then that

blond came in—"
Di groaned. "Fay has been after Monica's hide ever since she came to
Jenks, you idiots! And while you two were screwing your brains
out—assuming you have any—Fay was probably kidnapping Monica!
Now where the hell would she take her? The farm out near Catoosa?"
"But—" Alan began, Derek was finally getting his act together.
"No, not there, " he said, shaking his head. "That Sex Magick
stuff—what you told Dad and me—the first time we—" He coughed,
"-uh-"
"Spit it out, kid!" Di said impatiently.
"I thought she was just kind of kinky, like she just liked doing it
outside. You kept asking me about cabins and things, and I guess I
kind of forgot about this. She's got this place, this little place; it's a
stable at the end of the runway where her dad used to keep horses.
She never lived there or anything, and it's kind of run-down. I guess I
must of figured it didn't count. We'd go there sometimes when we
were in Tulsa and she couldn't—you know—wait—"
He gulped, and finished weakly, "She's kind of—enthusiastic. She used
to say she liked the place 'cause she could scream all she wanted and
nobody would ever hear her over the planes.”
Shit, I'm a real idiot myself— Di thought in disgust. She'd have to
have an outside facility for some things, and any experienced
sorceress would have a backup Power Point. She has to have figured
out that we had her old place staked out when she tried to call her
succubus. I would have checked my stronghold before I did a major
spell, and I'll bet she did, too.
Lord and Lady. I can't take the time to go pick up Larry and Mark.
I'll have to use what I've got.

Two kids. Gods help me.
They were untrained, unknown quantities. Alan didn't even register
much above normal. But they were all she had.
"Stand by for a shocker, kid, " she muttered, pulling all the shields off
Derek. " 'Cause I'm going to have to figure out what you're good for.”
Derek had been surprised at what Di looked like before—when she
was still wearing her outermost shield. Now he practically fainted. She
didn't blame him; doing a quick scan on him, she'd already figured
that he was just as Sensitive as his father ever was; he had some Wild
Talent she couldn't figure yet—
And he was a living Power Point. He could quite easily shunt energy
to, or drain it from, anything he chose—once he was trained. No
wonder he'd survived Fay so long.
And no wonder Fay wanted her claws in him. At least a hint of that
must have gotten through the shielding, and it must have driven her
crazy, even if she couldn't identify it.
"Come on, you two, " she ordered, shoving them in front of her and
out the door. "Let's move!"
She briefed them on what they might expect when they got there, or
tried to. It was a little difficult, since she didn't know what she was
expecting. She could at least tell Derek what she expected him to do.
He'd long since passed the stage of suspension of disbelief; he just
hung onto the back of the seat and nodded at whatever she said.
She hoped she was getting through to them. She wasn't sure how clear
she was being; it had been a long time since she'd had to brief
mundanes under combat conditions. And it was a little difficult to talk
and drive like a maniac at the same time.
Alan just looked at her forlornly. He wasn't saying anything, but she

knew he was feeling utterly useless.
"Look, " she said, trying to think of anything Alan could do. "In the
glove compartment. Can you shoot?"
"I'm on the Jenks target team, " he said, fumbling it open. "And I was
with the Police Explor—Christ!"
"It isn't as big as it looks, " she said acidly. "Shit, I can handle it. " Alan
removed the. 45 revolver gingerly and stared at it. "If a little bitty
broad like me can shoot it, so can you.”
He just gulped and stared at her, and pulled the handful of
speed-loaders out as well.
She didn't even have time to sigh with exasperation; at that point,
Derek shouted "There!" and she slid a bootlegger turn into a
half-hidden gravel drive on the side of the four-lane county road, a
little turnoff that was buried in overgrown bushes.
They bounced through a series of washouts and over a one-lane
bridge—
And suddenly the headlights spotlighted Fay, her blond hair and red
silk harem pants and blouse unmistakable.
And beside her was Monica, held between two of Fay's little pets.
Di slammed the car into park and yelled "Now!" as she bailed out of
the driver's side of the car, hitting the gravel and rolling into the
weeds at the side of the road. Alan went out the other side, just as he'd
been told. Derek stayed with the car—as he'd been told, since he didn't
have any shields of his own anymore, he needed the ones on the car.
Come on Derek, get your ass in gear! Di could feel him fumbling
around in the energy currents as she picked off Monica's left-side
guard with a levin-bolt.

It shrieked and went up in a pillar of flame. She heard the gun go off
as Alan shot at the right-side demon. The bullet wasn't more than a
distraction, but between it and Di's actions, a distraction was all that
was needed. Monica pulled free of the thing and came pelting back
toward the car.
There was an inarticulate scream of rage from the sorceress.
And at that point, all hell—literally—broke loose.
Di didn't even have time to think much more than Holy shit! before
she was running for her life, trying to put as much distance between
herself and the kids as she could.
Fay was pulling power from sources even the most reckless of
sorcerers would have left untapped—sources that bled into the
protections around the One Below, sources mat kept Tulsa's weather
relatively stable, and sources that would leave her owing her soul a
hundred times over to her allies. Levin-bolt after levin-bolt came
winging at Di out of the darkness—and other things as well. Di was
pretty certain they -weren't illusions; illusions took a certain amount
of mental control, and it was pretty obvious that Fay had lost any
semblance of that. Di treated the things as though they were
summonings instead of illusions, and they certainly went up with little
screams of anguish when she hit them with her own levin-bolts.
She stumbled through the tangled brush and over tree roots, trying to
keep her head down, trying to stay alive— Derek still hadn't figured
out what he was supposed to do, and she wasn't sure he would in time
to save her.
If she doesn't kill me, her allies are going to make chili out of her for
what she awes them. They may do it anyway. But right now— She
made a dive for the cover of some bushes as an ugly little thing with a
long poisonous stinger made a dive for her. She managed to pick it off
as it sheered away, but that gave away her hiding place, and a
levin-bolt splashed off her shielding. —right now I'm a bigger, shinier

target than she is. Shit. I got the innocents out of the line of fire; very
noble, but I'll bet that means that Guardian Magic isn't going to kick
in.
Wonderful. Just wonderful. Thanks a bunch, fellas.
A rumble of thunder overhead alerted her to yet another danger. Fay's
uncontrolled magics were boiling up the atmosphere, and the
granddaddy of all thunderstorms was building up at preternatural
speed.
There was another storm brewing beneath the ground. The
protections were thinning. The dreams of the One Below were taking
on a disturbed quality.
Mark and Larry— She made a quick check; felt with relief that they
were all right; still draining the site, like an attentive swimming-pool
crew, oblivious to what was going on in Tulsa because of the shields
around the place. I have the power to take her down. But I haven't
given her fair warning. And dammit, I can't do it while she's taking
potshots at me!
Within a few moments, the thunder and lightning were so continuous
that the entire landscape was strobing around her, and she couldn't
even hear the screeching of Fay's creatures.
The One Below was dreaming of storms, too.
She was right at the edge of the area covered by the headlights. Not a
good place to be. She scrambled up out of her bushes, tried to
backpedal, and tripped over something hidden in the darkness. Then a
strange and stomach-lurching feeling distracted her for a moment,
and, signalled by something deep inside her, she looked up.
Lightning played across the entire sky, illuminating the clouds
whirling around a hole in the thunderheads.

A funnel-cloud.
And there was a definite stirring beneath the earth now; something
beginning to wake and take an interest in the proceedings. The last of
its dreams shredded away—
It wasn't pleased at having its dreams interrupted.
And was going to make every living thing within reach pay for being
awakened.
Its reach was very long…
Long enough to call down a hundred tornadoes on Tulsa, and send
them ripping through every neighbourhood in the city until there was
enough peace for the One Below to drift back into dreams again.
Di spent a split second reckoning up the worth of her Oath, and her
options.
I haven't got any. I'm going to have to bet it all.
And hope she hasn't learned the "reflect your enemy's power back at
him" trick. Everything she's done so far is three hundred years old,
and that trick dates from 1854. Please, oh gods—
Or there isn't going to be a Tulsa in the morning.
She made her "mirror"; grounded and centred herself, bracing it as
well as she possibly could—
And dashed out into the cone of light from the headlights; then stood
up in plain view, as if caught by surprise.
Di could feel the surge of triumph—and saw the blast of power coming
straight at her.

The parabolic "mirror" held—and funnelled the sorceress's power
right back into her teeth.
Di's arcane "eyes" as well as her physical ones were blinded as a
half-dozen lightning bolts lashed down, attracted by the pull of the
power. Her "ears" were deafened by the scream of rage and pain, even
as her physical ears were buffeted by thunder that literally pounded
her to her knees.
And overhead, the storm died; while underfoot, the One Below
growled in satisfaction and drifted back into sleep…
—
After a while, sight came back, and hearing, and Di picked herself
back up off the ground.
Oh, gods. Everything hurts. Absolutely everything. Maybe I'd have
been better off if she'd fried me.
She staggered wearily back to her car; and as she came closer, she
heard the sound of voices.
The boys.
Arguing.
Over just whose girl Monica was.
I can't believe this! she thought, gritting her teeth to keep from
screaming. Okay, granted Alan couldn't See anything but those two
demons, and Derek probably couldn't See most of what was going on
because he was trying to figure out what to do and had his eyes
closed—but dammit, I'm out there getting my ass trashed, and—Lady
of Light, if I had the strength, I'd strangle him!
—

Monica could not believe what she was hearing.
I was kidnapped by a witch, she thought, stunned into silence. I was
going to be given to a couple of demons. I was nearly killed, we were
all nearly killed. There was almost a tornado, we all saw it! And all
they can think about is whose girl I am?
The argument had started right after the huge bolt of lightning, when
she'd cowered on the ground between them. That was when they both
looked up, when their hands met, and each discovered a rival on the
other side of her. It was probably all due to the fact that they were all
an inch away from hysteria, but it was about to reach the point of
blows, and suddenly she couldn't take it anymore.
"You—assholes!" she screamed shrilly, her voice cutting across both of
theirs.
They stopped yelling, and stared at her.
"You can go fuck yourselves!" she screamed, shaking her clenched
fists at both of them. "You're crazy, both of you! I'm going home!"
With that, she turned on her heel and flounced up the rutted road,
with the lights of the car behind her, heading for the airport. If
nothing else, she figured she could get a cab there, and her mother
could pay for it when she got home.
They're crazy! They're both insane! If Fay ever shows up again, she
can have both of them!
The light behind her grew brighter, and she heard the car engine right
at her heels. She stumbled off the track into the grass, and the car
pulled up beside her. She peered suspiciously into the car, ready to tell
the guys off, as the overhead flickered on. It was Diana; alone.
"I'm with you, kiddo, " the witch said tiredly.

"God, " Monica said, awed by the gray pallor of the woman's
complexion, the sheer exhaustion that made her eyes look sunken
clear into her head. "You look awful!"
"I feel awful, " Diana replied. "Like death, only worse. How about a
ride home?"
There were shouts behind them, as the boys suddenly realized that
they were being left in the lurch. Monica looked back and could barely
see them, stumbling along and waving frantically. "What about
them?" she asked.
"Let 'em walk. It'll cool 'em down. By the time they get home, they'll
be buddies again. They just needed something to take their nerves out
on.”
Monica managed a tremulous grin, then yanked the door open and
jumped into the passenger's side. Diana Tregarde gunned the engine
just as the two boys reached the side of the car, and pulled away,
leaving them in darkness and a cloud of dust.
"Don't you think they could have done something instead of fight?"
Monica asked plaintively.
"Yeah. Except that they're male. You know, " Diana said as the boys'
forlorn cries died behind them, "I'm twice your age, and I still don't
understand men.”
—
Dr. James Powell rubbed his hands together nervously. He hated to
lose this patient—she'd meant a great deal in the way of a steady
income to feed his coke habit—
Powell, that was one incentive you didn't need, he scolded himself.
You've been cold turkey for a month now. You can do just fine with
the rest of your practice. And you got into this business to cure

people, not make them dependent on you! Go back to being a doctor,
not a goddamned drug addict!
"You can let Mrs. Harper in now, Sherri, " he told the secretary.
Rowena Harper moved gracefully through the door to his office and
took the chair opposite his desk.
"Well, Mrs. Harper, " he said quietly. "There's no doubt in anyone's
mind. When you passed the certification board, it was only a matter of
the paperwork. I want you to know that I was very happy to give you
your release papers. And I'm happy to see you leaving us today.”
"I never doubted it, Dr. Powell, " she said, in a low, throaty voice. "I
want you to know that I'll always be grateful to you for your help.”
"I'm just sorry that it took such a shock—"
She bowed her head. "My poor daughter. What a horrible way to die.
Lightning. Who would ever have thought something like that would
happen to her? I still find it hard to believe she's gone. And yet—it's a
paradox; if she hadn't had that terrible accident, might I not still be
locked in my little world of delusions, insisting that I was her?"
"It's possible, I suppose, " Powell said carefully. "I've learned never to
discount anything when it comes to the mind.”
She sighed, and twisted her hands in her lap. "I suppose it's just as
well that I was so thoroughly drugged when it happened. You were
able to break the news to me gently that way. Somehow I think that's
why when you lightened the dosage, I was able to come back to my
real self.”
"That's entirely possible, " Powell repeated. "Now, before you go—are
you certain you'll be all right? All alone in that big house?"
"I won't be alone, " Rowena said, still looking down at her hands. "Will

I, Emily?"
Powell jumped; he hadn't noticed Rowena's sister Emily when she'd
come in, nor that she had sat down on the couch behind Rowena. She
was so quiet and subdued, she might well have been Rowena's
shadow, or a piece of the furniture.
"No, Rowena, " the woman said, in a soft, mouse-timid voice. "You will
not be alone.”
Rowena rose, and Powell realized that he could not delay the moment
any longer. "All right, " he said, rising to his own feet. "You take care
of yourself. And stay in touch. You may need some help in adjusting.
You might find yourself with too much time on your hands."
"I'm certain I'll be able to keep busy, " Rowena replied, looking up at
him. For a moment he thought he saw a hard, calculating look in her
eyes. "I have a great deal of unfinished business to handle. A great
deal, " she repeated.
Then the look was gone, replaced by simple, warm gratitude.
It's the nerves, Powell figured, clenching his jaw. Coke damages the
nerves. I'm going to have to stop being so paranoid.
He opened the door for her, and she and her sister slipped by him,
both of them thanking him again, in sincere, effusive tones.
He watched her walk past his receptionist's desk and out into the hall.
God, she moves like that daughter of hers; at least she does now that
she's sane again. Sometimes she even looks like her. Maybe that was
the root of the delusion. There might be a paper in that…
Lord, she could be that sexy little thing all over again. Right down to
the come-hither walk…

