Ladders  
Various types of ladders are available. When considering buying or hiring a ladder, look at the 
choice available and decide what kind you need for the work you are going to use it for. For 
occasional work it will be cheaper to hire what you want when you want it. It is probably worth 
while buying a set of multipurpose steps to suit your most 
frequency needs.  
Platform step ladder  
A platform step ladder gives stable working position with a 
high level platform for resting tools and materials being 
used. Available in various heights and with or without a 
high level hand rail. This type opens up like scissors to 
give a free standing set of steps with a small platform at 
the top, thus leaving your hands free and saving the need 
to keep getting off the steps for tools and materials. They 
are very stable and, if fitted with a handrail above the 
platform, extra safe. When choosing a platform ladder, 
make sure the treads are wide enough to allow you to 
stand comfortably for long periods. When not in use, the steps fold up and are quite compact 
to store.  
Combination ladder  
A combination ladder offers various arrangements to give a step ladder, an extension ladder 
and a stair ladder in one piece of equipment. The combinations fold down to about the same 
size as the platform step ladder but is much more versatile. Three way combination ladders 
(illustrated right) consist of a pair of ladders which can be arranged in three different 
configurations to give a simple step ladder, an extension ladder and a step ladder which can 
be positioned astride steps. Four way combination ladders consist of 3 ladders which can be 
arranged in the same ways as the 3 way plus an additional arrangement which provide an 
extension to the basic step configuration. If you live in a bungalow or flat, a combination 
ladder should be sufficient for most jobs.  
Extension ladder  
Extension ladders are used for working at height. These 
consists of two or three parts which can be slid apart to 
give the required height. Available as two or three 
extensions and in various 'closed' lengths (2.5 to 3.5m). A 
double extension ladder, which can give a length of upto 
about 8 meters, should be suitable for most two storey 
properties. Longer, 3 section ladders can give lengths upto 
about 10 metres.  
On smaller ladders, the ladder may be extended by hand 
and secured with stay locks which rest on to a selected 
rung. On larger ladders, the sections are extended by means of a rope loop running down the 
side of the ladder and secured upon a cleat.  
As the average diy'er will use an extension ladder infrequently, it is probably better to hire one 
when it is required. Although if you do use an extension ladder frequently, it will be more 
economical to purchase one.  

Roof ladder  
Always use this type of ladder when working on a pitched 
roof - fit it and climb onto it from scaffolding (or a scaffold 
tower), not a ladder. The roof ladder has two wheels at the 
upper end which enables it to be pushed up the roof 
without damaging the slates or tiles. On the other side to 
the wheels, the ladder is formed into a hook which fits over 
the top ridge of the roof and stops the ladder from slipping 
down 
the 
roof. 
 
Choosing a ladder  
Ladders are available in either aluminium or fibreglass (timber ladders have more or less 
disappeared from the market). Fibreglass ladders cost more that aluminium, but they do have 
advantages.  
Aluminium  
Aluminium is lightweight and durable, but bends easily and can present risks when electrical 
work is being performed. Never use a metal ladder to do electrical work unless it is fitted in 
insulated feet. 
Aluminium ladders can corrode and weaken by salt air or chemicals an aluminium ladder. The 
aluminium sections can also be bent if they are knocked or fall, a distorted section cannot be 
reliably repaired. 
Fibreglass  
Fibreglass is not as light as aluminium, but it does not conduct electricity, is not susceptible to 
damage by moisture or rot and does not bend easily.  
Fibreglass ladders have not been available for very long, as time passes disadvantages to 
them may come to light.  
Weight rating  
All steps and ladders have a weight rating which indicates the load which will be safely placed 
on it.  
Look at the quality of the connections and hinges on the ladder, if they look weak and liable to 
break, they probably will.  
Length needed  
To calculate what length of ladder you need, work out the highest point at which you will want 
to stand when working and allow for the ladder to extend at least three clear rungs above that 
point. Remember that the foot of an extension ladder has to be away from the base of the wall 
by about a quarter the height of the ladder, so the working height will be less than the length 
of the extended sections. Also remember that the sections need to overlap, a 2 section 3.4m 
ladder will give about 6.2m working length and a 3 section 3.4 ladder will give about 8m.  
Useful accessories  
Various ladder accessories can be bought or hired. Some of them are worth using as they 
make working at height more comfortable and convenient.  

Ladder 
platform  
Clips onto a rung to provide a convenient area for tools 
and materials at the top of the ladder.  
 
 
Ladder 
tray  
This attachment holds bucket and tools in a high position. A stout 'S' hook may also be used 
to 
suspend 
a 
bucket 
or 
paint 
can, 
but 
is 
less 
versatile.  
 
Ladder 
stay  
One end locks onto the top two rungs of the ladder and the 
other end rests against the wall so the ladder is held off a 
small distance from the wall. It allows the underside of the 
eaves and guttering to be worked on without having to lean 
back.  
 
 
Maintaining a ladder  
Very little maintenance is required for aluminium or fibreglass ladders. Check that the hinges 
of step ladders are not binding and that the sections on extensions ladders slid freely - 
aluminium to aluminium friction can weaken the material over a period of time.  
On extension ladders, check where rope is used, that it is in sound condition and the fixing 
positions are secure/undamaged. Fit new rope as soon as there is any sign of fraying.  
Storage  
Step and combination ladders can easily be stored in any dry corner but make sure they are 
not likely to be damaged or twisted.  

An extension ladder presents a bigger problem due to its size. An ideal place is the garage, 
where it can be kept dry and under lock and key and possibly hung along the wall on strong 
hooks or angle brackets and make sure it is well supported in the middle.  
ixed point.  
 
Make sure that any ladder is secure and not available for the local burglars, a bicycle style 
security chain is useful to secure a ladder to a metal eye in a wall or other f
  

