
A History of Linear Electric Motors

Other Macmillan titles of related interest
W. A. Atherton From Compass to Computer-A history of electrical and electronics 
engineering
J. D. Edwards Electrical Machines-An introduction to principles and characteristics

A History of 
Linear Electric Motors
Eric R. Laithwaite
PhD, DSc, CEng, FIEE, FIEEE
Professor of Heavy Electrical Engineering 
Imperial College, London
M
MACMILLAN

© Eric R. Laithwaite 1987
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1987 978-0-333-39928-6
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission 
of this publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied 
or transmitted save with written permission or in accordance 
with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended).
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to 
this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and 
civil claims for damages.
First published 1987
Published by
MACMILLAN EDUCATION LTD
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS
and London
Companies and representatives
throughout the world
Distributed in the USA and Canada by
San Francisco Press, Inc.
Box 6800, San Francisco
CA 94101-6800
Typeset by
TecSet Ltd, Sutton, Surrey
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Laithwaite, E. R.
A history of linear electric motors.
1. Electric motors, Linear-History
I. Title
621.46'2 TK2537
ISBN 978-1-349-08298-8 ISBN 978-1-349-08296-4 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-08296-4

Contents
Preface 
ix
Acknowledgements 
x
1 Introduction—the first age of topology 
1
1.1 
Design and evolution 
2
1.2 
The earliest rotating machines 
3
1.3 
An explanation of some terminology 
4
1.4 
‘Magnetic’and‘electromagnetic’machines 
5
1.5 
De mortuis nil nisi bonum 
6
1.6 
Fundamental shapes 
8
1.7 
A classification of machine shapes 
9
1.8 
The early inventions classified 
10
1.9 
An engine should look like an engine! 
12
1.10 Steps forward and backward 
21
1.11 Shape becomes an end in itself 
26
1.12 1888—the biggest milestone since 1831 
27
1.13 References 
29
Appendix: Chronological order of rotating machine inventions 
30
2 The early inventors and their patents 
31
2.1 
The pre-induction motor period 
31
2.2 
A.c. reciprocating motors 
34
2.3 
The start of the induction motor era 
35
2.4 
Boucherot, Zehden and Birkeland 
36
2.5 
Bachelet and World War I 
38
2.6 
Japolsky 
41
2.7 
Liquid metal pumps 
43
2.8 
World War II 
45
2.9 
References 
50

vi 
CONTENTS
3 The contributions of the textile men 
52
3.1 
‘Action at a distance’ is the ‘bait’ 
52
3.2 
How a power loom weaves 
53
3.3 
The amazing Monsieur Jacquard 
55
3.4 
Classifying shuttle drives 
56
3.5 
A topological giant 
57
3.6 
Classification using electrical considerations 
58
3.7 
A curiosity 
59
3.8 
Milestones revealed by the patent history 
61
3.8.1 Concerning Monsieur Bachelet 
61
3.8.2 The men who had it didn’t know they had it 
62
3.9 
Duplication of effort 
66
3.10 Ingenuity continues 
67
3.11 An amateur textile engineer tries his hand 
68
3.12 A naturally self-oscillating motor 
70
3.13 Series and parallel worlds 
76
3.14 The ‘DNA’ molecule of machine engineering 
76
3.15 References 
78
Appendix: Chronological order of patents on electromagnetic textile 
devices 
79
4 
‘Fashions’ in engineering 
84
4.1 
The task of the engineer 
84
4.2 
The importance of ‘fringe subjects’ 
84
4.3 
Ignorance really is bliss! 
85
4.4 
Digression on a theoretical dilemma 
85
4.5 
The bad old days 
87
4.6 
A ‘fashiongraph’ 
87
4.7 
Extrapolation of the fashiongraph 
88
4.8 
The great pollution bandwagon 
89
4.9 
The danger of breeding a race of robots 
90
4.10 Contrasts in industrial outlook 
90
4.11 
‘We must simplify the theory’ 
90
4.12 Useful theory or formal discipline? 
91
4.13 Unification for its own sake 
91
4.14 Industrial ‘pros and cons’ 
92
4.15 Automation 
92
4.16 Design or evolution? 
93
4.17 Accountants become fashionable as dictators 
93
4.18 References 
94
5 Electromagnetic levitation 
95
5.1 
Different worlds 
95
5.2 
Obsession with cylindrical geometry 
97
5.3 
A theory‘brought out and dusted’ 
98

CONTENTS 
vii
5.4 
Levitation melting 
102
5.5 
Levitation with a degree of freedom 
104
5.6 
References 
106
6 Academics and industrialists 
107
6.1 
Background 
107
6.2 
Portrait of an academic 
108
6.3 
The importance of a great industrialist 
110
6.4 
The new generation 
112
6.5 
John Lowe
113
6.6 
The ‘clean-up’ men
6.7 
The blending of electronics and ‘machines’ 
1
6.8 
A lot depended on communication
6.9 
Series connection
6.10 References 
^3
7 The high-speed transport game 
125
7.1 
What to leave out, not what to put in! 
125
7.2 
The railway experiments 
125
7.3 
The ‘A6rotrain’ 
130
7.4 
The formation of Tracked Hovercraft Limited 
134
7.5 
The pace makers 
136
7.6 
The long pole pitch problem 
140
7.7 
The ‘darkest hour before the dawn’ 
144
7.8 
The three-part problem concept of the mid ’60s 
149
7.9 
Global competition 1966-1972 
153
7.10 Transpo 72 
160
7.11 The stop-go phase 
166
7.12 The Select Committee 
167
7.13 References 
168
8 The world-wide game 
169
8.1 
New readers begin here! 
169
8.2 
The Toronto Urban Transit Scheme 
170
8.3 
Earith and after 
172
8.4 
The Consortium of British Universities 
175
8.5 
‘Landspeed’ 
178
8.6 
The world scene up to 1976, country-by-country 
179
8.6.1 USA 
180
8.6.2 Canada 
187
8.6.3 Japan 
188
8.6.4 Europe 
190
8.6.5 USSR 
194
8.7 
References 
195

viii 
CONTENTS
9 The second age of topology 
196
9.1 
A voice from the past 
196
9.2 
Can no-one be right? 
197
9.3 
The lateral dimension 
197
9.3.1 Concern about stability and about power factor 
200
9.4 
Tubular motors 
202
9.5 
The vertical dimension 
205
9.5.1 Electromagnetic levitation 
206
9.5.2 The topology of track joints 
209
9.6 
The longitudinal direction 
212
9.6.1 Surface current topology 
213
9.6.2 Superimposed skewed windings 
215
9.7 
Linear synchronous motors 
220
9.7.1 Claw-pole motors 
220
9.7.2 Combined cryogenic Maglev and propulsion 
222
9.8 
References 
223
10 
A continuing story 
224
10.1 
General 
224
10.2 
‘Stop-press’on HSGT 
225
10.2.1 USA 
226
10.2.2 Canada 
226
10.2.3 Japan 
226
10.2.4 West Germany 
226
10.2.5 UK 
226
10.3 
What have we learned? 
229
10.3.1 Wisdom 
229
10.3.2 Courage 
229
10.3.3 Theory, design and evolution 
230
10.3.4 Invention 
231
10.4 
References 
233
Bibliography 
234
General 
235
Industrial applications 
255
Levitation 
277
Transport 
296
Theory 
349
Index
385

Preface
The manuscript of this book was first prepared at the request of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers in 1971. This coincided with a period of great activity in one 
particular aspect of linear motors, that of high-speed ground transport (HSGT) 
applications. It was a time when the Tracked Hovercraft project showed such great 
promise, when new inventions grew like mushrooms and hopes for a world-adopted 
British system ran high, only to be dashed by the Government’s closure of the 
project in 1973 and demolition of the full-scale track in 1974. It was a time when 
personal emotions ran high.
The original draft contained a whole chapter on the rise and fall of Tracked 
Hovercraft, some of which was found unacceptable in that it might have given 
grounds for libel action. The whole manuscript was in fact revised to avoid giving 
any offence whatsoever. Meanwhile, new developments in HSGT were taking place 
in several countries from the USA to Japan and more papers were flooding in to 
swell the bibliography. By 1975 new papers on linear motors were appearing at 
the rate of between 14 and 16 per month and it was decided to close the biblio­
graphy at that date on the grounds of space and of the escalating task of cross­
referencing to check that the bibliography after 1975 was complete.
Originally it had been intended to publish in 1983 with the final chapter bring­
ing everything up to date, but the final manuscript was declined by the lEE’s 
publishers in 1984 and a re-revision took place for the present publishers.
Some updating has been carried out on the last chapter in view of the time that 
has elapsed since the original target date for publication. Perhaps future historians 
may record that not until 1986 could the linear motor be said to have really 
become industrially accepted, for the author was invited to address the IEE in 
London on January 15, 1986 on the subject of ‘Linear motors-a new species takes 
root’, which was then to be published in Electronics and Power. In newspaper 
language and in the context of this book, this paper must surely be classed as 
‘Stop Press’!
Eric R. Laithwaite
ix

Acknowledgements
This work might never have been completed had it not been for the untiring efforts 
of my secretary, Miss Elizabeth Boden, who not only typed and re-typed the manu­
script several times but corrected spelling and grammar and did a tremendous job 
on the bibliography in respect of accuracy and attention to detail. While neither of 
us pretends that it is now perfect, all I would say is that as the result of her efforts, 
‘It’s a lot better than it was!’
I am also much indebted to Dr Brian Bowers of the Science Museum, South 
Kensington, firstly for help with research on the early days of the subject and the 
patents of Wheatstone in particular, and secondly for reading the whole manuscript 
and advising me on the production of a revised version that would offend no-one.
I am also grateful to the publishers for picking up the pieces when, at one time, 
all seemed a lost cause.
The diagrams were drawn by Mr E. Lawler.

1 Introduction — the first age 
of topology
The greatest difficulty in compiling a history of almost any specialist subject is to 
know where to begin. There is a popular saying—‘There is nothing new under the 
sun’—and certainly it is often impossible to credit the invention of the most useful 
of devices to any known single person. In The Children's Encyclopaedia (1922) a 
verbal picture of a stone-age man is painted with the use of phrases such as “He 
lifts the stone, raises it above his head, and flings it from him. The others imitate 
him. They chuckle and grin. The first game of cricket is being played.”
At first sight this appears to be exaggeration taken to extremes. 1.7 million years 
were to elapse before anything like the modern game of cricket began to emerge, 
but since no single man invented it and since the fascination of cricket, in common 
with that of most other ball games, comes from appreciating a sphere in motion, 
perhaps the encyclopaedia has a most valid point.
Linear motors are undoubtedly a product of technology and there is much con­
fusion in the modern world between science on the one hand and engineering and 
technology on the other. John Lenihan (1969) in his Kelvin lecture of 1968 put 
technology into its proper perspective when he said:
“It is often supposed that technology is the product of science, emerging unpredict- 
ably as a reward for untrammelled intellectual curiosity. Two of the most signi­
ficant and spectacular advances in the history of civilisation were accomplished by 
technology alone. Until the eighth century, a mounted soldier had the advantage of 
a better view but had to rely on his own muscle power and was helpless when 
unhorsed. Once provided with stirrups, however, his fighting power was greatly 
increased.
“The horseman now merely held the lance between his arm and his body, allow­
ing the muscle power of the horse to deliver the blow. The Franks absorbed and 
exploited the new technology of war. The Anglo-Saxons did not take it seriously 
and in 1066 they paid the price of their neglect.”
He continues with his second example as a dual invention, the two occurring at 
about the same period but with no precise origin in time.
1

2
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
“.. . the ox was commonly used for ploughing and other agricultural tasks. Horses 
were not very serviceable, partly because their hooves were easily damaged and 
partly because their tractive effort was very limited. The ox yoke was inefficient 
when applied to the horse because, as soon as the animal took the strain, the neck 
strap pressed on the windpipe with discouraging results.
“The nailed horse-shoe appeared during the ninth century and the modern type 
of harness, with a padded collar allowing the animal to exert full effort was deve­
loped almost simultaneously. The rise of the middle classes, the growth of com­
merce, industry and education and many other features of modern civilisation may 
be traced back to the agricultural revolution—technological but not scientific—of 
nine or ten centuries ago.”
[The scientist’s view of the great landmarks in the history of civilisation is very 
different from that of the architect (Clark, 1969).]
1.1 Design and evolution
In the history of electric motors similar influences will be seen to have come 
together to produce the rotating machines of today, perhaps as much an evolution 
as a process of logical design. These developments may be referred to as ‘the First 
Age of Topology’ for in the nineteenth century, particularly from Faraday’s dis­
coveries in 1831 to Tesla’s induction motor of 1888, the study of shape dominated 
electric motor development. So far as linear electric motors are concerned, we may 
well be only at the middle or even the beginning of what is called in chapter 9 ‘the 
Second Age of Topology’. As with the horseshoe and the stirrup it is almost impos­
sible to say where linear motors began, for linear motion, as such, plays a much 
greater part in human life than does rotary, except perhaps in centres of very high 
industrial content. In Nature there is little rotary motion, except that of the planets 
and solar systems themselves, but in plant-life and animals there are virtually no 
wheels and one could argue that linear motion is ‘natural’ motion.
A great pioneer in electrical machines—no less a person than the great French 
engineer Paul-Marie-Joachim Boucherot (1869-1943), inventor of the double-cage 
rotor—had something very emphatic to say on precisely this point (Boucherot, 
1908).
“Man has adapted his machinery to rotate because he found it the easiest to pro­
duce artificially. To conclude that rotary motion is natural motion is begging the 
question. Stars have rotary motion, electrons also, but animals only move and act 
by oscillating movements. Snakes move on a miniature system and we know with 
just what exotic speed. I am of the opinion that there are, in animal mechanics, 
profound fundamentals which have been analysed far from completely.”
Linear motors can be regarded, in their most general form, as the physical result 
of the splitting and unrolling of rotary machines, and there are therefore at least 
as many types of linear motor as there are of rotary, for each one (induction, 

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
3
synchronous, commutator, reluctance, hysteresis etc.) has its linear counterpart. 
It is therefore profitable, by way of introduction to the importance of topology 
in the development of linear machines, to study the First Age of Topology (1830­
1890), for many types of linear motor are no more than one simple topological 
exercise from their rotary equivalents.
1.2 The earliest rotating machines
Figure 1.1 shows the earliest and certainly one of the simplest shapes of electric 
motor, although in its original form it was used as a generator—in fact it is the basic 
arrangement used by Faraday for his dynamo of 1831. It should be made clear at 
the outset that all electrical machines are reversible, so far as power flow is con­
cerned. A d.c. motor may, without a change in its basic physical shape, be used as a 
d.c. generator—that is, the power can flow from shaft to electric terminals and vice 
versa. As it is with rotary machines, so it is with linear, but so far the use of a linear 
machine as a motor has far exceeded its use as a generator. Nevertheless there are 
periods in the duty cycles of commercial linear motors when they may operate as 
generators, plugging induction motors etc.
Figure 1.1 Schematic arrangement of Faraday’s disc dynamo, 1831
Following only months behind Faraday’s disc came Hippolyte Pixii’s machine 
shown diagrammatically in figure 1.2. This machine had all the essential elements 
of the modern alternator in that
(i) The field-generating magnets, rather than the output coils, comprised the 
moving part
(ii) The output was alternating current rather than ‘battery-like’ current
(iii) The airgap could be made quite large
(iv) The system could be made multi-polar.
The principal difference between Pixii’s generator and the modern machine was 
that the working surface was a plane rather than a cylinder. The use of the term 
‘working surface’ needs some further explanation here for, like some other phrases 
not in common use, it will be used throughout the book as a convenient way of 
expressing some of the theoretical arguments which follow.

4
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.2 The arrangement of Pixii’s a.c. generator, 1831
1.3 An explanation of some terminology
In a transformer, the magnetic circuit is completed entirely in ferromagnetic 
material of high permeability, and this is in many ways (although not all) ideal for an 
electromagnetic machine. Where the object of the machine is to convert energy from 
an electrical form to a mechanical or vice versa, relative motion between different 
parts of the machine must exist and in the absence of a ferromagnetic fluid which 
could conveniently be used, some airgap is necessary, if only for purely mechanical 
reasons, between one ferromagnetic part of the machine and another. Because the 
relative permeabilities—that is, magnetic ‘conductivities’, of certain steels and air are 
of the order of 1000, the reluctance of the airgap often dominates the magnetic cir­
cuit design. To this extent it can be argued that the airgap of a machine is ‘where the 
action takes place’, even though we know that electromagnetic phenomena have little 
meaning unless considered in relation to interlinked, closed circuits (electric and 
magnetic). So we speak of the available tangential thrust of a rotating machine ‘per 
unit of pole area’, but since the extent of poles is not always easy to define (slot 
openings being convertible into effective pole area) the idea of a working surface in 
which slots and teeth alike are regarded as homogeneous is often a convenient one.
A second philosophical outlook, not found in the usual textbooks on electrical 
machines, should perhaps also be explained here, for in this case it is not only a 
‘convenient’ way of describing a machine but sets out a most fundamental dif­
ference between certain types. Various inventors (both in the field of linear and 
rotary machines) have discovered this difference for themselves, yet it does not, 
even at the present time, form a part of formal courses in electrical machines. The 
fact that it is related to the ‘working surface’ makes it convenient to explain it 
here.

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
5
1.4 'Magnetic9 and 'electromagnetic9 machines
Electricity and magnetism are said to be manifestations of a fourth dimension, 
which is perhaps another way of saying that we shall never appreciate them to the 
extent that we appreciate three-dimensional objects. To say that we shall never 
‘explain’ electromagnetic phenomena is probably true but unhelpful. To say that 
one particular, so-called, ‘explanation9 is better than another however is unworthy 
of a scientist, for he should know that a particular concept (and it is generally 
agreed that it can be no more than a concept) can be much more profitable than 
another for one particular person. Nevertheless, a history of any aspect of electrical 
phenomena will record the general acceptance of particular concepts which go in 
and out of ‘fashion9 as do designs of human clothing. Perhaps one of the simplest 
examples, although not an electrical engineering one, is the corpuscular theory of 
light, followed by the wave theory, followed by the quantum theory. In many 
cases, unfortunately, the teaching of a new ‘gospel’, especially by those who first 
propounded it, inhibits the next generation to a large extent, often inferring even 
that ‘this is the only way’ a phenomenon may be explained or a device manufac­
tured. It is impossible to estimate the extent of the delay in the development of 
linear machines which was occasioned in particular by the handing on of the 
dogma—‘only machines with small airgaps are good machines’—especially during the 
period 1920-1950, as is discussed more fully in chapter 2.
Another aspect of the writing of any history of a subject is that the writer can 
see both the wisdom and the folly of his ancestors, at least in part, and benefit 
therefrom; but it then becomes necessary to relate, in the introduction, pieces from 
the end of the story in order that the reader can appreciate, and enjoy the more, 
the work of the early pioneers.
The action of most electrical machines may be explained on the basis of a set of 
magnets on the stationary member reacting with a second set of magnets on the 
moving part. The word ‘magnets’ in this context however is too broad for the student 
who would make a closer study, for these magnets may be of several types, thus:
(a) permanent magnets, which are perhaps the only real magnets in the true sense 
of the word
(b) electromagnets energised by windings whose current may be controlled
(c) steel in which magnetism is induced in one set of pieces, simply as the result 
of the proximity of another set, whether the latter be of (a) or (b) type.
In the context of this book, classes (a) and (b) will be referred to as ‘Electro­
magnetic Machines’. Class (c) will be called ‘Magnetic Machines’. The fundamental 
difference between these two groups lies in the fact that any electromagnetic 
machine, when simply scaled up in size, becomes a ‘better’ machine, while mag­
netic machines become better as they are scaled down. Formal proof of these 
statements and a definition of what is meant by ‘better9 can be found in other pub­
lications (Laithwaite, 1966, 1971). It will suffice at this point to say that a factor 
of ‘goodness’ can be defined which is based only on the product of firstly, the 
resistance of the electric circuits of a machine, secondly the reluctance of the 

6
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
magnetic circuit and thirdly the speed of the machine. This quantity is, to a first 
approximation with leakage ignored, the ratio of the full load current of a machine 
to its no-load current. Since the latter is largely determined by the airgap, attention 
is bound to be focussed on this point of the machine, which brings us back to the 
idea of a ‘working surface’.
Another concept which can be useful in some thought processes is that the 
presence of what we normally call ‘magnetic poles’ is due only to stepped changes 
in reluctance of the magnetic circuit. If, for example, a piece of electric wire of high 
resistance were connected to a battery via thick conductors of low resistance and 
the whole circuit were then to be immersed in a brine bath and probes used to 
detect the current flow lines in the liquid, the pattern would appear similar to that 
shown in figure 1.3. Had we been told that the flow lines were lines of magnetic 
force, we would at once have labelled the points A and B as ‘magnetic poles’. This 
is not a new concept, rather it is a neglected one, for Faraday himself was aware of 
it.
Figure 1.3 Electric analogue of a bar magnet showing that poles arise only as the 
result of a change in impedance
1.5 De mortuis nil nisi bonum
To return to Pixii’s machine of figure 1.2; an original machine was, in 1971, lent by 
the Smithsonian Institution to the Science Museum at South Kensington, London 
where an excellent replica is on display to the public. The caption under the name­
plate reads
“Faraday produced the first continuous current in 1831. Later in that year Pixii 
made a machine incorporating an iron-cored multi-turn bobbin. This was a great 
advancement in design, and a year later, at Ampere’s suggestion, a simple com­
mutator was also added.”
Since the only man-made electric currents before Faraday’s discoveries were 
generated chemically, there was much praise for anyone who could turn alternating 
current (which we now know to be the most convenient and economical to use) 

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
7
into ‘battery-like’ current, and I have no doubt that Ampere’s suggestion of fitting a 
simple reversing switch driven by the moving part of the machine itself received 
much applause at the time. Yet we now know that the struggle to make d.c. set 
back the course of electrical engineering history for perhaps as much as several 
decades.
History, of course, is a source of wisdom as opposed to pure science which is a 
source of knowledge. In history we can read of great men and of their mistakes, for 
it is often in the making of mistakes that the experimenter learns. Indeed it is 
hoped that this volume itself may, by recording retrograde, as well as forward steps 
in rotating machinery, enable the linear motor designer of the future to avoid the 
analogous pitfalls.
The generation of alternating current is perhaps one of the most fundamental of 
all topological considerations, for when a bar magnet is pulled out of a coil (as 
Faraday demonstrated) a pulse of current can be made to flow in the circuit of the 
coil and this will be unidirectional. But the process cannot be repeated with the 
same, or any other magnet, unless a current flowing in the opposite direction is 
first produced or the coil is at some point disconnected and reconnected. Of course, 
it must have been incredibly difficult for Ampere to have seen his simple reversing 
switch as the forerunner of the multi-segment, modern commutator of d.c. machines, 
and even more difficult to see Faraday’s disc dynamo as the ultimate limit of multi­
segment commutators in which the size of each segment could be said to be zero 
and the number of segments infinite. But these ideas, which are simple enough for 
us to appreciate now, are examples of the Wisdom which comes only after a wealth 
of experience (a history) has been accumulated.
What is even more fascinating is the next direct development of Pixii’s machine 
which occurred in 1846 and was the result of an invention by Emil Stbhrer of 
Leipzig. His machine is shown in figure 1.4. This is claimed to be the first multi­
polar machine, carrying three horseshoe magnets. The extra weight of the magnets 
led the inventor to interchange the stationary and moving parts. This in itself 
demonstrates great appreciation of Faraday’s experiments, for when you know 
‘nothing’ and someone tells you that an electric current (which you know to be 
only the result of a chemical action) can be generated by pulling a magnet from 
inside a coil, it is by no means to be assumed that pulling the coil from the magnet 
produces the same effect.
The moving coils could now only pass current to an external circuit, where it 
could be put to work via slip rings and brushes, and this machine therefore repre­
sents the second major retrograde step in generator design. We now see that Pixii 
had the modern turbo-alternator right in the palm of his hand and yet let it slip 
away through the advice of men whom he no doubt considered greater authorities 
than himself. The Pixii machine has no commutator or slip rings to carry the output 
current. Apart from the replacement of permanent magnets by electromagnets, the 
only difference in arrangement between the modern alternator and Pixii’s machine 
was the relatively simple topological re-arrangement of making the working surface 
that of the surface of a cylinder rather than of a disc. It is interesting also that, for 
certain purposes, modern machines with disc surfaces can be profitable. They are

8
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.4 Six-pole generator developed by Emil Stohrer of Leipzig (courtesy of 
Trustees of the Science Museum)
now usually described as ‘axial-flux machines’—a term we shall meet again in linear 
motor terminology. Perhaps foremost in ‘re-discovering’ the usefulness of the disc 
surface was the firm of Fairbanks-Morse in the USA.
1.6 Fundamental shapes
The pressure on the early pioneers to produce d.c. was increased with the rapid 
developments in the technology of electro-plating. From early experiments by 
Jacobi in 1838, commercial-sized plating baths were in use in the 1840s and in 
1844 Messrs Prime and Son of Birmingham built, to a design by Woolrich, what 
was probably the earliest industrial electrical machine of any magnitude. This 
generator was first described in The Electrician (1889). The four compound horse­
shoe magnets had like poles on the same side. The moving armature had eight coils 
with a common connection to a slip ring on one side and to separate commutator 
segments on the other. Topologically the arrangement was basically the same as 
Faraday’s disc as shown in figure 1.5 but the rotor configuration was essentially a 
new topology at that time.
A few years ago one could have said that the complete exploitation of a Faraday 
disc dynamo would involve the use of magnetic circuits which would be very diffi­
cult to make—structures perhaps in the form of the plates of a quadrant electro­
meter—in order to utilise the whole surface of the disc. Yet the appearance of a new 
material in the form of niobium-tin (superconductor) caused the whole topological

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
9
Figure 1.5 Physical layout of Woolrich’s design, 1844
concept of a machine to be changed overnight. The first large-scale superconducting 
generator to be built at Newcastle returned basically to Faraday’s disc, using 
virtually no ferromagnetic material and a layout as shown in figure 1.7, type (la).
1.7 A classification of machine shapes
At this point it is interesting to simplify each invention of the nineteenth century 
into its basic topological arrangement, regarding the primary member as a stationary 
permanent magnet system and the secondary as a disc (elongated to a cylinder 
whenever the edge, rather than the face of the disc is used as working surface). With 
a single horseshoe magnet and a disc, six fundamentally different arrangements are 
possible, as shown in figure 1.6, (1) to (6). These arrangements make no assumption 
as to how the magnetic circuits are completed, nor even whether the disc is of 
(i) solid conductor, (ii) conducting windings only, (iii) slabs of steel or (iv) a combina­
tion of steel and copper. Since there are in general three planes in which the magnetic 
circuit can be completed and these are entirely independent of the plane in which 
the primary horseshoe lies, there are 6 x 4 x 3 = 72 basically different topological 
arrangements for rotating machines without involving all the many ingenious 
variations in each group and the variations in winding arrangements which, in part, 
overlapped the inventions of the nineteenth century but were, in the main, invented 
after that period.
From the basic arrangements of figure 1.6, (1) to (6), other secondary topologies 
can emerge. Figure 1.7 shows a modified form of (1), labelled (la), two arrange­
ments (2a) and (2b) derived from (2), (4a) derived from (4), and a (5a) from (5). 
Figure 1.8 shows four arrangements developed from the basic type (3) of figure 
1.6. In discussing the inventions of the first age of topology in strict chronological 
order, the object is to illustrate that, while the various machines may now be classi­
fied as in figures 1.6 to 1.8 in a logical manner, no such logic existed, nor can we 
expect it to have so existed in the minds of the inventors of the 1800s, and there-

10
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
type (2)
type(3)
type (4)
type (5)
type (6)
Figure 1.6 Fundamentally different topologies
fore some of the ideas were clearly ‘ahead of their time’ while others were just 
as clearly retrograde steps. Thus the forward steps of technology are invariably 
stumbling ones. The inventors of linear motors, having the history of rotary machines 
to study, should have been able to develop the best machines much more rapidly. 
Yet they failed to do so, as subsequent sections will show.
1.8 The early inventions classified
Faraday’s disc was type (1) of figure 1.6, while Pixii’s was type (2a) of figure 1.7. 
The fact that most writings of the 1800s were illustrated by pictures of magnets

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
11
type (1 a)
type (2 a)
type (2b)
type (4a)
Figure 1.7 Secondary topologies seen as extensions of the basic types
with the flux coming ‘out of the end’ of the poles, rather than from their sides, 
makes Faraday’s machine all the more remarkable. Types (2) and (3) make use of 
the pole ends, while (4) and (5) use the sides. That the early pioneers did not 
‘brainwash’ each other to anything like the extent that the engineers of 1900-1920 
did their sons is evidenced by the fact that Pixii’s machine was followed by Woolrich’s 
arrangement which clearly used magnet pole ‘sides’, as in type (4a).
Another interesting machine was built by W. Sturgeon in 1832 and is shown in 
figure 1.9. It differed from Pixii’s machine, not only in that it was designed to run 
as a motor, rather than a generator, but that it also ran on d.c. and by modern 
notation could be said to be ‘inside out’, for the discs of type (4a) were simply bar 
magnets which were pulled into line with the bar-type electromagnets whose coils 
were fed from a commutator, driven by the rotor. Rotor inertia served to carry the

12
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.8 Secondary topologies all derived from basic type (3) of figure 1.6 
bars past each stationary pair of magnet bars as the commutator de-energised them. 
It will be noted at this point that type (4a) is very nearly the same as type (6).
The full significance of types (4a) and (6) will not emerge until their linear 
counterparts have been discussed and this does not occur historically until 1967 
(see chapter 7 in particular). At this point it is only necessary to notice that these 
two types of rotary machine could be defined simply by saying that the axis of the 
primary m.m.f. is parallel to the axis of rotation, although even this definition 
requires some stretch of the imagination if the horseshoe magnet of figure 1.6 
(type (6)) were replaced by an electromagnet with its exciting coils on the pole 
faces.
1.9 An engine should look like an engine!
Trying to place oneself mentally in the position of an early inventor and seeing his 
difficulties is itself an extremely difficult thing to do. In later chapters, however, I 
can recall my own feelings at a time when I did not know the usefulness of a three-

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
13
Figure 1.9 Sturgeon’s machine of 1832 was virtually a d.c. motor ‘inside out’ 
(courtesy of Trustees of the Science Museum)
dimensional approach, of magnetic equivalent circuits, the transverse flux idea and 
other discoveries in which, subsequently, I had a hand. It is therefore perhaps 
justifiable that a history of a subject should be written by one himself ‘immersed’ 
in it, for the difference between not knowing a concept on one day and being fully 
aware of it on the next is the equivalent of climbing the North Face of the Eiger 
and much more so for the earlier pioneers.
In 1840, there were many engines in use—steam engines mostly, and it was not 
unnatural for electrical inventors to use the steam engine as their first guide to 
general layout. Couple with this the fact that the properties of magnets had been 
known for 5000 years and that the principles of electromagnets were now fairly 
well known, and their efforts to harness these forces become clearly justified for 
us at the present time.
Wheatstone (1841) devised a series of four electromagnetic engines, three of 
which are described in his patent. In a fascinating article Brian Bowers (1972) of 
the Science Museum, South Kensington, London, describes these developments in 
detail. All are reluctance machines, the first of which was a type (6) in which the

14
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.10 Reproduction from Wheatstone’s patent of his first engine, 1841
horseshoe magnets were electrically energised and could be switched on and off in 
sequence so as to pull the ‘keepers’ on the rotor into line. The machine could be 
said to be an elaboration of Sturgeon’s machine, although Bowers points out that a 
very similar machine built by W. H. Taylor in 1840 was exhibited less than a mile 
from Wheatstone’s workshop and could well have been the inspiration for the first 
of Wheatstone’s four reluctance motors. Although Taylor’s machine no longer 
exists it is described in the Mechanics Magazine of 9th May, 1840. Bowershimself 
‘unearthed’ the Wheatstone machines only a few years ago, thus contributing a 
valuable link in the chain of electromagnetic machine discovery. Figure 1.10 shows 
the patent drawing of the first of Wheatstone’s ‘eccentric’ engines and figure 1.11 
a photograph of the actual motor. The rotor was rolled inside the bore of a ring of 
electromagnets each of which could be switched on and off in turn to attract the 
steel cylinder rotor and cause it to rotate. This machine is therefore a reluctance 
motor and its place in a history of linear machines is assured by Wheatstone’s con­
cept of the machine being ‘unrolled’ to give linear motion.
To quote directly from Bowers’ article, describing Wheatstone’s patent specifi­
cation: “Essentially it says that whereas other electromagnetic engines had electro­
magnets and armatures with their active faces [my term—‘working surface’] arranged 
in concentric circles (as is the case also with modern rotating electrical machines) 
these engines had their armature surfaces in a circle which was not concentric with 
the circle linking the surfaces of the electromagnets. The two circles could have 
either parallel or intersecting non-parallel axes. It then goes on to suggest that one 
of the circles might be unrolled into a straight line so that the other circle would 
roll along it and produce a reciprocating machine. This is by far the earliest reference 
to the idea of a linear motor.”

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
15
Figure 1.11 Wheatstone’s first ‘eccentric’ engine, 1840 (historically his second 
machine, his first being a simple concentric type (6)) {courtesy of Trustees of the 
Science Museum)
The non-parallel axis idea is extraordinarily ingenious and could well be unique 
in the whole history of electromagnetic machines. The basic layout was a type (2) 
(figure 1.6) but the rotor, instead of spinning on a fixed axis, performed precisely 
the motion of a dinner plate which is set in motion on a table such that its axis 
gyrates in conical fashion while the edge of the plate contacts the table at one point 
only, a point which rotates in a circle. I agree of course with Dr Bowers’ conclusion 
about the earliest reference, provided a linear motor fits the modern American term 
for an electrical machine, namely an ‘electromechanical energy converter’—that is, 
it converts electrical energy into mechanical energy or vice versa. If it were not so 
we would be back with the lodestones!
At the time of writing it appeared that Wheatstone had tossed in the idea of 
linearisation as an afterthought, almost as a chef would add a pinch of herbs to a 
soup, but during this period Brian Bowers made a further search of the same 
locality in which he found the eccentric engines and pulled out a row of coils made 
by Wheatstone which, although there was no secondary, could only have been used 
as the primary of a linear motor (figure 1.12).

16
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.12 The first linear motor of all time, built by Wheatstone between 1841 
and 1845
Invention, for me, is not mere observation of a phenomenon. Although it is 
possible that a schoolboy of 1820 had pulled a small iron rod along a thin table by 
means of a magnet underneath the table, such an arrangement was not proposed for 
direct application to a practical system until 1844 (see chapter 3) and this is there­
fore the proper date to record the system as having been invented. The true inventor 
is a man of vision, not the man who, like a child on its way home from school, sees 
a diamond, picks it up because it shines, loses it on the way home and never knows 
what it was worth. What is interesting is that the linear system using electromagnets 
—that is, a true electric motor—preceded by three years the more obvious system 
using permanent magnets (which is properly described as a ‘clutch’).
To classify Wheatstone’s eccentric machines, his first was a type (3), his second, 
shown in figure 1.13, a type (6) and, as just described, his third a type (2). I can 
only comment that in the light of all this work it took my co-workers and me a 
disgracefully long time to achieve such flexibility in thinking in three dimensions, 
as is described in chapter 9 on the ‘Second Age of Topology’. Wheatstone’s third 
eccentric machine is shown in figure 1.14.

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
17
Figure 1.13 Wheatstone’s second eccentric engine (courtesy of Trustees of the 
Science Museum)
Figure 1.14 Wheatstone’s ‘rolling plate’ eccentric engine (courtesy of Trustees of 
the Science Museum)

18
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
arranged transversely
Figure 1.15 Layout of Froment’s electromotor, 1845
Figure 1.16 Apps’ second machine (perhaps an electromagnet version of Froment’s 
engine) (courtesy of Trustees of the Science Museum)

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
19
Bowers points out that this third machine of Wheatstone bears a remarkable 
similarity to an unusual design of steam engine developed by E. and J. Dakeyne 
and patented in 1830.
Perhaps the next significant machine was due to Froment in 1845. Using a 
similar layout to Taylor’s machine for the stator, the rotor was also composed of 
steel bars of which over 50 per cent were in use at all times. Froment’s machine 
layout is shown in figure 1.15 and is clearly a type (6).
In addition to Froment’s ‘electromotor’ which resides in the South Kensington 
Science Museum there are two machines, due to Apps, whose dates are difficult to 
trace but which are certainly later than 1866 and therefore a long time after 
Froment. The first is simply a Pixii machine with the permanent magnet replaced 
by an electromagnet and this machine could lay claim to be the first electromagnet­
electromagnet system. Apps’ second machine (figure 1.16) is an electromagnet 
version of Froment’s electromotor and this alone suggests that Apps made it after 
1845, at the earliest.
If Wheatstone’s ‘unrolled’ eccentric rotor motor was the first invention in linear 
motors, the second was undoubtedly a machine patented in 1852. The inventor’s 
name will no doubt come as a surprise for it was William Henry Fox Talbot, better 
known for his pioneering work in photography. Not only was he the first man to 
take a paper photograph (1835) but the first man to make a negative and use it for 
printing. There is no doubt that from time to time Nature produces a ‘superman’ 
capable of switching his fertile brain from one subject to another, so apparently 
remote as to stagger the mind of even the better-than-average scientist.
The description of Fox Talbot’s linear motor in his patent of 1852 reads: “This 
Invention is a new kind of electro-magnetic machine. A heavy cylinder is made to 
roll upon a long but narrow metallic table or plate, close beneath which a long row 
of horse-shoe electro-magnets is placed. These magnets stand vertically with their 
poles uppermost, so that as the cylinder rolls along the plate, it unites the two poles 
of each magnet consecutively. If the magnets are placed close enough together and 
on a level with each other, their summits will form a sufficiently firm surface for 
the purpose required. The machine is so contrived that the cylinder is always 
attracted forwards till it reaches the end of the row of magnets; the action is then 
reversed, and it returns in the opposite direction till it reaches the other end, and so 
on. The whole distance traversed by the moving cylinder makes one stroke of the 
engine. The cylinder communicates its force and motion to the rest of the machinery, 
by its axis being attached to a crank and fly wheel. [Note still the insistence that 
dynamo-electric machines are ‘engines’ that make ‘strokes’ which are converted to 
rotary motion by cranks.] The motion of the cylinder itself sets in action the con­
trivance (sometimes called a commutator, sometimes a rheotome), which magne­
tises the magnets that are before the cylinder, and unmagnetises those behind it.”
For a man of Fox Talbot’s imagination the building of a linear motor was clearly 
a sideline, and I am sure that had he given this topic the attention he gave to photo­
graphy, it is likely that fewer than 45 years would have elapsed before anything like 
his linear motor was given an application.

20
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
It is also very important to record at this point that a row of electromagnets 
which are switched on in a sequence (only one or two at a time being energised) in 
order to propel a single and small piece of steel, by reluctance change, does in fact 
produce a dominant travelling field component moving in the opposite direction 
to the sequence of coil switching. This field is capable of propelling a secondary, 
consisting of a simple sheet of conductor in the reverse direction. A complete 
explanation of this phenomenon in terms of conventional concepts is given by 
Laithwaite (1967).
By 1853, electromagnetic machines had not made any real impact on industry 
and the thought was still being pursued that to generate rotation per se from 
magnets was basically wrong. Electric ‘engines’ should be designed like steam 
engines with pistons, cranks being used to convert what was essentially linear 
motion into rotation. Allan’s Electromagnetic Engine of 1853 (figure 1.17) har-
Figure 1.17 Allan’s magnetic piston engine (courtesy of Trustees of the Science 
Museum)

INTRODUCTION-THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
21
nessed the attractive force between an electromagnet and a steel block; but realising 
that magnets could only exert a really effective pull over about -J- inch, he put four 
coils and keepers in tandem, switching on each magnet at the appropriate time so 
that coil (1) lifted not only its own keeper but those of coils (2), (3) and (4), after 
which coil (2) was energised and lifted armatures (2), (3) and (4), and coil (3) then 
lifted (3) and (4), so that when coil (4) had ‘fired’ the total lift transmitted to the 
crankshaft was about 1 inch. With four such stacks phased at 90° to each other, his 
four-stroke engine used ‘magnetic’ forces quite effectively.
He was not to know, of course, that because he had used purely ‘magnetic’ 
forces, his machines could never be successful in large sizes. However, Allan was not 
by any means the last inventor to try to use the very ‘promising’ B2 compressive 
forces of magnetism as opposed to the weaker BJ shearing forces of electromag­
netism, and the pronouncements of Boucherot (1908) on this subject are evidence 
of the continuing study of this apparently frustrating feature of the Laws of Nature, 
for creatures of the size of men! Allan’s machine could, quite properly, however, be 
described as an early ‘linear’ motor.
It is interesting also that Allan’s engine, which undoubtedly ‘looked like an 
engine’, was preceded by both Fox Talbot’s and Wheatstone’s linear machines, 
which looked much less like mechanical engines and which effectively used a 
linear-to-rotary device the opposite way round—that is, to convert rotary motion, 
by rolling friction, into linear traverse.
1.10 Steps forward and backward
About 1857 Professor Holmes’ ‘Magneto-Electric’ machine used a multiplicity of 
type (5) machines (type (5a)). One such machine was assessed and approved by 
Faraday himself. In a later version (1871) Holmes used six discs and seven rows of 
horseshoe magnets. Each row consisted of eight horseshoes and the whole machine 
therefore carried 56 horseshoes of such a size that the overall diameter was over 
6 feet and the length 7 feet. From such a machine which is now seen to have 
inherited the worst features of types (3) and (5) an output of less than 2 kW was 
obtained. Nevertheless it was a milestone in its own way for it was largely respon­
sible for the introduction of arc lamps in lighthouses and was used for Souter Point 
lighthouse for many years (see figure 1.18).
Overlapping the ‘lighthouse era’ and following it there was a period of concen­
tration on electric circuits and in 1856 Siemens wound a rotor like the shuttle in a 
loom, a cross-section of which is shown in figure 1.19. These shuttle armatures were 
to survive even to the present time (in very small machines) but did not lend them­
selves readily to subdivision for the purpose of heat distribution. They represent, in 
one sense, the ‘opposite end of the scale’ from Faraday’s disc in which infinitesimal 
subdivision of rotor conductor obtained. Large modern machines with commutators 
find an optimum arrangement between these extremities. The first recorded use of 
this type of rotor which is perhaps the first ‘slotted rotor’ is that it was incorporated 
in a dynamo by Ladd in 1856 which had a permanent horseshoe magnet stator.

22
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 1.18 The Souter Point Lighthouse generator installed in 1871 (courtesy of 
Trustees of the Science Museum)
Figure 1.19 Siemens’ shuttle rotor, 1856, in cross-section

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
23
Figure 1.20 Pacinotti’s ring-wound armature, 1860
A new concept of electric windings for rotors was presented by Pacinotti in 
1860. His ring-wound armature shown in figure 1.20 made possible semi-infinite 
distribution of rotor current with its inherent uniform spreading of rotor heat. 
This type of rotor was also to find much favour, even to the present day. It is 
surprising that Faraday’s induction experiments of the 1820s in which he used 
precisely this type of construction did not warrant a second look until 1860.
In 1870 a Belgian named Gramme produced a machine using the ring winding 
for the rotor and somehow his name, rather than Pacinotti’s became associated with 
these ring windings. While not fundamentally different from the later ‘surface’ or 
‘drum’ windings so far as the electromagnetic action on the working surface is con­
cerned, their linear equivalents have a profound topological difference from surface 
windings. In the rotary machine, all return or ‘non-useful’ portions of the windings 
(the term ‘non-useful’ being often misleading, for it insists that an e.m.f. is induced 
in one part of a circuit and not in another, and this concept can at times prove to 
be a very false friend) are bunched together in the bore of the rotor and, since 
‘what goes in must come ouf, the net current in the bore of an a.c. rotor of this 
type is zero. In linear machines, the return parts of a ‘Gramme-ring’ winding are not 
bunched and hence give rise to high leakage reactances. Incidentally Gramme’s 
machine had its rotor axis turned through 90° from the layout shown in type (3aa) 
so that the shaft lay in the plane of the diagram.
In 1867 Wilde revived Stbhrer’s type (2) by using a double-sided magnet system, 
type (2b), and a rotor which consisted of a co-axial set of coils with iron cores. In 
the same year Dickenson, no doubt trying to avoid the very large diameter, short 
length machines which almost inevitably resulted from the use of a multi-pole 
type (3), reduced the number of poles to two and extended his horseshoe electro­
magnet to that of type (3a). These machines were usually mounted with the back 
of the horseshoe horizontal and field windings on the side limbs (this last feature 
having the effect of reducing leakage). If the rotor was above the field coils, the 
machine was known as an ‘over’ type, or if the rotor was below, an ‘under’ type. 
Siemens used a horizontal (3a) type but fed the working surface magnetically from 

24
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
both sides, as in type (3aa). Also in 1867, Ladd used the flux from a type (3a) 
twice, having twin armatures as in type (3ab), the one providing the excitation for 
the other.
The large diameter feature of type (3) also seems to have inspired the arrange­
ment of type (4) with multiple magnets ‘folded over’ to make the overall diameter 
little more than that of the rotor. The latter however was still of short axial length. 
A Gramme-ring armature version of this type was produced in France in 1881 (see 
figure 1.21). At this time there was a strong belief in the potency of‘magnetic 
moment’—that is, length of magnet multiplied by pole strength—and the fashionable 
philosophy was to take the line that what was lacking in pole strength (the machine 
world was still waiting for the metallurgist to give it a better ferromagnetic material) 
could be compensated by use of long magnets. Field winding cores over four feet 
long were not uncommon and it is on record in the Journal IEE (1922) that it was a 
good idea to have long poles “to give the flux a good run at the airgap”!
1878 is another landmark in that the Brush dynamo, using a type (2b) with 
bobbin coils like those of a Wilde alternator, removed the iron cores from the rotor 
coils and, for the first time, used laminated iron in the stator part of the magnetic 
circuit. It is recorded as an almost casual comment that: “In larger machines the
Figure 1.21 A permanent magnet stator system in which the magnet system was 
not radial and co-planar {courtesy of Trustees of the Science Museum)

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
25
armature
*
 was laminated, an improvement which increased the output by 50%.” 
What publicity would be made today of a commercial machine with an output of 
1.5 times its predecessor?
*The word ‘armature’ has been used throughout the history of machines to indicate stator, 
rotor, primary or secondary almost at random. The word is therefore avoided as much as 
possible in this history, so as not to confuse; but in this case, since the machine was a generator, 
the stator is clearly the armature, for the rotor contained no steel.
Siemens, in 1880 made a type (2b) using a Wilde stator and Gramme-ring rotor 
with steel core. The first age of topology was now virtually at its height; many of 
the 72 possible topological arrangements listed earlier with reference to figures 1.6 
to 1.8 became real pieces of hardware rather than merely ideas. For example, a 
dynamo by Pilsen and Joel in 1885 was employed to light Bethnal Green museum— 
a type (2b) machine, the rotor being iron-cored and Gramme-ring wound, and 
therefore differing from the Brush, Gramme and Ferranti machines.
One has the impression on reading the literature of the period that it was all 
being done ‘for fun’ and in the spirit of ‘mine’s better than thine’—of friendly 
rivalry and infinite fascination. Pioneers of what was to become one of the most 
universal businesses of the modern world, they were as yet unhindered by the need 
to make their machines ‘fit the system’ for there was no system fixing the voltage 
or frequency (if a.c.) with which a machine design must comply. They were making 
their own rules and jargon as they went along. Much of design technique was 
empirical, pure technology rather than anything mathematically inspired.
I feel entitled to include, by way of illustration of the previous paragraph, a few 
quotations from the lEE’s Proceedings at Commemoration Meetings (Journal IEE, 
1922).
My first extract was related by Crompton and refers to Kapp:
“Having seized on this I went back to my own designer (Kapp) and told him we 
must cut down the air-gap. “Oh,” he said, “you will diminish the space needed to 
get the necessary number of turns on the armature, and you will not get the electro­
motive force you require.” I urged that if we made our magnets and our armature 
cores of largely increased cross-section we should get such an improved magnetic 
field that one layer of winding on the armature would give us the E.M.F. we required. 
But Kapp would have none of it. Luckily, Kapp’s holiday was then due and during 
his absence I made a dynamo with huge field magnets of Swedish iron, with a huge 
armature core-ring of soft-iron plates pushed on to spiders and with only one layer 
of armature winding, so that the air-gap on which so much depended was reduced 
in this machine to a little over inch on each side, the double air-gap being thus 
only inch. This machine was finished and on the bed-plate when Kapp returned. 
When the test commenced, owing to the fact that the large mass of iron had but 
little residual magnetism the magnetic field took some time to build up, so that at 
first there was only a very small E.M.F. in the circuit. Kapp said quite triumphantly, 
“I told you so, you have wasted your money; you have nobody but yourself to 
thank.” But even as he spoke the field began to build up and the E.M.F. mounted 

26
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
rapidly, the testing resistance became red hot and the belt came off; but the 
modern dynamo was born. I only knew later from what Hopkinson himself told me 
and from what Wordingham will tell those present here, that Hopkinson had been 
working on identically the same lines as I had, neither of us knowing what the other 
was doing. I showed a dynamo of the new form at the Inventions Exhibition and 
the judges gave me a Gold Medal.”
The second quotation is from a speech by Sir Oliver Lodge:
“The electrified rail was about one foot off the ground, on little posts by the side of 
the railway, and the railway ran by the side of the road. Of course, this rail some­
times went past gates and once it killed a cow. I forget the voltage, but quite a nice, 
harmless shock could be got from it. There was nothing to prevent people from 
touching the live rail, and FitzGerald and I amused ourselves by taking these 
shocks. Lord Kelvin, however, could not feel them at all. He asked us what we were 
jumping about for. We said, “You try it.” He tried it, gravely pressing both hands 
on the rail. After a pause he remaked, “I think I do feel something.” I suppose his 
skin was so dry that a moderate number of volts had no effect on him. It reminded 
me of the old charwoman in ‘Three Men in a Boat’. Many will remember the incident 
about a cheese, which was so strong that it made the cab-horse gallop when they 
were taking it away to bury it, and the charwoman said yes, she did notice a some­
thing.”
Finally, this gem from Mr G. W. Partridge:
“To give another example of accidents; at one time an arc of 10 feet length was 
started up between the terminals of a transformer and the iron roof of the building. 
One of our men threw his hat at the arc and thus put it out.”
1.11 Shape becomes an end in itself
One of the great men of his time was Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti. An alternator 
which he designed with A. Thomson in 1882 was the prototype of the 1000 kVA 
alternator for the Deptford scheme built in 1889. This was a type (2b) with steel in 
the rotor. The rotor coils consisted of a single continuous ribbon of insulated 
copper. The machine generated at a frequency of 80 Hz.
In 1885 an arc-lighting dynamo by Thomson and Houston introduced a new 
dimension to large machine design, literally—it was the third dimension (axial), for 
the rotor of their machine was spherical. Not since Froment’s machine of 1845 had 
this dimension been exploited and not until 1957 (see Williams et al., 1959) was it 
to be so again. The strange thing about this design however, is that it is difficult to 
see what benefit was derived from the spherical shape, except that of a satisfaction 
in elegance in that the sphere was the ‘perfect’ shape for a solid body—topology for 
its own sake perhaps? The machine now in the Science Museum, South Kensington, 
has been cut away to show the construction (figure 1.22).

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
27
Figure 1.22 The spherical Thomson-Houston dynamo of 1885. Part of the stator 
has been cut away to reveal the shape of poles and rotor (courtesy of Trustees of 
the Science Museum)
1.12 1888—the biggest milestone since 1831
A Crompton generator of 1888 marked the end of the Gramme-ring wound machines, 
its rotor being in effect a half-way stage between ring and drum windings, but this 
year was far more notable for the achievement of Nikola Tesla, who constructed his 
first successful induction machine. Tesla was different from the rest. While others 
enjoyed their inventing and the friendly rivalry which went with it, Tesla was in 
deadly earnest. He neither married nor had friends, declaring both to detract from 
a man’s performance. He did however enjoy a very special mental relationship with 
his mother and it is said that they practised the art of conversation by telepathy 
very successfully. At times he was both poverty stricken and despondent about his 
ideas. He worked as a road digger for a time. At one stage he deduced that a rotating 
secondary could only produce a perfect rotating field (that is, circular not elliptic) 
when rotating in exact synchronism, by which time there was no torque developed, 
by definition, so he felt it impossible that induction motors could ever be useful. 
(We know now that sizable torques are developed by the crudest of elliptic fields.) 
Tesla was apparently unaware that in 1879 Professor Walter Baily had pro­
pounded an experiment in which four electromagnets were arranged at 90° intervals 
below a conducting disc which was free to rotate. Although a.c. was not used, the 
electromagnets were fed from a battery via a hand-operated rotary switch and 
undoubtedly produced a two-phase rotating magnetic field. The device was first 
demonstrated at a meeting of the Physical Society in London on 28 June 1879.

28
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
When asked about its use by one of the audience, Baily replied that he regarded it 
only as a scientific toy. Tesla’s intention was always that a brushless machine 
should dominate the world of electric drives as indeed it does, and nowhere less 
than in the most recent developments in high-speed ground transport where the 
vehicles are required to free themselves entirely from contact with the ground 
(chapter 7).
The importance of Tesla’s invention can be judged by the fact that the 
Crompton-Brunton alternator being developed in 1890 was seen to be capable only 
of generating single-phase current and was therefore abandoned because Tesla’s 
later induction motors of 1889 required three-phase current. The first three-phase 
power transmission was demonstrated between Laufen and Frankfurt in 1891 when 
Oscar von Miller transmitted 240 kW at 15 kV over 110 miles. The first three-phase 
public supply was from the Wood Lane generating station in West London, which 
began operating in October 1900.
By this time, type (3) topology had been firmly established, even for magnetic 
machines, and a Pyke-Harris reluctance alternator of 1892 was undoubtedly the 
forerunner of the aircraft alternators of 1950 (figure 1.23). The first half of the 
twentieth century was to see the abandonment of long poles, the use of axially 
longer machines and a most ingenious array of machine windings. But the mag­
netic circuit was to remain unchanged, co-planar, short, fat, laminated (a.c.) and 
using as small an airgap as economics allowed, especially in the case of the now 
all-dominant induction motors. (It has been estimated that of the total horsepower 
of all electric drives in the world today, over 95 per cent is supplied by induction
annulus of ferromagnetic 
bars which rotate with 
the driving shaft \
ring of output coils
^cylindrical array of fixed 
electromagnets matching 
the output coil array
Figure 1.23 Pyke-Harris reluctance alternator schematic, 1892 

INTRODUCTION—THE FIRST AGE OF TOPOLOGY
29
motors.) The first age of topology had ended. Fashion in engineering turned to 
‘squeezing the last drop out of the lemon’ in terms of efficiency, and in the new 
fashion of increased power/weight ratio. This last was the concern of metallurgists 
(who invented better steel alloys), chemists (who developed better insulating 
materials—notably varnishes) and mechanical engineers skilled in fluid flow (who 
developed vastly superior cooling systems). The electrical engineer, by comparison, 
stood aside and watched.
1.13 References
Boucherot, P. (1908), ‘Appareils et machines a courant et mouvement alternatifs’, 
Bulletin de la Societe Internationale des Electriciens, Vol. 8, pp. 731-755
Bowers, B. (1972), ‘The eccentric electromagnetic engine—a chapter from the very 
early history of the electric motor’, Electronics and Power, Vol. 18, pp. 269-272
Clark, Sir Kenneth (1969), Civilisation—A Personal View (British Broadcasting 
Corporation and John Murray).
Journal IEE (1922), ‘Proceedings at the meetings held in commemoration of the 
first ordinary meeting of the IEE in 1872’, Vol. 60, No. 308, pp. 377-500
Laithwaite, E. R. (1966), Induction Machines for Special Purposes (Newnes) 
Laithwaite, E. R. (1967), ‘The moving window motor’, Electrical Review, Vol. 181, 
pp.278-279
Laithwaite, E. R. (1971), Linear Electric Motors (Mills and Boon)
Lenihan, J. M. A. (1969), ‘The triumph of technology’, The Philosophical Journal, 
Vol. 6,No. l,pp. 12-18
The Children ’s Encyclopaedia (1922), Vol. I, p. 47 (Amalgamated Press)
The Electrician (1889), ‘The Birmingham Exhibition—Woolrich’s magneto-plating 
machine’, Vol. 23, p. 548
Wheatstone, C. (1841), British Patent No. 9022
Williams, F. C., Laithwaite, E. R. and Eastham, J. F. (1959), ‘Development and 
design of spherical induction motors’,TVoc. IEE, Vol. 106A, No. 30, pp. 471-484

Appendix: Chronological order of rotating machine inventions
to 
o
Date
Inventor and invention
Basic topology 
(figures 1.6 to 1.8)
Form of secondary
1831
Faraday’s disc dynamo
1
Copper disc
1831
Pixii’s a.c. generator
2a
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils and yoke
1832
Sturgeon’s electromagnetic engine (motor)
4a
Bars of steel (reluctance motor)
1840
Taylor’s eccentric rotor motor
3
Steel ‘keepers’
1841
Wheatstone’s eccentric rotor motors (i)
3
Steel cylinder 'j
(ii)
6
Steel cylinder > all reluctance motors
(iii)
2
Steel disc 
J
1844
Woolrich’s electro-plating generator
1
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils and yoke
1845
Froment electromotor
6
Iron-cored, radially-wound coils and yoke
9
(Apps (i)
2a
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils and yoke
|Apps (ii)
6
Iron-cored, radially-wound coils and yoke
1846
Stohrer
2
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils and yoke
1853
Allan’s magnetic ‘piston engine’
Linear with cranks
Iron keepers
1856
Holmes’ lighthouse generator
5a
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils
1856
Ladd’s dynamo
3a
Shuttle type armature (first slotted rotor)
1860
Pacinotti’s dynamo
3a
‘Ring-wound’ armature
1867
Wilde alternator
2b
Iron-cored, axially-wound coils
1867
Dickenson ‘over’ and ‘under’ types
3a
Gramme-ring, iron-cored
1867
Ladd double armature dynamo
3ab
Shuttle type, iron-cored
1870
Gramme’s machine
3aa
Ring-wound rotor but with shaft in plane of
magnetic circuit
1878
Brush dynamo, laminated stator
2b
Air-cored, axially-wound coils
1880
Siemens double-sided dynamo
3aa
Surface-wound, iron-cored
1881
de Meritens, Paris dynamo
4
Gramme-ring, iron-cored
1882
Ferranti alternator
2b
Air-cored, strip-wound, axial coils
1885
Pilsen and Joel’s dynamo
2b
Iron-cored, Gramme-ring
1885
Thomson and Houston arc-lighting dynamo
Spherical
Surface-wound rotor, iron-cored
1888
Crompton generator
3aa
Half Gramme-ring, half drum
1888
Tesla
3
Short-circuited, wound rotor, iron-cored
1890
Crompton-Brunton alternator
3a
Air-cored, strip-wound, axially-mounted coils
1892
Pyke-Harris reluctance alternator
3b
Salient steel blocks
1900
Parsons alternator
3
Drum-wound with three slip rings
(the first commercial three-phase generator)
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS

2 The early inventors and their 
patents
2.1 The pre-induction motor period
Linear motion is common in Nature and in the motions of early steam, gas and 
other internal combustion engines. In the mechanical devices the ‘natural’ linear 
motion is converted to rotation by other mechanical means. The history of linear 
electrical machines is concerned with the influence of such reciprocating machines 
only to the same extent as that to which rotary electric motors left their mark, as 
discussed in chapter 1.
Clearly there can be no electromagnetic machines before Faraday’s discovery of 
the laws of induction in 1831. To this extent it is surprising that the earliest linear 
electric motor emerged as early as 1838, for it then took over a century for any 
linear machine to make a substantial commercial profit. In another sense however, 
it is perhaps not so surprising that linear motors were tried so early, for their direct 
ancestors were beam engines and the like with pistons and cylinders.
A historian of the 1920s (although I doubt very much whether he ever saw the 
introduction to his paper as a potted history of 80 years of linear motor develop­
ment) was undoubtedly P. Trombetta. His paper to the Spring Convention of the 
American Institution of Electrical Engineers held in Chicago in 1922 is one of my 
favourite references on the subjects of engineering in general and linear motors in 
particular (Trombetta, 1922). He begins his historical section thus:
“The writer invented the electric hammer early in 1915 when still at school. After 
coming out of school the war was in full swing and it was thought inadvisable to 
start developments of any kind.” (How many good ideas are lost because their 
originator was too young to have the confidence to proceed?) He continues: “. . . 
the earliest attempts to make electric motors were mainly along the lines of imi­
tating the reciprocating steam engine and the first patent for a reciprocating motor 
to be applied to a pump was issued in 1852.” This patent contains the drawing 
reproduced in figure 2.1.
Tomlinson’s Cyclopaedia of Useful Arts, first published c. 1852, however, des­
cribes earlier reciprocating electromagnet-driven engines, figs 838 and 839 of that 
work being reproduced in figure 2.2 (Tomlinson, 1852-54). Of this machine it is
31

32
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 2.1 The first patented reciprocating motor applied to a pump (1852)
written: “By means of an engine on this principle, Professor Jacobi
*,
 of St. 
Petersburg, in 1838 and 1839, succeeded in propelling a boat upon the Neva at 
the rate of four miles an hour. This boat was 28 feet long, about 7 feet wide, and 
drew nearly 3 feet of water. It contained 10 persons. The engine was worked by a 
voltaic battery of 64 pairs of plates.” Later it is said, “The most powerful engine of 
this kind yet made has been equal to one horse.” (Not in every respect, one hopes!)
The same volume goes on to mention a Mr. Llewelyn who, in 1848 “exhibited to 
the members of the British Association a similar experiment on a lake at his resi­
dence near Swansea.” It also records that “In 1842 Mr. Davidson constructed an 
electro-magnetic engine, which was tried on the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway.” 
Tomlinson’s Cyclopaedia concludes:
“Various forms of electromagnetic machines have been invented by Wheatstone, 
Talbot, Hearder, Hjorth and others, but it is not likely that such machines will 
meet with much encouragement, while coal, the food of the steam engine, is 
abundant.”
The last word on the replacement of steam engine cylinders by electromagnets 
must surely rest with Trombetta, however, for he wrote without any bitterness, I 
feel sure: “The idea of plunger reciprocating motors prevails until the present time 
and it would be useless to recount here the innumerable patents that have been 
issued on the subject. It may be said however, that the idea remains unchanged 
and the only thing that changes is the inventor.”
In the pre-induction period, dominated as it was by pistons and cylinders, it was 
natural that the ‘electromagnetic engines’ (which we now recognise as reluctance
*Jacobi is perhaps better known for the mark he left on the world of mathematics, the ‘Jaco­
bian matrix’ consisting of partial derivatives of two functions with respect to two other func­
tions symmetrically arranged in a 2 X 2 matrix.

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
33
VOL. I,
Figure 2.2 An early reciprocating electromagnet engine from Tomlinson’s Cyclo­
paedia of Useful Arts
motors of a crude kind—in modern reluctance motor parlance they had but a single 
‘tooth’) should retain piston-in-cylinder construction. They were little more than 
electromagnets with holes through their centres so that the iron armatures (or 
‘pistons’, if you prefer) could be embraced completely by the primary coil and thus 
form a reasonably good magnetic circuit without the use of primary iron.
Nowadays, with our wide variety in electric motors, it is necessary to resort to 
the biologists’ solution to a complexity and classify them. Thus the earliest types of 
linear motor are not to be seen as the linear equivalent of a rotating machine which 
has been split along a radial plane and unrolled, the change from (a) to (b) in figure 
2.3, for this exercise produces the now almost standard linear motor which is flat. 
The re-rolling of the flat structure about a perpendicular axis as in (c) produces a 
class of linear motors which have had cylindrical symmetry restored but which pro­
duce their travelling fields and secondary motion axially, as it were ‘down the 
barrel’ of an electromagnetic gun. Such machines have now been classified as 
‘Tubular Motors’, but let this not detract from the fact that although the earliest 
linear motors undoubtedly fall into such a class, they were inventions in their own 
right, based only on their true ancestors, the piston and cylinder.
When I published my first paper on linear motors in 1957 I found myself unable, 
for a time, to decide on whether to call the linear equivalent of the rotor of a 
rotating machine a ‘secondary member’, thereby effectively succumbing to the 
patent agent’s necessarily (to avoid ambiguity) cumbersome language, or whether

34
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
Figure 2.3 Topological developments of the two basic linear motors from a 
rotating machine
to retain the word ‘rotor’ on the grounds that no confusion could possibly arise 
when only linear motion was involved. I was flattered that other writers, in the 
main, followed my example and new words such as Tinor’ are to be found only in 
one or two remote points in the literature. But with the moving primary motor 
becoming a natural choice for high-speed transport applications and the invention 
of hybrid ‘rack and pinion’ motors in which one member was linear and the other 
rotary (I^aithwaite and Hardy, 1970), a return to the terminology ‘primary’ and 
‘secondary’ was inevitable. Subsequent chapters and the papers referred to therein 
will be seen to reflect these trends.
2.2 A.c. reciprocating motors
Trombetta describes a linear asynchronous polyphase induction motor for a rock 
drill, appearing in a patent of August 1901 issued to R. D. Mershon. This patent 
states that earlier linear motors have been proposed in which reversal was effected 
by means of a switch connected to the generator. Such systems are condemned 
by the inventor as being able to start only if the natural period of the moving part 
is related to the generator speed, and Mershon prefers instead to have the switch 
operated by the rotor. This patent puts the date of the first linear induction motor 
at least prior to 1901.
Trombetta goes on to describe a patent issued to P. Centener in 1905 , in which: 
“each stator is fed with two separate sources of alternating current of different 
frequencies and in this way the motion of the field is reversed at the beats occurring 
in the two frequencies, so the moving part would reverse its motion without the 
necessity of reversing the current by means of contactors or switches.” This patent 
is undoubtedly the forerunner of the West and Jayawant Oscillator described later. 
In typical style, Trombetta concludes on this aspect of the subject: “The success of 
these inventions in rectilinear motors is apparent from the fact that none of them 
are at the present time on the market.”
His philosophy on the subject of special-purpose motors could well serve as a 
model to certain sections of heavy industry in the 1980s, for he wrote: “It may be 
said further that in the early stages of electrical development, the total demand for 
motors was very small and of this total demand, the percentage which required an 
ordinary standard motor was far greater than that which required a special straight­

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
35
line motor, so that it was altogether out of the question for any manufacturer to 
undertake the development of as many special motors as there were special cases to 
be taken care of. At the present stage of electrical industries, the conditions are 
precisely reversed in that there are now many special cases which require a much 
larger number of motors than was required for the total electrical industry in the 
earlier days of the art and certainly anybody who is acquainted with the industry 
will agree that many manufacturing enterprises are now existing, and in fact pros­
pering, in the manufacture of only one or two special appliances. It is for this 
reason that it is felt justifiable to state that the application of standard rotary 
motors to special cases has gone beyond its limits.” A man ahead of his time. Forty- 
four years were to elapse before the present author, then unaware of Trombetta’s 
philosophy, produced a book devoted almost exclusively to linear machines under 
the title Induction Machines for Special Purposes. I hasten to add that this is not 
the reason for Trombetta being one of my favourite authors!
Between 1850 and 1888, nothing strikingly significant was invented in the way 
of linear motors. There was a proposal to use one in a sewing machine, there were 
two patents on a solenoid rock drill in 1880 and a patent by Van Depoele in 1885 
in which he carried the exciting winding of a d.c. solenoid on the moving part, and 
this last idea seems to have created some excitement at the time. It was described 
by Trombetta as “a well-developed idea on straight-line motion”.
2.3 The start of the induction motor era
On March 6, 1891 Professor J. A. Fleming delivered a most important Discourse at 
the Royal Institution which was subsequently published as a paper in The Elec­
trician (Fleming, 1891). In this he introduced subjects which were to have a major 
influence on research into high-speed vehicles 80 years later and this aspect of it 
properly belongs in the chapter on that subject. The fact is that his apparatus con­
sisted of objects of great curiosity at the time. One piece in particular has aroused 
many an undergraduate from slumber in an otherwise unillustrated lecture, which 
assures it of a place in this chapter also. I refer, of course, to the famous ‘jumping 
ring’ experiment, the basic tubular motor, in which a conducting ring is thrown off 
the extended straight core of an a.c. magnet on switching on. Among other things 
the jumping ring represents the first tubular induction motor. Fleming’s lecture was 
a landmark in the study of induction, despite his modest and generous recognition 
of the work of others, declaring the whole to be based on the work of Ampere and 
attributing the invention of the jumping ring, electromagnetic levitation and that 
most important phenomenon of the shaded pole effect to Elihu Thomson, who was 
clearly as great a hero and inspiration for Fleming as Faraday is for me.
There were many great principles and fundamentals disclosed in novel and 
simple ways in this Discourse, which indicated the depth to which Fleming appre­
ciated the subject of induction. Thus, one reads such sentences as: “The secondary 
coil is, in fact, an electromagnetic eye which can see through an inch of wood, but 
to which a sheet of zinc is semi-transparent, and a thick sheet of copper quite 
opaque.”

36
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
The language in which people of those days wrote their findings was never dull. 
Would that many of our modern authors could drop their scientifically correct 
‘suits of impenetrable armour’ if only for a few sentences in a paper and say such 
comparable things as Fleming’s “All good conducting rings will execute this gym­
nastic feat, and rings of copper and aluminium are found to be the most nimble 
of all.” His use of analogue was free-flowing and brilliant. A resilient mechanical 
model to illustrate the nature of self-inductance to a not entirely scientific audience 
—“If rings of different metal and equal size are placed on a tube, they float at dif­
ferent levels like various specific-gravity beads in a liquid”—and the following 
quotation are both examples of this: “There is a symmetry in the relations of 
magneto-motive force and the magnetic induction and electromotive force and 
electric current, and we can, as Faraday pointed out long ago, make the sym­
metry complete, if we suppose the two interlinked magnetic and electric circuits 
immersed in an imperfectly conducting medium.” Why, I might reasonably ask, 
was I not taught these easy-to-appreciate analogues and duals? In what I regard as 
my most important paper ‘The goodness of a machine’ (Laithwaite, 1965) I was re­
creating the same concept of that circuital interconnectedness which is surely the 
very bedrock of machine studies and was first put together in this paper by Fleming, 
which was unknown to me until after I had written my ‘goodness’ paper. Fleming’s 
Discourse should be compulsory reading for all undergraduates in electrical engin­
eering, for it appears to have been written especially for those who feel oppressed 
by the formal lectures to which they are subjected in the 1980s and which suggest 
both that ‘exciting research has all been done’ and that ‘electromagnetism is a dull 
subject anyway’.
Fleming declared of such students: “They are in a fertile field both for the 
investigator seeking to add to the sum total of existing knowledge, or to the inventor 
in search of applications in electrical technology for such acquired facts.”
2.4 Boucherot, Zehden and Birkeland
The first decade of the twentieth century brought its own ‘giants’ in electric motor 
development, one of whom was the Frenchman, P. Boucherot (1869-1943), the 
kind of engineer who could design a turbo-alternator this month and the turbine to 
drive it in the next. A great protagonist of linear motors, he declared his frustration 
at the fact that with the maximum values of magnetic induction (B) and current 
loading (J) being what they were at that period, the normal magnetic pull on a 
motor surface (B2/2ju0) N/m2 was of the order of 20-40 times the tangential thrust 
(BJ) N/m2 , yet only the latter was apparently usable in a machine with continuous 
rotary motion. Not to be entirely thwarted, he developed reciprocating machines in 
which he could utilise the magnetic (B2) forces, and converted this into rotary 
motion by ratchet. His largest and most nearly commercially acceptable machine is 
shown in figure 2.4. It is interesting to note the re-appearance of an improved 
machine (with transverse flux) of this type in the 1970s (Hesmondhalgh et al., 
1973).

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
37
Figure 2.4 Boucherot’s largest reciprocating ‘magnetic’ ratchet motor
Boucherot studied natural history in much the same way that several authors 
have done some 60 or more years later (Gamow and Harris, 1972; Laithwaite, 
1973). Of a multiplicity of miniaturised magnetic machines he declared the possi­
bility of making a conveyor system which operated “in the manner of a serpent” 
(its skin, that is).
Yet Boucherot is remembered in electrical machine development history mostly 
as the father of the double-cage rotor for induction machines, pioneering work 
which was later developed into the deep-bar rotor, the cast aluminium cage machines, 
in fact to the whole philosophy of direct, on-line-start induction motors. If for no 
other reason, the influence of this work on the design of the linear motors of the 
1970s entitles him to a place in the history of these machines. His enthusiasm for 
the electromagnetic production of straight-line motion directly ensures him such a 
place.
While Boucherot was an engineer and philosopher and his ideas undoubtedly 
were over half a century ahead of their time, Zehden, whose work was published 
over roughly the same period as that of Boucherot saw the use for the linear motor 
as immediate. Like his contemporary, he was aware of the frustrating magnetic pull, 
some 30 times the useful thrust, going to waste, but whereas Boucherot had tried to 
use it, Zehden saw it as a fundamental limitation to linear motor development and 
invented means to avoid it. His reasons were sound. If a 50 ton vehicle was to be 
accelerated at 0.1 g, 5 tons of forward thrust must be associated with about 150 
tons of downward magnetic pull—that is, the vehicle appears to ‘weigh’ 4 times its 
natural weight.

38
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Half a century later, the subject of magnetic pull still carried a high significance 
in design offices, for rotary machines are never perfect, and especially in respect of 
cylindrical symmetry. In a perfectly centred rotor the radial pull should be com­
pletely balanced all round the machine. In a practical machine, that which is not is 
known as Unbalanced Magnetic Pull (UMP) and even in the 1960s the mystic figures 
which were included in design office procedure were not well understood, as exem­
plified by a paper which came into my hands for refereeing and contained the 
formulae of several firms for this particular quantity. Such was the diversity of 
opinion between different firms that for specific running conditions two particular 
formulae gave values for the UMP in the ratio ten to one! Since these figures had a 
bearing on the shaft diameter, their calculation could not be dismissed as a trivial 
one.
Zehden may or may not have gone through the same mental processes as I did in 
the 1950s, but certainly the end-product was the same. Figure 2.5 illustrates the 
stages in my argument. Initially I called my machines ‘sheet-rotor motors’ but since 
in high-speed traction the secondary was anything but a ‘rotor’, the term was soon 
replaced internationally by the title ‘double-sided sandwich’ motors.
Zehden was undoubtedly the ‘father’ of this topology (Zehden, 1905) and his 
first patent (applied for in 1902) was to be a milestone in the history of the subject, 
even though he, like Boucherot and many others before him, right back through 
Leonardo da Vinci to Moses, were only to see the Promised Land from afar!
Almost coincident with Zehden’s patent on flat motors for rail traction came an 
even more ambitious series of five patents by Professor Kristian Birkeland (from 
September 16, 1901 to April 23, 1903), for they proposed to apply a d.c. linear 
reluctance motor as a noiseless gun. Today with our knowledge of the difference 
between electromagnetic machines and purely magnetic machines such as reluc­
tance motors, it is easy to condemn Birkeland’s work from its outset since it was an 
attempt to apply a magnetic machine to an application of the largest size (certainly 
in terms of power). Its inclusion here serves to emphasise further that the men of 
the 1900-1910 decade were certainly ‘thinking big’ in terms of linear motors. We 
may reflect on what a cornucopia they might have poured out had they had the 
advantages of modern materials and the results of changing ‘fashions’.
2.5 Bachelet and World War I
Wars, however bad they are, have a habit of stimulating humans to heights that 
otherwise would apparently have to wait for decades. One need only contemplate 
the products of World War II in respect of jet engines, radar (the beginnings of 
computer technology) and medical advances for illustrations of this statement. It is 
also my own experience that man’s compassion for his fellow man rises in at least 
as high a proportion as does his inhumanity to man during times of war. It is as if 
Good and Evil walked hand-in-hand.
At the start of World War I, a most ingenious engineer, Monsieur Bachelet, 
attempted to take the linear motor by the scruff of the neck and make the engin­
eering world notice it. He set up companies to exploit, in particular, the properties

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
39
conventional motor unrolled
\onnnnnonnnnonononnnonaonoooonnoonnonoonl
stage (1)
remove rotor conductors from slots, shorten rotor iron
stage (2)
merge rotor bars into a sheet
stage(3)
add a second primary winding to make a'double sided'motor
Figure 2.5 Stages in the development of a ‘sheet-rotor’ motor 
of the jumping ring, both as levitator and propulsion device. His goals lay in two 
apparently quite remote technologies—the weaving of cloth and the development of 
a levitated, high-speed railway. Readers who are familiar with my own efforts in 
these two fields may well ask whether my interest was indeed focussed by Bachelet’s 
work, but the plain fact is that I was already concentrating on these two subjects 
before I ever heard his name. Can it be that the linear electric motor is as ‘natural’ 
a choice in these respects as apparently is the wheel to civilisation?—I think not, so 
far as shuttles are concerned, for it is still an uphill battle for those who would 
commercialise the linear motor for textiles, but high-speed ground transport is 
another matter.

40 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Bachelet did all he could to publicise his developments. He set up public com­
panies with shareholders in both technologies. He was visited by important people 
of the day, as figures 3.4 to 3.7 in chapter 3 illustrate. It was clearly fashionable for 
the aristocracy to visit Emile Bachelet’s laboratory. Mr Churchill saw his experi­
ments. He was clearly well-known personally to Fleming. Technical journals referred 
to his work with excitement—The Engineer (1912), The Motor (1914), Junior 
Mechanics and Electricity (1914). The article in The Motor in particular reported 
on the transport side of the work and remarked that it was “causing some stir in 
scientific and railway circles in London.” It went on to say: “The inventor claims 
that extremely high speeds are possible with his apparatus, 300 m.p.h. being, in 
fact, talked of. The principles of this apparatus are well known to those who have 
studied electromagnetism and its effects.” Almost identical words have been used 
to describe my own efforts in the early 1960s, in fact, in relation to the latter state­
ment, one eminent retired Professor of electrical engineering wrote to the London 
Evening News “just to place on record the fact that Professor Laithwaite did not 
invent the linear motor.” This book must surely underline this statement adequately!
Typical headlines in a 1913 London newspaper read
MIRACLE OF SCIENCE
TRAIN WITHOUT RAILS
AT 300 MILES AN HOUR.
NO WHEELS.
SUSPENDED IN SPACE
BY ELECTRICITY.
EXPERTS ASTOUNDED.
LONDON TO BRIGHTON
IN 15 MINUTES.
The air train has arrived! . ..
History shows us that, at least in the mind of the imaginative popular journalist, 
there has been no advance whatever in over 50 years, for compare the above with 
theZWy Telegraph, 1 May 1968:
300 mph HOVERTRAIN IN
BRITAIN BY THE 1970s
British Rail disinterest.

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
41
In respect of high-speed transport, Bachelet was too far ahead of his time to be 
successful. He was for high-speed ground transport what Charles Babbage was for 
computers. His work deserves more than a cursory glance and therefore is treated 
more fully in chapters 3 and 7 as appropriate. It will suffice here to say that although 
his ideas on transport may have oeen stimulated by the patents of Zehden, he first 
conceived the idea of an object in free flight—levitated, guided and propelled by the 
mystic forces of electromagnetism which Faraday had revealed almost a century 
earlier.
Whether it was the war, or purely the economics of the day which brought an 
end to his activities I have been unable to discover.
2.6 Japolsky
There was a shortage of linear motor enthusiasts between the World Wars, apart 
from the textile men (chapter 3), and the work of Dr N. Japolsky is therefore of 
special merit, for like so many of the ‘greats’ he was concerned for the future and 
his predictions included examples both of great foresight and of ‘missing the big 
one’. Of his several papers, the classic is probably that of 1931 (Japolsky, 1931) 
in which he produced a number of new names to describe linear technology, none 
of which however, ‘stuck’. For example, he called the linear motor itself a ‘mag- 
netofuge’. The secondary (moving) part, corresponding to the rotor of a conven­
tional motor, he named the ‘runner’.
The applications he dismissed as impractical included that to rail traction. Quot­
ing Linev and Zelenay (but not Zehden or Bachelet) as having suggested the idea 
“at the beginning of the present century,” he went on: “The magnetofuges had to 
be fixed underneath the trains: the rails were supposed to play the part of fixed 
runners. The commercial application was handicapped by the necessity of having a 
considerable air-gap for practical purposes, hence too great a reluctance in the 
magnetic circuit.” But the big fish that really got away was when he considered 
the possibilities of high-speed transport. I can do no better than quote his paragraph 
on this topic verbatim.
“I suggested, in 1914, a traction on the same lines, but so arranged that the car 
should be suspended on the rail by the force of magnetic attraction without touch­
ing the rail. Special arrangements were suggested in order to stabilise this force. The 
speed might be very high, as there is no limitation due to the centrifugal force on 
the wheels. The calculation gave a quite favourable result, as to the possibility, and 
even the economic practicability, of such a traction. That, however, was before the 
development of aviation. Now, I think, the development of this idea has hardly any 
raison d’etre, as air traffic solves the problem much more easily.”
Alas, poor Japolsky, I knew him well! He was to die before oil began to influence 
world transport. ‘The irony of fate’ is an overworked expression I know, but how 
better is one to comment on the fact that if the system of the magnetically sus­

42
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
pended vehicle using a feedback amplifier (Japolsky’s ‘special arrangements’)— 
which was so vigorously developed in the 1970s in Japan, Germany and in the UK 
by British Rail—succeeds, it may be largely because of the failure of aircraft to meet 
the needs of the 21st century for short-haul internal flights. We have made nuclear 
submarines but we shall be a long time (if ever) before we make a nuclear aeroplane, 
for the submarine was forged as a weapon of war and aeroplanes are outdated as 
such. Aeroplanes however, have whetted our appetites for high-speed inter-city 
travel, and we will settle for nothing less in the way of inter-city speed when the 
last internal air flight is cancelled.
My suggestion above (in my Shakespearean mis-quote) that I knew Japolsky well 
is not quite true. But know him a little I did, for I was dining at the Savage Club in 
London as the guest of Fred Barwell when this small distinguished-looking man 
entered the dining room. Without explaining who he was, my host at once got up 
and brought over for introduction this elderly Russian with bright penetrating eyes. 
The year, I think, was 1964 and the topic of the moment was ‘Sputniks’. He 
opened the conversation by saying how interested he was “to see a young man like 
yourself taking up a subject where I left off in my young days.” Then his eyes 
brightened and pointing upwards he said quickly: “I think I know how they put 
their Sputniks in orbit.” “Really?” I queried. He replied indirectly: “In my student 
days in Russia I had a friend named-----*.  We worked together on linear motors. I
*1 regret I cannot produce the name, for it was complicated and I remember at the time making 
no effort to try to remember it!
know that when I left Russia he continued the work all the time until now. Last 
year he was elected a Fellow of the Soviet Academy of Science for this work, so I 
think I know how they put their Sputniks in orbit.” Considering that the first 
American space shot had yet to be made it was a plausible idea, for it was said that 
all the Russians’ vehicles had gone into identical orbits because they were launched 
up a steep hill and not vertically. History records, I think, that Japolsky’s specu­
lation found no support.
In his earlier years he had quite a number of ‘firsts’ to his name. For example, in 
making a forging hammer he accelerated the field by imposing a frequency/time 
programme on the stator coils. His 8 cwt forging hammer is shown in figure 2.6. He 
pointed out that: “If you take a powder containing magnetic ingredients, the latter 
will be carried out by the magnetofugal field.” This anticipated the ‘rack and 
pinion’ mechanism outlined in my paper of that title (Laithwaite and Hardy, 1970) 
and used, without being understood, in separating iron particles from slurry 
(McCarthy, 1922).
He was probably the first man to propel liquid metal (mercury) and the versa­
tility of his mind can be seen by the agile leap from liquid to gas: “I have used 
this phenomenon (mercury pumping) for the purpose of demonstrating the pro­
perties of magnetofugal fields to students, but I think it may also be utilised for a 
practical purpose, viz. of ejecting air if we insert in that mercury stream suitably 
shaped ends of tubes connected with an evacuated space.. . . Now we shall con­
sider the possibilities of application of the magnetofugal field to communicating

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
43
Figure 2.6 Japolsky’s forging hammer
motion to electrons and ionised atoms, and even to neutral atoms. This field of 
application is quite new, and, I believe, very promising.” So promising was it, in 
fact, that most of what followed in this direction is outside the scope of this book!
2.7 Liquid metal pumps
The first linear motors to achieve anything resembling commercial success were 
machines for ‘Very Special Purposes’, indeed in the 1930s it was a ‘way-out’ idea to 
use liquid metal for the rapid removal of heat from a locality. However the thermal 

44
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
capacity of a metal is high, and if its movement can be effected without physical 
contact—that is, without a conventional pump—a high degree of reliability can be 
obtained. Such reliability is required in highly contaminated atmospheres and 
especially that particular kind of contamination which at that time was a piece of 
‘things yet to come’—radioactive contamination. An early pioneer of those days 
was the late Mr R. D. (‘Cannon’) Ball, a great character who insisted on being 
addressed as ‘Cannon’ by masters and servants alike. He would proudly show you 
an enormous pocket on the inside of his jacket which he claimed was large enough 
to smuggle a blueprint out undetected! What he really used it for I never knew. It 
was always empty when I saw it. As for stealing other people’s blueprints I would 
have thought it much more likely that other people would have wanted his sketches, 
for he was blazing the trail in linear motors at that time.
Liquid metal pumps were the first real linear motors to break the ‘fashion’ 
barriers of the time and become the first of the revival of the ‘to hell with effic­
iency, can it be done at all?’ slogan (see chapter 4). The liquid metal had to be con­
tained in a thick walled tube of a non-corroding, non-alloying metal—that is, stain­
less steel. The magnetic flux had therefore to penetrate the tube walls before 
penetrating the metal itself, and despite their high resistivity the walls incurred 
heavy ohmic loss. (Stainless steel is not however as bad as its name implies, for 
some ‘recipes’ for it produce a more paramagnetic than ferromagnetic substance 
with resistivities many times that of copper.) A.c. liquid metal pumps had skin 
effect in the liquid itself because the tubes had such large bores, and the liquid 
suffered turbulence as a result of ‘competition’ between the linear motor which 
would have liked the liquid to flow fastest on the outside of the column, and the 
laws of hydraulics which wanted it fastest in the middle. When all its troubles were 
added up, few pumps achieved an efficiency much above 30 per cent and in at least 
one instance of which I have personal knowledge, they acted as a deterrent to 
adventure into Linear Motor Land, it being implied quite wrongly that all linear 
motors would have low efficiencies ‘because they had big airgaps’.
The man who wrote the classic paper on liquid metal pumps was Dr L. R. Blake 
(1957). He classified them into three types, FLIP, SIP and ALIP, which stood for 
‘Flat Linear Induction Pump’, ‘Spiral Induction Pump’ and ‘Annular Linear Induc­
tion Pump’.
The first type is self-explanatory, the last is another name for tubular motors, 
but SIP requires further explanation. The liquid-carrying tube was constructed in 
the form of a helix, like a huge, closely wound tension-spring, and the whole 
inserted into the bore of a conventional induction motor stator. The fluid was thus 
constrained to move at a small angle to the travelling field direction, a feature later 
to become a stepping stone to the theory of short primary linear motors via a 
search for the brushless induction machine in the form of a sphere (see chapter 6). 
What a tangled and twisted story is that of a single piece of technology! I should 
add that, with FLIP in particular, not only true induction pumps were tried. D.c. 
equivalents in which the ‘brushes’ consisted of long copper bars in the wall sides 
(extending the full length of the d.c. magnet poles) were constructed. The liquid 
in such cases acted as its own commutator, having an infinite number of infini­
tesimal segments; surely the most perfect commutator ever made?

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
45
From liquid metal pumping to liquid metal stirring is a relatively short step. 
Before a liquid secondary had ever been tried there was reason to doubt whether 
it would work at all, for one can imagine the ‘law of natural cussedness’ working 
so as to break up the liquid into strata, rather like the process of lamination, in just 
such a way as to minimise current flow and force. For example, an annular tube 
containing mercury, when threaded on to a magnetic circuit carrying alternating 
flux, will be seen to contract at its narrowest point with increasing rapidity until 
the column actually breaks, producing a spark. Gravity then restores the connection, 
thereby reproducing the effect at some other point around the ring. This pheno­
menon is given the appropriate name—‘pinch effect’. However, the day a linear 
motor first pumps is the day stirring and levitation of liquids also become possible 
(see chapter 5). Stirring liquid metal meant little more than fitting a set of poly­
phase coils under the vat of liquid and allowing the a.c. field to spread upwards in 
the liquid (increased resistivity due to high temperature coming to the rescue where 
skin effect might otherwise have put the scheme ‘out of court’). More recent 
methods of liquid metal stirring are discussed in chapter 9.
2.8 World War II
Electrical machines were relatively in the doldrums so far as inventions were con­
cerned, and academics, believing all the important machines to have now been 
invented, turned their attention to analysis, almost to a man. The two cornerstones 
of such philosophy were undoubtedly tensor analysis, which was literally ‘preached’ 
in the market place by the late Gabriel Kron (1942) and, to my mind, the more 
useful Generalised Machine Theory, first put in order by the American, R. H. Park 
(1929, 1933) and subsequently much developed by my friend and former colleague, 
the late Bernard Adkins (1957). Brilliant academic work though this was, it did 
tend to confirm that all profitable electric machines were now known and an elec­
trical engineering student who said he was doing research on ‘machines’ meant 
‘computing machines’!
Of the only two linear motors of any significance to come out of the War years, 
one of them almost drove the last nail into the coffin of machine invention for it 
was short-lived and shown to have been unprofitable; another 10 years were to 
elapse before linear motor technology ‘rose like a Phoenix from its ashes’ (and the 
first Phoenix was not a very big one!). The project to which I refer was the air­
craft launcher ‘Electropult’ built by Westinghouse (USA). A schematic diagram of 
the system is shown in figure 2.7.
The motor is at once seen to be a single-sided, straight equivalent of the conven­
tional rotary motor, but with moving primary and elongated secondary, both 
necessary adaptations where 10000 horsepower was dissipated in the active zone. 
Oddly enough the secondary carried insulated windings, which must have quad­
rupled the track cost compared with that of a sheet rotor motor—and there was 
plenty of track. The first to be built was a quarter of a mile long, the second, just 
over a mile. The performance was pretty fantastic. Acceleration of a 10000 lb jet 
plane from rest to 115 m.p.h. in 4.2 seconds was achieved. Take-off speed was 
225 m.p.h. after which the carriage that constituted the motor primary was brought

46
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 2.7 Schematic layout of the Westinghouse aircraft launcher
to rest by d.c. braking. It was certainly the fastest linear motor ever built up to that 
time and also, as one US journal title described it: “The Longest Induction Motor 
in the World.”
Figure 2.8 shows the primary unit on its track. The herring-bone pattern corres­
ponded to skewed slots in a conventional motor for the prevention of tooth-locking. 
The aircraft was attached to the primary by a tow cable. It was proposed to use the 
track for landing as well as take off, a sling from the incoming craft being caught up 
in a hook on the primary. The facts about the end of the Electropult were that it 
was superseded by the steam catapult as an aircraft carrier device, largely one pre­
sumes on the grounds of first cost and power supply requirements. Looking at 
today’s developments in high-speed transport, it is fascinating to see how the 
Westinghouse engineers of 1946 stood as near to the transport ‘super-system’ of 
the 1980s as did Hippolyte Pixii in 1831 to the turbo-alternator of the 20th 
century. The reader is recommended to read the literature on the Electropult 
(Jones, 1946; Westinghouse Engineer, 1946) after having read chapter 7.
The other World War II development was not in fact completed until the early 
1950s but it also had its origin in war planes and was, like the Electropult, a record 
breaker in its own right, although in this case the record still stands, for the terminal 
speed of the secondary exceeded 1300 m.p.h. at ground level (well on the way to 
Mach 2!). This project was different in almost every way from the modern trans­
port-oriented linear motors. It was a d.c. machine with slip tracks and brushes—a 
fixed primary machine with a short secondary (only a few per cent of the energised 
primary was ‘active zone’ at any one time).

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
47
Figure 2.8 The Westinghouse ‘Electropult’ primary on its track (courtesy of 
Westinghouse Engineer)
Its purpose arose from a facet of wind-tunnel technique and scale-modelling 
which, like so many things, is not obvious until you are told of it. When an aircraft 
model is placed in a wind tunnel it is supposed to simulate the conditions in the 
open air as nearly as possible. Examination of the extent to which this is not met 
shows that if a real aircraft were to operate in identical conditions to those of the 
model, then it should fly inside a tube of only a few hundred feet bore with the 
tube walls moving along at the same speed as the aircraft!—a simple question of 
relativity after all. For supersonic tests where the tunnels were necessarily narrow, 
it was decided to attempt a better simulation of the real conditions by actually firing 
aerofoil sections at high speed.

48
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 2.9 Battery bank supplying the fastest-ever linear motor (1954) {British 
Crown Copyright I RAE photograph)
The d.c. supply consisted of accumulators, the extent of which can be judged 
from figure 2.9. The energy stored in the stator was very considerable and five air­
blast circuit breakers were needed to switch it off. The sight of these breakers in 
action was most impressive and figure 2.10 is itself indicative of the mammoth task 
attempted (Shaw et al., 1954). I find the most intriguing part of this experiment 
however, in the photograph of a missile emerging at supersonic speed (figure 2.11). 
The camera was almost fast enough to ‘stop’ the missile, but what of all the bright 
streaks that surround it? Presumably they were caused by particles travelling at 
speeds which made 1300 m.p.h. look like a snail’s pace! So how did they receive 
their accelerating forces?—sub-harmonics in space or time harmonics? Back comes 
the immediate reply: ‘You can’t have harmonics in d.c. motors’—or can you?
The only personal touch I would add to this amazing experiment was that one of 
the three authors of the report on it was a fellow officer cadet at R.A.F. Cosford in 
1944 and a contemporary at Farnborough in the later war years. He had had a 
share in the design and building of the fastest linear motor ever without knowing 
that I was at the same time developing linear motors in Manchester. I was ignorant 
of his work and he of mine. Communication is still one of our major problems!

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS
49
Figure 2.10 Circuit breakers switching off the field of the d.c. linear motor {British 
Crown Copyright/RAE photograph)
Figure 2.11 A missile emerges from the d.c. stator at supersonic speed. (Note the 
tracks of particles that must have reached a whole order of magnitude faster speed) 
{British Crown Copyright/RAE photograph)

50
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
2.9 References
Adkins, B. (1957), The General Theory of Electrical Machines (Chapman and Hall) 
Birkeland, K. (1901), Norwegian Patent No. 11201
(1901), Norwegian Patent No. 11342
(1902), Norwegian Patent No. 11228
(1903), Norwegian Patent No. 13035
(1903), Norwegian Patent No. 13052
Blake, L. R. (1957), ‘Conduction and induction pumps for liquid metals’, Proc. IEE. 
Vol. 104A,No. 13, pp. 49-63
Fleming, J. A. (1891), ‘Electro-magnetic repulsion’, The Electrician. Vol. 26, 
No. 669, pp. 567-571 and 601-604
Gamow, R. J. and Harris, J. F. (1972), ‘What engineers can learn from nature’, 
IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 9, pp. 36-42
Hesmondhalgh, D. E., Tipping, D. and Sarson, A. (1973), ‘High-torque low-speed 
motor using magnetic attraction to produce rotation’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 120, 
No. 1, pp. 61-66
Japolsky, N. (1931), ‘Moving magnetic fields in electrical engineering and physics’, 
Scientific Journal of the Royal College of Science, Vol. I, pp. 105-126
Jones, M. F. (1946), ‘Launching aircraft electrically’, Aviation, Vol. 45, No. 10, 
pp.62-65
Junior Mechanics and Electricity (1914), ‘An experimental model electric railway’, 
1st June, pp. 246-247
Kron, G. (1942), ‘The application of tensors to the analysis of rotating electrical 
machinery’, General Electric Review
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965), ‘The goodness of a machine’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, No. 3, 
pp.538-541
Laithwaite, E. R. (1973), ‘Man made or God made?’, Electronics and Power. Vol. 
19,pp.17-19
Laithwaite, E. R. and Hardy, M. T. (1970), ‘Rack-and-pinion motors: hybrid of 
linear and rotary machines’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 117, No. 6, pp. 1105-1112
McCarthy, J. (1922), U.S. Patent No. 1417189
Park, R. H. (1929), ‘Two-reaction theory of synchronous machines—I’, Trans. 
AIEE, Vol. 48, pp. 716-730
Park, R. H. (1933), ‘Two-reaction theory of synchronous machines—II’, Trans. 
AIEE, Vol. 52, pp. 352-354
Shaw, J. M., Sketch, H. J. H. and Logie, J. M. (1954), ‘The theory, design, con­
struction and testing of an electric launcher’, RAE Report AERO. 2523, 
E.L. 1484
The Engineer (1912), ‘Foucault and eddy currents put to service’, 18 October, 
pp.420-421
The Motor (1914), ‘A high-speed electric repulsion railway’, 12th May, p. 686
Tomlinson, C. (editor) (1852-54), Cyclopaedia of Useful Arts, Mechanical and 
Chemical, Manufactures, Mining and Engineering. Vol. I, p. 577 (George Virtue 
and Co., London)

THE EARLY INVENTORS AND THEIR PATENTS 
51
Trombetta, P. (1922), ‘The electric hammer’, Trans. AIEE.NoX. XLI,pp. 233-241 
(presented at the Spring Convention of AIEE, Chicago, 19-21 April 1922)
Westinghouse Engineer (1946), ‘A wound rotor motor 1400 ft. long’, Vol. 6, pp.
160-162
Zehden, A. (1905), U.S. Patent No. 732312

3 The contributions of the 
textile men
Chapter 2 describes inventions in linear drives in strictly chronological order. The 
applications of linear motors to weaving were deliberately omitted from that 
chapter for several reasons.
(i) There were far more patents filed between 1845 and 1950 on textile applica­
tions of linear motors than on all other applications of these machines taken 
together.
(ii) The textile men knew virtually nothing about electricity and could be said to 
be ‘amateurs’ by comparison with Bachelet, the designers of liquid metal 
pumps and those of the ‘Electropult’.
(iii) The textile patents covered amazingly diverse shapes of linear motor, some of 
which did not re-appear for 20-30 years. Their ingenuity was of the highest 
quality but the economic fashions of the day (see chapter 4) were against them 
and no textile application of linear motors yet exists commercially.
The three foregoing statements nevertheless add up to the fact that the textile 
men who dabbled in linear motors made a real contribution to the subject and 
while they were probably unaware of each other’s inventions, it seems probable 
that some of their work was known to later workers in other fields. If only some of 
the textile men had been aware of the potential for linear motors in those other 
fields, the ‘Second Age of Topology’ described in chapter 9 might well have started 
earlier, just as the invention of the induction machine might have occurred in the 
1830s had not the inventors of that time been blinded by the demand to generate 
‘battery-like’ current.
The invention list in this chapter is therefore to be interleaved chronologically 
with that of chapter 2, the two together covering the years 1846-1950 (and beyond 
in the case of textile applications only).
3.1 ‘Action at a distance’ is the ‘bait’
I have been told by different people on separate occasions that the first patent on 
linear motors was filed by the Mayor of Pittsburgh in 1890 and that it was an 
52

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
53
induction machine applied to loom shuttle propulsion. I have not however been 
able to trace the patent, but if it does not exist there is certainly a patent with the 
same objective in 1895. The popular concept of a ‘flying shuttle’ was of an object 
which literally flew through the air across a loom. In practice this did not occur, 
and a moment’s thought suffices to show how complex the geometry of a loom 
would have to be to attain that (perhaps ‘ideal’) end.
Any object, given a horizontally directed blow and left to travel on its own will 
follow a parabolic path, so far as its vertical motion is concerned, and no-one is 
going to try to match such a path in the design of a loom. Nevertheless, the very 
name given to James Kay’s shuttle of 1733 suggests movement without contact 
and, as with modern transport in which it is proposed to have ground vehicles 
‘hovering’ clear of the ground, Tesla’s invention promised immediate success if it 
could be applied in linear form. It is a fact, however, that just as at the time of 
writing (1985) no commercial shuttle is being propelled, so no fare-paying passenger 
was being transported by the electromagnetic mechanism invented in 1888 some 
80 years later. It is also a fact, however, that sponsored research into electromagnetic 
shuttle propulsion was being actively conducted in 1972, while several countries are 
on the brink of achieving a successful high-speed ground transport system based on 
linear motor propulsion. The time interval of some 70-80 years during which 
progress in linear motors was extremely slow clearly needs an explanation. The 
latter is not simple and there are many contributing factors, not least that of the 
‘amateur’ status of the textile inventors in the world of electrical engineers.
3.2 How a power loom weaves
Before embarking on the variety of linear motors invented by textile engineers it 
is necessary to appreciate how cloth is woven, so that the various constraints 
imposed by the application may be seen in the linear motor context. It is simplest 
and will suffice to describe ‘plain weaving’ in which each thread in the x-direction 
goes alternately under and over successive threads in the y-direction and vice versa.
The threads in the .y-direction begin their passage through the loom by being 
pulled slowly from a ‘beam’ (a roller roughly as long as the width of the finished 
cloth with end cheeks which could be said to make the beam into an extremely 
wide pulley). These threads are all wrapped on to the beam, each thread being as 
long as is needed for the length of the finished cloth. These are the ‘warp’ threads. 
They are spaced apart by the correct amount after leaving the warp beam by 
passing between the teeth of a ‘reed’ (a metallic strip exactly like a comb but with 
the teeth closed at both ends). This reed or comb serves a second purpose as we 
shall see in a moment. Between the warp beam and the reed, each thread has been 
passed through an eyelet formed in a vertical wire which can be raised or lowered 
at will by attaching the top of the wire to another part of the loom mechanism. 
These wires and eyelets are called ‘healds’. In a plain weave, heald numbers 1,3,5, 
7 etc. are fastened to the same horizontal strip at the top of the loom. Heald 
numbers 2, 4, 6, 8 etc. are fastened to another so that either set can be raised or 
lowered. The two horizontal strips are so arranged that they rise and fall alter-

54 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
nately. When one set of healds is raised, alternate threads form the top of a tunnel 
of threads called the ‘shed’, and in this position the shuttle carrying a bobbin of 
thread known as the ‘weft’ (in early days sometimes called the ‘web’) is passed 
horizontally through the shed from side to side of the loom, unwrapping weft 
thread as it goes. In making the journey across the loom the shuttle runs over a 
solid wooden beam known as the ‘slay’ (in early patents known also as the ‘lay’). 
The weft thread thus inserted lies loosely in the warp shed and must be pushed 
forward tightly until it lies as close as possible, or as designed, to the previously 
inserted weft thread which is situated at the end of the cloth which has been 
woven so far (known as the ‘beat-up point’). This beating-up action is performed 
by the whole of the slay which carries the reed being rocked until the teeth of the 
reed reach the beat-up point. The slay then retires to its original position, for the 
start of the next cycle of operations. The woven cloth is wrapped on to a second 
beam (the ‘take-up beam’), whose slow rotation could be said to be responsible for 
the whole of the motion of the warp in the y-direction. One opening of the shed, 
passage of the shuttle and beating-up of the thread is known as a ‘pick’. Lancashire 
looms would perform 60-150 picks per minute, depending on cloth width, and 
as the actual time of shuttle travel occupied perhaps one third of the total time of 
a pick, speeds of up to 60 m.p.h. are required by the shuttle. After each pick the 
healds change places and the shuttle returns through the new shed in the reverse 
direction. The lower set of warp threads rests on the slay so that the shuttle rides 
on the thread-slay combination rather than flying through space, indeed it gener­
ally has to force its way between the two sets of threads, since the shed may begin 
to close before the shuttle traverse is completed. Shuttles are therefore pointed at 
both ends.
The method of flinging the shuttle along the beam is to push it hard for a short 
distance (outside the limits of the cloth) by means of a piece of bone sliding on a 
rod. A recess in the bone houses the sharp end of the shuttle during this push, 
which accelerates it from rest to maximum speed just before it enters the shed, 
after which it is essentially ‘on its own’ until it enters the ‘shuttle box’ at the oppo­
site end, where it is braked by rubbing alongside a strip of spring steel, thereby 
compressing the latter. It is finally arrested by striking the bone which is to re­
propel it on the next pick. To obtain such rapid acceleration, the bone is made the 
end of a whiplash of which the stock (known as the ‘picking stick’) is given a sharp 
twist by its mounting shaft, the latter carrying a cam which is struck by a projec­
tion on a shaft emanating from the main drive (see figure 3.1).
This system, invented perhaps 50 years ahead of its time, was used in Lancashire 
mills until it was 50 years behind its time. It was a clear case of mechanical engin­
eering which was crude but effective. The pressures which finally forced it out of 
business included the demand for higher and higher weaving speeds and for greater 
and greater reliability. With the system described it was disastrous for the ‘beat-up’ 
to take place before the shuttle was clear of the shed. Thus the time required to 
stop the loom before the shuttle could be smashed through the warp threads, 
bending the reed in the process, tended to limit the top speed. In addition a worn 
piece of bone, picking stick or shuttle might cause an oblique drive which would

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
55
Figure 3.1 Mechanical shuttle propulsion by means of a picking stick with a whip­
like action
cause the shuttle to pierce the roof of the shed and fly across the room, sometimes 
injuring other operatives. The likelihood of this occurrence was evidenced by the 
presence of a large diameter iron wheel at each side of the loom which, while 
allowing the operative to help the loom start by rotating this wheel by hand applied 
to its rim, also served as a guard against truly ‘flying’ shuttles with their lethal 
pointed ends.
3.3 The amazing Monsieur Jacquard
It is of interest, if only as a further link between the weaving and electrical indus­
tries, to explain that for weaving patterns more complicated than a plain weave 
there will be more than two horizontal strips to which the he aids are attached. In 
the limit, provision can be made for each individual heald (and therefore each indi­
vidual warp thread) to be lifted separately. In such an arrangement there need to 
be as many levers to lift the healds as there are warp threads. That such looms were 
made and used commercially with effect quite early in weaving history is quite 
remarkable, even by modern technological standards, but that the first of these 
looms was exhibited in 1801 is a tribute to the sheer genius of the French inventor, 
Joseph Marie Jacquard who, after finding himself a failure in business, lived to see 
his loom achieve such success that in 1806 the invention was acquired for the 
nation and Jacquard was awarded a royalty and a pension which he enjoyed for a 
further 28 years.

56
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Jacquard looms are capable of weaving tablecloths with a pattern of flowers, 
leaves or even scenes, depicted as changes in the ‘shine’ of the cloth rather than by 
colours. These tablecloths, in linen, were particularly popular in the early part of 
this century. The same looms were capable of weaving pictures to be framed and 
hung upon walls. The ‘programme’ for the picture was first worked out on squared 
paper, each tiny square being either black or white and represented as an element 
of the picture in much the same way as a television engineer thinks of elements of 
his picture which is made up of lines. The pattern on the squared paper was trans­
ferred to the loom as a series of holes in cards into which needles dropped to 
operate the appropriate healds or as a series of pegs pushed into holes in strips of 
wood, the strips being fed into the loom on a continuous belt, in much the same 
way that a cartridge belt is fed into a machine gun. The fact that the weaving 
process is a ‘lift/no lift’ scheme for the healds means that the system deals essentially 
in binary digits—a hole/no hole or peg/no peg scheme on the belt—a black or 
white square on the paper. Thus Jacquard’s concept was ahead, even of Babbage’s 
famous computing engine of 1837.
The link with linear motors lies in the fact that the first traceable patent on 
shuttle propulsion by linear motor (1895) was taken out by the Weaver, Jacquard 
and Electric Shuttle Company.
3.4 Classifying shuttle drives
All the inventions proposing linear motor drive can be divided into one of two 
kinds.
(i) Stator units restricted in length to the shuttle boxes only.
(ii) Stator units mounted in the slay across the whole width of the loom plus 
shuttle boxes.
The first of these obviously demands much greater accelerations for shorter 
periods but has the advantage that it is not necessary for the shuttle boxes to move 
with the slay and reed during beat-up, although this puts a timing restriction on the 
parts of a pick. In mechanical looms the shuttle traverse, heald change and beat-up 
periods overlap. Even if the ‘shuttle box only’ linear motor is used, a more constant 
acceleration will be achieved than is possible with the whiplash mechanism. This is 
advantageous for it is possible that the peak acceleration may be large enough to 
break up the bobbin of weft carried in the shuttle, for the latter is wound on a core 
with no end cheeks. The reason for this is that only by pulling weft off a roll end­
wise can a sufficiently high speed of payout be achieved without breaking the yarn. 
The shuttle bobbin is hence mounted with its axis parallel to its direction of motion 
and is therefore highly susceptible to being broken by excessive acceleration. The 
‘all-across the loom’ linear motor would, of course, have the shuttle under control 
throughout a traverse and could be arranged to be either accelerating or decelerating 
throughout this period, and the values of acceleration needed would be very low 
indeed compared with the peak values attained during a picking stick and whiplash 
action.

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN 
57
The first Jacquard patent of 1895 used an ‘all-across the loom’ motor. It was a 
reluctance motor in which an iron shuttle was handed on from magnet to magnet, 
as shown in figure 3.2. The magnets were switched on and off in sequence as 
required by means of a rotary switch driven in synchronism with the other mech­
anisms on the loom. It is easy to see that the disadvantages of this system were the 
downward magnetic pull on the shuttle, which must have been at least 10 times the 
horizontal driving force, the difficulty in the rapid switching of highly inductive 
circuits, this without the advantages of modern electronic switches (not that the 
latter solve the problem of inductive switching by any means), and the difficulty in 
accelerating rapidly from rest at each end. Crude as this patent may have been, it 
still represented a considerable advance in thought along a line which was subse­
quently to be explored and ‘re-invented’ by many others. After all, the invention of 
the induction machine was but seven years earlier.
3.5 A topological giant
Just as, in chapter 1, I first dismissed the caveman’s hurling of a stone as the first 
game of cricket and then took a second look and decided that it might, from one 
point of view, have been just that, so there are simpler mechanisms involving mag­
netism which at first sight might be discounted as linear motors, in that mechanical 
power was required to produce mechanical motion, the magnet merely acting as a 
clutch. Yet it would be a pity to discount such systems entirely, for to do so would 
be to miss the patent of a most ingenious London man, J. Meeus, produced in 
1844. For versatile, free-ranging thought in three-dimensional topology, this man 

58
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
can have few equals. He turned the conventional loom through a right angle, as 
it were, on to its side. Next he turned it through a right angle in the third axis—that 
is, front to back. Then he tried angles less than 90° in either axis alone or in combi­
nation. He tried circular looms in which the shuttle never stopped (and circular 
looms had a part to play in textile technology thereafter up to the present day). 
When he used linear looms in which the shuttle movement was anything other than 
horizontal (as it is in the conventional loom) he used gravity to propel or to assist in 
propelling the shuttle, so that drive in one direction only was sometimes possible. 
In one loom in which shuttle movement would have been vertical, he suggested 
dispensing with the shuttle and bobbin of weft entirely, each pick consisting of 
dropping a needle, carrying a single thread of weft through a very small shed and 
allowing the needles to drop off into a box at the bottom. This idea was to lie 
dormant for close on 100 years until Sulzers’ so-called ‘shuttleless loom’ made a 
tremendous impact on the weaving industry in the late 1930s. Weaving speeds far in 
excess of anything which had been thought possible were then achieved by first 
miniaturising the shed to reduce heald lift and beat-up motions and then by firing 
across small weft-carrying ‘bullets’.
Meeus’s ideas did not stop there. He wrote “I propose to employ the pressure of 
the warp threads upon the tail of the shuttle; I also propose to employ the power of 
a magnet acting upon an iron shuttle.” Wheatstone himself only just beat Meeus in 
at least the basic idea of a linear reluctance motor. At that time, courtesy came first 
in almost all human affairs and respect for one’s ‘elders and betters’ was almost an 
art. It is a real pleasure to read the first page of a patent of those days, even though 
none of it related to the technical matter at all. In Meeus’s case it began as follows:
“TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, I, Joseph Meeus 
of Ludgate Hill, in the City of London, send greeting.”
This was followed by such flowery legal language as remains today only in such 
documents as are prepared when one proposes to purchase a house, or prosecute 
one’s neighbour, but in Patent documents it included such courtesies as to be 
“. . . in praise of Her Glorious Majesty in the seventh year of her reign.”
In the early part of the twentieth century and certainly in the nineteenth, 
Britain was the centre of the world textile industry, so it is fairly certain that 
inventions made overseas were covered by British patents as well as those of their 
own country. Accordingly, in the list of patents arranged in chronological order at 
the end of this chapter only British patents are given when the same invention is 
covered by patents in other countries. It is notable therefore, how Britain begins to 
be left out of the cover of other nations’ ideas as the twentieth century progresses.
3.6 Classification using electrical considerations
Having said that electromagnetic shuttle propulsion systems can be broadly classi- 
field into ‘shuttle boxes only’ or ‘all-across’ systems, there are other forms of more 
detailed classification which are certainly more useful in a book about linear 
motors. For example, linear versions of d.c. machines, reluctance, hysteresis, syn­

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
59
chronous and induction motors are all possible in theory, as also are repulsion, 
Schrage and the other forms of a.c. commutator motor, although none of the latter 
has ever been built to my knowledge.
Travelling magnetic fields can be generated in one of several ways, the simplest 
of which is by means of permanent magnets which themselves move, as was the case 
in Meeus’s patent. The permanent magnets can be replaced by electromagnets. Then 
the physical movement of such magnets can be simulated by switching a series of 
stationary magnets on and off in sequence and finally a polyphase a.c. feed to a row 
of electromagnets gives the sinusoidal travelling field system of the true induction, 
synchronous and other rotary types of a.c. motor.
The patent list given as an appendix at the end of this chapter includes the 
following systems classified as outlined above.
(i) Moving permanent magnets pulling shuttles containing iron parts (reluctance 
machines).
(ii) Moving permanent magnets operating on shuttles themselves containing per­
manent magnets (a ‘synthetic’ kind of synchronous motor).
(iii) Switched electromagnets operating as a reluctance motor with iron-filled 
shuttles.
(iv) ‘Jumping ring’ type impulse drive from each end of the loom (a crude form 
of tubular induction motor).
(v) Induction motors proper which may be subdivided into single-sided, electric­
ally, mechanically or both, ‘sheet rotor’ motors, tubular, etc.
(vi) Switched electromagnets pulling an energised shuttle with current collection 
(a form of d.c. linear motor).
In addition there are patents concerned with other aspects of textiles such as 
package winding. It is interesting that this list by no means exhausts the possible 
combinations. For example, there are no moving electromagnets operating as the 
primaries of reluctance motors, nor on permanent magnet shuttles, but one system 
has been particularly popular with inventors and equally unsuccessful in practice. 
This is the switched reluctance motor (group (iii) above) which began in 1895 and 
is still being patented, with various additions in detail as recently as 1971. More 
than twenty of the patents listed are of this type.
3.7 A curiosity
I now propose to describe a selection of the textile patents in more detail, those in 
fact which I regard as advances of some magnitude in linear motor thinking, but 
first there is one curiosity which needs explanation and this is concerned with the 
essential difference between a row of magnets which are switched, on and off, in 
sequence, the same row fed with polyphase a.c. and an equivalent row of moving 
permanent magnets, as shown in figure 3.3. The fundamental principles which 
separate the three may be stated thus: a permanent magnet is a source of m.m.f. 
and not one of flux. It is therefore to be seen as a series element in any equivalent 
circuit. If it is moved so that it induces current in a conductor, that secondary 

60 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
current will, so far as the goodness of the system allows, oppose the m.m.f. which 
was its creator and in the case of a permanent magnet it succeeds. The effective 
current source of the primary system is unable to react by supplying more current, 
so the resultant flux is reduced, as is the drag force, as the relative speed between 
magnet and conductor is increased.
On the other hand, a primary coil attached to a voltage source of a.c. and 
presented with secondary conductor in which to induce current, maintains, in the 
absence of imperfections such as primary resistance and leakage reactance, a 
constant flux at all times.
R 
Y
B
Figure 3.3 Three methods of producing travelling magnetic fields: (a) despite 
appearances to the contrary, the principal component of the switched field moves 
to the left', (b) the a.c. field is fixed by the impressed voltages and does not change 
substantially in the presence of secondary conductor; (c) the permanent magnet 
field behaves like a series-connected system and is largely neutralised by the presence 
of secondary conductor

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
61
The biggest surprise of all however is that, as mentioned in chapter 1, if the 
magnet system shown in figure 3.3(a) is switched so that two coils at a time are 
energised as shown and a conducting sheet is presented to the magnets as they are 
switched from left to right, D being switched off as F is switched on, the conducting 
sheet experiences a tangential force to the left! That this should be so can be 
demonstrated by deducing the instantaneous current flow in the sheet due to a coil 
being switched on or off, then using the lefthand rule to find the directions of the 
forces (Laithwaite, 1967). It suffices to point out here that if the switched coil 
system operates as a reluctance motor primary, the motion is to the right as our so- 
called ‘common sense’ would suggest. It is only as an induction drive that apparent 
reversal occurs.
3.8 Milestones revealed by the patent history
Following Meeus [1844] and Weaver, Jacquard and Co. [1895] the next patent 
proposed the use of an entirely different type of linear motor—a switched coil 
system primary operating on a shuttle containing a d.c.-fed magnet, the current 
being collected by brushes from slip tracks. This arrangement constitutes the first 
true synchronous motor, such as might have been suggested in the 1970s when, of 
course, the coil switching would have been effected by solid state electronic devices 
[Fairweather, 1897].
3.8.1 Concerning Monsieur Bachelet
Without doubt the next big step forward was made by Emile Bachelet whose 
electromagnetically levitated, reluctance-propelled vehicle was not only proposed as 
a transport drive as described in chapter 2, but as a flying shuttle mechanism. 
Indeed Bachelet formed a limited company to develop the textile side of his work. 
The Bachelet Shuttle and Loom Company had a capital of £100000 divided into 
shares of £1 each and published an instructive booklet on the subject as a whole. 
A summary of the text on the first page reads as follows.
“The principle of Monsieur Emile Bachelet’s invention is—
(a) TO LEVITATE, z.e., hold suspended in the air by means of magnetic 
repulsion over the line of electro-magnetic coils, and
(b) TO TRANSMIT the shuttle, shell or other body by means of or through 
a series of solenoids or pulling magnets, quickly attaining a tremendous 
rate of speed which is regulated according to the amount of power used.”
In the claims for his system he points out that: “It is as easy to weave goods from 
20 to 25 feet in width as material only 3 or 4 feet wide,” and that “There will be 
none of the awful din occasioned by the hammering of hundreds of shuttles.” The 
booklet concludes with the words “It cannot be too clearly stated that there is 
either nothing in Monsieur Bachelet’s invention, or his adaptation of what is for 
commercial purposes A NEW FORCE will have far reaching effects of a stupendous 
nature. There can be no middle course. Either the invention is of no commercial 

62
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
value whatever, or it will absolutely revolutionise all present methods of work in 
many directions, and bring corresponding profits to those persons who are far 
seeing enough to realise and have sufficient courage to invest money in the immense 
potentialities of the invention.”
These last sentences might well have been written in 1986 for the question is not 
yet entirely resolved, but there is certainly proof that his ideas were not of ‘no 
commercial value’. Certainly Bachelet made a big splash when launching his ideas, 
as photographs from the booklet show. Figures 3.4 to 3.7 carry captions which illu­
strate among other things that discussion of engineering projects was perhaps as 
popular for ladies of fashion of that time as were mathematical topics of the 
previous century. The caption on the Lord Mayor is either prophetic or written by 
a man who knew Bachelet personally.
3.8.2 The men who had it didn 7 know they had it
In 1923 the switched coil reluctance motor was applied to circular looms, again we 
must assume, unprofit ably. In 1925, G. Gourdon patented a reciprocating reluctance 
motor (an iron armature attracted alternately by a pair of switched coils) and pro­
posed to use it for driving various parts of a loom including beat-up, progression of 
warp and shuttle propulsion, the last being very like, if not identical to Bachelet’s 
system. But if Bachelet failed to impress the financiers, what chance had they who 
came after? Perhaps the only mistake the subsequent textile inventors made was 
that they did not consider how many other industrial processes required linear and 
generally reciprocating devices.
Figure 3.4 The Lord Mayor, who remained nearly an hour, said, after a close 
inspection, “It is absolutely marvellous! This is something new, and what the possi­
bilities are one can only imagine.”-The Standard, 9th May, 1914

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
63
Figure 3.5 The Times, 27th May, 1914-The Duke and Duchess of Teck and their 
children visited M. BACHELET yesterday. They were accompanied by a large party, 
which included the Duchess of St Albans, Lady Moyra Cavendish, Lord Arthur 
Butler, the Hon. John and Lady Margaret Bosca wen, the Hon. Claud Anson, and 
Sir Reginald and Lady Beatrice Pole-Carew
Figure 3.6 MR CHURCHILL, ever to the fore where progress is concerned, has 
seen it. “By George, it’s great!” he said, “It is the most wonderful thing I have ever 
seen”-Weekly Dispatch, 10th May, 1914

64
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 3.7 Sir HIRAM MAXIM, the famous gun expert, visited the Laboratory and 
in a humorous remark said, “You have found a new kind of grease. It is greased 
lightning in actual fact.”—Illustrated Chronicle, 14th May, 1914. [He is here seen 
with Professor FLEMING]
In 1932 a most comprehensive patent by Jasicek and Polnauer included the sort 
of linear topology which was to be re-investigated in the 1950s and harnessed for 
profit in the 1960s. These two inventors in particular held much of the topology of 
modern linear motor actuators in the palms of their hands without knowing the 
potential of what they held. Not only was this patent the first to propose an induc­
tion motor for linear shuttle propulsion, the inventors had many ideas which were 
‘firsts’ in any field of linear motor activity. They used a new word, ‘runner’, to 
describe the secondary of a linear motor. They were aware of the problems imposed 
by magnetic pull on an iron-cored secondary, and of low efficiency caused by too 
large an airgap in the magnetic circuit. Like Bachelet, they were conscious, too, of 
that commodity which was often the subject of leading newspaper articles and tele­
vision programmes of the 1970s-pollution by noise.
Their answer was to invent the ‘sheet rotor’ motor in which only a sheet of con­
ductor moved between iron members which completed a good magnetic circuit. 
The variations on this theme which were listed included single-sided, electrical feed 
with double-sided magnetic circuit as in figure 3.8(b), double-sided, electric feed, as 
in 3.8(a), propulsion coils all across the loom or in the shuttle boxes only and 
perhaps best of all, they were more emphatic than Bachelet in pronouncing electro­
magnetic shuttle drive as “particularly advantageous for wide looms”—a feature 
which has not been commercially exploited up to the time of writing but one which 
I personally still maintain should be exploitable commercially.
Only one year later, Hopewell, perhaps without the knowledge of Jasicek and 
Polnauer’s proposals, also designed a sheet rotor motor and included conducting

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
65
(bl
Figure 3.8 Some of Jasicek and Polnauer’s shut tie-propelling arrangements, 1932
shuttle cross-sections as shown in figure 3.9. He described the travelling fields of an 
induction motor in a curious way by saying: “Two of said core elements are pro­
vided respectively at the opposed sides of the loom, each of the said core elements 
being adapted to be energised to produce a flux of variable density whose point of 
maximum density travels toward the centre of the loom.” I can only assume that 
this refers to a back-to-back induction system such as I myself patented in 1956, 
having achieved switchless operation, and that Hopewell’s moving ‘point of maxi-
(al
Figure 3.9 Cross-section through Hopewell’s shuttles, 1933

66
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
mum density’ is only the peak of a travelling sine wave of flux. However, he does 
describe also a switched d.c. form of his machine in which he may well have ‘shaped’ 
the flux wave. Hopewell was also conscious of the need to make the width of a 
sheet rotor motor greater than the width of the primary pole face so as to allow end 
currents to flow. The penalty for not doing this was calculated much later in linear 
motor history (Russell and Norsworthy, 1958).
3.9 Duplication of effort
After the patents of Jasicek and Polnauer and of Hopewell, what else was left to 
say? Apart from the application of linear motors to other reciprocating parts of the 
loom, apparently very little, although a lot of patents were to follow, most of 
which had perhaps just a little novelty of their own but spent a long time explaining 
already-known facets of the subject and it is doubtful whether there would have 
been many of the original claims left if the patents had ever been challenged in open 
court. But of course they were not challenged because no-one made profit from 
them. Whether or not this was because the developers were amateurs in electrical 
machine design, although expert in textile engineering (and no doubt in business 
also) we are about to discover, for development work towards commercialising the 
linear motor-driven shuttle was certainly being continued in the 1970s by people 
expert in machine design, who could draw on the knowledge of linear motor deve­
lopment which had occurred in other fields such as high-speed transport, liquid 
metal pumping and stirring, linear actuators, etc.
Eisselt [1936] after re-describing a reluctance motor system proposed a supply 
frequency higher than 50 Hz to enable pole pitch to be reduced; in the light of the 
rule about the size of a magnetic machine, clearly this was a progressive step. 
Grondhal [1937] described a reluctance system also but proposed putting the 
primary coils on top of the shed to use magnetic pull to relieve the weight of the 
shuttle from the lower warp threads (only to re-introduce the problem on the upper 
warp, I would have thought). In the USA, Wilson [1938] turned the plane of the 
magnetic circuit through a right angle in passing between shuttle box and shed; in 
the latter it was horizontal, in the former, vertical. What he might have achieved 
had he tried the third (transverse vertical) axis (see chapter 8)! Young [1939] 
brought photo-electric detectors of the shuttle position on to the textile scene, but 
again presumably, to little effect. Hodges [1940], perhaps suspecting that the 
electromagnetic shuttle drive part of his invention was not really novel, proposed 
using it for other applications. It was, he said, a “motion transmitting means.” 
Still nobody listened.
Another new facet was introduced by Forman [1949]. He proposed a horizontal 
‘jumping ring’ tubular motor (see also chapters 2 and 5) at each end, with additional 
switched coils along the track if necessary, shuttle position again being detected 
photo-electrically. Again came the proposal to use such motion for other purposes 
(valve operation in internal combustion engines). Again nothing was done, not 
until 1968—that is, when the jumping ring principle was applied successfully to 
high-speed circuit breakers (Freeman, 1968).

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
67
The shuttle propellers continued their search for the shape which would best use 
the forces of magnetism or of electromagnetism. As the patents illustrate, they were 
caught up between whether to choose permanent magnets/electromagnets as reluc­
tance devices, or induction/synchronous motors. We can see why experiments left 
them still unable to decide between magnetism and electromagnetism for a shuttle 
is a ‘small’ thing in some senses, but like a reasonably large induction motor in that 
its speed is high enough for its propeller to be ‘good enough’ (see pages 76-78).
3.10 Ingenuity continues
Johnson and Johnson [1951] produced new thinking in magnetics by putting 
rollers or wheels on both sides of the lower warp threads as shown schematically in 
figure 3.10. This idea was developed further by Linier and Latieule [1954] so that 
either both wheels of one pair were themselves the magnets or transmitted mag­
netism through smaller magnets than had previously been possible (figures 3.11 and 
3.12).
Figure 3.10 Entirely new concept of shuttle drive by Johnson and Johnson, 1951
Figure 3.11 Development of Johnson and Johnson patent by Linier and Latieule,
Figure 3.12 Orthogonal view of the system shown in figure 3.11

68
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Meanwhile in France, von Vago [1952] had produced a new electromagnetic 
induction system in which the pole pitch of the stator coils was progressively 
increased towards the middle of the slay, as shown in figure 3.13. On the same 
theme of controlling shuttle speed during its entire run, rather than leaving it free 
to run between shuttle boxes, Filter [1954] proposed d.c. braking magnets at each 
end of the run to act as clamps during the beat-up and take-up period. Haberhauer 
[1959], in Germany, made the shuttle itself switch on the next coil ahead in a 
reluctance device, which therefore also exhibited an accelerated field system. His 
original cam-switched coils were later replaced with electronic devices—Haberhauer 
[1959]. When ‘rapier’ looms were introduced (a rapier loom replaces the bobbin­
carrying shuttle by threading the weft through a very small shed, a separate thread 
at each pick, by means of a very long needle or rapier), Weil [1971] applied a 
tubular induction motor to the task of pushing and withdrawing the rapier.
One thing perhaps emerges above all else as a reaction to reading the published 
work on shuttle propulsion by magnetic or electric motors. No-one, Bachelet apart, 
wrote about it, boasted about it or tried to sell it. The reason is plain. No-one was 
succeeding! Despite a wealth of topological ingenuity the cost of linear motor 
shuttle propulsion was always too high, and this could be said to be due to the even 
greater ingenuity of the loom designers, who fashioned the shape of a Lancashire 
loom, so that it was not only effective in use but cheap to buy.
Figure 3.13 Accelerated field system due to Von Vago, 1952
3.11 An amateur textile engineer tries his hand
At the risk of being accused of making this book a part autobiography as well as a 
history I should like to conclude this chapter by describing the events which led up 
to my interest and later intensive specialisation in linear machines for I too, can be 
called a ‘textile man’. Born among the cotton mills of Lancashire and my best 
schoolfriend a member of a mill-owning family, I knew more about weaving by the 
time I was 14 than I did about electric motors. In my schooldays the average cotton 
mill machinery in Lancashire was driven almost entirely from a central steam engine 
and flywheel, with a network of belting and shafting throughout the factory. A 
weaving mill which was experimenting with a separate electric motor to drive each 

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
69
loom was considered ‘way out in front’ so far as textile technology was concerned. 
Let it also be recorded that other European countries (notably Switzerland and 
Sweden) were at that time thinking about and working on entirely new types of 
loom and concepts of weaving. This work was soon to contribute to the virtual 
downfall of the Lancashire cotton industry. There is surely a lesson to be learned 
here for the whole of industry. The Lancashire loom with its ‘flying shuttle’ was, 
when first conceived in the nineteenth century, 50 years ahead of its time. It must 
surely rank (along with the umbrella perhaps) as one of the best ‘value for money’ 
machines that technology has ever produced. Even in the 1950s a Lancashire loom 
which would weave 48 inch cloth could be bought for around £500. The irony is 
that this fact also contributed to the downfall of that self-same loom, for users were 
slow to buy a Swiss loom costing four times as much which would weave only twice 
as fast. The era when the engineering ‘fashion’ was reliability had not yet dawned 
(see chapter 4). Besides, there had grown up a kind of ‘engineer’ in Lancashire (I 
use engineer in the strictest sense of the French word—ingenieur-zn ingenious one) 
who has perhaps been without parallel in the history of technology—the Lancashire 
‘tackler’. Such a man was solely responsible for the repair, maintenance and smooth 
running of a batch of looms entrusted to his charge.
The dynamics of a flying shuttle were not understood formally. The slay, on 
which the wooden-cased shuttle ran, was also of wood—not the best material for 
reducing wear. As the slay changed shape the tackler would re-adjust the shuttle 
flight by unscrewing one or two nuts and inserting bits of cigarette packet as 
washers here and there, indeed it was said that a tackler who did not smoke was at a 
considerable disadvantage! The Swiss engineers meanwhile dabbled in this ‘new 
fangled electricity’ and tried new types of shuttle drive. In particular one system 
was developed in which the shuttle was blown from side to side by compressed air.
My best friend’s father’s mill bought one of these looms in the late 1940s (this 
company was undoubtedly in the forefront of progress in the country) and I was 
shown the new loom on the day of its arrival. I asked what controlled the opening 
and closing of the air jets and was told that it was done by an electrical solenoid 
operated from a 12-volt car battery. Knowing of the existence of the Electropult, 
I remember making the almost casual remark that “if you were going to bring 
electricity to a loom you might as well go the whole way and fire it electromag- 
netically.” “Could that be done?” my friend inquired. I promised him I would 
make a model and show it to him.
I was at this time an undergraduate at Manchester University and it was cus­
tomary to take a job in industry for two months during long vacations as an almost 
necessary qualification for the degree. I found myself working within an organi­
sation such that I had access to a coil winder. Missing my lunch for 18 days, I 
wound one coil secretly during each lunch hour and threw it over the barbed wire 
enclosure (a common precaution during the World War II era). In the evenings I 
would cycle down a country lane and retrieve the coil of the day from the long 
grass. Thus I built my first linear motor, shown in figure 3.14, which is now housed 
in the Science Museum, South Kensington.

70
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 3.14 The first linear motor stator built by the author, 1948
3.12 A naturally self-oscillating motor
I decided that the main difficulty in applying linear motors to shuttle driving would 
be the rapid reversals of current flow necessitated by changes in the direction of the 
driving magnetic field at a frequency greater than 1 reversal per second (the thyristor 
not yet being on the market). I realised that not the whole of the primary track 
coils need be switched. There could be, I argued, an unswitched portion at each end 
and a reversible portion in the centre, as shown in figure 3.15. This would allow 
time for the switches to operate while the shuttle was in the fixed direction field 
zone. I tried to find how small this central portion could be so as to be adequate to 
supply frictional losses.
While thus occupied I learned that it was possible to suspend conducting objects 
on an alternating magnetic field system. I was told by someone (and 20 years later, 
when one undertakes to write history, one wishes one had enquired at the time as 
to the source of the information and made a note of it!) that at a “recent exhi­
bition” (at a place unspecified) he “had seen an egg fried in an aluminium pan 
which was floating in space and there was no apparent source of heat under the 
pan.” This, I thought, would be a part solution to my shuttle problem-if only I 
could make it float! I would have produced the first truly ‘flying’ shuttle, sup­
ported and propelled perhaps by one and the same set of coils. Assisted by a new 
member of staff, George Nix, I embarked on a contributory line of research—elec­
tromagnetic levitation. The subsequent interplay between this subject and the 
further researches into new and better linear motor drives became increasingly 
advantageous and is very much still in evidence at the present time as a result 
primarily of the new fashion of high-speed transport discussed in chapter 7.
It took a year for me to realise that, even without a floating shuttle and a quite 
sizable frictional force to fight, I could reduce the length of the switched centre­
section to zero! Invention is seldom the cool, premeditated, clever process usually 
assumed by those who have never invented. It is much more often the result of

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
71
Figure 3.15 Back-to-back motor with a reversible centre piece (lapsed patent of 
1948)
finally observing something which should have been obvious months ago! So it was 
with the self-oscillating induction motor.
Almost every student of electrical engineering at that time was taught that the 
torque/speed relationship of a rotary induction motor (and therefore, by inference, 
of a linear induction motor) was of the form shown in figure 3.16, the different 
curves corresponding to different ratios of Rz/Xz.
R?
values 
x2
W - 2.50
X - 1.25
Y - 0.50
Z -0.25
speed
Figure 3.16 Force/speed curves of linear motors for different ratios of secondary 
resistance to reactance
Consider now a linear motor of the form shown in figure 3.15 from which the 
central, switched section has been removed entirely. The resulting layout is shown 
schematically in figure 3.17. It will be assumed in the first instance that the R2IX2 
ratio gives a force/speed relationship of the form shown at Z in figure 3.16. Suppose 
a short rotor is initially released from rest at a point A distant from the centre of 
the track (figure 3.17). It will at once be accelerated towards the centre of the track 
by the force OP (figure 3.16). As its speed increases, so does the accelerating force 
(a condition seldom met in ‘natural’ force phenomena which usually display a 
damped simple harmonic motion). Let us suppose that by the time the rotor 
reaches the centre it has attained a velocity v corresponding to an accelerating force 
vQ. Beyond this point the rotor travels to the right under the influence of a mag­
netic field which is travelling to the left. So far as the primary field system is con­
cerned the rotor is now travelling backwards and its effective value of slip is greater 
than unity, and in fact its operating point on curve Z, figure 3.16, as it crosses the 
track centre moves from Q to Q'. The rotor is subsequently brought to rest under 

72 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
the influence of retarding forces represented by the ordinates from Q’ to P, which 
are seen to be everywhere less than those from P to Q, which accelerated the rotor 
from A to the track centre. In the absence of friction therefore, the rotor reaches a 
point B, distant x2 from the centre, before coming to rest, where x2 >xr. The 
next run towards the centre now begins and having a greater distance to go before 
meeting reversed field, the rotor reaches a greater speed v at the centre. Each sub­
sequent distance x increases so long as the accelerating effects are greater than those 
when decelerating. If we imagine the graph of figure 3.16 to have been folded about 
the j>-axis as in figure 3.18, an easier appreciation of the action is possible for now 
we see that the amplitude of oscillation must continue to increase until the point at 
which the two curves cross over has been passed and the rotor settles down into a 
steady cycle. When the rotor is resisted by a load force, such as Coulomb friction 
load of the form shown in figure 3.19, the effect modifies the cycle to that shown.
Figure 3.17 A back-to-back arrangement requiring no switched section, 1956
Figure 3.18 One of the force/speed curves of figure 3.16 folded about the vertical 
axis to simplify explanation of amplitude build-up
Figure 3.19 A similar diagram to figure 3.18 taking into account Coulomb friction

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
73
It follows from the foregoing arguments that unless the speed/force characteristic 
is rising at zero speed—that is, the graph has a peak to the right of the origin—no 
self-sustaining oscillation can exist.
The first back-to-back motor to be tested (now also in the Science Museum, 
South Kensington) is shown in figure 3.20, having each half three feet long and- 
wound so as to give the field a synchronous speed of 25 feet/second. The rotor 
consisted of a 9 inch long laminated steel core with a ladder-type copper bar and 
end-connection grid let into its face. All primary coils of the same phase were in 
parallel. The machine failed to oscillate continuously and its degree of failure was 
obviously considerable. The rotor conductors were sunk deeper into the slots in an 
attempt to increase X2. Various desperate inventions were tried, in one of which 
steel rings were fitted around the end bars of the rotor grid. Surely these must 
increase X2 enough to make R2/Xz < 1?—for this is the condition needed for a 
speed/force peak to occur to the right of the origin. We pressed on harder with our 
levitation experiments in the belief that excessive friction, aided and abetted by 
that arch enemy magnetic pull, was responsible for the failure to oscillate. Impatient 
for new levitation apparatus we increased the voltage on the back-to-back machine 
in the hope that with roller bearings on the rotor we could improve the drive force/ 
friction ratio. We increased the applied voltage until the motor insulation finally
Figure 3.20 The first self-oscillating linear motor

74
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
broke down and the windings were totally destroyed. We were not to know for 
several weeks that our Guardian Spirit and not a Demon had apparently afflicted 
us thus, for I remained convinced that switchless operation should be possible. I 
asked the workshop for a rewind and a technician, Arthur Hill, asked if he might 
wind the new coils in thick wire and put all coils in one phase in series. “It would 
be easier to wind,” he said. I agreed and as soon as the new winding was complete, 
any of the rotors we had tried previously oscillated magnificently, building up 
from incredibly small initial amplitudes.
It had been suggested much earlier that if the back-to-back system had failed 
to oscillate, an alternative system could be used whereby the much-discussed 
central portion of a track of the form shown in figure 3.15 need not be switched at 
all for it could consist of single-phase windings only. A single-phase motor was, 
after all, known to be capable of accelerating in either direction, the direction of 
the accelerating force being governed only by the direction in which it was already 
moving. It was even pointed out that the whole track could be wound single-phase, 
reversal being effected by a mechanical spring at each end of the track. The only 
trouble was that none of our linear rotors would run on a single-phase track! My 
former teacher and guide Professor F. C. Williams often used a phrase “In the bright 
light of hindsight, all things are obvious.” When you cannot understand a pheno­
menon, the problem may appear as an unscalable mountain, yet in an instant the 
whole mountain can disintegrate. If it were not so, few people might be engaged in 
fundamental research, for there is no substitute for the witnessing of mountains of 
ignorance crumbling away in a few seconds. When I knew far less about induction 
motors than I do now, the failure to make a single-phase linear motor operate 
suggested that there was something fundamental in the linearisation process which 
prevented it from behaving as a rotational machine was known to behave. It was a 
fundamental which, in a way, was too simple for me to notice. It took just over a 
year before the mystery was revealed. It was during this time that I had burnt out 
the back-to-back oscillator and had it rewound. Of course, once a device works, it 
is much easier to change parameters, dimensions, materials to see what makes it 
worse. In the days before it works it is a whole degree of magnitude more difficult 
to know what will make it better.
In the case of the burnt-out winding however, we had made it better by accident 
—and there were no ‘shades of grey between the black and the white’. It was 
virtually an all-or-nothing exercise—Series or parallel. I must confess that the idea of 
all the coils in one phase group in series and the phase groups in parallel did not 
occur to me at that time. However, the tantalising results of experiments during 
the year of ignorance showed that any rotor which would oscillate continuously 
in the back-to-back connection would run when the stator was connected for single­
phase operation only. If it would not oscillate, it would not run single-phase. The 
converse was also true. All rotors which would run single-phase would oscillate 
back-to-back and vice versa. The preciseness of this relationship led me to realise 
that a single-phase stator-rotor arrangement was essentially the same as a back-to- 
back oscillator in which the designed natural amplitude was, say, 50 feet but whose 
track was limited to 5 feet and terminated by end-springs, for the ‘journeys’ along

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
75
Figure 3.21 Self-oscillation cycle when end-springs are incorporated: (a) imperfect 
springs, (b) perfect springs
the speed/force relationship with imperfect end-springs were as shown in figure 
3.21(a). If the end-springs were perfect, the behaviour would be as in figure 3.21(b). 
This diagram is virtually identical to those appearing in elementary textbooks to 
‘explain’, in the simple terms which Ferraris had coined over 50 years ago, the 
action of the single-phase induction motor.
There exists, so the teachers and books of my student days insisted, in the air­
gap of a rotary single-phase induction motor, a pair of counter-rotating fields which 
are the precise equivalent of the pulsating field of a single coil carrying a.c. (see 
figure 3.22). One may draw the speed/torque characteristics of each field separately 
and add them to discover the total torque (or force in the linear case). Once again 
this can be done by folding the diagrams about the vertical axis, when the net 
torques are seen to be the vertical intercepts between the curves, and therefore, 
when running on load, the same characteristics, the same criterion Rz/Xz < 1, 
obtain for both back-to-back and single-phase operation.
What most (although happily not all) textbooks failed to point out was that a 
single coil carrying alternating current does not represent the single-phase induction
B sin wt
Figure 3.22 A single pulsating field is equivalent to a pair of counter-rotating fields

76
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
motor windings except at standstill, for in the presence of rotating secondary con­
ductors there are fluxes of different phase in different axes, in fact an elliptic field. 
My own awareness of this came through reading ‘old’ books and papers on machines 
rather than ‘modern’ ones (post-1950). In particular Behrend’s book on The Induc­
tion Motor and Other Alternating Current Motors (Behrend, 1921) explained all to 
me and I then read Karapetoff’s classic paper (Karapetoff, 1921) in which he com­
pared the two-axis theory (initially due to Blondel) and the counter-rotating field 
theory of Ferraris and showed them to give the same results, provided that one 
applied counter-rotating field properly.
3.13 Series and parallel worlds
The profound difference between series and parallel connection in the back-to-back 
oscillator was that having a very much shorter secondary than primary, well over 
90 per cent of the applied voltage (in the case of series connection) was dropped in 
the non-active coils, so the speed of the rotor made little difference to the overall 
impedance; that is, the machine worked at virtually constant current and it was a 
hundred times easier to make Xm/Rz > 1 than to make Xt/R^ > 1, the conduc­
tivity of copper and permeability of free space being the values they are.
I recorded my more generalised findings in a paper in 1965 (Laithwaite, 1965a). 
They were that in any machine not having cylindrical symmetry, series connection 
was essentially different from parallel connection and not merely an exchange of 
amps for volts. Linear motors had now, perhaps for the first time, begun to reflect 
knowledge back into the commercial rotating machine world, for the above pro­
nouncement affects vitally the unbalanced magnetic pull experienced in a rotary 
motor as the result of a departure from axial symmetry, whether it be due to an 
offset rotor, inconsistent rotor end-ring joints, a non-circular cross-section of rotor 
or stator, a locating slot in either rotor or stator core, or a preferred grain orien­
tation in the core steel and teeth.
3.14 The ‘DNA’ molecule of machine engineering
What was for me a much more important concept was that I had discovered for 
myself the very heart of an electrical machine—the DNA molecule of electro­
magnetism, if you like—a factor which had appeared again and again in my calcu­
lations and which in the researches into spherical motors about 1953-1956 (see 
chapter 6) we had represented as a time constant r multiplied by the angular 
frequency of the supply co. The interplay between studies of linear motors on the 
one hand and spherical (Williams et al., 1959), helical (Williams et al., 1961a) and 
log motors (Williams et al., 1961b) on the other was highly educational for me and 
I shall be forever grateful to Professor F. C. Williams for the opportunities and 
guidance which came my way through being able to watch him work on this latter 
collection of machines. As will be discussed in chapter 6, the spherical motor in 
particular was a foretaste of ‘the shape of things to come’.
During the years 1957-1963 I had become more and more aware of the necessity 
of being able to express in physical terms (and therefore to ‘understand’ in the only 

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
77
way we know when dealing with four-dimensional phenomena) the overall ‘quality’ 
(for want of a better word) of an electromagnetic device. Through a series of argu­
ments about flux cutting and flux linking explanations (which were later to rage in 
print in letters which appeared in the Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers 
between October 1962 and October 1963), and a knowledge of the relativistic 
explanations of both a.c. and d.c. phenomena, I finally decided that neither a 
magnetic flux nor an electric current had any meaning in the absence of a closed 
circuit and that the interlinking of magnetic and electric circuits was all that should 
be needed to specify the quality of a machine. About the same time I remember 
noting that while the electric circuits of machines had undergone a fantastic 
number of ‘shape’ permutations in the form of interpoles, compensating windings, 
Schrage motor and N-S motor windings, etc. during perhaps a hundred years of 
progress, the magnetic circuit had stayed virtually unchanged throughout this time, 
being a single-turn, short, fat loop.
Faraday, however, had placed considerable emphasis on the magnetic circuit, 
declaring that the design of such could be likened to the problem of designing 
electric circuits using bare copper wire in a bath of salt water. This undoubtedly is 
one of the main reasons for the non-development of magnetic circuits from about 
1890 to the 1950s.
At first I despaired of ever being able to write an algebraic expression which 
represented the quality of an electromagnetic machine, whatever its form. It 
seemed, I thought, like asking someone to define in mathematical symbols how the 
quality of an oil painting might be judged. It was surely a matter of taste on the 
part of the user or viewer. It was no help to be able to measure the reflection co­
efficient of each minute part of the oil painting nor to know the frequencies of the 
light radiation emitted therefrom.
But with motors it was different. The quality of an electric machine did seem to 
be capable of being measured as some function of the electric and magnetic circuits 
alone. So I set down equations for the two circuits. Since the tangential force 
developed by any electromagnetic machine could always be calculated per unit of 
equivalent pole area as B x the current loading J, and since force x velocity = power 
(the quantity which usually interests us most), the generation of the maximum 
values of B and J, combined with some function expressing the surface velocity, 
must be, I argued, of vital importance.
The final step occurred when I took the view (more for fun than as a serious 
exercise) that
J 1 
goodness =----------
badness
and that badness was the product of resistance (in the electric circuit) and reluc­
tance (in the magnetic circuit) (Laithwaite, 1965b).
Later (Laithwaite, 1968) I wrote the equation for goodness in terms of the 
physical parameters of the electric and magnetic circuits of any electromagnetic 
machine. This equation was, I now realise, to become the bedrock on which all my 

78
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
subsequent work was to be based. It was a great comfort to me to learn later that 
the same quantity was being used by Russian engineers under the name ‘Magnetic 
Reynolds Number’. It is, after all, as important a quantity in electromagnetic 
dynamics as the Reynolds Number is in fluid dynamics.
This ‘textile man’ had at last made a positive contribution to the subject of 
linear motors, only to find that it embraced the whole of electromagnetic machinery. 
The engineer is only concerned with sifting the profitable from the unprofitable, 
whether it be in hardware or in his concepts, and for the academic at least, the 
concepts are more important than the hardware. Nor need he claim that his con­
cepts are ‘better’ than someone else’s. What is a most useful ‘explanation’ for one 
man is confusion for another.
In the period 1950-1970, hitherto flourishing textile firms came to grief. We 
should never forget that in the broadest sense, in technology as in Nature, ‘progress’ 
generally means ‘death’ for certain ‘species’ of the population.
3.15 References
Behrend, B. A. (1921), The Induction Motor and Other Alternating Current Motors 
(McGraw-Hill, New York)
Freeman, A. T. (1968), ‘Latched ultra-high-speed d.c. circuit-breaker’, The Engineer, 
Vol. 226, pp. 212-215
Karapetoff, V. (1921), ‘On the equivalence of the two theories of the single phase 
induction motor’, Journal of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Vol. 40, pp. 640-641
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965a), ‘Differences between series and parallel connection in 
machines with asymmetric magnetic circuits’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, No. 11, 
pp.2361-2375
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965b), ‘The goodness of a machine’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, 
No. 3, pp. 538-541
Laithwaite, E. R. (1967), ‘The moving window motor’, Electrical Review, Vol. 181, 
pp.126-128
Laithwaite, E. R. (1968), ‘Some aspects of electrical machines with open magnetic 
circuits’,Proc. IEE,No\. 115, No. 9,pp. 1275-1283
Russell, R. L. and Norsworthy, K. H. (1958), ‘Eddy currents and wall losses in 
screened-rotor induction motors’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 105A, No. 20, pp. 163-175
Williams, F. C., Laithwaite, E. R. and Eastham, J. F. (1959), ‘Development and 
design of spherical induction motors’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 106A,No. 30, pp. 471-484
Williams, F. C., Laithwaite, E. R., Eastham, J. F. and Farrer, W. (1961a), ‘Brushless 
variable-speed induction motors using phase-shift control’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 
108A,No. 38, pp. 100-108
Williams, F. C., Laithwaite, E. R., Eastham, J. F. and Piggott, L. S. (1961b), ‘The 
logmotor—a cylindrical brushless variable-speed induction motor’, Proc. IEE, 
Vol. 108A,No. 38,91-99

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
79
Appendix: Chronological order of patents on electromagnetic textile devices
1844
Meeus, J.
Reluctance device in which a moving permanent magnet 
pulled along a shuttle containing a piece of iron.
British
10196
1895
Weaver, Jacquard and Electric Shuttle Co.
Switched reluctance drive all across the slay.
British
12354
1897
Fairweather, W.
Switched stator coils, electromagnet in shuttle with 
current collection. A linear synchronous motor in 
shuttle boxes only.
British
19 745
1911
Bachelet, M.
Switched single coil for shuttle at each end, levitation 
with mechanical guidance all across the slay.
British
9573
1923
Electromagnetic Loom Corporation (New York)
Switched reluctance shuttle drive for circular looms.
British
215 733
1925
Gourdon, G.
Beat-up and progression of warp both achieved by 
reciprocating motion of an iron armature between a 
pair of single switched coils. A reluctance impulse 
device also for shuttle propulsion, very similar to that 
of Bachelet [1911].
British
242 701
1932
Jasicek, A. and Polnauer, F.
Sheet rotor shuttle in induction motor system. 
Comprehensive claims covering single-sided and 
double-sided stator systems either in shuttle boxes only 
or all across the slay, or in circular looms. Reversal 
by contacts on a rotating cylinder. Many shapes of 
sheet rotor shuttle conductor. Systems in which stator 
is sectionalised and switched by the shuttle itself. Some 
sections short-pitched for regenerative braking.
British
374 741
1933
Hopewell, F. B.
Double-sided sheet rotors or linear cage rotors as 
shuttle. Stator a.c.-fed when driving, d.c. applied for 
deceleration. Shuttle box drives only.
British
398 917
1936
Eisselt, G.
Linear reluctance motor shuttle drive all across the 
slay. Conscious of stator end-winding bulk, suggested 
higher-frequency supply than mains and smaller pole 
pitches. Cage-type rotors.
British
483 816

80
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1937
Grondhal,K. T.
Switched reluctance shuttle drive with stator magnets 
on top of shed to compensate for shuttle weight.
British
507 429
1938
Wilson, P. B.
Single-sided linear motor shuttle propulsion with stator 
below shed, with double-sided stators in shuttle boxes 
driving horizontal flux through the shuttle.
USA
2 135 373
1938
Bowles, E. L., Fames, W. and Smith, G. H. B.
Almost identical material to Hopewell [1933].
USA
2112 264
1939
Young, Y. L., Junior
Single-pole stator, switched synchronous motor in 
shuttle boxes only. Shuttle electromagnet fed from 
brushes. Switching point detected by photo-electric 
cells.
USA
2146611
1940
Hodges, P.
Moving permanent magnet primary system for reluc­
tance shuttle drive. Patent applies to devices other 
than looms also; described as ‘motion transmitting 
means’.
British
522 046
1949
Forman, J.
Impulse shuttle propulsion by ‘jumping ring’ principle 
at each end. Additional coils at intervals along slay 
if necessary. Coils switched by photo-electric sensors. 
Quotes patent 605 747 for use of device in valve 
operation in internal combustion engines.
British
626 719
1950
Dalle, 0. and Servillat, G.
Reluctance device including tubular stators.
French
967 269
1951
Johnson and Johnson Ltd
Moving permanent magnet primary, reluctance shuttle 
drive all across slay with triple wheel combination to 
prevent magnetic attraction from wearing warp threads.
British
696 457
1951
Ockermann, G. and Mulet, P.
Contact-switched reluctance shuttle drive. Double­
sided stator all across slay.
French
989 730
1952
von Vago, P. I.
Induction motor shuttle drive. Cage-type secondary.
Stator track all across slay and of variable pole pitch for 
improved acceleration and regenerative braking. Final 
deceleration by reversed plugging as result of switching 
two phases.
French
1 009 908

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
81
1953
Purdy, B. B.
Fixed permanent magnet track all across slay for 
shuttle guidance only.
USA
2647 542
1953
Olivier, L. and Dehors, R.
Reluctance device in shuttle boxes only but with 
elaborate timing circuitry.
French
1033 191
1954
Filter, W.
Single-phase, double-sided reluctance shuttle device 
all across the slay with d.c. magnets at each end to 
act as braking clamps.
British
709 299
1954
Linier, C. and Latieule, Y.
A wheeled shuttle drive similar to that of Johnson and 
Johnson [1951], but in which the wheels themselves 
are magnetised.
British
715 494
1954
Linier, C. and Latieule, Y.
Extension of previous patent to include systems in 
which wheels carried only induced magnetism supplied 
by non-rotating permanent magnets separated from the 
wheels by a small airgap.
British
720027
1954
Linier, C. and Latieule, Y.
Minor modifications to earlier two patents only.
British
720028
1956
Laithwaite, E. R. and West, J. C.
Self-oscillating back-to-back linear induction motor.
British
763 362
1956
Josephy’s Erban G.
Double-sided linear motor shuttle drive with double­
sided cage-type secondary.
French
1 120 559
1959
Haberhauer, K.
Self-switched reluctance shuttle device all across slay 
and therefore an accelerated field system. Shuttle 
guided through pairs of fork prongs between which 
warp threads fall.
German 1066 958
1959
Haberhauer, K.
Cam-switching of earlier patent replaced by electronic 
switching with sensing devices to determine shuttle 
position.
German 1 072 569
1959
Chevallier, M.
Reluctance shuttle device, tubular stator.
French
1 201 684

82
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1959
Sulzer Brothers Ltd
Guidance device only for shuttle using permanent 
magnets. Similar to Purdy [1953].
British
924 902
1960
Electronica Textil S.A.
French
1227 885
Switching circuits for pulsing a coil at each end of 
the slay for reluctance shuttle propulsion. Very 
similar to Bachelet [1911].
1961
Laithwaite, E. R.
Self-oscillating motor, double-sided, all across the slay 
shuttle propulsion with sheet rotor. Similar to Hopewell 
[1933], and with d.c. magnets for retardation and 
pause at each end of a traverse.
British
866 772
1961
Williams, F. C. and Laithwaite, E. R.
Self-oscillating motors with end-springs added.
British
876 795
1961
Laithwaite, E. R.
Non-tubular, axial flux motors with wound secondary. 
Also optimum connections at centre of a back-to-back 
system.
British
883 837
1961
Grand!, G. A.
Moving horseshoe electromagnet primary for 
reluctance shuttle drive.
Dutch
264 671
1962
de Fliedner, A., Pollak, I. and Parekh, S.
Rows of horseshoe stator electromagnets all across the 
slay, switched for reluctance shuttle operation with 
upper set also providing lift.
Swiss
362 992
1962
de Fliedner, A., Pollak, I. and Parekh, S.
Concerned only with improvements in a switched stator 
coil system using light beams, photocells and relays.
Swiss
363 623
1963
Bergerdorfer Eisenwerke-Astra
Reluctance motor shuttle propulsion, not particularly 
novel.
Belgian
636 811
1965
Electronica Textil S.A.
Phased stator coils operating on reluctance-type 
shuttle with variable stator coil pitches to provide 
acceleration and deceleration.
Swiss
395 892
1970
Sigrist, E.
Propulsion of trolley around circular rail for feeding 
different spools to a shuttle mechanism—that is, not 
itself concerned with shuttle propulsion.
Swiss
525 309

THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE TEXTILE MEN
83
1971
Weil, A.
Tubular induction motor applied to the propulsion of 
the weft-carrying device (a long thin rod) in ‘rapier 
looms’.
French 2060 258
1971
Nogoy a City
Impulse-reluctance shuttle system with a primary coil 
at each end of the run and one coil in the centre. Very 
similar to Bachelet [1911].
French 2082105
1971
Basart, J. B.
Tubular reluctance shuttle gun with electronic switching 
and d.c. available for accurate positioning of the shuttle.
USA
3 590879
1971
Linka, A.
Moving primary permanent magnet system with horse­
shoe permanent magnets on both primary and 
secondary.
USA
3 618 640

4 ‘Fashions’ in engineering
4.1 The task of the engineer
An engineer is first and foremost a scientist. He is undoubtedly an applied scientist 
and one whose ultimate objective is the profitable manufacture of articles for 
himself or for the organisation which employs him. Academic engineers may argue 
that they are as concerned with profitable concepts as they are with hardware and 
that the concept is more important than the machine. To this extent they run 
alongside the pure scientist, seeking the advancement of knowledge for its own 
sake, yet with at least half an eye on the profits and with problems many orders of 
magnitude greater in complexity than any with which the pure scientist is con­
cerned. An engineer may be faced with a problem whose solution lies in a set of 19 
simultaneous differential equations which contain perhaps 82 variables known to 
the engineer and possibly a further 63 which are relevant to the problem but 
unrevealed to him. He must of necessity fix the values of all but perhaps 21 of the 
unknowns and then seek the use of a computer to find the best solution formally. 
But no-one can tell him which 21 to choose, nor even whether his 19 equations 
have even interpreted the problem correctly.
In such a no-man’s land he is hand-in-hand with his medical colleague, who 
faced with a malignant disease must let the patient die or try something. It is not 
strange that the engineer fails to produce a unique solution, that his product is seen 
to be the result of ‘art’ more than science. As such, it can be criticised, more by 
some than by others. Another engineer would have done it differently. The product 
becomes a matter of opinion and because it is subject to opinion, it joins the ranks 
of many other products such as literature, painting and sculpture, and of course, 
clothing. It has, in fact, its own history of Fashion.
4.2 The importance of ‘fringe subjects’
Fashion is inextricably interwoven with almost all aspects of human life, including 
religion. A history of any facet of engineering must therefore be concerned, in part, 
with what might be called ‘the fringe subjects’, which have been initiated perhaps 
by no more than a single word in public or a single thought in private conversation 
84

‘FASHIONS’ IN ENGINEERING
85
which led the originator, his colleagues or even his enemies to branch out into new 
fields of study.
The Industrial Revolution clearly had a great deal to do with textiles and, as 
indicated in the previous chapter, they were the lifeline which perhaps held on to a 
basic need which found its outlet in linear motor development. If so, then I could 
argue selfishly that there was a period when that lifeline was but a single thread, 
which was I myself between the years 1946-1953. Of course, no lifeline need exist 
for a subject to be re-opened at any time by a mind with imagination, and specu­
lation of what the present state of the linear motor art might have been without my 
own contribution is both unprofitable and unscientific.
4.3 Ignorance really is bliss!
What is fact is that I applied the principle of the Electropult to the shuttle without 
the knowledge that many others before me had tried and failed. Such ignorance is 
almost vital in research and equally so in invention. Had we known, in 1954 in 
Manchester, of the papers of Shturman (1946) and Shturman and Aronov (1947) 
years earlier, we would have almost certainly abandoned our work on edge effects 
in short primary machines, for the analysis of the Russian papers was extremely 
complex, but accurate, and showed the heavy extra losses incurred by those who 
dared to put a discontinuity in a rotating electrical machine. As it was, a theory 
emerged at Manchester based on simpler concepts, sweeping aside even such 
important factors as leakage reactance, but showing how to design against edge 
losses, rather than merely calculating their values for any given configuration. Such 
is the power of ignorance. The would-be inventor must struggle daily to empty his 
mind of all earlier rules which he has been taught or has taught himself. Put all this 
material into a kind of half-tone background, to be drawn upon when required but 
not to influence original thinking, and you have the makings of a fascinating life, 
for often you can dip twice into the pool of background knowledge only to find 
that the new idea is black on one piece of sacred ‘evidence’ of experience but white 
on another!
4.4 Digression on a theoretical dilemma
Such was the case of the angled-field principle which we tried to exploit in a brush­
less variable-speed motor in Manchester in 1953-1959. This example is such a 
classic case of the above that it is probably worth digressing here for a moment to 
elaborate upon it. Figure 4.1 shows a linear motor represented as a row of alternate 
magnetic poles which are travelling at speed vs in the direction shown. They 
influence a conducting sheet of non-magnetic material, A, by induction, but the 
conductor is constrained in such a way that it may only move along a path making 
an angle 0 with the direction vs. What is the terminal speed in the absence of 
friction?
Figures 4.2 and 4.3 provide two alternative answers. In figure 4.2 we plotted 
a vector diagram of velocities and showed that once the conductor had reached a

86
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 4.1 The angled field principle
Figure 4.2 In each vector diagram the dotted line indicates the direction in which 
the conductor is constrained to move
Kf = field velocity
Kc, Kc' and Kc " are conductor velocities
Kr, and Vr" are corresponding relative velocities
It is difficult to see how further driving force can be obtained when the value of Vq 
rises above that shown in (b), for, as shown in (c) the relative velocity Vr" has a 
backward component along 7c"
velocity value of vs cos 0, its velocity relative to that of the field was perpendicular 
to the motion of that field and hence no more thrust could be derived from that 
source. Thus the terminal speed
(v0)i = vs cos 6 that is, always smaller than vs
Figure 4.3 shows the same polar array moving over a glass tube containing a 
single steel ball and set at angle 0 to vs. This represents a synchronous motor as

‘FASHIONS’ IN ENGINEERING
87
Figure 4.3 The ball-in-slot analogue
opposed to the induction motor of figure 4.2, but the effective synchronous speed 
is, in each case, the target for the argument. In the synchronous case, the ball must 
at all times remain in line with the pole which it is shown as ‘occupying’ so that as 
the field moves from A to C, the ball must, of necessity, reach B and thus its 
velocity, for unaccelerated motion of the field must be
(^0)2 = Vg/cos 0 that is, always greater than vs
The reader should refer also to chapter 6 where this topic is further discussed in 
relation to spherical motors.
4.5 The bad old days
Returning to the subject of fashion, in the ‘bad old days’ there were real ‘working 
classes’ who are distinguishable from any class of society today in at least two ways.
(i) They were generally exploited by the management, the wealthy, ruling classes, 
(ii) They worked at maximum capacity, driven by the ever-present threat of total 
poverty, misery and starvation.
In those days to replace a man by a machine was generally too expensive, even 
if the machine was very good, for human labour cost hardly anything. When a 
machine was accepted it had to be seen to be highly ‘efficient’, even though this 
word was used both in its strict scientific sense (that is, power output/power input) 
and loosely to describe such concepts as an ‘efficient typist’.
4.6 A ‘fashiongraph’
In those days, the man whose motor was 85 per cent efficient triumphed over the 
man whose motor was 80 per cent efficient, even though the latter cost only half as 
much to build. But ‘first cost’ soon caught up with efficiency as a fashionable 
commodity, only itself to be subsequently overtaken by other quantities. I have 
attempted to draw a ‘fashiongraph’ in figure 4.4 to show the rise and fall of the 
popularity of each commodity as a criterion of ‘goodness’ with the passage of time.
In the beginning it was a question of ‘Can it be done at all?’ This is the happy 
hunting ground of the inventor whose products may be the subject of conversation

88
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 4.4 A ‘fashiongraph’
of a nation, for short periods. Then the devices are put to the test and profit motive 
appears, first in the form of efficiency in its strictest scientific and therefore simplest 
sense. ‘First cost’ is increasing rapidly at the turn of the twentieth century, to be 
followed by ‘power/weight’ ratio, a criterion undoubtedly influenced by the 
developments in transport (both in quantity and in speed). Heavier objects cost 
more to transport (especially in aircraft), it takes a heavier crane to load and 
unload them, a larger concrete block for a heavier machine to stand upon, and so 
on. Size, and more especially weight, made their presence felt in almost every 
aspect of the economics of a job. Efficiency was very much on the decline. Power/ 
weight and first cost became almost a part of each other, although this was not 
always true in the electrical machines field. An aircraft generator for 80 kW might 
weigh only 80 lbs. A conventional alternator for 50 Hz a.c. and the same output 
might weigh 10 times as much, but the aircraft alternator cost more than the 
800 lb machine. So power/weight dominates even first cost in the aircraft era. (It 
was estimated that in 1952 it cost £1 per year to lift each extra 1 lb mass in an 
aircraft’s equipment. Today, the monetary figure must be considerably higher.)
4.7 Extrapolation of the fashiongraph
Can we stand back and see ourselves in perspective with what has gone before and 
assess properly the relative fashions of today? I think we can do more in that we 
can use a crystal ball and continue the ‘fashiongraph’ into the twenty-first century.
With the release of atomic energy in the form of a bomb came the immediate 
question as to whether such an energy source could be tamed, and the ‘Can it be 
done at all?’ fashion is at once revived. The realisation that the fossil fuels must 
come to an end, as surely as must the life of a living creature, made atomic energy 
a ‘must’. The beginning of the space age strengthened this renewed fashion a great 
deal. Ask not what it costs to send a man to the moon—ask what it costs to get 
him back!

‘FASHIONS’ IN ENGINEERING
89
4.8 The great pollution bandwagon
In the 1970s it was impossible to listen to all radio or watch all television pro­
grammes for one week without hearing the word ‘pollution’. In its broadest sense it 
could mean anything from pollution of the atmosphere or of water by chemicals to 
pollution of the air by noise. It was a subject which became the source of the total 
income of ‘experts’ who studied and advised on it, wrote ‘prophet of doom’-type 
articles for the popular press, etc.—and yet in the USA perhaps the most complex 
computer program in the world was used to assess the kind of life we are uncon­
sciously ‘planning’ for our grandchildren in the twenty-first century. The results 
were alarming—an almost inevitable human catastrophe within that generation, but 
never, under any set of constraints, arising from pollution. Yet ‘nuisance-freeness’ 
must now have a place in the fashiongraph and is certainly going to rise, at least 
until the end of this century.
So far as linear motors are concerned the possibilities of the controlled use of 
atomic energy alone were sufficient to produce a most ingenious linear synchronous 
reluctance motor, working on the Vernier principle (Lavelle and Orpen, 1964) as 
shown in figure 4.5, for pushing the control rods of nuclear reactors in and out. 
These motors have virtually zero efficiency and an appallingly low power/weight 
ratio but can do the job, and do it perhaps for centuries without attention. So can 
liquid metal pumps perform their task in nuclear reactors, and so simple are they 
in construction that should a winding burn out, it can be replaced by remote 
control entirely. For this reason, the double-sided ‘FLIP’ was preferred to the 
permanently linked ‘ALIP’ (Blake, 1957).
Figure 4.5 A linear vernier reluctance motor. As the lower member is moved a 
distance x to the right, a region of high flux density travels the full length of the 
lower member, and vice versa when used as a motor

90
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
4.9 The danger of breeding a race of robots
The growth of a new industry automatically attracts the best brains in related fields 
of technology. Thus did the electronic valve and the transistor deplete the ranks of 
the heavy electrical engineering men. The computer added to this trend as leading 
universities in the world began to scrap their experimental machine laboratories. 
This last exercise represents of course, the death of invention in that subject. It 
reminds me of seeing masses of tennis players, all coached in the ‘proper’ way to 
play the game, being beaten at Wimbledon by a man who never had a lesson in his 
life and was most ‘unorthodox’. In other sports the ‘proof of the pudding’ is more 
obvious. High jumping is a religion until Fosbury goes over flat on his back, breaks 
the world record and a new fashion is born in that instant.
4.10 Contrasts in industrial outlook
In linear motors as in many other facets of human endeavour, only success succeeds. 
So it was that the first linear motors to sell commercially were small machines, the 
cost of development of which was probably less than £1000. Only when these were 
seen to work did anyone try a bigger machine as a commercial proposition. I have it 
on good authority that the world’s first commercial linear actuators were developed 
with the following philosophy: ‘We had the opportunity to spend a certain amount 
of money on producing a linear motor for commercial uses. This meant we could 
either do a design study on them, or simply make a thousand of them without 
trying to get the design right. We made a thousand and we’ve sold five hundred of 
them already’.
Contrast this with a small team of Government employees who were investi­
gating methods of improving a piece of test equipment and came to me to ask 
whether a linear motor would do the job. On being told that it was ideal, they were 
visibly shaken, asked me to put it in writing, which I did, and returned to report the 
fact to their Masters. I never saw them again! For some it is better to be seen to 
have done a survey of all impossible methods than to have had the courage to go for 
something which had nothing better than a ‘fair chance’ of success.
4.11 ‘We must simplify the theory’
In rotating electrical machines, the men who followed the pioneers of the Victorian 
era were fully aware of the problems which confronted them. They were expected 
to make better and better machines, even though the laws of electromagnetism 
seemed complicated and at times even contradictory. So they resorted to the bed­
rock of all good engineering, the use of analogy. ‘If electric current behaves like 
water flowing in a pipe, I shall hope that it will do so in an entirely untried situ­
ation. I shall go on using it until it fails me. All analogies fail ultimately. My skill 
will be judged by how far I know I can go’. Such might have been the religion of an 
engineer of the 1900-1920 era. So Hey land invented the circle diagram for the 
induction motor, Ferraris the counter-rotating field theory for single-phase 

‘FASHIONS’ IN ENGINEERING
91
machines, a theory subsequently misinterpreted by generations of teachers who 
used ‘field’ to mean ‘flux’ when it should have meant ‘m.m.f.’. These theories 
served generations of machine designers virtually until the advent of ‘generalised 
machine theory’ begun by R. H. Park (1929 and 1933) and developed by Adkins 
(1957), as quoted in chapter 2. I well remember Bernard Adkins visiting me in 
Manchester in the early 1950s and looking a little disturbed by some of my linear 
motors. I guessed that he must have been conscious of the difficulty of applying 
generalised theory to travelling fields which had a ‘start’ and a ‘finish’. ‘Is genera­
lised theory really generalT—he must have been thinking. There is really no conflict 
here. The old theory can often be applied to the new machine, albeit somewhat 
laboriously and in the end generally unprofitably, and to this extent the academic 
is justified perhaps in declaring concepts to be more important than hardware.
4.12 Useful theory or formal discipline?
My own feelings on the generalised theory were that the subject of electrical 
machines was in danger of becoming a ‘discipline’—to be taught in the manner of 
Latin, formal logic or even mathematics, simply as a means of training the mind. 
Computers, we were told later, would be designing all electric motors by the 
1980s. For me the linear motor was the means by which this danger was averted, 
for we now know that all rotary machines follow a strictly cylindrical and there­
fore uni-dimensional topology. In two or three dimensions, what remains to be 
invented far exceeds that which has been done (see chapter 9).
4.13 Unification for its own sake
A second limitation on inventiveness is often imposed by a desire to ‘unify’, or at 
least to reduce all things to three or four very ‘fundamental’ things and generally to 
forget that what is regarded as fundamental is also subject to changes of fashion. 
The alchemists of old would have it that all things were made from earth, fire, air 
and water. Maybe they were right but I doubt it, although one has to be most 
careful in this modern age of engineering, for almost anything is possible at a price. 
After all the alchemists, whose mention would raise a smile at any discussion in the 
early part of this century, had dreamed of changing one element into another and 
to a limited extent this we can now do—at a price.
By the time I was at school the physicists had got themselves nicely sorted out 
again. There were protons, neutrons and electrons, and that was all. Looking back 
we are inclined to regard them as Little Jack Horner in the nursery rhyme! Soon 
there were positrons, then mesons, then others until I lost count of the number of 
‘fundamental’ particles which we were told existed. Who can doubt that the fashion 
in physics in the 1950s was ‘get yourself a new particle’?

92
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
4.14 Industrial 'pros and cons9
In that same period I was struggling for recognition if not even for survival in 
academic life. I was the more baffled by the fact that many industrialists who visited 
me would demonstrate to me conclusively that linear motors were just ‘not on’ 
commercially. It was pointed out that the greatest tangential force obtainable from 
a linear motor was of the order of 10 Ibs/sq. inch of pole surface (and this only on 
short-term rating or with a very elaborate cooling system). Compared with the tens 
of thousands of lbs per square inch available by hydraulic means, the linear motor 
came a very poor second. Yet others encouraged me with such statements as ‘You 
will never get an oil leak’, and ‘Linear motors are more convenient’. How does one 
measure ‘convenience’ in physical terms—or for that matter noise, nuisance and 
reliability? I was told that a large post office parcel sorter in the USA had gone over 
to linear motors because of oil leaks in their standard system.
So it appears that fashions in other topics had a very important effect in linear 
motor developments. Without nuclear power there would have been no liquid metal 
pumps. Liquid metal pump designers never achieved a greater efficiency than 50 
per cent and had come to accept such figures as profitable, within their own specia­
lised needs. But at least one industrialist carried his knowledge of the inherently 
low efficiency into regions beyond liquid metal pumps and implied that all linear 
motors must, of necessity, be of low power factor and efficiency (Armstrong, 
1967). I am indeed grateful for this public display of antagonism towards com­
mercial linear motors for it pointed out to me earlier than I might otherwise have 
noticed that if dimensionless quantities such as efficiency and power factor could 
be determined by the measurement of a single length (the length of the airgap), this 
fact might be unique in the scientific world. Be that last statement right or wrong, 
it set me out on a quest for the other linear dimension which must couple with the 
airgap length to provide the ‘magic ratio’. It is now a fact of history that I found 
that dimension in 1964, that it was the wavelength of the travelling wave of mag­
netic field and that ‘good’ machines could be designed with large airgaps, and 
this discovery, coming at that time, made it perhaps my biggest contribution to the 
subject, except for the discovery of the transverse flux topology (chapters 7 and 9).
4.15 Automation
If there is one outstanding fashion in a ‘fringe’ subject which is dominant today it 
is that of ‘automation’. There is probably more effort being directed towards the 
control of linear motors than towards their improvement as machines. Automatic 
conveyor belts, controlled accelerators, sliding doors, travelling cranes are all 
demanding better and cheaper controls, for linear motors themselves are inherently 
cheap to produce, being even easier to wind than are their rotary counterparts.
One other aspect of fashion is worthy of inclusion in this chapter. Fashion 
implies change, whether it be for better or for worse—and in many subjects who 
shall say which? In clothes, a French couturier can take a lady’s skirt hemline from 
the ground to the thigh overnight, but in engineering the change has to take place, 

‘FASHIONS’ IN ENGINEERING
93
of necessity, much more slowly. The time taken to change from British Units to 
metric is measured in decades, whereas change to decimal coinage takes only 
months.
4.16 Design or evolution?
When fashion changes slowly there is a possibility that ‘design’ may be largely 
replaced by ‘evolution’, where each ‘new’ machine is based on the previous one— 
and this is evolution proper. In my 1971 Chairman’s Address to the Power Board 
of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (Laithwaite, 1972) I declared that the first 
teapot ever to be designed had just appeared on the market! I exaggerated, of 
course, but merely to point out that most teapots were very ill-designed for the 
purpose intended and this largely because the shape of a teapot was ‘traditional’. 
How much better are we in electrical machine design? Already we fight the danger 
of the old dogmas dominating what should be essentially new thinking in linear 
motors. The double-sided sandwich motor was the first shape to be considered for 
high-speed transport, since it made the track as cheap as possible and eliminated the 
dreaded ‘magnetic pull’ in a single stroke. But the first of these qualities is now in 
question and fear of the second was destroyed in a simple short letter in the IEE 
Proceedings entitled ‘Unbalanced magnetic push’ (Freeman and Laithwaite, 1968).
Evolution is almost unavoidable in industrial ‘design’ offices (a contradiction in 
terms surely?) for no manufacturer can afford to design every machine ab initio, 
starting with Maxwell’s equations and using Conformal Transformations at the end 
of every tooth. So the designers use well-tested formulas which lead directly to 
equivalent circuits and quick answers. But now it is simply a question of where you 
stop—if the simple formulas are acceptable on the grounds that they are ‘well 
tested’ it is a short step to building the customer a machine which is very little 
different from a well-tested machine that has been available ‘off the shelf’ for years, 
for this also is well tested. This attitude is much encouraged by the profit motive.
4.17 Accountants become fashionable as dictators
It has been fashionable for quite some years now for the leaders of industry to have 
had their basic training at a School of Economics rather than an Engineering 
Department. This is nevertheless a fashion which never troubled the pioneers of the 
nineteenth century. Never for them was an accountant looking over their shoulder 
daily and asking ‘Will it make a profit next year?’ There is however the famous 
story of a lady who is supposed to have asked, ‘But Mr Faraday, what use is it?’ 
and received the sharp rebuff, ‘Madam, what is the use of a new-born baby?’
Fashions move on and although modern economics can never afford science to 
be the luxury it was in Faraday’s time, at least one engineer is encouraged by the 
Space Program and hopes that engineers as a community can keep in mind the 
slogan which is engraved around the Lamme Medal of the IEEE: “The engineer 
views hopefully the hitherto unattainable.” I hope that this is a fashion which 
never changes.

94
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
4.18 References
Adkins, B. (1957), The General Theory of Electrical Machines (Chapman and Hall)
Armstrong, D. S. (1967), ‘Application of the linear motor to transport’, Railway 
Gazette, Vol. 123, pp. 145-150
Blake, L. R. (1957), ‘Conduction and induction pumps for liquid metals’, Proc. 
IEE, Vol. 104A, No. 13, pp. 49-63
Freeman, E. M. and Laithwaite, E. R. (1968), ‘Unbalanced magnetic push’, Proc.
IEE,No\. 115, No. 4, p. 538
Laithwaite, E. R. (1972), ‘The shape of things to come’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 119, 
No. l,pp. 61-68
Lavelle, P. M. and Orpen, V. C. (1964), Sperry Report no. 153 (AERE, Harwell)
Park, R. H. (1929), ‘Two-reaction theory of synchronous machines—I’, Trans. 
AIEE, Vol. 48, pp. 716-730
Park, R. H. (1933), ‘Two-reaction theory of synchronous machines—II’, Trans.
AIEE, Vol. 52, pp. 352-354
Shturman, G. I. (1946), ‘Induction machines with open magnetic circuits’, Elek- 
trichestvo, No. 10, pp. 43-50
Shturman, G. I. and Aronov, R. L. (1947), ‘ “Edge effect” in induction machines 
with open magnetic circuits’, Elektrichestvo, No. 2, pp. 54-59

5 Electromagnetic levitation
5.1 Different worlds
A great deal of literature and much pontification have emerged from the last two 
decades on the subject of specialisation—or rather on its opposite, the ‘broadening’ 
of education. Since 1960 I have watched with interest, and sometimes with horror, 
the inroads which the educationalists, many of whom never did any research in 
science per se, have made into the educational institutions and their traditions, and 
this activity is by no means confined to Britain. Perhaps it had its origins in the 
‘Science makes War’ movement which followed when the full impact of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki had been felt by the man in the street who then, inadvertently or 
otherwise, brought his opinions to bear on his teenage children who then marched 
annually to Aldermaston or to any place rumoured to be dabbling in germ warfare 
and the like. But I think not. The broadeners consisted, at least in part, of those 
who felt a need to compete with their University colleagues who were more gifted 
in the art of research. Others were genuine crusaders with a deep sense of respon­
sibility for the Destiny of Man. What is surely a fact is that the broadening process 
overgrew itself like a neglected greenhouse plant and in the last decade alone I have 
seen the ‘broadening’ (usually said to the accompaniment of a gesture in which the 
arms are thrown apart) of primary school teaching, secondary school curricula, 
sixth form courses, undergraduate teaching, the Master’s degree and the Ph.D., in 
rapid succession. Not all establishments by any means joined this bandwagon, but 
nevertheless I feel that I can now look forward to the broadening of the D.Sc., the 
F.R.S. and perhaps ultimately the Nobel Prize!
But of course, it all depends on one’s definition of ‘broadening’. If the science 
side of it consists of writing new books in which Heat, Light, Sound, Magnetism 
and Electricity appear together in one volume of a series of books, one of which 
deals with Waves, Forces and Action at a Distance, another with Symmetry and 
Analogue, this is fine to my way of thinking, but any attempt to mingle Sociology 
and Atomic Physics will spell disaster for those who participate and for the organi­
sations whose members have been so taught. Now this is only one man’s opinion 
and I am merely exercising what I think has always been the right of a historian, 
namely to write his own ‘slant’ into his train of facts.
95

96
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
The vision of science as a great jigsaw puzzle covering the whole earth, in which 
millions were trying to fit pieces together on different ‘fronts’, quite unaware that 
the pieces which they needed badly were being examined on the other side of the 
world, has been with me for many years. It is only recently that I have come to 
know the immensity of the puzzle and the microscopic proportions which have 
been made to fit. But if I can stake my own claim to have put any pieces together, 
then I think I would like it said by others that I have cemented together the work 
begun by Bachelet in 1914 and have extended the knowledge of induction by that 
very process of combining electromagnetic levitation and the theory of electrical 
machines.
I think, for example, that it was obvious from the outset that levitation systems 
involved electric and magnetic fields in a three-dimensional space. What was less 
obvious was the restriction of elementary rotating machine theory to a one-dimen­
sional world in which the student was concerned only with magnetic flux which 
entered and emerged from primary and secondary pole surfaces at right angles to 
those surfaces. In other words, one could get near enough to the prediction of a 
machine’s performance by consideration of the radial dimension only. Perhaps 
the principal consideration responsible for this limited approach was the necessity 
to impart information to the student by means of books—essentially collections of 
flat pieces of paper on which the ability to be able to represent the so-called ‘essen­
tial’ parts of a machine on a single cross-sectional drawing was a ‘godsend’ indeed. 
These diagrams are, after all, only an elaboration of that popular seaside confection, 
also manufactured traditionally in cylindrical form, in which one of the principal 
attractions is the fact that wherever it is cut the words ‘Blackpool Rock’ can be 
seen.
An interesting point about the manufacture of seaside rock, for those who have 
never seen it made, is the fact that it starts as a cylinder of large diameter (about a 
foot) and is rolled out thinner and thinner until it is the designed selling thickness. 
During the rolling, the outer layers yield throughout the material, so that the 
coloured lettering first appears to be a completely random affair, as illustrated in 
figure 5.1.
More detailed design of machines for industry gave the impression that the 
machines were actually being given the full three-dimensional treatment by calcu­
lation of slot leakage, zig-zag leakage, etc., to take account of dimension no. 2, and 
of end-winding leakage and shaft voltages to bring in dimension no. 3, but it was 
only like having a bite at a cream cake in which the confectioner had smeared a thin 
layer of cream on top of a plain spongecake, whereas the full delight of a confec­
tion was only to be revealed when the entire inside of a cake was as interesting to 
the palate as the top decoration was to the eye! As in so many facets of machine 
theory however, one must seek an ‘enlightened’ viewpoint from the past rather 
than from the present, and the most elaborate books were produced nearly a 
century ago in which stiff, cut-out pages were laid layer upon layer to show the 
machine in every detail, just as if you were literally taking it apart with a spanner. 
The pages were coloured on both sides, giving views of both back and front, inside 
and outside and leaving no part unillustrated.

ELECTROMAGNETIC LEVITATION
97
(C)
Figure 5.1 Stages in the rolling of Blackpool Rock
As with many technological developments, it seems as if we had to get worse 
before we could get better!
5.2 Obsession with cylindrical geometry
Historically one must acknowledge Fleming as the first ‘levitator’, as already dealt 
with in chapter 2, even though the ‘jumping ring’ needed mechanical guidance 
laterally. Bachelet was undoubtedly the first man to recognise that induction forces 
could be used in two dimensions on the same piece of secondary conductor (he still 
used mechanical support laterally) but his ideas fell on barren ground at the time. 
Whether our obsession for cylindrical geometry stemmed principally from the need 
to print books or with the deeper-rooted pride of Man, that he had outwitted 
Nature by his exploitation of the wheel, is of little consequence perhaps, but not 
for another 50 years was there an attempt (outside the textile industry) to com­
bine forces in two dimensions in a single machine.

98
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Of course it could be that theory forbade experiment, for there was certainly a 
period in this century when the theoreticians were ‘tying up the ends’ of conven­
tional machine design so securely as to give the impression that nearly everything 
was known about rotating machines. Certainly I myself was advised in 1949 (on 
graduation) that I should do research in electronics, for only in industry where large 
teams of men and large sums of money were available were the ‘frontiers of know­
ledge’ being pushed forward in heavy machines. I came to learn later that such 
‘pushing forward’ very often meant no more than an increase of efficiency from 92 
to 93 per cent in a motor of given frame size.
As for levitation, an elegant paper in the Transactions of the Cambridge Philo­
sophical Society (Earnshaw, 1839) had revealed that stable levitation of objects was 
not possible in any system where the forces between the elements of the levitator 
and the levitated varied inversely as the square of their distance apart. This meant 
that a charged body could never be stably supported by other charges, nor a perma­
nent magnet by other magnets. Nevertheless, theoreticians are quite rightly dis­
believed, and I wish I had £1 for every hour spent by all individuals trying to 
balance permanent magnets on each other since 1839!
5.3 A theory ‘brought out and dusted’
The exceptions to Earnshaw’s theorem, or rather the conditions implied by his 
calculations under which stability was possible, were that the relative permeability 
or permittivity effective in the system should be less than unity—that is, diamag­
netic substances can be made stable in a permanent magnet field (Braunbek, 1939). 
Certainly, some 35 years ago I was shown a small drop of liquid air suspended for a 
few seconds (before it evaporated) between the tapering poles of a very powerful 
electromagnet but, as in other systems of levitation, the forces obtainable were of 
no more than ‘museum curiosity’ value.
In an interesting review of the whole subject of levitation (or ‘anti-gravity’ as 
some would call it) it was pointed out (Boerdijk, 1956) that there were four 
methods by which it could be achieved; namely
(1) reaction forces, as in rocket technology
(2) radiation pressure (very small forces at very great expense)
(3) diamagnetics in stationary magnetic fields
(4) quasi-stationary magnetic fields.
It is interesting to note that the last of these embraced both of the two systems 
which are now being hotly contested in the high-speed transport game (see chapter 
7); namely
(4a) induction at low frequency into secondary conductor
(4b) feedback systems using magnetic attraction limited by detector and feedback 
amplifier.
Two more diametrically opposed systems it would hardly be possible to find, as will 
be illustrated also in chapter 7.

ELECTROMAGNETIC LEVITATION
99
My work in this chapter has been simplified enormously by a publication (Geary, 
1964) in which almost every paper of note, even vaguely connected with electro­
magnetic levitation, was not only referenced but given a drastic condensation which 
varied from a page in length to zero, depending on its importance. The fact that this 
author included my own paper on ‘Linear induction motors’ in the Proceedings of 
the IEE for 1957 fills me with misgivings as to the adequacy of this book, for I can 
only afford to look at papers whose title suggests linear motors or levitation almost 
directly. Geary must have scanned virtually all papers and patents on induction in 
order to provide such a comprehensive book.
Returning to the subject of exceptions to Earnshaw’s theorem, the search for an 
equivalent to ferromagnetism on the ‘diamagnetic side’ of gj. = 1.0 might be com­
pared to the Gordian Knot of legend. This famous knot is reputed to have been tied 
by the Phrygian King Gordius to bind the pole to the sacred wagon in the Acropolis 
of Gordium. An oracle proclaimed that whoever untied the knot should conquer 
Asia. Many tried and an equal number failed, for we are told that no ends of the 
cord were showing. Then came Alexander the Great who cut the knot in half with 
his sword. ‘Cheat!’ might exclaim all those with any sense of justice, but Alexander 
went on to conquer not only Asia but all of the then-known world. (A friend of 
mine would declare at once that Alexander was to be complimented for his ‘lateral 
thinking’.)
The electromagnetic analogy is apparent when one considers the superconductor. 
Niobium-tin, one of the alloys which are best suited for this purpose, has a true 
value of very little removed from unity (like untying the Gordian Knot), but 
when used in an electric circuit it behaves as if pr ~ 0 (cutting the Knot, surely!). 
Geary credits a Russian (Arkadiev, 1945) with the first publication of supercon­
ducting levitation in which a bar magnet 15 mm long was supported over a super­
conducting lead plate at the Institute for Physical Problems of the Academy of 
Science of the USSR. A letter to Nature from the same author followed in 1947, 
including a photograph of a 4 x 4 x 10 mm bar in suspension.
Geary, pointing out that only Maxwell (1881) and Jeans (1925) had commented 
on Earnshaw’s theorem in the 100 years following its publication, referred delight­
fully to the papers of Holmes (1937) and Tonks (1940) in this context by saying 
“Earnshaw’s theorem,. . . was brought out and dusted.” He also effectively passed 
comment on the inefficacy of the Patent system by the following passage:
‘... at least six patents were granted for, or included descriptions of, arrays of 
permanent magnets intended or seemingly intended to be capable of producing 
levitation .. . One can only conclude that these inventors either did not try out 
their schemes before patenting them, or else assumed that it would be possible to 
obtain a position of stable equilibrium after further experiment. The first of these 
patents, that of Snell (1940), has been cited by patent examiners against more than 
a few later patents granted for magnetic suspensions: one wonders, therefore, 
whether the existence of these six patents has brought about the rejection of any 
applications made for patent cover for physically realisable magnetic suspensions.” 
—and fair comment too!

100
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Patents which were granted and undoubtedly worked were the results of the 
German Kemper using method 4(b) in the list described earlier on page 98 
(Kemper, 1934). Using an electromagnet operating via a good magnetic circuit into 
the underside of a steel girder and a sensing device to detect proximity to the 
girder (the sensing device feeding in turn an amplifier which then controlled the 
magnet strength) Kemper was without doubt the ‘father’ of the so-called ‘Maglev’ 
systems of the late 1960s in connection with high-speed transport—described in 
full in chapter 7. By 1938 Kemper had suspended 210 kg. His basic arrangement 
of magnetic circuit is shown in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2 Basic arrangement of Kemper’s patent, 1938
Of the electromagnetic self-stabilising methods (listed as 4a), the first of the 
‘moderns’ and possibly of all time was exhibited at the New York World’s fair in 
1939 (Bedford et al., 1939). Their system is shown in cross-section in figure 5.3. 
The input of 40kVA at 60 Hz floated a 19-jinch diameter disc at a height of 
3-j- inch, a remarkable achievement as a mere ‘starter’ in the subject. Loaded with 
13 lbs of non-conductive material, the suspended height was reduced to 1-J inch. 
Peer (1940) went on to develop more elaborate systems of 3 or 4 coils placed at the 
corners of triangles or squares respectively. Geary comments on interesting ‘spin­
off’ topics, recording such facts as that “the disc will return to its central position 
after being displaced 4 inch off centre and may be thrown into the levitating field 
from 10 ft. away,” and “At certain critical temperatures a disc 3/32 inch was found
Figure 5.3 Bedford, Peer and Tonks’ induction levitator, 1939, shown in cross­
section

ELECTROMAGNETIC LEVITATION
101
to emit a loud note, apparently due to resonance with the frequency of the levi­
tating field at critical resistances of the disc material.” Finally, this interesting 
passage: “The use of a shading coil to produce rotation of the disc is described. 
Use of the device for advertising displays is envisaged: its possible application as a 
centrifuge is mentioned.”
This last application, like many others in linear motor techniques proper also 
had a ‘pupation’ period, in this case some 34 years, for only in 1973 did the medical 
centrifuge become the subject of further research. The combined levitation and 
rotation can now be seen as the very first ‘electromagnetic river’ (see chapter 7, 
section 7.10) albeit in this case a ‘whirlpool’ rather than a ‘river’. Regarding the 
acoustic resonance described, this is a clear practical indication (if one is ever 
needed) to demonstrate the fact that a vertical axis levitation is but a curious form 
of single-phase, linear induction motor. In addition to the steady component of 
tangential force produced by shading ring, split-phase coils or rotation alone, all 
single-phase motors produce a pulsating force at double supply frequency.
The only difference between the Bedford, Peer and Tonks’ levitator and those 
which we developed at Manchester in the late 1950s was the extra outer magnetic 
ring, shown in the cross-sectional view of figure 5.4 (compare with figure 5.3). Only
/aluminium plate
Figure 5.4 Cross-section of a levitator of ‘modern’ times
after we had discovered accidentally for ourselves that a small piece of aluminium 
held just above the centre of such a double-coil system would experience a down­
ward attractive force, did I read of the attempts of Lovell and others to utilise a 
similar force in a Bedford, Peer and Tonks’ levitator to remove non-ferrous particles 
from human eyes (Lovell, 1955). Lovell’s experiments had two quite distinct 
effects on my own research in the early 1960s. First, they suggested to me that all 
stable electromagnetic levitation systems in which the primary coils were entirely 
below the suspended body also produced, of necessity, a ‘cone of attraction’ as 
shown in figure 5.5 which must cut the suspended object for the latter to be stable. 
This untrue assumption on my part was to inhibit my initial thinking on the possi­
bilities of large levitation systems (such as those with possible application to pas­
senger vehicles), since it appeared that a levitator supplied at 50 Hz had a maximum

102
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 5.5 The ‘cone of attraction’ above a levitator. Conducting pieces within the 
cone are attracted, outside it they are repelled
suspension height, by the very nature of electromagnetism (in the same way that 
there is a maximum size of bird that can fly or a minimum size of shunt generator 
which can ever self-excite).
Secondly, as if to compensate for this negative thinking, I learned from Lovell’s 
failure to remove tiny particles of metal from the eye that his failure was funda­
mental, and in the process of pursuing what was later to become my ‘goodness 
factor’ (Laithwaite, 1965), I first became aware of the ‘size effect’ which I was to 
develop subsequently to cover the whole range of magnetic and electromagnetic 
devices and which enabled me to see clearly which high-speed transport proposals 
were ‘non-starters’ long before millions of pounds had been spent on their develop­
ment. Expressed mathematically, the size rule for electromagnetism relates the rate 
of temperature rise in any secondary member which is required to be moved by 
induction, to the absolute size of such secondary.
Thus if the rate of temperature rise be dT/dt and the object to be moved has an 
acceleration F/M (force per unit mass) in unrestricted motion, the absolute linear 
dimension (£) to which all dimensions of any secondary are related is governed by
=^F" 
(5.1)
ot
where k is a constant of proportionality and n is greater than unity. Stated in 
practical terms, this means that if acceleration of a mass is attempted by induction, 
other things (including shape, cooling method, etc.) being equal, the conducting 
mass will ultimately melt before it moves, as it is made smaller and smaller.
5.4 Levitation melting
While some experimenters were bemoaning this fact, others were exploiting it, and 
the desirability of melting small specimens of metal in vacuo, without contamination 
by physical contact, inspired many workers to produce successful solutions to the 
problem by induction in which the secondary currents both suspended and melted 
the metal. In such a system, primary coils could be placed in any position, including 
vertically above the specimen to be lifted, and such a position was desirable when 
the melted metal was finally to be dropped into a receptacle. As Geary points 
out, although the first patent on this subject was filed in 1923 (Muck, 1923) the 

ELECTROMAGNETIC LEVITATION
103
practical techniques did not appear until some 28 years later when there followed 
a flood of papers, mostly by American authors, between 1951 and 1958. Be that as 
it may, Muck’s patent certainly held the key by declaring the advantages of coils 
above the specimen, later to be known as ‘attractors’.
The major difference between the apparatus for levitation melting and that of 
larger levitators for transport, however, lies in the frequency of the supply. Where 
levitation at the lowest cost is the target, the system should clearly be as large as 
possible, as indicated by equation (5.1). If small enough, a levitator will melt the 
secondary whether the designer wishes it to be so or not, but in the ‘no-man’s land’ 
between these extremes, the designer must seek what is in effect artificial deter­
ioration of performance—that is, a larger secondary loss per unit of force applied. 
In the several important papers on the purely metallurgical applications the designers 
were, in the main, physicists who were unlikely to come to an engineer’s viewpoint 
of the problem, which is that the appropriate analogy in these problems is to regard 
the forces which oppose those due to gravity as being supplied by moving magnetic 
fields. For each system the slip is unity, so that the power dissipated in the second­
ary increases with increase in synchronous speed. Since ‘effective pole pitch’ is 
set by the dimensions of the specimen, the only variable is frequency.
The experimenters of the 1950s are not to be regarded as ‘slow developers’. 
Remember: Tn the bright light of hindsight all things are obvious!’ Nor were the 
high-frequency systems apparently the result of massive calculations. At least I 
have failed to find any formal design technique for the shape of levitator which 
became popular as a metallurgical melting system, as shown in figure 5.6, other 
than that the best way to hold liquid is in a basin with a concave surface facing 
upwards, so they built a basin-shaped coil and found that it worked! The other 
design feature which was forced upon the experimenters was that the primary 
losses were also high and needed to be literally washed away by using tubular 
conductors for the primary coils through which water could be pumped con­
tinuously.
A great deal of discussion went on concerning the question of whether a liquid 
metal which was free to move in any direction at a microscopic level could ever
h—1in —H
conductors 1/4india
Figure 5.6 Cross-section through a water-cooled primary system for suspending 
liquid metal

104
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
truly be contained by induced current alone, for a ring of mercury in a trough 
surrounding a ‘jumping ring’ core is known to be in constant agitation as a result of 
the narrowest sections ‘pinching’ and parting, only to be continually rejoined by 
the effects of gravity. Surface tension, of course, plays a part, but the ultimate 
conclusion of most authors appeared to be that oxide film forming on the surface, 
as the result of what little air remained in the melting vessel, was a vital contri­
bution to the stability of shape of the molten mass (generally of a ‘pear’ shape, as 
shown in figure 5.6). Without oxide film, many metals dripped from the bottom as 
soon as they become molten.
Another facet of levitation is its application to attempts to produce higher and 
higher rotational speeds of objects in vacuo. Once bearing contact can be eliminated 
entirely, speeds a whole order of magnitude greater than otherwise obtainable 
become possible. Without doubt the authority on this subject is Jesse W. Beams, no 
fewer than 40 of his papers being listed by Geary. In 1969 I met one of the authors 
of the Guinness Book of Records, the late Ross McWhirter, while on holiday and 
pointed out to him that the highest rotational speed produced by man was not ‘in 
the Book’. I quoted a paper by Beams recording one million revolutions per second. 
Not long afterwards, Ross McWhirter wrote to me to say that he had communicated 
with Beams whose world record now stood at 1.5 million revolutions per second 
(90 000 000 r.p.m.)! At such speed the periphery of a needle of 0.001 inch diameter 
spinning on its own axis would need to sustain a radial acceleration of over a 
hundred million times the acceleration due to gravity, without doubt one of the 
most amazing feats of technology of modern times. Some of the vacua necessary 
for speeds of this order were such that when the rotating magnetic field drive was 
removed the rotor reduced in speed by 1 per cent over a period of two hours. But 
then, men have made a ‘tilt meter’ that can detect lunar-produced ‘tides’ in a cup 
of tea!
5.5 Levitation with a degree of freedom
Another experimenter in levitation, E. C. Okress (Okress et al., 1952), and myself 
both found it possible (independently) to levitate a metallic object with a single coil. 
The apparent impossibility of such a feat, for myself at least, was broken only when I 
realised another great bedrock on which electromagnetic theory can be erected, and 
I have frequently declared it to students in the following manner: Tn any problem 
concerned with electromagnetic induction, the flux pattern cannot be determined 
until the secondary current distribution is known, yet until the flux pattern is 
known, the secondary current pattern is unknown’. Such a statement is not to be 
interpreted as saying that induction processes cannot be evaluated. It states, how­
ever, that human failing which demands, among other things, that we shall always 
have simultaneous equations to solve is the result perhaps only of our lengthy 
process of ‘explaining’ electromagnetism in terms of classical physics. As in life, 
if you tell one lie, you usually have to tell another to cover it up!
The lesson to be learned from the statement on purely physical considerations, 
however, is that the apparent lack of ‘ingredients’ required to produce a desired 

ELECTROMAGNETIC LEVITATION
105
effect on an object will often be solved by the existence of the object itself, often 
giving therefore apparently impossible achievements. For example, the primary 
coils of a single-phase induction motor are apparently incapable of producing any 
kind of rotating field, ‘and therefore’, doubtless cried the pessimists of 1880 ‘it can 
never run’. There is a piece of prose by Minnie Louise Haskins, made more famous 
by its quotation by King George VI in speaking to his people at Christmas 1939 
when all seemed uncertain in World War II, that could well still be used to put heart 
into those who fear the limitations of electromagnetism: ‘And I said to the man who 
stood at the gate of the year: “Give me a light that I may tread safely into the 
unknown” and he replied: “Go out into the darkness and put your hand into the 
hand of God. That shall be to you better than light and safer than a known way.” ’ 
So might a prophet of 1880 have said to Tesla: ‘Ask not how the rotating field shall 
be produced. Only place a rotor in the path of the pulsating flux and give it a push.’
Levitation by induction was achieved, I am convinced, by just such acts of faith, 
for permanent magnets came before electromagnets and Earnshaw’s theorem came 
up like barbed wire each time stable levitation was considered. For me, stability 
was achieved initially only through the mechanism of setting up inward-travelling 
fields by feeding inner and outer coils of the levitator shown in figure 5.4 with 
currents of appropriate phase difference. Later I discovered that the inner coil 
could be disconnected from the mains and simply short-circuited on itself to act as 
a ‘shading ring’ with the lagging current which this action implies. It was several 
years before it was realised that the levitated object itself might provide the lagging 
current and therefore the inward-travelling field needed for stability. I know not by 
what thought processes Okress arrived at the system shown in figure 5.7, which is 
only two-dimensional to the extent that it represents a cross-section of a long tube 
supported by parallel wires which ultimately were joined at the ends of the ‘track’ 
to form a very long narrow single coil. Dr Nix and I arrived at the same system 
some time later without the knowledge of Okress’s work.
solid conducting 
cylinder (or sphere)
primary loop
Figure 5.7 A single coil can support a conducting ball or cylinder
Such systems were to reveal a further ‘secret’ of electromagnetic induction. The 
tubular secondary of figure 5.7 need not extend the full length of the primary. 
When a short length of tube is suspended over a long coil, no change in operating 
conditions occurs as the result of movement along the coil—that is, movement 

106
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
perpendicular to the plane of the diagram in figure 5.7. This fact should have made 
its full impact far earlier than it did, for in my Manchester days (prior to 1964) we 
demonstrated a similar system, using twin primary coils and a flat plate, in which 
the latter can likewise move with zero resistance in a horizontal plane. Our only 
satisfaction in those days was that we had produced a ‘spirit level’ (without spirit!) 
and that in this respect the device was perfect, in that when at rest, any force 
greater than zero would start it moving. We did not know that we stood at the gates 
of a much bigger city within which electromagnetism was to be practised in three 
dimensions. But the story of levitation must properly be halted temporarily here, 
for historically it awaited the spur of the application to high-speed transport before 
it moved on significantly.
5.6 References
Arkadiev, V. (1945), ‘Hovering of a magnet over a supraconductor’, Journal of 
Physics (Moscow), Vol. 9, No. 2, p. 148
Bedford, B. D., Peer, L. H. B. and Tonks, L. (1939), ‘The electromagnetic levitator’, 
General Electric Review, Vol. 42, No. 6, pp. 246-247
Boerdijk, A. H. (1956), ‘Levitation by static magnetic fields’, Philips Technical 
Review, Vol. 18, pp. 125-127
Braunbek, W. (1939), ‘Free suspension of diamagnetic bodies in magnetic fields’, 
Zeitschrift furPhysik, Vol. 112, pp. 764-769 (in German)
Earnshaw, S. (1839), ‘On the nature of the molecular forces which regulate the 
constitution of the luminiferous ether’, Trans. Cambridge Philosophical Society, 
Vol. 7 (published 1942), pp. 97-112 (Paper read 18 March 1939)
Geary, P. J. (1964), Magnetic and Electric Suspensions (British Scientific Instru­
ment Research Association)
Holmes, F. T. (1937), ‘Axial magnetic suspensions’, Review of Scientific Instru­
ments, Vol. 8, No. 11, pp. 444-447
Jeans, J. H. (1925), The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism 
(Cambridge University Press, 5th edition)
Kemper, H. (1934), German Patent No. 643 316
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965), ‘The goodness of a machine’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, No. 3, 
pp.538-541
Lovell, W. V. (1955), ‘Electromagnet removes nonferrous metals’, Electronics, 
Vol. 28, No. 9,pp. 164-166
Maxwell, J. C. (1881), A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Oxford University 
Press, 2nd edition)
Muck, 0. (1923), German Patent No. 422 004
Okress, E. C. et al. (1952), ‘Electromagnetic levitation of solid and molten metals’, 
J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 23, pp. 545-552
Peer, L. H. B. (1940), British Patent No. 535 871
Snell, M. S. (1940), British Patent No. 539 409
Tonks, L. (1940), ‘Note on Earnshaw’s theorem’, Electrical Engineering (New 
York), Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 118-119

6 Academics and industrialists
6.1 Background
There are so many facets to almost any subject worthy and old enough to deserve 
a historical record that to tell the whole in its proper time sequence would be to 
lose the reader in a sea of facts and details, some related, others not at all. Electric 
motors and generators ‘came of age’ over almost the same period that engineering 
was becoming clean and respectable as a profession. Although technology (inextric­
ably entangled with engineering so that it can never, in my view, be unravelled) 
preceded science, indeed paved the way for it, scientists were regarded for centuries 
as belonging to the upper class, the intelligentsia, so closely related to philosophers 
as to allow overlap. In such a world, technology was not recognised as a subject 
and engineers, by definition, did not appear until there were ‘engines’ for them to 
look after. Even then an engineer looked after his engines much as a shepherd did 
his sheep.
Even in the early part of the twentieth century, science as a whole was almost a 
‘middle class’ occupation compared with studies of the classics. I myself attended 
a Grammar School where the headmaster was a scholar of Latin and Greek and a 
Minister of the Church (without Parish). He regarded all his pupils who elected to 
pursue science in the sixth form as slightly deranged mentally and saw little point 
in studying physics except as a discipline, and therefore those who pursued it could 
only be faced with the possibility of teaching the stuff to the next generation in 
order to perpetuate it. (In fact his outlook on physics coincided almost exactly 
with my outlook, at that time, on ancient Greek!)
I am sure that World War II brought home to many the tremendous intellectual 
content of applied science, together with, in my case, the realisation that, even if 
my own school was unaware of it, there existed recognition of the extensions of the 
disciplines of pure science into more than a score of engineering subjects, all of 
which could be read at universities. After that the question: ‘Where does pure 
science end and applied science begin?’ could never again be answered, but for the 
first forty years of the twentieth century there was a similar question which had an 
obvious answer: ‘Where does an engineering academic end and an industrialist 
107

108
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
begin?’ The universities and the factories were as far apart as the gymnasium and 
the monastery. University graduates who dared to set foot in a factory were inevit­
ably greeted by the manager ‘who’d worked ’is way up from’t shop floor’ with a 
sentence such as: “Ah suppose tha’ thinks tha’ knows it aw!” (in my home county 
of Lancashire, of course). In a small way perhaps, this watershed inhibited linear 
motor development for the industrialist would make a linear machine, basing his 
designs on conventional rotary machine practice, find it to have an efficiency of 
20 per cent and a power factor of 0.1, and abandon it for the rest of his career. 
The reason for the low values of these, in part, still fashionable quantities, was 
not only the lack of theoretical ability but the low speed and small size of appli­
cations for which the linear motor was suggested. (In the 1950s I had a standard 
form of reply letter for correspondents who had ‘invented’ the application of 
linear motors for car windscreen wipers.)
So the academic tended to dislike the industrialist and the industrialist both 
distrusted and feared the academic—distrusted because ‘theory never works in 
practice’ and feared because the managing director might reveal some chink in his 
‘armour of experience’ when confronted by the academic in the presence of some 
of his own staff. Had not the ‘long-haired Professor’ long been a music-hall joke 
and his caricature the subject of comedy films?
6.2 Portrait of an academic
Perhaps it was World War II which came to the rescue again when the ridiculous 
Professor became almost indistinguishable from the ‘Back Room Boy’—a war hero 
if ever one existed! It reminded me of a young lady who was quite accurately des­
cribed as ‘long and lanky’ until she inherited half a million pounds and overnight 
became ‘tall and stately’. The image of a Professor ‘stumbling across ideas’ was 
transformed into the Scientist making ‘inspired guesses’. ‘Men ahead of their time’ 
became a common compliment to those whose ideas were so abstract that they 
could not be understood. It was true of some, not of others. The image of a scien­
tist as a hermit, neglecting himself and his bodily needs in the cause of science 
also found support and the genius of Oliver Heaviside had long been recognised by 
the 1950s, supported by a special volume of the IEE Proceedings to celebrate in 
1950 the century since his birth. If further example be needed then the Russian- 
born Dr N. Japolsky was surely everyman’s ‘boffin’. Moreover, he is my link with 
the past as I was privileged to meet, just once (see chapter 2, pages 41-43), this 
genius of the ‘old school’ who became the legendary academic, regarded perhaps 
by today’s undergraduates as part legend, part fact.
It was not until I had begun to write this book that I realised that Professor 
E. M. Freeman, my present colleague and friend at Imperial College, had known 
Japolsky well and I am greatly indebted to Professor Freeman for allowing me to 
recount some of his personal recollections of this amazing man, for me a true 
inhabitant of the ‘first age of topology’. Professor Freeman recalls Japolsky’s 
philosophical attitude towards the ‘unbelievers’ of one of his theories, a much more 
patient and tolerant attitude than was my own at the time of the closure of the

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
109
Tracked Hovercraft project (see chapter 7). “Aristotle had to wait 2000 years,” 
reflected Japolsky, “so why should I worry?” This book records that he did not 
have to wait more than 50 years to see the application of his ideas. Of his forging 
hammer he claimed such accuracy that: “With this magnetofuge hammer I can 
crack nuts without breaking the kernels.”
Professor Freeman described for me a visit he made to Japolsky’s lodging, a 
description from whose value I should only detract by any attempt to modify:
“At his invitation I visited him at his flat in Highgate. The flat was in a chaotic state 
with books and papers everywhere. Poor Dr. Japolsky was apparently very worried 
about the possibility of being evicted because he was using one bedroom as a 
laboratory. We went into this room and he proudly pointed out a set of cupboards 
of unusual shape. He opened the doors to reveal a bedstead. He was, he claimed, 
therefore still using the room as a bedroom. Although this was within the letter of 
the law (according to Japolsky) the whole ruse was negated by a gigantic assembly 
standing in the middle of the floor. This object was the reason for my visit. Japolsky 
required an extra pair of hands in order to conduct his experiments. The reward 
would be great ‘cudos’ [szc]. The apparatus terrified me. It looked like the com­
mand module of an Apollo in the launch position. Japolsky had obviously not 
changed his equipment suppliers since the day he declared that all experimental 
equipment could be made up from articles bought at Woolworths. The object was 
constructed from copper wire, bits of wood and an enormous quantity of paper— 
any paper—used as an insulator. Paper was everwhere, giving the impression of being 
ankle deep. It was a potential home for mice! He described the apparatus as his 
‘magnetofugal umbrella’. It was not awfully clear just how it worked. A rotating 
field (electric?) would cause air to be rotated and thrown out of the base and the 
whole assembly would rise in the air. Electrically it looked extremely dangerous.
“I tried to persuade Japolsky that he would be better employed writing up his 
life’s work rather than trying to conduct further experiments. As I expected, he was 
not interested in writing, he only wanted to go on experimenting. I had to decline 
the invitation to work with him on the grounds that I was already committed to 
work one day a week at Imperial College, apart from my daily tasks at King’s 
College.
“I believe his experiments were not the important things. They were a means to 
some other end. Any newcomer to the staff at King’s during Japolsky’s stay was 
soon tracked down and invited to his room for a chat. He was extremely slow in 
speech and he still retained a very heavy Russian accent. He would be extremely 
persuasive and it was only with the utmost difficulty that you could get away 
without promising him some assistance.
“He had absolutely charming manners and was a great favourite with wives of 
staff at social gatherings. He would always appear at these functions in formal 
attire. He did everything slowly, very slowly. Putting on his glasses or getting a 
book out of a cupboard seemed to take minutes. Some months after he had left 
King’s I saw him in the Strand during the evening rush hour. Everyone was in a 
hurry except Japolsky. He was carrying unprotected several 5-foot long glass rods 

110
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
before him like a spear. I had a word with him and asked if he was going far with 
the glass. He was ‘going home on the Northern line’—I doubt if the rods survived!”
He once embarked on an extraordinary project to make a six-strand, flat cable. 
People told him that it was available commercially but he was intent on making his 
own. His criterion of excellence was still: ‘as bought at Woolworths’. The winding 
machine took months to build. It was made from a breadboard, four television 
table legs, two silver-covered wedding cake bases, two rubber heels, razor blades, 
Sellotape, knitting needles and door finger plates. The cable that came out of it 
had to be seen to be believed.
In cupboards around the electrical department Japolsky kept bits of equipment 
which were regarded by many as the products of an eccentric mind. But for his 
sternest critics there was always the feeling that he was close to something. (There 
was a story that he once designed an electromagnetic cannon for the Czar.)
At his memorial service on 29 June 1972, the address was given by Professor 
James Greig who was Head of the Department in which both Freeman and Japolsky 
worked, and perhaps the best description of the latter comes from this address: 
“No one could be long in Japolsky’s company without recognising an intellect of 
exceptional power and a mind which was a storehouse of knowledge both scientific 
and cultural. He had a fund of reminiscence, particularly of his early days in Russia. 
He would recall how, shortly after the Revolution he exchanged a few words with 
Pavlov when they stood together in a queue.
“He could be a delightful companion, yet one had to approach his companion­
ship with a little caution, for as he was once described to me, he was a man with no 
sense of time.. ..
“In a way, he exemplified one of the great Christian virtues, courage in the face 
of rejection and defeat.
“In the words of the Apostle Paul he was ‘able to withstand in the evil day and, 
having done all, to stand.’ ”
6.3 The importance of a great industrialist
The Japolsky s of academic life were no strangers to me during my Assistant Lecturer 
days in Manchester. The slogan ‘publish or perish’ was just a joke, until in 1952 I 
was told that I would not be re-appointed at the end of my three-year appointment 
as I had not published any work. It was not a joke after all! As a result only of the 
efforts of my head of department, Professor F. C. Williams, a ‘stay of execution’ of 
one year was granted to see if I really had the makings of an academic. It was 
during this period of great uncertainty that I observed a certain lecturer in botany 
who was spoken of in hushed tones by his students as ‘the only man in the world 
who could identify, with certainty, one particular species of moss’. I was duly 
impressed, and even more so when the lecturer got himself a Chair of Botany. I 
enquired further of the species of moss and was told that it was only to be found 

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS 
111
in the Chilean Andes above 10000 feet, so who cared? Somebody cared—he got a 
Chair!
I determined to get me one of these mosses—an ‘electromagnetic moss’ of 
course, but like the real moss, a great rarity. I would get the largest orange box I 
could find and stand on it at the Hyde Park Corner of the academic world and 
declare as loudly as possible: ‘I am the world’s leading authority on ? ?’. It only 
took me an hour or two to fill in the blank space at the end with ‘Linear Motors’, 
for the Westinghouse aircraft launcher Electropult had fascinated me for some 
seven years. I was not to know until the industrialist who mattered most entered 
my world, that my ‘moss’ grew in everybody’s garden—how lucky can you be?
By 1957 I had won myself a doctorate for my work on linear motors and had 
not only been appointed to age of retirement but had been promoted senior lec­
turer.
So when the industrialists began to enquire of the linear motors which I claimed 
I had made my own, they were all warned off by such statements as, ‘They are 
much too low inefficiency because of the large airgap’, ‘There is too much magnetic 
pull’ and all the phrases with which my own enthusiasm had been blunted prior to 
my Ph.D. (and, oddly enough, are still being used by people in high places when 
such phrases lead to the desired answer!)—all, that is, but one.
Gilbert Vaughan Sadler was a member of the North Western Centre Committee 
of the IEE, as was I, in 1958. Gilbert, I knew, worked for Vaughan Cranes (in 
Vaughan Street) in Manchester (although I did not recognise the possible connec­
tion of his middle initial for many years). At committee meetings he would ask me 
about linear motors and whether he could come and see my experiments. Once in 
the lab, he would argue that low efficiency was of hardly any consequence in 
moving the gantry of a travelling crane. I was wrong, he said, to condemn linear 
motors as I was now doing. I was right before I got my Ph.D. There was a great 
future for linear motors. In the end he won the argument and I agreed to help him 
design the first motor for a crane traverse. It was also the first time I had made 
money out of linear motor studies!
Throughout the trials and setbacks of my days with the British Transport Com­
mission in the early 1960s, Gilbert never lost faith and we became friends as well as 
business partners, both aspects of which grew increasingly until Gilbert’s untimely 
death in 1973. He was a man full of vigour and of good business sense, just the sort 
of man we needed to bridge that gulf between the academic in his ivory tower and 
the industrialist who would never admit to ignorance about any aspect of his busi­
ness. He experimented with products as I did with concepts of magnetic circuits. 
His thinking was never ‘out of date’. His conversation could stimulate me as could 
that of several of my academic colleagues. Casting aside the glamour of high-speed 
transport he had his sights set on such a multiplicity of uses for linear induction 
motors that he could have hoped, as did the painter Deakins when painting a 2 ft x 
1 ft canvas with a palette knife in 20 minutes, to have a piece of his work in every 
home in Britain. Like Moses, however, he was only allowed to see the Promised Land 
from afar and he died on his way to read his IEE paper on the applications of linear 
motors (Sadler and Davey, 1971) to the IEE local centre in Hull.

112
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
6.4 The new generation
But in many other places the division between industrialists and academics was 
being bridged. Consulting for industry by university lecturers was encouraged by 
allowing the latter to keep their fees either wholly or in part. It became fashionable 
in the 1960s for Professors to become Company Directors also. From the opposite 
direction, prominent industrialists became part-time Industrial Professors of Uni­
versities. Research workers outside universities were allowed to register for higher 
degrees, including the Ph.D. As the decade neared its end the future of linear 
motors for slow speeds was assured, even though there was no official fanfare of 
trumpets to announce the fact. Such a fanfare was reserved for the high-speed trans­
port applications which captured the imagination of newspapermen and public alike.
There was a new generation of young engineers springing up who had put aside 
fears of world catastrophe by nuclear bomb and had a genuine concern for such new 
topics as social science, while famine and pollution were to replace atomic war as 
the Great Black Shadow over mankind.
The definition of pollution was often broad enough to cover pollution by sound 
and by atmospheric disturbance, as well as actual chemical substances poisoning 
air and sea alike, and in such a climate all-electric propulsion for high-speed travel 
was a ‘natural’. As will be seen from chapter 7, however, some of the fanfares were 
blown too loudly and some were out of tune.
My ‘moss’ grew in private gardens rather than in fields, and certainly not yet on 
the railway tracks of the world.
6.5 John Lowe
I find it quite impossible to write a history of linear motors without reserving a 
corner of it for a most remarkable man. I met him originally in connection with 
high-speed transport but, since his production of hardware has always been severely 
limited, I choose to describe his activities here on the grounds that, so far as linear 
motors are concerned, he has never been for me, either industrialist or academic. 
More than that, I would describe him as almost a ‘species’ apart and if not Homo 
sapiens, then surely H sapiens sapiens would be more fitting for, on the subject of 
industrialists, wisdom poured from him like a torrent. Academically I could never 
fault him on induction motor theory and I will always recall in this connection 
his first visit to me in Manchester in 1958.
When he slipped in modestly the fact that he had had no formal technological 
education, having obtained a first degree in Mediaeval Languages at Oxford, my 
reaction was one of plain disbelief. He spoke of his ‘consortium’ of companies but 
I was never to know more than that about his personal connections. What I do 
know is that he obtained a pit-head winding pulley (some 15 ft in diameter) and 
had it delivered by road from the Potteries to Trafford Park, Manchester, with 
police escort. There he had the use of premises of a civil contractor and set up the 
wheel as a base for a circular aluminium track around which he proposed to run a 
400 Hz motor which George Nix and I built for him, and Hugh Bolton (now a 

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
113
member of my staff) helped him put together with a 400 Hz generator and prime 
mover.
His interest in high-speed transport could be traced back further than my own 
for in August 1958, together with Sir Alfred Bossom, a report was prepared for the 
Rt Hon. Harold Watkinson M.P., the then Minister of Transport. Among his other 
business associates was Sir Frederick Snow and I remember a champagne party 
which was held at the latter’s offices in Southwark Street, London SEI, to intro­
duce the Gentlemen of the Press to ‘Magnarail’. Previous to that, he had set up a 
lunch date in London with myself and representatives of Alcan Industries who, as a 
result, offered me a mile of aluminium plate free of charge on which to test a high­
speed motor. The ‘climate’ at British Rail at that time was most unfavourable and 
neither that track, nor John Lowe’s 15-ft wheel track ever materialised, for he never 
found sufficient funds for a big enough prime mover for his 400 Hz supply, and 
eventually the civil contractors in Trafford Park forced him to dismantle the system.
Readers may like to refer back to this section after having read chapter 7 and 
reflect that
(i) John Lowe proposed in 1958 precisely the same form of magnetically levitated 
and propelled vehicle as the most advanced form of feedback amplifier system 
proposed in 1974.
(ii) the building of either the wheel track or the mile of aluminium at that time 
would have changed the whole of transport history.
I like to think that I may still count John Lowe among my friends although 
there have been times when I have given him just as much ‘cold shoulder’ as was 
ever meted out to me in the same context. He has taught me much about the ways 
of industrialists. He would refer to large industrial empires (both nationalised and 
otherwise) as ‘dinosaurs’ and told me a long time ago that I must learn to live 
among dinosaurs. “All you have to do,” he said, “is to learn how to move faster 
than they do, which is easy.” Another quote which I shall always remember is: 
“The only place to be is in the Driving Seat.”—I try, John, I keep trying!
6.6 The ‘clean-up’ men
In many social systems, whether they be of men or of insects, there are those with a 
flair for exploration, a natural desire to be ‘first’, and they are invariably followed 
by a larger group which then ‘saturate’ the newly won territory, exploring every 
corner of it, classifying it, making it fit existing knowledge. The army calls it 
‘mopping up’. Engineers may call it ‘analysis’.
There is no suggestion intended in this concept that the ‘clean-up men’ are in 
any way inferior or of less moral fibre than the ‘front men’. Those skilled in 
mathematical manipulation may embark on analyses which are in no way forced 
upon them and they are, to this extent, front men also. But it has always been my 
experience that when an entirely new invention has been made, its originator saw it 
as a physical concept first and then set down its equations, even though his first 
paper on the subject may be written ‘maths first’. Yet the interplay between indus­

114
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
trialists and academics is such that analysis carried out by the man with a pistol at 
his head (the industrially employed analyst) may unconsciously be solving the 
problem of the device yet to be invented.
So, in a way, it was with linear motors. The textile men did their experiments 
almost entirely without analysis. Had they enjoyed commercial success, the theory 
of edge effects in linear motors might well have been advanced by 50 years or more. 
Even asit was, the theory of a discontinuous pole array in an a.c.-produced magnetic 
system was first attempted for purely commercial reasons. Russian engineers in the 
1940s had tried to capitalise on that same effect that had frustrated Boucherot 
40 years earlier—the utilisation of magnetic pull. If the top half only of a conven­
tional stator were used to drive a complete rotor (figure 6.1(a)), then the magnetic 
upward pull on the latter might compensate, possibly completely, for the force of 
gravity, thus relieving the bearings of their load. A second glance at figure 6.1(a), 
however, suffices to show that the driving thrust will also require bearing reaction, 
being no longer symmetrical cylindrically. The ideal ‘arch motor’, as such machines 
were called, is therefore that shown in figure 6.1(b) where electromagnetic thrust 
and magnetic lift are combined to produce a net thrust of zero on the rotor bearings.
Figure 6.1 (a) An arch motor whose magnetic pull can lift the rotor in its bearings, 
(b) An offset arch to utilise both drive and radial forces for rotor lift

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
115
This condition can clearly obtain at only one speed and load, but good design, 
preceded by a knowledge of the dependence of flux and current loadings on the slip 
(arch motors were all induction machines) could clearly minimise rotor bearing 
pressures under all required running conditions, and a knowledge of the effect of 
edge transients was therefore vital.
The problem was tackled by Shturman and Aronov who set out the problem in 
the form of third-order partial differential equations which they proceeded to solve. 
Their mathematical model was a good one and it revealed many of the effects due 
to the entry of unmagnetised rotor teeth into the ‘active zone’ of the stator and 
their subsequent extraction at the exit edge. They were able to take secondary 
leakage reactance into account and they set out their conclusions in a positive 
manner, indicating clearly the new effects which the edge transients introduced. 
For example, they indicated clearly that the rotor bars in the active zone would 
carry heavy currents at zero slip and there would therefore be rotor ohmic loss on 
no load. They predicted extra ohmic loss at other values of slip and a complete re­
distribution of airgap flux density, depending on slip and the other parameters of 
the machine.
For the purpose of predicting the performance of a piece of machine which had 
already been built, this approach was excellent. The one thing it lacked was the 
ability to tell designers how to improve an existing design, for the equations were 
so complex that only a process of changing one parameter and repeating the com­
plete solution would give any indication of whether the change had even been in 
the right direction. Couple with this the fact that their analysis came six years 
before the world’s first large-scale commercial computing machine became available, 
and the limitations of such analysis become obvious.
This example of the failure of analysis to promote better machines is especially 
important in the computer era, for it does not follow that just because a machine 
exists that can solve equations ten thousand times faster than can a man with a desk 
calculator, it has the time to optimise the design of a device for which 19 equations 
relating the possible parameters of design can be set down but for which 81 para­
meters exist. Even if only 10 possible values of each parameter are admitted, there 
are 1062 sets of equations to be solved and despite ‘hill climbing’ techniques there 
are problems for which an analytical attack is a pretty unrewarding exercise.
But the sudden availability of these calculating wonders had an almost imme­
diate effect on the academic. Problems on conventional motors could now be 
attacked in greater detail. Their basic equations could now be set down to include 
several more variables and their solution would enable prediction of performance 
to have a greater accuracy than ever before. A new ‘rat-race’ began among engineers. 
The phrase ‘paralysis by analysis’ was coined in university circles. ‘Predict the per­
formance of an existing machine to 1 per cent greater accuracy’ was perhaps only 
rivalled by the ‘get yourself a new fundamental particle’ fashion in the academic 
hierarchy of physics. But none can deny that the products of both were beneficial. 
In particular, the academic who had this new-found power of more accurate predic­
tion was much wanted by the industrialist. So there was a steady flow of graduates, 
now even those with Ph.D.s, into industry as employees; there was an increase in 

116
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
the number of academics used as consultants to industry, until of course industry 
bought its own computing machines as well as its high-level academics.
So far as teaching was concerned, formal mathematics had certainly taken a 
knock. Number theory replaced equation-solving at a quite early stage in school 
curricula, and my own daughter was taught binary digits at the age of 10. The 
world-famous Massachusetts Institute of Technology scrapped its electrical machine 
laboratories in favour of desk calculators and access to large-scale computers and, I 
was told, lived to regret it. As a teacher myself I tend to divide the teaching of 
applied science into inductive and deductive teaching and as an engineer, to con­
demn the latter in even more scathing terms than ‘paralysis by analysis’.
6.7 The blending of electronics and ‘machines’
In deductive teaching you set down the most general set of equations covering the 
problem. Solve them (if you can) and then the applications are simply a question of 
putting a = c= /’=k = p = z = |3=0 = O, d = g = a = tt/2 . . . etc. (You tend to run 
out of symbols in the end!) In inductive teaching, on the other hand, you do a very 
simple case first, just to get the hang of it. Then you introduce additional variables 
one at a time, assessing the difficulty in solving at each stage, and stop when it 
hurts! It is fairly obvious that the inductive method belongs to the man who ‘sees’ 
the problem physically and knows the solution instinctively before he ever sets out 
the first equation. Such a man am I. It is also clear I think that the inductive 
method is much more likely to enable the investigator to spot the ‘arch-enemies’ in 
a system and to see how he might improve a design fundamentally without ever 
solving an equation.
With linear motor theory, the second theoretical wave was undoubtedly begun 
by F. C. Williams. Working as a postgraduate student and later as a staff member 
alongside such a man was like rubbing shoulders with a colleague wearing a suit of 
gold. Some of it was almost bound to rub off on to you and you would be the 
richer for it. I was honoured indeed that the penetrating brain which had produced 
dozens of patents on electronic circuit techniques and scores of papers in learned 
societies should even notice my linear motor work, let alone join in and allow me to 
study the mechanism of invention.
From an almost chance remark by ‘F.C.’ that a linear motor placed across a disc, 
as shown in figure 6.2, could produce a brushless variable-speed motor simply by 
changing its effective radius he was within days of appreciating the fact that merely 
‘aiming’ a linear motor at a different radius, as in figure 6.3, was enough to change 
the effective synchronous speed. He had replaced translation of the linear motor by 
the much more space-profitable rotation of it. Having established that it worked in 
principle he rapidly changed to spherical topology and was soon testing quite 
sophisticated spherical motors as large as 14-inch diameter rotors (Williams et al., 
1959) (figure 6.4).
It was in this connection that the edge effects of linear motors reared their ugly 
heads and, unaware of the Russian papers, we set about understanding and predict­
ing performance of arch motors, which were perhaps better described by Shturman

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
117
Figure 6.2 The ‘angled field’ principle had its beginnings in this simple concept of
a linear motor on a disc
Figure 6.3 The linear motor can be ‘aimed’ at a smaller radius without actually 
being put there
himself as “Induction Motors with Open Magnetic Circuit.” As I said earlier, it is 
possible that had I known in 1953 of the papers of Shturman and Aronov I would 
have abandoned work on linear motors, but knowing ‘F.C.’ he would, I think, have 
been spurred on all the more to find a physical explanation for the strange pheno­
mena predicted by analysis alone. As it was, I was able to appreciate the physical 
nature of edge effects as they were unfolded before me day by day by the Grand 
Master of electronic techniques.
He saw the entry edge of an arch motor as a thing in itself. Sweeping aside all 
secondary trivialities such as ohmic resistance of conductors, leakage of magnetic 
circuits and reluctance of airgap (!), he produced his first ‘model’ of a ‘short-stator’ 
machine (as we then called arch motors). This is shown in figure 6.5. Each secondary 
tooth, A, resisted a change of flux on entry completely since it was surrounded by 
a loop of zero resistance (figure 6.6(a)). Hence there could never be any flux under 
the active zone—not by any means a useless deduction, for it was not radically

118
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4 (a) Spherical motor of F. C. Williams, 1958. (b) Advanced form of 
spherical motor, later built commercially in a 5-ton prototype

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
119
changed in the vicinity of the entry edge when the first relaxation towards a real 
machine was made by considering the secondary to have a finite conductivity only. 
In this second stage the ohmic resistive volt drop in the secondary must be supplied 
by a rate of change of flux, which must therefore be constant, giving the result that 
the flux density in the airgap rises from zero at entry to a maximum at exit—the 
basic flux shift towards the back edge was established and understood in an 
extremely simple model (figure 6.6(b)).
Figure 6.5 Theoretical model to illustrate edge effects
zero resistance
(a)
finite resistance _________________________
conductors K 
field speed vs -------
,o Ko J;
secondary speed vs ------ **
linear rise 
of flux
(b)
Figure 6.6 Using the model of figure 6.5: (a) any change of flux is resisted success­
fully by a perfect short circuit; (b) in the presence of secondary resistance a steady 
d0/d? is needed to sustain the ohmic drop

120
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
The most difficult step was undoubtedly the next (slip ¥= 0). F. C. Williams saw 
the entry edge as the generator of two waves. In anti-phase at the entry edge, one 
wave travelled at primary (synchronous) speed and the other at rotor (secondary) 
speed. These waves produced a ‘beats’ effect as they moved in and out of phase, 
setting up both ‘in-phase’ (Bp) and quadrature (Bq) components of airgap flux. 
The extent of the beats depended upon the fractional slip, s, and on the length of 
the block (np, where n is the number of poles and p the pole pitch). Comparison 
with rotary machines at once revealed the extra secondary loss predicted by 
Shturman, but now its origin was understood and its fundamental relationship to 
slip and to active zone length (in pole pitches) was obvious. The new and quite 
surprising effect was that these extra losses could be negative. This did not imply 
perpetual motion. It was merely an expression of the fact that the fundamental 
induction motor equation
torque x synchronous speed = rotor loss
could be broken under sustained conditions of transient injection.
The second important fact was that the model of figure 6.6(b) had been retained 
without change for the case of finite slip, but retracting the ability of the gap to 
demand magnetising current and of course leakage flux was neglected in all cases. 
Thus SqpB^ dx was always zero in a similar treatment of a rotary motor, and 
another new concept was born—the production of reactive volt-amps not attribut­
able either to magnetising current or to leakage flux.
The model was ‘completed’ by the addition of magnetising current, but never 
so far as secondary leakage was concerned. Nevertheless, the mysteries of ‘short 
stator’ machines (which include most linear motors) had been revealed and no 
sophisticated theory of the 1970s will ever take that experience away from me.
Our researches into brushless variable-speed motors led Professor Williams from 
spherical motors to helical motors and logmotors—all brilliant concepts, any one 
of which might have made d.c. machines obsolete, but nearly 20 years later I can 
look back and declare the edge effects of the short-primary motor to have been the 
death of them all.
6.8 A lot depended on communication
That they were not the death of linear motors was due to the industrialist alone, to 
men like Gilbert Sadler who put a price on silence, cleanliness, reliability and con­
venience and put it higher than on efficiency and power factor for many, one might 
even say a multitude of applications. From 1960 I began to see the development of 
linear motors to be divisible into three groups, the division set by application alone. 
There were to be Power machines, Energy machines (accelerators) and Force 
machines. Energy/weight ratio and force/weight ratio were respectively the counter­
parts of power/weight ratio in the continuously rated machine. Likewise energy/ 
cost and force/cost corresponded to power/cost. In some applications the ‘can it be 
done at all?’ fashion returned.

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
121
It was not long before Fred Eastham and I were asked by the industrialists to 
put our exit edge theory to the test, as it emerged, one of the most severe tests to 
which it could be put. The Motor Industry Research Association (MIRA) wanted to 
smash road vehicles into a concrete block at a pre-determined speed, on the under­
standing that all acceleration must have ceased immediately before impact. The 
space for acceleration was, of course, limited. The desired speed was 32-^m.p.h. 
(+ 1/4 m.p Ji.; —0). This meant less than a 1 per cent tolerance on terminal running 
speed using a primary block with a small number of poles. I think we used a combi­
nation of numerical flux plotting and the known fact that the equivalent ‘airgap’ 
of an open-sided linear motor was (1/tt) times the pole pitch. We achieved an 
accuracy of better than 1 per cent and, whatever other historians may write, this 
was a milestone for us from which we began to design with confidence.
The importance which I place on this result is perhaps emphasised by subse­
quent events abroad. In the USA, in particular, the Department of Transportation 
in Washington D.C. had placed a study contract with AiResearch, a subsidiary of 
the Garrett Corporation. The resulting report contained a computer program for 
the prediction of short-primary machine performance. This took account of 
secondary leakage reactance which none of the 36 papers with which I had then 
been associated (and all of which were quoted in the report) had been able to do. 
Their predictions of performance at high values of slip were far better than were 
ours at Manchester, but all the Garrett speed-thrust curves ultimately passed 
through the synchronous speed point, which we knew to be untrue in practice, 
especially at low pole numbers. ‘A prophet is not without honour, save in his own 
country’ as we know, and far more use was made of the Garrett program in Britain 
than was of our Manchester programs. This is not a case of ‘sour grapes’, it was a 
plain fact.
If there was a ‘no-man’s land’ between academics and industrialists, it was with­
out doubt due to a bad system of communication. It would be easy to put the 
blame on either the academics or the industrialists for the lack of communication 
between them. But while it was certain that failure to communicate was, and still 
is, one of man’s greatest failings, it was not restricted to the academic/industrialist 
interface, for academic seldom met academic and industrialists were, by definition, 
in competition with each other. It is therefore not surprising that to an outside 
observer various groups appeared to be tackling the same problem in a variety of 
ways, even publishing their results in various Proceedings of learned societies, with­
out ever having time to know the relevance of the other fellow’s work to their own.
A statistician of this time estimated that when a paper was published in the 
Proceedings of a ‘learned society’ (as opposed to a trade journal) it would, on 
average, be read from start to finish by 1.6 people in the whole of time—if it were 
on physics, chemistry or engineering, that is. If it was a mathematical paper the 
figure was 0.2 people in the whole of time!
A single example will serve to illustrate the breakdown of the communication 
system, for which blame could be apportioned to
(a) the printing explosion

122
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
(b) personal jealousy and ‘competitiveness’ 
(c) apathy (and there was plenty of that!) 
(d) the ascendancy of the accountant as overall dictator 
(e) the academic’s legendary ‘ivory tower’
depending on which viewpoint you took. Those who put the emphasis on (a) might 
with advantage refer to the Bible to discover that it was ever thus: ‘Of making many 
books there is no end; and much learning is a weariness of the flesh’ (Ecclesiastes 
12, xii).
But as to the example, linear induction motors with liquid rotors have obviously 
something in common with induction stirrers of liquid metal. Liquid metal pumps 
are only one stage removed from the ordinary double-sided sandwich motor, yet 
the designers of stirrers clearly knew nothing of the properties of the simplest of 
solid-secondary linear motors.
From about 1966 I had been aware that a conducting cylinder placed on a 
single-sided linear primary with the cylinder axis parallel to the primary slots would 
roll from end to end of the motor in the opposite direction to that of the travelling 
field. In 1970 I published a paper (Laithwaite and Hardy, 1970) that included a 
simple physical explanation of the phenomenon, including the fact that it applied 
to steel cylinders as well as those of non-ferrous metal and was effective on all sizes 
of the latter down to microscopic ferrous dust. But my paper was itself only a 
simplification of the more complete treatment by Dr Brown of Sheffield University 
a year earlier (Brown, 1969). In his quantitative treatment Brown showed that the 
inherent rotating flux component over an open-sided motor was equal to the purely 
linearly travelling field that was usually the designer’s target. This meant that in a 
liquid stirring system in which a circular coil arrangement was to produce a swirling 
effect in the liquid metal above it, the rotating flux component was of much more 
use in mixing the liquid than the designer’s so-called ‘rotating field’, for the latter 
rotated about a vertical axis and under such influence the liquid could remain in 
layers. The rotating component described by Brown operated, so to speak, ‘top to 
bottom’. Yet a paper on stirrers published in the same year as Brown’s (Sundberg, 
1969) took no account of the horizontal axis rotations whatsoever—a clear case of 
the ‘Little Jack Horner’ disease from which most scientific papers suffer, at least 
in part.
6.9 Series connection
Another fact which should be recorded here, if only to save future historians the 
job of searching through mountains of paper work, is that F. C. Williams’ experi­
ments and theoretical arguments of the early 1950s left a mark on linear motor 
design which remains with us still, namely, all our short primary linear motors have 
all the coils of each phase connected in series. If this had been otherwise, an 
entirely different theory would have been needed. Being a ‘pentode man’ (F. C. 
Williams could make more use of a single pentode than most electronic engineers 
of his day could of a whole boxful of vacuum tubes) he was self-educated in the 

ACADEMICS AND INDUSTRIALISTS
123
‘constant-current’ concept. This approach often landed us in a lot of cross-talk 
when our variable-speed motor papers were read at local centres of the IEE. The 
industrialists would protest loudly that large electrical machines ‘were never run at 
constant current’, while we would insist that our theory was easily convertible into 
constant voltage predictions, for what we were really calculating was dynamic 
impedance not expressible in terms of a simple equivalent circuit, as was any con­
ventional rotating machine. It took some time, I must confess, before it hit me that 
‘constant current’ in this context was to be translated as ‘series connection’. It was 
not until 1965 that I understood the fundamental difference between series and 
parallel connection (Laithwaite, 1965) and not for a further two years did I appre­
ciate that every electric equivalent circuit could be converted into a magnetic 
equivalent circuit, thereby ‘inventing’ the concepts of magnetic inductance and 
capacitance (which I called ‘transferances’), and magnetic impedance which I called 
‘concedance’ (Laithwaite, 1967). Magnetic equivalent circuits are as ‘natural’ to a 
parallel magnetic circuit, and therefore to a series electric circuit into which it 
transforms, as electric equivalent circuits had been for nearly a century for the 
conventional, but nevertheless man-made, parallel world of constant voltage.
Throughout the 1960s and early 1970s engineers throughout the world devised 
linear motors in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, but I know of only one which, 
to date, was not series-connected. This was a short-secondary machine developed 
for impact extrusion of metal at Manchester College of Technology (now UMIST) 
and whose energy efficiency was raised from 3 to 28 per cent by changing from 
series to parallel connection. At least as much work, both theoretical and experi­
mental, remains to be done on parallel connection, or what is probably more fruit­
ful, judicious use of series/parallel hybrid connections, as has been completed so far 
on the series-connected machine (especially if the pole pitches are non-uniform). 
However original we may at times think ourselves to be, we prefer in the main to 
‘follow my leader’ along at least reasonably well-trodden paths. This could be, 
indeed has been, termed the process of ‘brain-washing’, although not in anything 
like so extreme a form as political brain-washing and generally, unlike the latter, 
not intentional. But there is no brain-washing of the technical form quite so effec­
tive as self brain-washing, which makes the process of inventing largely one of 
brain-emptying rather than one of filling!
As the industrialists began spending more money on linear motor development, 
the academic clean-up men really went into business and whole books on edge 
effects alone are now on sale. Happily a blending of industry and university activity 
has occurred as part of a general pattern of development, and it is unlikely that the 
technologist will ever again re-build his ivory tower or the industrialist think that 
theories are ‘just for the birds’.
6.10 References
Brown, R. (1969), ‘Travelling magnetic waves in electrical machines described by 
rotating vectors’, Proc. IEE.N61. 116, No. 6,pp. 1011-1013
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965), ‘Differences between series and parallel connection in 

124 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
machines with asymmetric magnetic circuits’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, No. 11, 
pp.2074-2082
Laithwaite, E. R. (1967), ‘Magnetic equivalent circuits for electrical machines’, 
Proc. IEE, Vol. 114, No. 11, pp. 1805-1809
Laithwaite, E. R. and Hardy, M. T. (1970), ‘Rack-and-pinion motors: hybrid of 
linear and rotary machines’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 117, No. 6, pp. 1105-1112
Sadler, G. V. and Davey, A. W. (1971), ‘Applications of linear induction motors in 
industry’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 118, No. 6, pp. 1044-1056
Sundberg, Y. (1969), ‘Magnetic travelling fields for metallurgical processes’, Spec­
trum, Vol. 6, No. 5, pp. 79-88
Williams, F. C., Laithwaite, E. R. and Eastham, J. F. (1959), ‘Development and 
design of spherical induction motors’, Proc. IEE,No\. 106A,No. 30, pp. 471-484

7 The high-speed transport 
game
7.1 What to leave out, not what to put in!
The previous chapter has hopefully set a background against which the story of 
high-speed linear motors can be told, for nowhere else in the subject, so far, has 
there been emotional involvement, public awareness, international competition, 
industrial espionage and political intrigue!
Where to begin is obvious—with Michael Faraday, of course. But we must 
proceed rapidly, jumping 70 to 80 years to Zehden (1902) and to Bachelet, then on 
to Kemper (1934) (surely the ‘father’ of Maglev), on again to Bedford, Peer and 
Tonks (1939) for induction levitation and finally to the Westinghouse ‘Electro- 
pult’ of 1946, the first high-speed linear motor ever to be built. While I myself 
see the Electropult as the proper beginning of high-speed motors, there was a gap 
of 13 years (with one exception
*)
 until the world really began to stir itself about 
the possibilities of the contactless drive that linear electric motors had to offer. 
Maybe we had to see a Hovercraft in action or to contemplate space travel seriously 
before the ‘magic’ of electromagnetism was brought home to us. Certain it is that 
I can guarantee to interest an audience for an hour, using only an open-sided linear 
induction motor and a few bits of metal, whereas similar efforts with a ‘rolled-up’ 
conventional motor with iron-cored rotor would risk yawns, clock-watching and 
all the other general discomfort which an audience can convey to a none-too- 
interesting lecturer. If the ‘end product’ is public transport, then the interest is so 
much the greater, for people of all ages like listening to a story-teller for they may 
identify themselves with the characters or the action, in this case may imagine what 
it would be like to be carried over the ground at 300 m.p.h.
*The d.c. machine described in chapter 2.
7.2 The railway experiments
Once the newspapermen get these thoughts the flood gates are opened and every 
lift of an eyebrow of those developing the technology is seen as meaningful. So it 
125

126
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
was with the first efforts of Fred Barwell and myself to try out the feasibility of 
linear motor drives for railways. In 1960 we built an 80-foot track in the labora­
tories of Manchester University (figure 7.1). Having put a seat on this vehicle and 
given rides to daily newspaper reporters (acceleration 0.5 g), we had all the pub­
licity we needed for a time. Readers should note that in those days we put a seat 
on every vehicle that was big enough to take it. During the taking of evidence by 
the Select Committee of the House of Commons following the closure of the 
Tracked Hovercraft project in 1973, the Minister of Transport said that it was 
obvious that the Advanced Passenger Train was more developed than the Tracked 
Hovercraft because it had seats in it. At the time these were seen as words of 
wisdom for a vehicle with seats can give rides to journalists who will make enthus­
iastic reports and the project escalates from there. On this argument, however, 
the Manchester machine of 1960 was more developed than the full-scale vehicles of 
Germany and the USA in 1975! Its pole area measured 24 inches x 2 inches and it
Figure 7.1 The 80-foot track in the laboratory at Manchester University, 1960

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
127
produced over 200 lbs of thrust, accelerating and decelerating a passenger at over 
0.5 g. (For comparison, the wheels of a sport car start to spin on the road at 
0.3 g.)
A picture of the experiment was published in the American magazine Mechanix 
Illustrated in August 1961.
The Press therefore attached great importance to our move to the Gorton Loco 
Works late in 1962 to set up a 100-yard track with a motor of some four times the 
thrust of the laboratory machine. That we did fit a seat—and headlamps (!)—is 
evidenced in figure 7.2 which shows the author making a point to Mr C. C. Inglis 
(Director of Research, British Transport Commission) and Dr F. T. Barwell, then 
Director of Electrical Research.
I remember asking Fred Barwell just why we were building the Gorton track 
since we knew a linear motor designed for 34 m.p.h. (sync.) would work well. His
Figure 7.2 Seats come first—then headlamps! The author demonstrates to British 
Transport Commission Directors C.C. Inglis (left) and F. T. Barwell, 1963 (courtesy 
of the Liverpool Daily Post and Echo Ltd)

Figure 7.3 H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh talks to Dr Barwell as they inspect the Gorton vehicle after its 
transfer to B. R. Labs, Derby. Lord Beeching is on the Duke’s immediate left {courtesy of British Railways 
Board)
bO 
00
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
129
reply reassured me that we had a common purpose in mind: “To get some money 
to build a bigger one.” It was then that I first knew that the seat was the most 
important part of the whole equipment. The Gorton machine was transferred to 
the British Rail Research Laboratories at Derby and in due course shown to the 
Duke of Edinburgh (figure 7.3). It will be noted that for this demonstration the 
passenger seat had been removed!
Facts to note about the Gorton machine were that with a speed of only 30 
m.p.h. and a goodness factor of 4, it developed 90h.p. at an efficiency of over 
70 per cent, for 14 years later the ‘low efficiency’ of linear motors was still ‘seen’ 
as a stumbling block.
It was while riding on the Gorton machine, which was a double-sided sandwich 
motor, that the problem of track joints first occurred to me. The vehicle itself ran 
on conventional railway track but the linear motor was connected to it in such a 
way as to allow relative lateral movement so that the motor could be guided separ­
ately from the track aluminium by guide wheels. Side pressure from these wheels 
could cause the plate to bend and, if a joint between any two adjacent lengths of 
track was insecure the side-wheel pressure might shear the fishplate connecting the 
two pieces so that the front edge of the primary would make a head-on collision 
with the oncoming sheet end (see figure 7.4). Discussing this with American 
engineers in 1973 I discovered that the same kind of thought had occurred to them 
also: ‘What happens to all the aluminium sheet in that event?’ The American test 
vehicle had three seats abreast. They told me that the engineers always sat on the 
seats at either side. The centre seat was for distinguished guests only—the ‘Senator’s 
Seat’ they called it!
The other important point about track joints that we discovered at Gorton was 
that, even when using a 34 m.p.h. vehicle with a pole pitch of only 6 inches and a 
goodness factor no better than 4, a recording of input current against time gave the
Figure 7.4 End view of a split reaction plate to an oncoming double-sided primary 

130
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
form of trace shown in figure 7.5. The joints are clearly ‘visible’. The motor obviously 
lost thrust when it passed over a joint for the reason illustrated in figure 7.6. The 
problem would be worse at larger pole pitches. The spacings between the transients 
on the current trace were sufficiently accurate for us to use them as measurements 
of acceleration.
Figure 7.5 Variation of input current with time locates the track joints easily
7.3 The ‘Aerotrain’
Even during the existence of the Gorton experiments I became alerted to the fact 
that overseas engineers were not unaware of the possibilities of non-contact trans­
port—‘low level flying’ is the term I like to use, for it has many aspects in common 
with those of aircraft proper.
In France, Monsieur Jean Bertin had been experimenting with a vehicle suspended 
by air pressure and propelled by an airscrew since 1961. He named it the ‘Adrotrain’ 
and was proposing speeds so high that rocket propulsion might ultimately supersede 
airscrews. There was talk (and patents) in 1962 in both France and the UK of 
speeds of 250m.p.h. British Rail’s inability to fund a test track prompted me to 
apply to the Science Research Council in 1966 for funds to build a disc rig on 
which aluminium, steel or aluminium-faced steel discs, 7 ft in diameter, could be 
rotated using a ‘linear’ motor built in the form of an annular sector so as to avoid 
the problem of different slip values at different radii, but to retain all entry and exit 
edge effects. Given a variable frequency supply for 25-250 Hz a large amount of 
almost invaluable data could quickly be accumulated at real speeds up to 300 m.p.h.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
131
(c)
Figure 7.6 The discontinuity in current flow occasioned by a track joint: (a) in 
a continuous sheet, primary and secondary currents mirror each other; (b) the 
effect of slits is seen to expose unbalanced portions that produce only leakage­
reactance-creating flux; (c) a total break leaves the primary coil facing virtually 
an open-circuit
(the maximum peripheral speed). Practical measurements, I argued, were sure to 
be the one thing anyone would need who wanted to enter the high-speed transport 
game. No sooner had my equipment been assembled (figure 7.7) than I learned of 
a similar rig in Japan, and another in Italy—other countries, too, were economising 
to the extent of preferring a disc rig to a long track, initially.

132
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.7 7-foot diameter disc rig installed in the labs at Imperial College, 1969. 
Maximum peripheral speed 300 m.p.h.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
133
As early as March 1961, I had received a small deputation from the National 
Research Development Corporation’s subsidiary company, Hovercraft Development 
Limited, a company set up to exploit Christopher Cockerell’s invention. They were 
considering the possibility of forming a further separate company, to be called 
‘Tracked Hovercraft Limited’ (THL), to utilise more effectively the principles of 
the hovercraft. It was obvious that a vehicle hovering 5/8 inch above a smooth, 
concrete beam would waste less air and therefore make less noise and less of an 
atmospheric mess (turbulence) than would a land/sea vehicle with a large clearance. 
The NRDC people had come to study the possibilities of linear motor drive, for at 
that time the proposal had been to drive by airscrew, as had Monsieur Berlin’s. 
The choice of a noisy, gale-making airscrew seemed a curious one to me, until I 
remembered that the men who had been to see me were aerodynamic engineers and 
I recalled a legend of an Englishman who was a pillar of the RSPCA and was appalled 
at the cruelty to animals in Spain. He decided to set up a branch of the Society in 
Spain. On arrival he found many sympathisers but they warned him: ‘Setter, you 
needa tha money. You do nothing withouta tha money!’ ‘True,’ said the English­
man, ‘what’s the best way of raising money here?’—‘A bullfight’ came the unani­
mous reply. For such reasons, perhaps, did NRDC first propose airscrews and did 
Bertin retain his airscrew drive longer than did all others. (His first linear induction 
motor drive did not appear until 1968.) What was surprising to me, as a novice in 
the industrial scene, was the speed with which news was passed to interested parties 
thousands of miles apart. In 1962 I received a letter from the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration asking for linear motor design information to help them 
build acceleration test equipment.
Another piece of writing of the early sixties, dismissed without a second thought 
no doubt in Whitehall, appeared in New Scientist from the pen of Timothy Johnson, 
and what an accurate prophet he turned out to be. Under the heading ‘Science and 
the Paymasters’, he wrote on the subject of lifts as follows:
“The drawback is that a linear motor lift costs about £40 extra. This may not seem 
much on equipment that can cost £10000, but the biggest customers for lifts are 
local councils, and they are bound to take the lowest satisfactory tender. ‘I’ve 
known a £4 million contract lost for less than £1000’ remarks Dunlop ruefully. But 
he remains confident that ‘as people discover it’s an indestructible, rugged com­
ponent’, the linear motor will come into favour.
“What the linear motor needs to develop rapidly is someone big enough to carry 
the cost and effort of designing a modular range of motors and controls for a mass­
market application, setting them at a price which is realistic from the user’s point of 
view, and then waiting for rates to grow to a volume which justifies the price.... 
One is left with the uneasy feeling that, despite our current world leadership in 
linear motor design, British industry is too tired and conservative to try anything 
so adventurous.”
I wish everyone had believed in our ‘world leadership’ at that time. By 1976 I 
had wished it even more.

134
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
7.4 The formation of Tracked Hovercraft Limited
Four months were to elapse, following the initial discussions with the NRDC repre­
sentatives, before I received a request from a Board member of that organisation to 
visit me in Manchester to hear the linear motor story again first hand. The meeting 
took place on the 28 July of that year (1961). I spent a whole day with Dennis 
Hennessey who was later to become Chairman of the new company.
It is necessary to specify ‘of that year’ in connection with the start of the project 
for although I expected some rapid action following the visit of the ‘head man’, it 
was in fact 1962 before I next met the same people who had first discussed the 
project with me nine months previously. “This time,” they assured me, “we have 
got the green light.” ‘Amber’ might have been a better description, for not until 
1967 was the Tracked Hovercraft company actually formed.
It was at this point that I had some misgivings about NRDC’s handling of the 
project. Six years to reach that decision was a long time and I recalled my assistant 
lecturer days when I was Secretary to the Inaugural Conference of the world’s first 
Universal Digital Computer (the Ferranti Mark I). By the time the conference was 
held, F. C. Williams, Tom Kilburn and their research team had completed the 
prototype of Mark II, later to become ‘Mercury’. These were the days when many 
hours were spent in trying to name projects in such a way that their initial letters 
spelt out an interesting word.
News hounds at the Computer Conference wanted a name for the machine and 
someone came up the ‘MADAM’ (Manchester Automatic Digital Adding Machine). 
It was agreed among the academics that this was a good name, for at times the 
machine did appear to have a mind of its own! ‘What shall we call the Mark II?’ 
was an obvious question. One morning one of the research team bounced into the 
lab. with ‘Got it!—BISON’. How did he make that one? ‘Binary Indicating Sum- 
mator of Numbers.’ he said. ‘That’s not clever,’ said another. ‘I know,’ added the 
inventor, with a glee that showed there was more to come, ‘but those of us who 
have worked on it will always remember that it stands for ‘Built In Spite Of NRDC.’
But as any actor will tell you, only no publicity is bad publicity and the cartoon 
shown in figure 7.8 which appeared in the technical newspaper Engineering News in 
1962 was a real boost for anyone like myself who did appear, at that time, to be 
alone and hanging on to a project by the fingernails. In order to tie in the subject of 
this chapter with those of the foregoing, however, it should be noted that 1961 was 
the year in which I first talked with Gilbert Sadler about crane motors and the 
possibility of forming the company ‘Linear Motors Limited’.
Over the years that followed the formation of Tracked Hovercraft, I grew to 
respect very highly the brain power of the men directing the research, especially 
in the case of Mr Dennis Hennessey (Chairman) and Mr Tom Fellows (Managing 
Director). But some of the Board's policies (NRDC that is), the thinking behind 
which was never made known to me, were to give me some little insight into the 
BISON story, in the years to come.
Following a Press Release on 16 May 1967, describing NRDC’s proposals to 
form the company Tracked Hovercraft Limited, the first of many surprises came 
with a formal invitation to attend a joint Press Conference to launch the new

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
135
Figure 7.8 Cartoon (after Mortimer) appearing in Engineering News (National 
Trade Press) 1962
company which was to take place at the Headquarters of British Railways in 
London on the 17 July 1967. A few days before that event, however, there were 
frantic phone messages to all those invited to say that the Treasury would not 
release the £2 million promised and that the Press Conference was cancelled. The 
money was in fact made available some six weeks later and the real cause of the 
delay was never made clear. It is possible that some Treasury official may have read 
one of the several critical articles on linear motors which were appearing here and 
there about that time, articles coming to the conclusion that linear motors were 
hardly suitable for any application, least of all transport. For example, D. S. 
Armstrong, writing in the Railway Gazette (Armstrong, 1967) came to the con­
clusion that: “It is therefore unlikely that linear motor propulsion can be used with 
existing railway vehicles, and it can only be considered for existing routes reserved 
for special vehicles or for completely new routes” and he showed “test results 
obtained with a small two-stator linear motor” having a maximum efficiency less 
than 40 per cent and a power factor of 0.3 at running speed (0.45 on starting).

136
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
To be fair to Donald Armstrong I always found him ready to listen, which is 
more than I can say for most of the industrialists whom I met in the early 70s 
(when it really mattered), and Armstrong himself conducted extensive experiments 
at Derby, on behalf of British Rail, between 1973 and 1976 using, oddly enough, 
three ‘existing railway vehicles’! But of course we had come through a topological 
explosion between 1967 and 1976 and single-sided motor techniques, the use of 
wide slots and narrow teeth for primary windings (Laithwaite and Barwell, 1969), 
the concept of transverse flux (Laithwaite et al., 1971) and the invention of electro­
magnetic joints put right all the defects that were listed in the Railway Gazette of 
1967. I should also like to record here that Donald Armstrong was the first re­
searcher to test electromagnetic joints at speed on real vehicles, and was the first 
man outside Imperial College and THL to appreciate their worth. What is more he 
lost no time in telephoning me to congratulate us on the concept, once he had 
made the initial tests.
7.5 The pace makers
News of further overseas activity had meanwhile been received. Having tested the 
half-scale 01 Adrotrain in 1965, Monsieur Bertin added thrust boosters and attained 
a speed of 345 k.pji. (215 m.p.h.) and went on to design the 02 Adrotrain (figure 
7.9), also half-scale. In Japan, the Railway Technical Research Institute reported
Figure 7.9 Monsieur Berlin’s second half-scale hovering vehicle ‘02 Adrotrain’, 
built 1968, ran at 263 m.p.h. (422 k.p.h.), 1969 (courtesy ofSociete de I’Aerotrain)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
137
a linear motor experiment (with photograph) on a small, indoor, wheeled vehicle 
(1964). Monsieur Bertin formed his company, the ‘Soci6td de 1’Adrotrain’ in 1965, 
the first such company since that of the other French pioneer Monsieur Bachelet, 
in 1914, but, as yet, there were no plans for linear motor propulsion of the A6ro- 
train.
Other Britons had also been ‘putting it together’, at least mentally and, on 
9 January 1964 the Engineering News reported on its front page: “MONORAILS 
TO SPEED UP UK TRAVEL” with a sub-title “Consortium formed to pioneer new 
transport systems.” The company was to be called ‘Speedover Transport Limited’ 
and was said to be a combination of British industrial and banking concerns with 
former Minister of Power, Lord Mills, as President and to consist of the Hawker 
Siddeley Group, Sir Robert McAlpine and Sons, Philip Hill, Higginson, Erlangers 
(Bankers), Rapid Transport Development Company, Edger Investments and Stock­
land Property. Sir Miles Thomas was to be executive chairman.
I never knew what became of this collection. One name in particular was to re­
appear some eight years later in a different role, but one thing is certain—no-one 
from the consortium ever came to see me during the early 1960s. Nor, according 
to Engineering News, had they ‘so far’ been to see Christopher Cockerell, but 
the article pointed out that: “Two years ago Hawker Siddeley entered into a three- 
year agreement with the French Safege consortium of engineering and financial 
interests, to explore monorail possibilities.” But it passed away, no doubt, in the 
light of what was to follow, to the relief and delight of the Civil Servants in Whitehall.
After the initial scale-model demonstration track of a Tracked Hovercraft had 
been set up in the garden of what had been a private house in Hythe, Hampshire, 
it was exhibited at ‘Hovershow 66’ in Browndown, Portsmouth (figure 7.10). The 
success of the model gave approval to move away from the Hovercraft Develop­
ment Ltd’s site and to set up a full-sized track ‘somewhere very straight’. The site 
chosen was between two drainage rivers running from Earith in the South to Denver 
Sluice in the North, a distance of almost 20 miles. The land was loaned from the 
Great Ouse River Authority and although marshy, huge concrete piles were sunk 
down to 70 feet to meet the bedrock. The hangar to house the vehicles was to be at 
the Earith end and building proceeded northwards. At about the 3-mile point there 
was a road crossing and it was proposed to use this to demonstrate high-level track 
(figure 7.11) as well as low-level (figure 7.12).
One of my first tasks for THL, and one of the hardest, was to give professional 
opinion on two study contracts (each worth £5000) which were awarded to Asso­
ciated Electrical Industries, for whom I had acted as consultant for many years, and 
to the English Electric Company, with whom I had had little contact. On first sub­
mission I felt bound to say that the English Electric proposal was just what I myself 
would have suggested at that stage of the game. It was to supply power at 200 Hz 
from a trackside station and to feed it ‘raw’ to the linear motor. The hoverpad fans 
needed high-speed motors for which the 200 Hz supply was ideal. Trackside gener­
ators would not be subject to the restrictions on power factor imposed by the use 
of the National Grid, or to the weight penalty of inverters, and on a test track of 
only a few miles, transmission line reactance would not rear the same size of ugly

138
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.10 The model hover vehicle exhibited at Hovershow 66 (courtesy of 
Hovercraft Development Ltd)
Figure 7.11 High-level track of the full-scale tracked hovercraft, Earith, 1970 
(courtesy of Shephard Hill and Co. Ltd)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
139
Figure 7.12 Low-level track at the southern end of the Earith track (courtesy of 
Tracked Hovercraft Ltd)
head as it would on an inter-city link which was to be the ultimate target. The 
English Electric scheme was a ‘belt and braces’ solution, sure to be overweight, sure 
to be of lower power factor—sure to WORK! In my view, the only mistake one 
could make at this stage was for the beast not to work at all, for some unforeseen 
reason, or to have such ‘teething troubles’ as would lead to a long development time 
and give our overseas competitors a chance to see the mistakes we had made and to 
profit from them. I hoped that we would have found a solution to the power/ 
weight and power factor problems by the time the prototype was running, so that 
we could demonstrate a 250 m.p.h. vehicle to the World in a few months with the 
powerful additive: ‘Of course, we now know how to do much better than that.’
The AEI submission could not have been more different. D.c. supply was to be 
fed to the vehicle by the slip tracks and fed ‘raw’ to the fan motors (for safety—a 
strong argument indeed). On board the vehicle the d.c. was to be converted to 
variable-frequency a.c. by solid-state inverter for the linear motor. This would 
allow efficient speed control, increased power/weight ratio in the motor itself and 
regenerative braking—a whole bagful of powerful selling points, but the system was 
complex, to say the least. I might have found myself in a dilemma in that I favoured 
the English Electric scheme but was consultant for AEI, but something happened 
which made my opinions of no consequence, for English Electric followed their 
original submission with a revised scheme (within a few weeks) and the latter was 
almost entirely in accord with the AEI proposals. Whether or not this decision was 

140
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
in any way connected with the AEI (by now ‘GEC’) merger with English Electric 
which was shortly to follow, I doubt whether I shall ever know, but THL accepted 
the AEI scheme and a meeting was arranged between the design engineers of that 
company, THL representatives and the consultants, to thrash out the more detailed 
aspects of the design.
The motor to be built was for THL’s first full-scale vehicle (named ‘research test 
vehicle’ (RTV) 31) to have a full speed of up to 300 m.p.h. and to weigh approxi­
mately 23 tonnes. When we looked at the inverter design, the consultants and THL 
men looked across the table at each other in horror, for this item alone could weigh 
as much as 13 tonnes! It was then explained to us that the blame lay with the linear 
motor whose power factor was only of the order of 0.3. “Inverters don’t like reac­
tive kVA,” we were told, “the motor needs 40 per cent more of this than the 
original estimate.” “Then why,” I asked, “is the inverter not 40 per cent heavier 
instead of 100 per cent as shown?” It was explained to me that inverters came ‘in 
lumps’, like loaf sugar. You could have one lump or two, but not 1.4, and we were 
just lucky with the first linear motor estimate in that it consumed marginally less 
than one lump could supply.
The meeting broke up in some disorder with no firm conclusions as to the future 
—except that we were in a Grade I mess. We were, as we now know, tasting the 
poisonous fruits of long magnetic circuits which could not be magnetically ‘insu­
lated’.
1966 had seen the entry of some new and formidable ‘gladiators’ in the shape of 
the Department of Transportation in Washington D.C., who gave a study contract 
to the Garrett Corporation (AiResearch Manufacturing Division), and of the West 
German firm of Messerschmitt-Bblkow-Blohm, who also began papers studies, 
closely followed by Krauss-Maffei. The Americans spotted the difficulties of long 
pole pitches and had coined a phrase that defined the ‘best’ frequency for a given 
running speed. It was to be ‘one cycle per second per mile per hour’, which can be 
translated as: when the pole pitch of a linear motor reaches 10 inches, hold it at 
that and increase beyond standard frequency for higher speeds.
7.6 The long pole pitch problem
The synchronous speed, vs, of a linear motor is given by
Vs = 2p/
and if one substituted 50 Hz for f and 400 ft per second for vs (« 250 m.p.h. and 
by the gift of Dame Fortune also 400 k.p.h.), the disturbing value of pole pitch, 
p, emerges as 4 feet (with allowance for slip, something over 4 feet 6 inches (^ 1.5 
metres)). Imagine now a linear motor as shown in figure 7.13, perhaps 12 inches 
wide and 18 ft long (4 poles) and think of the weight of copper wasted in end 
windings and the leakage it produces (a). Of course one could short-chord the 
winding viciously (say to 1/3), doubling the primary ohmic loss due to the copper 
in the slots but dividing it by between 2 and 3 in the end windings. One could, 
indeed must, adopt aircraft generator standards where current densities of 13 000

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
141
(b)
Figure 7.13 (a) The end winding problem of a mains-frequency, high-speed motor; 
(b) the core flux problem
amps/sq. inch are commonplace. As suggested earlier, this is not the only place 
where the constraints placed on designers of high-speed ground transport motors 
are similar to those on aircraft designers.
The real ‘end of the road’ for conventional, mains-fed, high-speed linear motors 
in 1968 was not, therefore, the primary end windings. Rather it was the magnetic 
circuit that called the tune (b). Tracked Hovercraft and Imperial College had 
already agreed in 1967 that double-sided motors were OUT on grounds of safety 
alone. There was a fantastic hollow track section of aluminium subsequently 
produced by one American team (shown in figure 7.14) which looked as if it would 
wave about in a gentle breeze, before the motor ever got near it. The Americans also 
tried to weld aluminium track in the manner in which British Rail had welded steel 
rails to such good effect. Aluminium does not have the strength of steel. It was 
worth a try, but on a cold night the track aluminium split in several places.

142
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
primary
position
Figure 7.14 Aluminium plate section actually used in a test track for double-sided 
sandwich motors
To go ‘single-sided’, however, looked as foolish to the Americans as their welded 
plate looked to us, for at first sight it looks as if the disadvantages of single-sided 
working are monstrous—a range of mountains one might never cross. Listed, they 
are
(1) Magnetic pull between primary and track, by all the rules of rotary machine 
design, must increase the weight of the vehicle by several times the force of 
gravity.
(2) The depth of steel needed for big pole pitches must be of the order of a foot 
or more and therefore
(3) The track iron must be laminated. The cost of such a track is prohibitive.
What no-one in the world seemed to know was contained in a paper that Fred 
Barwell and I had published in 1969 (Laithwaite and Barwell, 1969) in the IEE 
Proceedings. But people do not read other people’s papers—there just isn’t time. 
But this one expanded on a concept that a colleague, (then Dr) E. M. Freeman, 
had first put to me some years earlier that B2/2/z0 newtons per square metre was 
not the exact evaluation for the normal force across the airgap of an induction 

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
143
machine and that under certain circumstances, what commercial designers had long 
called ‘unbalanced magnetic pull’ (UMP) could even become ‘unbalanced magnetic 
push’ (Freeman and Laithwaite, 1968).
The full expression for normal force should read B2l2pQ — pQJ2/2. If typical 
values for B and current loading J (amps/metre) are inserted into this formula the 
first term dominates the whole to the tune of perhaps 97 per cent. The industrial 
designer is right to ignore (— g0^2/2). But the paper with Fred Barwell proved the 
relationship for all induction machines that
B 
p
---- a —
J 
g
where p is the pole pitch and g the airgap. In small rotary motors, where p is small, 
or large linear motors, where g is big, the value of B is likely to be some five times 
smaller than normal, so that the teeth for a given tooth pitch can be reduced by 
that factor. This virtually doubles the available slot width and, for the same slot 
leakage, doubles the possible slot depth, multiplying J by a factor of 4.
The effects of this radical difference between linear and rotary motors of com­
parable power-handling capacity are twofold and were still not fully appreciated by 
those who directed top projects in the technology in 1976. The first effect is the 
more obvious. Teeth of 1/5 the width of those of a comparable rotary machine 
need only 1/5 of the core depth and since this applies to both vehicle-carried 
primary and to track, in a single-sided system, it reduces the track steel depth to a 
few inches, instead of more than a foot.
The second effect is on the normal force. Even if B2/2pQ represents 97 per cent 
of the total normal force in a rotary design and attracts the primary to the second­
ary, PqJ2!2 is a repulsive force. When B is divided by 5 and/multiplied by 4, the 
ratio 97:3 becomes (97/25) t(3 x 16)-that is, less than 1:12—and the large lifting 
force occurs when the values of slip are high. These facts were known and demon­
strated first at Imperial College in September 1964, but were still not being believed 
by the majority of workers outside the College as late as 1976. Even so, a few 
inches of laminated steel in the track was excessive, and it was thought that flux 
doubling, a phenomenon peculiar to linear configurations, virtually put mains-fed 
linear induction motors ‘out of court’.
By 1968 a world situation in ‘the game’ was developing. Monsieur Bertin had 
been converted to the usefulness of linear motor propulsion by (I think) Monsieur 
M. Barthalon, who was developing low-speed motors for urban mass transit systems 
(the ‘URBA’ system was the name for M. Barthalon’s outfit), but had yet to incor­
porate it in a test vehicle. The West German firm of Krauss-Maffei had started 
paper studies, while in East Germany Peter Budig had published his first linear 
motor paper. Washington DOT had economised on track length by accelerating 
their test vehicle by twin jet engines up to high test speeds in a relatively short 
distance. On-board high-frequency turbines gave the USA an apparent lead over the 
UK and France.
When faced with the long pole pitch problem and the possibility of a 13-tonne 
inverter for a 23-tonne vehicle, emissaries from THL went to France and to the 

144
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
USA to see what ‘the other guys’ were doing about it. In France it appeared that 
the old Gramme-ring winding had, like Earnshaw’s Theorem, been ‘taken out and 
dusted’ and designs were proceeding using large pole pitches and 50 Hz supply. 
They too, had spotted one of the constraints—that is, long end windings—but not 
the other (thick, leaky magnetic circuits). The leading contender in the USA had a 
proposal almost identical to the AEI scheme, except that the inverter was to weigh 
not 13 tonnes, but 16.
Within a fortnight of the news from France, we had put together a laminated 
iron core 10 ft long and 5 inches x 5 inches cross-section. A few turns of thick, 
insulated wire were wrapped around the bar, Gramme-ring fashion, to correspond 
to the winding in each slot (had there been slots). We were going to give this wind­
ing every chance to be good by eliminating primary slot leakage, zig-zag leakage, 
and the like. The pole pitch was 5 ft. Opposite one of the two appropriate primary 
faces—that is, the one displaying the edges of the laminations—a second laminated 
block of the same dimensions was mounted, carrying a 1/4 inch sheet of aluminium 
on the face opposite the primary, allowing a 6-inch overhang on each side. There 
were three immediate observations:
(a) With a mere 10 amp supply the leakage field was so great that feed wires 
writhed and twisted in it at distances of several feet from the motor, as the 
current was switched on. Measuring instruments had to be at least 10 ft from 
the motor.
(b) A search coil around the bar indicated that the core would display marked 
saturation effects at only 10 amps/phase.
(c) The power factor measured was 0.05.
7.7 The ‘darkest hour before the dawn’
There was deep gloom for a period of about six weeks and for myself, who had 
been described more accurately as its ‘prophet’ rather than its inventor, I felt as if 
I had ‘sold my friends up the river’—or rather more literally down the Earith ‘drain’ 
in this case. Work had proceeded to the point where there was an empty slot up 
the centre of the top face of the track (figure 7.15) waiting to receive—who knew 
what kind of secondary metal? I must have repeated to myself a hundred times 
“The French made Gramme-ring windings and made it worse.” Then late one night 
I changed the wording to “The French turned their electric circuit through a right 
angle and made it worse.” In a flash came an obvious retort “Why not do the 
opposite and make it better?” The ‘opposite’ of a Gramme-ring winding was not 
obvious. But the opposite of an electric circuit was—the magnetic circuit.
My first effort is shown in figure 7.16 and it lingered about two minutes in 
my mind before I dismissed it as bad since it contained more steel than would a 
Gramme-ring arrangement, but the second concept was already supplanting it (all 
this I should add, was taking place on the top deck of a No. 72 London ’bus!). The 
second layout is shown in figure 7.17. This half-a-slot/pole and phase winding could 
of course be extended to a properly distributed winding as shown in figure 7.18.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
145
Figure 7.15 The Earith track top awaiting its metal ‘filling’ (courtesy of Tracked 
Hovercraft Ltd)
But this also would leak badly, I argued, so I put the windings right on to the level 
of the pole faces as in figure 7.19. By this time I had arrived at my office. I rang 
THL at once and told the Chief Engineer, Denys Bliss, of my findings, dictating the 
shape over the telephone. During the following week my secretary received a letter 
(on 4 March 1969) that Tom Fellows had sent from San Francisco to London for 
typing on 24 February. It began as follows:
“Were it not for the fact that I am visiting the Garrett Corporation the day after 
tomorrow and do not wish to appear to have been influenced by them I should 
have waited to ask the question contained in this letter until my return. If there is 
some fundamental error in the underlying thinking perhaps you would be forgiving 
enough to put it in the category of the nine false trails which we have to follow 
for each one that succeeds.

146
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.16 First thoughts on a transverse magnetic flux machine
Figure 7.17 The‘Mark II’TFM
Figure 7.18 Distributed winding arrangement for TFM

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
147
Figure 7.19
Reduction of leakage is achieved by placing windings near pole faces, 
as in this single-sided ‘C-core’ primary
Figure 7.20 Sketch by Mr T. G. Fellows of his idea for a transverse flux configur­
ation
“The question relates to long pole pitch motors with narrow pole faces and it 
is to ask if there is any point in rotating the plane of the magnetic circuit through 
90° so that it lies transverse to the direction of motion? (see simplified sketch).” 
(figure 7.20). I was in Southampton on 4 March and read the letter on my return 
on 5 March.

148
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
I wrote to Denys Bliss on 6 March, remarking on the concurrence of thought in 
relation to my call of the previous week. Dr Bolton, whose office is next to mine, 
left Imperial College early in the morning of 5 March, to lecture at Runcorn, and 
came up with the transverse flux idea that same night, not knowing about my 
ideas, nor about the letter from Tom Fellows.
Whether or not you believe in telepathy over such distances is of little conse­
quence. What is fact is that three men, all fully aware of the problem, all under 
the stress which it imposed, arrived separately at the solution within a few days of 
each other. Transverse flux motors were here to stay and although we were not 
aware of it at the time (February 1969), the ‘Second Age of Topology’ had begun. 
For THL however it began too late, as an order for an axial flux machine for a 
lower speed (150m.p.h.) had already been placed with GEC, who went ahead 
and designed a full-sized motor for RTV 31 and the track top was filled with an 
inch of laminated steel overlaid and overhung with a 3/8 inch thick aluminium 
sheet (figure 7.21). THL were somewhat committed to a limited number of motor 
types that could be tested but there is no doubt that it was better at that time to 
do something than to sit thinking about it.
Figure 7.21 The ‘filling’ is decided, 1 inch of laminated steel is shown being 
surfaced with a f-inch aluminium extrusion {courtesy of Tracked Hovercraft Ltd)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
149
7.8 The three-part problem concept of the mid ’60s
About the same time, a Japanese leaflet printed in English had declared that the 
problem of high-speed transport could be divided into three distinct facets
(i) supporting the weight 
(ii) guiding the vehicle laterally 
(iii) propelling the vehicle.
It was claimed that cryogenic coils (superconducting niobium-tin in a liquid 
helium bath), mounted on the vehicle and carrying monstrous direct currents, 
would produce (i) and (ii) when the vehicle was at speed, if the coils faced an 
aluminium-covered track (both horizontally and vertically) while the linear motor 
was the obvious choice for (iii).
Other workers, of course, had their own ideas. We had put THL’s money on air 
cushions in the first instance. British Rail were backing the Advanced Passenger 
Train, APT (steel wheels on steel rails) for the very best of reasons. It was not until 
Dr Sydney Jones (Board Member for Research of the British Railways Board) gave 
a stimulating colloquium at Imperial College in 1973 that I fully appreciated just 
how right was the concept behind APT. I cannot guarantee to remember his exact 
words and if I misquote him I trust he will forgive me, but they went something 
like this: “We have, from our ancestors, a great legacy in the form of thousands of 
miles of track. They made it flat enough but they didn’t make it straight enough 
(for modern needs). So we are developing APT to take the corners faster as this is 
the only way open to us at this time to reduce journey times. We are making the 
best of what we have got, with the money available.” I reminded him that the 
Lancashire cotton industry did just that between 1930 and 1955 and lost a national 
industry in a quarter of a century. (See also ‘The Future of Steel on Steel’, Illu­
strated London News, 1966.)
Monsieur Bertin was totally committed to air suspension and to linear motor 
drive for low speeds. In July 1969 his first full-scale Inter-urban A^rotrain 1-80 was 
presented before a press conference at Le Bourget Airport and in September it 
achieved 250k.p.h. (156m.p.h.) on the 9 km track (figure 7.22). It should be 
noted that the propulsion system of a shrouded propeller with boosters was still 
retained but a second string project was now being undertaken for suburban trans­
port and the Suburban Adrotrain 44 (figure 7.23) was linear motor propelled by a 
double-sided sandwich motor (figure 7.24) built by Merlin Gerin. The full-scale 
track, 3 km long at Gometz, with current collection system, is shown in figure 
7.25. The S-44 carried 50 seats and weighed 10.5 tonnes. The 350 kW supply was 
3 phase at 50 Hz and the motor developed a maximum thrust of 1.6 tonnes.
West Germany was now in the hunt too, and the firm of Krauss-Maffei was 
putting its money into a magnetic suspension now referred to as ‘Maglev’, but much 
confused with the cryogenic lift and guidance system which many American workers 
also referred to as ‘Maglev’. The magnetically attractive type was first demon­
strated ta me at Manchester in 1946 by John West, now Vice-Chancellor of the 
University of Bradford. In its simplest form it consists of a sensing device (figure

150
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.22 Berlin’s inter-urban vehicle 180 on its 18 km track. By 1971 it had 
run for 700 hours at 160 m.p.h. (260 k.p.h.) (courtesy of Societe de VAerotrain)
Figure 7.23 The Suburban A^rotrain S44, propelled by double-sided LIM (courtesy 
of Merlin Gerin)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
151
Figure 7.24 The double-sided LIM for S44 in its test chassis, delightfully called 
‘Chariot d’essais’ (courtesy of Merlin Gerin)
Figure 7.25 The French track at Gometz. A 3-phase line can be seen alongside the 
inverted-T aluminium alloy secondary (courtesy ofSociete de VAerotrain)

152
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
right hand side 
of vehicle
V////////////////////////////////,
Figure 7.26 Basic system of ‘attractive Maglev’
7.26), such as a light source and photocell, detecting the position of a set of electro­
magnets that are attached to the vehicle and feeding error signals to an amplifier 
that in turn energises the lifting magnets. Such a system can be stabilised and made 
to correct disturbances rapidly and with damping. Professor West moved to the 
University of Sussex and set up a research team to develop the idea. This can now 
be seen to have been going on in parallel with the work of the German firm.
In the USA they were doing ‘some of each’. The Garrett Corporation were 
developing thrust units on contract from the DOT, Washington D.C., who also 
awarded study contracts for cryogenic levitation studies both to the Stanford 
Research Institute and to the Ford Motor Company. The Rohr Corporation decided 
to pursue Maglev (‘Romag’, the feedback type) and in parallel developed a proto­
type (150m.p.h.) tracked air cushion vehicle (PTACV) with Bertin-type air cushions 
and a double-sided, Gramme-ring, fixed-frequency linear motor built by Le Moteur 
Lin6aire with a GEC voltage control, illustrating that international exchanges of 
technological know-how are possible (despite assertions to the contrary later to be 
made before the Select Committee in 1973). At Pueblo there was an air cushion 
vehicle TACRV (Tracked Air Cushion Research Vehicle) designed for 300m.p.h. 
with peripheral jet air cushions similar to those developed in the UK, and a double­
sided linear motor, inverter-controlled and fed from the trackside, together with a 
Linear Induction Motor Research Vehicle (LIMRV), running on steel wheels, the 
counterpart of THL’s plans for a similar 160 m.p.h. vehicle, RTV 22, which was 
never completed. In France the ‘Tridim’ vehicle was driven by mechanical rack and 
pinion. I reckon that if radiation pressure (by means of which stable levitation of 
microscopic objects can be achieved) had been only vaguely ‘on’ at that time, 
someone would have taken it up during this period of gestation when the engineers 
of the world saw future transport as a three-part problem and were sharpening their 
weapons for the real in-fighting to begin.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
153
7.9 Global competition 1966-1972
Interest in high-speed linear motors was expanding rapidly. To recapitulate, the 
line-up in 1966 was as follows:
(1) The Garrett Corporation had their first contract from the DOT, Washington 
D.C.
(2) Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm were doing studies. The Technical University 
at Braunschweig were also doing paper studies.
(3) Hovercraft Development Ltd had a 6 ft working model shown at Browndown 
in ‘Hovershow 66’.
(4) Imperial College had a 7-ft diameter disc rig.
Monsieur Barthalon had joined the contenders with the URBA system in France, 
initially for comparatively low-speed urban transport, and had made his first tests 
of Gramme-ring linear motors on an air cushion vehicle, and attained 40 m.p.h. 
Garrett had started their full-scale linear motor programme. They had produced a 
computer program for the design of linear motors to include end effects, and this 
was being used in British firms as well as in those of other countries, in preference 
to what became known as ‘the Manchester method’ (Laithwaite, 1966). The trouble 
with the latter was that, as published, it contained no terms to account for either 
primary or secondary leakage, so got the starting conditions very wrong. Fred 
Eastham and I knew how to put leakage in and considered our system of calcu­
lating effects near synchronous speed as superior, for the Motor Industry Research 
Association’s accelerator at Nuneaton, officially opened by the Minister of Tech­
nology (The Rt Hon. Anthony Wedgwood Benn) in March 1968, had a terminal 
speed correct to better than 1 per cent. The motor and track (figures 7.27 and 
7.28) were built by AEI and by 1976 had completed eight years of continuous 
service.
If there was one facet of the game that was still in its infancy in 1968, it was 
communication between workers with common interests. At Imperial College we 
were ‘going it alone’ in the belief that we were winning. So, I suspect, were several 
other competitors. When overseas engineers visited Imperial College they were 
shown as much as we thought was good for them. They were shown the problems 
on one rig while the demonstrator was literally leaning on the ‘answer’ in the form 
of another, more advanced rig, to which their attention was not to be drawn.
In Germany, Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm landed a systems analysis contract 
with the Federal Ministry of Transport in 1969 (the year we invented the TFM). 
Another German firm, Krauss-Maffei, began a ‘study of the development of future 
long-haul, high-speed transportation’ in 1968 and had made a static rig to prove 
the feasibility of attractive magnetic suspension with feedback amplifier and 
followed this with a ‘worldwide study on the development status of high-speed 
transportation systems’. (In 1974 these two German firms were to combine their 
programmes.) MBB completed a full-scale vehicle in 1970 (figure 7.29).
In 1971 Krauss-Maffei produced a vehicle labelled ‘Transrapid 02’. This machine 
weighed 11 tonnes, was 11.7 metres long, and with it they claimed a ‘world record’

154
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.27 The car crash test facility at the Motor Industry Research Association’s 
laboratories at Nuneaton (courtesy of Motor Industry Research Association)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
155
Figure 7.28 The moment of impact must occur at constant speed, in this case
30.4 m.p.h. (courtesy of Motor Industry Research Association)
Figure 7.29 Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm were first to test a full-scale feedback 
amplifier-type magnetic suspension (courtesy of Transrapid International)

156
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 7.30 ‘Transrapid 02’ achieved a ‘world record’ of 164 k.p.h. in 1971 using 
a double-sided linear motor (courtesy of Transrapid International)
of 164 k.p.h. (102 m.p.h.) on a 930-metre track on a curve of 800 metres radius, 
with linear motor propulsion (figure 7.30). (Garrett at that time had done 94m.p.h.) 
German academic interest in linear motors began as an offshoot of magneto­
hydrodynamics, but not until 1971 did they do more than paper studies. In that 
year the West German Ministry of Research and Technology established a pro­
gramme to “introduce novel technologies into the field of high-speed transporta­
tion.” They concluded that “Gramme-ring windings were preferable” for large pole 
pitches, but tried to improve the power factor by “an additional ladder-like damper 
winding that reflects the magnetic flux back into the secondary.” The results for 
a motor 1 metre long were said to be “highly satisfactory.” Be that as it may, I 
had tried copper sheet shielding of Gramme-ring motors (see figure 7.31) in the 
late 1950s in Manchester and found that all you did was to convert a primary series 
impedance of 0.1 +/5.0 into one of 2 +/2, and I would hardly have called this 
‘satisfactory’. But the Germans and I were unaware of each other, even in 1971.
Meanwhile, in France, Monsieur Barthalon was claiming the “very first tests on 
a linear motor associated with an air cushion vehicle of the type URBA” in 1968. 
This claim was justified only to the extent that his air cushion was a vacuum type, 
whereas THL’s was a pressure cushion. Nevertheless, in 1969 his project ‘Test 
Wagon’ using a double-sided, Gramme-ring motor, reached 180k.p.h. on Monsieur 
Berlin’s 3-km track at Gometz. When large organisations begin claiming world 
records, I reckon it can be assumed that ‘the game’ has become serious. I mention 
this here for there were many suggestions in the later 1970s, in evidence before

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
157
Figure 7.31 Copper sheet shielding in an attempt to reduce primary leakage flux
the Select Committee and elsewhere in Britain, that no-one overseas was really 
taking linear motor propulsion for inter-city transport seriously.
At this time (1971) the French firm Le Moteur Lindaire had begun collaborating 
with the British firm Linear Motors Ltd (note that both companies had the initials 
‘LML’—which was most confusing for managers and politicians alike!), to the 
extent that there was a joint company named ‘Lintrol’, the Loughborough firm’s 
marketing trade name being ‘Lintrol Systems, UK’ and the French counterpart 
‘Lintrol Systems, France’. There were rumours of a merger of Le Moteur Lin6aire 
with the very large industrial firm of Merlin Gerin of Grenoble, at which time the 
Loughborough subsidiary of Herbert Morris cut the French firm adrift. Le Moteur 
Lineaire made the Gramme-ring motor for Monsieur Barthalon’s Gometz vehicle 
and went on in 1972 to make a motor for the Rohr PTACV in the USA, despite 
‘home competition’ from the Garrett Corporation who had had the large study 
contract from the Department of Transportation in Washington D.C. Garrett could 
justifiably have felt affronted, for they probably had the best theoretical design 
equipment in the world at that time. Even the under-modest publicity for the 
French machine had a hint of some disappointment. Designed to give a starting 
thrust of 2100 daN, and with a synchronous speed of 77 m/s (277 k.p.h.), fed 
from 4160 volts at 60 Hz, the motor was only run at 3100 volts and did 163 k.p.h. 
when consuming 13.2 MVA (a power factor less than 0.1, but then, they still 
believed in Gramme-ring windings and had not heard of TFMs).
Whether this motor was the beginning of the end of ‘LML’ (France) is not clear 
but the company was closed in July 1974 and news of this did no good at all for 
the British ‘LML’ who were not making mistakes. From now on, whoever failed 
anywhere in the world, whether it was seen as an air cushion failure, a magnetic 
suspension failure or a bad Gramme-ring design, seemed to be receiving trans­
lation in British ‘political’ (by which I mean perhaps ‘Scientific Civil Service’) 
circles as ‘proof of the failure of linear motors’. Whatever it was, overseas ‘compe­
tition’ was making itself felt not as superior technology but as inferior with the 
implication that if the might of the USA, German and French industries could not 
produce a winner, what chance had the British?

158
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
In the USA, Garrett Corporation apart, academic interest began at the Massa­
chusetts Institute of Technology in 1971 with the ‘Magneplane’ project—a cryo­
genically suspended model on a short track (figure 7.32). At the same time ‘Min- 
Tech’ support (effectively from the DOT) awarded two study contracts for cryo­
genic suspension jointly worth a quarter of a million dollars. One grant was made 
to the Ford Motor Company, the other to the Stanford Research Institute. Their 
reports showed artist’s impressions of good ‘old-fashioned’ double-sided linear 
induction motors. We knew at this time that the Americans in particular could not 
contemplate the possibility of single-sided motors for fear of a magnetic pull that 
might increase the effective weight of the vehicle tenfold. They were not alone 
in this, indeed in 1972 only THL seemed to know anything at all about vertical 
forces from single-sided LIMs, having, as pointed out earlier, taken the decision to 
go single-sided in 1967. This was the ‘apparent’ size of the British lead (in time) in 
1972. The word ‘apparent’ is used because the Americans did know how to design 
motors for fixed low-frequency supply and high speed. The reluctance to manu­
facture this kind of machine could possibly be put down to ‘national pride’, without 
intending to cause offence, for there is a quite justifiable preference in most coun­
tries to develop their own ideas first.
Figure 7.32 The MIT model ‘Magneplane’ using cryogenic suspension and guidance 
in its V-shaped track {courtesy of Professor Henry H. Kolm)

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
159
American linear motor interests had progressed in General Motors and the Rohr 
Corporation (1970). Japanese interest had been directed to cryogenic suspension 
and by 1972 an article had appeared in Japanese Railway Engineering (Kyotani, 
1972). Japanese National Railways had begun building the two-man cryogenically 
levitated vehicle shown in figure 7.33. THL’s big vehicle RTV 31 (figure 7.34) did 
its first test run on 4 December 1971 and a modest 30 m.p.h. a few days later for 
the press; no-one could fault it as a vehicle, or as a concept, at this stage.
Figure 7.33 Japanese National Railways’ two-man, cryogenically levitated vehicle 
on its test track (courtesy of Japanese National Railways)
Figure 7.34 RTV 31 being installed on its concrete beam (courtesy of Ron Bailey 
Studios)

160
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
In terms of speed alone, Monsieur Bertin was definitely winning in 1972. He 
had begun air cushion development as far back as 1957, the year of my first linear 
motor paper (Laithwaite, 1957). The Adrotrain concept was dated 1961 and the 
Gometz track was begun in 1965. By April 1966, speeds of 112 m.p.h. (180 k.p.h.) 
were attained, 190 m.p.h. (303 k.p.h.) by December of that year and 215 m.p.h.. 
(345 k.p.h.) by 1967, all without linear motors. The track was now 6.7 km long. 
Monsieur Bertin built a second (elevated) track 18 km long and gave rides to ‘VIPs’ 
and, as one of them told me, “I don’t think it was an accident that this track was 
built parallel to and in sight of the fast Paris-Orleans line. Nor do I think it an 
accident that we started a few moments after the 100 m.p.h. crack French express 
and overtook it at a relative speed of 80 m.p.h.”
But it suffered the fate of THL and a most impressive leaflet showing nine stages 
of Airotrain (only two of which were artist’s impressions) was overprinted rather 
sadly ‘Project abandoned consequent to Government decision on July 17, 1974’, 
but not before Bertin had a world record for ground speed vehicles with passengers, 
at 270 m.p.h. (430 k.p.h.).
Likewise, at the time of closure of THL, RTV 31 had achieved 108 m.p.h. 
(173 k.p.h.) against a 20 m.p.h. headwind, stopping and starting under its own LIM 
power in less than a mile. Like the A6rotrain, RTV 31 had many critics of all kinds, 
none of whom could do better.
7.10 Transpo72
What happened just prior to both of these project closures reminded me forcibly 
of the ancient jousting tournaments which took place in England between the 
Normans and Saxons whenever a test of strength was called for. The supposition 
was that the side that won the tournament would win the battle (if there was to 
be one). A similar phenomenon perhaps persists, even in modern times, except that 
the words ‘Olympic Games’ replace ‘Jousting Tournament’, even though the results 
are far more disconnected from a nuclear war than were the knights and wars of 
old. However it was, the Americans decided to hold a ‘Tournament’ in high-speed 
transport in May 1972 in Dulles, near Washington D. C. Named ‘Transpo 72’, each 
potential ‘winner of the game’ was allocated a space 30 ft x 20 ft in which to 
demonstrate a working system. Although the outcome was totally indecisive, it 
was important for THL and its consultants in providing a target date for ‘some­
thing’. The exercise illustrated quite clearly for us the need to have a terminal date 
from time to tinle, even if the goal sometimes seemed impossible. Later historians 
may possibly regard 1972 as the year when panic about pollution was at its height. 
In such a climate Tom Fellows suggested that we should try for a THL exhibit 
which was entirely electromagnetic and pointed out quickly that the elongated 
rectangular-plate levitator was already the basis for such a system, merely requiring 
a single-sided linear motor to be fitted along the centre, between the two, long 
C-cores.
The scale of the operation, of course, was against us. On a 30-ft run, a vehicle 
would look ridiculous if it exceeded 3 ft in length. To scale, this meant 4 inches

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
161
wide, at most, and our levitation track was 10 inches wide. Since the levitator was 
only 2-minute rated as it stood, a reduction to 4 inches wide would have such a 
devastating effect on its performance as to make it 2-second rated! In December 
1971 we made a start by the assumption (and this was my contribution, I believe) 
that only ‘edges’ mattered (see figure 7.35(a)). The edges A, B of the floating plate, 
I argued, could not ‘see’ the edges C and D of the primary, nor even E and F, so we 
could cut off the areas P, P' and therefore probably Q, Q' also, to leave a narrower 
system, as in figure 7.35(b). Then, since only circuits matter in electromagnetism, 
the system should not care where the m.m.f. was applied, so the outer sides of the 
exciting coils could be re-positioned below the C-cores as in figure 7.35(b). This 
reduced the width to 7 inches without loss of goodness, so we made a short length, 
just to be sure that it still worked—and it didn’t! The wretched plate tried to tilt 
sideways into one or other of the positions shown dotted in figure 7.35(c). That 
was to be the only contribution I was to make to the proposal. I was entertaining 
an important visitor on the afternoon of the day we tested the first developments 
of the long levitator but half way through that afternoon my colleague Fred Eastham 
burst into my office, recognised the visitor and retired in confusion with an excla­
mation which began almost as a whisper and rose to almost a shout at the end of 
the very short sentence: “Oh, I’m sorry-but it’s STABLE!” I ended my discussions 
with the VIP as soon as I could, without making it obvious that I wanted him to go, 
and rejoined Fred. “What did you do?” I said, for the system looked identical to 
that in figure 7.35(c). “You may remember” he said, “that in our Manchester days 
(a)
Figure 7.35 (a) Cross-section through a rectangular plate levitator. (b) Reduction 
of cross-section by purely ‘edge arguments’, (c) Instability of a simple system

162
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
someone once connected up the long levitator with one of the coils reversed and it 
seemed to make little difference, so I tried it with this, just for the sake of it, and 
it works.” The system was now that shown in figure 7.36 and, since we had used 
smaller C-cores than before, the levitation part of the system was down to the 
4 inch width required, but only about 15-seconds rated. We could blow it hard, we 
argued, by putting it over a duct.
Figure 7.36 The first self-supporting, self-guiding linear motor at Imperial College, 
December 1971
At this point we called a meeting of both user and manufacturer and John Bell 
and Tony Davey of Linear Motors Ltd, Geoff Easton and Geoff Brown of THL and 
Fred and I sat around a table to discuss a final design which had to be built and 
shipped by March 1972. John Bell was first to comment, and to the effect that we 
would never build a 30-ft length of C-core stampings and ship it to the States in one 
piece, however strong an epoxy resin we used. “Perhaps we could build it in sec­
tions,” said Geoff Easton. I began what was to have been a lengthy explanation as 
to why that was impractical because each coil would need hundreds of turns and 
the making of a hundred joints per section was just ‘not on’—or something like 
that—but I was cut short by Fred, who with a magnificent authority in his voice, 
declared: “Not only can you make it in sections, but you can make each section no 
more than 4 inches long and wind them all separately and connect them—red, 
minus yellow, blue, etc.—and the levitator now becomes the motor.”
I shall never forget the excitement of that moment and as a piece of sheer inven­
tive genius it rivalled anything I had ever witnessed in my F. C. Williams/Tom 
Kilburn computer days. A ‘mark III’ machine was rapidly constructed and worked 
just as Fred Eastham had predicted. Shown in plan view in figure 7.37 it had just 
about enough thrust as a motor to propel a lightweight bodywork of fibreglass 
mounted on an aluminium sheet 36 inches x 4 inches x 1/8 inch. We would really 
have liked a little more thrust, and within the week Fred Eastham provided it by 
the, now apparently simple, process of using the third (vertical) dimension and 
making the aluminium secondary a U-channel. Another mountain had crumbled 
into a heap of dust in a few days. The steps in Fred’s argument were as follows. The 
reason for low thrust is the apparently high secondary resistivity—an effect created 
by the lack of overhang ‘end-winding’. To increase the width of the plate would be 
to destroy the stability, for which edge positions are vital. The channel idea allows 
both edge and extended plate width to co-exist.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
163
I
R -Y B -R Y -B R -B Y
coils
Figure 7.37 Plan view of magnetic suspension/propulsion system that became 
known as ‘the Washington Prototype’
Still we were not satisfied. An air duct was still required for a reasonable time­
rating and the air made so much noise that we might as well have had an air-bed, 
defeating the original objective. I argued that if vertical edges were a good idea at 
the extremities of the plate, perhaps they would be equally good at the centre, as 
shown in figure 7.38. We bolted two channels together and found it to be unstable. 
The pressure was really on now. The manufacturers said it was touch and go as to 
completion by March. Tom Fellows said we could fly it out, if we really believed 
we could still do better. One night Fred said to me just before leaving for home 
(we were both practically exhausted at the time), “I suppose it would be silly to 
try just one half of that double channel over one set of C-cores.” We tried, and it 
took up an unstable position as shown in figure 7.38(b), but by now we were both 
so ‘saturated’ in the subject that we both shouted in unison, “That’s only the effect 
of the other half!” We went home both happy and confident and in the morning 
we took a woodsaw (all experiments were mounted on wooden bases not unlike 
the ‘breadboards’ of early electronic days), and sawed it up the middle, placing the 
two pieces end-to-end, and we floated a half-width channel (2 inches overall) suc­
cessfully. Now we were ‘home’. With an increase in width to 4 inches the goodness 
was multiplied by 4 and a successful track was sent out to Dulles and operated 
throughout the fortnight of the exhibition (figure 7.39). The ‘magnetic river’ was 
born.
(a)
Figure 7.38 (a) Upturned centre plate is unstable in roll, (b) A single U-plate
(b)
appears unstable only on a double track

Figure 7.39 The first demonstration of a Magnetic River at Transpo 72, Dulles, Washington D.C. The spectator 
second from left is Mr Clinton Davis, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department of Trade, and 
third from left is Mr Claud Bennett, Ontario’s Minister for Trade (courtesy of British Overseas Trade Board}
164 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
165
There was just one more bit of know-how which emerged during the manufac­
ture of this equipment which I found particularly pleasing. For some 12 years I had 
believed that there was probably an absolute maximum height to which a piece of 
conductor could be levitated at 50 Hz for complex reasons similar to those which 
dictate the maximum size of bird that can fly. This belief was based largely on the 
work of the American W. V. Lovell who showed that over a levitation coil system 
there existed a region (conical if the coil system was circular, wedge-shaped if 
linear) within which small conducting objects would be attracted. Outside of this 
region they would be repelled (Lovell, 1955). It appeared that a necessary condi­
tion for stability was that the supported object must lie partly within the ‘cone 
of attraction’ (see figure 5.5).
The first test of the Dulles model showed the vehicle to be underdamped in roll, 
and Tony Davey had discovered that a slightly wider plate was more damped. I was 
shown this on a visit to Loughborough. “Yes,” I said, “but you will have lost some 
lateral ‘stiffness’ will you not?” This proved to be so and I thought I had rounded 
off the matter by saying: “If you were to raise the supply voltage so as to lift the 
plate higher it will become totally unstable laterally.” A higher voltage was available 
so it was used, and with increasing height the plate achieved increased lateral stiff­
ness! At once it was clear that the cone of attraction had been eliminated. The 
single C-core operated on an expanding geometry, as shown in figure 7.40, whereby 
increased power supply, resulting in increased supported height, could be maintained 
with the same stability, so long as the plate width was increased to fit between the 
dotted lines, as shown—but the input power needed tends to increase at something 
like the fourth power of the levitated height. “Give me a place to stand and I will 
move the earth,” said Archimedes, having appreciated the principle of the lever. 
“Give me Battersea Power Station for only two minutes and I will float the Taj 
Mahal 30 ft in the air!” I could now add, noting that both Archimedes and I were 
incapable of actually performing the respective feats, but both of us at least knew 
how. ‘Knowing how’ is what engineering is all about.
Figure 7.40 The levitation system with an expanding geometry

166
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
The real importance of this discovery was to come later when workers on cryo­
genic suspension were to declare that ‘only cryogenic levitation’ enabled 6-inch 
clearances to be possible between track and vehicle. Transpo 72 really ‘paid off’, 
so far as our efforts had been concerned.
We had no illusions about the ‘magnetic river’. It was amazing that it was even 
possible to float, guide and propel a sheet of conductor from one and the same set 
of coils, but we had measured the propulsive force and the power input and knew 
that 95 per cent of the latter was consumed as non-mechanical-power-producing 
ohmic loss in the plate, so the efficiency of the machine as a motor was less than 
5 per cent. It was a curiosity and a device to impress visitors. It was also ‘upside 
down’ in the sense that the coils were in the track, but so were most of the 
Washington models, for neither miniature fans nor miniature linear motors are good 
at producing adequate lift to support their own weight and I know of no electro­
magnetic system which will not invert—that is, it is either stable both ways up, or 
unstable both ways.
7.11 The stop-go phase
What was to be the next development? In late 1972 we saw it as more exploitation 
of the TFM idea. With all three dimensions now available, design parameter varia­
tions were semi-infinite in number. A full description of the thinking at this time is 
very complex, for although TFMs were invented specifically to solve the long pole 
pitch problem they could have application for lower speeds also. What happened in 
the high-speed transport game in 1972 and subsequently can now be seen in several 
countries more as political manoeuvring than as technological development, and the 
storm that broke in the UK in February 1973 was only one of a number of similar 
political/technological tangles that were to play havoc with development of the 
subject of linear motors as a whole.
Although a historian must constantly be reminded not to over-emphasise the 
immediate past of which he was a part at the expense of older events that concerned 
other people, there was nothing to compare with the sequence that led to the 
closure of the Tracked Hovercraft project.
The noise of ‘distant thunder’ came to me first throughout 1972 by visits from a 
very worried Tom Fellows telling me of proposed cut-backs in Government spending 
on THL. The parent company, NRDC, was growing unenthusiastic about the 
project, it appeared, and I was reminded of ‘BISON’ in 1951. We were somewhat 
harassed from time to time by sudden bursts of interest from the daily press who 
are always ready to report a good clean fight. A single newspaper headline is enough 
to ‘stop production’, for an academic, for a couple of days or more during which he 
is scarcely away from a telephone day or night. Going into hiding implies that you 
personally have something to hide, and to reply ‘no comment’ to every question 
only stimulates the news hounds the more, so you might just as well tell them all, 
which is both time-consuming and demands great skill, if you are not to be mis­
quoted out of context in a manner which suggests that you have called Mr X a 
fool.

THE HIGH-SPEED TRANSPORT GAME
167
But there was no doubt that ‘stop-go’ policy existed in high places, inaccessible 
to an academic like myself, and I was fully aware of the size of the impending 
storm and the amount of cleaning up which would be necessary afterwards, quite 
some weeks before it broke. What I could not possibly foresee was the manner of 
it.
7.12 The Select Committee
The future of THL had, on the 8 February 1973, been placed before the Select 
Committee for Science and Technology of the House of Commons for examination. 
The Select Committee consisted of Members from both sides of the House and was 
chaired at that time by that most able and famous man, the late Mr Airey Neave. 
Members of the Committee were expert in various fields of science, and were all 
back-benchers. Thus Mr Arthur Palmer, Labour Member for Bristol Central was a 
fellow electrical engineer with whom I could, and in fact did, converse at the 
highest technical level and be assured that I was being understood. It was, for me, 
a most commendable organisation. It took evidence in public, which of course 
included the gentlemen of the Press. At the second meeting on 14 February 1973 
the Committee had before them five Memoranda submitted by the following 
organisations
(1) The Department of Trade and Industry
(2) Tracked Hovercraft Ltd
(3) National Research Development Corporation
(4) British Railways Board
(5) Tracked Hovercraft Ltd Staff Association.
The tone of the first of these was not so much a suggestion of closure as “an 
indication of the type of questions being studied by the Department” (the last 
sentence of the first Memorandum). On that same day the Select Committee took 
evidence from and examined two witnesses. Mr Michael Heseltine, Minister for 
Aerospace and Shipping, and Mr S. N. Burbridge, an Assistant Secretary of the 
Department of Trade and Industry.
The first question from the Chairman was “Has a decision been reached on this 
project?” Mr Heseltine replied simply: “Yes.” “When was it reached?”—“On the 
29 January.” “What was the decision?”—“That we should in fact close down the 
Company Tracked Hovercraft Ltd as it now operates and that we should come to 
agreements with two particular contractors to deal with those two aspects of the 
technology at Tracked Hovercraft which are of immediate interest.” This shocked 
and angered the Committee whose members saw it as a snub, insofar as they were 
effectively being asked to advise on a project which was already a dead duck and 
there was natural resentment, particularly in view of the tone of the Department’s 
Memorandum.
The Select Committee’s immediate retort was to announce their intention to 
make a complete examination of the THL project, closed or not. During the subse­
quent weeks they took other evidence from small groups of representatives from 

168
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
the various interested parties, including NRDC, the Department of the Environment, 
British Rail and the Universities. The detailed minutes of evidence given in public 
form remarkably good reading, for anyone interested in seeing Government work­
ing, and perhaps even follow a pattern of confusion and error, mostly because of lack 
of proper communication, such as was soon to follow in other countries, notably 
West Germany and Canada.
7.13 References
Armstrong, D. S. (1967), ‘Application of the linear motor to transport’, Railway 
Gazette,Vol. 123, pp. 145-150
Bedford, B. D., Peer, L. H. B. and Tonks, L. (1939), ‘The electromagnetic levitator’, 
General Electric Review, Vol. 42, No. 6, pp. 246-247
Freeman, E. M. and Laithwaite, E. R. (1968), ‘Unbalanced magnetic push’, Proc.
IEE,N(A. 115, No. 4, p. 538
Kemper, H. (1934), German Patent No. 643 316
Kyotani, Y. (1972), ‘Magnetic levitation research vehicle’, Japanese Railway Engin­
eering, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 6-9
Laithwaite, E. R. (1957), ‘Linear induction motors’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 104A, No. 18, 
pp. 461-470
Laithwaite, E. R. (1966), Induction Machines for Special Purposes (Newnes)
Laithwaite, E. R. and Barwell, F. T. (1969), ‘Applications of linear induction motors 
to high-speed transport systems’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 116, No. 5, pp. 713-724
Laithwaite, E. R., Eastham, J. F., Bolton, H. R. and Fellows, T. G. (1971), ‘Linear 
motors with transverse flux’,Proc. IEE, Vol. 118, No. 12, pp. 1761-1767
Lovell, W. V. (1955), ‘Electromagnet removes nonferrous metals’, Electronics, 
Vol. 28, No. 9,pp. 164-166
Zehden, A. (1902), ‘New improvements in electric traction apparatus’, U.S. Patent 
No. 88 145

8 The world-wide game
8.1 New readers begin here!
I built my first linear motor in 1948 and wrote my first paper on the subject in 
1954. The Gorton experiment took place in 1962. The first model of a tracked 
hovercraft was publicly demonstrated at Browndown in the summer of 1966. We 
abandoned double-sided sandwich motors in 1967 on the grounds of safety and 
with the realisation that a track of aluminium sheet backed by steel need not neces­
sarily put large downward attractive forces on the vehicle. The ‘we’ referred to here 
consists of Fred Eastham, Hugh Bolton, other members of my staff, and of Tom 
Fellows and his THL senior staff at Cambridge. We met and conquered the long 
pole pitch problem in 1969. We were on the track of very far-reaching experiments 
with the emergence of a ‘magnetic river’ following Transpo 72 in May of that year. 
We were aware of the feedback amplifier type of magnetic suspension and of the 
cryogenic method (superconductor). We were aware of a potential customer for a 
linear motor transport scheme in the form of the Canadian Government who had 
invited 11 firms to submit schemes. Two of the 11 (Tracked Hovercraft Ltd and 
Hawker Siddeley (Canada)) combined effort to put in a single bid. Their solution 
was to use rubber-tyred wheels with no treads running in concrete guides with 
linear motor propulsion. The absence of treads would reduce noise levels to well 
below those of the tyres of ordinary cars.
By the time the Select Committee began their job on THL, the Canadian Govern­
ment had shortened their list to two contestants:
(1) Krauss-Maffei of Germany who proposed a feedback amplifier type of ‘Maglev’ 
plus linear motor propulsion.
(2) The THL/Hawker Siddeley (Canada) proposal.
Just how all this occurred was explained to me by a man who stood as close to 
the Toronto project as I did to THL. I will tell his story here, for much of it can be 
grouped under the heading ‘The perils of having a System’! But first I will digress 
merely to illustrate just what I mean by that phrase.
169

170
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Many academics believe that ‘Benevolent Dictatorship’ is the ideal form of 
Government, for it is only when a ‘SYSTEM’ is set up that anomalies begin to 
occur.
In the summer of 1975 the French Government had promised the apple farmers 
a minimum price for their fruit—a very reasonable thing to do. But that year there 
was a glut. The only sensible thing to do would have been to reap what was needed, 
pay the farmer for the estimated total of all apples, let the remainder drop from 
the trees and rot and roll them in for fertiliser. But there would have been an out­
cry about the waste of public money.
They were paid for, so they had to be seen to be reaped and carted away—at 
considerable expense. Then came the problem of what to do with them. You could 
not dig a hole and bury them because someone would have to do the tipping and 
the digging and the filling in. And he would tell the Press and the cat would be out 
of the bag again.
So they found an elegant solution. A fruit canning factory had a pulping machine 
and was located near a river. So the lorries delivered the surplus apples to the 
factory (to be canned, everyone thought). But only two people knew that the out­
put pipe of the pulping machine went straight into the river. That was nice and tidy.
But alas, they made a river of pure cider that poisoned all the fish. The dead fish 
floated to the surface and the conservationists wanted to know who killed them, 
and not one but two cats flew out of the bag at once.
Now for the punch line: while all this was going on, France was importing apples!
To the layman this looks like stupidity in any language, but try putting yourself 
in the place of any one of the people involved and you will find yourself doing 
your best and doing exactly as they did. You must import apples or you won’t 
export your wine, and so on. The fault belonged to no one person, but to the social 
system as a whole.
If the actions in the UK over the Tracked Hovercraft project seemed illogical, 
it was comforting to see the same kind of ‘circus’ taking place in Toronto about 
the same time—in fact the two systems had considerable effect on each other. The 
following account is one man’s view of what went on in Toronto. Only the portions 
in brackets are my ‘asides’.
8.2 The Toronto Urban Transit Scheme
In the 1960s there was public concern over pollution, soon to be replaced by the 
‘Energy Crisis’. It was proposed to build a North to South Transit System through 
Toronto and many ‘action groups’ were formed to see that something was done. 
The most important ingredient was that the Provincial elections were near (1972). 
A political issue was made of the idea of stopping the building of ‘expressways’, 
and building an Urban Transport System instead, even though no-one had any firm 
ideas as to what form it would take.
In February 1971, a group was formed to look into what kind of system would 
be best, not only for Toronto, but elsewhere in Ontario also. Outside authorities 
were to be encouraged to bring in their own expertise. Ten firms were invited to 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
171
submit their own versions and anyone else was invited to volunteer proposals. Of 
the 200 applications in this second group, all were rejected and the 10 invited sub­
missions became the ‘finalists’, only one of which (the Toronto Transit Commis­
sion) was a ‘local’.
The objective was to transport 20 000 passengers an hour at, perhaps, no more 
than 20 m.p.h. Basically three ways of doing it were possible:
(1) Do it yourself
(2) Go out to experts—as was in fact done
(3) Do it conventionally.
Of the nine ‘outsiders’, five were from the US, two from France, one was British 
and one German. The rules were not specified at the time of the invitations but, a 
year later, a short list of three was funded for more detailed study with a view to 
demonstrations in 1973. During this period the number of staff employed by the 
Canadian Transportation Department to assess the projects exploded from 5 to 
200; some were ‘rooting for air cushions’, some for cryogenic suspension, and so 
on, and as one worker put it: “An awful lot of guts got spilt on the floor—after all, 
how do you compare where the water closet is situated in rival systems?”
Toronto became ‘a central meeting place for junior engineers from the Colonies’. 
The short list of three and their systems were as follows:
(1) Krauss-Maffei (Germany) with three linear motor bidders including SPAR 
Aerospace Products Ltd in Canada itself, proposing feedback amplifier mag­
netic suspension, and linear induction motor propulsion.
(2) A combined Hawker Siddeley (Canada)/Tracked Hovercraft Ltd (UK) project 
using rubber-tyred wheels with no treads (and therefore very quiet) with single­
sided linear induction motor propulsion.
(3) Ford Motor Company proposing cryogenic magnetic suspension and linear 
motor propulsion.
Then Ford pulled out, presumably because they had done less experimentation 
than either of the other two.
A few weeks later the Toronto contract was awarded to Krauss-Maffei. In 
Toronto there was a great clamour for an answer to the question ‘Why not a 
Canadian system?’, to which the ready answer was the urgency and shortage of 
time. Krauss-Maffei had available studies for Taiwan, Fiji and other metropolitan 
areas.
The first test was to be carried out in a place to which nobody went and then 
moved to a public area when seen to be good. Trees were uprooted, conservationists 
got cross, but a system with points and four stations was built, the stations alone 
costing 18 million dollars. Things began to go seriously wrong at the start of 1974. 
Parts were not delivered on schedule, schematics were not finalised, the require­
ment for 16 passenger seats was increased to 22 seats. This added to the on-board 
power supply and, by the summer of 1974, the original 7-tonne proposal had 
increased to a 13-tonne vehicle (almost 1 tonne/passenger).

172
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
In the end there was disaster—in simple terms it just did not work. All faces had 
to be saved, of course, and in order that some public confidence should remain it 
was claimed that the exercise had given ‘a feel’ for the problem. [Rather like putting 
one’s hand into liquid helium and discovering just what it can do.] They tried to 
make the best of what there was and no official details of why or where it failed 
were given. The Canadian Government would carry on their studies, but with less 
money spread over a longer time. Putting wheels on was thought to be rather a 
good idea—especially when they could be treadless to reduce noise, since the linear 
motor could be used for propulsion. (The end of the personal view of a Canadian 
academic.)
What a tragedy for THL—Toronto was proposing to use their system after all. 
The ‘one man’s view’ in the foregoing nine paragraphs did not reveal the nature of 
the failure but talks were arranged between myself and an engineer from Krauss- 
Maffei when cards were laid on the table and, since there was no confidential 
correspondence and no money changed hands, there is no reason why I should not 
disclose the nature of the conversation as part of the history of the subject.
It appeared that at some stage it had been decided to ‘go single-sided’ on the 
LIM, and that no proper investigation had been made of the vertical forces likely 
to be produced by a single-sided motor. In the event no tests on full-scale devices 
were made until Maglev and LIM were ‘married’ on a disastrous day when the LIM 
was found to deliver an enormous upthrust on starting that banged the suspension 
magnets against the track. In this condition the carriage skidded down the track 
until the cross-over point of the lift/attract characteristic was reached when it 
peeled off the rail entirely under the LIM’s magnetic attraction. Even this might be 
thought to have been retrievable, but the fundamentals were wrong. The engineers 
had scaled up a sparrow to the size of an ostrich and found that it could not fly 
(they were unaware of the ‘great Divide’ (Laithwaite, 1973))—and for the same 
reason. After magnetic saturation sets in, magnetic levitation forces (as opposed to 
electromagnetic forces involving induced current) can increase only in proportion 
to pole-face area (L2). Weight increases as volume (L3). The same is true of the 
lift/weight considerations in birds. To continue to increase the size of such creatures 
is to reach a point of no return. It seemed incredible that in the face of such funda­
mental restriction, grants from public funds in the UK were still being awarded in 
1976, and Japan Air Lines were interested in pursuing the same form of Maglev 
for high-speed transport.
8.3 Earith and after
Eight of the redundant engineers from THL went to Canada and joined the SPAR 
company. This was immediately followed by an announcement that SPAR had 
“bought the entire linear motor design team from Cambridge (THL).” This, how­
ever, did not imply that Britain had lost its expertise, for a full-scale longitudinal 
flux motor driving RTV 31 had been designed and built by the AEI/GEC/English 
Electric group, and the 1/5 scale transverse flux motor tested at Cambridge on the 
vehicle ‘RTV 41’ had been built by Linear Motors Ltd, at Loughborough. But then, 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
173
the most amazing things were being said in various places and I had a telephone 
call from the technical director of a manufacturing company which began thus: 
“Good morning, - - - here, we’re taking over your research on linear motors.” I’m 
afraid he got the very rude instant reply: “The hell you are!” Mistakes through lack 
of communication were being made in several places, and not only in Britain. 
SPAR, however, were not slow to exploit their gains in personnel and soon had an 
experimental track (figure 8.1). One felt that a little more of this in the UK would 
not have gone amiss. The most common mistake was to assume that hardly any 
work on linear motors had been done at Imperial College, or for that matter any­
where else, but the Select Committee did a good job on unravelling all the loose 
ends and getting at the facts. Their approach was really tough. A minister who said 
he did not intend to answer a particular question was severely rapped by one of his 
own back benchers who replied, “This happens to be a Select Committee and I am 
asking the questions. I do not want reproof from you. I will ask my question, if 
the Chairman finds it out of order he will speak to me, not you.”
The Committee told a Board Member of NRDC that he should resign. The 
leaders of THL were almost made to appear the villains of the piece. A member of 
the Select Committee suggested that I myself was being ‘bloody-minded’, and I 
replied that in the circumstances I regarded that as a compliment! The Minister of
Figure 8.1 The SPAR track in Canada, testing single-sided motors mounted on a 
wheeled carriage (courtesy of SPAR Aerospace Ltd)

174
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Transport (Mr Peyton) made his almost famous remark about the APT having seats 
in it which, for many, indicated his lack of knowledge of the facts, but for me was 
one of the wisest statements made before the Committee. I cast my mind back to 
the Gorton days and to Fred Barwell’s equally wise remark that we were doing the 
tests (which mostly consisted of giving rides to VIPs) to get money to build a 
bigger one.
The Select Committee announced their intention to visit Imperial College to see 
the linear motor work. This gave me another ‘target’ date and once again under 
pressure Fred Eastham produced another ‘world beater’. He had a magnetic river 
primary constructed within three weeks, but instead of single coils on single C-cores, 
he wound each of the two rows of projecting iron core faces with a properly dis­
tributed winding, as shown in figure 8.2. This was a new concept. It was exciting, 
for it lifted the magnetic river at least halfway out of the Ivory Tower, possibly 
towards the workshops of the world, for it was now clear that it could be regarded 
as purely a pair of parallel linear induction motors and as such it was possible to do 
a power balance horizontally, in the direction of motion, for if F was the force in 
this direction and vs the synchronous speed
input power = Fvs + (primary ohmic loss) + (primary iron loss)
The vertical lift and lateral guidance forces were obtainable for zero input powerl 
There was, ideally, no movement vertically or laterally so no power should be called 
for. We were in a new world in which you allow the forces of induction to act in 
quite separate planes and if you ‘pay’ for your thrust in one plane (payment in the
Figure 8.2 The first distributed-winding Magnetic River at Imperial College, 1973

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
175
form of losses) you do not have to pay for it in the others. Once again in the ‘bright 
light of hindsight’ it was obvious, for unbalanced magnetic pull in a conventional 
rotary motor can be enormous in relation to the useful tangential thrust, but there 
are no watts attached to the radial forces, otherwise no rotary motor would have an 
efficiency greater than 10 per cent, except by good fortune.
If the work of the Select Committee had done no more than stimulate this single 
concept, it was a job well done. The odd thing is that in 1976 there were few 
engineers, either in the UK or anywhere else, prepared to believe these relatively 
simple facts, the others arguing that, at standstill, all the input producing the lift 
goes as loss. You point out that this is also true of a purely propulsive, conventional, 
rotary induction motor and they fail to see the relevance. The fact islhat you can 
either elect to say that your levitation costs you 1 kW per lb lifted, and you get 
your propulsion force for zero power, or that you need 1 kW per lb thrust at 
250 m.p.h. and you get all the lift for nothing.
But you don’t lose twice!
8.4 The Consortium of British Universities
The letters of sympathy flowed in at a ‘personal’ level following the THL closure. It 
was quite an interesting situation for I was able to discover my enemies in other 
spheres of activity very quickly. On the closure day itself, for example, a colleague 
whom I was accustomed to passing frequently without exchanging words, crossed 
the main road especially to say with a great beaming smile “Sad day for you, eh?” 
Of course it wasn’t sad at all. But it was a call for action or our accumulated stack 
of patents (all the property of THL) might well be of no use to British Industry. 
What was important and yet not realised by the ‘man in the street’ was that the 
Government had closed the project but not the Company. So the patents were safe 
and the track was still standing and, what is more, was used for some months as a 
noise-testing track for experiments carried out on behalf of the Department of 
Trade and Industry. There was a natural desire on the part of the senior staff of 
THL, who knew enough about the state of the project and about the state of the 
‘game’ in the world generally, to want to salvage the track and to limp along on a 
skeleton staff. On the other hand, there were clearly people who wanted to see 
that mile-and-a-bit of track put under the bulldozer at the earliest possible date. 
Who these people were I never knew; perhaps they did not really care all that 
much, but the Press whipped up what they could of a fight and the actions which 
followed were quickly described by journalists as ‘the Universities’ fight to save 
Earith’.
What was fact was that Professor Sir Hugh Ford, the Head of the Mechanical 
Engineering Department of Imperial College, took time off from his many other 
duties to interest himself in the work that we were doing in the Electrical Engin­
eering Department and to do what he could to ensure a continuation of our 
researches and of those in other universities which were directed towards the 
coveted 250m.p.h. ‘goal’. It was clear that British Industry was not over-enthus­

176
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
iastic about high-speed linear motors. That being so, the Department of Trade and 
Industry could not be blamed for taking little more than a passing interest and 
nobody was willing to put up money for development—not in the six months or 
so after the closure of THL. Sir Hugh Ford pulled together the interested parties 
among the academics and formed a policy Steering Committee.
An application was made to the Science Research Council for financial support 
to maintain the high-speed track and to turn the site and buildings at Earith and 
Cambridge into a Centre for High Speed Transport Research. The Science Research 
Council responded by appointing an Ad Hoc Committee to look into our claim and 
a formal meeting was arranged in May 1974.
And it was not entirely wasted. Of course our application was declined. So was a 
last-ditch personal application that I made to SRC for £52000 to re-surface the 
track top with a 3/8-inch thick aluminium sheet, the full track width, backed 
by a -inch sheet of boiler plate steel, somewhat narrower, and to build a full-sized 
‘Magnetic River’ motor (with no vehicle) that would be able to accelerate at over 
2 g and attain 250m.p.h., self-guiding and levitating within a mile. The objective 
was to have been a demonstration to the delegates of an international conference 
planned by the Institution of Electrical Engineers for October 1974 (I was the 
organising chairman). The reason for declining was that SRC funds were not avail­
able for public demonstrations.
But by this time I would have needed a very strong belief in the inherent benevo­
lence of Mankind not to suspect that from where I stood, very powerful decisions 
had been made (at very high level) that could not be reversed. Whether we ever 
discover who made them and why they were made is doubtful and probably not 
important.
A possible result of the formation of the SRC Ad Hoc Committee, although I 
cannot be certain for I was not a member of it myself, involved the Company of 
GEC in a counter-proposal. A letter from the then Chairman of the Select Com­
mittee on Science and Technology, Mr Airey Neave, to Professor Arthur Ellison of 
the City University made the first reference to these counter-proposals:
“After our meeting with Lord Beswick, Arthur Palmer and I saw Professor Edwards, 
Chairman of the Science Research Council, at the House of Commons last week.
“Professor Edwards explained that the view of the Council was that they should 
support the principle of the University scheme for research into electric surface 
transport. They did not, however, think the Earith Track was suitable, being only a 
mile in length. They suggested that this should be moth-balled.
“They have in mind to build a circular track on land adjoining the Rutherford 
Laboratory in my Constituency, but have not, I think, worked out details of the 
finance.”
Only when we learned later that GEC were involved did we realise that the 
‘circular track’ was a moving track! GEC were in fact proposing to build, not so 
much a track, as a legendary Great Wheel, 15 metres in diameter and 3 metres axial 
length, to test full-scale linear motors, nearly all of which was to be paid for out of 
public funds. By the time a meeting had been arranged at GEC’s Hirst Research 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
177
Centre, to which ‘outsiders’ such as myself, Professor B. V. Jayawant of Sussex 
University and Dr R. G. Rhodes of Warwick University had been invited, SRC had 
apparently completed a ‘first stage assessment’ and appeared to be proceeding to a 
second stage. To my surprise, members of the SRC Ad Hoc Committee turned up in 
force to the Hirst Centre meeting and what must surely qualify for a famous 
Record Book was the fact that the roles of the industrialist/civil servant and the 
academic were reversed in respect of linear motors. The former were making the 
proposals and the latter were throwing the bricks. It was a refreshing experience!
The biggest ‘brick’ was the fact that members of the Department of Industry’s 
Linear Motor Programme Committee (LMPC)—one of the better outcomes of the 
THL closure—including academics, industrialists and civil servants, had been to 
Grenoble to inspect a wheel test rig of not dissimilar proportions, built by the 
French company of Merlin Gerin. It was suggested prior to the trip that British 
interests might ‘buy time’ on the rig or, since French enthusiasm for the project had 
waned, buy the thing outright and rebuild it in the UK. When the facts were known, 
the peripheral speed attained had never exceeded 100 m.p.h. by very much on 
account of failure to balance the wheel. Yet the motors that propelled it were of 
the double-sided sandwich type, giving every chance to attain balance. The GEC/ 
SRC wheel was for single-sided motors known to be capable of exhibiting enormous 
radial forces that changed with a change in speed.
One of the reasons voiced in those days why a drum rig of this type was clearly 
superior to a test track like Earith, was that linear motors could not be given a heat 
run on only a few miles of track. Yet on a drum rig of 15 metres diameter doing 
400 k.p.h. at the periphery each part of the drum re-enters the field zone for a 
another heat injection every 0.424 second which is not at all the situation on a real 
track. Nor could track aerodynamics be simulated on a drum rig.
Consultancy contracts, meanwhile, were changing hands in a most curious and 
interesting way. For example, at the time the staff of Earith were given just two 
days’ notice to quit, the consultants to THL were given the necessary three 
months’ notice of termination of contract—all, that was, except me. My services 
were retained. I was not particularly surprised to receive notice of termination of my 
contract in February 1976 because the world as a whole was in a state of financial 
recession and many ‘luxury’ activities were under the axe, and not only in Britain. 
But life is full of surprises and an article in the New Scientist (New Scientist, 1976), 
based on an interview with Dr Kenneth Spring of British Rail, began with the 
amazing revelation that “British Rail now believes that magnetic levitation may be 
better than traditional railways for the underground and suburban lines of the 
future.” I would be less than fair if I failed to include the fact that there were two 
schools of thought on means of support for transport of the future in the UK which 
had remained quite independent of THL, British industry and the Universities’ 
Consortium, even though they themselves were based at universities.
One of these, at the University of Sussex, had made a concentrated study of the 
feedback amplifier type of Maglev, under the direction of Professor B. V. Jayawant. 
The other, at the University of Warwick, led by Dr (later Professor) R. G. Rhodes, 
was likewise engaged on a study of the other kind of Maglev-the cryogenic magnet 

178
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
suspension. Funding for these projects had come from the Nuffield and Wolfson 
Foundations.
One wondered how many people who gave evidence before the Select Committee 
and spoke of ‘saving the technology’ in respect of Maglev and linear motors were 
aware
(a) that there were two forms of Maglev
(b) that both were already researched in the UK
(c) that a great deal more money had already been spent abroad on the same 
subject
(d) that one ‘attractive Maglev’ system, namely that of Krauss-Maffei on the 
Toronto job, had been a demonstrable failure
(e) that the magnetic river was quite different from either of the two recognised 
forms.
Now we were told in the New Scientist that “This dramatic reversal in BR 
thinking comes after three years of research which BR believes has cracked the 
problems in magnetic suspension. BR now claims a world lead in mag-lev (magnetic 
levitation). The big remaining problem, according to Dr Kenneth Spring, BR’s head 
of research, is the relatively poor efficiency of the linear induction motors required 
by mag-lev systems. Previously this was thought to be the easier half of the 
problem.”
An interesting point to note is that by 1973, the feedback-amplifier, magnetic 
form of Maglev was being commonly known as ‘attractive Maglev’ in the USA while 
the cryogenic type was, by contrast ‘repulsive’. When one considers the average 
technological make-up of the ‘decision makers’ whether in Government, the Civil 
Service or big industrial concerns, and one thinks of the everyday meaning of the 
words ‘attractive’ and ‘repulsive’, one is perhaps entitled to ask how much weight 
was given simply to the subtle use of words. After all, who wants anything that 
is ‘repulsive’! Another thought that occurred to me about the time of the Toronto 
project was how interesting and useful it would have been to have had an open 
debate between the extremists of the day—the engineers of Krauss-Maffei, com­
mitted to building a system ‘for real’ and the engineers at Stanford Research Insti­
tute and at the Ford Motor Company, both in the USA, whose $4 million studies of 
cryogenic suspension on behalf of the Department of Transportation in Washington 
D.C. came out so overwhelmingly in favour of the ‘repulsive’ system (Coffey etal., 
1973; Reitz a/., 1973).
Again for the record, a magnetic river is, within the above terminology, a ‘repul­
sive’ system.
8.5 ‘Landspeed’
As it emerged later, the Universities’ Steering Committee by no means wasted its 
time in meeting the SRC Ad Hoc Committee, for its voice was at least heard in a 
sector of British Industry prepared to give it a try. A lot of the credit for this must 
go to Mr Geoffrey Hart who had acted for Tracked Hovercraft in matters of public 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
179
relations. The firm of Brian Colquhoun and Partners, civil engineering consultants 
and holders of the Queen’s Award to Industry, were prepared to finance a separate 
company whose directors included members of their own Board and members of 
the Universities’ Steering Committee. Thanks to foresight by Geoffrey Hart, ‘Land­
speed’ was available as a registered name and fitted well into the gap left by 
Lockheed’s ‘Airspeed’ and British Rail’s ‘Seaspeed’. Lord Kings Norton, who had 
long been anxious to help in linear motor development (he had been for some years 
President of the Royal Institution, during which time I was an external Professor 
of that famous establishment), agreed to be Chairman of Landspeed and the 
announcement of the formation of the Company appeared in the Press on 5 June 
1975. The Universities’ Consortium then formed a subsidiary company under the 
name ‘Landspeed University Consultants Ltd’.
Now perhaps is the time to examine what was going on elsewhere.
8.6 The world scene up to 1976, country-by-country
Rather than attempt to write a chronologically correct account of developments in 
places thousands of miles apart, by teams of engineers largely unaware of each 
other’s existence, this section will be divided into a few introductory pages, showing 
the interleaving of various projects that did have some small effects on each other 
(most of which have already been discussed in the context of the political/industrial 
scene), and a main section of the developments, country-by-country. The large 
number of photographs showing advanced vehicles will give an immediate indi­
cation of the amount of investment in the high-speed transport game, a fact to be 
borne in mind when considering the amount of fuss made in the UK about the 
relatively small sums of public money spent there (£5-^ million by NRDC on THL, 
£0.3 million by British Rail and small amounts by Hawker Siddeley, GEC and 
Linear Motors Limited).
In the early days of a new technology the failure of any one project is inclined 
to put the fear of God in those holding the purse strings for all similar projects 
throughout the world. Only success succeeds in such a climate and to this extent 
those of us involved in the high-speed game were all dependent on each other, and 
some made mistakes and did the others no good at all. The historian cannot say, in 
such cases, how far the ripples from any one event spread, or he will end up in 
court. Even to state the facts that followed in the same paragraph may be construed 
as linking the two events, and therefore as a direct assault on individuals or on 
companies.
Let a new paragraph therefore be started and let me begin by saying that there 
were many actions in the mid 1970s for which I could find no logical reason. 
Sometimes there was support, sometimes the lack of it, in the most unusual places.
When the Garrett Corporation had done so much work on linear motors with 
DOT support, including a linear motor design programme that was accepted world­
wide, why was the Rohr vehicle’s motor entrusted to an overseas company? The 
much publicised ‘not manufactured here’ doctrine did not seem to apply in this 
case. Had British Rail gone a stage further than Gorton in 1963, the motors sup­

180
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
plied to the Rohr Corporation would have been British motors. Why did an organi­
sation as effective as the Merlin Gerin Company, with some of the best brains 
in the business working on linear motors projects (Monsieur Victorri and Dr 
Sabonnadtere, for example), suddenly terminate all interest in linear motors? There 
were conflicting reports of this company taking Le Moteur Lindaire on board, but 
having seen the intricacies of industrial politics in action in the UK I cannot hope to 
untangle that particular overseas manoeuvre.
It is easy to excuse mistakes on the grounds that there is insufficient time to 
keep pace with events elsewhere and the bibliography in this book will more than 
amply support such a statement. Of course, engineers do not have time to talk to 
each other, but failure to do so can result in enormous waste of money and effort 
and ultimately can be made the scapegoat for failures. With some aspects of tech­
nology there is usually a ‘no-man’s land’ of knowledge where all failure can be 
hidden, but with Maglev the situation is more akin to a ball game where one side 
must lose if the other wins. If your test vehicle fails in urban transport, you can 
always put wheels on it and pretend that such an act represented ‘phase 2’ of the 
development, but in the high-speed game you put all your money on one square.
A similar dichotomy exists for the induction/synchronous motor choice that 
was offered on the assumption that cryogenic Maglev is the one that succeeds. It 
will be pointed out—has been pointed out—that induction machines are lossy, have 
low power factor, are unproven as guiders and levitators, and it has been stated in 
several situations that transverse flux machines offer no solution to these problems. 
So the protagonists of synchronous linear motors, who were possibly at the same 
stage of development in 1976 as were those of LIMs in the mid 1960s, might 
reasonably have been asked to prove their claims to full-scale test vehicles. The sad 
state in 1976 was that there were the engineers with the courage to do this, but 
their accountants did not allow it, and from the accountant’s viewpoint, quite 
rightly so. The spirit of adventure was fading, alas, in the high-speed game, in the 
face of inflation and other world problems, such as energy resources, hunger, 
pollution—survival! But I am an optimist and I have no doubt that someone must 
ultimately win the High-Speed Game. I cannot see ‘the beloved motor car’ domi­
nating transport for ever, nor yet the omnibus.
Examination of the distance run by the several countries as witnessed in the 
photographs in this chapter alone should surely be enough to convince the fiercest 
critic that we weren’t ALL wrong. Could all the engineers who designed the vehicles 
shown in figures 8.4 to 8.15, as well as that in figure 7.34 have been misguided, 
over-enthusiastic cranks?
8.6.1 USA
The start of the High Speed Ground Transportation (HSGT) studies can be seen to 
have been initiated by President Kennedy at the start of the 1960s. By 1964 there 
was a Department of Transportation in Washington D.C. A 1965 report from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) was directed towards what became 
known as the ‘North East Corridor Project’, an area of highly urbanised land along 
the Atlantic coast that included Washington D.C., New York and Boston. In the 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
181
same year the HSGT Act was passed. Among its requirements was that the Secretary 
of Transportation was to report at least once annually to the President and to 
Congress. Another direct outcome was the funding of a high-speed test centre at 
Pueblo. The MIT report recommended that a development programme be set up to 
examine the use of Linear Induction Motors (LIMs) for HSGT. Two of the three 
major vehicles that were subsequently built and tested were to be seen as a part of 
the implementation of the report. They were as follows.
(1) A linear motor research vehicle (LIMRV) using wheel-on-rail support and 
guidance, and planned to test linear motors up to 400 k.p.h. (250 m.p.h.). The 
track length was to be 10 km and the principal contractor was the Garrett Corpor­
ation (AiResearch Manufacturing Division). The LIMRV programme began in 1966 
as a paper study at Garrett. In 1967 motor building began, to be followed by 
building the vehicle to house and test it in 1968. The official ‘roll-out’ was made at 
Los Angeles in 1969. After a year of standstill and low-speed testing on 400 metres 
of track in California, the vehicle was transferred to the now-established Trans­
portation Test Center (TTC) at Pueblo in California. Figure 8.3 shows the state of 
the layout in 1974. By May 1971, LIMRV had given a ride at 150k.p.h. to the 
Secretary of Transportation. Figure 8.4 shows the original vehicle. A lot of money 
was spent on the TTC. What is also of interest is that in the 8th Report on the 
Railroad Technology Program (1974) there is a paragraph specifically devoted to 
single-sided linear motors:
“A research phase on single-sided linear electric motors (SLEM) has been success­
fully completed. Because of the positive results of analytical and laboratory work at 
Polytechnic Institute of New York (PINY) and TTC, as well as in Europe and Japan, 
the FRA (Federal Railroad Administration) is now planning a development pro­
gram for SLEMs... The most important potential advantage offered by SLEMs 
over the present double-sided Unear motors is that they eliminate the protruding 
vertical reaction rail (about two feet, i.e. 610 mm, tall) and use instead a horizontal 
reaction rail structure that is flush or nearly flush with the track. EUmination of 
the vertical rail represents a major simpUfication of construction and maintenance, 
as well as vehicle switching from one track to another.”
THL came to the same conclusion in 1967.1 wondered how long aU these excel­
lent organisations would take to ‘discover’ the exceUence of TFMs and of Magnetic 
Rivers in particular? I guessed quite a long time, for in the 8th Report, one of the 
advantages listed for the single-sided motor is that it inhibits “track hunting because 
of attraction forces between the vehicle and track.”
(2) An air cushion vehicle with peripheral jets running in a trough section track 
initially using aero propulsion. Called the Tracked Levitated Research Vehicle 
(TLRV) the contract was given to Grumman in 1969. A linear motor was also 
designed and a ‘second generation’ linear motor in 1970 was commissioned under 
contract to the Garrett Corporation. This incorporated an on-board frequency 
changer (usually referred to in the US as a ‘power conditioning unit’), with current 
collection from trackside. In 1971 the Garrett Corporation obtained a further 
contract for current pick-up experiments.

182
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1 TACRV guideway
2 Urban TACV (150 m.p.h.)
3 Railroad (160 rn,p.h.)
4 Impact facility
5 Rail dynamic?
6 Transit <90 fD„p + h<)
7 Perturbed track
fl Balloon track
9 Screech ioop
10 Future programs test area
11 LIHRV track
Figure 8.3 Plan of the DOT Test Center at Pueblo, California
This second generation LIM developed 22200 N (over 2 metric tonnes) of thrust 
continuously rated, and this could be augmented 50 per cent on overload. The 
motor under normal operation consumed nearly 3 megawatts from 4120-volt, 
3-phase supply. The variable-frequency supply was designed to reach a maximum of 
165 Hz, corresponding to 480k.p.h. With an airgap (entrefer) of 1.5 inches 
(38 mm) in a double-sided system, the efficiency was 80.5 per cent and the power 
factor 0.575. Water-cooled tubes were used as primary conductors. The thrust/ 
weight ratio was 1.13 and the power consumption some three times that of the 
first generation LIM. Both the LIM and its power conditioning equipment were 
designed in two halves so that, among other things, the motor and its supply unit 
could be tested at full power, at standstill, as a back-to-back test in the best tradi-

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
183
Figure 8.4 The original Linear Induction Motor Research Vehicle (LIMRV) before 
the boosters were fitted (courtesy of US Federal Railroad Administration)
tions of the Victorian ‘greats’, Hopkinson (for rotary d.c. machines), and Sumpner 
(for transformers).
The TLRV weighed over 12 tonnes, but carried 8-y tonnes of equipment. It was 
designed to stop in 3.2 km from 480k.p.h. (a ‘fierce’ deceleration of 0.28 g aver­
age). Not wishing to add the weight of a transformer to the rest of the power con­
ditioner, the frequency changer was to operate at 8.2 kV and to use a synchronous 
(rotary) capacitor. This had special relevance in the UK in 1976, where low power 
factor was condemned nation-wide in industry and in some universities alike as the 
‘death knell’ of LIMs. (It all seems to depend, for my money, on the willingness to 
win.) The size of the capacitor is clearly not intolerable in vehicles of the size of 
TLRV.
The initial current collection tests were carried out on a rocket sled at China 
Lake, California, and led to the design by Garrett of the most sophisticated current 
pick-up system to date. Figure 8.5 shows a view along the inside of the track. The 
end view of the collectors gives only some idea of the futuristic brush carrier. 
Figure 8.6 shows the carrier alone, described by Keith Chirgwin of Garrett 
(Chirgwin, 1977) as a ‘double-ended, missile-like collector’. Missile-like indeed at 
480 k.p.h.! Brush pairs pinched the copper rails so that reduced pressure on one 
side arising from misalignment and inertia implies increased pressure on the other 
and contact is never lost.
The vertical bounce on TLRV was over a foot in amplitude. One cannot help 
wondering how the ‘attractive Maglev’ protagonists see themselves either improving 
on this, or coping with it. Incidentally, in the same reference quoted above, Chirgwin 
came out strongly against active track systems with linear synchronous motors, a 
sentiment I personally endorsed, and he concluded with most ingenious suggestions

184
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 8.5 The Tracked Levitated Research Vehicle (TLRV) current collection 
system (from the inside) designed to pick up 17 MW at 480 k.p.h. (300 m.p.h.) 
{courtesy of The Garrett Corporation)
Figure 8.6 The spacecraft-like brush gear for the track in figure 8.5 {courtesy of 
The Garrett Corporation)

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
185
of a linear Kando phase multiplication and frequency changer such as was used in 
rotary form on the electrified railways of Europe (as opposed to those in the UK) 
at the start of this century. Chirgwin also proposed transverse flux, but unfortu­
nately only referenced an early patent of 1904 by Andrde in this context.
The TLRV suffered a similar, though not as cruel a fate as RTV 31. Because of 
shortage of funds, only one-half of the LIM/inverter was built and installed in 
1973. Had the second half been built it was planned to replace a hot water sink that 
had been used in connection with the cooling system by an air-to-water exchanger 
at the front of the vehicle “to make room for the second half of the power con­
ditioner.” Even this statement is not without its implications, of course. An on­
board frequency converter is clearly an object of considerable size when this kind 
of ‘room’ has to be made for half of it.
The official line on the TLRV was that it would be diverted to a programme of 
lower speeds on ‘more conventional’ vehicles.
TLRV and LIMRV were parallel projects of course, and meanwhile the latter 
had been run at high speeds, only to demonstrate that the LIM could not attain 
the highest speeds required in the track length available. Such ‘failure’ would have 
been justification for demolition in the UK, but such was the determination of the 
experimenters on the other side of the Atlantic that jet engines were fitted to assist 
the LIM (figure 8.7) and in 1974 a world record for LIM propulsion with wheel-on-
Figure 8.7 LIMRV after the fitting of thrust boosters (courtesy of US Federal 
Railroad Administration)

186
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
rail was claimed at 411 k.p.h. (255.4 m.p.h.). Braking was accomplished with the 
aid of a 2000 kW resistor on board. This was assisted by two air doors, friction 
brakes, a set of parachutes and finally an emergency arresting cable installation. 
Travel at 400 k.p.h. is a different world.
A third vehicle known as the Prototype Tracked Air Cushion Vehicle (PTACV) 
was originally intended to serve an airport and travel at a maximum speed of 
150 m.p.h., but was diverted to Pueblo when the airport plans fell through. This 
vehicle was notable in that it used a double-sided LIM and was guided by the 
reaction rail. In order to do this, the aluminium rail had to be continuous and 
despite earlier attempts to use the welded rail technique which had failed, the 
PTACV track was pre-heated and welded and survived the extremes of temperature 
that occur in Colorado. The 5 km track was completed in 1974 at a cost of $206 000 
per mile. An extension of 4 km was proposed in the 1974 report at a cost of 
$352000 per mile “due to inflation.”
The contractor for PTACV was the Rohr Corporation who seemed to have 
ridden out the storm of earlier disappointments when the French firm Le Moteur 
Lindaire built them a Gramme-ring LIM whose power factor was rumoured to have 
been 0.03. Their latest vehicle (figure 8.8) was certainly one of the most science­
fiction-like structures to date. But the PTACV project has now been stopped. 
Perhaps they put too many seats in it!
Co-operation eventually began between the US and other nations on the subject 
of HSGT. An agreement was signed in 1974 between the Federal Railroad Admini­
stration and the West German Ministry of Transportation and the Ministry of 
Research and Technology, for an exchange of R and D data. The Germans have
Figure 8.8 Full-scale fabrication of the last-proposed Rohr vehicle (courtesy of 
Rohr Industries, Inc.)

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
187
provided information on Maglev, the Americans in return provided LIMRV noise 
test results and a noise demonstration at Pueblo—a tentative beginning but better 
than nothing. Without doubt one of the most impressive figures in the 8th report 
of the DOT is that in the financial year “FY 1975, the budget authority in the 
combined HSGT and Railroad Research and Development Appropriations is $40.2 
million.” I would have settled for less than a quarter of 1 per cent of that amount 
to test a Magnetic River at Earith in 1974! Nevertheless, the pace, even in the US, 
began to slacken thereafter. The Pueblo test centre was being maintained, LIMRV 
was testing single-sided LIMs, but DOT funding for the MIT Magneplane stopped 
and the TLRV aims were made short-term, after having operated successfully at 
100 m.p.h. (160 k.p.h.).
During a sabbatical year, 1975-1976, Professor Barwell spent considerable time 
in a number of countries, studying opportunities for linear motors. The countries 
included India, Japan, Taiwan, Canada, USA, France and Germany. In his visit to 
the Office of the Secretary of the Department of Transportation in Washington 
D.C. he learned that they were “unimpressed by the British system because Eric 
Laithwaite had stated that there was a poor power factor on his demonstrations”! 
It is a bit like the whispering game at Christmas. You say—‘Here is a new invention. 
As a device it gets better as it gets bigger.’ The Establishment says—‘prove its value 
to us for £500.’ You have to make a small model for that amount of money. It 
works. They say ‘What is its power factor?’ You say ‘0.2, but it gets better in bigger 
sizes.’ The last part goes unheard. Professor Barwell found the same insistence at 
the DOT that lift forces from linear motors must of necessity involve loss of power. 
His failure to quote kW/tonne was taken to mean that it must be unacceptably high.
8.6.2 Canada
Following the abandonment of the original Krauss-Maffei project, a re-grouping of 
forces was necessary and an account of this activity is well reported in the New 
Civil Engineer dated 15 July 1976 (Hayward, 1976). Not all was lost in Toronto 
it appears. “Fortunately someone had the sense to include a cancellation protection 
clause in the £9m contract with the Germans, and when Krauss-Maffei lost German 
government backing and pulled out of the deal in November 1974, Ontario lost 
more time than money. Apparently the principle of using a linear induction motor 
to transport a 7.5 m long vehicle along an elevated guideway worked well. The no­
moving parts motor and the frictionless propulsion were genuine assets.” One feels 
that the last two sentences of this quotation were written with some surprise! The 
same author continues:
“The contract had collapsed just six months short of scheduled completion of a 
2 km prototype loop in Toronto and the government had been bequeathed not 
only the technical information but also the use of 30 German engineers to help 
develop the principle further. Ontario, however, did not relish the possibility of its 
fingers being burnt twice, and all ‘magnetic levitation’ thoughts were ignominiously 
banished to the shelves.”—And who shall blame them?
“However, the principle of ‘intermediate capacity transit’ was to survive and the 
UTDC (Ontario’s Urban Transportation Development Corporation) was the obvious 

188
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
body to pick up the pieces of the Krauss-Maffei failure. Adopting the approach of 
‘find what the user wants before producing anything’ the Corporation’s committee 
included eight transit operators and, in announcing the birth of the Advanced Light 
Guideway Transit system, it is confident that government aid to develop the pro­
gramme will follow.
“If all goes well, the 12 m-long cars incorporating the best of the proven tech­
nology from the Krauss-Maffei competition, will be running off the production line 
by 1980. Steerable axles should take care of the previous tight curvature problems 
and the linear motor, with its high acceleration, built-in braking facilities and low 
maintenance costs, seems once again the most suitable elevated guideway power­
box.”
This description makes an amusing (even if tragic) comparison with a description 
of the same kind of motor quoted in the SRC report Advanced Ground Transport’. 
“The linear motor with its inherent low power factor and efficiency...” It all 
depends which way one wants to look at an object. Even a rosebush, described as 
‘an irregular assortment of branches, covered in thorns that tear the flesh, termi­
nating in sex organs (stamens) distorted and made gaudy by man’s interference with 
Nature.. .’ could be made to appear the least desirable plant in a garden.
In 1973 three Canadian universities were allocated Government money (from 
the Transport Department Agency) for transport projects and in particular Queen’s 
University, Kingston, Ontario, used some of it to build a drum rig in which the 
8-metre diameter, 1.5-metre long wheel carried the wave winding of a synchronous 
motor to co-operate with stationary cryogenic magnets around the periphery. It 
was also possible to replace the windings with a continuous aluminium strip. Maxi­
mum peripheral velocity was 100k.p.h., which suggests that the apparatus was 
intended for Urban rather than Inter-city transport research. The DOT in Washington 
D.C., it appears, had arranged to spend $400000 using the Canadian wheel rig at 
Queen’s University and testing was due to start in the Spring of 1977.
The Canadians were aware of what failed in Toronto and had the courage to 
persevere with the linear motor as “the best of the technology.” But whereas this 
latter phrase was probably the most overworked of them all in the UK in 1973, it 
was paid little more than lip service in Britain.
8.6.3 Japan
Japanese industry earned itself, in pre-war days, the reputation of being the greatest 
copier of other people’s ideas. That this is no longer true is evidenced by the 
systematic way in which it has taken over successively the electronics industry, the 
motor cycle business and now the motor car itself (surely ‘sacred’ to the West?). 
Whose ideas did they copy in building the Tokaido line with its 150 m.p.h. trains?
Japanese commercial linear motor work can be traced back at least as far as 
1964 and my only critical comment on their progress is that whether or not they 
were alerted to the potential of the linear motor by what they saw in Europe, they 
developed, along with the technology, that strange inability to communicate with 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
189
each other that has crippled linear motor development in North America, wounded 
it in Germany and all but arrested it entirely in the UK.
I refer specifically to the ‘tug-of-war’ between the feedback amplifier type of 
‘Maglev’ and the cryogenic type, for while Japanese National Railways poured a 
great deal of money into the latter and planned a 40 km track to accommodate 
cryogenic suspension and linear synchronous motor propulsion. Japan Air Lines 
arranged a Press demonstration of Maglev that was almost a replica of the Krauss- 
Maffei Canadian system and thereby inherited the same problems, at which time 
they appear to have sought help from the UK!
Nevertheless, the Japanese R and D outlook was very much more in line with 
that of Isambard Kingdom Brunel than that of present-day UK industry and they 
extended a railway to an island by building a tunnel as long as the Channel Tunnel 
might be, with virtually no publicity or cheering. Our own technological history 
should tell us that such an outlook has a habit of succeeding. If it begins with poor 
technology it will put it right on the way, and as the US effort on high-speed trans­
port seemed to be following the same sad pattern set by France and the UK, the 
Japanese effort seemed to be growing. For example, Japanese National Railways 
had been working towards a 7 km test track in Kyushu to be operational by April 
1977 and in December 1976 it was reported from American sources to be “on 
schedule.” The experimental sections of track of Krauss-Maffei in Allach (Munich) 
and of MBB in Manching, near Ingolstadt were said (Tasch, 1975) to be “lined with 
Japanese ‘train spotters’, who have filmed the trials in exhaustive detail.” Figure 
8.9 shows Japan Air Lines’ experimental vehicle and track. In January 1976 the
Figure 8.9 Japan Air Lines first high-speed test vehicle ‘HSST-01’ at rest on its 
track at Kawasaki, near Tokyo {courtesy of Japan Air Lines)

190
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
first vehicle HSST-01 was demonstrated to the public on a 200 m track in Yokohama. 
Its target speed was said to be 300 k.p.h. to be attained in only 1.3 km. The vehicle 
was comparatively small, being only 4.2 m long and weighing 1 tonne. The clearance 
between magnets and rail was allowed a tolerance between 1.0 and 1.5 cm. Pro­
pelled by LIM, the peak thrust was 750 lbs f—modest, but impressive.
It was at this point that I ceased to regard France, Germany and the UK high­
speed linear motor developments as separate efforts, and for several reasons.
8.6.4 Europe
Being closer geographically and more inter-related historically, European Nations 
do seem to be able to communicate rather better among each other than is possible 
on an East-West global scale. The formation of the European Economic Community 
will do—has already done—much to amplify this most important aspect of techno­
logical development. Britain’s finances force its R and D into very low key, but 
West Germany has money. In November 1976, Britain was the first country to be 
visited by two representatives of the EEC in Brussels. These gentlemen were making 
a survey of all research into high-speed transport within the Community, for it 
appeared that there was to have been a high-speed inter-city network of guided land 
transport in Europe where vehicles in one city are effectively ‘aimed’ at the capital 
city of another country and ‘fired’ like a bullet in a near-straight trajectory to that 
city at between 250 and 300 m.p.h. In THL days there was a feeling of competitive­
ness with regard to the type of track that would emerge as the ‘standard’. It is 
merely an updating of the problem of railway line gauges, with greater complexity, 
but as far back as 1971 we believed (at THL) that there were forward-looking 
plans within German industry to make the European track a German track. I know 
that it was a great disappointment to the Management of THL that they failed to 
persuade Hawker Siddeley (Canada) to adopt their box-beam construction in the 
submission for the Toronto job. Had we won the Toronto job, the European track 
might have been a British track, built by Dowmac. ‘If only..
What is particularly interesting to me personally about the visit of the EEC 
representatives is that they learned of my work through a man in the Department 
of Industry whom, although we have probably met, I would not recognise if we 
passed each other in the street. The Brussels men also had on their list of people 
to visit, my then ‘right hand man’ Dr Freeman, and they did not have time to 
discuss their other visits at the time they first visited me. The result was that a few 
weeks later, they returned to find that the said Dr Freeman had an office next to 
mine!
I almost pleaded with them to persuade the German workers that they must 
abandon the screened, Gramme-ring wound stators that only look promising in 
small sizes. More than that, I begged them to believe that we were no longer ‘com­
petitors’ in the high-speed game, having been torpedoed by some person or persons 
unknown in 1973. Co-operation between engineers—not politicians—is something 
that could take place now. I told the EEC men to urge the German authorities 
to make that all-important decision in 1977 to build 56 km of track at Donnaureid 
rather than to withdraw.

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
191
Figure 8.10 The banked track at Erlangen built by the powerful consortium of 
AEG Telefunken, Brown Boveri, and Siemens (courtesy of Projektgruppe Magnet- 
schwebebahri)
Figure 8.11 An experimental vehicle on test on the Erlangen track (courtesy of 
Projektgruppe Magnetschwebebahn)

192
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
The 400 million Deutschmark track at Erlangen completed in 1974 (figures 8.10 
and 8.11) was possibly the leading research facility in the world in 1976. It was an 
example of the kind of facility that our University Steering Committee proposed to 
the SRC, since it was not a ‘one-system’ track and was equally capable of testing 
cryogenically-levitated or wheel-supported vehicles.
A project known as ‘Cabinentaxi’ had a 2y km track at Hagen (figure 8.12). The 
linear motor drive was controlled purely by voltage adjustment at constant fre­
quency. Similar systems were in use on a 600 metre track in a hospital and on a 
short mountain railway. Although stepping out of geographical location for a 
moment, it seems appropriate to point out that there were equivalent linear-motor- 
driven systems in the USA, as figure 8.13 shows. In Dallas, George Scelzo put linear 
motors on the Astroglide carriages (figure 8.14) and lost 1 tonne of equipment per 
coach (Scelzo, 1976). The change was made in 1973, being fully operational by 
1974. Having run successfully for over a year, it was proposed to convert all the 
LIMs to TFMs by 1980.
Academic work in West Germany might be said to have been ‘moderately funded’ 
by Government. For example, at Braunschweig under Professor Weh, Federal 
Government supported research which had advanced as far as the levitation and 
propulsion of a 1-tonne vehicle on a 30 metre track. The primary winding was in 
the track and was fed from variable frequency. The airgap was 10 mm and the 
research was directed towards a ‘City-Bahn’ (urban) transport system.
Figure 8.12 The ‘Cabinentaxi’-a joint PRT project between DEMAG and Messer- 
schmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (courtesy of DEMAG Fbrdertechnik)

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
193
Figure 8.13 A fully automated PRT system by Transportation Technology Inc. 
(now part of the Otis Elevator Company) of Denver, Colorado, used single-sided 
linear induction motors (courtesy of Otis Transportation Technology Division)
Figure 8.14 The ‘Astroglide’ PRT system in Dallas uses magnetic attraction of the 
LIMs to relieve the wheels of weight (courtesy of PRTSystems Corporation)

194
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 8.15 ‘Transrapid 04’, using double-sided LIM propulsion, which achieved 
a ‘world record’ for passenger-carrying Maglev vehicles of 204.3 k.p.h. in 1975 
(courtesy of Transrapid International)
Following the combination of the two major German groups in 1974, the vehicle 
Transrapid 04 (figure 8.15) was designed for double-sided linear motor propulsion 
up to 400 k.p.h. Later the motor was rewound for 200 k.p.h. because of excessive 
side forces at very high speed. The later vehicles of this consortium carried the 
name ‘Komet’.
At Imperial College we continued to develop the Magnetic River. We tried to 
make as many people as possible aware of a third magnetic suspension system 
which is neither tensile nor compressive ‘Maglev’. We hoped that other research 
teams would ask our advice before they ‘went big’, for we knew from bitter exper­
ience that a failure of a linear motor project anywhere in the world .would imme­
diately reflect back as our failure.
8.6.5 USSR
It is always difficult to know exactly what is going on in Russian technology at any 
one time. The monorail at Kiev was reported in 1969 (New Scientist, 1969) and in 
March 1966 The Guardian reported the design of a 300 m.p.h., linear-motor- 
powered, wheel-less train. The source of this information was the official journal 
Soviet Military Review which stated that the train was to have magnetic suspension 
(without saying which kind) and would “be carried by the magnetic waves passing 
through the airgap between the cars and the rails.” Synchronous linear motor and 

THE WORLD-WIDE GAME
195
cryogenics—or Magnetic River?—I would think the latter. Russian research on linear 
induction motors has always been of interest to me personally and I think this 
latest development may be no exception. That it combined levitation and propulsion 
in one unit seems certain.
8.7 References
Chirgwin, K. M. (1977), ‘Linear electric propulsion systems’, Chapter 2 of Transport 
Without Wheels, edited by E. R. Laithwaite (Paul Elek)
Coffey, H. T., Colton, J. D. and Maher, K. D. (1973), ‘Study of a magnetically 
levitated vehicle’, Stanford Research Institute, Report prepared for DOT, No. 
PB 221696
Hayward, D. (1976), ‘Toronto adds two new people movers’, New Civil Engineer, 
15 July 1976, pp. 21-24
Laithwaite, E. R. (1973), ‘Magnetic or electromagnetic? The great divide’, Electro­
nics and Power, Vol. 19, No. 14, pp. 310-312
New Scientist (1969), ‘Monorail for Kiev airport’, 13 March 1969, p. 571
New Scientist (1976), ‘BR gives big boost to mag-lev’, 22 April 1976, p. 163
Reitz, J. R., Borcherts, R. H., Davis, L. C., Hunt, T. K. and Wilkie, D. F. (1973), 
‘Preliminary design studies of magnetic suspensions for high speed ground trans­
portation’, Ford Motor Company, Report prepared for DOT, No. FRA-RT-73-27
Scelzo, G. P. (1976), ‘Astroglide—the advanced automatic guideway transit system’, 
Proc. 2nd International Conference on Hovering Craft, Hydrofoils and Advanced 
Transit Systems, Amsterdam, pp. 29-35
Tasch, D. (1975), ‘Hovertrain breakthrough imminent’, The German Tribune, 
5 June 1975, No. 686, p. 8

9 The second age of topology
9.1 A voice from the past
The Royal Society of Arts was simply ‘The Society of Arts’ in Victorian England. 
The word ‘art’ can be used to cover a much wider field than painting and sculpture 
and in the context of the following quotation, it may safely be taken to mean 
‘engineering’. The occasion is a paper by Professor Osborne Reynolds and the date 
is 1883. He has a message for academic and industrialist alike as we approach the 
21st Century. It is a message all too often overlooked by politician, accountant and 
industrial manager alike.
“I have to deal with facts, and I shall try to deal with nothing but facts. Many of 
these facts, or the conclusions to be immediately drawn from them, may appear to 
bear on the possibilities—or, rather, the impossibilities—of art. But in the Society of 
Arts I need not point out that art knows no limit; where one way is found to be 
closed, it is the function of art to find another. Science teaches us the results that 
will follow from a known condition of things; but there is always the unknown 
condition, the future effect of which no science can predict. You must have heard 
of the statement in 1837, that a steam voyage across the Atlantic was a physical 
impossibility, which was said to have been made by Dr Lardner. What Dr Lardner 
really stated, according to his own showing, was that such a voyage exceeded the 
then present limits of steam power. In this he was within the mark, as anyone 
would be if he were to say now that conversation between England and America 
exceeded the limit of the power of the telephone. But to use such an argument 
against a proposed enterprise, is to ignore the development of art to which such an 
enterprise may lead.”
In this remarkable paragraph he defended Dr Lardner, clearly forecast the trans­
atlantic cable and ended with the most relevant remark in the context of the ‘High­
speed Transport Game’. If you fill in football pools your chances of winning may 
be slender, even over a lifetime, but if you never fill them in, it is certain that you 
will never win. The hazards of linear motor development were far less likely to 
prevail in the later 1960s-early 1970s, but those who refused to give them a try 
ignored ‘the development of art’ to which they may have led.
196

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
197
9.2 Can no-one be right?
As stated previously, a world financial recession brought governments into conflict 
with technological innovation in linear motors in the mid 1970s. Looking back 
from the next century it will seem amazing that at a time when millions of pounds- 
worth of commercially manufactured linear motors had been sold and had proved 
their worth, everyone was so slow to appreciate their value in the transport scene, 
knowing that bigger, faster motors would have enormously superior characteristics 
to those used for sliding doors, travelling cranes, conveyor belt drives and the like. 
Although the bibliography and detailed text of this book were effectively ‘frozen’ 
at the start of 1975 to avoid escalation of the narrative, the final pages were penned 
as late as 1985 and there is still no outright ‘winner’ in the High-speed Transport 
Game. Yet Japan Air Lines, Japanese National Railways, Transrapid (in West 
Germany) and British Rail all made advances in their own particular versions of 
Maglev and linear motor propulsion in the mid 1970s. Let it also be recorded that 
exciting activities in university departments continued into the 1980s and a great 
deal of this was an extension of the topological developments of the 1960s. Surely 
the point of no return was passed at this time? There could not have been a con­
tinuing stream of wrong answers from the research departments of the world such 
as was forecast by the prophets of doom of the late 1960s.
9.3 The lateral dimension
The legacy of rotary machine design can be seen, in part, as an inhibition of linear 
motor experimentation, even as far as the 1970s. In rotary machines, the tangential 
direction was the thrust direction and the axial direction was simply a means of 
increasing power output. Three-dimensional thinking was, in some ways, more 
advanced in the Victorian era, so far as machine innovation was concerned. At the 
risk of accusations of self praise, the Second Age of Topology can be seen as having 
had its beginnings in the demand for high-speed propulsion, the problem of the 
long pole pitch and the resulting development of the TFM concept.
Maglev systems went ‘transverse flux’ in an almost identical manner to that of 
the induction drive, U-cores replacing single electromagnets. The Maglev of Trans­
rapid (MBB and Krauss-Maffei) used the system shown in cross-section in figure 
9.1(a). This is a true TFM with inverted U track. A longitudinal flux system, but 
still using U-shaped magnets under a simple steel beam, as in the cross-section view 
of figure 9.1(b), was investigated by Tracked Hovercraft and subsequently deve­
loped by British Rail. Plan views of the poles of both systems (in their primitive 
form) are shown in figure 9.2. The German system (a) used a U-core magnet 
almost as long as the vehicle, along both sides. The THL/BR system (b) was a series 
of alternating poles. Both systems were virtually d.c. fed (apart from adjustments of 
the control system).
A broken pole system, as in (b), will induce considerable eddy currents into a 
solid steel rail so the rail was laminated in the THL/BR track. The disadvantage of 
the long magnet (whose eddy current effects are negligible) is that it is heavier than

198
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
(o)
Figure 9.1 Cross-section through the lifting magnets of tensile Maglev: (a) the 
West German system developed by Krauss-Maffei and Messerschmitt-Bolkow- 
Blohm; (b) the British system developed by THL and British Rail
the longitudinal flux machine and it is not easy to bend a U-shaped rail for track 
curves. Bending a laminated beam is no problem.
Both systems were improved by staggering successive magnets laterally as shown 
in (c) and (d) of figure 9.2. In the German system (c) the entire block was divided 
into a number of alternately displaced sections, as shown. In the British system 
alternate magnets were displaced (d). If the alternate pairs are now energised selec­
tively, the natural lateral stiffness (which was already considerable) was strengthened 
and was well worth while, even though some lift power had been sacrificed. Further 
advantages and disadvantages emerged as development proceeded. The windings on 
the pole faces of the British system were exposed to natural air cooling and could 
generate a higher m.m.f./weight, but the German system might prove better for 
heavier, faster vehicles because of its longitudinal extensibility which, in the case of 
the longitudinal flux system, might produce unacceptably high iron losses. At the 
time of writing, Maglev is still at the crossroads.
Back in the 1950s the Manchester team were often pleasantly surprised at the 
performance of their experimental motors (even at standstill). Theory had advanced 
to the stage where many workers claimed to be able to predict the force of a given 
machine on the basis of (B x J), yet repeatedly the real machines exceeded it. There 
was much argument about whether the Russell and Norsworthy factors for the 
overhang portions of a secondary sheet were sufficiently detailed. It was some years

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
199
(a)
(b)
(0
Figure 9.2 Plan view of the pole faces of tensile Maglev systems: (a) primitive 
transverse-flux system; (b) primitive longitudinal-flux system; (c) and (d) staggered 
versions of (a) and (b) for improved stability and damping
before the realisation that the end windings of primary and secondary were 
coupling was to be implemented in the developments of the TFM. Figure 9.3 shows 
the flux around the end regions as displayed in a cross-sectional view of a simple, 
single-sided motor (now called an I-core arrangement in the light of what follows). 
From this diagram can be seen not only the tendency of primary-generated, end­
winding flux to couple with a wide secondary plate, but also the leakage flux from 
the same primary end windings which led to very high leakage reactances in 
machines of large pole pitch. Political decisions relating to the role of linear induc­
tion motors in the High-speed Transport Game were often backed by technical

200
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 9.3 A cross-section view of an axial flux linear motor showing how induc­
tion takes place from the end windings to the sheet overhang
expertise in the prediction of power factors less than 0.3 and by arguments relating 
to basic lateral instability.
9.3.1 Concern about stability and about power factor
So long as a linear motor is used to propel a wheeled vehicle, its tendency to throw 
the secondary sideways if not precisely centred is of little consequence. This is true 
whether the airgap is horizontal (as in most single-sided arrangements) or vertical, as 
in the double-sided sandwich systems of the 1950-1965 period. The only exception 
occurs in the case of a hollow conducting cylinder suspended such that its axis lies 
between a pair of parallel wires, with no ferromagnetic material in the system 
(Laithwaite, 1965), but to the best of the author’s knowledge no combined propul- 
sion/suspension system of this type has been built to date. But the story is very 
different once magnetic suspension of any kind is to be incorporated, for a propul­
sion motor that is laterally unstable only adds to the size of the suspension unit 
which has to counteract it. The U-core Magnetic River set the pattern for a self­
stabilising propulsion unit, whether or not other kinds of suspension (Maglev) were 
to be used in conjunction with LIMs.
But a cross-section through the U-core, as seen in figure 9.4, shows that the 
system is every bit as leakage prone as was the I-core. The basic problem, of course, 
is as old as the subject of transformer design, and from the latter context it should 
have been obvious that wherever there is a ‘U’ there can always be an ‘E’! But it 
was not until Professor Eastham’s suggestion late in 1969 that the E-core shown in 
figure 9.5 was built and tested. Even then, it took a week or two for the full impact 
of the arrangement to be realised. Not only is all the copper ‘trapped’ within steel
" ''^$7777777777777777^ _
Figure 9.4 Cross-section through a U-core Magnetic River, showing that end-turn 
leakage is as dominant as in the corresponding I-core

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
201
Figure 9.5 Cross-section through an E-core TFM in which almost all useful flux is 
confined by the iron circuit
boxes, but such an arrangement of a linear motor uses the flux twice! While it can 
be argued, and rightly so, that the return of half the main flux across the working 
airgap on either side of centre limb is done at a ratio of width/pole pitch only half 
that of the centre core, it is still a ‘gift horse’, since the original intention had 
been to improve power factor.
But now came another surprise. An E-core, whether used as a Magnetic River or 
merely as a propulsion unit, is basically unstable laterally. By 1974 it appeared that 
the only alternatives for a linear induction motor were a low power factor and 
lateral stability, or a reasonable power factor and lateral instability.
Again it took far too long to realise that the technique of coupling the end 
windings of the primary by embracing them with steel limbs could be applied to the 
U-core, just as it was to the I-core. The result was a four-limbed primary core as 
shown in figure 9.6. Given the name £-core (since Xi is the only letter that could be 
said to have four spurs) these machines were seen to be stable and to have low 
magnetic leakage. Subsequently a theory was developed showing that, to a fit st 
approximation at least, the stability criterion was extremely simple: odd numbers 
of polar projections, in a lateral sense, were basically unstable; even numbers were 
basically stable but could still be rendered unstable by poor design. The criterion 
was found to work, even though the polar projections were not connected mag­
netically, and systems such as those shown in figure 9.7 were shown by experiment 
to be stable even though each half itself carries an odd number. Clearly one must 
count all lateral projections whether or not magnetically connected.
Figure 9.6 Cross-section through a four-limbed Xi-core which can be used as a 
Magnetic River

202
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 9.7 Twin E-core or even twin I-core motors can be laterally stable
It is now a good time to look back at the last sentence of the Osborne Reynolds 
quotation with which this chapter began. The development of the art to which 
enterprises led are to be seen, in the case of linear induction motors, as the Magnetic 
River, the Xi-core, the transverse flux tubular motor and the ‘electromagnetic joint’ 
(the last two of which are about to be described), and all of these were the result 
of spending £5.25 million on a Tracked Hovercraft. Who knows what other deve­
lopments might have been forthcoming if the project had been continued?
9.4 Tubular motors
Tubular motors have never been popular, even though a range of short-stator 
versions was commercially developed. It is easily appreciated that one of the diffi­
culties in making either a short-rotor machine or a moving-primary, short-primary 
version is inaccessibility to the inner member, in the case of the first, and inability 
to suspend a long secondary, in the latter case (see figure 9.8). But there is a second 
difficulty with tubular motors. All the radial (useful) flux generated by each pole 
must pass longitudinally along the secondary core. With large pole pitches the 
problem becomes acute and leads to excessively massive and expensive centre rods.
Figure 9.8 The difficulty of the bending of a long tubular motor secondary
A third difficulty is that of laminating the rotor core. For small tubular motors 
the core can be of solid mild steel, but it is difficult to obtain a goodness factor 
greater than unity for such a system. In larger machines where high G is needed, 
lamination becomes obligatory and there is no way of laminating except by blocks 
of stampings as shown in figure 9.9 which waste the available cylindrical surface 
because of the contracting rotor geometry. Bundles of iron wire will not do, for 
the flux must jump from wire-to-wire in penetrating it. It is a topological law that 
although a straight flux path can be contained in steel which may be laminated 
in any plane that contains the path, no non-planar flux can be contained in lami-

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
203
Figure 9.9 Lamination of a tubular motor using parallel-sided blocks
nations that are not divided into differently-oriented blocks, which is not practical 
in a tubular motor secondary.
The latter two difficulties were swept away in 1971 when the tubular equiva­
lent of the flat TFM was invented (Eastham and Alwash, 1972). The principle is to 
wind the primary with helical coils as shown diagrammatically in figure 9.10. This 
is a primitive winding having effectively only ‘half a slot per pole and phase’ (had 
there been slots!). The ingenious part of the invention is shown in figure 9.11 where 
the negative phase currents are interlaced by taking each helical phase coil to the 
end of the motor remote from the supply, passing it diametrically across the end 
and returning it midway between the outward helix back to the starting end. When 
all three phases have been so treated, a star point is made at the same end as the 
terminals, as shown in figure 9.11.
Figure 9.10
Figure 9.11
Helical primary wind­
ings of a primitive tubu­
lar TFM
Reversed phases inter­
laced in a tubular TFM 
(one phase only shown 
for clarity)

204
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
If we now draw a diagram of an instantaneous flux pattern, as in figure 9.12, we 
can see just what kind of a flux pattern to expect. Travelling along the surface 
parallel to the cylinder axis (as along PQ) we see a succession of N and S poles, each 
of pitch p. Every line such as PQ gives an identical resultant field to that of a 
conventional tubular motor. But to travel around the surface in a diametral plane 
(the path R) is to see alternate N and S poles just as in a conventional rotary motor. 
The helical travelling field is made up of a rotating field and a linear field, and an 
unrestrained rotor would receive both torque and axial thrust. The inventors 
pointed out at once that the rotating component could be cancelled and the linear 
component doubled by superimposing a second layer of helical winding of opposite 
handedness, as shown in figure 9.13.
Figure 9.12 Instantaneous flux pat- Figure 9.13 A double-layer-wound 
tern in a tubular TFM 
tubular TFM produces
only longitudinal thrust
If we now look along the axis of such a motor and observe the instantaneous 
field pattern on a plane at right angles to the axis (figure 9.14) we see what is tanta­
mount to a conventional rotary motor flux, in which no lines need enter or leave 
the plane. Thus the rotor core, so vital in tubular motors, can consist of circular 
punchings mounted as a stack. In fact, the rotor core becomes that of a conven­
tional rotary machine, even to the extent that helical slots can be milled to contain 
a cast aluminium ‘cage’ whose appearance is similar to that of a sheet of extruded 
aluminium, used for radiator grilles and the like, wrapped around a cylinder.
A motor of this type (single layer only) was built in 1974 using single conductor 
primary windings of copper bar, 1 inch x-J- inch section, uninsulated, and used 
‘inside out’ to stir molten aluminium in a large tank. In motors drawing 100 amps 
at 5 volts, line, there is no point in insulating conductors which, because of the high

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
205
Figure 9.14 Cross-section through a tubular TFM showing instantaneous flux 
pattern
working temperatures then possible, are covered in insulating oxide. The turbulence 
caused by the rotating flux component was utilised for the mixing in of additives 
and new aluminium swarf, while the linear movement provided the overall stirring 
action.
Further research into this type of motor revealed what should have been an 
obvious phenomenon, but which at the time was experienced as a surprise. If a solid 
cylindrical secondary conductor is used in conjunction with a single-layer helical 
primary, and restrained from axial movement, it will spin up to near synchronism. 
If now the axial constraint be removed, there will be no axial force. Conversely, if a 
missile is allowed to accelerate axially it will only experience spin torques until it 
approaches the linear synchronous speed (2p/), by which time virtually all the 
torque will have disappeared. If it had been otherwise the development of spherical 
motors would never have progressed as far as it did in the 1950s. An angled-field 
motor with rotor constrained to move at 45° would appear to have an input current 
component ZJx/2 working on the rotor in the direction of motion and producing 
losses appropriate to a normal slip. At the same time the cross component should 
‘see’ the rotor at standstill, producing enormous I2R loss to no purpose. That 
spherical motors angled at 60° and beyond produced efficiencies over 70 per cent 
should have enabled us to predict the phenomena of the helical motor. More than 
that, it should have given us ‘ammunition’ to use at the time of the Tracked Hover­
craft closure, when there was widespread disbelief that a combined lift and propul­
sion unit consumed zero power in achieving the lift (see chapter 8, section 8.3).
9.5 The vertical dimension
Fear of the effects of magnetic pull between primary and steel-backed secondary 
sheets inhibited the designs of several large propulsion units in the 1960s and the 
‘double-sided sandwich’ arrangement was retained as far as full-scale experimental 
vehicles. The subjects of linear motors and electromagnetic levitation did not come 
together until the late 1960s although the latter subject had its roots much further 
back in time.

206 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
9.5.1 Electromagnetic levitation
I remember well the first time I achieved a net upward force from a steel-backed, 
single-sided system. The year was 1964 and I had been appointed to my Chair at 
Imperial College less than a month. I was showing a group of postgraduate students 
and one or two of my newly acquired staff that inversion of a levitation system did 
not affect its stability. I was using a simple iron-cored coil as shown in section in 
figure 9.15. With a small circular disc of aluminium, as in (a), the system is unstable 
laterally, despite the fact that such sizes of disc can be stabilised by means of a 
second coil inside the first (shown dotted), or in some cases, merely by a thick 
copper cylinder inserted in the same position. The latter acts as a shading ring to 
produce the inward-travelling fields necessary almost as the first ingredient for 
stability. One must always be on guard against over-simplification of analysis, and 
inward-travelling fields are not an absolute prerequisite for lateral stability. The 
same man who discovered the ‘odds and evens’ rule (page 201), Nigel Greatorex, 
also showed that by suitable choice of arrangement and dimensions, lateral stability 
could be obtained when outward-going fields, as detected by search coils, were 
present. With a further different arrangement he was able to demonstrate the 
reverse—that is, lateral in stability with a system of inward-travelling fields (Greatorex, 
1978).
I 
- .J (bl
I J (a)
Figure 9.15 A levitated aluminium sheet is unstable over a single coil, whether it is 
(a) a disc of about the same size, or (b) a much larger sheet
With a large plate of any shape, as in figure 9.15(b), the single coil primary is never 
able to stabilise it in suspension, this statement being almost the only generalisation 
I have so far been able to make in this difficult aspect of electromagnetism.
When this system of figure 9.15(b) is inverted, as in figure 9.16, and the floating 
coil fed from loose coils of untwisted, stranded wire to reduce the mechanical 
forces inevitably applied thereby to a minimum, the coil will float in a tilted position 
as in figure 9.16(a), if the coil is small and/or the secondary sheet thin (an 8-inch 
diameter coil with an inner bore of 4 inches will tilt on a 4 -inch thick aluminium 
sheet) or in level suspension, as shown in figure 9.16(b), if dimensions of coil and 
secondary thickness are somewhat greater. (Increasing the plate thickness to -inch 
in the example just quoted will suffice to produce level suspension.)

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
207
Figure 9.16 Self-levitation of an iron-cored coil over an aluminium sheet: (a) if the 
sheet is thin or the coil small; (b) if the sheet is thick or the coil large
Stable as such systems appear superficially, it is only the supply leads that hold 
them central over a very wide plate and, given complete freedom, self-levitated coils 
will always move towards the point on the edge of the secondary which is nearest, 
even though the definition of ‘nearest’ may include displacements less than a 
thousandth of an inch (other geometry, such as the coil dimensions being assumed 
‘perfect’). What is more, when the floating coil approaches the edge it tilts in such a 
manner as to suggest that it is ‘falling upwards’ (see figure 9.17). During this tilting, 
rapid acceleration off the plate can be observed.
Figure 9.17 ‘Falling upwards’ illustrated by a levitated coil near the edge of a sheet
It was such phenomena that the ‘New Professor’ was demonstrating to his learned 
colleagues in 1964, when one said, “What would happen if you put steel below the 
plate?” The reaction to “I don’t know,” was a quick comment from my Experi­
mental Officer, Barry Owen, to the effect that we could easily try, and he was off 
to stores to bring a piece of boiler plate. As he was doing so I told my captive 
audience that we ought to be good enough to be able to predict the behaviour of 
such a simple electromagnetic arrangement. “It was, after all,” I argued mentally, 
“basically a yes/no-type problem. It would either float higher or clamp down 
solidly.”
Now I knew enough in 1964 to beware of any obvious answer, which in this 
case was that it would clamp down—was this not, after all, the basic reason (in 
1964) why none of us favoured a single-sided motor for a propulsion system for 
traction application? I also knew that electromagnetic systems were fickle and that 
in a yes/no situation one was more likely to get the wrong answer by sticking to the 
well-trodden path. Looking back, I suppose that my apparent ‘wild guess’ was 

208 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
founded on the best of modern physics—a statistical approach that included assess­
ment of my own abilities. One can draw a graph of such with an abscissa marked 
off in number of mistakes. I reckoned that in 1964 I knew enough for my curve to 
peak strongly at ‘one mistake’. The probability of two mistakes which would allow 
me to get a correct answer by default was less likely than that of only one mistake. 
The probability of no mistakes was remote! By the time the boiler plate arrived I 
had decided to embark on a technique which I was to use much more frequently 
afterwards—work out the answer to the very best of your ability, then take the 
opposite! That this applies ‘right across the board’ in life in the 1970s and 80s is 
a piece of advice I would give to all those who are occupied in politics, local govern­
ment, foreign affairs, bringing up children—etc. It stimulated me to write an article 
on ‘The about-face age’ (Laithwaite, 1978).
In the case of the boiler plate incident, the ferrous sheet was of smaller dimen­
sion than the aluminium sheet, as shown in figure 9.18(a), a fact which made the 
result still more interesting. I declared my prediction as ‘higher levitation’ and got it 
right! More than that, the coil could ‘see’ the edges of the steel through the 
aluminium, and was rapidly ejected from over the nearer edge of the steel, as shown 
in figure 9.18(b). The sight of an electromagnet (even if it is fed with a.c.) repelling 
a piece of ferrous material was not a common sight in 1964.
' /duminiunK 
[ 
1 "
-steel
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.18 An iron back plate produces greater repulsive forces both in (a) vertical 
and (b) lateral directions
The thinking by which I reached the wrong answer, enabling me to triumph 
before my newly won staff, went something like this: if the coil is very small, the 
iron thick and the aluminium thin, the coil is sure to clamp down (magnetic things 
get better as they get smaller). But if the coil is large and the aluminium thick, then 
any amount of backing iron must improve the goodness factor, induce more current 
and result in more lift, since electromagnetic things get better the bigger they are 
and they will overhaul the attractive magnetic force which is not increasing even 
in proportion to L3. Now the only thing to decide was whether an 8-inch diameter 
coil on a 0.25-inch thick aluminium plate was big enough to be good enough to 
provide extra lift. It seemed to me almost obvious that it was not, so I had reasoned 
that it would clamp down, took the opposite and got it right. The one mistake was 
that 8 inches was big enough.

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
209
9.5.2 The topology of track joints
As in many previously discussed situations, the bright light of hindsight revealed the 
solution to the track discontinuity problem as nothing more than a 90° plane shift. 
The use of aluminium channel as the secondary of a Magnetic River had long been 
known to enhance the propulsive force (figure 9.19). The folded-down edges were 
seen as a wide plate, so far as Russell and Norsworthy factors were concerned, but 
the folding enabled the primary to ‘see’ the folds as edges so far as lateral guidance 
forces were concerned.
Figure 9.19 Cross-sections through U-core Magnetic Rivers showing how plate 
overhang can be both ‘eliminated’ (from the point of view of lateral stability) and 
retained (for purposes of propulsion)
As far back in time as the Gorton Loco Works tests, the effects of discontinuities 
in secondary conductors were known. An indication of the nature of the effects was 
given in chapter 7, section 7.2. Preoccupation with the effects of long pole pitches 
had led to an examination of the old Gramme-ring method of winding (notably in 
France) and possibly this was in the mind of Tom Fellows when he suggested to me 
early in 1974 that a solution to the track joint problem might He in wrapping the 
track conductor right around the steel backing, as shown in figure 9.20, immediately 
adjacent to a joint, on either side.
Figure 9.20 Gramme-ring technique applied to the track joint problem

210 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
In a linear motor designed only for propulsion, the track joint problem is not 
serious. Temporary reduction in thrust, not occurring as a step function so much as 
a dip with gentle slopes, would hardly be noticed, but in a system using the linear 
motor for lateral guidance or in a Magnetic River using all three axis forces, the 
result of joints might be disastrous.
We discussed the possibility and concluded that the same leakage flux that 
bedevilled the French motors would stifle circuital currents around the secondary 
steel. But on the following day I did some more topological thinking and came up 
with the idea shown in figure 9.21. As I contemplated the effect of a current path 
on the left-hand half of the joint, flowing, so far as the plan view of figure 9.22 was 
concerned, in paths such as ABCD, as if no discontinuity existed, there was the 
marked increase in adrenalin which always accompanies a new thought at the 
instant of conception, for the vertical current, as it disappears at D and re-appears 
at A from the folded-down aluminium would either assist similar currents in the 
right-hand half or the pair would mutually stifle each other: a moment’s anxiety— 
and all was well!
Figure 9.21 Folded-down edges in a lateral plane
6___________ A 
C 
D
Figure 9.22 The obviously ‘impossible’ ideal current pattern at a joint (in plan)
Figure 9.23 Vertical-plane currents in the folded-down joint cancel each other

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
211
Figure 9.23 shows that the two semi-circuital currents in the vertical plates will 
be equal and opposite, as in a transformer winding with single turn coils. What is 
more, the system can be made into an even better transformer by folding down the 
steel core also, as shown in the figure, for the effective area of the ‘transformer’ 
core is now large enough to offset the fact that it has an inherent airgap (the expan­
sion gap, as shown).
An early test on the system by British Rail at Derby showed that a vertical 
dimension of only 5 inches on a track used by a primary with a 9-inch pole pitch 
sufficed to stifle the transients to the extent shown in figure 9.24. Another piece 
of pure topology took its place in the tool chest of the linear motor designer.
Figure 9.24 Pen-recorded transients at a track joint with and without folded-down 
edges. (A) corresponds to a folded-down joint, as does (B) for a simple gap between 
adjacent sheets

212
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
9.6 The longitudinal direction
It is common practice, in considering the action of conventional rotating machines, 
to regard the slot currents as the ‘useful bit’ and the currents in the end windings as 
the ‘wasted bit’. Induction motor end rings, in particular, are a means of getting 
current from the bars under an instantaneous N-pole to the bars under the adjacent 
S-poles and little more, unless the designer decides to opt for a rotor resistivity 
higher than pure copper and puts the necessary impurity into the metal of the end 
rings only. The flow of current in the direction of motion which looks as if it 
should flow in cast rotors in which the aluminium is brought into contact with 
every rotor lamination, is stifled by the fact that it finds no opposite primary 
current to match it, and therefore faces a magnetising reactance which stifles it 
very effectively.
History records that where such currents were found to be more than negligible 
they turned out to be the cause of the hitherto mystical ‘stray load loss’ that had 
long baffled manufacturers of cast aluminium rotors (Christofides, 1965). Again I 
can return to my Manchester days of the spherical motor and recall a visit of my 
colleague to be, Bernard Adkins, about 1955, when he expressed surprise that we 
had not encountered enormous stray load loss effects in the spherical motors where 
we had deliberately introduced a two-dimensional lattice of secondary conductor 
to encourage the flow of tangential currents (in the direction of motion). As 
emerged many years later, the spherical motor was immune from such ill-effects 
because the angled primary provided the necessary ‘equal and opposite’ tangential 
paths, a typical pair of primary and secondary current paths being shown in the 
‘double-developed’ diagram of figure 9.25 (a Mercator projection of the spherical 
surface in fact).
□□□□□□□□□□
□□□□nun □□□
□[□□□□□□ □□□
□□□□□□□□□□
(b)
Figure 9.25 Primary (a) and secondary (b) currents in the surface of a spherical 
motor
There have been many times when I have had occasion to look back on the 
spherical motor research of the 1950s as the first occasion on which certain effects 
were encountered and studied, and I am forcibly reminded of the powerful words 
of Osborne Reynolds with which this chapter began: “ .. . the development of art to 

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
213
which such an enterprise may lead.” What began as a simple disc experiment 
(Williams and Laithwaite, 1955) turned out to be a mighty splash that sent ripples 
to all parts of the earth where machines research is pursued.
9.6.1 Surface current topology
During the development of Tracked Hovercraft and before the concept of the 
Magnetic River, attention had been focussed on the need for lateral stabilisation, if 
possible, using the linear motor whose currents were primarily designed for propul­
sion—side-to-side currents therefore, in relation to the direction of motion. It had 
long been realised, after all, that when the secondary conductor is a continuous 
sheet of conductor lying totally in the ‘airgap’ between primary and secondary 
steel, currents in any direction could be utilised. Once one has ‘paid the price’ for 
increased magnetising current (lower G) necessitated by airgap-located conductor, 
one cannot go on ‘losing’ all the time!
In a paper devoted almost entirely to what might now be called ‘surface current 
topology’ (Eastham and Laithwaite, 1973), a number of novel arrangements were 
suggested in which longitudinal currents played an active part. Figure 9.26, 9.27, 
9.28, 9.29, 9.31 and 9.35 illustrate a number of ‘preferred embodiments’ (to use 
patent language).
The simple herring-bone pattern shown in figure 9.26(a) can be designed either 
as a surface winding or as a more conventional winding in slots. (The conventional 
technique of rotor slot skewing to prevent magnetic locking is like one half of a 
slotted herring-bone winding with a large obtuse angle.) This arrangement can be 
seen as a direct descendant of the spherical motor for the following reason. A 
developed diagram of one primary block of a pre-skewed spherical motor is as 
shown in figure 9.27, where alternate poles are marked corresponding to one 
particular instant of time. The rotor takes the distance y' as its effective pole pitch. 
In the lateral direction, however, the pole pitch is seen to be only a half of the 
block width, but the half pole is differently located for different positions along the 
block. Thus, at positions such as ab, cd, the primary behaves as a C-core TFM, while 
at positions such as ef it is clearly an E-core. At all intermediate positions it behaves 
as an asymmetric E-core whose actions have never been studied as a separate topic. 
But it is interesting to note that for C-core sections, for example, the slot geometry 
of the spherical motor was distributed, as it always is in machines with conventional, 
cylindrical geometry, and there is no call for a large central slot that is always asso­
ciated with what might (in the 1980s) be called ‘conventional C-core TFMs’.
There were two ideas incorporated in the ‘herrring-bone’ winding arrangement 
shown in figure 9.26 (Eastham and Laithwaite, 1973). The first was to exploit the 
distributed slot principle, the second was to eliminate the unilateral forces that 
would occur at all but small values of slip. The two arrangements differ in that the 
same pole is continuous across the centre line in (a), while the polarity changes 
at the centre in (b). The latter is clearly a TFM, exploiting the technique especially 
when the pole pitch, p, is large compared with the half width w/2. The arrange­
ment in (a) is, like the spherical motor, a curious hybrid of longitudinal and trans-

214
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 9.26 ‘Herring-bone’ patterns of instantaneous poles on the surface of a 
linear motor: (a) longitudinal flux motor; (b) TFM
rotor 
motion
Figure 9.27 Instantaneous pole pattern on a spherical motor surface
verse flux, being a simple I-core in particular sections, an E-core proper in other 
particular sections and an asymmetric E-core for all other intermediate sections.
A part of the original paper on linear induction motor topology (Eastham and 
Laithwaite, 1973) was devoted to discussion of the ways in which magnetic flux 
can be ‘directed’ along desired paths. For example, lamination places certain con­
straints on flux directions because steel is a conductor of electricity as well as of 
magnetism and any flux crossing from lamination to lamination penetrates the 
sheets, inducing circulating currents that oppose the primary current components 
parallel to the plane of the laminations. At the same time there are magnetic gaps 
between adjacent laminations which are filled with paper, varnish or merely natural 
oxide (rust). In a stack of punchings a metre thick, the total effective ‘airgap’ in a 
direction normal to the lamination plane may amount to several centimetres. Both 
of these effects can be deliberately amplified by the insertion of layers of conducting 
foil between each pair of adjacent, insulated laminations. This technique has been 
used for many years in d.c. machine rotors for the discouragement of slot-leakage 
flux, which flux produces inferior commutation.

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
215
A less obvious, but nonetheless effective technique consists simply of differential 
dimensioning, using the natural reluctance of the iron circuit (which must be of the 
same order as that of the total airgap, however, for this method to be effective). In 
the example shown in figure 9.28 there will be a tendency for more flux to pass 
laterally from Nx to Sj and N2 to S2, despite the constraints imposed by the 
features described in the foregoing paragraph, than will pass from Nj to S2 and 
N2 to Si, but especially so if the depth of the stack in a direction normal to the 
plane of the diagram is of the order of the half width w/2 or less. In such cases, the 
use of high airgap flux densities would produce saturation of the core in the longi­
tudinal or p-direction which would lower the permeability and further increase the 
reluctance in this direction. If the ratio of the permeability in the p-direction to the 
w-direction is pp/Pw the ratio of longitudinal (p-direction) reluctance to transverse 
reluctance is (2p2/w2) (pw/pp) which, for gw/pp = 20 and p/w = 10, makes this 
ratio equal to 4000. This powerful topological tool can be used in the design of 
herring-bone primaries.
Figure 9.28 Flux-directing by suitable choice of dimensions
9.6.2 Superimposed skewed windings
What emerged as a much more profitable topological exercise was the splitting of 
the diagram of figure 9.26(a) along its centre line and the overlaying of one half on 
top of the other. This produces a diamond-shaped mesh of alternate poles, draught­
board fashion, whose pattern is seen to move longitudinally and to have merged the 
end windings completely into the slot-contained winding. If now an actual winding 
diagram for such a machine is attempted, it takes the form of figure 9.29(a). This 
would appear to be a very difficult winding to construct until it is realised that it is 
identical to the arrangement of simple, diamond-shaped coils shown in figure 
9.29(b).

216
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.29 The overlaid skew-windings (a) are equivalent to simple, overlapped 
diamond coils (b)
There is now only one further topological stage to complete a ‘circular argument’. 
If two conventional linear motor primaries are laid side-by-side as in figure 9.30, a 
suitable choice of coil pitch and spacing between the blocks allows a complete 
physical fit between the inner sets of end windings, as shown, so that a red-phase 
current carried, for example, by one set appears to continue in the same position 
—that is, in the top layer—exactly as in the figure 9.31 schematic. In other words, 
the latter diagram could have been arrived at by consideration of a simple U-core 
TFM with its ‘active’ conductors shrunk to zero length! If further proof is needed 
that the end windings of the E-core TFM produce useful thrust pro rata, here it is.
Figure 9.30 The end windings of two, double-layer, conventional linear motors fit 
each other to produce the double-skew pattern of figure 9.31

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
217
Figures 9.32 to 9.34 show a full-scale wooden model that was constructed to illu­
strate how the motor that propelled RTV 31 might have been replaced by a TFM 
that produced three times the thrust and weighed less. The fittings were made as 
replicas of those already existing in the vehicle, including air cushion feeds. The 
method of designing this machine was to begin with standard 11 kV windings and 
fit the steel around it, lest it be said that the whole exercise was purely academic 
and that windings of this shape could not be built. This defensive attitude of the 
academic was a direct consequence of the reaction of industry to change which had 
been so much in evidence during the development of the Tracked Hovercraft.
But years after the large wooden model had been built it was realised that a 
surface-wound arrangement of the overlapped diamond coils shown in figure 9.29(b) 
would have been the simplest machine to build, and a 3 ft x 1 ft primary was built 
and tested at Imperial College. There can be little doubt that if the Tracked Hover­
craft project had been continued, this form of winding would have emerged as the 
most advantageous.
Figure 9.31 Schematic winding diagram of a U-core TFM with cross-over windings
Figure 9.32 View of pole surface of a full-scale wooden model of an E-core TFM, 
designed to deliver 4 MVA

218
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 9.33 Back view of the TFM in figure 9.32
Figure 9.34 Cut-away view of the TFM to show the small quantity of backing steel 
needed

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
219
Other topologies might have followed. If we return to figure 9.26(a), for example, 
total overlap of the two halves could be replaced by partial overlap, as shown in 
figure 9.35, in which the centre, diamond-form system is flanked by herring-bone 
lateral stabilisers. But until there is a real need to make a large machine of this type 
it will be almost impossible to say whether or not such an attempt at lateral stabili­
sation would be successful.
Figure 9.35 A central, diamond pattern flanked by partial herring bones
Once again, in the ‘bright light of hindsight’ it is obvious which arrangement 
held the most promise. If high-speed motors of large pole pitch are the target, then 
the significance of large airgaps shrinks and the induction motor designer has a 
newly found freedom, especially if he is given the 3 or 4 inches that separated the 
motor of RTV 31 from its track, or the comparable gaps that are contemplated by 
the designers of superconducting Maglev, possibly combined with linear synchronous 
motor propulsion. The designers of synchronous and d.c. machines long enjoyed 
this freedom and never used it until Professor E. J. Davies produced his paper on 
airgap windings for alternators (for which I believe I was an enthusiastic referee) 
(Davies, 1971). The basic idea behind large airgaps in these machines was to stifle 
‘armature reaction’, so that, for example, when used as generators of a.c. and d.c. 
respectively, the terminal voltage would not fall appreciably on load. The phrase 
‘making a stiff machine’ was often used in this context. In the case of alternators 
the philosophy that ‘d.c. amp-turns are cheap’ was pursued with vigour in 20th 
Century designs and airgaps of up to 7 inches were used (a full-scale design for a 
multi-megawatt alternator with a 14-inch gap was once completed but the machine 
was never built).
The message of 1970 is now clear. Of course we should investigate machines 
with both primary and secondary conductor in the ‘entrefer’. Of course the arrange­

220
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
ment shown in figure 9.29(b) is the most elegant. Of course, no-one has had the 
courage to try one yet. No-one has the money!
9.7 Linear synchronous motors
Whether it was the result of encouragement provided by the at least ‘partially suc­
cessful’ progress of linear motors in the 1960s, the desire to compete with induc­
tion machines for the sake of competition or the search for a solution to the 
problem of ‘wasted flux’ in a cryogenic Maglev, linear induction motor-propelled 
system could form the subject of a hot debate-the fact is that linear synchronous 
motors came more and more into prominence during the 1970s as an alternative 
drive for levitated vehicles. Of course the rapid advances in solid state inverters were 
crucial to this subject. A synchronous motor on fixed frequency will not self-start. 
Variable-speed running demands variable-frequency supply, for the motor is locked- 
on to the supply as faithfully as are all mains-fed electric clocks.
Any type of rotary machine can be linearised. Until the 1950s all adjustable- 
speed motors of large size were either commutator machines or slip-ring induction 
motors wasting losses by the tankful (in liquid resistors). Linear versions of either 
of these would be fairly horrific pieces of technology! But linear synchronous 
motors could be different.
Before embarking on specific proposals it is worth asking the old question: why, 
for every h.p. of synchronous rotary motor drive in the world, are there 100 h.p. 
of rotary induction motor? The answer is not quite as straightforward as it might at 
first appear for
(1) solid state inverters ought to solve the problem of self-starting synchronous 
machines
(2) unity power factor (simplifying solid state supply design enormously), can be 
assured in synchronous motors.
When it comes to linear motors, however, there are new considerations which 
militate further against the use of synchronous, as opposed to asynchronous drives. 
The most fundamental of these are
(a) There are two types of synchronous machine: the d.c.-excited type and the 
reluctance motor. One could even add the hysteresis motor as a third type, 
which will run-up asynchronously in a most desirable manner.
(b) Of these three, only the d.c.-excited machine is ‘electromagnetic’. The others 
are ill-suited to very large power levels.
(c) By definition, the electromagnetic machine has m.m.f. on both sides of the 
airgap and therefore demands a ‘live’ track, even if the m.m.f. is provided by a 
line of permanent magnets.
9.7.1 Claw-pole motors
There have been two attempts to develop linear synchronous machines as drives for 
high-speed transport. In the first, the opinion expressed in (b) above (and at other 
places in these pages) has been effectively refuted and a linear form of a ‘claw-pole’ 

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
221
motor has been proposed (Balchin and Eastham, 1979). It is interesting to compare 
the rotary and linear versions of this configuration, for the two are not identical. In 
the first instance the rotary claw-pole motor was designed to exploit powerful 
permanent magnets such as were developed between the wars and during World 
War II. Permanent magnet materials of high B/7max value are inevitably brittle and 
virtually unmachinable. The intricacies of multi-polar magnetic circuits must there­
fore involve ingenious arrangements of soft iron pole pieces. Figure 9.36 illustrates 
the topological steps in assembling a rotor. Mild steel sheet is punched out to form 
‘teeth’, as shown in (a), with a central hole for bolting right through the permanent 
magnet. The teeth are then bent over, as shown in (b), to produce interlaced 
‘fingers’ of alternate polarity. When spun inside a stator consisting of individual 
coils wrapped around teeth such that there are as many teeth as there are fingers 
on the rotor, the machine is extremely useful at quite low speeds and is widely used 
as a bicycle dynamo. The requirements are right for this permanent magnet
(a)
Figure 9.36 Construction of a ‘claw-pole’ (bicycle) dynamo: (a) original steel 
punching; (b) result of folding two punchings

222 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
machine—small, low-speed and therefore multi-polar and robust—and yet the 
machine is still electromagnetic.
The track of the linear reluctance motor is as shown in figure 9.37 in which the 
E-core primary (on the vehicle) completes its magnetic circuit first to the right of 
centre, then to the left, and so on, as the fingers of track steel alternate, side to side.
Figure 9.37 Arrangement of a proposed linear reluctance motor
9.7.2 Combined cryogenic Maglev and propulsion
The second break-out from induction motor ‘domination’ takes the point that in a 
cryogenic Maglev system a most powerful field (3 to 4 Tesla) already exists between 
vehicle and track, so why not use it as a propulsion flux by making the cryogenic 
coil the exciting winding of a synchronous (electromagnetic) machine? The cost of 
a track-based armature is offset in part by the fact that no steel can be, or need be, 
used in such a high flux density and the armature winding in its simplest form can 
consist of nothing more than a single conductor bent into the shape shown in 
figure 9.38, in which the size of a cryogenic ‘pole’ is shown.
The inversion of the field/armature roles in this arrangement has one inherent 
drawback however. Even though track cost may be met, no company could afford 
to energise miles of track all the time. Nor would it be desirable, anyway. If more 
than one vehicle or train of vehicles is to occupy the same track at any one time, it 
is unlikely that both will require precisely the same frequency of supply and there­
fore the track must essentially be subdivided into relatively short sections, each of 
which is fed from its own variable-frequency, switchable inverter, and this makes 
the installation very expensive. To return to a moving armature, stationary field 
system is unthinkable in terms of superconducting track members.
But it must be said at the end of a ‘Second-Age-of-Topology’ chapter that 
ingenuity has not yet run out, and development of these and many other forms of 
drive is likely to proceed well into the next decade.

THE SECOND AGE OF TOPOLOGY
223
Figure 9.38 Zig-zag track conductor for a linear synchronous motor
9.8 References
Balchin, M. J. and Eastham, J. F. (1979), ‘Characteristics of a heteropolar linear 
synchronous machine with passive secondary’, IEE Electric Power Applications 
Journal, Vol. 2, No. 6, pp. 213-218
Christofides, N. (1965), ‘Origins of load losses in induction motors with cast 
aluminium rotors’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 112, No. 12, pp. 2317-2332
Davies, E. J. (1971), ‘Airgap windings for large turbogenerators’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 
118, Nos 3/4, pp. 529-535
Eastham, J. F. and Alwash, J. H. (1972), ‘Transverse-flux tubular motors’, Proc. 
IEE,N6l. 119, No. 12, pp. 1709-1718
Eastham, J. F. and Laithwaite, E. R. (1973), ‘Linear-motor topology’, Proc. IEE, 
Vol. 120, No. 3, pp. 337-343
Greatorex, N. (1978), ‘A study of transverse flux linear induction motor perform­
ance’, Ph.D. Thesis, Imperial College (University of London)
Laithwaite, E. R. (1965), ‘Electromagnetic levitation’,Proc. IEE,Nq\. 112, No. 12, 
pp. 2361-2375
Laithwaite, E. R. (1978), ‘The about-face age’, Electrical Review, Vol. 203, No. 18, 
pp.33-34
Williams, F. C. and Laithwaite, E. R. (1955), ‘A brushless variable-speed induction 
motor’, Proc. IEE, Vol. 102A, No. 2, pp. 203-210

10 A continuing story
10.1 General
It was the original intention of the author to end the narrative, the reporting and 
the references at the end of 1975. But the manuscript went through a traumatic 
experience between 1978 and 1984 (in fact, several!) and was later revised after 
adoption by a new publisher.
It was suggested that the last chapter might contain an update, at least of the 
High-Speed Transport Game, if only in summary form, and since the whole subject 
was expanding more rapidly than it had ever done in 1976 it did seem that the 
reader deserved some indication as to where the subject was going—history book 
though it is supposed to be!
First then, a few facts and figures about the development of non-transport- 
oriented developments might be of interest, especially if condensed into a mini 
Guinness Book of Records form.
The research director of Linear Motors Ltd told me in the late 1970s that he had 
then listed over one thousand different applications for linear motors. By this he 
meant that motors had been manufactured and sold for that number of different 
jobs. The most common applications included sliding doors, travelling cranes and 
conveyors.
The items that were moved varied from 0.1 mg in weight to over 5 tonnes. In 
the case of the lower end of this range the particles moved were themselves the 
whole secondary members of the motors.
Within such a wide variety of types and sizes there was bound to be overlap 
with other topics, one of the most notable being that of liquid metal stirrers. ‘Face 
plate’ motors, in which the conductors were laid radially on a steel backing plate 
and rotated a copper disc secondary, are clearly not strictly ‘linear’ but they were 
‘sheet-rotor motors’ and they did have airgaps much longer than those of conven­
tional machines. So they were a natural spin-off or secondary product for a firm 
building strictly linear machines because the design techniques were extremely 
similar. Electromagnetic levitation of both solid and liquid secondaries is obviously 
a closely allied subject and at least one professional conjuror is presenting as ‘magic’ 
224

A CONTINUING STORY
225
something which we know is as ordinary as the mechanism of a hair-drier—and yet 
I shall always believe the force of induction to be sheer magic in its own right! 
From the levitation of liquid metals and the pumping of these came applications in 
powder metallurgy, in the scrap metal industry (for sorting non-ferrous metal from 
non-metal trash) and in the glass industry.
Linear motors for industrial plant applications ‘came of age’ between 1976 and 
1986, even though their general acceptance was still slow.
10.2 ‘Stop-press’ on HSGT
The question ‘What happened next in high-speed transport?’ must of course be 
answered, as far as possible on a world-wide basis.
Air cushion vehicles in the USA, France, West Germany and the UK were mostly 
abandoned in the early 1970s, including the American TACV (Tracked Air Cushion 
Vehicle).
West Germany branched out into yet another new topology with a large-scale 
demonstration of the ‘M-Bahn’ system for urban transport. Permanent rare-earth 
magnets were used to provide the lift from the underside of a ground rail. Guide 
wheels were used to control the gap. The philosophy here was simple—better to 
provide a lifting force of 120 per cent of the vehicle weight and run the wheels on a 
‘ceiling’, thus reducing wheel-rail pressure from 100 per cent weight to 20 per cent 
weight, the latter being necessary to avoid fluctuations in track etc. from ‘unhook­
ing’ the vehicle from its magnetic suspension.
The field of the permanent magnets was then used as excitation for what was 
effectively a very long stator synchronous motor, with active track, in which it was 
proposed to switch on one kilometre at a time.
West Germany was also actively engaged in a quite different system—along with 
Canada—in which the lift was provided by cryogenic magnets, and lateral guidance 
was effected by the use of closed, figure-of-eight loops of conductor laid along the 
central section of the track between the twin, parallel levitation strips.
The Japanese cryogenic system that came into favour used a powered winding 
along each side of a U-shaped guideway, cross-connected in such a way that any 
lateral displacement produced circulating currents that interacted with windings on 
the vehicle to produce restoring forces. A recent Canadian design also makes use 
of this topology.
As if to leave no stone unturned or perhaps to emphasise that any rotary machine 
can be ‘linearised’, one Japanese venture involved the use of a linear commutator 
motor.
The above examples are chosen to illustrate the intensity of the thinking, deter­
mination and ingenuity that continued into the 1980s and will doubtless still 
continue. A summary of events, country-by-country, now follows. This material 
is taken from an international conference held at Solihull, England, in October 
1984 (Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 1984).

226
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
10.2.1 USA
AU Government support for research into basic concepts was withdrawn in 1975. 
A study of a possible high-speed link between Las Vegas and Los Angeles, carried 
out by the Budd Company, recommended an attractive Maglev system as the most 
viable.
10.2,2 Canada
A study was made for the Toronto-Ottawa-Montreal ‘corridor’ and it was concluded 
that Maglev was better than wheels, but so far it remains a paper study only.
A paper on economic proposals for the corridor project contained only five 
references—all to Canadian papers.
10.2.3 Japan
Japanese National Railways claims record speeds of 517 k.p.h. for a single vehicle 
on a T-shaped track at Miyazaki in 1979, 305 k.p.h. for two coupled vehicles and 
221 k.p.h. for three coupled vehicles. It is said to be aiming at a 500 k.p.h., Tokyo- 
Osaka link. A paper on this topic lists 13 references—all to Japanese publications.
10.2.4 West Germany
Work at Erlangen was suspended in favour of attractive Maglev, which has been 
developed over a period of ten years jointly by the firms Krauss-Maffei and Messer- 
schmitt-Bolkow-Blohm. A full-scale demonstration of the attractive Maglev system 
was given at an International Transport Fair in Hamburg in 1979, using a linear 
synchronous motor as propulsion unit.
A new test centre is being started in Emsland with a proposed track 31.5 kilo­
metres in length for a 200 passenger, twin-bodied, Maglev vehicle for speeds up to 
400 k.p.h., but this project is stiU only at the planning stage. Work to put the site 
at Emsland into service, however, began in 1983 and the vehicle known as Trans­
rapid 06 has run there. The work is described in a paper containing 16 references- 
aU to German papers.
One thing emerges crystal clear at this point. The main obstacle to progress is 
a lack of communication between what are obviously very deeply committed 
research teams. They pursue their own researches without looking left or right and 
what has come to be known as the ‘Not Invented Here Syndrome’ operates at all 
levels. Belief in what one is doing is, of course, vital to any project. But there must 
surely be room for a wider look at a whole relatively new technology. The extent 
of the literature on it is evidenced by the bibliography in this book.
10.2.5 UK
British Rail’s Birmingham Airport-Birmingham International Rail Link has 
been completed and carries fare-paying passengers. There are now many papers on 
this project, each containing references mainly to papers from the UK, although at 
the Solihull conference on 9/10 October 1984 Donald Armstrong of British Rail 
wrote a fascinating world review paper which included the topology figure repro­
duced here as figure 10.1. It is interesting to compare this with the topology classi­

A CONTINUING STORY
227
fication with which this history began (chapter 1, figure 1.6 to 1.8). The various 
layouts depicted in figure 10.1 refer to the following systems.
A — Permanent magnets on the vehicle mounted underneath a steel reaction rail 
on the track to give more lift than the weight of the vehicle so that guide 
wheels run on a ceiling. This is the ‘M-Bahn’ system described in the third 
paragraph of section 10.2—said to be ‘suitable for low-speed, light-weight 
vehicles’.
B — A combination of permanent magnet and electromagnet attractive Maglev. 
The permanent magnets are represented by the vertical lines between adjacent 
poles.
C - Straight cryogenic lift system needing wheels at low speed (credited originally 
to Powell and Danby).
D — A split-track cryogenic lift system attempting lateral guidance.
E - Split, inclined track plates attempting lateral stability for a cryogenic system. 
F — Inverted-T system for cryogenic lift.
G — Straight cryogenic system with wound coils in the track replacing the con­
ducting sheet.
H — Multiple coil/coil system for combined lift, guidance and propulsion (the 
proposed Japanese National Railways system).
I — Ferro/null-flux system due to Danby, Jackson and Powell in which levitation 
is achieved by cryogenic coils being attracted to a steel plate. Adhesion is 
prevented by active repulsion loops fixed to the track.
J - Horizontal flux from coils on the vehicle reacts with horizontal conductors 
on the track. Said to achieve combined lift and propulsion with either iron- 
cored or air-cored cryogenic coils on the vehicle. The saddle coil is intended 
to produce lateral stability.
K — The so-called ‘mixed//’ system comprising a combination of a superconducting 
energised coil, a superconducting sheet screen and a ferro-magnetic rail 
(research at Bangor University).
L — Attractive Maglev with longitudinal flux.
M — Attractive Maglev with transverse flux.
N — The Hamburg IVA demonstration system, 1979. Attractive Maglev with 
secondary air suspension and linear synchronous motor propulsion.
P — ‘Magnetic River’.
Q — Homopolar synchronous motor. The track has staggered pole pieces.
R — The Zig-Zag linear synchronous motor due to McLean, Williams and West 
(1980) of Manchester.
S — A heteropolar synchronous machine.
This is clearly a classification based more on systems and their functions than on 
the straight topology of magnetic and electric circuits of figures 1.6 to 1.8. But it 
illustrates the facts that world opinion on the subject is by no means crystallised in 
the 1980s, that ingenuity continues unabated and that the engineers thus engaged 
all have enough faith in their own systems to spend considerable research money on 
prototypes and demonstration vehicles for the world market place—hopefully!

228
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
Figure 10.1 Donald Armstrong’s topological classification of linear motors 
{Reprinted by permission of the Council of the Institution of Mechanical Engin­
eers from 'Maglev Transport-Now and for the Future’)

A CONTINUING STORY
229
10.3 What have we learned?
10.3.1 Wisdom
It is possible that in the whole of science there is all Knowledge—if we could ever 
have access to it. But that does not imply that there should be at least a grain of 
Wisdom. Wisdom comes of experience, the experience of living with both our 
fellow men and with machines. Wisdom can be found by reading history and the 
great literature of the world. The Bible tells us: “Wisdom is the principal thing; 
therefore get wisdom: And with all thy getting get understanding” (Proverbs 4, 
vii). Understanding?—now there's a paradox. We do not understand electromagne­
tism—our basic building block in electrical machine design. We put iron and copper 
together in shapes of remarkable ingenuity and intricacy, on the understanding that 
whenever we have done it before, the resulting behaviour produces forces in the 
directions and of the sizes we would both expect and desire. There is no further 
Truth, no Understanding. But Wisdom remains, even in an ‘earthy’ subject such as 
electric motors; after all, is this not a history book?
One can trace the history of a technology such as that of digital computers and 
arrive at the conclusion that Jacquard and Babbage were a century or more ahead 
of their time. They seemed to be waiting for advances in basic technology to give 
them the tools and the materials to open the truly ‘Golden Door’. They needed the 
diode, the triode, the pentode, the transistor and possibly the thyristor to make 
their inventions blossom. But it is not the same with linear motors.
10.3.2 Courage
It could be argued that curiosity has always been the spur to advances in tech­
nology, but I am sure that whether you are a primitive man making an arrowhead 
out of flint or a director of a company making wheelchairs, personal greed has been 
at least an ingredient in your success, if successful you are seen to be. This is not a 
bitter remark, merely a factual one. I am sure that the increase in the rate of rise 
of technological know-how has had a large slice of its origin in the acceleration of 
greed with which the 20th Century is cursed. There are many, at first sight, anoma­
lies that under close inspection are not anomalous at all, but merely cold, hard fact, 
however sad. Greed advances technology faster than hunger. War advances surgery 
more than does compassion alone. In the famous film, The Third Man, Orson 
Welles takes Joseph Cotton to a high place from where they can see people as tiny 
moving dots and asks him if he really cares whether or not one of the dots were 
suddenly to stop moving. He goes on to point an almost accusing finger at the Swiss 
as a nation for having enjoyed centuries of peace during which they invented—“the 
cuckoo clock”! Seen as a shocking [sic] philosophy with Orson Welles as the villain 
(at the time the film was made) there is an Orson Welles living in almost every expen­
sive house today, and again I insist, this is not emotion, neither is it political and 
certainly not ‘left wing’.
The one thing that neither success nor wealth bring is a feeling of security. 
Richard Lovelace’s “Stone walls do not a prison make, Nor iron bars a cage” applies 

230
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
every bit as much to keeping others out as to being oneself confined. Yet this is 
almost without exception what every successful technologist effectively does—he 
builds a wall of lesser men around him to fend off anyone who looks as if he might 
pose the slightest threat to his ‘empire’. It is an animal instinct after all: the terri­
torial instinct, even though the ‘territory’ may be no more tangible than a theory 
of the Universe.
What the aspiring inventor (and to an even greater degree, the developer) needs 
most in such a world is courage—by the bucketful! Yet the history of technology 
over the last two centuries surely shows an increasing number of missed oppor­
tunities? Whether this be true or not the factors militating against the individual or 
even the small company to ‘go it alone’ with a new idea have certainly increased in 
the present century. The rise in accountancy as a controlling influence, the growth 
of very large ‘empires’, which inevitably favour mediocrity and the wealth decline 
in the 1960s on an international scale have all contributed to make it harder for a 
modern Brunel or Telford or Edison to emerge triumphant, no matter how much 
courage they have. The domination of the computer and lately the silicon chip have 
even begun to work against a latter day Clerk Maxwell, for they imply that if a 
computer cannot solve a problem, it is insoluble—and worse, if a computer is not 
involved in a project, that project must be of low key. One has only to watch any 
popular science programme on television to hear the emphasis and the reverence 
with which the commentator will announce: ‘All this data is collected and pro­
cessed by a COMPUTER,’ or ‘This bulldozer is completely controlled by a tiny 
SILICON CHIP.’ As one who was at least an ‘assistant midwife’ at the birth of the 
computer
*
 I can perhaps be allowed to say that the youth of today are being brain­
washed by the media so that when they become young development engineers 
they may well tend to use a silicon chip instead of their common sense and to use a 
computer without any assurance that it has been fed the right equations that are 
relevant to the problem.
Courage alone will not be enough to withstand the onslaught.
So far as linear motors are concerned, however, the largest manufacturer of com­
mercial machines was founded in the 1960s on the basis that the control unit was 
more important than the motor, and how right that turned out to be.
10.3.3 Theory, design and evolution
From a good look at the history of technology we ought to be able to accelerate 
the rate of development. In part, and particularly on the grand scale, I suppose we 
do. But in narrower fields I suspect that we do not. Specialisation brings its own 
form of ‘negative feedback’. A person who teaches well, does it with authority and 
this can easily be translated by the student into ‘This is the only way of doing it.’ 
(Particularly is this true of theoretical analyses.) It is a form of ‘brainwashing’. But 
there is no brainwashing half so deadly as self-brainwashing. The engineer who dis-
♦Secretary of the Inaugural Conference of the Ferranti Mk I, the world’s first commercially 
built computer in 1951.

A CONTINUING STORY
231
covers a new technique in manipulating the quantities of his art will therefore use it 
on everything, often without any kind of justification.
A recent book of physics, beautifully written (Lewis, 1972) contains a chapter 
on the teaching of the subject and begins with an example on rate of cooling. An 
East African schoolboy, making ice creams in the school kitchen fridge, discovered 
that if you put two beakers of milk (or water) into a fridge together, the one at 
100°C and the other at 20°C, the hot liquid turns into ice first! No-one believed 
him, of course. He was ridiculed, told to ‘learn his Newton’s Law of Cooling’ and so 
on. But he impressed a visiting professor who promised to try it himself when he 
returned to Dar-es-Salaam. He there asked his technician to repeat the experiment 
and was told later in the day that the hot liquid froze first. But the technician 
added, ‘But we’ll keep on trying until we get the right result.’
‘The Theory’ is the most sacred of cows, perhaps the greatest ever brake on the 
advance of technology, rapid though the latter now is. In discussion on a recorded 
television show I once retorted “Well man created God in his own image” and it 
finished up on the cutting room floor, presumably either because: (a) they thought 
I had got my tongue in a twist, or (b) it would upset the Bishops (it was about 
1964), or both. The ‘Laws of Physics’, the ‘Fundamental Particles’, the ‘Striving 
after the Truth’ are all expressions of the attempts to unravel the secrets of the 
Almighty—as seen through the eyes of Men, of course! But I digress, as often.
Theory is closely allied to design. When you know Ohm’s Law and the theory 
of temperature coefficient of resistance you can improve on the original concept 
of a Wheatstone bridge. University undergraduate courses in electromagnetism are 
heavily weighted in theory—Maxwell’s equations for breakfast, dinner and tea— 
and happily it comes as a rude shock to many to find that industrial firms do not 
approach machine design in quite this way!
The first thing that a machine designer does when confronted with a customer’s 
requirements for a ‘new’ motor is to search through his ‘humanoid data banks’ (he 
sits and thinks). After time he gets up and physically searches through his filing 
cabinets for time t2, pulls out a file in triumph and returns to his seat to study it. 
Next he writes down the stator slot dimensions. The new graduate, observing all 
this is disturbed. How can he know the slot dimensions?—He doesn’t. Why did he 
begin there? ‘It is easier,’ he is told. If the newly fledged is quick of thought, he may 
deduce, after following through the whole process of this one design, that he has 
been witnessing a process of Evolution, no more and no less. The designer had first 
‘ransacked his sprawling inventory’ (as an overseas correspondent once wrote to 
me) for an earlier customer who had wanted something very like it, and the new 
design was the same as the old one with the odd ‘mutation’ here and there. What is 
more, it works well as a technique. But it is a far cry from James C. M. or even from 
Oliver Heaviside.
10,3.4 Invention
It is only given to a few to make a real leap forward and how often one finds that it 
is an intuitive leap, rather than a cold hard deduction born of pure learning. I can 
think of no better example than the invention of a new generation of reluctance

232 
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
motors by my ex-research student and long-time friend Peter Lawrenson. ‘Tradi­
tional’ (a word so often used as an excuse for doing nothing) reluctance motors 
had been designed on the most obvious of grounds. The theory said you must make 
the shape of the rotor steel such as to give the greatest difference in reluctance 
between in-line and quadrature positions in relation to the axis of the stator m.m.f. 
Of course they should be of the shape shown in figure 10.2(a). Professor Lawrenson’s 
shape is shown in figure 10.2(b). At first sight it seems fundamentally wrong to put 
the airgap opposite the primary axis, as wrong as hot liquid freezing faster than 
cold. But look at the two corresponding quadrature positions shown in figure 10.3. 
The conventional design in (a) has enormous gap lengths. But look at the area avail­
able for the flux. Reluctance is not just gap length alone. The gaps in (b) may be
Figure 10.2 Alternative geometries for a reluctance motor rotor
Figure 10.3 Quadrature fluxes are suppressed in the new form of rotor shown 
in(b)

A CONTINUING STORY 
233
only y of those of (a), but their effective area is only
We return almost to where we began, or more strictly to where I began. “Nobody 
makes linear induction motors. They’re so terribly inefficient, awful power factor, 
far too expensive—they’ve got very large airgaps, you see.”
10.4 References
Institution of Mechanical Engineers (1984), International Conference on ‘Maglev 
transport-now and for the future’, Solihull, UK (IMechE Conference Publica­
tion 1984-12)
Lewis, J. L. (1972), ‘Teaching school physics’ (Penguin Books—Unesco)

Bibliography
There is no claim that any section of this bibliography is complete. All that can 
be said is that an honest attempt has been made to list most of the major papers in 
the various topics up to the end of 1975.
There are problems whenever one attempts to cover such a vast field as this. 
Would the reader prefer an alphabetical list of authors?—or an alphabetical list of 
subjects? How should the topic be subdivided to make reference easier? As soon as 
subdivision is made there are sure to be papers that overlap more than one section. 
There will also be papers that do not really ‘fit’ any one subdivision, so there is 
almost bound to be a ‘General’ section, which many classifiers condemn as a mark 
of failure. An attempt has been made not to duplicate a paper in two or more 
sections but to decide, on balance, which is the more relevant section. The main 
overlap occurs, of course, between ‘Transport’ and ‘Levitation’, and readers are 
warned to check carefully that an apparently ‘missing’ paper is not in the other 
section.
The order of presentation is fairly arbitrary. ‘General’ could equally well have 
come last. The other problems as to the order of listing were finally solved by 
declaring: ‘This is a history book, the papers shall be listed in order of year of 
publication’. In that way, the order at least makes a vague attempt to follow the 
text.
The only thing that is claimed is that this is probably the most comprehensive 
list of publications to date on the subject of linear motors and allied topics.
Order
General
Industrial Applications
Levitation
Transport
Theory
234

BIBLIOGRAPHY
235
GENERAL
1957 
LAITHWAITE, E.R. :
1957, 104A, No.18,
'Linear induction motors', Proc. IEE
461-70
WILLIAMS, F.C., LAITHWAITE, E.R. and PIGGOTT, L.S.: 'Brush­
less variable-speed induction motors', ibid., No.14, 102-18
1958 
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Induction machines - some new ideas',
Technology (publ. by The Times), June 1958, 2, No.4, 110
VOL'DEK, A.I., VIL'YAMYAE, G.Kh., SILLAMAA, Kh. V. and 
TIISMUS, Kh.A.: 'Proposed compensation windings in a 
linear induction device', Trudy Tallinskogo Politekhniche- 
skogo Institute (USSR), 1958, Ser. A, 131. In Russian
WILLIAMS, F.C. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Unusual induction 
machinery', Proc. Manchester Assoc, of Engineers, 
28 Feb. 1958, 83-104
1959 
NORTH, G.G.: 'Linear induction motors', M.S. Thesis,
University of California, Berkeley, Dec. 1959
1961 
MARINESCU, M.: 'On a new electric motor with oscillatory
motion', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1961, 70, No.9, 453-9. In French
THORN, K. and NORWOOD, J. Jr.: 'Theory of an electromag­
netic mass accelerator for achieving hypervelocities', 
NASA Technical Note D-886, 1961
1962 
HAUS, H.: 'Alternating current generation with moving
conducting fluids', J. Appl. Phys.(USA), 1962, 33, No.7, 
2162-72
IDELBERGER, K.: 
'Geradeaus-Beschleuniger arbeitet nach
dem Prinzip des Induktions-Motors', VDI-Nachrichten, 1962, 
16, No.6, 2

236
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1963
JAYAWANT, B.V.: 'A new linear oscillating motor', Elec. 
Rev., 1962, 171, No.20, 767-72
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Oscillating machines, synchronous and 
asynchronous', Proc. IEE, 1962, 109A, No.47, 411-4
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The linear motor', Discovery, 1962, 
23, No.11, 17-22
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and MAMAK, R.S.: 'An oscillating synchro­
nous linear machine', Proc. IEE, 1962, 109A, No.47, 415-26
MARINESCU, M., GAVRILIU, N. and GRiNARU, I.: 'Asupra 
efectului de "histereza electromecanica". Un nou proces 
de transformare a energiei electrice in lucru mecanie ji 
aplicarea la realizarea de noi tipuri de ma^ini electrice', 
Stud. Cercet. Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania), 1962, 12, 
No.3, 337-61
WEST, J.C. and JAYAWANT, B.V.: 'A new linear oscillating 
motor', Proc. IEE, 1962, 109A, No.46, 292-300
YANES, Kh.I., TIISMUS, Kh.A., VESKE, T.A., LIIN, Kh.A. 
and TAMMEMYAGI, Kh.A.: 'Proposed compensation windings in 
linear induction device', Trudy Tallinskogo Politekhniche- 
skogo Institute (USSR), 1962, Ser. A, 215, 197. In Russian
JAYAWANT, B.V. and WILLIAMS, G.: 'Analogue of a new linear 
oscillating motor', Control (GB), 1963, 6, No.60, 97-9
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Recent developments in linear induction 
motors', 18th Electronics Convention, Manchester College of 
Science and Technology, 13 July 1963 (Institution of 
Electronics)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
237
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’The linear induction motor’, Machine 
Design Engineering, 1963, 1, No.5, 35-8 (’The principle of 
the linear machine'), ibid., No.6, 39-43 (’Applications')
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and TUSTIN, A.: 'An oscillating 
synchronous linear machine', Proc. IEE, 1963, 110, No.8, 
1494-5 (Correspondence)
'Linear motors. Review of main features', Elect. Engr. 
(Australia), 1963, 40, No.4, 47-9
STUHLINGER, E.: 'Electric propulsion', Electrical 
Engineering (USA), 1963, 82, No.7, 459-65
1964 
IDELBERGER, K.: 'The linear induction motor - a new form
of the induction motor', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 1964, 
16, No.5, 105-8. In German
SEQUENZ, V.H.: 'Electrical machines with linear motion', 
Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau (Austria), 1964, 81, No.17, 
421-31. In German
USAMI, Y.: 'Linear motor', Japanese Railway Engineering 
(Japan Railway Engineers' Assoc.), 1964, 7, No.l, 3198-200
1965 
BARWELL, F.T. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction
motors', Mining Electrical and Mechanical Engineer, 1965, 
45, No.532, 195-9
IVANOV-SMOLENSKII, A.V. and TAMOYAN, G.S.: 'An experimental 
investigation of the processes occurring in a layer of 
conducting liquid in the "air" gap of an induction motor', 
Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1965, 36, No.2, 5-9. English trans. 
Soviet Elect. Engng., 1965, 36, No.2, 8-12

238
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1966
MACCHIAROLI, B.: 'Linear induction motors', L'Energia 
Elettrica, 1965, 42, No.l, 21-7. In Italian
MARINESCU, M.: 'Despre transformarea direct^ a fortelor 
electromagnetice pulsatorii in forte alternative. 
Perspectivele dezvolt&rii motoarelor liniare de tip 
electromagnetic', Stud. Cercet. Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania) 
1965, 15, No.l, 63-72
MARINESCU, M.: 'On the direct transformation of pulsatory 
electromagnetic forces into alternating forces. Development 
prospects for electromagnetic type linear motors', C.R. Acad. 
Sci. (Paris), 1965, 260, No.11, 3021-4. In French
MARINESCU, M.: 
'Unmittelbare Umwandlung pulsierender
elektromotorischer Krafte in alternierende Krafte. 
Entwicklungsaussichten linearer Motoren elektromotorischen 
Typs', Rev. Roum. Sci. Tech. Electrotech. Energet., 1965, 
10, No.l, 99
TAKAHASHI, M.: 'An experimental study on the two-phase 
linear induction motor', Reports of the Faculty of Engineering, 
Yamanashi University, Takeda, Japan, Dec. 1965, No.16, 104-8
USAMI, Y.: 'Linear motor, the second report', Japanese 
Railway Engineering (Japan Railway Engineers' Assoc.), 1965, 8, 
No.l, 3821-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: Induction machines for special purposes 
(London: Newnes) 1966, (New York: Chemical Publishing Co.) 1966
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Engineering, 
29 April 1966, 201, 835-40
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'New forms of electric motor
*,
 Science 
Journal, 1966, 2, No.2, 38-43

BIBLIOGRAPHY
239
1967
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: Propulsion without wheels (London: English 
Universities Press) 1966, (New York: Hart Publishing Co.) 1968
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Self-oscillating induction motors’, 
Elec. Rev., 1966, 179, No.10, 346-8
BALA, C.V.: 'Predetermination of the load characteristics 
of the electromagnetic linear oscillating motors', Rev.
Roum. Sci. Tech. Electrotech. Energet., 1967, 12, No.1, 55-73 
In German
BERTINOV, A.I. et al: 'The movement of a conducting piston 
in a magnetic field', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1967, No.14, 
149-52. In Russian
CAMPANARI, E.: 'Linear asynchronous motors', Elettrotecnica, 
1967, 54, No.9, 716-27. In Italian
CERINI, D.J. and ELLIOTT, D.G.: 'Performance characteristics 
of a single wave length liquid metal MHD induction generator 
with end loss compensation', 8th Symposium on Engineering 
Aspects of Magnetohydrodynamics, Stanford, 1967
IDELBERGER, K.: 'Der Linear-Motor lauft geradeaus statt 
zu rotieren', Elektro-Jahrbuch (Zurich), Dec. 1967, 48-56
KUNTE, J.: 'Der Linear-Induktionsmotor', Industrie-Elektrik 
und Elektronik, 1967, 12, No. 15/16, 321-2
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: *A  tubular reluctance motor "shotgun"', 
Elec. Rev., 1967, 180, No.22, 836-7
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear electrical motors', Engineering 
Materials and Design, 1967, 10, No.l, 83

240
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Project, 
Autumn 1967, No.5, 8 & 23
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Magnetic power in new forms', The Times, 
28 April 1967, V.
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: The engineer in wonderland (London: 
English Universities Press) 1967
1968 
BRANOVER, G.G.: 'Experimental investigation of the velocity
distribution in the flow of conducting liquid in rectangular 
ducts situated in a transverse magnetic field', Izv. Akad. 
Nauk SSSR, Mekh. Zhidkosti Gaza, 1968, No.l, 79-83. In Russian
KALE, K.S. et al: 'Magnetic track circuit - a hypothesis', 
J. Instn. Engrs. (India), 1968, Pt. ET, 48, 713-9
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'A self-propelled magnetic circuit', 
Elec. Rev., 1968, 182, No.17, 622-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Electrical
India, 1968, VIII, No.4, 27-30
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear line-up in force', The Times, 
19 April 1968, 23
POLOUJADOFF, M. and PELENC, Y.: 'Recent developments of 
the linear induction motor', Ingenieur (Canada), 1968, 54, 
No.237, 14-9. In French
R&MY, E.: ’Why the linear motor?', Flux (Revue des Anciens 
&l£ves de l'£cole Supdrieure d'filectricite), 1968, No.51, 
12-5. In French

BIBLIOGRAPHY
241
TIMMEL, H.: ’The travelling-field linear motor - a 
remarkable special form of the induction motor', Elektrie, 
1968, 22, No.10, 398-402. in German
1969 
ASTROP, A.W. : 'A linear micro-stepping motor', Mach. & Prod.
Eng. (GB), 1969, 115, No.2966, 465-7 
BARTHALON, M.: 'Reciprocating electric motor', Patent UK 
1152209, 8 Sept. 1966; publ. 14 May 1969; prior. 24 Sept. 
1965, France 32529
DAS, J.K.: 'Use of single-phase linear induction motor 
as a synchro substitute', J. Instn. Engrs. (India) Elect. 
Engng. Div., 1969, Pt. EL2, 50, No.4, 39-42
DE COSTER, F.A.: 'Linear motor control system', Patent 
US 3435312, 14 Feb. 1966; publ. 25 March 1969, USA 527257
FUJIE, C., TAKETOMI, A., NAKAJIMA, H., KOJIMA, T. and 
MITOMI, T.: 'Feasibility study of linear motorized car 
retarder accelerator (Report 2)', Quart. Rept. Railway 
Technical Research Institute, JNR, 1969, 10, No.4, 221-3
GRIFFITH, J.T. and JONES, T.L.: 'Developing the d.c. 
linear motor', Engineer, 7 Feb. 1969, 227, 197
HOLM, H.: 'Linear induction motor', Patent UK 1142108, 
4 Aug. 1967; publ. 5 Feb. 1969, UK 35862/67
JOHNSON, J.L. and STEPHENS, H.C.: 'Linear motor velocity 
detection apparatus', IBM Corp., Patent USA 3470399, 
17 June 1968; publ. 30 Sept. 1969, USA 737438
KEPPERT, S.: 'Das magnetische Feld eines Planstators', 
Elektrie, 1969, 23, No. 1/2, 116-8.

242
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAGIER, J.C.: 'Oscillating linear motor', E.R. Squibb & 
Sons Inc., Patent USA 3475629, 30 March 1967; publ.
28 Oct. 1969; prior. 30 March 1966, Switzerland 4602/66
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Physics
Education, 1969, 4, No.5, 309-11
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear motors', Encyclopaedic
Dictionary of Physics, Supplementary Vol. 3 (Pergamon
Press) 1969, 191-4
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The linear motor moves on', Spectrum 
(British Science News), 1969, No.67, 9-11
PALMERO, A.: 'Reciprocating linear motor', Superior 
Electric Co., Patent USA 3441819, 18 April 1966; publ. 
29 April 1969, USA 543219
PELENC, Y. : 'Linear motor with stationary field structure', 
Merlin Gerin SA, Patent USA 3482124, 13 Nov. 1967; publ.
2 Dec. 1969; prior. 24 Nov. 1966, France 84919
PIERRO, J.J.: 'Linear electric motor', North American 
Rockwell Corp., Patent USA 3456136, 26 Sept. 1966; publ. 
15 July 1969, USA 581946
REMY, E.: 'The linear motor: I Prospect of the linear 
motor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1969, 78, No.4, 357-61. In French
RICHARDS, T.L.: 'The linear motor', Copper (GB) , 1969", 3, 
No.3, 2-4
ROUVEROL, W.S.: 'Shiftable rotor variable speed induction 
motor', Patent USA 3460016, 30 Aug. 1967; publ. 5 Aug. 
1969, USA 664371

BIBLIOGRAPHY
243
SAAL, C.: 'Study of an oscillating biphase synchronous 
linear motor: II', Bui. Inst. Politeh. Iasi (Rumania), 
1969, 15, No.1-2, 77-84. In English
TIMMEL, H.: 'The linear induction motor', Maschinenbau, 
1969, 18, No.4, 156-61. In German
VICTORRI, M. : 'Linear induction motors', Elektrotech. Z. 
(ETZ) B, 1969, 21, No.23, 535-9. In German
WALTKE, G.: 'On the performance of the MHD converter and 
the linear induction motor', Ph.D. Dissertation, T.U.
Braunschweig, 1969. In German
WEH, H., WALTKE, G. and APPUN, P.: 'Induction phenomena 
in MHD converters with constant and travelling magnetic 
field', Energy Conversion, 1969, 9, 31-8
1970 
CHIRGWIN, K.M.: 'Linear induction motor research programs'
Energy 70 Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering 
Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada, 21 Sept. 1970
'Elongated electric motor', Borg Warner Corp., Patent 
UK 1188147, 1 Aug. 1967; publ. April 1970, UK 35353/67
HARZ, H.: 
'Linearmaschine mit Repulsionswirkung fur
einphasigen Wechselstrom', German Patent 2029462, 1970
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'New wave in electric machinery', 
New Scientist, 1970, 46, No.706, 570-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 
'Rack-and-pinion motors', Electronics
& Power, July 1970, 16, 251-2

244
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and HARDY, M.T.: 
'Rack-and-pinion motors:
hybrid of linear and rotary machines', Proc. IEE, 1970, 
117, No.6, 1105-12
'Novel reciprocating electrical drive', Elect. Engr. 
(Australia), 1970, 47, No.3, 45-6
RASHCHENKIN, A.P.: 'The excitation in the gap of a linear 
induction machine with variable travelling magnetic field 
velocity', Magn. Gidrodin.(USSR), 1970, No.l, 116-20. In 
Russian (English trans, in Magnetohvdrodvnamics (USA))
REITZ, J.R.: 'Forces on moving magnets due to eddy 
currents', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1970, 41, No.5, 2067-71
SAAL, C.: 'Theory of the reactive biphase synchronous 
oscillating motor', Electrotehnica (Rumania), 1970, 18, 
No.l, 1-7. In Rumanian
WEH, H. : 'Linear motors', VOE Fachber (Germany), 1970, 
26, 37-43. In German
YUN JONG LEE and DAL HO IM: 'The travelling field of two 
phase linear induction motor
*,
 J. Korean Inst. Elect. Engrs., 
1970, 19, 1-10. In Korean
1971 
BOLTON, H.: 'Progress in linear motor techniques in
Great Britain', Elektrie, 1971, 26, No.6, 213-4. In German
DAVIS, M.W.: 'Concentric linear induction motor', Patent
USA 3602745, 27 March 1970; publ. 31 Aug. 1971, USA 23317
DAVIS, M.W.: 'Developments of concentric linear induction 
motor', IEEE 6th Annual Meeting of Industry and General
Applications Group, Cleveland, Ohio, USA, 18-21 Oct. 1971, 85-93 

BIBLIOGRAPHY
245
DENIS, M. and MAY, P.: ’A linear stepping motor for 
numerical control
*,
 Ing. & Tech. (France), 1971, No.255, 23. 
In French
GERRARD, J. and PAUL, R.J.A.: ’Rectilinear screw-thread 
reluctance motor
*,
 Proc. IEE, 1971, 118, No.11, 1575-84
GREEN, C.W. and PAUL, R.J.A.: 'Performance of d.c. linear 
machines based on an assessment of flux distributions', 
ibid., No.10, 1413-20
HUHNS, T. and KRATZ, G.: 'The asynchronous linear motor as 
driving element and its peculiarities', Elek. Bahnen 
(Germany), 1971, 42, No.7, 146-51. In German
HUHNS, T. and KRATZ, G.: 'The linear motor as a drive 
component', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 1971, 23, No.19, 
449-50. In German
'Induction motor', NRDC, Patent UK 1256091, 14 May 1969; 
publ. 8 Dec. 1971; prior. 14 May 1968, UK 22799/69
ISHII, T.K.: 'Impulse motor for electric propulsion', 
IEEE 22nd Annual Vehicular Technology Conference, Detroit, 
Mich., USA, 7-8 Dec. 1971
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: Linear electric motors (London: Mills 
and Boon) 1971
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Canada - UK 
Trade News (Journal of the Canada - UK Chamber of Commerce), 
May 1971, 11,13,15,24
LARONZE, J. and FAURE, A.: 'Linear motors', Tech. CEM 
(France), 1971, No.81, 3-11. In French

246
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LINDSLEY, J.C.: ’Multipole closed end linear motor’, 
IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. (USA), 1971, 13, No.12, 3682-3
’Linear induction motor', VEB Kombinat Elektromaschinenbau, 
Patent UK 1233208, 29 Aug. 1968; publ. 26 May 1971, 
UK 412477/68
'Linear motor', NRDC, Patent UK 1224470, 4 July 1968; 
publ. 10 March 1971; prior. 10 July 1967, UK 31694/67
'Linear motor system', AEG-Elotherm GmbH, Patent UK 1236119,
24 Sept. 1969; publ. 23 June 1971; prior. 20 Feb. 1969, 
Germany P1908457-2
LINKE, H.: 'Operation and control of a special-purpose 
linear motor', Maschinenwelt Elektrotech. (Austria), 1971 
26, No.8, 202-4. In German
PATEL, T.R.: 'Flat coil linear motor', IBM Tech.
Disclosure Bull. (USA), 1971, 13, No.11, 3385
PELENC, Y. and REMY, E.: 'The future of the linear induc­
tion motor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 138-42. 
In French
POLOUJADOFF, M.: 'Linear induction machines, I. History 
and theory of operation', IEEE Spectrum, 1971, 8, No.2, 
72-80
'Polyphase linear induction motor', Merlin Gerin SA, 
Patent UK 1249800, 30 Aug. 1968; publ. 13 Oct. 1971;
prior. 1 Sept. 1967, France 119804
'Stretching the linear motor pole pitch with transverse 
flux', Elec. Rev., 1971, 189, No.27, 936-7

BIBLIOGRAPHY
247
1972
TANAKA, H.: 'The linear motor', JEE (Japan), 1971, 
No.60, 34-40
WATTS, J.L.: 'Linear motors', Mach. & Prod. Eng. (GB), 
1971, 118, No.3057, 909-12
ALGER, P.A. and WILSON, C.: 'Linear reciprocating electric 
motors', Meeh. Technol. Inc., Patent USA 3643117, 3 Sept. 
1970; publ. 15 Feb. 1972, USA 69267
BAUSCH, H. and NOWAK, S.: 'Performance of synchronous 
linear motors', Arch. Elektrotech. (Germany), 1972, 55, 
No.l, 13-20. In German
BEATSON, C.: 'Inducing more pull into the linear motor', 
Engineer, 1972, 234, No.6044, 36-8
BOLL, K.F. and STEPHENS, T.R.: 'Linear bidirectional 
servomechanism', IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. (USA), 1972 
14, No.8, 2333-4
BOYD, M. and HU, P.Y. 'Linear electric motor', ibid., 15, 
No.3, 1023-4
CANTEMIR, L.: 'Some problems concerning the linear 
induction motor whose armature has a circular motion', 
Bull. Sci. Assoc. Ing. Electr. Inst. Electrotech. Montefiore 
(Belgium), 1972, 85, No.3, 133-6. In French
CHAI, H.D. and PAWLETKO, J.P.: 'N-phase linear stepper 
motor concept', IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. (USA), 1972, 
15, No.2, 489-90
DAVIS, M.W.: 'Development of concentric linear induction 
motor
*
, IEEE Trans., 1972, PAS-91, No.4, 1506-12

248
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
EASTHAM, J.F.: ’Linear induction motor stator', Tracked 
Hovercraft Ltd, Patent USA 3644762, 22 Feb. 1971; publ. 
22 Feb. 1972, USA 117461
EASTHAM, J.F. and ALWASH, J.H.: 
'Transverse-flux tubular
motors', Proc. IEE, 1972, 119, No.12, 1709-18
FIREFEANU, V. and STANCIU, D.: 'Experimental study of the 
magnetic field and power of a linear induction model',
Electrotehnica (Rumania), 1972, 20, No.2, 53-7. In Rumanian
GIRARD, A. Ch.: 'The linear motor runs from success to 
success', Inter Electron. (France), 1972, 27, No.47, 46-8. 
In French
JOSSE, B.: 'Linear induction motor', Patent UK 1279670, 
21 Nov. 1969; publ. 28 June 1972; prior. 21 Nov. 1968;
27 Oct. 1969, France 174788; 6936802
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'How a low-speed brushless a.c. motor 
was invented', Elec. Rev., 1972, 191, No.7, 221-2
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: "'Rack and pinion" motors', ibid., 
No.22, 749-50
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The development of linear electric 
motors, I and II', Elect. Engr. (Australia), 1972, 49, 
No.4, 21-2, 24-6 and No.5, 14-8
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The development of the linear motor', 
Rev. Polytech. (Switzerland), 1972, No.1306, 987-99.
In French
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The shape of things to come', 
Proc. IEE, 1972, 119, No.l, 61-8

BIBLIOGRAPHY
249
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and BOLTON, H.R.: ’Linear induction 
motors', NRDC, Patent USA 3648084, 16 June 1970; publ.
7 March 1972; prior. 31 Aug. 1967, UK 39933/67 (1226966)
NONAKA, S., HAYASHI, K. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Operating 
characteristics of double sided linear motors driven by 
the three phase PWM invertor', Technol. Rep. Kyushu 
Univ. (Japan), 1972, 45, No.6, 834-40. In Japanese
NONAKA, S., YOSHIDA, K. and YAMADA, M.: 'Characteristics 
of double sided linear motors with Fe-Cu alloy secondary 
conductors' ibid., 841-8. In Japanese
PADMANABHAN, S.: 'Linear DC motor', IBM Tech. Disclosure 
Bull. (USA), 1972, 14, No.11, 3300-1
PAUL, R.J.A.: 'Flat single-sided linear helical reluctance 
motor', Proc. IEE, 1972, 119, No.12, 1693-7
PETRECCA, G. and VISTOLI, I.: 'Tubular motor design and 
performances', Elettrotecnica, 1972, 59, No.11, 1186-94, 
In Italian
ROUBICEK, O.: 'Controlled low-frequency linear oscillatory 
drives', Elec. Rev., 1972, 190, No.21, 727-9
RUMMICH, E.: 'Methods of braking linear induction machines', 
Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 1972, 43, No.12, 273-7. In German
RUMMICH, E.: 'Synchronous linear machines', Bull. Assoc.
Suisse Electr. (Switzerland), 1972, 63, No.23, 1338-44. In 
French

250
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SUCHODOMSKI, M. : ’Electric crank and servo-motors, types 
ELS and EWS’, Pomiary Autom. Kontrola (Poland), 1972, 18, 
No.2, 83-5. In Polish
’The straight line to linear motion is a linear motor’, 
Engineer, 1972, 235, No.6091, 49
ZARIPOV, M.F. and KHAKIMOV, Kh. Kh.: 'A noncontacting 
linear selsyn', Izv. Akad. Nauk USSR Ser. Tekh. Nauk, 
1972, No.l, 18-20. In Russian
1973 
BUDIG, P.K., MAGERL, R. and RIEDEL, C.: 'Piezoelectric
linear stepping motor', Elektrie, 1973, 27, No.8, 423-7. 
In German
CRAIG, J.P., SELIN, K.I., KAUSS, W.: 'Operating charac­
teristics of a two-stator induction motor', 1973 SWIEEECO 
Record of Technical Papers, Houston, Texas, USA, 4-6 April 
1973 (IEEE), 166-71
de ZEEUW, A.: 'Linear short gap motors, I and II', 
Polytech. Tijdschr. Elektrotech. Elektron. (Netherlands), 
1973, 28, No.25, 820-8 and No.26, 872-9. In Dutch
DELEROI, W.: 'The starting process for the asynchronous 
linear motor', Elektrotech. Z, (ETZ) A, 1973, 94, No.8, 
488-93. In German
EASTHAM, J.F. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear motor 
topology', Proc. IEE, 1973, 120, No.3, 337-43
GERRARD, J. and PAUL, R.J.A.: 'Dynamic performance of 
rectilinear screw-thread motor', ibid., No.l, 73-8

BIBLIOGRAPHY
251
GUTT, H.-J.: ’Viewpoints pertaining to the application 
of modern linear and moving field motors’, VDI Z. (Germany), 
1973, 115, No.16, 1259-65. In German
LAMB, C. St.J.: 'Parallel connected linear motor', Elect.
Engr. (Australia), 1973, 50, No.7, 16-8
MATSUMIYA, T.: 'On the stationary characteristics of two- 
phase linear induction motors', Trans. Soc. Instrum. & 
Control Eng. (Japan), 1973, 9, No.l, 29-36. In Japanese
ONISHI, K., TAKAHASHI, T. and ISHIZAKI, K.: 'Characteristics 
of new type transistor-controlled de micromotor', Hitachi 
Hyoron (Japan), 1973, 55, No.7, 23-8
SCHIEBER, D.: 'Principles of operation of linear induction 
devices', Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 647-56
'Tubular motor could combine linear and rotary motion', 
Elec. Rev., 1973, 192, No.l, 25
WEH, H. and LANG, A.: 'The linear motor with a ring 
winding and leakage-fieId damping', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 
1973, 94, No.2, 97-102. In German
1974 
ANCEL, J.: 'A test stand for experiments on linear motors',
Tech. CEM (France), 1974, No.91, 26-9. In French 
ANDRESEN, E.: 'Linear induction motor with adjustable 
secondary and discontinuously arranged stators', Elektrotech. 
Z. (ETZ) A , 1974, 95, No.2, 69-74. In German
BASAK, A. and OVERSHOTT, K.J.: 'The ferrite field d.c. 
linear motor', IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 39-44

252
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
BROUGH, J.J.: 'An introduction to the linear d.c. motor', 
Electronics & Power, 1974, 20, No.15, 628-32
BROUGH, J.J.: 'The linear d.c. motor improves control 
flexibility', Elec. Rev., 1974, 195, No.17, 593-4
BUDIG, P.K.: 'Some remarks on the device of three-phase 
linear motors for low synchronous speed', IEE Conference 
on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 
25-30
CHEPELE, Yu. M.: 'A study of cylindrical linear induction 
motor’, Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1974, No.6, 56-8. In 
Russian
CHURA, V. and DVORAK, F.: 'A square linear motor', 
Elektrotech. Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 1974, 63, No.4, 
211-3. In Czech
DELEROI, W. and HUBNER, K.D.: 'Effect of the armature 
winding arrangement on the operation of asynchronous 
linear motors', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1974, 95, No.11, 
601-6. In German
EASTHAM, J.F. and BALCHIN, M.J.: 'Pole-change linear 
induction motors', IEE Conference on Linear Electric 
Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 9-14
GUZMAN, A.M. and LAWES, H.D.: 
'Rotary/linear motor',
IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. (USA), 1974, 27, No.5, 1306-7
JUFER, M. and CASSAT, A.: 'Static and dynamic charac­
teristics of electromagnetic transductors. Applications 
to a linear step motor', Feinwerktech. & Micronic 
(Germany), 1974, 78, No.4, 151-60. In German

BIBLIOGRAPHY
253
LUDA, G. and POHLSEN, K.H.: 'Control and regulation of 
linear motors', Elektro-Anz. (Germany), 1974, 27, No.24, 
515-8. In German
MEYER, H.: 'Linear motor', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 
1974, 26, No.2, 42-3. In German
NASAR, S.A., BOLDEA, I. and LAGUNA, N.: 'Performance of 
linear induction motors with dual windings', IEE Conference 
on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 191-6
OBERRETL, K.: 'Linear motors with extended and compact 
winding', Arch, Elektrotech. (Germany), 1974, 56, No.2, 
55-8. In German -
OBERRETL, K.: 'Linear motors with special double-layer 
windings', IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 15-20
SHUKELIS, A.Ch.V.: 'Some aspects of investigations and 
synthesis of linear stepper motors', ibid., 83-8
YOUNG, P.C.: 'Magnetic switches control linear motor 
(magneto-transistor IC)', Elect. Engr. (Australia), 1974, 
51, No.3, 14-6
1975 
BALCHIN, M.J. and EASTHAM, J.F.: 'Performance of linear
induction motors with airgap windings', Proc. IEE, 1975, 
122, No.12, 1382-90
BHATTACHARYYA, M. and MAHENDRA, S.N.: 'Self-oscillating 
single-phase linear motor
*,
 J. Instn, Engrs. (India) Elect. 
Engng. Div., 1975, Pt. EL3, 55, 134-8

254
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
DELEROI, W., GRUMBKOW, P.V. et al.: 'Short-stator linear 
motor - state of development', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 
1975, 96, No.9, 401-9. In German
EASTHAM, J.F. and BALCHIN, M.J.: 'Pole-change windings 
for linear induction motors', Proc. IEE, 1975, 122, No.2, 
154-60
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear electric machines - a personal 
view', Proc. IEEE, 1975, 63, No.2, 250-90
'Linear motor with coils and laminar core', Conz- 
Elektricitats GmbH, Patent UK 1382863, 5 April 1972; publ.
5 Feb. 1975; prior. 5 April 1971, W. Germany 116516
MELIK-SHAKHNAZAROV, A.M., SAVIN, V.V. and DADAYAN, Yu. A. : 
'Linear phase digitizer for a selsyn
*,
 Izv. VUZ Priborostr. 
(USSR), 1975, 18, No.4, 55-60. In Russian
PAYEN, J.P.: 'Suspension and coupling device for the 
movable magnetic field unit of a linear induction motor', 
Soc. Dauphinoise Electrique, Patent USA 3874300, 6 March 
1973; publ. 1 April 1975; prior. 15 March 1972, France 
9749
SOKOLOV, M.M. and SOROKIN, L.K.: 'An experimental 
investigation of the mechanical characteristics of a 
linear induction motor', Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1975, 
No.2, 43-6. In Russian
WATSON, D.B.: 'Speed and torque control of a single­
phase linear induction motor', Proc. IEE, 1975, 122, 
No.2, 188-9

BIBLIOGRAPHY
255
WEH, H. : 'Linear electric motors - state of the art', 
Naturwissenschaften (Germany), 1975, 62, No.3, 113-7. 
In German
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS
1949 
KOPECKI, E.S.: 'Induction stirring in electric furnace
steelmaking', Iron Age, 1949, 164, No.12, 73-8
1953 
BARNES, A.H.: 
'D.C. electro-magnetic pumps', Nucleonics,
1953, 11, No.l, 16-21
ROBIN, M.: 'Electromagnetic flowmeter', J. Rech. Cent. 
Natn. Rech. Scient. (Paris), 1953, 5, 187-9
SHERCLIFF, J.A.: 'Steady motion of conducting fluids in 
pipes under transverse magnetic fields', Proc. Camb, 
Phil. Soc., 1953, 49, Pt.l, 136-44
WATT, D.A.: 
'A.C. liquid metal pumps for laboratory use',
A.E.R.E. (Harwell), Report No. CE/R 1089, 1953
1954 
COTTRELL, W.B. and MANN, L.A.: 'Components for sodium or
NaK systems (i.e. pumps)', Nucleonics, 1954, 12, No.12, 
22-5
REMENIERAS, G. and HERMANT, C.: 'The electromagnetic 
measurement of velocities in liquids', Houille Blanche, 
1954, 9, Special No.B, 732-46. In French
1955 
GREENHILL, M.: 'Electromagnetic pumps and flowmeters',
A.E.R.E. (Harwell), Inf. Bib. No.93, 1955

256
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LOCK, R.C.: ’The stability of the flow of an electrically 
conducting fluid between parallel planes under a transverse 
magnetic field', Proc. Royal Soc., 1955, 233A, 105-25
SHERCLIFF, J.A.: 'Experiments on the dependence of 
sensitivity and velocity profile in electromagnetic flow­
meters' , J. Sci. Instrum., 1955, 32, No.11, 441-2
1956
THURLEMANN, B.: 'On the electromagnetic measurement of 
the velocity of flow of liquids', Helv. Phys. Acta , 
1955, 28, No.5-6, 483-5. In German
WATT, D.A.: 'A study in design of travelling field 
electromagnetic pumps for liquid metals', A.E.R.E. (Harwell), 
Report No. ED/R 1696, H.M.S.O., June 1955
WOOLLEN, W.B.: 'Electromagnetic pumping of liquid metals', 
Fluid Handling, 1955, No.62, 60-3 and No.63, 90-2
DENISON, A.B. et al: 'Square wave electromagnetic flowmeter 
design', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1956, 27, No.9, 707-11
KOLIN, A.: 'Principle of electromagnetic flowmeter without 
external magnet
*,
 J, Appl. Phys. (USA), 1956, 27, No.8, 
965-6
LIELPETER, Ya. Ya. and TYUTIN, I.A.: 
'Berechnungs-Verfahren
fur Flussigmetall-Induktions-Pumpen', Prikladnaya Magneto- 
gidrodinamika, 1956, No.8, 95-106
SHERCLIFF, J.A.: 'Entry of conducting and non-conducting 
fluids in pipes', Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 1956, 52, 573-83
STRONG, G.H.: 'Electromagnetic ball conveyor', Electrical 
Engineering (USA), 1956, 75, No.12, 1064-9

BIBLIOGRAPHY
257
TYUTIN, I.A. and YANKOP, E.K.: 'Elektromagnetische Pumpen 
fur Fliissige Metalle', Prikladnaya Magnetogidrodinamika, 
1956, No.8, 24-48
TYUTIN, I.A. and YANKOP, E.K.: 'Elektromagnetische Vorgange 
in Induktions-Pumpen fur Fliissige Metalle', ibid., 65-80
UL'MANIS, L. Ya.: 'Randeffekte in Linearen Induktions- 
Pumpen', ibid., 81-94
WATT, D.A.: 'Electromagnetic pumps for liquid metals, 
circulating reactor coolants and fuels', Engineering, 27 April 
1956, 181, 264-8
1957 
BLAKE, L.R.: 'Conduction and induction pumps for liquid
metals', Proc. IEE, 1957, 104A, No.13, 49-63
FENEMORE, A.S.: 'Linear induction pumps for liquid 
metals', Engineer, 17 May 1957, 203, 752-5
HOLDAWAY, H.W.: 'A note on electromagnetic flowmeters 
of rectangular cross-section', Helv. Phys. Acta., 1957, 
30, No.l, 85-8. In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'New developments in electromagnetic 
shuttle propulsion', Textile Weekly, 1957, 57(1), 
No.1506, 234-5
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Recent developments in electromagnetic 
shuttle propulsion', Textile Manufacturer, March 1957, 
131-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and DUXBURY, V.: 'Electromagnetic 
shuttle-propelling devices', Journal of the Textile 
Institute, 1957, 48, No.3, 214-24

258
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and LAWRENSON, P.J.: 'A self-oscillating 
induction motor for shuttle propulsion', Proc. IEE, 1957, 
104A, No.14, 93-101
SHERCLIFF, J.A.: 'Electromagnetic flowmeter without 
external magnet', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1957, 28, No.l, 
140
WATT, D.A., O'CONNOR, R.J. and HOLLAND, E.: 'Tests on an 
experimental D.C. pump for liquid metals', A.E.R.E. 
(Harwell), Report No. R/R 2274, 1957
1958 
BROMKAMP, K.H., IDELBERGER, K. and SCHNEEFUB, P.:
'Drehstrom-Induktions-Pumpe', Diplomarbeit Technische 
Hochschule Aachen, 1958
CUSHING, V.: 'Induction flowmeter', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 
1958, 29, No.8, 692-7
1959 
BALLS, B.W. and BROWN, K.J.: 'The magnetic flowmeter',
Trans. Soc. Instrum. Technol., 1959, 11 , No.2, 119-30
BIRZVALKS, Yu. et al: 'Velocity distribution in 
electromagnetic pump channels with a rectangular cross 
section', Latv. PSR Zinat. Akad. Vestis (USSR), 1959, 
No.10 (147), 85-9. In Russian
HLASNIK, I.: 'Reaction of armature of an electromagnetic 
pump', Elektrotech. Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 1959, 48, 
No.3, 135-46. In Slovak
LIELPETER, Ya.: 'The thermal processes in electromagnetic 
induction pumps', Latv. PSR Zinat. Akad. Vestis (USSR), 1959, 
No.9 (146), 91-100. In Russian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
259
WATT, D.A.: ’The design of electromagnetic pumps for 
liquid metals’, Proc. IEE, 1959, 106A, No.26, 94-103
1960 
CAMBILLARD, E. and SCHWAB, B.: 'Multiphase annular
electromagnetic pumps - design and construction', 
Bull. Soc. Franc. Elect. (Ser. 8), 1960, 1, No.6, 417-24. 
In French
DEVIDAS, R.: 'Single phase AC electromagnetic pumps', 
ibid., 411-6. In French
HERMANT, C.: 'Improving the characteristics of the 
linear-type electromagnetic induction pump', ibid., 
No.3, 163-78. In French
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and NIX, G.F.: 'Further developments 
of the self-oscillating induction motor', Proc. IEE, 
1960, 107A, No.35, 476-86
LAITHWAITE, E.R., TIPPING, D. and HESMONDHALGH, D.E.: 
'The application of linear induction motors to conveyors', 
ibid., No.33, 284-94
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: 'Electromagnetic phenomenon in flat 
induction pumps for liquid metals', Elektrichestvo, 1960, 
No.3, 48-54. In Russian
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: 'Electromagnetic phenomenon in flat 
induction pumps for molten metals', Elect. Technol. USSR, 
1960, 5, 132
ROLFF, J.J.P.: 'Magnetic flowmeters', Arch. Tech. Messen,1960
No.297 (ref. V1249-2), 197-200. In German

260
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SCHWAB, B.: 'Different types of electromagnetic pumps', 
Bull. Soc. Franc. Elect. (Ser. 8), 1960, 1, No.6, 404-10. 
In French
VAUTREY, L.: 'The use of electromagnetic pumps', ibid., 
399-403. In French
VOL'DEK, A.I.: 'Electromagnetic pumps for liquid metals', 
Elektrichestvo, 1960, No.5, 22-7. In Russian
WILKINSON, K.: 'Linear motors applied to materials 
handling', Elec. Times, 1960, 154, No.3996, 31-6
1961 
HANKA, L.: 'The geometry of induction pumps for liquid
metals', Elektrotech. Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 1961, 50, 
No.l, 38-44. In Czech
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors and their 
applications', Design and Components in Engineering, 
Dec. 1961, 589-94
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Prospects for linear induction motors', 
New Scientist, 1961, 12, No.255, 42-5
LAITHWAITE, E.R., NIX, G.F., BRUNNSCHWEILER, D. and 
BINA, J.: 'The self-oscillating induction motor as a 
traverse mechanism for cone-winding machines', Journal 
of the Textile Institute, 1961, 52, No.11, 625-34
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: 'Optimal geometrical relations in 
the induction pumps for liquid metals', Elektrichestvo, 
1961, No.9, 10-6. In Russian
'Pumps in atomic energy - survey', Nuclear Power (GB), 
1961, 6, No.63, 68-73

BIBLIOGRAPHY
261
1962 
BROMKAMP, K.H.: 'Inductive stirring device for metallic
melts', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1962, 83, No.24, 811-5. 
In German
BYESTE, L.A.: 'An electromagnetic chute for molten metal', 
Elektrichestvo, 1962, 82, No.5, 74-7. In Russian
KHABLENKO, A.I. and IL'YASHENKO, O.I.: 'Electromagnetic 
pump', Pribory i Tekh. Eksper. (USSR), 1962, No.2, 178-9. 
English trans. Instrum. Exper. Tech.(USA), 1962, No.2, 400
1963 
GERMAIN, C.: 'Bibliographical review of the methods of
measuring magnetic fields', Nuclear Instrum, and Methods 
(Netherlands), 1963, 21, No.l, 17-46 
(280 refs)
LEBEE, G., RICHARD, M. et al: 'Study and production of 
a rectangular field electromagnetic flowmeter', Rev. Gen. 
Elec., 1963, 72, No.9, 439-43. In French
PANHOLZER, R.: 'Electromagnetic pumps', Electrical 
Engineering (USA), 1963, 82, No.2, 128-35
SLATER, R.A.C., JOHNSON, W. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'An 
appraisal of the linear induction motor concept for high- 
energy- rate metal forming', Sheet Metal Industries, 
April 1963, 237-43
SLATER, R.A.C., JOHNSON, W. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'An 
experimental investigation relating to the accelerated 
motion of various 'translators" in the air gap of a linear 
induction motor', Int. J. of Mach. Tool Des, and Res., 
1963, 3, 111-135
VERTE, L.A.: 'Experimental induction pump for molten 
iron', Elektrichestvo, 1963, 82, No.12, 64. In Russian

262
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1964 GUSEL'NIKOV, E.M. and ROTT, V.Zh.: 'A series of single­
rod electrohydraulic linear actuators', Elektrotekhnika 
(USSR), 1964, No.8, 55. In Russian
’Impact extrusion by linear induction’, Engineering, 
4 Sept. 1964, 198, 302-3
JOHNSON, W., LAITHWAITE, E.R. and SLATER, R.A.C.: ’An 
experimental impact-extrusion machine driven by a linear 
induction motor', Proc. I. Meeh. E., 1964-65, 179, Pt.I, 
No.l, 15-35
’Linear motor drives impact extruder', Elec. Times, 1964, 
146, No.8, 259-60
1965 
KIRSHTEIN, H.Kh. and RYBAKOV, E.K.: 'Method for measuring
velocity of conducting medium using a pulsatory magnetic 
field', Latv. PSR Zinat. Akad. Vestis Fiz. Tehn. Ser. (USSR), 
1965, No.2, 35-40. In Russian
MARIN, N.I., POVSTEN, V.A., DOKTOROVA, T.V. and AVILOVA, E.M.: 
'Electromagnetic pumps for (liquid) alkali metals', 
Atomnaya Energiya (USSR), 1965, 18, No.3, 239-42. In Russian
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: Travelling magnetic wave induction 
pumps’, Magn. Gidrodin (USSR), 1965, No.4, 3-23. In Russian
STEINER, D.: 'On the feasibility of electromagnetic pumps 
in space vehicles', Atomkernenergie (Germany), 1965, 10, 
No.9-10, 359-62. In German
TOURCHIN, N.M.: 'Magnetic flowmeters', Magn. Gidrodin (USSR), 
1965, No.l, 147-53. In Russian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
263
VASIL’EV, S.V. et al: 'Experimental investigation of an 
induction pump in a magnetic field', ibid., No.2, 111-22. 
In Russian
VOJ, P.: 'Electromagnetic flow meters for liquid metals', 
Arch. Tech. Messen, 1965, No.357 (ref. V1243-4), 217-8. 
In German
1966 
DANCY, W.H. Jr. and TOWLER, W.R.: 'Three dimensional
magnetically supported wind tunnel balance', Rev. Sci. 
Instrum., 1966, 37, No.12, 1643-8
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Linear motors for crane drives. Development 
and production', Elec. Rev., 1966, 179, No.26, 956-8
DOMRES, H.G.: 'The transport of molten metals by means 
of electromagnetic pumps', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 
1966, 18, No.26, 989-91. In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Induction-type actuators', Design
and Components in Engineering, 10 Dec. 1966, 16-24
NIX, G.F. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction 
motors for low-speed and standstill application', 
Proc. IEE, 1966, 113, No.6, 1044-56
ROSE, G.A.: 'Magnetic field measurements for electro­
magnetic flowmeters', Phys. Med. Biol. (GB), 1966, 11, 
No.l, 109-12
1967 
ADAMS, W.J. and WHITE, B.A.: 'Applying linear induction
motors', Automation, 1967, 14, No.6, 74-7

264
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
BERNARD, H.: 'The magnetic inductive measurement of 
flow', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 1967, 19, No.l, 7-11. 
In German
BOWLES, L.F. and TAYLOR, D.: 'Prototype fast reactor 
sodium pumps', U.K.A.E.A. TRG Report No. 1538(r), 1967
COYNE, D.G. and MULLINS, J.H. : 'Critically damped 
oscillatory linear induction engine for driving a bubble 
chamber valve', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1967, 38, No.5, 681-5
DORAIRAJ, K.R. and KRISHNAMURTHY, M.R.: 'Polyphase 
induction machine with a slitted ferromagnetic rotor', 
IEEE Trans., 1967, PAS-86, No.7, 835-43 ('I - Experimental 
investigations and a novel slipmeter'), ibid., 844-55 
('II - Analysis')
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Applications of linear induction 
motors', Electrical and Electronics Technician Engineer, 
1967, 1, No.3, 10-6
MARINESCU, M.: 'Automatic adjustment of the charge for 
the driving by linear electrical motor of a piston 
compressor with double effect', Rev. Roum. Sci. Tech.
Electrotech. Energet., 1967, 12, No.4, 563-9. In French
WHITE, B. : 
'Linear induction motor loads bobbins',
Control Engineering, 1967, 14, No.7, 91
1968 
DRAKE, J., GEE, R. and PIERRO, J.: 'Linear electric
motors', Frontiers of Technology Study, 3, Sec. 10, 
North American Rockwell Corp., 1968
EZEKIEL, F.D.: 'Electromagnetic actuators', Instrum. 
Control Syst. (USA), 1968, 40, No.12, 90-6

BIBLIOGRAPHY
265
GOLDHAMMER, A.B., MARKEY, P.J. and MATHUR, S.K.: 
’Linear motors applied. Economic for special purposes 
despite low efficiency', Elec, Times, 1968, 153, No.24, 
967-71
KANT, M.: 'Contribution a 1'etude du champ magnetique 
dans un convertisseur magnetohydrodynamique a viene 
liquide', These de Doctorat d'Etat es Sciences Physiques, 
Paris, 1968.
KVACHEV, G.S., MELNICHENKO, G.I. and STASENKO, P.: 
'Linear motor drives for oil circuit breakers', Elek. 
Sta. (USSR), 1968, No.2, 56-60
'Linear motor in crash-test rig', Electronics & Power, 
May 1968, 14, 213
MADDON, D.: 'Linear induction motors: tomorrow's transit 
power', Product Engineering, 20 May 1968, 39, 73-5
VICTORRI, M. : 'The rolling chute, a new solution for 
the transport of bulk products', Manutention, Nov. 1968, 
18, No.151. In French
WILKINSON, K.: 'Linear motors applied to materials 
handling', Elec. Times, 1968, 154, No.3996, 31-6
1969 
CHOUDHURY, J.K. and DAS, J.K.: 'Use of single-phase linear
induction motor for a self-balancing d.c. potentiometer', 
J. Instn. Engrs. (India) Electronics Telecomm. Engng. Div., 
1969, Pt. ET3, 49, No.9, 94-6
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Linear motors thrust ahead in many roles', 
Engineer, 1969, 229, No.5928, 42-5

266
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
GREEN, C.W. and PAUL, R.J.A.: ’Application of d.c. linear 
machines as short-stroke and static actuators’, Proc. IEE, 
1969, 116, No.4, 599-604
HERRNKIND, O.P.: ’Der Linearmotor und seine Anwendung', 
Elektro-Anz. (Germany), 1969, 22, No.17, 365-6.
HOPPE, L.: 
'Linearmotoren-Richtungsweisende Elektroantriebe
der Fordertechnik', Maschinenmarkt, 1969, 75, No.101, 2212-3
JONES, P.L.: 
'D.C. linear motors for industrial applications',
Elec. Times, 1969, 156, No.2, 48-51
KULP, P.G.: 'Operation mode and application possibilities 
of linear motors', Tech. Uberwach (Germany), 1969, 10, No.11, 
395-7. In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Moteurs lineaires: les applications 
futuristes d'une vieille idee', Atomes, 1969, 24, No.263, 
179-81
'Linear induction motor', Herbert Morris Ltd, Patent 
UK 1152410, 15 Sept. 1967; publ. 21 May 1969; prior. 
UK 29 Sept. 1966, 50909/68
REMY, E.: 'A new linear motor conveyor for mining 
products', Annales des Mines, Feb. 1969, 73-81. In French
R&MY, E. and VICTORRI, M.: 'The linear motor: II The 
application of the linear motor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1969, 
78, No.4, 362-70. In French
SUNDBERG, K.: 'Magnetic travelling fields for metallurgical 
processes', IEEE Spectrum, 1969, 6, No.5, 79-88

BIBLIOGRAPHY
267
USAMI, Y., ISHIHARA, M., KOJIMA, N. and MITOMI, T.: 
'Feasibility of linear motor for car-retarder or car­
accelerator at marshalling yards', Bull. Internet.
Railway Congress Assoc. (Belgium), 1969, 46, No.5, 311-20
VICTORRI, M.: 'The linear motor and its applications', 
Journees d*Informations  Electro-industrielles, Grenoble, 
Oct. 1969, No.13. In French
1970 
BEATSON, C.: 'Linear motors are poised to thrust into
industry', Engineer, 1970, 230, No.5968, 38-9
BUDIG, P.-K. : 'Construction, mode of operation, operating 
behaviour and possibilities of application of linear 
motors', Elektrie, 1970, 24, No.10, 335-40. In German
KLOCKE, W.: 'Use of linear motors in the shipbuilding 
experimental station
*,
 ibid., 354-6. In German
KNOPEK, G. and KRAJEWSKI, J.: 'Design problems and the 
development of silent crane induction motors
*
, Przeglad 
Elektrotech. (Poland), 1970, 46, No.7-8, 307-9. In Polish
KOCKISCH, k.-H.: 'Experiences with the design and 
construction of linear motors from the manufacturer's 
point of view', Elektrie, 1970, 24, No.10, 344-6. In 
German
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and NASAR, S.A.: 'Linear-motion 
electrical machines', Proc. IEEE, 1970, 58, No.4, 531-42
LINKE, H.: 
'Betriebsverhalten und Steuerung eines
speziellen Linearmotors', Industrieanzeiger, 1970, 92, 
No.25, 533-5

268
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LORINET, J.P.: ’Handling by linear (induction) motor', 
Tech. Mod. (France), 1970, 62, No.9, 343-6. In French
'New handling system using the linear motor', Electrician 
(France), 1970, 83, No.2115, 52-4. In French
PEACH, N.: 'Linear motors have practical applications', 
Power (USA), 1970, 114, No.6, 96
REMY, E.: 'Possibilities of application of the linear 
motor', Elektrie, 1970, 24, No.10, 352-4. In German
ROSATI, S.-: 'Linear induction motors and their possible 
use in industry', Alta Frequenza (Italy), 1970 , 39 , No.7 
(supplement), 133-41. In Italian
SFAX, E.: 'Drive and positioning of vehicles for 
internal transport in workshops by means of linear motors', 
Elektrie, 1970, 24, No.10, 358-61. In German
STOLZEL, D.: 'Use of linear motors in mines', ibid., 
361-5. In German
WIART, A.: 'Basic theory and applications of linear 
motors', Rev. Jeumont-Schneider, May 1970, No.8, 43-50. 
In French
WIART, A.: 'Theory and applications of linear motors', 
ibid., Aug. 1970, No.9, 39-46. In French
1971 
ANCEL, J. and FAURE, A.: 'Design alternates for the
linear motor according to its specific applications',
Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 135-7. In French

BIBLIOGRAPHY
269
BIRZVALKS, Yu. A.,BROKA, M.E. et al: 'An experimental 
investigation and generalization of channel charac­
teristics in conduction pumps with independent 
excitation', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1971, No.4, 117-22. 
In Russian (English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
BUDIG, P.-K.: 'Application of linear motors', Elektrie, 
1971, 26, No.6, 204-6. In German
BUDIG, P.-K.: 'Possible applications of linear motors', 
Automatisieningspraxis (Germany), 1971, 14, No.8, 149-53. 
In German
CONRAD, H. and NOPIRAKOWSKI, J.: 'Electromagnetic 
stirring of molten metal', Elektrie, 1971, 26, No.9, 
375-7. In German
CYNOBER, S.: 'Applications of the linear motor to the 
handling of materials', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 
114-20. In French
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Control systems for cranes', Herbert 
Morris Ltd, Patent USA 3596156, 15 July 1968; publ.
27 July 1971; prior. 21 July 1967, UK 336227/67
ERICSON, A.: 'Metallurgical aspects of the induction 
stirring of molten metal', Asea J. (Sweden), 1971, 44, 
No.4, 81-2
FARAH, O.G. and LAY, R.K.: 'Power conditioning unit 
for linear induction motor thrust and speed control', 
IEEE International Convention Digest, New York, 
22-25 March 1971, 418-9

270
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
GUTT, H.-J.: 
'Wanderfeldmotoren im Vergleich zu ublichen
DrehfeIdinaschinen1 , Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1971, 92, 
342-7
HANAS, B. : 'Design and plant considerations of induction 
stirrers', Asea J. (Sweden), 1971, 44, No.4, 87-92
KRAUYA, V.M.: 'A conduction pump with a circular channel', 
Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1971, No.4, 133-7. In Russian 
(English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
POLOUJADOFF, M.: 'Linear induction machines: II 
Applications', IEEE Spectrum, 1971, 8, No.3, 79-86
ROUBECEK, 0., PEJSEK, Z. and TUSLA, P.: 'The possibility 
of application of an electric translatory drive (with 
linear motion) of the mine drilling hammer', Elektrotech. 
Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 1971, 60, No.4, 202-7. In Czech
SADLER, G.V. and DAVEY, A.W.: 'Applications of linear 
induction motors in industry’, Proc. IEE, 1971, 118, 
No.6, 765-76
SUNDBERG, Y.: 'Principles of the induction stirrer', 
Asea J. (Sweden), 1971, 44, No.4, 71-80
TORGERSEN, P.: 'The linear motor - simple and strong 
without moving parts. Possible applications in industry 
and the carriage of goods', Elektrotek. Tidsskr. (Norway), 
1971, 84, No.21, 16-8. In Norwegian
VED'KALOV, I.R., KAPUSTA, A.B. et al: 'An electromagnetic 
pilot plant for the treatment of flowing molten metal', 
Magn. Gpdrodin. (USSR), 1971, No.4, 127-32. In Russian 
(English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))

BIBLIOGRAPHY
271
1972
WARNETT, K.: ’Linear electric motor', Electro-Lifts Ltd, 
Patent USA 3581127, 21 April 1969; publ. 25 May 1971;
prior. 20 April 1968, UK 18777/68
AHMAD, V.: ’Applications of linear induction motors in 
industry', Proc. IEE, 1972, 119, No.2, 233-4
ASTON, T.R.: 'Impact testing of motor vehicles: an 
application for the linear induction motor', Electrical 
and Electronics Technician Engineer, 1972, 6, No.4, 3-7
DATTA, S.K.: *A static variable-frequency three-phase 
source using the cycloconverter principle for the speed 
control of induction motor', IEEE Trans., 1972, IA-8, 
No.5, 520-30
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Linear motors for industrial processes', 
Elec. Times, 1972, 161, No.19, 45-8
EADY, J.G.: 'Electromagnetic transport and metering of 
molten metals', Mining Technol. (GB), 1972, 54, No.615, 
28-31
'Electric industrial furnaces', Mon. Tech, Rev. (Germany), 
1972, 16, No.l, 5-7. In English
'Electromagnetic conveying trough', AEG Flotherm GmbH, 
Patent UK 1292576, 19 April 1971; publ. 11 Oct. 1972;
prior. 30 Sept. 1970, Germany P2048026.6
GALE, K.: 'Shove a penny: linear motor sorts them out', 
Engineer, 1972, 23, No.6072-3, 64-5

272
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
GUTT, H.-J.: 'Applications of travelling-fieId motors 
of the sector and linear type', Siemens Rev. (Germany), 
1972, 39, No.l, 32-6
HIYANE, M. INOUE, Y. and KURUSU, M. : 'Development of 
linear motion actuator', Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J. (Japan), 
1972, 8, No.2, 59-92
KURZWEIL, F. Jr.: 'Linear eddy current actuator using 
moving conductive belt', IBM Tech. Disclosure Bull. (USA), 
1972, 15, No.l, 95-6
LANCASHIRE, R.: 'The application of linear thrust units 
to work transporters on metal finishing plant', 
Electroplating and Met. Finish. (GB), 1972, 25, No.7, 30-2
LENZKES, D.: 'Electric drives with linear motors', 
Electr. Ausreustung (Germany), 1972, 13, No.4, 13-8
RUMMICH, E.: 
'Entwicklungsstand und Anwendungs-
moglichkeiten von Linearmotoren', Bull. Assoc. Suisse 
Electr. (Switzerland), 1972, 63, No.19, 1093-9
RUMMICH, E.: 'Linear motors and their applications', 
Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau (Austria), 1972, 89, 
No.2, 60-9. In German
'The linear motor: applications and perspectives', 
Achats & Entretien Mater. Ind. (France), 1972, No.237, 
45-54. In French
1973 
BAKANOV, Yu. A., DRONNIK, L.M. et al: 'An experimental
investigation of a liquid metal induction machine in the 
pump regime', Magn. Gidrodin (USSR),- 1973, No.l, 153-5. 
In Russian (English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))

BIBLIOGRAPHY
273
BAKANOV, Yu. A., VLASENKO, L.G. et al: 'An experimental 
study of a liquid metal alternating current conduction 
machine', ibid., No.2, 124-9. In Russian (English trans, 
in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
BERESFORD, J.E. and BARCLAY, R.: 'A cheap linear motor 
for teaching and research purposes', Elec. Rev., 1973, 
192, No.21, 748-50
D'YAKOV, V.I. and OROLOV, A.N.: 'The plotting of the 
mechanical characteristics of a linear induction machine 
with a liquid metal working medium
*
, Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 
1973, No.2, 100-4. In Russian (English trans, in Magneto­
hydrodynamics (USA))
GIROUD, F.: 'Linear motor propelled catapult for 
automobile collision testing', Analyses (France), 1973, 
No.l. In French
HUHNS, T. and KRATZ, G.: 'Steuerung von und mit Linearmotoren', 
Steuerungstechnik, 1973, 6, No.2, 23
LLOYD, R.G.: 'Linear motors for better performance and 
reliability in instrumentation', Elec, Rev., 1973, 193, 
No.19, 631-3
OLBRICH, O.E.: 'Layout and characteristics of electrodynamic 
linear motors as'positioners for disc storages', Feinwerktech. 
& Micronic (Germany), 1973, 77, No.4, 151-7. In German
USAMI, Y., FUJIE, J., ISHIHARA, M. and NAKASHIMA, H.: 
'Linear-motorised yard automation system', Quart. Rept. 
Railway Technical Research Institute, JNR, 1973, 14, No.4, 
207-13

274
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
WITWICKI, A.: 'The development of linear motor applications', 
Wiad. Elektrotech. (Poland), 1973, 41, No.3, 72-8. In Polish
1974 
BAMJI, P.J.F.: 'Some applications of a linear electric
machine for handling molten aluminium
*
, IEE Conference 
on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 
68-76
BOLTON, H.: 'An electromagnetic bearing' ibid., 45-50
BROWN, M. and FERRY, G.A.: 'A high voltage thyristor 
regulator for control of a linear induction motor', 
IEE Conference on Power Semiconductors and their 
Applications, London,’ 3-5 Dec. 1974, 63-70
DAVEY, A.W.: 'How to assess the rating of a linear 
motor', Design Engineering, June 1974, 38-9
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Linear motor applications', IEE Conference 
on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 51-5
DAVEY, A.W.: 'Variable speeds for industry by versatile 
linear motor', Elec. Times, 1974, No.4286, 7-8
GUTT, H.-J.: 'Limitations to the application of linear 
motors', Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau (Austria), 1974, 
91, No.9, 4555-61. In German
JUFER, M. and CASSAT, A.: 'Application of linear stepping 
and induction motors', 3rd Annual Symposium on Incremental 
Motion Control Systems and Devices, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, 6-8 May 1974, L/l-13

BIBLIOGRAPHY
275
JUFER, M. and MATTATIA, S.: ’The linear induction motor - 
characteristics and applications’, Bull. Assoc. Suisse
Electr. (Switzerland), 1974, 65, No.12, 880-91. In French
KHOZHAINOV, A.I.: 'Study of a conduction-type linear motor 
with liquid metal conductor', Elektrichestvo (USSR), 1974, 
No.10, 52-6. In Russian
LAZARUS, J.H., ENSLIN, N.C. and LIDDIARD, R.C.: 'Application 
of a linear motor to the hydraulic transportation of ore', 
IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 
Oct. 1974, 56-61
LIANDER, W.: 'Motors for servo and linear applications', 
Eltek. Aktuell Elektron. (Sweden), 1974, 17, No.4, 38-40. 
In Swedish
MARINESCU, M.: 'A linear electro-magnetic type of motor 
for operating compressors for cooling devices, by direct 
coupling', IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 118-23
RESIN, M.G., PIRUMIAN, N.M., SARAPULOV, F.N. and 
YASENEV, N.D.: 'Some aspects of the linear motor's 
design and application', ibid., 21-4
SCHLEGEL, K.-D.: 'Linear drives for limited displace­
ments - application perspectives of linear motors in 
the control of material flow', Wiss. Z, Tech. Hochsch. 
Otto Von Guericke Magdeb. (Germany), 1974, 18, No.5, 
565-9. In German

276
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SIKORA, R., LIPINSKI, W. and PURCZYNSKI, J.: ’Analysis 
of levitation force and power losses of a certain 
induction bearing’, Arch. Elektrotech. (Poland), 1974, 
23, No.2, 487-500. In Polish
TIISMUS, Kh.A. : 'Prospects for the development of an 
electrical drive with linear induction MHD motors', 
Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1974, No.10, 6-10. In Russian
1975 
CHIRIIOIU, N.: 'Linear motor used with magnetic-disk
memory', Electroteh. Electron. & Autom. Electroteh. 
(Rumania), 1975, 23, No.3, 127-36. In Rumanian
'Drive for linear positioning of magnetic leads', Philips 
Electronic Ind., Patent UK 1381143, 3 May 1972; publ.
22 Jan. 1975; prior. 6 May 1971, Netherlands 6185
LARONZE, J.: 'Linear motor with multi-section armature 
and a drive device utilizing a linear motor of this 
kind', Brown Boveri & Co. Ltd, Patent USA 3860840, 
17 July 1973; publ. 14 Jan. 1975; prior. 31 July 1972, 
France 72.27585
LUDA, G.: 'The range of application of the linear 
motor', Polytech. Tijdschr. Werktuigbouw (Netherlands), 
1975, 30, No.14, 443-54. In Dutch
MARINESCU, M., MORARU, A. and BUNEA, V.: 'A linear 
electromagnetic type of motor for operating a cooling 
device compressor by direct coupling', Rev. Roum. Sci. 
Tech. Electrotech. Energet., 1975, 20, No.l, 57-63. 
In English

BIBLIOGRAPHY
277
MORI, K. : 'Linear motor winding and method of fabricating 
the same’, Patent USA 3903437, 1 April 1974; publ. 2 Sept. 
1975; prior. 3 April 1973, Japan 4837420
OCHI, T., KUNITOMO, Y., TAKEI, K., MURAI, T. and ANDO, M.: 
’Simulation of marshalling yard system using linear motor 
cars', Hitachi Rev. (Japan), 1975, 24, No.l, 34
PAUL, R.J.A. and THOMSON, A.F.: 'Dynamic performance of 
a linear helical reluctance stepping motor', 4th Annual 
Symposium on Incremental Motion Control Systems and 
Devices, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1-3 April 1975, 
F/l-16
LEVITATION
1912
'Foucault and eddy currents put to service', Engineer,
18 Oct. 1912, 114, 420-1
1923
MUCK, 0.: 'Method of and devices for melting materials, 
in particular conductive materials, by means of induced 
electric currents', German Patent No.422004, 30 Oct. 1923. 
In German
1939
BEDFORD, B.D., PEER, H.B. and TONKS, I.: 'The electromagnetic 
levitator', Gen. Elec. Rev. (USA), 1939, 42, No.6, 246-7
1950
BEAMS, J.W.: 'Magnetic suspension for small rotors', 
Rev. Sci. Instrum., Feb. 1950, 21, 182-4
1951
LUNDQUIST, S.: 'On the stability of magneto-hydrostatic
fields', Phys. Rev., 1951, 83, No.2, 307-11

278
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1952 
’Melting metals in mid air’, Life, 16 June 1952, 49
OKRESS, E.C. and WROUGHTON, D.M. : 'Metals melted without 
crucibles’, Iron Age, 1952, 170, No.5, 83-6
OKRESS, E.C., WROUGHTON, D.M., COMENETZ, G., BRACE, P.H. 
and KELLY, J.C.R.: ‘Electromagnetic levitation of solid 
and molten metals', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1952, 23, No.5, 
545-52
WROUGHTON, D.M., OKRESS, E.C., BRACE, P.H., COMENETZ, G. 
and KELLY, J.C.R.: 'A technique for eliminating crucibles 
in heating and melting metals', J. Electrochem. Soc., 
1952, 99, No.5, 205-11
1953 
KEMPER, H.: 'Elektrisch Angetriebene Eisenbahnfahrzeuge
mit elektromagnetischer Schwebefuhrung', Elektrotech. Z. 
(ETZ) A, 1953, 74, No.l, 11-4
SCHEIBE, W.: 'Some problems of high-vacuum metallurgy', 
Metall, 1953, 7, No.19-20, 751-4. In German (English 
Trans. TIL/T 4603, Ministry of Supply, Technical Information 
and Library Services, Sept. 1956)
WINKLER, 0.: 'The melting of metals without crucible 
reaction', Z. MetaiIkunde, 1953, 44, No.8, 333-41. In 
German (English Trans. TIL/T 4701, Ministry of Supply, 
Technical Information and Library Services, Aug. 1957)
1954 
KRUSKAL, M. and SCHWARZSCHILD, M.: 'Some instabilities
of a completely ionized plasma', Proc. Royal Soc., 1954, 
223, 348-60

BIBLIOGRAPHY
279
POLONIS, D.H., BUTTERS, R.G. and GORDON-PARR, J.: 
'Levitation melting titanium and titanium alloys’, 
Research (London), 1954, 7, No.2, S10-2 (Correspondence 
supplement)
POLONIS, D.H., BUTTERS, R.G. and GORDON-PARR, J.: 
'Some techniques for melting reactive metals', ibid., 
No.7, 273-7
POLONIS, D.H. and GORDON-PARR, J.: 'Phase transformations 
in titanium rich alloys of iron and titanium', J. Metals 
(Met. Soc. AIME), 1954, 6, 1138-54
1955 
LOVELL, W.V.: 'Electromagnet removes nonferrous metals',
Electronics, 1955, 28, No.9, 164-6
1956 
BOERDIJK, A.H.: 'Technical aspects of levitation',
Philips Research Reports, 1956, 11, No.l, 45-56
1957 
TAYLER, R.J.: 'Hydromagnetic instabilities of an ideally
conducting fluid', Proc. Phys. Soc., 1957, Section B, 
70, 31-48
1958 
BERNSTEIN, I.B., FRIEMAN, E.A., KRUSKAL, M.D. and
KULSRUD, R.M.: 'An energy principle for hydromagnetic 
stability problems', Proc. Royal Soc., 1958, 244A, 
No.1236, 17-40
COMENETZ, G. and SALATKA, J.W.: 'Ten-gram levitation 
melted ingots', J. Electrochem. Soc., 1958, 105, No.11, 
673-6

280
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
ZHEZHERIN, R.P.: ’The problems of the electromagnetic 
crucible', Conference on MHD, Riga, USSR, July 1958. 
In Russian (English Trans. US Atomic Energy Comm. 
No. AEC-tr-Physics, 242-55)
1959 
BEGLEY, R.T., COMENETZ, G., FLINN, P.A. and SALATKA, J.W.:
'Vacuum levitation melting', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1959, 
30, No.l, 38
FOGEL, A.A.: 'Melting of laboratory specimens of metals 
in vacuum or an inert gas by levitation technique', 
Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, OTN, Metallurgiya i Toplivo, 1959, 
No.2, 24-34. In Russian (English trans. Henry Brutcher 
Technical Trans1. No. 4702)
HARRIS, B. and JENKINS, A.E.: 'Controlled atmosphere 
levitation system', J. Sci. Instrum., 1959, 36, No.5, 
238-40
VLADIMIRSKII, V.V. and KALEBIN, S.M.: 'The stability of 
rotating ferromagnetic bodies suspended in a magnetic 
field', Pribory i Tekh. Eksper. (USSR), 1959, No.2, 41-2. 
English trans. Instrum. Exper. (USA), 1959, No.2, 216-23
WEISBERG, L.R.: 'Levitation melting of Ga, In, Au and Sb', 
Rev, Sci. Instrum., 1959, 30, No.2, 135
1960 
BIRDSAL, D.H., COLGATE, S.A., FURTH, H.P., HARTMAN, C.W.
and SPOERLEIN, R.L.: 'Livermore pinch program', 
University of California, Report No.UCRL-9500, Sept.-Nov. 
1960, 38-51

BIBLIOGRAPHY
281
PORITSKY, H.: ’Conducting sphere in alternating magnetic 
fields', Trans. AIEE (Part 1 Communication and Electronics), 
1960, 78, No.46, 937-42
SLATER, W.J., BARTON, J.W. and TAGGART, R.: 'Coil design 
in levitation melting', Sci. and Industry, 1960, 7, 89-96
1961 
FURTH, H.P. and KILLEEN, J.: 'Instability of resistive
sheet pinch', University of California, Report Nos. 
UCRL-9777, UCRL-9969, approx. 1961
JENKINS, A.E.: 'The physico-chemical applications of 
electromagnetic levitation', XVIII International Congress 
of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Montreal, Quebec, 1961
STERLING, H.F. and WARREN, R.W.: 'A cold crucible for 
high-temperature melting processes', Nature, 1961, 192, 
No.4804, 745
'Temperature control improves levitation', Chem. Eng. News, 
21 Aug. 1961, 39, 38 & 40
1962 
COLGATE, S.A., FURTH, H.P. and HALLIDAY, F.O.: 'Hydromagnetic
equilibrium experiments with liquid and solid sodium', Rev. 
Mod. Phys., 1962, 32, No.4, 744-7
LEWIS, J.C., NEUMAYER, H.R.J. and WARD, R.G.: 'The 
stabilization of liquid metal during levitation melting', 
J. Sci. Instrum., 1962, 39, No.11, 569
REDLICH, R.: 'Stability of thin metal foils levitated 
by ac fields', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1962, 33, No.l, 231

282
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
VOLKOV, T.F.: ’Stability of a heavy conducting fluid 
contained by a rapidly varying magnetic field', Soviet 
Phys. - Tech. Phys., 1962, 7, No.l, 22-7
1963 
BRISLEY, W. and THORNTON, B.S.: 'Electromagnetic
levitation calculations for axially symmetric systems', 
Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 1963, 14, No.10, 682-6
HULSEY, W.J.: 'The design and performance of levitation 
melting coils', Union Carbide Nuclear Co., Report No.
Y-1413, April 1963
JENKINS, A.E., HARRIS, B. and BAKER, L.: 'Electromagnetic 
levitation and its uses in physico-chemical studies at 
high temperature', Metallurgical Society Conference, Dallas, 
Texas, 1963, 22, 22-43
KIRKO, I.M. and MIKEL'SON, A.E.: 'Concerning the stability 
of free suspension of liquid metal in an alternating 
magnetic field’, English Trans, in Problems of MHD and 
plasma dynamics II, Report No.FTD-TT-62-1301, 587-94, 
Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, 1963
STERLING, H.F. and WARREN, R.W.: 'High temperature melting 
without contamination in cold crucibles', Metallurgia, 
1963, LXVII, No.404, 301-7
WHITE, H.E. and WELTUM, H.: 'Electromagnetic levitator
*
, 
Amer. J. Phys., 1963, 31, No.12, 925-9
1964 
BUNSHAH, R.F. and JUNTZ, R.S.: 'Levitation melting of
beryllium and aluminum' , Amer. Vac. Met. Soc. Conference, 
Boston, Mass., 1964, 136-44

BIBLIOGRAPHY
283
GEARY, P. J. : Magnetic and electric suspensions. A survey 
of their design, construction, and use (Chislehurst, Kent: 
British Scientific Instrument Research Association) 1964, 
Research Report R 314 (345 refs)
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Electromagnetic levitation', Design 
and Components in Engineering, 10 Sept. 1964, 17-23
NIXON, J.D. and KENNEY, D.J.: 'Electronic damping for 
the magnetically suspended rotor', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 
1964, 35, No.12, 1721-2
OLIVER, B.F.: 'The segregation of tantalum-in iron in 
levitating zone melter', Trans. Metallurgical Society 
(AIME), 1964, 230, No.4, 1353-7
RONY, I.R.: 'The electromagnetic levitation of metals', 
Amer. Vac. Met. Soc. Conference, Boston, Mass., 1964, 
145-53
SIDOROVA, T.A.: 'Power and energy relationships in an 
electromagnetic crucible', Collection: Industrial 
applications of high frequency currents, Izd-Vo. 
'Mashinostroyeniye', 1964, 266-9
1965 
BEAMS, J.W.: 'Magnetic support for non ferromagnetic
bodies', Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1965, 36, No.12, 1892
FROMM, E. and JEHN, H.: 'Electromagnetic forces and 
power absorption in levitation melting', Brit. J. Appl.
Phys., 1965, 16, 653-63

284
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
HATCH, A.J.: 'Potential-well description of 
electromagnetic levitation', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1965, 
36, No.l, 44-52
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', 
Proc. IEE, 1965, 112, No.12, 2361-75
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', 
Electronics & Power, Dec. 1965, 11, 408-13
PEIFER, W.A.: 'Levitation melting, a survey of the 
state-of-the-art', J. Metals (Met. Soc. AIME), 1965, 17, 
No.5, 487-93
PONIZOVSKII, V.M.: 'A generator for magnetic suspension 
of ferromagnetic motors', Pribory i Tekh. Eksper. (USSR), 
1965, No.5, 234-5. English trans. Instrum. Exper.
Tech. (USA), 1965, No.5, 1269-70
SKOV, P.B.: 'A preliminary study of the problems of 
electromagnetic suspension and linear propulsion', 
Systems Technology, Westinghouse R & D, Report No.TDS-65- 
1D3-CSCON-R1, April 1965
SMITH, W.E.: 'Electromagnetic levitation forces and 
effective inductance in axially symmetric systems', 
Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 1965, 16, No.3, 377-83
STERLING, H.F.: 'Towards a perfect crucible', Discovery, 
1965, 26, No.4, 30-3
VIGOUREUX, P.: 'Electromagnetic levitation forces', 
Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 1965, 16, No.5, 757

BIBLIOGRAPHY
285
1966 
ADAMS, J.B.: 'A review of nuclear fusion research’
(1965 Guthrie Lecture), Proc. Phys. Soc., 1966, 89, 189-216
GETSELEV, Z.M.: Patent UK 1,157,977, 4 Oct. 1966
GRANEAU, P.: 'Electromagnetic levitation forces and 
self inductance’, Brit. J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 17, No.l, 
139-40
HAAS, F.A. and WESSON, J.A.: 'Stability of the theta­
pinch', Phys, of Fluids, 1966, 9, No.12, 2472-7
MAGER, A.: 'Theory and experiments on levitation melting', 
Z, Metallkunde, 1966, 57, No.5, 358-63. In German
PIGGOTT, L.S. and NIX, G.F.: 'Electromagnetic levitation 
of a conducting cylinder', Proc. IEE, 1966, 113, No.7, 
1229-35
POLGREEN, G.R. : New applications of modern magnets (London: 
Macdonald) 1966
ROSENWEIG, R.E.: 'Buoyancy and stable levitation of a 
magnetic body immersed in magnetizable fluid', Nature, 
1966, 210, 613-4
ROSENWEIG, R.E.: 'Fluidmagnetic buoyancy', AIAA J. (USA),
1966, 4, No.10, 1751-8
STERLING, H.F.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', Proc. IEE, 
1966, 113, No.8, 1395-6 (Discussion)

286
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1967 
CAMPBELL, I.E. and SHERWOOD, E.M. (Ed.): 'Levitation
melting' in High temperature materials and technology 
(New York: Wiley) 1967, 600-6
HAAS, F.A. and WESSON, J.A.: 'Dynamic stabilization 
of the theta-pinch', Phys. Rev. Letters, 1967, 19, No.15, 
833-5
HAAS, F.A. and WESSON, J.A.: 'Stability of the theta­
pinch II', Phys, of Fluids, 1967, 10, No.10, 2245-52
HATCH, A.J. and SMITH W.E.: 'Inductance-variation method 
of measuring characteristics of electromagnetic levitation 
systems', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1967, 38, No.2, 742-4
JAYAWANT, B.V. and REA, D.P.: 'New electromagnetic 
suspension and its stabilisation', Electronics Letters, 
1967, 13, No.9, 401-2
KAPLAN, B.Z.: 'Analysis of a method for magnetic 
levitation', Proc. IEE, 1967, 114, No.11, 1801-4
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', Engineering, 
6 Jan. 1967, 203, 37-40
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', Student 
Technologist, Feb. 1967, 19-21
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Research jumping ring experiment', 
Elec. Rev., 1967, 180, No.11, 406-7
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The anti-magnetic effect', ibid., 
No.l, 18-9

BIBLIOGRAPHY
287
'Trends in superconductivity related to electromagnetic 
suspension of HSGT vehicles’, TRW Systems Group, 
Washington, DC, Report No.06818-6009-R000 for US Dept 
of Transportation under Contract C-353-66, 6 Oct. 1967
1968 
FILE, J., MARTIN, G.D., MILLS, R.G. and UPHAM, J.L.:
’Stabilized, levitated superconducting rings’, J. Appl. 
Phys. (USA), 1968, 39, 2623-6
FOGEL, A.A., SIDOROVA, T.A., KORKIN, I.V. and MEZDROGINA, 
M.M.: 'Obtaining a predetermined steady-state temperature 
during fusion of a metal in levitation’, Russ. Met.,
1968, No.l, 54-60
FOGEL, A.A., SIDOROVA, T.A., SMIRNOV, V.V., GUTZ, Z.A.
and KORKIN, I.V.: 'Optimum parameters for apparatus for 
levitation melting of metals', ibid., No.2, 89-95
FREEMAN, E.M.: 'Levitation or attraction due to a 
travelling field’, Proc. IEE, 1968, 115, No.6, 894 
(Correspondence)
POLGREEN, G.R.: 'Railways with magnetic suspension', 
Engineer, 1968, 226, No.5883, 632-6
1969 
GUDERJAHN, C.A.: 'Magnetic levitation and guidance of
a rocket sled', Atomics International Report No. AI-68-149, 
Jan. 1969
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electromagnetic levitation', 
Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Physics, Supplementary Vol.3 
(Pergamon Press), 1969, 82-7
'Magnetic suspension for the fastest rocket on earth', 
New Scientist, 1969, 42, No.646, 186

288
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
NICKL, J.C.: ’A new crucible-less induction melting 
process (the Stipp process)’, Z, MetaiIkunde, 1969, 60, 
No.10, 800-2. In German
SAITO, T., SHIRAISHI, Y. and SAKUMA, Y.: ’Density measure­
ment of molten metals by levitation technique at temperatures 
between 1800OC and 2200°C’, Trans. Iron-Steel Inst. Japan, 
1969, 9, No.2, 118-26
1970 
WESSON, J.: 'Dynamic stabilization and the Rayleigh-
Taylor instability', Phys, of Fluids, 1970, 13, No.3, 
761-6
WOODS, L.C., COOPER, R.K., NEIL, V.K. and TAYLOR, C.E.: 
'Stability analysis of a levitated superconducting current 
ring stabilized by feedback and eddy current', J. Appl.
Phys. (USA), 1970, 41, No.8, 3295-305
1971 
BARAN, W.: 'Optimizing a permanent magnet suspension
system for high-speed ground transport', Z. Angew. Phys. 
(Germany), 1971, 32, No.3, 216-8. In German (Report of 
meeting of working group on magnetism, Salzburg, Austria, 
29-31 March 1971)
BOCIAN, E.S. Jr. and YOUNG, F.J.: 'Some stability 
considerations in levitation melting', J. Electrochem. 
Soc., 1971, 118, No.12, 2021-6
BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'Mathematical analysis of "permanent" 
magnet suspension systems’, J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1971, 
42, 1528
’Congress delegates see rival magnetic suspension cars', 
Railway Gaz. Int., 1971, 127, 434

BIBLIOGRAPHY
289
DARDEL, Y. : ’The scopes of techniques of electromagnetic 
levitation on rectilinear network', Rev. Met., 1971, 69, 
No.l, 71-83
DAVIS, L.C. and WILKIE, D.F.: 'Analysis of the motion 
of magnetic levitation systems: implications for high 
speed vehicles', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1971, 42, No.12, 
4779-93
DUKOWICZ, J.K.: 'Attraction/repulsion forces in a single­
sided linear induction motor', Mitre Corp., McLean, Va., 
Final Report No.WP-7519 FRA-RT-71-78 for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract OHSGT-7-35248, March 1971
FREEMAN, E.M.: 'The dolphin effect in linear induction 
motors', 6th Universities Power Engineering Conference, 
UMIST, Manchester, 4-6 Jan. 1971
FOGEL, A.A., SIDOROVA, T.A. and MEZDROGINA, M.M.: 
'Characteristics of the "boat" inductor for retaining 
liquid metal in a state of levitation', Russ. Met., 
1971, No.l, 48-52
GETSELEV, Z.M.: 'Casting in an electromagnetic field', 
J. Metals (Met. Soc. AIME), 1971, 23, No.10, 38-9
HIERONYMUS, H., MIERICKE, J. and BOGNER, C.: 'Preliminary 
results on an electrodynamically levitated superconducting 
coil', 2nd International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Suspension, Southampton University, July 1971
JAYAWANT, B.V.: 'Electromagnetic suspensions using tuned 
LCR circuits', ibid.

290
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
JAYSINGHANI, N.D.: 'Power supply for a magnetic suspension 
system', ibid.
KNIGHT, C.F. and PERKINS, R. : 'Levitation melting of 
uranium mono-carbide', J. Nuclear Mater., 1971, 39, No.2, 
224-5
ZAPATA, R.N.: 'Safety aspects of superconducting magnetic 
suspension systems', 2nd International Symposium on 
Electromagnetic Suspension, Southampton University, July 1971
1972 
BOHN, G., ROMSTEDT, P., ROTHMAYER, W. and SCHWARZLER, P.:
'A contribution to magnetic levitation technology', 
4th International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, 
Eindhoven, 24-26 May 1972 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 
202-6 
DAVIS, L.C.: 'Drag force on a magnet moving near a thin 
conductor', J. Apol. Phys. (USA), 1972, 43, 4256-7 
JAYAWANT, B.V.: 'Magnetic and electrostatic suspension 
techniques', Elektrotechnik (Germany), 1972, 54, No.8, 
22-8. In German 
JAYAWANT, B.V.: 'Magnetic and electrostatic suspension 
techniques', New Zealand Elec. J., 1972, 45, No.3, 32-6
KOLM, H.H. and THORNTON, R.D.: 'The magneplane: guided 
electromagnetic flight', Applied Superconductivity 
Conference, Annapolis, Md., May 1972
REITZ, J.R. and DAVIS, L.C.: 'Force on a rectangular 
coil moving over a conducting slab', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 
1972, 43, 1547-53

BIBLIOGRAPHY
291
1973 
ATHERTON, D.L., CASTEL, B. and PUHACH, P.A.: ’Magnetic
levitation forces - finite conductor size', J. Appl. Phys. 
(USA), 1973, 44, No.4, 1938-40
FREEMAN, E.M. and LOWTHER, D.A.: 'Normal force in single­
sided linear induction motors', Proc. IEE, 1973, 120, 
No.12, 1499-506
LANGERHOLC, J.: 'Electrodynamics of magnetic levitation 
coil', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1973, 44, No.6, 2829-37
LICHTENBERG, A.: 'Research and development on 
electrodynamic levitation in West Germany', 2nd 
Intersociety Conference on Transportation, Denver, 
Colorado, 23-27 Sept. 1973
MIERICKE, J. and URANKAR, L.: 'Theory of electrodynamic 
levitation with a continuous sheet, I and II', Appl.
Phys., 1973, 2, 202-11 and 1974, 3, 67-76
NASAR, S.A. and del CID, L. Jr.: 'Propulsion and 
levitation forces in a single-sided linear induction 
motor for high-speed ground transportation', Proc. IEEE, 
1973, 61, No.5, 638-44
PUHACH, P.A., ATHERTON, D.L. and CASTEL, B.: 'Magnetic 
levitation forces - circular coils', Canadian J, Phys., 
1973, 51, No.7, 731-6
RYBAR, J.: 'Theory of a linear induction A.C. motor 
with levitation effect', Elektrotech. Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 
1973, 62, No.11, 670-3. In Czech

292
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SAITO, R., TADA, N., KIMURA, I. and TAKAHASHI, T.: 
'Superconducting magnet for magnetic suspension device', 
Hitachi Hyoron (Japan), 1973, 55, No.6, 31-5. In Japanese
STEKLY, Z.J.J., de WINTER, T.A., VITKEVICH, J.A., 
TARRH, J.M. and EMANUEL, A.E.: 'Design of superconducting 
magnetic levitation pads', Magnetic Corp, of America, 
Report NO.MCA-TP124 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Sub Contract DOT-FRA-10026, April 1973
THORNTON, R.D.: 'Design principles for magnetic 
levitation', Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 586-98
THORNTON, R.D.: 'Flying low with Maglev', IEEE Spectrum, 
1973, 10, No.4, 47-54
URANKAR, L. and MIERICKE, J.: 'Forces on null-flux 
magnetic levitation systems', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1973, 
44, No.4, 1907-8
1974 
APPLETON, A.D. and BOLSHAW, S.: 'Superconducting
propulsion systems (d.c. machine)', 5th International 
Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Kyoto, Japan, 
May 1974 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 149-53
DANBY, G.T., JACKSON, J.W. and POWELL, J.R.: 'Force 
calculations for hybrid (ferro-nullflux) low-drag 
systems', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 443-6
FREEMAN, E.M. and LOWTHER, D.A.: 'Normal force in single­
sided linear induction motors', IEE Conference on Linear 
Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 210-5

BIBLIOGRAPHY
293
IWASA, Y., HOENIG, M.O. and KOLM, H.H.: 'Design of a 
full-scale magneplane vehicle', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, 
No.3, 402-5
JACKSON, D.W.: 'Magneplane power supply costs', ibid., 
406-9
LEE, S.W. and MENENDEZ, R.C.: 'Force on current coils 
moving over a conducting sheet with application to 
magnetic levitation', Proc. IEEE, 1974, 62, No.5, 567-77
MATSUMURA, F. and YAMADA, S.: 'A method to control the 
suspension system utilizing magnetic attractive force 
(railway)', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1974, 94, No.6, 50-7
PITTS, E.: 'The stability of pendent liquid drops, 
Part 2, Axial symmetry', J. Fluid Meeh., 1974, 63, No.3, 
487-508
SABNIS, A.V.: 'Analysis of forces in rectangular-pole 
geometries using numerical integration techniques', IEEE 
Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 447-50
SAITO, Y., TAKANO, I., MATSUDA, S. and OGIWARA, H.: 
'Experimental studies on superconducting magnetic 
levitation for ultra-high-speed vehicles', Elec. Eng.
Jap. (USA), 1974, 94, No.2, 92-105
SYKES,A. and WESSON, J.A.: 'Two-dimensional calculation 
of Tokamak stability', Nuclear Fusion, 1974, 14, 645-8
URANKAR, L.: 'Survey of basic magnetic levitation 
research in Erlangen', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 
421-4

294
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
URANKAR, L. and MIERICKE, J.: 'Forces on arbitrary 
plane multiple excitation current system used in 
magnetic levitation', Siemens Forsch. und Entwicklungsber., 
(Germany), May 1974. In English
USAMI, Y. , KUZUU, T. and FUJIE, J.: Superconducting 
magnet levitation/propulsion test vehicle', Quart. Rept. 
Railway Technical Research Institute, JNR, 1974, 15, 
No.2, 62-8
WILKIE, D.F. and BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'Dynamic characteristics 
and control requirements of alternative magnetic levitation 
systems', American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 
Technical Paper No. ASME-73-ICT-17, publ. 1974
YAMAMURA, S., ABE, S. and HAYASHI, T.: 'Attractive 
electro-magnet levitation of vehicles', Elec. Eng. Jap. 
(USA), 1974, 94, No.3, 72-9
1975 
ALBRECHT, C.: 'Electrodynamic supporting and guiding
systems', Elektrotech. Z, (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, No.9, 
383-90. In German
APPUN, P. and RITTER, G.R.: 'Calculation and 
optimization of the magnets for an electromagnetic 
levitation system', IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.l, 39-44
GOODYER, M.J., HENDERSON, R.I. and JUDD, M.: 'The 
measurement of Magnus force and moment using a 
magnetically suspended wind tunnel model', ibid., No.5, 
1514-6

BIBLIOGRAPHY
295
GUNTHER, R., HEYM, Kl.D. and NAVE, P.M.W.: 'The Maglev 
support and guidance system as seen by the dynamicist', 
Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, No.9, 373-7. In German
HARRIS, M.R. and STEPHAN, S.Y.: 'Support of liquid metal 
surface by alternating magnetic field', IEEE Trans., 
1975, MAG-11, No.5, 1508-10
HOCHHAUSLER, P.: 'Model of an electrodynamic levitation 
train', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, No.9, 394-6. 
In German
KRATKI, N. and OBERRETL, K.: 'Transients and oscillations 
in the electrodynamic magnetic suspension system', Arch.
Elektrotech. (Germany), 1975, 57, No.2, 59-64. In German
LANG, A., WEH, H. and MAY, H.: 'On the inductive 
levitation system with finite secondary width', ibid., 
No.5, 223-33. In German
LICHTENBERG, A.: 'Electrodynamic suspension in future 
long-distance traffic', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, 
No.9, 378-83. In German
LOCKERBIE, N.A., SHERLOCK, R.A. and WYATT, A.F.G.: 
'Linear motion at O*1K',  14th International Conference 
on Low Temperature Physics, Otaniemi, Finland, 14-20 
Aug. 1975, Pt. IV, 305-8
OBERRETL, K.: 'Comparison of electrodynamic suspension 
systerns', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, No.9, 391-4. 
In German

296
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
OBERRETL, K. and KRATKI, N.: 'Transients and oscillations 
in the repulsive magnetic levitation system', IEEE Trans., 
1975, MAG-11, No.5, 1493-4
001, B.T.: 'Electromechanical dynamics in superconducting 
levitation systems, ibid., 1495-7
REITZ, J.R. and BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'US Department of 
Transportation program in magnetic suspension (repulsion 
concept)', ibid., No.2, 615-8
WEH, H.: 'The integration of magnetic levitation and 
electric propulsion', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1975, 96, 
No.3, 131-5. In German
WINKLE, G.: 'State of research and development of 
electromagnetic suspension engineering in the Federal 
Republic of Germany', ibid., No.9, 367-73. In German
WONG, J.Y., MULHALL, B.E. and RHODES, R.G.: 'The impedance 
modelling technique for investigating the characteristics 
of electrodynamic levitation systems', J. Phys. D, 1975, 
8, No.16, 1948-55
TRANSPORT
ZEHDEN, A.: 'New improvements in electric traction 
apparatus', Patent USA 88145, 4 June 1902
ZEHDEN, A.: Patent USA 732312, 1905
'A wound-rotor motor 1400 feet long', Westinghouse Engineer, 
Sept. 1946, 6, 160
1905
1946

BIBLIOGRAPHY
297
1959 
HUBER, J.: 'Electrodynamic force effects on a wheel set,
movable on railway tracks’, Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau 
(Austria), 1959, 76, No.8, 169-74. In German
'Linear motor for rapid transit', Westinghouse Electric 
Corp., Rectifier and Traction Dept., Feasibility Study, 
Nov. 1959
1961 
BEKKER, M.G.: 'Is the wheel the last thing in land
locomotion?', New Scientist, 1961, 11, No.248, 406-10
1962 
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Electrical machines of the future',
Proc. Royal Institution, 1962, 39, Pt.I, No.176, 119-35
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motor propulsion 
for high-speed railways', Engineers' Digest, 1962, 23, 
No.8, 61-8
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors', Interavia, 
1962, XVII, No.8, 1029-30
'Linear motor for traction', Elec. Times, 1962, 142, 
No.21, 759
'Rail transport traction of the future?
*,
 Engineering, 
1962, 194, 731
1963 
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear induction motors for rail
traction', Engineering, 1963, 195, No.5069, 784-5
'Linearbeschleuniger als Fahrzeugmotor', Deutsche 
Eisenbahntechnik (East Berlin), 1963, 11, No.8, 376

298
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
POWELL, J.R.: 'The magnetic railroad: a new form of 
transport', American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
Railroad Conference, 23-25 April 1963, Paper 63-RR4
'Versuchsfahrzeug mit linearem Elektromotor
*
, 
Industrie-Elektrik-Elektrowelt, 1963, 8, No.B6, 113
1964 
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and BARWELL, F.T.: 'Linear induction
motors for high-speed railways', Electronics & Power, April 
1964, 10, 100-3
'Linear motor may be used in channel tunnel', Elec. Rev., 
1964, 174, No.21, 777-8
1965 
KINGSLEY, C. Jr.: 'Linear traction motors', Project
Report, MIT, Spring 1965
'Survey of technology for high speed ground transportation', 
MIT Report No.PB 168648 under US Dept of Transportation 
Contract C-85-65, 15 June 1965
1966 
BARWELL, F.T.: 'Traction research', J. Instn. Locomotive
Engineers, 1966-67, 36, No.2, 158-96
BARWELL, F.T. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Application of the 
linear induction motor to high-speed transport', Proc. I. 
Meeh. E., 1966-67, 181, Pt.3G, 83-100 (Convention on 
Guided Land Transport, London, 27-28 Oct. 1966)
BAUMANN, D.M. and MEACHAM, G.B.K.: 'Preliminary design 
and test of linear induction traction motors and 
suspension systems', MIT Report DSR-6106-3 under US Dept 
of Transportation Contract C-85-65, 1 Nov. 1966

BIBLIOGRAPHY
299
'British high speed transport system', Engineering, 
11 March 1966, 201, 498
EBELT, R.: 'Der Linearmotor und sein Einsatz fur den Bau
elektrischer Triebfahrzeuge', Deutsche Eisenbahntechnik 
(East Berlin), 1966, 14, No.2, 66-70
'Electric rapid transport: a multi-faceted opportunity 
(Special Report)', Elec. World, 11 July 1966, 166, 71-90
POLGREEN, G.R.: 'Magnetic suspension', Proc. I. Meeh. E», 
1966-67, 181, Pt.3G, 145-50 (Convention on Guided Land 
Transport, London, 27-28 Oct. 1966)
WHITE, D.C., THORNTON, R.D., KINGSLEY, C. Jr., NAVON, D.H. 
and NONAKA, S.: 'Some problems related to electric 
propulsion', MIT Report DSR-76104 under US DOT Contract 
C-85-65, 1 Nov. 1966
1967 
ARMSTRONG, D.S.: 'Application of the linear motor to
transport', Railway Gaz. Int., 1967, 123, 145-50
CHAPOUTHIER, F.: 'The French aerotrain', High Speed 
Ground Transportation J., 1967, 1, No.l, 100-4
'Der franzosische Luftkissenfahrzug Aerotrain', Die 
Bundesbahn, 1967, 41, No.10, 346-7
FRIEDLANDER, C.D.: 'Railway versus highway', IEEE Spectrum, 
1967, 4, No.9, 62-76
'Green light for the hovertrain', Engineering, 15 Sept.
1967, 224, 406-7

300
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
'Hovertrain goes ahead - in stages', Air Cush. Veh., 1967,
10, No.63, 30
'Kommt der 500 km/h-Zug?', Die Bundesbahn, 1967, 41, No. 
13/14, 494
KURIHARA, S.: 'Wheel-axle traverser with linear induction 
motor. An application of a linear induction motor for a 
car', Toshiba Rev. (Internat. Ed.), July-Aug. 1967, 20-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Machines with open magnetic circuits', 
Elec. Rev., 1967, 181, No.26, 942-3
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Propulsion without wheels', The 
Advancement of Science (British Association), Sept. 1967, 
24, 119-28
LEARY, F.: 'High-speed ground transportation', Space 
Aeronaut., 1967, 48, No.4, 85-101.
LEE, C.H.: 'Study of linear induction motor, its feasibility 
for high-speed ground transportation', Garrett Corp.
AiResearch Mfg. Div., Los Angeles, Final Report No.67-1948 
for US Dept of Transportation under Contract C-l45-66(Neg), 
June 1967
'NRDC gives hovertrain go-ahead
*,
 Air Cush. Veh., 1967, 
9, No.59, 48
'Plan for rapid transit in Manchester
*
, Railway Gaz. Int.
1967, 123, 865-9

BIBLIOGRAPHY
301
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: ’High speed transport by 
magnetically suspended trains', American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers Winter Annual Meeting (Railroad 
Division), New York, Nov. 1966, Technical Paper No. 
66-WA/RR-5, published 1967
'Proposals for tracked hovercraft', Engineer, 1967, 223, 
No.5809, 784-5
REMY, E.: 'Moteur lineaire et aerotrain', Cahiers de 
1'Alpe, Oct. 1967, No.34
RODWELL, R.R.: 'Aerotrain advancing on two fronts', 
Air Cush. Veh., 1967, 9, No.59, 66-7
ROSS, H.R.: 'High speed ground transport in 1980', 
Interavia, April 1967, 22, 492-4
'Schiene Oder Luftkissen? Untersuchungen uber den 
Stadteschnellverkehr des Jahres 1980', Moderne Eisenbahn, 
1967, 5, No.29, 20-1
'Technical extracts from tracked air cushion vehicle 
system study and analysis report', TRW Report No.06818- 
6008-R000 for US Dept of Transportation, Oct. 1967
THORNTON, R.D., NAVON, D.H., LICHTENBERGER, J.,
ERDELYI, C. and MILLER, E.: 'Application of high power 
solid-state electronics to electric propulsion', MIT 
Report No.PB-176 920 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract C-85-65, Oct. 1967
'Track section chosen for UK Hovertrain', Air Cush. Veh., 
1967, 10, No.65, 71-2

302
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
’Versuche mit dem Aerotrain bei 345 km/h’, L’Usine
Nouvelle, 1967, No.51, 21
1968 
AUTRUFFE, H.: ’The linear motor', Revue Generale des
Chemins de Fer, April 1968. In French
BARBEE, T.W., BYCROFT, G.N., CHILTON, E.G., CHILTON, F.M. 
and COFFEY, H.T.: 'The hypervelocity rocket sled - a 
design analysis', SRI Project PMU-7014, July 1968
BARTHALON, M.: 'Urba, a new transport system for 
tomorrow's cities', Sciences et Techniques, 1968, No.10, 
21-5. In French
BARWELL, F.T.: 'Problems of support, guidance and 
propulsion involved in high speed transport systems', 
IRCA-UIC 'High Speeds' Symposium, Vienna, July 1968
BUDIG, P.-K., TIMMEL, H. and DITTRICH, W.: 'Design of 
linear motors as propulsion means of railway vehicles', 
Elektrie, 1968, 22, No.10, 405-8. In German
CHIRGWIN, K.M.: 'Linear induction motor research in 
the USA', IRCA-UIC 'High Speeds' Symposium, Vienna, 
July 1968
FREEMAN, E.M. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Unbalanced 
magnetic push', Proc. IEE, 1968, 115, No.4, 538 
(Correspondence)
'Future transport by "airborne bus'", Ind. Handling, 
May 1968, 59-61

BIBLIOGRAPHY
303
GIRANE, F.L.: ’Tracked air cushion vehicles for ground 
transportation systems', Proc. IEEE,1968, 56, No.4, 
646-53
GIRAUD, F.L.: 'The Aerotrain system: air cushion 
guided ground transportation: description and performance 
of the experimental vehicle', Aeroglide Systems Inc., 
New York, Report No. PB-178961, 1968
'High-speed surface transportation', UK Scientific Miss., 
Jan. 1968, 47, 1-2
LEWIS, H.E.: 'Tracked hovercraft: a future challenge 
to civil engineers', Consulting Engineer, Aug. 1968, 
32, 54-7
LILEN, H.: 'Public transport and the linear electric 
motor', Electronique Indust., 1968, 112, No.4, 284-7. 
In French
'Linear induction motor propulsion system', Garrett
Corp. Progress Report No.67-2439(5), 19 June 1968, 
Supplementary Report, 'Performance of 2500 horsepower
LIM', No.68-4027, 22 July 1968, Technical Progress
Report No.67-2439(6), 3 Oct. 1968, Progress Report, 
27 Dec. 1968
'Linear induction motors: tomorrow's transit power', 
Product Engineering, 20 May 1968, 39, 73-4
MILLAR, J. and DEAN, J.: 'Practical considerations of 
rapid transit: summary of Manchester study', High Speed
Ground Transportation J., 1968, 2, No.3, 409-22

304
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
NOGI, T. and KUROIWA, M.: 'Electric traction in 
Japanese National Railways', IEE Conference on Performance 
of Electrified Railways, London, Oct. 1968
'Nonfrictional power collection for guided high-speed 
ground vehicles', General Electric Co., Schenectady, New
York, Final Report (Pt.2) No.S-68-1056 for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract C-7-35121, 12 April 1968
'NRDC and tracked hovercraft', Inv. for Industry, Jan. 
1968, 31, 21-2
PELENC, Y.: 'Nouvelle methode de propulsion electrique’, 
Firmenschrift Merlin Gerin, 1968, No.D/P 186
'Putting the hovertrain upside down’, Design, July 1968, 
235, 61
'Rapid transit on rubber tyres', Engineering, 1968, 205, 
No.5312, 210
rSmY, E.: 'Le moteur lineaire au service d'un nouveau 
moyen de transport: 1'Urba', Cahiers de 1'Alpe, 1968, 
No. 37
REMY, E.: 'Why a new means of transportation?’, Flux 
(Revue des Anciens Sieves de 1’Ecole Superieure d' 
Electricite), 1968, No.52, 5-8. In French
SOOKAWA, H.: 'Standing test of trial linear induction 
motor', Quart. Rept. Railway Technical Research Institute, 
JNR, 1968, 9, No.3, 175-7

BIBLIOGRAPHY
305
’Specifications for linear induction motor P/N 546230, 
etc.’, Garrett Corp. Report No.FRA 68-01 TACRV for 
US Dept of Transportation, 1968
STONE, P.: ’French hovertrain streaks ahead’, Br. Ind.
Week, 1968, 2, No.17, 30-1
’Technical discussion of LIM capabilities’, Garrett Corp. 
Progress Report No.68-4185-1 for US Dept of Transportation, 
15 Aug. 1968
’The design of linear motors for vehicle drives’, Wiss. 
Z. Tech. Hochsch. Karl-Marx-Stadt (Germany), 1968, No.3, 
321-4. In German
’The ”Urba” monorail transport system’, Engineers' Digest, 
1968, 29, No.4, 71-3
’Transportation', Proc. IEEE Special Issue, 1968, 56, 
No.4, 377-786
USAMI, Y., ISHIHARA, M., KOJIMA, N. andMITOMI, T.: 
'Feasibility of linear motor for car-retarder or car­
accelerator at marshalling yards', Quart. Rept. Railway 
Technical Research Institute, JNR, 1968, 9, No.2, 91-6
'Vacuum-supported suspension railway', Engineer, 1968, 
225, No.5852, 478-9
VICTORRI, M. and REYX, P.: 'For Urba, a linear 
induction motor', Science et Techniques, 1968, No.10, 
26-9. In French

306
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
WANG, T.C.: ’A preliminary study of the linear 
induction motor for high speed ground transportation’, 
TRW Systems, Report No.06818-W454-R0-12 for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract C-353-66, Jan. 1968
1969 
BUCHANAN, Colin (and Partners): ’Tracked Hovercraft
study', Hovering Craft & Hydrofoil, 1969, 9, No.2, 11-2
CARPETIS, C., GANN, A. and PESCHKA, W.: ’A contribution 
of the liquid-metal induction-MHD-converter-theory to 
the calculations of the linear motor for very high speed 
ground vehicles', 4th Intersociety Energy 
Conversion Engineering Conference, Washington, D.C., 
22-26 Sept. 1969, 818-25
CHAPA, J.: ’Control and instrumentation for a high 
speed rail vehicle propelled by a linear induction motor’, 
Proc. 24th Annual ISA Conference, 1969, 24
CHIRGWIN, K.M., LEE, C.H. and LARSEN, P.J.: ’Linear 
induction motor for high-speed tracked vehicles', 4th 
Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, 
Washington, D.C., 22-26 Sept. 1969, 795-806
COFFEY, H.T., BARBEE, T.W. Jr. and CHILTON, F.: 
'Magnetic suspension and guidance of high speed vehicles', 
Int. Inst, of Refrigeration Conference on Low Temperatures 
and Electric Power, London, 24-28 March 1969, 311-7
COFFEY, H.T., CHILTON, F. and BARBEE, T.W. Jr.: 
'Suspension and guidance of vehicles by superconducting 
magnets’, J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1969, 40, No.5, 2161

BIBLIOGRAPHY
307
’Electric power systems for high speed ground transpor­
tation’, Westinghouse Electric Corp., Pittsburgh, Pa., 
Final Report for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-9-0025, 25 Aug. 1969
GUDERJAHN, C.A., WIPF, S.L. et al: ’Magnetic suspension 
and guidance for high speed rockets by superconducting 
magnets', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1969, 40, No.5, 2133-40
’HSGT systems engineering study, tracked air cushion 
vehicles’, TRW Systems Group, Washington, D.C., Final 
Report No. NECPT-219 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-C-353-66, Dec. 1969
KALMAN, G.P. and HAFELE, B.W.: ’Feasibility study of 
linear induction motor thrust boosters for diesel-electric 
locomotives’, Garrett Corp. AiResearch Mfg. Div., Los 
Angeles, Report No. 69-4862 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract DOT-FR-9-0014, 21 March 1969
KALMAN, G.P., IRANI, D. and SIMPSON, A.U.: ’Electric 
propulsion system for linear induction motor test 
vehicle’, 4th Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering 
Conference, Washington, D.C., 22-26 Sept. 1969, 807-17
KETTERER, H.: ”’Urba” - eine Schwebebahn, die wirklich 
Schwebt’, Elektrotech. Z, (ETZ) B, 1969, 21, No.l, 14-5. 
In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Linear induction motors for high­
speed vehicles’, Electronics & Power, July 1969, 15, 230-3

308
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’The application of linear induction 
motors to high speed vehicles’, Design and Components in 
Engineering, 7 May 1969, 36-42
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and BARWELL, F.T.: ’Applications of 
linear induction motors to high speed ground transport 
systems’, Proc. IEE, 1969, 116, No.5, 713-24
LAMBERMONT, P.: 
’80 passenger Aerotrain nears completion’,
Hovercraft World, 1969, 3, No.2, 41-2
’Linear induction motor', Zavod Elektrotransporta Jmeni 
F.E. Dzerzhinskogo, Patent UK 1175487, 22 Feb. 1968;
publ. 23 Dec. 1969, UK 8589/68
MORTIMER, J.: 'Konkurrenz fur den Aerotrain: hovercraft', 
VDI-Nachrichten, 17 Dec. 1969, No.51, 2
PEARCE, T.G. and MAY, B.J.: 'A study of the stability and 
dynamic response of the linear induction motor test vehicle', 
British Railways Board Research Dept., Derby, Final Report 
No. FRA-RT-70-25 for US Dept of Transportation under Contract 
DOT-FR-3-0261, Sept. 1969
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: 'Magnetically suspended 
trains for very high speed transport', 4th Intersociety 
Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, Washington, D.C., 
22-26 Sept. 1969, 953-63
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: 'Magnetically suspended 
trains: the application of superconductors to high speed 
transport', Cryogenics Industr. Gases (USA), 1969, 4, 
No.10, 19-24

BIBLIOGRAPHY
309
’Preliminary design study of a linear induction motor 
with aluminium bonded to a steel reaction rail’, 
Westinghouse Electric Corp., Pittsburgh, Pa., Final 
Report No. PB 186231 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-9-0025, 25 Aug. 1969
RECHOU, J., du MERLE, G., ETIENNE, M. and VICTORRI, M.: 
’New technical means of mass land transport, Sciences 
et Techniques, 1969, No.16, 3-24. In French
ROUSSIAUX, P.: 'Aerotrains’, Rev. Alumin., Jan. 1969, 
370, 51-5
SOOKAWA, H., YASUKAWA, S. and YUDA, S.: ’Standing and 
running tests of the trial linear induction motor M-300', 
Quart. Rept. Railway Technical Research Institute, JNR, 
1969, 10, No.2, 94-100
STOCKFORD, M.A.: 'Tracked hovercraft transport systems', 
Engineering, 1969, 207, No.5363, 249-52
'Tracked hovercraft and the third London Airport’, 
Hovering Craft & Hydrofoil, 1969, 9, No.2, 12
'URBA, a new short-distance transport vehicle’, ITA Bull., 
12 May 1969, 19, 443-6
WANG, T.C.: 'Linear induction motor for high speed 
ground transportation', 4th Intersociety Energy Conversion 
Engineering Conference, Washington, D.C., 22-26 Sept. 1969, 
964-74

310
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1970 
'A cost comparison of three tracked air cushion vehicle
configurations’, Tracked Hovercraft Ltd, London, Final 
Report No. FRA-RT-71-68 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract DOT-FR-9-0032, July 1970
BLISS, D.S.: 'The evolution of tracked air cushion 
vehicles, Parts I and II’, Hovering Craft & Hydrofoil, 
1970, 9, No.11, 17-47 and No.12, 6-39
DAVIES, K.J.: ’Tracked hovercraft’, Chart. Meeh. Engr., 
1970, 17, No.7, 330
'Electromagnetic traction systems', Rotax Ltd, Patent 
UK 1217514, 10 July 1968; publ. 31 Dec. 1970; prior. 
17 July 1967, UK 32729/67
’Experimental linear motor vehicles for high speed 
transport’, Elec. Rev., 1970, 187, No.22, 761-2
FORD, T.: 'Tracked Hovercraft Ltd’, Hovering Craft & 
Hydrofoil, 1970, 9, No.7, 4-6
'High-speed ground transportation systems engineering 
study. Tracked air cushion vehicle systems', TRW Systems 
Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., Final Report No. 06818-6039- 
RO-OO FRA-RT-59 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-C-353-66, May 1970
'Hovertrains for Japan?’, Nature, 1970, 225, No.5229, 214
’Japanese 300 mph linear motor magnetic suspension 
project’, Modern Railways, 1970, 26, No.262, 321

BIBLIOGRAPHY
311
KANTER, H.: ’The importance of linear motors to 
metropolitan railway services’, Elektrie, 1970, 24, No.10, 
347-51. In German
KLAPPER, C.F.: 'Tracked hovercraft: the Buchanan Report', 
Modern Railways, 1970, 26, No.257, 64-8
LAWES, G.: 'Hovertrain comes on apace', New Scientist, 
1970, 47, No.709, 68-70
MUHLENBERG, J.D.: 'Control systems for linear induction 
motor guidance in high speed vehicles', American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers Joint Transportation Engineering 
Conference, New York, Oct. 1970
MUHLENBERG, J.D.: 'LIM guidance control systems', Mitre 
Corp. McLean, Va. , Report No. MTR-4136-Rev-l, FRA-RT-71-46 
for US Dept of Transportation under Contract DOT-7-35248, 
June 1970
PETERS, D.: 'The hovertrain: takeoff point for new 
technique', Engineer, 1970, 231, No.5978, 29-31
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: 'Dynamically stable 
cryogenic magnetic suspension for vehicles in very high 
velocity transport systems' in Recent advances in 
engineering science, 5 (Gordon and Breach) 1970
SANHUEZA HARDY, H. and STRAUGHEN, A.: 'Track-powered 
linear induction motors as a rapid-transit drive', 
Engineering J. (Canada), 1970, 53, No.4, 26-32

312
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SHINRYO, Y.: 'Test facility for linear induction motor 
for high speed train’, Railway Electric Rolling Stocks, 
1970, 23, No.5, 20-5
'Steps towards practical linear motor propulsion in
France', Elec. Rev., 1970, 186, No.l, 11-5
'Technical background on linear induction motors in 
transportation', Garrett Corp., Torrance, Calif., 
Report prepared for the US Dept of Transportation, 
June 1970
'The flying railroad', Time, 24 Aug. 1970, 39
'UK tracked hovercraft to be tested this summer', 
Science Journal, 1970, 6, No.5, 17
USAMI, Y., FUJIE, J. and NAKASHIMA, H.: 'Linear-motorized 
flat yard system', Quart. Rept. Railway Technical Research 
Institute, JNR, 1970, 11, No.2, 101-4
1971 
ASAGOE, Y., SINRYO, Y. and OHNO, E.: 'Fundamental study
of high-speed ground transportation', Mitsubishi Denki 
Eng. (Japan), 1971, No.30, 10-9
BOLTON, H.R., FELLOWS, T.G., LAITHWAITE, E.R., EASTHAM, J.F. 
and NEEDHAM, E.F.: 'Linear induction motor', Tracked 
Hovercraft Ltd, Patent USA 3585423, 1 May 1970; publ.
15 June 1971; prior. 2 May 1969, UK 225427/69
BORCHERTS, R.H. and REITZ, J.R.: 'High speed transporta­
tion via magnetically supported vehicles: a study of the 
magnetic forces', Transportation Research (Pergamon Press), 
1971, 5, 197-209

BIBLIOGRAPHY
313
CARPETIS, C.: ’On the use of linear induction motors and 
magnetic suspension for high speed ground vehicles and 
trains’, Tech. Chron. (Greece), 1971, No.3, 187-96. In 
Greek
CHILTON, F. and COFFEY, H.T.: 'Magnetic levitation. 
Tomorrow’s transportat ion’, The Helium Society, 
Washington, D.C., 1971, 288
COLLING, N.W. and QUAYLE, G.P.: ’Linear induction motor 
stator assembly’, Tracked Hovercraft Ltd, Patent USA 
3626858, 10 July 1969; publ. 14 Dec. 1971; prior. 11 July 
1968, UK 33182/68
DANNAN, J. and D’SENA, G.O.: ’Linear induction motor 
research. Vol.I. Introduction and background’, Garrett 
Corp. AiResearch Mfg. Co., Torrance, Calif., Final Report No. 
71-7094-Vol-l FRA-RT-73-4 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract OHSGT-7-35399, Oct. 1971
'Development and manufacture of a linear induction motor 
propulsion system for the tracked air cushion research 
vehicle’, Garrett Corp. AiResearch Mfg. Co., Torrance, 
Calif., Final Report on Task 1, No. 71-7289 FRA-RT-72-35 
for US Dept of Transportation under Contract DOT-FR-00029, 
April 1971
EASTHAM, A.R. and RHODES, R.G.: ’The levitation of high 
speed trains using superconducting magnets’, 2nd Inter­
national Symposium on Electromagnetic Suspension, 
Southampton University, July 1971

314
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
’Electromagnetic transport system’, North American 
Rockwell Corp., Patent UK 1240574, 21 Oct. 1969; publ.
28 July 1971; prior. 25 Oct. 1968, USA 770.695
ERLER, K.: ’Application of linear motors for transport 
systems’, Elektrie, 1971, 26, No.6, 211-3. In German
GUDERJAHN, C.A. and WIPF, S.L.: ’Magnetically levitated 
transportation’, Cryogenics, June 1971, 171
HARDING, J.T.: ’Progress in magnetic suspension applied 
to high speed ground transportation', 17th Annual Conference 
on Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Chicago, Ill., 16-19 
Nov. 1971, AIP Conf. Proc., 1971, 5, Pt.2, 938-48
HOCHBRUCK, H., BOPP, K. and MARTEN, F.: ’Developments in 
unconventional guideway, carrying and propulsion systems 
in the Federal Republic of Germany’, International 
Congress on Electric Railways, Munich, Germany, 11-15 Oct. 
1971, Paper 7.2 (Berlin: VDE-Verlag). In German
HOLDEN, W.H.T.: 'Electrical systems for rapid transit 
railroads’, IEEE Trans. , 1971, IGA-7, No.5, 580-7
JEFFS, E.: ’Tracked air-cushion vehicles offer speed and 
high frequency’, Des. Eng. Mater. & Compon., July 1971, 
50-4
KAHLEN, H., RUNGE, W. and WEIGEL, W.D.: ’Research on 
propulsion systems of electrically powered urban vehicles’, 
Elektrotech, Z. (ETZ) A, 1971, 92, No.10, 571-5. In German
KAYE, D.: ’Linear motor for mass transport improved by 
pulsed-DC technique’, Electron. Des. (USA), 1971, 19, 
No. 10, 30

BIBLIOGRAPHY
315
KIKUCHI, T.: ’Application of linear motor at Toyama 
marshalling yard’, J. Soc. Instrum. & Contr. Eng. (Japan), 
1971, 10, No.8, 611-6. In Japanese
KURZ, K.: ’Unconventional means of transport in public 
rapid transit systems’, International Congress of Electric 
Railways, Munich, Germany, 11-15 Oct. 1971, Paper 7.3 
(Berlin: VDE-Verlag). In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R. and BLISS, D.S.: ’Linear induction 
motor for vehicle propulsion’, Tracked Hovercraft Ltd, 
Patent USA 3585939, 25 Sept. 1969; publ. 22 June 1971; 
prior. 26 Sept. 1968, UK 45277/68
LAITHWAITE, E.R., BOLTON, H.R. and EASTHAM, J.F.: ’High 
speed linear motor testing at Imperial College', 6th 
Universities Power Engineering Conference, UMIST, 
Manchester, 4-6 Jan. 1971, Paper 3.1
LAITHWAITE, E.R., EASTHAM, J.F., BOLTON, H.R. and 
FELLOWS, T.G.: ’Linear motors with transverse flux’, 
Proc. IEE, 1971, 118, No.12, 1761-7
LEHMANN, H.: ’Problems of integrating transportation 
systems with conventional and unconventional media’, 
International Congress on Electric Railways, Munich, 
Germany, 11-15 Oct. 1971, Paper 7.4 (Berlin: VDE Verlag). 
In German
’Linear induction motor’, Linerail Manutention Moteur 
Lineaire, Patent UK 1247257, 19 Dec. 1969; publ. 22 Sept. 
1971; prior. 26 Dec. 1968, France 180268

316
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
’Linear induction motor research: Linear induction motor 
and test vehicle design and fabrication. Vol.II, Books 
1 and 2', Garrett Corp. AiResearch Mfg. Co., Torrance, 
Calif., Final Report Nos. 71-7094-Vol-2-Bk-l FRA-RT-73-2 
and 71-7094-Vol-2-Bk-2 FRA-RT-73-5 for US Dept of Trans­
portation under Contract OHSGT-7-35399, Oct. 1971
’Linear induction motor research: Data acquisition, data 
analyses, and low-speed testing. Vol.Ill’, Garrett Corp. 
AiResearch Mfg. Co., Torrance, Calif., Final Report No. 
71-7094-Vol-3 FRA-RT-73-3 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract OHSGT-7-35399, Oct. 1971
MACHEFERT-TASSIN, Y.: ’Application of the linear motor 
in transportation', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 
121-34. In French
'Magnetic support for HSB test car', Railway Gaz. Int., 
1971, 127, No.6, 233
MEISENHOLDER, S.G., GRAHAM, H.R. and BIRCHILL, J.: 
'Dynamic response tests of an air cushion suspension 
system for the linear induction motor (LIM) of the 
tracked air cushion research vehicle (TACRV)', TRW Systems 
Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., Report No. 17617-6003 - RO-OO 
FRA-RT-72-24 for US Dept of Transportation under Contract 
DOT-FR-00044, July 1971
MOYSE, S.A.: 'Vehicle linear induction motor', Patent 
UK 1233250, 30 Dec. 1968; publ. 26 May 1971; prior. 9 Jan. 
1968, France 235266

BIBLIOGRAPHY
317
NAVE, P.M.W.: 'The Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm magnetically 
suspended vehicle', 2nd International Symposium on 
Electromagnetic Suspension, Southampton University, July 
1971
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: 'Magnetic suspension for 
levitated tracked vehicle', Cryogenics, June 1971, 11, 
192-204
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: 'The linear synchronous 
motor and high speed ground transport', Intersociety 
Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, Boston, Mass., 
3-5 Aug. 1971, 118-31
RICHARDS, P.L.: 'Magnetic suspension and propulsion 
systems for high-speed transportation', 17th Annual 
Conference on Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Chicago, 
Ill., 16-19 Nov. 1971, AIP Conf. Proc., 1971, 5, Pt.2, 
935-7
ROBERT, G.: 'FS moves towards 200 km/h', Railway Gaz. 
Int., 1971, 127, No.11, 425-6
SCHLOSSER, A.: 'Tracked air cushion research vehicle.
Subsystems analysis', Grumman Aerospace Corp., Bethpage, 
N.Y., Design Report No. FRA-RT-72-33 for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract DOT-FR-00005, March 1971
'Study backs train at 1000 mph', Christian Science 
Monitor, 23 March 1971
TAKAHASHI, N., KAWAI, S. and AKIHASHI, K.: 'Analysis of 
rail eddy-current brake for high-speed railroad vehicles’, 
Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1971, 90, No.1-2, 95-104

318
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
TAKEI, K. , AKIHAMA, Y., TAKAYAMA, M., TAKAHASHI, H and 
ANDO, M.: ’Type Lu linear motor system wagon booster­
retarder’, Hitachi Rev, (Japan), 1971, 20, No.11, 457-64
TAMAKI, M. and USAMI, Y.: 'Linear-motorized yard 
automation system', Rail Int. (Belgium), 1971, 2, No.6, 
534-40
'The way ahead for tracked hovercraft', Railway Gaz. Int., 
1971, 127, No.6, 229-32
WANG, T.C.: 'Linear induction motor for high-speed ground 
transportation’, IEEE Trans., 1971, IGA-7, No.5, 632-42
WEH, H.: 'Asynchronous linear motors for traction 
duties', Energ. & Tech. (Germany), 1971, 23, No.12, 
431-4. In German
WEH, H. and APPUN, P.: 'Eddy currents in the stationary 
part of magnets for magnetic suspension of vehicles', 
Elektrotech. Z, (ETZ) A, 1971, 92, No.11, 623-7. In 
German
'West Germans unveil new hovertrain', Int. Ry. J. 
(Netherlands), 1971, 11, No.7, 42
WILKIE, D.F.: 'A study of the control of magnetically 
levitated vehicles', Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., 
Report No. SR 71-104, 3 Aug. 1971
YAMADA, T. and IWAMOTO, M.: 'Theoretical analysis of 
lift and drag forces on magnetically suspended high speed 
trains’, Mitsubishi Electric Corp., Japan, 1971 (unpublished)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
319
1972 
ALSTON, I.A. and HAYDEN, J.T.: 'A preliminary technical
assessment of magnetically suspended trains’, 4th 
International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Eindhoven, 
Netherlands, 24-26 May 1972 (IPC Science & Technology 
Press) 198-20 1
ATHERTON, D.L., LOVE, L.E.G. and PRENTISS, P.O.: ’Magnetic 
levitation: linear synchronous motor efficiency', Canadian 
J. Phys., 1972, 50, No.24, 3143-6
BARAN, W.: ’The present position and further development 
in the area of permanent magnet suspension systems for 
track-bound high speed transport', Int. J. Magn. (GB), 
1972, 3, No.1-3, 103-11. In German
BOPP, K., HOCHBRUCK, H. and MARTEN, F.: ’Developments in 
the area of unconventional vehicle, drive and guidance 
components in the German Federal Republic’, Elek. Bahnen 
(Germany), 1972, 43, No.5, 98-106. In German
BORCHERTS, R.H. and DAVIS, L.C.: 'Force on a coil moving 
over a conducting surface including edge and channel 
effects', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1972, 43, No.5, 2418-27
BORCHERTS, R.H., DAVIS, L.C., REITZ, J.R. and WILKIE, D.F.: 
'High-speed ground transportation using superconducting 
magnetic suspension', 4th International Cryogenic 
Engineering Conference, Eindhoven, 24-26 May 1972 (IPC 
Science & Technology Press) 185-7
BUNTING, P.M.: 'Magnetic suspension for guided transport 
vehicles’, Transp. Plann. & Technol., 1972, 1, No.l, 49-74

320
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
COFFEY, H.T., CHILTON^ F. and HOPPIE, L.O.: ’The 
feasibility of magnetically levitating high speed 
ground vehicles. Final Report on Task 1’, Stanford 
Research Institute, Menlo Park, Calif., No. SRI-FR-1080 
FRA-RI-72-39 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-FR-10001, Feb. 1972
COFFEY, H.T., HOPPIE, L.O. and CHILTON, F.: 
’Performance of a magnetically levitated vehicle', 
7th Annual Meeting of IEEE Industry Applications 
Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 9-12 Oct. 1972, 331
DANBY, G.T. and POWELL, J.R.: ’Integrated systems for 
magnetic suspension and propulsion of vehicles', 
Applied Superconductivity Conference, Annapolis, Md., 
May 1972
DUKOWICZ, J.K.:'The single-sided LIM with saturated back 
iron’, Mitre Corp., McLean, Va., Final Report No. MTR- 
6094, FRA-RT-72-28 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-FR-7-35248, Jan. 1972
DUKOWICZ, J.K.: 'The single-sided LIM with saturated 
guideway back iron', 7th Annual Meeting of IEEE Industry 
Applications Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 9-12 Oct. 1972, 
321
ENGLISH, C.D.: 'A linear induction motor propulsive 
system, I and II’, Modern Railways, 1972, 29, No.287, 
292-5 and No.290, 432-4

BIBLIOGRAPHY
321
FALLSIDE, F., JACKSON, R.D., MISKIN, D.J. and PORRELLI, 
C.N.: ’A cyclo-converter-linear motor drive for air­
cushioned vehicles', IEE Conference on Electrical 
Variable Speed Drives, London, 10-12 Oct. 1972, 243-8
FOGG, J.C.: 'Tracks into the future', Electrical and 
Electronics Technician Engineer, 1972, 7, No.3, 3-10
GAVIN, J.G. Jr.: 'Tracked air cushion research vehicle - 
today's test bed for tomorrow's high speed ground trans­
portation', 2nd Urban Technology Conference and Display, 
San Francisco, 24-26 July 1972 (American Inst. Aeronautics 
and Astronautics) 72-614/1-7
HAIGHT, E.C. and HUTCHENS, W.A.: 'Lower boundary condition 
effects on LIM (linear induction motors) reaction rail 
mechanical behavior: analysis and experiments', Mitre Corp., 
McLean, Va., Technical Report No. MTR-6038 FRA-RT-73-11 
for US Dept of Transportation under Contract DOT-FR-7-35248, 18 
July 1972
HAIGHT, E.C., HUTCHENS, W.A. and WILLIAMS, J.G.: 
'Experimental determination of the compressive behavior 
of a linear induction motor reaction rail', Mitre Corp., 
McLean, VA., Report No. MTR-374 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract DOT-FR-7-35248, 1 Nov. 1972
'High-speed railway train', Voith Getriebe KG, Patent 
UK 1292683, 6 April 1970; publ. 11 Oct. 1972; prior. 
5 April 1969, West Germany P1917 640.0
'High-speed traction line-up', Railway Gaz. Int., 1972, 
128, No.8, 296-7

322
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
JOHNSON, R.A.: ’Aerodynamic drag and stability charac­
teristics of a magnetically levitated vehicle’, AVCO 
Report No. AVSD-0391-72-CR, 1 Nov. 1972
KYOTANI, Y.: ’Magnetic levitation research vehicle’, 
Japanese Railway Engineering (Japan Railway Engineers' 
Assoc.), 1972, 13, No.4, 6-9
LEVI, E.: ’Design of the electric propulsion system for 
an 820 km/h train’, Ingegneria Ferroviaria, 1972, No.2, 
1-8. In Italian
'Linear induction motor reaction rail', Tracked Hovercraft 
Ltd, Patent UK 1292801, 17 Oct. 1969; publ. 11 Oct. 1972; 
prior. 17 July 1968, UK 34096
MEISENHOLDER, S.G. and WANG, T.C.: 'Dynamic analysis of 
an electromagnetic suspension system for a suspended 
vehicle system', TRW Systems, Redondo Beach, Calif., 
Final Report No. FRA-RT-73-1 for US Dept of Transportation, 
Jan. 1972
MOON, F.C. and MARKIEWICZ, W.D.: 'Calculations for the 
design of magnetically suspended vehicles', Report to 
Boeing-Vertol Corp., Philadelphia, Pa., Dec. 1972
MUHLENBERG, J.D. et al: 'Comparative analysis of non­
contacting suspensions for high speed ground vehicles', 
Mitre Corp., McLean, Va., Report No. MTR-6223, Dec. 1972
OGIWARA, H. and TAKANO, N.: 'Large scale superconducting 
magnets for suspended high speed trains', Toshiba Rev., 
1972, 27, 631

BIBLIOGRAPHY
323
OGIWARA, H., TAKANO, N., MATSUKUMA, M. and YAMAYA, T.: 
’Magnetically suspended superhigh-speed train’, ibid., 625
OGIWARA, H., TAKANO, N., SAITO, Y., NAKAYAMA, Y. and 
YONEMITSU, H.: ’Magnetic levitation and power transmission’, 
4th International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, 
Eindhoven, 24-26 May 1972 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 
194-7
POLGREEN, G.R.: ’Controlled permanent magnets for tracked 
transport’, Elec. Rev., 1972, 191, No.2, 41-4
POWELL, J.R. and DANBY, G.T.: ’Integrated magnetic 
suspension and propulsion systems’, 7th Annual Meeting of 
IEEE Industry Applications Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 
9-12 Oct. 1972, 517-26
PRIEBE, E.P.: 'Propulsion motor requirements for mass 
transportation’, IEEE Trans., 
1972, IA-8, No.3, 310-15
REITZ, J.R., BORCHERTS, R.H., DAVIS, L.C. and WILKIE, D.F.: 
’Technical feasibility of magnetic levitation as a 
suspension system for high speed ground transportation 
vehicles’, Ford Motor Co., Technical Report No. FRA-RT-72- 
40 for US Dept of Transportation under Contract DOT-FR-10026, 
Feb. 1972
'Report on a study of the magneplane high-speed transpor­
tation system', Jackson & Moreland, Division of United 
Engineers and Constructors Inc. for Raytheon Company 
Advanced System Engineering Dept., P.O. 50-5073-AS-8386, 
R.N. 5633-00, 10 Jan. 1972

324
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
RICHARDS, P.L. and TINKHAM, M.: 'Magnetic suspension and 
propulsion systems for high-speed transportation’, 
J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1972, 43, No.6, 2680-91
'Single-sided linear motor key to hovertrain design', 
Elec. Rev., 1972,190, No.12, 402-4
'Statistical analysis of LIMRV reaction rail survey data’, 
Mitre Corp. Working Paper No. WP-10125, 30 Nov. 1972
'Study of magnetic levitation and linear synchronous 
motor propulsion', Canadian Institute of Ground Transport, 
Queen's University at Kingston, Ontario, Annual Report, 
1972
'Superconducting solenoids for magnetically levitated 
high speed trains', VDI Z. (Germany), 1972, 114, No.17, 
1276-7. In German
TAKANO, N. , OGIWARA, H., SAITO, Y., NAKAYAMA, Y. and 
YONEMITSU, H.: 'Experimental studies on large supercon­
ducting magnets for magnetically suspended trains', 
4th International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, 
Eindhoven, 24-26 May 1972 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 
191-3
TAKANO, N., SAITO, Y. and OGIWARA, H.: 'Characteristics 
of magnetic levitation for high-speed trains, ibid., 188-9
'Thyristor control of high-speed trains', Railway Gaz. 
Int., 1972, 128, No.8, 289-93

BIBLIOGRAPHY
325
VIERLING, B.J.: 'Personal rapid transit _ applying 
electronics to urban transportation', IEEE Electronics 
and Aerospace Systems Convention, Washington, D.C., 
16-18 Oct. 1972, 130-5
WAGNER, A.: 'Bibliography on the linear induction 
motor in high speed ground transportation', IEEE Summer 
Power Meeting, San Francisco, Calif., 1972
WARD, E.J.: 'Linear electric motors for high speed 
ground transport
*,
 IEEE Electronics and Aerospace 
Systems Convention, Washington, D.C., 16-18 Oct. 1972, 
169-73
WILKIE, D.F.: 'Dynamics, control and ride quality of 
a magnetically levitated high speed ground vehicle', 
Transportation Research (Pergamon Press), 1972, 6, 343-64
WILKIE, D.F., DAVIS, L.C. and BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'A design 
for a magnetically levitated high speed vehicle', 7th 
Annual Meeting of IEEE Industry Applications Society, 
Philadelphia, Pa., 9-12 Oct. 1972, 333-42
YAMADA, T. and IWAMOTO, M.: 'Theoretical analysis of 
lift and drag forces on magnetically suspended high-speed 
train', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1972, 92, No.1, 53-62
YAMADA, T., IWAMOTO, M. and ITO, T.: 'Levitation 
performance of magnetically suspended high speed trains', 
IEEE Trans., 1972, MAG-8, No.3, 634-5
YAMAMURA, S., ISHIKAWA, Y. and HAYASHI, T.: 'Magnetic 
levitation of trains by means of normal conductive 
electromagnets', ibid., 629

326
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1973 
ARP, V.D., CLARK, A.F. and FLYNN, T.M.: ’Some
applications of cryogenics to high speed ground 
transportation', Nat. Bur. Stand., Washington, D.C., 
Report No. NBS-TN-635, Feb. 1973
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: 'Magnetic levitation 
of high speed guided ground transport', IEEE Inter­
national Electrical, Electronics Conference and 
Exposition Digest, Toronto, 1-3 Oct. 1973, 80-1
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: 'The Canadian 
magnetic levitation program', Annual Conference, Roads 
and Transportation Association of Canada, Halifax, 
9-12 Oct. 1973
BORCHERTS, R.H., DAVIS, L.C., REITZ, J.R. and WILKIE, D.F.: 
'Baseline specifications for a magnetically suspended 
high-speed vehicle’, Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 569-78
COFFEY, H.T., CHILTON, F. and HOPPIE, L.O.: 'Magnetic 
levitation for tomorrow's transportation' in Jane's 
Surface Skimmers (London: Sampson Low, Marston & Co. ) 
1973-74
COFFEY, H.T., COLTON, J.D. and MAHRER, K.D.: 'Study of 
a magnetically levitated vehicle', Stanford Research 
Institute, Menlo Park, Calif., Final Report No. DOT-FR-73-24 
for US Dept of Transportation under Contract DOT-FR- 
10001, Feb. 1973
COOPER, B.K.: 'Thyristors for high-speed traction', 
Modern Railways, 1973, 30, No.292, 34-5

BIBLIOGRAPHY
327
DANNAN, J.H., DAY, R.N. and KALMAN, G.P.: ’A linear- 
induction-motor propulsion system for high-speed ground 
vehicles', Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 621-30
FAHLENBRACH, H.: 'Magnetic suspension for tracked 
transport systems', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B , 1973, 25, 
No.3, 48-9. In German
FORGACS, R.L.: 'Evacuated tube vehicles versus jet 
aircraft for high-speed transportation', Proc. IEEE, 
1973, 61, No.5, 604-16
FRIEDRICH, R.: 'Guideways for repulsion MAGLEV tests', 
2nd Status Seminar of BMFT, Berlin, Feb. 1973
GOTTZEIN, E. and LANGE, B.: 'Magnetic suspension control 
systems for the German high speed train', 5th IFAC 
Symposium on Automatic Control in Space, Genoa, Italy, 
June 1973
GREENE, A.H., HARROLD, W. J. , KASEVICH, R.S., TANG, C.H. 
and WEISS, E.: 'Final Report on Magneplane synchronous 
motor study’, for MIT National Magnet Laboratory, 
June 1973
'Ground transportation for the eighties', Proc. IEEE
Special Issue, 1973, 61, No.5, 513-688
GUDERJAHN, C.: 'Hybrid magnetically levitated bus', 
Greater Los Angeles Area Transportation Symposia, 
1972-73 (North Hollywood: Western Periodicals) 1973, 
209-14

328
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
HANLON, J.: 'Magnets boost high speed trains’, New 
Scientist, 1973, 57, No.833, 360-2
HARROLD, W.J., KASEVICH, R.S., TANG, C.H. andVIENS, N.P.: 
'Electromagnetic propulsion for magnetically levitated 
vehicles’, 19th Conference on Magnetism and Magnetic 
Materials, Boston, Mass. 16 Nov. 1973, AIP Conf. Proc., 
1973, No.18, Pt.2, 1240-4
HARROLD, W.J. and TANG, C.H.: 'Optimization of magnet 
configuration for the Magneplane model’, IEEE Trans., 
1973, MAG-9, No.3, 248-52
'Herringbone windings key to high speed linear motor’, 
Elec. Rev., 1973, 192, No.12, 435-6
HOCHHAUSLER, P.: 'New data on the operation of the 
magnetic suspended railway', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 
1973, 25, No.3, 45-7. In German
HOLLINGBERY, P.L.: 'High-speed transport: are we on 
the right lines?', Electronics & Power, 1973, 19, No.17, 
420-2
IWASA, Y.: 'Electromagnetic flight stability by model 
impedance simulation', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1973, 44, 
No.2, 858-62
IWASA, Y.: 'Magnetic shielding for magnetically levitated 
vehicles', Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 598-603

BIBLIOGRAPHY
329
KATZ, R.M. , NENE, V.D. et al: 'Performance of magnetic 
suspensions for high speed vehicle operating over flexible 
guideways', Intersociety Conference on Transportation, 
Denver, Colorado, Sept. 1973, Paper No. 73-ICT-89
KILL, E.: 'Electrical engineering in guided transport 
systems of the future', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1973, 
94, No.12, 717-25. In German
KOLM, H.H. and THORNTON, R.D.: 'Electromagnetic flight', 
Scientific American, 1973, 229, No.4, 17-25
KONOVALOV, V.S.: 'Linear drive motors for lifting and 
transporting machinery', Vestn. Mashinostr. (USSR), 1973 
No.9, 21-2. In Russian. English trans. Russ. Eng. J. 
(GB), 1973, 53, No.9, 16-8
KRINGS, B.J.: 'Alternative systems for rapid-transit 
propulsion and electrical braking', Westinghouse Engineer, 
1973, 33, No.2, 34-41
KUSTER, W., JORAN, H. and KOEWIUS, A.: 'Aluminium for 
linear motor reaction rails', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 
1973, 94, No.8, 494-8. In German
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear motors for high speed vehicles', 
New Scientist, 1973, 58, No.852, 802-5
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Linear motors with transverse flux', 
Indian & Eastern Engineer, 1973, 115, No.10, 529-31
LANGERHOLC, J.: 'Torques and forces on a moving coil due 
to eddy-currents (transportation systems)', J. Appl. Phys. 
(USA), 1973, 44, No.4, 1587-94

330
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LEVI, E.: ’Linear synchronous motors for high-speed 
ground transportation’, IEEE Trans., 1973, MAG-9, No.3, 
242-8
MACHEFERT-TASSIN, Y. and WIART, A.: ’Linear induction­
type rail brakes', Rev.Jeumont-Schneider, 1973, No.16, 
32-42. In French
MELVILLE, P.H.: ’Magnetic propulsion for magnetically 
levitated trains', Cryogenics, 1973, 13, No.12, 716-7
NAGAHIRO, T., TERADA, K., KASAI, Y. and MOTONAGA, M.: 
'Magnetically suspended experimental vehicle - strength 
of structure and dynamic analysis', Hitachi Hyoron (Japan), 
1973, 55, No.6, 37-42. In Japanese
NONAKA, S., HAYASHI, K. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Thrust 
characteristics of high-speed linear motors driven by 
the three-phase invertor', Technol. Rep. Kyushu Univ. 
(Japan), 1973, 46, No.2, 102-8. In Japanese
OHNO, E., IWAMOTO, M., OGINO, O.,KAWAMURA, T. and 
SHINOBU, M.: 'Studies on magnetic levitation for high­
speed trains', Mitsubishi Electr, Eng. (Japan), 1973 
No.37, 23-9
OHNO, E. , IWAMOTO, M. and YAMADA, T.: 'Characteristics 
of superconductive magnetic suspension and propulsion 
for high-speed trains', Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, No.5, 
579-86

BIBLIOGRAPHY
331
1974
RAPOSA, F.I., KNUTRUD, T. and WAWZONEK, J.J.: 'Power 
conditioning for high speed tracked vehicles', 
Transportation Systems Centre, Cambridge, Mass., Report 
No. DOT-TSC-FR-72-13, DOT-TSC-FR-71-1A for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract DOT-RR-205, Jan. 1973
REITZ, J.R., BORCHERTS, R.H., DAVIS, L.C., HUNT, T.K. 
and WILKIE, D.F.: 'Preliminary design studies of 
magnetic suspensions for high speed ground transportation
*,
 
Ford Motor Company, Report No. FRA-RT-73-27 for US Dept 
of Transportation under Contract DOT-FR-10026, 1973
ROSS, J.A.: 'ROMAG transportation system', Proc. IEEE, 
1973, 61, No.5, 617-20
TINKHAM, M.: 'AC losses in superconducting magnet 
suspensions for high-speed transportation', J. Appl. Phys. 
(USA), 1973, 44, No.5, 2385-90
WEH, H.: 'Magnetische Schwebetechnik fur Schnellbahnen', 
Bull. Assoc. Suisse Electr. (Switzerland), 1973, 64, No.9, 
564-71
ABEL, E. , CORBETT, A.E., MULHALL, B.E. and RHODES, R.G.: 
'Levitation and propulsion of guided vehicles using 
superconducting magnets', IEE Conference on Linear 
Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 223-9
ALBRECHT, C., ELSEL, W., FRANKSEN, H., PARSCH, C.P. and 
WILHELM, K.: 'Superconducting levitated systems: first 
results with the experimental facility at Erlangen', 
5th International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Kyoto, 
Japan, May 1974 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 28-34

332
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
ANDREI, R. and SORAN, I.: ’Study of a configuration for 
an asynchronous linear motor used in electrical traction’, 
Stud. Cercet. Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania), 1974, 24, 
No.l, 179-91. In Rumanian
ARIMA, K. , NAKASHIMA, H. and KUZUU, T.: ’Refrigeration 
system for magnetically levitated trains’, 5th International 
Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 
(IPC Science & Technology Press) 99-101
ASZTALOS, S., BALDUS, W., KNEUER, R. and STEPHAN, A.: 
’On-board cryogenic system for magnetic levitation of 
trains: cryogenic system of EET', ibid., 37-41
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: ’Flat guidance systems 
for magnetically levitated high speed guided ground 
transport’, J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1974, 45, No.3, 1398-1405
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: ’Guidance of a high 
speed vehicle with electrodynamic suspension’, IEEE 
Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 413-6
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: ’High-speed Maglev 
studies in Canada' , 5th International Cryogenic Engineering 
Conference, Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 (IPC Science and 
Technology Press) 46-50
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: ’Limitations of 
levitation by iron-cored electromagnets’, IEEE Trans., 
1974, MAG-10, No.3, 410-2
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: 'Propulsion requirements 
for high speed vehicles with electrodynamic suspension', 
Proc. IEEE Industry and Applications Society Meeting, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1974

BIBLIOGRAPHY
333
AUGENREICH, K.: ’Control of a bulk-goods transport 
medium with linear motor drive', Foerdern & Heben (Germany), 
1974, 24, No.6, 578-83. In German
BAHMANYAR, H. and ELLISON, A.J.: 'The application of 
permanent magnets to the suspension of surface-guided 
vehicles', IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 203-9
BARTHALON, M.: 'A new linear electromagnetic motor 
TRAKLEC opens a wide field of application to linear 
machines', ibid., 
62-7
BOBINEAU, B. and TEYSSANDIER, C.: 'A test station for 
high-speed linear motors', High Speed Electric 
Propulsion Meeting (Societe des £lectriciens, des 
Electroniciens et des Radiodlectriciens), Grenoble, 
16 May 1974. In French
BOHM, H.: 'Magnetically suspended vehicles', Elektrotech. 
Z. (ETZ) B, 1974, 26, No.16, 411. In German
BOLDEA, I. and NASAR, S.A.: 'Some baseline specifications 
for an optimal design of a high-speed linear induction 
motor', International Symposium on Linear Electric Motors, 
Lyon, France, May 1974
BOMPA, L.: 'The linear motor and its future in high speed 
land transport', Rail Int. (Belgium), 1974, 5, No.6, 411-3
BOPP, K.: 'Electrical engineering problems of future 
high speed tracked land transport’, Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 
1974, 45, No.10, 222-30. In German

334
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
BORCHERTS, R.H. and DAVIS, L.C.: ’Lift and drag forces 
for the attractive electromagnetic suspension system’, 
IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 425-8
BORCHERTS, R.H., REITZ, J.R. and WAN, C.C.: 
’Superconducting magnetic suspensions using slotted 
or ladder tracks’, Digests of the IEEE Intermag 
Conference, Toronto, 14-17 May 1974
BURKE, P.E., TURTON, R.A. and SLEMON, G.R.: 'The 
calculation of eddy current losses in guideway 
conductors and structural members of high-speed 
vehicles’, IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 462-5
CHAHAL, J.S.: ’Some aspects of a transverse flux 
linear induction motor design, suitable for high speed 
applications’,IEE Conference on Linear Electric Motors, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 161-6
CHIRGWIN, K.M.: ’Test results from the US linear 
induction motor research vehicle program', ibid., 236-43
COFFEY, H.T.: 'Magnetic suspensions for high speed 
vehicles’, Advances in Cryogenic Engineering, 1974, 
19, 137-53
COFFEY, H.T., COLTON, J.D., SOLINSKY, J.C. and WOODBURY, 
J.R.: ’An evaluation of the dynamics of a magnetically 
levitated vehicle’, Report No. FRA-ORD D-74-41 for US 
Dept of Transportation, March 1974

BIBLIOGRAPHY
335
EASTHAM, J.F., BOLTON, H., LAITHWAITE, E.R. and
FREEMAN, E.M.: ’Transverse flux self-levitated linear 
induction motors', International Symposium on Linear 
Electric Motors, Lyon, France, May 1974
EASTHAM, J.F. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Linear induction 
motors as electromagnetic rivers’, Proc. IEE, 1974, 
121, No.10, 1099-108
EASTHAM, J.F. and WILLIAMSON, S.: 'Experiments on the 
lateral stabilization and levitation of linear induction 
motors’, IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 470-3
ELLISON, A.J. and BAHMANYAR, H.: 'Surface-guided 
transport systems of the future', Proc. IEE Reviews, 
1974, 121, No.HR, 1224-8
ELLISON, A.J. and BAHMANYAR, H.: 'The application of 
linear electric motors to the proposed surface-guided 
transport systems of the future', IEE Conference on 
Linear Electric Machines, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 124-30
FARRER, W.: 'Inverter system vital to rail traction by 
linear motor', Elec. Times, 20 June 1974, No.4286, 10-11
FELLOWS, T.G.: 'High speed surface transport', Railway 
Eng. J., 1974, 3, No.2, 4-13
GREENE, A.H., HARROLD, W.J., KASEVICH, R.S., MORRISON, F.P. 
and TANG-, C.H.: 'LSM control of maglev vehicle ride 
quality’, IEEE Trans.,1974, MAG-10, No.3, 431-4

336
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
GUARINO, M. Jr.: 'Integrated linear electric motor 
propulsion systems for high speed transportation', 
International Symposium on Linear Electric Motors, Lyon, 
France, May 1974
GUTBERLET, H.G.: 'The German magnetic transportation 
program', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 417-20
HIERONYMUS, H., MIERICKE, J., PAWLITSCHEK, F. and RUDEL, M.: 
'Experimental study of magnetic forces on normal and 
null flux coil arrangements in the inductive levitation 
system’, Appl. Phys., 1974, 3, 359-66
HOCHHAUSLER, P.: 'A catamaran as a magnetically levitated 
vehicle', IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 216-22
HOCHHAUSLER, P.: 'The catamaran as a magnetic suspension 
vehicle’, Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) B, 1974, 26, No.16, 12-3. 
In German
ICHIKAWA, H. and OGIWARA, H.: 'Design considerations 
for superconducting magnets as a maglev pad', 5th 
International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Kyoto, 
Japan, May 1974 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 86-9
ICHIKAWA, H. and OGIWARA, H.: 'Design considerations 
of superconducting magnets as a maglev pad', IEEE Trans., 
1974, MAG-10, No.4, 1099-103
ISHIZAKI, Y., KURODA, T. and OHTSUKA, T.: 'Sealed 
cryostat system for magnetically levitated vehicles', 
5th International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, 
Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 (IPC Science & Technology Press) 
102-5

BIBLIOGRAPHY
337
IWAHANA, T. and KUZUU, T.: 'Characteristics of the ride 
quality of superconducting magnetic levitation test 
vehicle’, ibid., 106-7
IWAMOTO, M., YAMADA, T. and OHNO, E.: ’Magnetic damping 
force in electrodynamically suspended trains’, IEEE Trans., 
1974, MAG-10, No.3, 458-61
JAYAWANT, B.V., HODKINSON, R.L., WHEELER, A.R. and
WARTON, R.J.: 'Transducers and their influence in the 
design of magnetically suspended vehicles', IEE Conference 
Publication No.117, 1974, 200-6
KALMAN, G.P.: 'Linear motors to power DoT's high-speed 
research vehicles', Railway Gaz. Int., 
1974, 130, No.10,
378-83
KARSTEN, P.: 'Survey and assessment of possible magnetic 
suspension and guidance systems for high-speed tracked 
transportation', Elektrotechnick (Netherlands), 1974, 
52, No.l, 26-31, 34-5. In Dutch
KASAHARA, T., SAITO, R. et al: 'A superconducting magnet 
for ML-100', 5th Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Kyoto, 
Japan, May 1974 (IPC Science & Technology Press), 82-5
KOLM, H.H.: 'Electromagnetic flight', IEEE Trans., 1974, 
MAG-10, No.3, 397-401
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Inverter system is not vital to 
traction by linear motor', Elec. Times, 17 Oct. 1974, 
No.4302, 6-7
LAMB, C.St.J.: ’Electric linear motor urban transportation
system', Elect. Engr. (Australia), 1974, 51, No.l, 6-8

338
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LAMB, C.St.J: ’Parallel-connected linear motor for 
high speed transportation and rapid transit systems’, 
IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, London, 
21-23 Oct. 1974, 137-42
LAMB, C. St.J.: ’Using a parallel-connected linear 
motor for urban transportation', Annual Engineering 
Conference, Newcastle, N.S.W., 20-25 May 1974 (Sydney: 
Inst. Engrs. Australia) 15-20
LEHMANN, H.: 'Latest developments affecting magnetic 
levitation vehicles', Rail Int. (Belgium), 1974, 5, 
No.10, 629-37
LEVI, E.: 'High-speed, iron-cored synchronously 
operating linear motors', IEE Conference on Linear 
Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 155-60
'Levitation lineup - 1974', Railway Gaz. Int., Oct. 1974, 
377
MANDT, K.: 'Measuring and control system for testing 
new components for guided transportation systems employing 
magnetic levitation', Siemens Rev. (Germany), 1974, 41, 
No.12, 527-32
MATSUI, K., UMEMORI, T., TAKETSUNA, Y. and HOSODA, ¥.: 
'D.C. linear motor controlled by thyristors and the 
testing equipment for its high speed characteristics', 
IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, London, 
21-23 Oct. 1974, 149-53
MOON, F.C.: 'Laboratory studies of magnetic levitation 
in the thin track limit', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, 
No.3, 439-42

BIBLIOGRAPHY
339
MOON, F.C. and DOWELL, E.H.: ’Dynamic interaction 
between a linear induction motor and elastic reaction 
rail’, IEE Conference on Linear Electric Machines, 
London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 173-8
NAKASHIMA, H. and ARIMA, K. : ’Vertical cryostat for 
guidance and propulsion of superconducting magnetic 
levitation vehicle’, 5th International Cryogenic 
Engineering Conference, Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 (IPC 
Science & Technology Press) 97-8
OGIWARA, H. and TAKANO, N.: ’Development of supercon­
ducting magnets for a magnetically suspended high-speed 
train in Toshiba’, ibid., 94-6
OHNO, E., IWAMOTO, M., OGINO, 0. and KAWAMURA, T.: 
’Development of superconducting magnets for magnetically 
levitated trains’, ibid., 90-3
PRAST, G. : ’On-board refrigeration for high-speed 
trains’, ibid., 35-6
RHODES, R.G., MULHALL, B.E., HOWELL, J.P. and ABEL, E.: 
’The Wolfson Maglev project’, IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, 
No.3, 398-401
ROUBICEK, O.: ’A controllable low-frequency oscillator 
linear electric drive system', Elektrichestvo, 1974, 
No.10, 86-8. In Russian
SAITO, Y., TAKANO, I., MATSUDA, S.and OGIWARA, H.: 
’Experimental studies on superconducting magnetic 
levitation for ultrahigh-speed vehicles’, Elec. Eng. 
Jap. (USA), 1974, 94, No.2, 92-105

340
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SHIRASHOJI, A., MUTO, T., OTA, S. and WORKS, I.: 'A 
control system for magnetically levitated vehicles’, 
Mitsubishi Electr. Eng. (Japan), 1974, No.42, 6-9
SLEMON, G.R., TURTON, R.A. and BURKE, P.E.: ’A linear 
synchronous motor for high-speed ground transport’, 
IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 435-8
TAKAHASHI, T., MAKI, N. and MIYASHITA, T.: ’Combined 
system for propulsion and guidance of magnetically 
suspended vehicles’, 5th International Cryogenic 
Engineering Conference, Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 (IPC 
Science & Technology Press), 78-81
TANG, C.H. and CHU, R.S.: ’Magneplane magnetic 
levitation study evaluation of guideway edge effects’, 
Final Report No. NSF-RANN under Contract NSF-C670 to 
M.I.T., Dec. 1974
THORNTON, R.D.: ’The magneplane linear synchronous 
motor’, Digests of IEEE Intermag Conference, Toronto, 
14-17 May 1974
THORNTON, R.D.: ’The magneplane linear synchronous 
motor propulsion system’, IEE Conference on Linear 
Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974,230-5
THORNTON, R.D., IWASA, Y. and KOLM, H.H.: ’The 
magneplane system’, 5th International Cryogenic 
Engineering Conference, Kyoto, Japan, May 1974 (IPC 
Science & Technology Press) 42-5

BIBLIOGRAPHY
341
1975
USAMI, Y., FUJIE, J. and FUJIWARA, S.: 'Studies on 
linear motor in the Institute of JNR', IEE Conference 
on Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 
131-6
VORONKOV, V.S., POZDEEV, O.D. and SANDALOV, V.M.: 
'Dynamics of magnetic suspension', Izv. VUZ Elektromekh. 
(USSR), 1974, No.10, 1082-9. In Russian
WIART, A.: 'Aerotrains: propulsion systems with linear 
motors and electronic convertors', Rev. Jeumont-Schneider, 
1974, No.17, 23-32. In French
YAMADA, T., IWAMOTO, M. and ITO, T.: 'Magnetic damping 
force in inductive magnetic levitation system for high 
speed trains', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1974, 94, No.l, 80-4
YASUMOCHI, R. and MORI, H.: 'Electromagnetic forces 
of the linear synchronous motor for magnetically 
levitated vehicle', International Symposium on Linear 
Electric Motors, Lyon, France, May 1974
APPUN, P. and von THUN, H.J.: 'An electro-magnetic 
suspension and guidance system for tracked, high-speed 
transportation', Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 1975, 46, 
No.4, 86-94. In German
ATHERTON, D.L. and EASTHAM, A.R.: 'Superconducting 
Maglev and LSM development in Canada', IEEE Trans., 
1975, MAG-11, No.2, 627-32
BERTLING, A.: 'Switch arrangement for a magnetic 
suspension railroad', Siemens AG, Patent USA 3869990, 
6 Sept. 1973, publ. 11 March 1975; prior. 29 Sept.
1972, Germany 2247858

342
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
BOBINEAU, B. and TEYSSANDIER, C.: ’A test station for 
high-speed motors’, Rev. Gen. Elec., 1975, 84, No.2, 
137-40. In French
BOLDEA, I.: 'On the performance of linear electric 
motors for the propulsion of fast vehicles (300-500 
km/h)’, Electroteh. Electron. & Autom. Electroteh. 
(Rumania), 1975, 23, No.3, 103-13. In Rumanian
BORCHERTS, R.H.: ’Comparison of two HSGT magnetic 
suspension systems (attraction)’, Ford Motor Company, 
Technical Report No. FRA-ORD-73-27A for US Dept of
Transportation under Contract No. DOT-FR-10026, Feb. 1975
BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'Repulsion magnetic suspension 
research - U.S. progress to date’, Cryogenics, 1975, 
15, No.7, 385-93
BROWN, W.3.: 'The effect of long magnets on inductive 
maglev ride quality’, IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.5, 
1498-500
BUCHBERGER, H. and LEITGEB, W.: 'Traction drives with 
linear synchronous motors’, Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 
1975, 46, No.4, 82-5. In German
BURKE, P.E.: 'The use of stranded conductors to reduce 
eddy losses in guideway conductors of high speed vehicles’, 
IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.5, 1501-3
COHO, O.C., KLIMAN, G.B. and ROBINSON, J.I.: 'Experi­
mental evaluation of a high speed double sided linear 
induction motor’, ibid., PAS-94, No.l, 10-7

BIBLIOGRAPHY
343
’Conceptual design and analysis of the tracked 
magnetically levitated vehicle technology program 
(TMLV) - repulsion scheme; Volume I - Technical 
Studies', Ford Motor Co., Dearborn, Mich., Report No. 
FRA-OR&D-75-21 for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract No. DOT-FR-40024, Feb. 1975
'Control system for magnetically levitated vehicle', 
Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, Patent UK 1404987, 11 Oct. 
1972; publ. 3 Sept. 1975; prior. 16 Oct. 1971, West 
Germany 151608
'Cooling system for rail-rotor of a linear motor', 
Conz Elektricit, Patent UK 1401592, 16 Jan. 1973; 
publ. 30 July 1975; prior. 19 Jan. 1972, West Germany 
202426
EASTHAM, A.R. (Editor): 'Superconducting magnetic 
levitation and linear synchronous motor propulsion for 
high speed ground transportation', Canadian Institute of 
Guided Ground Transport, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Report CIGGT 75-5, March 1975
GOTTZEIN, E., LANGE, B. and OSSENBERG-FRANZES, F.: 
'Control system concept for a passenger carrying maglev 
vehicle', International Conference on High Speed Ground 
Transportation, Arizona State Univ., Jan. 1975 (publ. 
High Speed Ground Transportation Journal) 435-45 
'High-speed railway conductor rail', Vahle Paul KG, 
Patent UK 1405039, 1 Aug. 1973; publ. 3 Sept. 1975; 
prior. 11 Nov. 1972, West Germany 244492

344
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
HOGAN, J.R. and FINK, H.J.: ’Comparison and 
optimization on lift and drag forces on vehicles 
levitated by eddy current repulsion for various null 
and normal flux magnets with one or two tracks’, 
IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.2, 604-7
HOWELL, J.P., WONG, J.Y., RHODES, R.G. and MULHALL, B.E.: 
’Stability of magnetically levitated vehicles over a 
split guideway’, ibid., No.5, 1487-9
IWAHANA, T.: 'Study of superconducting magnetic 
suspension and guidance characteristics on loop tracks’, 
ibid., No.6, 1704-11
IWASA, Y. , BROWN, W.S. and WALLACE, C.B.: ’An operational 
1/25-scale Magneplane system with superconducting coils’, 
ibid., No.5, 1490-2
KIMURA, H., OGATA, H., SATO, S., SAITO, R. and TADA, N.: 
’Superconducting magnet with tube-type cryostat for 
magnetically suspended train’, ibid., No.2, 619-22
KING, S.Y.: ’Inter urban rapid transit systems’, Elect. 
Engr. (Australia), 1975, 52, No.6, 19
KOLM, H.H., THORNTON, R.D., IWASA, Y. and BROWN, W.S.: 
’The magneplane system’, Cryogenics, 1975, 15, No.7, 
377-84
KYOTANI, Y.: ’Development of superconducting levitated 
trains in Japan’, ibid., 372-6
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Electromagnetic rivers’, Polytech. 
Tijdschr. Elektrotech. Elektron. (Netherlands), 1975, 
30, No.7, 226-33. In Dutch

BIBLIOGRAPHY
345
LAMB, C. St.J.: ’A rapid transit system for inner-city 
transportation’, Elect. Engr. (Australia), 1975, 52, No.2, 
11-3
LEE, S.W. and MENENDEZ, R.: ’Forces at low- and high-speed 
limits in magnetic levitation systems’, J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 
1975, 46, No.l, 422-5
LEVI, E.: ’A preliminary evaluation of electrical 
propulsion by means of iron-cored synchronously operating 
linear motors’, Report for US Dept of Transportation under 
Contract DOT-FR-30030, Jan. 1975
LICHTENBERG, A.: 'Electromagnetic track guidance arrange­
ment for a vehicle’, Siemens AG, Patent USA 3861320, 
5 April 1974; publ. 21 Jan. 1975; prior. 13 April 1973, 
Germany 2318756
’Linear induction motor’, Zavod Elektrotransporta,
Patent UK 1382904, 22 Feb. 1972; publ. 5 Feb. 1975;
prior. 22 Feb. 1972, UK 8020
’Linear motor driven and magnetically levitated 
railway carriage’, Augsburg Nurnberg AG, Patent UK 
1404975, 26 Oct. 1972; publ. 3 Sept. 1975; prior.
29 Oct. 1971, West Germany 153928
MACHEFERT-TASSIN, Y.: ’Concerning a few myths linked 
to the use of linear motors at high speed’, Rev. Gen.
Elec., 1975, 84, No.2, 91-101. In French
’Magnetic vehicle drive/suspension system', Rohr Ind.
Inc., Patent UK 1385212, 24 March 1972; publ. 26 Feb.
1975; prior. 19 April 1971, US 131041

346
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
MAKI, N.: 'Linear motor for high speed railroads', 
Hitachi Ltd, Patent USA 3858522, 11 June 1973; publ.
7 Jan. 1975; prior. 15 June 1972, Japan 47-59689
MANDT, K.: 'Measurement and guidance techniques in the 
Erlangen test track for magnetic floating trains', 
Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 1975, 46, No.4, 94-8. In German
MELVILLE, P.H., MULHALL, B.E. and WILSON, M.N.: 
'Propulsion of magnetically levitated vehicles’, 
Cryogenics, 1975, 15, No.5, 295
MUHLENBERG, J.D. and NENE, V.D.: 'Analysis of a combined 
attraction-maglev-propulsion system for a high speed 
vehicle', Technical Report No. FRA-ORD-75-61 for US Dept 
of Transportation, 1975
MURATO, K., TAKEI, K., AKIHAMA, Y., TAKAHASHI, H. and 
AKABANE, H.: 'Type L4 linear motor system wagon booster/ 
retarder for Shiohama shunting yard of the J.N.R. 
(Japanese National Railways)’, Hitachi Rev. (Japan), 
1975, 24, No.6, 269-76
NAVE, P.M.: 'Maglev test facilities at Messerschmitt- 
Bolkow-Blohm', International Conference on High Speed 
Ground Transportation, Arizona State Univ., Jan. 1975 
(publ. High Speed Ground Transportation Journal), 255-60
OGIWARA, H., TAKANO, N., OKAMATO, H. and HAYASHI, K.: 
'Development of superconducting magnets for magnetically 
suspended high-speed trains', Toshiba Rev. (Internat. Ed.), 
July-Aug. 1975, No.98, 7-11

BIBLIOGRAPHY
347
OHTSUKA, T. and KYOTANI, Y.: ’Superconducting levitated 
high speed ground transportation project in Japan', 
IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.2, 608-14
OOI, B.-T.: 'Levitation, drag and transverse forces in 
finite width sheet guideways for repulsive magnetic 
suspension', International Conference on High Speed 
Ground Transportation, Arizona State Univ., Jan. 1975, 
(pub1. High Speed Ground Transportation Journal), 369-73
001, B.-T.: 'Transverse force in magnetic levitation 
with finite width sheet guideways', IEEE Trans., 1975, 
PAS-94, No.3, 994-1002
'Polyphase linear induction motor', Tracked Hovercraft
Ltd, Patent UK 1394998, 25 Aug. 1972; publ. 21 May 1975; 
prior. 10 Sept. 1971, UK 42378
'Regulator system for hover railway vehicle', Messerschmitt- 
Bolkow-Blohm, Patent UK 1401313, 29 Aug. 1972; publ.
30 July 1975; prior. 17 Sept. 1971, West Germany 146499
REITZ, J.R. and BORCHERTS, R.H.: 'US Department of 
Transportation program in magnetic suspension (repulsion 
concept)', IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.2, 615-8
ROSS, J.A. and HARRIS, B.C.: 'Railway truck magnetic 
suspension’, Rohr Ind. Inc., Patent USA 3886871, 8 May 
1972; publ. 3 June 1975, US 251118
SEN, P.C.: 'On linear synchronous motor (LSM) for high 
speed propulsion’, IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, No.5, 1484-6

348
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
’Short stator induction motor circulating current 
reduction’, Tracked Hovercraft Ltd, Patent UK 1379676, 
7 June 1973; publ. 8 June 1975
SLEMON, G.R.: 'The Canadian Maglev project on high­
speed interurban transportation', IEEE Trans., 1975, 
MAG-11, No.5, 1478-83
SLEMON, G.R.: 'The Canadian Maglev project on high­
speed interurban transportation', Canadian Electric 
Power Symposium, Poland, 1975
STOSCHEK, J.: 
'5-MVA frequency converter for linear
motor propulsion', BBC Nachr. (Germany), 1975, 57, 
No.4, 192-7. In German
TANG, C.H., HARROLD, W.J. and CHU, R.S.: 'A review of 
the Magneplane project', IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, 
No.2, 623-6
THORNTON, R.D.: 'Magnetic levitation and propulsion, 
1975', ibid., No.4, 981-95 (124 refs)
'Transport system with electromagnetically-suspended 
vehicle’, Augsburg Nurnberg AG, Patent UK 1381241, 
15 Jan. 1972; publ. 22 Jan. 1975; prior. 15 Jan. 1972, 
West Germany 201923
UHER, R.A.: 'Electric power systems and high-speed 
ground transportation', IEEE Trans., 1975, IA-11, No.l, 
100-13

BIBLIOGRAPHY
349
URANKAR, L.: ’Basic magnetic levitation systems with 
a continuous sheet track', Siemens Forsch. und 
Entwicklungsber. (Germany), 1975, 4, No.l, 25-32. 
In English
WEH, H.: ’Synchronous long-stator drive with controlled 
normal attractive forces’, Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 
1975, 96, No.9, 409-13. In German
WIART, A.: 'Propelling set with linear motor and 
electronic convertor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1975, 84, No.2, 
112-20. In French
WIEGNER, G.: 'The drive of the experimental vehicle 
for the evaluation of the electro-dynamic suspension 
technique - an example of linear motor drive', Elek.
Bahnen (Germany), 1975, 46, No.5, 118-24. In German
YAMAMURA, S. and ITO, T.: 'Analysis of speed 
characteristics of attracting magnet for magnetic 
levitation of vehicles’, IEEE Trans., 1975, MAG-11, 
No.5, 1504-7
THEORY
1946 
SHTURMAN, G.I.: 'Induction machines with open magnetic
circuits', Elektrichestvo, 1946, No.10, 43-50. In Russian
1947 
SHTURMAN, G.I. and ARANOV, R.L.: 'Edge effect in
induction motors with open magnetic field', Elektrichestvo, 
1947, No.2, 54-9. In Russian
1950 
REZIN, M.G.: 'Armature reaction effects and the
mechanical characteristics of a motor with an arc-shaped 
stator', Elektrichestvo, 1950, No.2, 51-2. In Russian

350
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1951 
REZIN, M.G.: ’Some peculiarities of the electromagnetic
phenomena in a motor with an arc-shaped stator’, 
Elektrichestvo, 1951, No.6, 25-9. In Russian
SHTURMAN, G.I.: 'Open squirrel-cages in short-circuited 
induction motors', ibid., No.9, 36-43. In Russian
1956 
MURGATROYD, W.: 'Theory of the ideal A.C. conduction
pump', A.E.R.E. (Harwell), Report No. ED/R 1566, 1956
1958 
CULLEN, A.L. and BARTON, T.H.: 'A simplified electro­
magnetic theory of the induction motor using the 
concept of wave impedance', Proc. IEE, 1958, 105C, 
No.8, 331-6
1959 
SCHILDER, J.: 'Electromagnetic field moving in a
conducting medium', Elektrotech. Obzor (Czechoslovakia), 
1959, 48, No.3, 146-53. In Czech
SZULKIN, P.: 'Matrix form of the equations of 
propagation in an anisotropic medium with constant 
magnetic field', Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Ser. Sci. Tech. 
(Poland), 1959, 8, No.10, 581-7
WILLIAMS, F.C., LAITHWAITE, E.R. and EASTHAM, J.F.: 
'Development and design of spherical induction motors', 
Proc. IEE, 1959, 106A, No.30, 471-84
1960 
BIRZVALKS, Yu.: 'Analysis of optimal criteria being
applied in calculations of pumps of constant current', 
Latv. PSR Zinat. Akad. Vestis (USSR), 1960, No.11 (160), 
91-6. In Russian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
351
BIRZVALKS, Yu.: 'Current distribution in the region of 
the longitudinal axis of the channel of a constant­
current pump', ibid., No.2 (151), 63-72. In Russian
CARPENTER, C.J.: 'Surface-integral methods of 
calculating forces on magnetised iron parts', Proc. IEE, 
1960, 107C, No.11, 19-28
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Design of spherical motors', Elec. 
Times, 1960, 137, No.23, 921-5
STIER, E.: 'The determination of the energy of a plane 
magnetic field by considering the equivalent electric 
current field', Arch. Elektrotech. (Germany), 1960, 45, 
No.5, 343-6. In German
1961 
CIAMPOLINI, F.: 
'Introduzione allo studio dei motor! a
induzione lineari e sferici', Istuto di Elettrotenica 
del Universita di Bologna, Tipografia Gamma, 1961 
SHARIKADZE, D.V.: 'Motion of a medium with finite 
conductivity in the presence of a uniform magnetic field', 
Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1961, 138, No.4, 817-9. English 
trans. Soviet Physics, 1961, 6, No.6, 470-1
1962 
DAMBIER, Th.: ' Zugkr’af te eines Linearmotors im Stillstand',
Archiv fur Eisenbahntechnik, 1962, No.14, 2-10 
HARRIS, M.R.: 'A modified Poynting vector for local energy 
loss in a ferromagnetic lamination', J. Sci. Instrum., 
1962, 39, No.8, 441-2
RICHMOND, J.H.: 'Transmission through inhomogeneous plane 
layers', IRE Trans. Antennas & Propagation (USA), 1962,
AP-10, No.3, 300-5

352
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
VATAZHIN, A.B. and REGIRER, S.A.: 'Approximate 
calculation of the current distribution when a conducting 
fluid flows along a channel within a magnetic field', 
Priklad. Mat. Mekh. (USSR), 1962, 26, No.3, 548-56. 
English trans. Appl. Math. Meeh. (GB), 1962, 26, No.3, 816-28
WEST, J.C. and HESMONDHALGH, D.E.: 'The analysis of thick­
cylinder induction machines', Proc. IEE, 1962, 109C, 172-81
1963 
CHEKMAREV, I.B.: 'The influence of anisotropy of
electrical conductivity on the development of flow of 
a viscous fluid in the initial section of a plane 
channel', Priklad. Mat. Mekh. (USSR), 1963, 27, No.3, 532. 
English trans. Appl. Math. Meeh. (GB), 1963, 27, No.3, 
789-94 
KALISKI, S.: 'Attenuation of surface waves between 
perfectly conducting fluid and solid in a magnetic 
field normal to the contact surface', Proc. Vibration 
Problems (Poland), 1963, 4, No.4, 375-85 
KANER, E.A.: 'Anomalous penetration of metals by an 
electromagnetic field', Zh. Eksper. Teor. Fiz. (USSR), 
1963, 44, No.3, 1036-49. (English trans, in Soviet 
Physics - JETP (USA)) 
SHERCLIFF, J.A.: The theory of electromagnetic flow 
measurement (Cambridge University Press) 1963 
SUDAN, R.N.: 'Interaction of a conducting fluid stream 
with a travelling wave of magnetic field of finite 
extension', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1963, 34, No.3, 641-50

BIBLIOGRAPHY
353
1964 
BURMAN, R. and GOULD, R.N. : 'On certain exact wave
functions for electromagnetic fields in planar stratified 
media', J. Atmos. Terrest. Phys., 1964, 26, No.11, 1127-9
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: 'Magnetic field of a plane induction 
pump', Elektrichestvo, 1964, No.8, 18-26. In Russian
RATCLIFF, G. and GRIFFITHS, J.: 'A linear D.C. motor', 
J. Sci. Instrum. , 1964, 41, No.5, 267-8
SUCHY, K.: 'Coupled wave equations for inhomogeneous 
anisotropic media', Z. Naturforsch , 1964, 9a, No.7-8, 
630-6. In German
TAI, C.T.: 'A study of electrodynamics of moving media', 
Proc. IEEE, 1964, 52, No.6, 685-9
TIPPING, D.: 'The analysis of some special-purpose 
electrical machines', Ph.D. Thesis, University of Manchester, 
1964
1965 
BARLOW, H.E.M.: 
'Travelling-field theory of induction­
type instruments and motors', Proc. IEE, 1965, 112, 
No.6, 1208-14
BERTINOV, A.I. et al: 'Some problems of 3-phase 
induction pump calculation', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 
1965, No.3, 103-10. In Russian
BROWN, P.M. and TAI, C.T.: 'A study of electrodynamics 
of moving media’, Proc. IEEE, 1965, 52, No.11, 1362-3

354
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
HESMONDHALGH, D.E. and TIPPING, D.: 'General method 
for prediction of the characteristics of induction 
motors with discontinuous exciting windings', Proc. IEE, 
1965, 112, No.9, 1721-35
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Differences between series and 
parallel connection in machines with asymmetric magnetic 
circuits', ibid., No.11, 2074-82
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The goodness of a machine', ibid., 
No.3, 538-41
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'The goodness of a machine', Electronics 
& Power, March 1965, 11, 101-3
MARINESCU, M.: 'On the production of alternating 
(attractive and repulsive) electromagnetic forces. 
New means for linear motor development', Rev, Roum. Sci. 
Tech. Electrotech. Energet, 1965, 10, No.3, 543-52. 
In French
OKHREMENKO, N.M.: 'Transverse fringe effect in flat 
linear induction pumps', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1965, 
No.3, 87-95. In Russian
POSTNIKOV, J.M. et al: 'Calculating an 'electromagnetic 
travelling field in a laminar three-layer conducting 
medium', Elektrichestvo, 1965, No.9, 1-7. In Russian
REGIRER, S.A.: 'Laminar flow of conducting fluid pipes 
and channels in the presence of transverse magnetic 
field', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1965, No.l, 5-17. In
Russian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
355
SATO, G.: ’Propagation of the electromagnetic waves in 
layered inhomogeneous media', J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 1965, 
20, No.8, 1463-75
SMITH, W.E.: 'An electromagnetic force theorem for 
quasi-stationary currents', Austral. J. Physics, 1965, 
18, No.3, 195-204
VALDMANIS, Ya. Ya. : 'Electrodynamic forces acting upon 
a conducting layer in a one-sided 3-phase inductor 
field', Latv. PSR Zinat. Akad. Vestis Fiz. Tehn. Ser. 
(USSR), 1965, No.l, 51-4. In Russian
VALDMANIS, Ya. Ya. , KUNIN, P.F., MIKEL'SON, Ya. Ya. and
TAKSAR, I.M.: 'Conducting strip in the travelling 
electromagnetic field of a plane inductor', Magnetohydro- 
dynamics (USA), 1965, 1, No.2, 75-82
VESKE, T.A.: 'Solution of the electromagnetic field 
equations for a plane linear induction machine with 
secondary boundary effects', ibid., No.l, 64-71
VEZE, A.K. and KRUMIN, Yu. K. : 'Electromagnetic force 
acting on an infinitely wide conducting sheet in the 
travelling magnetic field of plane inductors', ibid., 
No.4, 62-8
VOL'DEK, A.I.: 'Compensation of pulsating magnetic 
fields in induction machines and pumps with an open 
magnetic circuit', Elektrichestvo, 1965, No.4, 50-3. 
In Russian
YANTOVSKII, E.I.: 'Determination of magnetic Reynolds 
number', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1965, No.4, 153-4.
In Russian

356
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1966
BETH, R.A.: ’Complex representation and computation 
of two-dimensional magnetic fields’, J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 
1966, 37, No.7, 2568-71
BRUNELLI, J.B. : ’Study of an induction motor with an 
arc shaped stator', L'Energia Elettrica, 1966, 43, No.10, 
605-17. In Italian
ERASLAN, A.H.: 'Duct flow of conducting fluids under 
arbitrary oriented applied magnetic fields’, AIAA J. 
(USA), 1966, 4, No.4, 620-6
ERMILOV, M.A. et al: 'Conductivity of a cylindrical 
PM-EM induction pump rotor', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 
1966, No.4, 121-5. In Russian
GUREVICH, B. Ya. et al: 'Flow of a plane sheet of 
electrically conducting liquid in a transverse magnetic 
field
*,
 ibid., 69-77. In Russian
KRUMINS, Yu. K. : 'Influence of conducting body with 
finite length on ponderomotive forces due to travelling 
magnetic field
*,
 ibid., No.3, 115-24. In Russian
OOI, B.-T.: ’Fringe end effects of short stator
*,
 
S.M. Thesis, M.I.T., Jan. 1966
PARTS, I.R.: ’Current distribution in the liquid metal 
of plane induction pumps with shorting strips’, Magn. 
Gidrodin. (USSR), 1966, No.4, 108-12. In Russian
PELENC, Y., PILLET, E., POLOUJADOFF, M., REMY, E. and 
REYX, P.: 'Influence of air-gap length on the performance 
of polyphase linear induction motors *,  Rev. Gen. Elec., 
1966, 75, No.11, 1300-5. In French

BIBLIOGRAPHY
357
POLOUJADOFF, M.: 'Calcul des caracteristiques des 
moteurs asynchrones polyphases a entrefer plan
*,
 ibid.t 
No.6, 859-63
POLOUJADOFF, M.: 'Improvement in the theory of linear 
induction motors for traction
*
, C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 
1966, 263, Ser.B, No.9, 605-7. In French
POLOUJADOFF, M. and REYX, P.: 'Etude theorique et 
experimentalle de 1* influence des sections de retour sur 
le fonctionnement de moteurs d'induction lineaires a 
inducteur court', ibid., No.14, 799-802
RASHCHEPKIN, A.P.: 'Longitudinal end effects of linear 
induction machines', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1966, No.3, 
106-10. In Russian
VALDMANIS, J.J. et al: 'On the theory of longitudinal 
edge effect in linear MHD machines', ibid., 101-5. In 
Russian
VESE, A.K.: 'On the determination of electromagnetic 
forces in finite width conducting sheet in the presence 
of travelling magnetic field of one stator
*
, ibid., 
111-4. In Russian
VIGLIN, A.S.: 'Electrodynamics of an homogeneous 
anisotropic and dispersive medium', Zh. Eksper. Teor. 
Fiz. (USSR), 1966, 50, No.l, 85-92. English trans.
Soviet Physics - JETP (USA), 1966, 23, No.l

358
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
VILNITIS, A. Va. : 'Transverse edge effect in flat 
induction magnetodynamic machines' in Movement of 
conducting bodies in magnetic fields, Latvian Academy 
of Sciences Institute of Physics, Monograph, 1966, 
63-94
1967 
GREIG, J. and FREEMAN, E.M.: 'Travelling-wave problem
in electrical machines', Proc. IEE, 1967, 114, No,11,1681-3
HARRIS, M.R.: 'Analysis of power factor in linear 
induction generators', ibid., No.8, 1179. (Correspondence)
KRUMINS, J.K.: 'On the maximum ponderomotive force at 
the in-phase connection of two flat stators', Magn. 
Gidrodin. (USSR), 1967, No.2, 154-5. In Russian
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Magnetic equivalent circuits for 
electrical machines', Proc. IEE, 1967, 114, No.11, 1805-9
LOPUKHINA, E.M. et al: 'Comparing asynchronous actuator 
motors with hollow non-magnetic and with squirrel-cage 
rotors', Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1967, No.6, 21-3.
(English trans, in Soviet Elect. Engng. (USA))
NARAYANAN, M.S.T.: 'Design, development and construction 
of a linear oscillating electric machine', J. Indian 
Inst. Sci., 1967, 49, No.l, 28-35

BIBLIOGRAPHY
359
POIRIER, Y. : ’Dragging motion of a liquid by plane 
walls in the presence of an induction magnetic field 
and at a low electromagnetic Reynolds number.
Theoretical aspects', C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 1967, 
265, No.25, 889-91. In French
SAAL, C.: 'Study of an oscillating biphase synchronous 
linear motor', Bull. Inst. Politeh. Iasi (Rumania), 
1967, 13, No.1-2, 345-62. In English
SAVY, C.: 'On the theory of linear induction motors', 
Elettrotecnica, 196 7, 42, No.2, A. 1.9 (Electrical 
Rotating Machines, 68th Annual Meeting of Italian 
Electrotechnical and Electrical Society, San Remo). 
In Italian
VALDMANIS, Ya. Ya. and LIELPETER, Y.Y.: 'The structure 
of a magnetic field in the airgap of a linear MHD 
machine', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1967, No.l, 115-21. 
In Russian
YANTOVSKY, Ye. I.: 'On the determination of magnetic 
Reynolds number', ibid., No.3, 154-5. In Russian
1968 
BRADFORD, M.: 'Unbalanced magnetic pull in a 6-pole,
10 kW, induction motor with a series-connected stator 
winding
*,
 Electrical Research Assoc., Leatherhead, 
Surrey, Report No.5216, 1968
BYOLER, G.A. and LUKOVSKAYA, T.A.: 'Eddy currents in 
a metallic plate, moving in a constant magnetic field’, 
Izv. VUZ Fiz. (USSR), 1968, No.2, 151-3. (English trans, 
in Soviet Phys. J. (USA))

360
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
FREEMAN, E.M.: 'Travelling waves in induction machines: 
input impedance and equivalent circuits', Proc. IEE, 
1968, 115, No.12, 1772-6
IVANOV-SMOLENSKII, A.V. et al: 'A method for calculating 
currents and losses in conducting layers located in 
travelling or rotating magnetic fields, Elektrichestvo, 
1968, No.8, 49-54. In Russian
KANT, M.: 'General equations of the sliding magnetic 
field of a magnetohydrodynamics machine', C.R. Acad.
Sci. (Paris), 1968, 266, Ser.A, No.3, 164-7. In French
KANT, M.: 'The generation of a travelling magnetic 
field in a linear machine of finite dimensions', ibid., 
Ser.B, No.24, 1455-8. In French
KANT, M. and BONNEFILLE, R.: 'Determination of an ac 
liquid metal MHD generator' in Electricity from MHD, 
Vol.3 (Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency) 1968, 
1717-29
KANT, M. and EFTHYMIATOS, D.: 'Contribution to the 
study of optimized efficiency of a linear induction 
machine', C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 1968, 267, Ser.B, 
No.25, 1328-31. In French
KESAVAMURTHY, N. et al: 'A general method of solving 
the field equations inside ferromagnetic sheets 
subjected to alternating magnetization
*
, Proc. Royal 
Soc., 1968, 303A, 103-25
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Shaded pole techniques applied to 
unusual electric motors', Electronics & Power, May 1968, 
14, 206-8

BIBLIOGRAPHY
361
LAITHWAITE, E.R. : ’Some aspects of electrical machines 
with open magnetic circuits’, Proc. IEE, 1968, 115, No.9, 
1275-83
’Longitudinal end effect of a linear induction motor', 
TRW Systems Group, Report No. 06816-6030-R000, Oct. 1968
MATSUMIYA, T. and TAKAGI, K.: ’Magnetic field of linear 
induction machines', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1968, 88, 
No.4, 74-82
MEYEROVICH, E.A. et al: 'Using the duality principle 
for modelling a three-dimensional field', Elektrichestvo, 
1968, No.8, 55-60. In Russian
MOFFATT, H.K.: 'On the suppression of turbulence by a 
uniform magnetic field', J. Fluid Meeh., 1968, 28, P.t.3, 
571-92
OHNO, E. and KISHIMOTO, T.: 'Basic characteristics of 
linear mo tors', Mitsubishi Denki Giho, Mitsubishi 
Electric Corporation, Marunouti, Tokyo, 1968, 42, No.12, 
1581-8
POLOUJADOFF, M. and SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: 'An equivalent 
circuit for linear induction machines and M.H.D. 
induction generators', C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 1968, 
267, Ser.B, 1412-15. In French
POLOUJADOFF, M. and SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: 'Determination 
of lines of current in the secondary of a short primary 
linear induction motor with a balanced current supply', 
ibid., 266, Ser.B, 272-5. In French

362
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
POLOUJADOFF, M. and SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: ’Utilisation 
d'une methode de partition dans la resolution de 
certaines equations aux derivees partielles dont le 
domaine comporte une bande infinie', ibid., 230-3
VOL’DEK, A.I. and LAZARENKO, L.F.: 'The effects of a 
finite length on linear induction machines', Proc. 6th 
Symposium on Magnetohydrodynamics, Institute of Physics, 
USSR Academy of Sciences, Riga, 1968, 2, 54. In Russian
WOODSON, H.H. and MELCHER, J.R.: Electromechanical 
dynamics, Part I: Discrete systems, Part II: Fields, 
forces and motion (New York: Wiley) 1968
1969 
BOLTON, H.: 'Transverse edge effect in sheet-rotor
induction motors', Proc. IEE, 1969, 116, No.5, 725-31
BRUNELLI, B.: 'Calculation of corrective coefficients 
for linear induction motors', L'Energia Elettrica, 
1969, 46, No.l, 16-22. In Italian
MATSUMURA, Y.: 'Analysis of flux distribution and end 
effect in linear motor', Quart. Rept. Railway Technical 
Research Institute, JNR, 1969, 10, No.4, 253-4
MORARU, A.: 'Contributions to the theory of the linear 
electric motor: characteristic operating equations’, 
Stud. Cercet Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania), 1969, 19, 
No.2, 315-35. In Rumanian
NASAR, S.A.: 'Electromagnetic fields and forces in a
linear induction motor, taking into account edge effects'
Proc. IEE, 1969, 116, No.4, 605-8

BIBLIOGRAPHY
363
POLOUJADOFF, M. : 'Influence of the form of the magnetic 
circuit on the edge effects in linear induction motors 
and on the braking by a magnet', C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 
1969, 269, Ser.B, No.24, 1215-8. In French
POLOUJADOFF, M.: 'Simplified theory of the linear 
induction motor', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1969, 90, 
No.21, 545-8. In German
PRESTON, T.W. and REECE, A.B.J.: 'Transverse edge effects 
in linear induction motors', Proc. IEE, 1969, 116, No.6, 
973-9
RANADE, S.B.: 'Eddy currents and forces in thin sheets', 
M.Eng. Thesis, Nova Scotia Technical College, Halifax, 
Canada, 1969
SAAL, C.: 'Operational equations of the two phase reactive 
oscillomotor with linear movement', Bui. Inst. Politehn.
Brasov (Rumania), 1969, 11, 49-62. In Rumanian
SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: 'Contribution to the study of 
induction motors', Doctoral Thesis, Grenoble, 27 Feb. 1969. 
In French
VALDMANIS, Ya. Ya. , KALNIN, T.K., PETROVICHA, R.A. and 
POLMANIS, Ya. E. : 'The problem of an induction pump with 
a linearly varying magnetic field across the duct
*,
 
Magnetodydrodynamics (USA), 1969, No.l, 86-91
YAMAMURA, S., ITO, H. and AHMED, F.I.: 'End-effect of 
induction-type linear motor', J. Fac. Engng. Univ. Tokyo A, 
1969, No.7, 32-3. In Japanese

364
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1970 
ANDREI, R.: ’Determining the distribution of magnetic
field in the air gap of a linear motor with inductor in 
short circuit
*,
 Electrotehnica (Rumania), 1970, 18, No.11, 
S417-25. In Rumanian
BOLTON, H.: ’Forces in induction motors with laterally 
asymmetric sheet secondaries', Proc. IEE, 1970, 117, No.12, 
2241-8
BONNEFILLE, R. and KANT, M.: ’Application of electromag­
netic field theory to linear induction machines', Rev.
Phys. Appl. (France), 1970, 5, No.5, 743-57. In French
BONNEFILLE, R. and KANT, M.: ’Contribution to the study 
of the linear induction machine', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1970 
79, No.10, 846-52. In French
de FLEURY, B.: ’Contribution to the study of end effects 
in the linear motor', These de Maltrise, Universite de 
Laval, Quebec, June 1970
de FLEURY, B., POLOUJADOFF, M. and ROBERT, J.: 'A 
contribution to the study of end effect in linear 
induction machines and the calculation of braking due 
to a magnet', Symposium on Linear Induction Motors, 
Grenoble, 15 April 1970
DIMBOIU, E.: 'The study of the electromagnetic field 
in the air gap and the stator core of the linear 
induction motor', Electrotehnica (Rumania), 1970, 18, 
No.3, 77-83. In Rumanian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
365
DIMBOIU, E. and PESTEANU, O.: 'Present position of 
power calculation for travelling field linear motors', 
Wiss. Z. Tech. Hochsch. Karl-Marx-Stadt (Germany), 1970, 
No.3, 333-43. In German
KALNIN, T.K., PETRAVICHA, R.A. and PRIEDNICK, E.V. : 
'The skin-effect in non-salient rotor induction pumps', 
Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1970, No.l, 121-6. In Russian 
(English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
KANT, M. and BONNEFILLE, R.: 'Contribution to the study 
of the diffusion of travelling magnetic fields in a 
linear machine of many different zones', C.R. Acad. Sci. 
(Paris), 1970, 270, Ser.B, No.9, 592-5. In French
KANT, M., MOUILLET, A. and SCHEUER, J.-M.: 'Theoretical 
and experimental study of LIM windings', Symposium on 
Linear Induction Motors, Grenoble, 15 April 1970
MATSUMURA, Y. : 'Magnetic flux density distribution of 
the unloaded linear motor', Quart. Rept. Railway Technical 
Research Institute, JNR, 1970, 11, No.4, 223-8
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Analysis of double-sided 
linear motors', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1970, 90, No.3, 
21-31
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Equivalent circuits for 
double-sided linear motors', ibid., 32-41
NORTH, G.G.: 'An analysis of a linear induction machine
*,
 
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Irvine, 1970 

366
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
001, B.T. and WHITE, D.C.: 'Traction and normal forces 
in the linear induction motor', IEEE Trans., 1970, PAS-89, 
No.4, 638-45
PARTS, I.R. and PARTS, R.R.: ’ 'Parameters of the equivalent 
circuit for cylindrical linear induction machines', Magn. 
Gidrodin. (USSR), 1970, No.3, 109-16. In Russian (English 
trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
RADULET, R. and ILFRIM, A.: 'The calculus of the force 
acting on the thin narrow plate rotor of linear motors', 
Rev. Roum. Sci. Tech. Electrotech. Energet., 1970, 15, 
No.l, 3-15. In German
STIER, E.: 'Digital measurement and control of speed of 
a trailing car driven by linear motors', Elektrie, 1970, 
24, No.10, 356-8. In German
TIMMEL, H.: 'Contribution to the determination of the 
stationary operation of linear short-stator motors', ibid., 
341-3. In German
YAMADA, H.: 'Equivalent circuit of the induction motor 
with a double-layer solid rotor
*,
 Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 
1970, 90, No.3, 92-101
YAMAMURA, S., ITO, H. and AHMED, F.J.: 'End effects of 
linear induction motor', ibid., No.2, 20-30
1971 ABRITSKA, M. Yu., BUGROV, N.S., MIKEL'SON, A.E. and 
CHEMODUROV, N.P.: 'The influence of channel shape on the 
parameters of a cylindrical pump', Magn. Gidrodin (USSR), 
1971, No.4, 99-104. In Russian (English trans, in
Magnetohydrodynami cs (USA))

BIBLIOGRAPHY
367
BRUNELLI, B. : 'Corrective coefficients and interference 
torques for an induction motor with a discontinuous 
stator', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 90-4. In French
BURNHAM, D.C.: 'Asymptotic lift-to-drag ratios for 
magnetic suspension systems', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1971, 
42, No.9, 3455-7
de FLEURY, B., POLOUJADOFF, M. and ROBERT, J.: 'The 
linear motor: contribution to the end effect in linear 
induction machines and to the calculation of magnet
braking', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 83-9. In French
DIMBOIU, E.: 'Contributions to the calculation of force 
for flat linear, travelling field motors', Elektrie, 1971, 
26, No.6, 207-8. In German
FINK, H.J. and HOBRECHT, C.E.: 'Instability of vehicles 
levitated by eddy current repulsion - case of an infinitely 
long current loop', J. Appl. Phys. (USA), 1971, 42, No.9, 
3446-50
FREEMAN, E.M. and LOWTHER, D.A.: 'Transverse edge effects 
in linear induction motors', Proc. IEE, 1971, 118, No.12, 
1820-1
HAGEMANN, W.: 'Computerised calculation of the working 
performance of linear motors with short stators', Elektrie, 
1971, 26, No.6, 209-10. In German
JUFER, M.: 'Determination of the specific characteristics 
of the linear motor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.2, 
105-13. In French

368
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
KANT, M., MOUILLET, A. and SCHEUER, J.-M.: 'Theoretical 
and experimental survey on the windings of linear induction 
motors', ibid., No.l, 13-9. In French
LIPKIS, R.S. and WANG, T.C.: 'Single-sided linear 
induction motor (SLIM). A study of thrust and lateral 
forces', TRW Systems Group, McLean, Va., Final Report No. 
06818-W032-R0-00, FRA-RT-72-25 for US Dept of Transportation 
under Contract DOT-C-353-66, June 1971
MATSUMIYA, T. and TAKAGI, K.: 'End effect and equivalent 
circuit of linear induction machines', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 
1971, 91, No.l, 117-36
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Characteristics of double­
sided linear motors with secondary conductors vertically 
displaced from a symmetrical position', Technol. Rep.
Kyushu Univ. (Japan), 1971, 44, No.6, 769-75. In Japanese
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: ’Characteristics of linear 
motors with sandwich compound conducting plates', Elec. 
Eng. Jap. (USA), 1971, 91, No.l, 183-93
ONUKI, T. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'Optimised design of 
linear-induction-motor accelerators', Proc. IEE, 1971, 118, 
No.2, 349-55
POLOUJADOFF, M. and REYX, P.: 'Intermediate method for 
the analysis of a linear induction motor', Rev. Gen. Elec., 
1971, 80, No.2, 99-104. In French
POLOUJADOFF, M., SABONNADIERE, J.-C., PELENC, Y. and 
REYX, P.: 'Design hypotheses for linear induction motors', 
ibid., No.l, 29-33. In French

BIBLIOGRAPHY
369
SABONNADIERE, J.-C. and POLOUJADOFF, M. : 'Determination 
of the lines of current and characterization of the edge 
effect', ibid., 34-8. In French
VALDMANIS, Ya. Ya. , VEZE, A.K. and ZUSMAN, I.M.: 'The 
force density distribution in an approximate model for 
an open core electromagnetic pump', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 
1971, No.4, 87-93. In Russian (English trans, in 
Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
WANG, T.C., SMYLIE, J.W. and PEI, R.Y.: 'Single-sided 
linear induction motor', IEEE 6th Annual Meeting of 
Industry and General Applications Group, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA, 18-21 Oct. 1971, 1-10
WEH, H., BRAESS, H. and MOSEBACH, H.: 'The analytical 
treatment of asynchronous linear machines', Energy 
Conversion, 1971, 11, 25-37. In German
WIART, A.: 'Separation of the variables in the study 
of linear or rotary motors with eddy currents', Rev. 
Jeumont-Schneider, 1971, No.12, 52-62. In French
WIART, A.: 'Separation of variables in the study of 
currents of linear or rotary motors with eddy currents', 
Rev. Gen. Elec., 1971, 80, No.l, 20-8. In French
YAMAMURA, S., ITO, H. and ISHIKAWA, Y.: 'Influence of 
end effect on characteristics of linear induction 
motors', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1971, 91, No.l, 136-47

370
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1972 
ALEKSANDROV, A.K. and BALTADZHIEV, G.M. : 'Magnetic field
in the window of magnetic systems with rectilinear 
movement of the armature', Izv. Vmei 'Lenin
*
 (Bulgaria), 
1972, 30, No.2, 49-57. In Russian
ALLIN, G., CREIGHTON, G.K. and HALL, J.K.: 'Operation 
and analysis of an invertor-fed-linear-motor system', 
Proc. IEE, 1972, 119, No.11, 1587-94
BERZIN, Ya. Ya. : 'Effect of departure from airgap 
cylindricality on the balance of electromagnetic forces 
on the rotor of an electric motor', Izv. VUZ Priborostr. 
(USSR), 1972, 15, No.3, 53-8. In Russian
BLAZHKO, Yu. M. and OVCHARENKO, T.I.: 'An experimental 
investigation of linear systems with travelling magnetic 
fields', Elektrotekhnika (USSR), 1972, No.2, 32-3. 
In Russian (English trans, in Soviet Elect. Engng.)
BOLDEA, I.: 'Method of electromagnetic calculation of 
low velocity linear induction motors', Electrotehnica 
(Rumania), 1972, 20, No.l, 16-23. In Rumanian
BUGENIS, S., CESONIS, V., SMILGEVICIUS, A. and RUMMICH, E.: 
'The effect of leakage flux in the coupling yoke of a 
linear induction motor', Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau 
(Austria), 1972, 89, No.11, 458-60. In German
CHEMERIS, V.T. and PIS'MENNYI, A.S.: 'The electromagnetic 
field in the air gap of an asymmetrically fed linear 
induction machine', Probl. Tekh. Elektr. (USSR), 1972, 
No.38, 33-43. In Russian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
371
DAL HO IM: 'Study on the travelling magnetic field in the 
linear induction motor with its end effect taken into 
consideration', J. Korean Inst. Elect. Engrs., 1972, 21, 
No.4, 7-14. In Korean
DIMBOIU, E.: 'An equivalent circuit of the asynchronous 
motor applied to the travelling field linear motor
*,
Bui. Univ. Brasov A (Rumania), 1972, 14, 151-61. In Rumanian
DONCHEV, D., BOZHINOV, Ya. and BOZHINOVA, M.: 'Single 
inductor linear induction motor with ferromagnetic armature', 
Tekh. Misul (Bulgaria), 1972, 9, No.5, 93-6. In Bulgarian
D'YAKOV, V.I. and FROLOV, A.N.: 'Speed control of 
induction motors with an open stator by a thyristor 
voltage regulator', Izv. VUZ Elektromekh. (USSR), 1972, 
No.2, 198-201. In Russian
D'YAKOV, V.I., FROLOV, A.N. and D'YAKOVA, N.V.: 'Determina­
tion of the mechanical characteristics of linear induction 
motors from the equivalent circuit diagram', Izv. VUZ Energ. 
(USSR), 1972, No.7, 54-8. In Russian
ELLIOTT, D.G.: 'Numerical analysis method for linear 
induction machines', 12th Symposium on Engineering Aspects 
of Magnetohydrodynamics, Argonne, Illinois, 27-29 March 
1972
HAYASHI, N.: 'Analysis of induction motors controlled 
by symmetrically triggered delta-connected thyristors, 
Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1972, 92, No.5, 105-15

372
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
HUBNER, Kl.-D., MOSEBACH, H. and WEH, H.: 'A contribution 
to the calculation of the air gap in asynchronous linear 
motors', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1972, 93, No.11, 644-6. 
In German
IWAMOTO, M., YAMAMURA, S. and IWANTO, M. : 'End effect of 
high-speed linear induction motors', Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 
1972, 92, No.3, 94-101
JUFER, M. and WAVRE, N.: 'The linear motor development 
theory and applications', Bull. Assoc. Suisse Electr. 
(Switzerland), 1972, 63, No.15, 844-56. In French
KAPCSOS, P. and TEVAN, G.: 'Application and calculation 
of linear eddy-current motors with ferromagnetic lining', 
Elektrotechnika (Hungary), 1972, 65, No.12, 458-65. 
In Hungarian
MOSEBACH, H.: 'The effects of finite length and width 
in linear induction motor, for both short primary and 
short secondary types', Ph.D. Dissertation, T.U. 
Braunschweig, 1972. In German
NITKA, S.: 'Dynamic processes of linear induction motors', 
Przeglad Elektrotech. (Poland), 1972, 48, No.4, 153-6. In 
Polish
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Characteristics of double­
sided linear motors with sandwich compound secondary 
conductors vertically displaced from a symmetrical position
*
, 
Technol. Rep. Kyushu Univ. (Japan), 1972, 45, No.l, 72-9. 
In Japanese

BIBLIOGRAPHY
373
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Qualitative studies of 
vertical forces of double-sided linear induction motors', 
ibid., No.4, 503-5. In Japanese
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Quantitative studies of 
vertical forces of double-sided linear induction motors', 
ibid., 506-13. In Japanese
OOKA, H.: 'Effect of wide air gap part in shaded pole 
motor', Hitachi Hyoron (Japan), 1972, 54, No.3, 203-6. 
In Japanese
PARTS, R.R.: 'Equivalent circuit of an induction motor 
with a large air gap between the stator and the rotor', 
Izv. VUZ. Elektromekh. (USSR), 1972, No.4, 385-7. 
In Russian
PELENC, Y.: 'Two slot linear induction motor', Merlin 
Gerin SA, Patent USA 3679952, 19 Jan. 1971; publ.
25 July 1972; prior. 25 Feb. 1970, France 7006858
POLOUJADOFF, M.: ’The circle diagram of linear motors 
with large air gap and very resistant rotor', C.R. Acad. 
Sci. (Paris), 1972, 275, Ser.B, No.22, 813-6. In French
RUMMICH, E.: 'A contribution on the calculation of 
suspension and driving properties of asynchronous linear 
motors', Elek. Bahnen (Germany), 1972, 43, No.11, 242-5. 
In German
STEPINA, J.: 'Theory of an induction motor with 
elliptical stator-bore', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) A, 1972, 
93, No.4, 187-9. In German

374
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SYUSYUKIN, A.I.: ’An approach to the calculation of an 
active type linear induction machine', Probl. Tekh.
Elektr. (USSR), 1972, No.38, 88-93. In Russian
SYUSYUKIN, A.I.: ’Exciting field of a single phase 
linear inductor with varying magnetic field wave phase 
velocity', ibid., 43-7. In Russian
TIMMEL, H.: 'Contribution to the prediction of the 
stationary operating performance of short-stator linear 
motors', Wiss. Z. Tech. Hochsch. Karl-Marx-Stadt (Germany), 
1972, No.6, 751-74. In German
TIMMEL, H.: 'Current density distribution in the moving 
plate of a travelling field linear motor', ibid., 775-88. 
In German
TIMMEL, H.: 'Velocity variation in travelling-field 
linear motors', Elektrie, 1972, 26, No.8, 228-31. In German
VAKLEV, 1.1.: 'Allowing for the influence of the 
secondary system in a linear induction machine with an 
armature broader than the induction coil', Izv. Vmei 
'Lenin' (Bulgaria), 1972, 29, No.2, 65-85. In Russian
VASIL'EV, S.V. and KOZLOV, A.I.: 'Electromagnetic effects 
in cylindrical linear induction pumps', Magn. Gidrodin.
(USSR), 1972, No.4, 87-94. In Russian (English trans, in 
Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
WEH, H., von GRUMBKOW, V. and MOSEBACH, H.: 'Kraftwirkungen
orthogonal zur Bewegungsrichtung beim asynchronen Linearmotor', 
Elektrotech. Z.(ETZ) A, 1972, 93, No.l, 1-7

BIBLIOGRAPHY
375
1973
YAMAMURA t S.: The theory of linear induction motors 
(New York: John Wiley# Halsted Press) 1972
YAMAMURA, S., ITO, H. and ISHIKAWA, Y.: 'Theories of the 
linear induction motor and compensated linear induction 
motor', IEEE Trans., 1972, PAS-91, No.4, 1700-10
AGARWAL, P.D. and WANG, T.C.: 'Evaluation of fixed and 
moving primary linear induction motor systems', Proc. IEEE, 
1973, 61, No.5, 631-7
ALVES, M.F. and BURKE, P.E.: 'Single-sided linear 
induction motor with magnetic material in the secondary', 
IEEE 8th Annual Meeting of Industry Applications Society, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA, 8-11 Oct. 1973, 321-9
ANDREI, R.: 'Normal and tangential forces developing in 
high speed motors with reciprocating movement',
Electrotehnica (Rumania), 1973, 21, No.2, 49-55. In Rumanian
BUDIG, P.-K., HAGEMANN, W. and TIMMEL, H.: 'Design of 
three-phase linear motors', Elektrie, 1973, 27, No.5, 
253-6. In German
BUGYANIS, S.A. and CHESONIS, V.I.: 'End effects in three 
phase linear induction machines taking account of the 
shunting fluxes on the reverse side of the stators', Magn. 
Gidrodin. (USSR), 1973, No.3, 140-2. In Russian (English 
trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
CARRER, A.: 'Linear induction motor contribution to the 
study of the magnetic field in the gap', Atti Accad. Sci. 
Torino I (Italy), 1973, 107, No.6, 774-51. In Italian

376
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
CHESONIS, V.I.: ’The magnetic field structure and the 
number of poles in linear induction machines * , Magn. 
Gidrodin. (USSR), 1973, No.3, 76-80. In Russian 
(English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
DUKOWICZ, J.: 'Analysis of linear induction machines 
with discrete windings and finite iron length', IEEE 
8th Annual Meeting of Industry Applications Society, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA, 8-11 Oct. 1973, 311-9
FIENNES, J.: 'New approach to general theory of electrical 
machines using magnetic equivalent circuits', Proc. IEE, 
1973, 120, No.l, 94-104
FOGGIA, A., GRELLET, G. and SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: 'Numerical 
and experimental study of the two-dimensional distribution 
of the inductance of linear electromagnetic device', 
C.R. Acad. Sci. (Paris), 1973, 276, Ser.B, No.14, 591-4. 
In French
HESMONDHALGH, D.E.: 'High-torque low-speed motor using 
magnetic attraction to produce rotation', Proc. IEE, 1973 
120, No.l, 61-6
HOLLEY, H.J., NASAR, S.A. and del CID, L. Jr.: 
'Computations of field and forces in a two-sided linear 
induction motor', IEEE Trans., 1973, PAS-92, No.4, 1310-5
IWAMOTO, M., OHNO, E., ITOH, T. and SHINRYO, Y.: 'End 
effect of high-speed linear induction motor', ibid., 
IA-9, No.6, 632-9
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 'How an experiment with iron filings 
provided new motor design information', Elec. Rev., 1973, 
192, No.3, 93-5

BIBLIOGRAPHY
377
LAITHWAITE, E.R.: ’Magnetic or electromagnetic? The 
great divide
*,
 Electronics & Power, 1973, 19, No.14, 310-12
LANG, A.: ’The effect of stray fields on the design and 
performance of linear induction motors’, Ph.D. Dissertation, 
T.U. Braunschweig, 1973. In German
NASAR, S.A. and del CID, L. Jr.: 'Certain approaches to 
the analysis of single-sided linear induction motors', 
Proc. IEE, 1973, 120, No.4, 477-83
NICOLAS, A. and SABONNADIERE, J.-C.: 'Etude des 
caracteristiques electromecaniques d'un moteur en tenant 
compte des effets de bord et des effets d'extremites', 
Symposium on Linear Motors, Capri, Italy, 19-21 June 1973
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Characteristics of double­
sided linear induction motors with secondary conductor 
vertically displaced from a symmetrical position
*
, 
Elec. Eng. Jap. (USA), 1973, 93, No.6, 38-46
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Space harmonic analysis 
of linear induction motors', ibid., No.2, 42-50
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'Studies of vertical forces 
of double-sided linear induction motors', JIEE 
(Japan), 1973, 93-B, No.10, 471-8
NORTH, G.G.: 'Harmonic analysis of a short stator linear 
induction machine using a transformation technique', 
IEEE Trans., 1973, PAS-92, No.5, 1733-43
OBERRETL, K.: 
'Dreidimensionale Berechnung des Linearmotors
mit Berucksichtigung des Endeffekte und der Wicklungsverteilung', 
Symposium on Linear Motors, Capri, Italy, 19-21 June 1973

378
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
OBERRETL, K.: ’Three-dimensional calculation of linear 
motor taking edge effects and winding distribution into 
account', Arch. Elektrotech. (Germany) , 1973, 55, No.4, 
181-90. In German
OOI, B.-T.: ’A generalized machine theory of the linear 
induction motor', IEEE Trans., 1973, PAS-92, No.4, 1252-9
PASCALE, D. and PUFLEA, I.: 'The study of linear motors', 
Stud. Cercet. Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania), 1973, 23, 
No.l, 177-99. In Rumanian
POLOUJADOFF, M. : *A  study of the form of the field of 
force normal to the air-gap in linear induction motors', 
Rev. E. (Belgium), 1973, 7, No.5, 114-8. In French
SKOBELEV, V.E.: 'Limiting factors in operation in linear 
motors at superhigh speeds', Rail Int. (Belgium), 1973, 
4, No.2, 269-76
TIMMEL, H.: 'Contribution to the transverse effect of 
short-stator linear motors', Elektrie, 1973, 27, No.5, 
257-9. In German
TUROWSKI, J.: 'Methods of the calculation of field and 
secondary parameters of linear induction motors', 
Razpr. Electrotech. (Poland), 1973, 19, No.2, 371-96. 
In Polish
VOL'DEK, A.I., KARASEV, A.V. and KIENKO, A.I.: 'Engineering 
methods of calculating secondary medium parameters in the 
equivalent networks for flat linear induction machines with 
side bars', Magn. Gidrodin. (USSR), 1973, No.l, 99-104. 
In Russian (English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))

BIBLIOGRAPHY
379
VOL'DEK, A.I., MIKIRTICHEV, A.A., SOLDATENKOVA, N.A. 
and TOLVINSKAYA, E.V.: 'The influence of end effects 
on the operation of a linear induction machine without 
complex elements', ibid., No.2, 82-8. In Russian 
(English trans, in Magnetohydrodynamics (USA))
1974 
ALDEN, R.T.H. and NOLAN, P.J.: 'Transfer-matrix analysis
of linear induction machines with finite width and depth', 
Proc. IEE, 1974, 121, No.11, 1393-8
BOGDANOV, V.I.: 'Structural stability of linear 
electromechanical systems', Izv. VUZ Elektromekh. (USSR), 
1974, No.12, 1291-4. In Russian
BOLDEA, I. and NASAR, S.A.: 'Simulation of high-speed 
linear-induction motor end effects in low-speed tests', 
Proc. IEE, 1974, 121, No.9, 961-4
BROUGH, J.J.: 'Anomalies in the design of direct current 
linear motors', Elec. Times, 20 June 1974, No.4286, 8-9
EDWARDS, J.D.: 'Scaling laws for electromagnets on 
magnetically levitated vehicles', Elec. Rev., 1974, 195, 
No.21, 745
FAWZI, T.H. and BURKE, P.E.: 'Edge effects in induction 
problems', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.3, 429-30
KLIMAN, G.B. and ELLIOTT, D.G.: 'Linear induction motor 
experiments in comparison with mesh/matrix analysis', 
IEEE Trans., 1974, PAS-93, No.5, 1624-33

380
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
LIN, S.-C.: 'A Fourier series analysis of linear 
induction machines’, Thesis, University of Illinois, 
Chicago Circle, 1974 (available from Univ. Microfilms, 
Ann Arbor, Mich., Order No.75-1796)
LOWTHER, D.A. and FREEMAN, E.M.: 'Electromagnetic scale 
models of linear induction motors', IEE Conference on 
Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 167-72
MIDDLEMISS, J.J.: 'Current pulsation of induction motor 
driving a reciprocating compressor1, Proc. IEE, 1974, 
121, No.11, 1399-403
NICOLAS, A. and SABONNADI&RE, J.-C.: 'Computation of 
constant voltage operation characteristics of linear 
induction motors', IEE Conference on Linear Electric 
Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 185-90
NONAKA, S. and YOSHIDA, K.: 'The characteristics of 
high-speed linear induction motors analysed using a space 
harmonic technique', ibid., 179-84
OBERRETL, K.: 'Single sided linear motor with cage in 
the secondary', Arch. Elektrotech. (Germany), 1974, 56, 
No.6, 305-19. In German
OLLENDORFF, F.: 'Relativistic electrodynamics of the 
linear induction machine', ibid., No.5, 278-83. In German
PESTEANU, 0., DIMBOIU, E. and BIDIAN, D.: 'The effect 
of the longitudinal static end of an asynchronous linear 
motor', Stud. Cercet. Energ. Electrotehn. (Rumania), 
1974, 24, No.l, 139-53. In Rumanian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
381
RADHAKRISHNA, C. and RAO, B.C.: ’Energy transients in 
controlling the speed of linear induction motors’, J, 
Instn. Engrs. (India) Elect. Engng. Div., 1974, 55, Pt.ELI, 
11-14
RYASHENTSEV, N.P., MALOV, A.T., UGAROV, G.G. and FEDONIN, V.N.: 
’Research into electromagnetic motors of impact action with 
linear travelling of armature’, IEE Conference on Linear 
Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 95-100
SCHNEIDER, J.: ’Calculation of eddy currents in linear 
motor geometries. A two-dimensional integral equation 
approach', IEEE Trans., 1974, MAG-10, No.4, 1097-9
SKALSKI, C.A.: ’Application of a general analysis for 
single-sided linear induction motors’, IEE Conference on 
Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 197-202
SKOBELEV, V.E.: 'Influence of longitudinal fringe effect 
on the operation of high speed traction induction linear 
motors', Rail Int. (Belgium), 1974, 5, No.12, 767-81
SKOBELOW, V., SOLOWJEW, H. and EPIFASOW, A.: 'Edge 
effects in the end zones of linear railway motors and 
their influence on performance
*,
 Wiss. Z. Tech. Univ. 
Pres. (Germany), 1974, 23, No.2, 375-83. In German
SLEMON, G.R., TURTON, R.A., BURKE, P.E. and DEWAN, S.B.: 
’Analysis and control of a linear synchronous motor 
for high-speed ground transport', IEE Conference on 
Linear Electric Machines, London, 21-23 Oct. 1974, 143-8

382
A HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
1975
TAKIZAWA, M., OTSUKI, M. and SUZUKI, T. : ’Theoretical 
analysis of a passive magnetic suspension system with 
an eight-pole stator - study on a magnetic suspension 
system for floated inertial sensors (1st Report)’, 
J. Jap. Soc. Precis. Eng. (Japan), 1974, 40, No.7, 
557-63. In Japanese
VASILEV, I.N. and POPOVA-CHURANOVA NIPKIEP, G.B.: 'On 
calculating the parameters of three-phase linear 
induction motors', Elektro. Prom.-st & Priborostr. (Bulgaria), 
1974, 9, No.5, 135-8. In Bulgarian
WEH, H., VOLLSTEDT, W. and MEINS, J.: 'Modell eines 
integrierten Trag- und Vortriebsaggregates auf 
elektromagnetischer Grundlage', Elektrotech. Z. (ETZ) a, 
1974, 95, No.12, 684-5
YUN JONG LEE, DAL HO IM and SOO HYUN BAEK: 'A study 
on transverse edge effect in linear induction motor 
with sheet rotor', J. Korean Inst. Elect. Engrs., 
1974, 23, No.4, 39-45. In Korean
BOHN, G.H. and LANGERHOLC, J.: 'Theoretical and 
experimental investigation of eddy current effects', 
International Conference on High Speed Ground 
Transportation, Arizona State University, Jan. 1975 
(publ. by High Speed Ground Transportation Journal)
BOLDEA, I. and NASAR, S.A.: 
'Quasi-one-dimensional
theory of linear induction motors with half-filled 
primary end-slots', Proc. IEE, 1975, 122, No.l, 61-6
BOLDEA, I. and NASAR, S.A.: 'Thrust and normal 
forces in a segmented-secondary linear reluctance 
motor1, ibid., No.9, 922-4

BIBLIOGRAPHY
383
ELLIOTT, D.G.: ’Matrix analysis of linear induction 
machines’, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., 
Final Report No.FRA-ORiD-75-77 for US Dept of 
Transportation under Contract No.RD 152, Sept. 1975
FOGGIA, A., SABONNADIERE, J.-C. and SILVESTER, P.: 
•Finite element solution of saturated travelling 
magnetic field problems’, IEEE Trans., 1975, PAS-94, 
No.3, 866-71
FREEMAN, E.M.: 'Equivalent circuit for the transverse- 
flux tubular induction motor', Proc. IEE, 1975, 122, 
No.7, 744-5
FREEMAN, E.M., LOWTHER, D.A. and LAITHWAITE, E.R.: 
'Scale-model linear induction motors', ibid., 721-6
HOLTZ, J.: 'Linear asynchronous motor without iron, 
force components and their control', Elektrotech. Z. 
(ETZ) A, 1975, 96, No.9, 396-400. In German
MENENDEZ, R.C. and LEE, S.-W.: 'Side force in coil- 
sheet magnetic levitation systems', Proc. IEEE, 1975, 
63, No.5, 768-76
OLLENDORFF, F.: 'Relativistic electrodynamics of the 
linear synchronous machine', Arch. Electrotech. (Germany), 
1975, 57, No.l, 27-30. In German
OOI, B.-T. and EASTHAM, A.R.: 'Transverse edge effects 
of sheet guideways in magnetic levitation', IEEE Trans., 
1975, PAS-94, No.l, 72-80

384 
a HISTORY OF LINEAR ELECTRIC MOTORS
SYUSYUKIN, A.I.: ’Longitudinal edge effect in linear 
induction devices with changing phase velocity and 
magnetic waveguide width along its length
*
, Probl. Tekh.
Elektr. (USSR}, 1975, No.51, 118-22. In Russian
WAVRE, N. and JUFER, M.: ’Choice of linear induction 
motor parameters’, Bull. Assoc. Suisse Electr.
(Switzerland), 1975, 66, No.10, 530-40. In French

Index
[Bold type denotes major topics]
accountant 93, 122, 180
Adkins, Dr B. 45,91,212
AEG 191
Aerotrain 130,136,149,160
Societe de F 137,150,151
Suburban 149, 150
airgap 3,5,44,115,194,213,218,
220, 232, 233
windings 219
Alcan Industries 113
ALIP 44,89
Allan, T. 20,21,30
alternator 3, 46
Ampere, A. M. 6, 35
analogue 6, 36, 87, 90, 95
Andree, H. 185
angled-field motor 86, 117
Apps 18,19,30
APT 149, 174
arch motor 114,115,117
Armstrong, D. S. 92, 135, 136, 226,
228
Astroglide 192, 193
Babbage, C. 41,56,229
Bachelet, E. 38-41,52,61-4,68,79,
96, 97, 125, 137
back-to-back 71-5
Baily, Prof. W. 27,28
Ball, R. D. 44
Barthalon, M. 143, 153, 156
Barwell, Prof. F. T. 42, 126-8, 142,
143, 174, 187
Beams, J. W. 104
Bedford, Peer and Tonks 100,101, 
125
Beeching, Lord 128
Behrend, B. A. 76
Bertin, J. 130, 133, 136, 137, 143,
149, 150, 152, 160
Birkeland, K. 36,38
Birmingham Airport 226
Bliss, D. S. 145, 148
Bolton, Dr H. R. 112,148,169
Boucherot, P. 2,21,36-8,114
Bowers, Dr B. 13-15,19
British Rad 40, 42, 130, 135, 136,
141, 167, 168, 177-9, 197, 198,
211, 226
research labs 129
British Transport Commission 111, 127
Brown, Dr R. 122
Brown Boveri 191
Brush dynamo 24, 25, 30
Budd Co. 226
Budig, P-K. J. 143
Cabinentaxi 192
Centener, P. 34
Chariot d’essais 151
chemist 29
China Lake 183
Chirgwin, K. M. 183, 185
ChurchiU, Sir W. S. 40,63
claw-pole motor 220, 221
Cockerell, Sir C. 133, 137
Colquhoun and Partners 179 
communication 48, 121, 180, 226
385

386
INDEX
commutator motor 3, 8, 11, 12, 19, 
44, 59, 225
concedance 123
cone of attraction 101,165
core steel 76
counter-rotating fields 7 5
courage 229, 230
Crompton, Col. R. E. B. 25, 27, 30
Crompton-Brunton alternator 28, 30 
cryogenic 140,169,171,177,178,
180, 189, 192, 195, 222, 225, 22
curiosity 229
current collection 181, 184
Dakeyne, E. and J. 19
Davey, A. W. 162, 165
Davidson, R. 32
Davies, Prof. E. J. 219
de Meritens & Cie, A. 30
deep-bar rotor 3 7
Demag 192
Department of the Environment 168
Department of Trade and Industry
167, 175, 176, 180
Department of Transportation,
Washington D.C. 121, 140, 152, 
153, 157, 178-80, 182, 187, 188 
design 2,93,230,231 
diamagnetic 98, 99 
Dickenson 23, 30 
disc dynamo 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 21 
disc rig 132 
Donnaureid 190 
double-cage rotor 37 
double-sided sandwich motor 38, 93, 
142, 200, 205 
dual 36 
Duke of Edinburgh 128, 129
Earith 138, 139, 145, 172
Earnshaw, S. 98
theorem 98, 99, 105, 144
Eastham, Prof. J. F. 153, 161, 162,
163, 169, 174, 200
eccentric engine 14-17, 30
E-core 200,201,202,216,217
edge effect 114,119,120,130
Edwards, Prof. S. F. 176
EEC 190
efficiency 29, 44, 87, 88, 92, 98, 108, 
120, 135, 188
Eisselt, G. 66, 79
electric hammer 31
electromagnetic gun 33
electromagnetic joint 130, 131, 136, 
202, 209, 210, 211
Electropult 45-7, 52, 69, 85, 111, 125
Ellison, Prof. A. J. 176
Emsland 226
energy machine 120
Erlangen 191,192,226 
evolution 2, 93, 230, 231
Fairbanks-Morse 8
Fairweather, W. 79
falling upwards 207
Faraday, M. 2,3,6-11,21,23,25,30, 
31,35, 36,41,77, 93, 125
fashion 5, 38, 44, 52, 69, 84, 92, 93 
fashiongraph 87-9
Federal Railroad Administration 186 
feedback amplifier 42, 98, 113, 177 
Fellows, T. G. 134, 145, 147, 148, 
160, 163, 166, 169, 209
Ferranti, S. Z. de 26, 30
Ferraris, G. 75, 76, 90
ferromagnetic 4, 9, 28 
first cost 88
Fitzgerald 26
Fleming, Prof. J. A. 35, 36, 40, 64, 97
FLIP 44, 89
force machine 120
Ford, Prof. Sir H. 175, 176
Ford Motor Co. 152, 158, 171, 178
Forman, J. 66, 80
Fox Talbot, W. H. 19, 21, 32
Freeman, Prof. E. M. 108-10, 142, 
190
Froment 18, 19, 26, 30
Gamow, R. J. and Harris, J. F. 37
Garrett Corporation 121, 140, 145, 
153, 156-8, 179, 181, 182, 184
Geary, P. J. 100
General Motors 159
generalised machine theory 45, 91
generator 3, 107
Gometz 151, 156, 160
goodness (factor) 5, 36, 60, 77, 87, 
102, 129, 202, 208
Gorton (Loco Works) 127, 209 
experimental machine 128-30, 
169, 174, 179
Gourdon, G. 62, 79
Gramme, Z. T. 23, 25, 30 
ring winding 23-5, 27, 30, 144, 
153, 156, 157, 186, 190, 209
Greatorex, Dr N. 206

INDEX
387
Greig, Prof. J. 110
Grondhal, K. T. 66, 80
Haberhauer, K. 68, 81
Hart, G. F. 178,179
Hawker Siddeley 137, 169, 171, 179, 
190
Hearder 32
Heaviside, O. 108, 231
helical motor 120
Hennessey, D. 134
Herbert Morris (Cranes) 157
Heseltine, M. 167
Hesmondhalgh, Dr D. E. 36
Hjorth, S. 32
Hodges, P. 66, 80
Holmes, F.H. 21,30
Hopewell, F. B. 64-6, 79, 82
Hopkinson, J. 26
Hovercraft Development Ltd 137, 153
Hovershow 66 137,138 
hysteresis motor 3, 58, 220
Imperial College 108, 109, 132, 136, 
141, 143, 149, 153, 162, 173-5, 
194,206, 217
Inglis, C.C. 127
Jacobi, Prof. 8, 32
Jacquard, J. M. 55,56,61,79,229
Japan Air Lines 172, 189, 197
Japanese National Railways 159, 189, 
197, 226, 227
Japolsky, Dr N. 41,43, 108-10
hammer 42, 43
Jasicek, A. and Polnauer, F. 64-6, 79
Jayawant, Prof. B. V. 34, 177
jet engine 38
Johnson and Johnson Ltd 67, 80
Jones, Dr S. 149
jumping ring 35, 39, 59, 66, 97, 104
Kapp, Dr G. 25
Karapetoff, V. 76
Kelvin, Lord 26
Kemper, H. 100,125
King’s College, London 109
Kings Norton, Lord 179
Kolm, Prof. H. H. 158
Komet 194
Krauss-Maffei 140,143,149,153, 
169, 171, 172, 178, 187-9, 197, 
226
Kron, G. 45
Ladd, W. 21,24,30 
lamination 45 
Lamme Medal 93 
Landspeed 178, 179
University Consultants 179
Lawrenson, Prof. P. J. 232 
laws of induction 31 
Laws of Nature 21
Le Moteur Lineaire 152, 157, 180, 186
Lenihan, Dr J. M. A. 1
Leonardo da Vinci 38 
levitation melting 102 
Linear Motor Programme Committee 
177
Linear Motors Ltd 134, 157, 162, 
172, 179, 224
Linier, C. and Latieule, Y. 67, 81 
Lintrol Systems 157 
liquid metal 42,103
pump 43,44,66,92,122,225 
stirring 45, 66, 122, 204
Llewelyn, J. D. 32
Lodge, Sir O. 26
logmotor 120 
loom 53, 56-8, 69
Lancashire 54
Lovell, W. V. 101, 102, 165
Lowe, J. 112,113
Maglev 100,149,152,169,172,178, 
180, 183, 187, 189, 194, 197-200, 
222, 226, 227
Magnarail 113
Magneplane 158, 187 
magnetic circuit 4, 6, 8, 9, 30, 33, 45, 
64, 77, 78, 100, 141, 144, 147 
equivalent circuit 13,123 
impedance 123 
inductance 123 
machine 5, 6, 37, 38 
pull 37, 38,57,64, 66,73, 93,111, 
114, 147, 205
Magnetic Reynolds Number 78 
Magnetic River 101, 163, 164, 174, 
176, 178, 181, 187, 194, 195, 
200, 201,209,210,213, 227
Manchester 48, 62, 85, 91, 101, 106, 
110, 112, 121, 134, 149, 153, 
156, 161, 198, 212
College of Technology 123 
University 69, 126
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
116, 158, 180, 187
Maxim, Sir H. 64

INDEX
388
Maxwell, J. C. 99,230,231
equations 93
Mayor of Pittsburgh 52
M-Bahn 225,227 
Meeus, J. 57-9,61, 79 
Merlin Gerin 149,150,151,157,177, 
180
Mershon, R. D. 34
Messerschmitt-Boiko w-Blohm 140, 153, 
155, 189, 192, 197, 198, 226 
metallurgist 29 
‘mixed M’ system 227
Motor Industry Research Association
121, 153-5
Muck, O. 103
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration 133
National Research Development 
Corporation 133, 134, 166-8, 
173, 179
Neave, A. 176 
niobium-tin 8, 99, 149 
Nix, DrG. F. 70,105,112
Okress, E. C. 104, 105
Ontario Urban Transportation Develop­
ment Corporation 187
Queen’s University, Kingston 188 
open magnetic circuit 117 
open-sided'motor 122 
Otis Elevator Co. 193
Pacinotti, A. 23, 30
Palmer, A. 167,176 
parallel magnetic circuit 123 
Park, R. H. 45,91
Parsons, C. A. & Co. Ltd 30
Partridge, G. W. 26 
permanent magnet 5, 9, 16, 19, 21, 59, 
60, 67, 82, 98, 105, 221, 225, 227 
permeability 4
Personal Rapid Transit systems 193
Peyton, Rt Hon. J. 174
Physical Society 27
Pilsen and Joel 25, 30
pinch effect 45,104
Pixii, A. H. 3,6,7,10,11,19,30,46 
Powell, J. R. and Danby, G. T. 227 
power factor 92, 108, 120, 135, 144, 
186-8, 200, 220, 233
power machine 120 
power/weight ratio 88, 120 
Pyke-Harris 28, 30
rack and pinion motor 34 
radar 3 8 
radiation pressure 98 
ratchet 36, 37 
reciprocating machine 14, 31-4, 36, 37 
reliability 44,69,88,120 
reluctance 4-6,20,66,67,215,232
motor 3,13,28,30,33,38,57-9, 
62, 82, 89, 220, 222, 232 
repulsion motor 59 
Reynolds, Prof. O. 196, 202, 212 
Rhodes, Prof. R. G. 177 
rocket sled 183 
Rohr Corporation 152,157,159,179, 
180, 186 
Romag 152 
Royal Aircraft Establishment 48, 49 
Royal Institution 35, 179 
Russell, R. L. and Norsworthy, K. H.
66, 198, 209 
Rutherford Laboratory 176
Sabonnadiere, J-C. 180 
Sadler, G.V. 110, 120, 134 
Scelzo, G. P. 192 
Schrage motor 77 
Science Museum 6, 8, 13, 15, 17-20, 
22, 24, 26, 27, 69, 73 
Science Research Council 130, 176, 
192 
scrap metal sorting 225 
Select Committee 126, 152, 157, 167, 
169,173-8 
self-oscillating motor 70, 71-5, 81, 82 
series connection 122 
shaded pole 3 5 
shading ring 105 
shape 8,26,52,67,77,123 
sheet-rotor motor 38, 39, 59, 64 
short primary 44 
Shturman, G. I. 85,116,120 
and Aronov, R. L. 85,115,117 
shuttle propulsion 53-9, 61, 64-7 
Siemens 21-3,25,30,191 
single-phase motor 74, 101 
SIP 44 
skewed slots 46 
skin effect 44 
slots 4, 136 
Smithsonian Institution 6 
Snow, Sir F. 113 
Souter Point lighthouse 21, 22, 30 
SPAR Aerospace Products Ltd 171-3 
Speedover Transport Ltd 137

INDEX
389
spherical motor 44, 76, 87, 116, 118, 
120, 205, 212-14
Spring, Dr K. 177,178 
stability 200, 206
Stanford Research Institute 152, 158, 
178
Stohrer, E. 7, 8, 23, 30
Sturgeon, W. 11,13,14,30 
superconductor 8, 9 
superimposed skewed windings 215, 
216
Sussex University 152, 177 
synchronous motor 3, 58, 61, 67, 86, 
180, 189, 194, 220, 223, 226, 227
Taylor, W.H. 14,19,30 
teeth 4,76,136,221 
Tesla, N. 2,27,30,53,105 
theory 230,231
Thomson, A. 26
Thomson, E. 35
Thomson and Houston 26, 27, 30
Tomlinson, Cyclopaedia of Useful Arts 
31-3
topology 2, 3, 7-12, 16, 25, 26, 34, 
52,57,91,92, 136, 148, 197, 
209,210,215,218, 222, 225, 
226,228
Toronto Urban Transit Scheme 170 
track joints 130, 131, 136, 202, 209-11
Tracked Hovercraft 109, 126, 134, 
136-41, 145, 148, 149, 158-60, 
166, 167, 169-72, 175-9, 190, 
197, 198, 202, 205, 213, 217 
transferance 123
Transpo 72 160, 164, 166, 169
Transportation Test Center, Pueblo 
181, 182, 186, 187
Transrapid 153, 155, 156, 194, 197, 
226
transverse flux 13, 36, 92, 136, 146, 
157, 166, 172, 181, 185, 192, 
197, 199, 202, 213, 216-18, 227 
motor 203-5
travelling field 20, 33, 44, 59, 60 
Tridim 152
Trombetta, P. 31, 34, 35
tubular motor 33, 35, 44, 59, 66, 68, 
83, 202, 203
unbalanced magnetic pull 38, 76, 143
unbalanced magnetic push 93, 143
Universities Steering Committee 178, 
192
URBA system 143,153,156
Van Depoele, C. 35
vernier motor 89
Victorri, M. 180
Von MiUer, O. 28
VonVago, P. J. 68,80
Warwick University 177
Watkinson, Rt Hon. H. 113
Wedgwood Benn, Rt Hon. A. 153
Weh, Prof. H. 192
Weil, A. 68, 83
West, Prof. J. C. 34,149,152
West German Ministry of Technology 
186
Westinghouse Corporation 45-7, 111, 
125
Wheatstone, Sir C. 13-17, 19, 21, 30, 
32
Wilde, H. 23,25
alternator 24, 30
WiUiams, Prof. Sir F. C. 26, 74, 76, 82, 
110, 116-18, 120, 122, 134,162
Wilson, P. B. 66, 80
wisdom 229
Woolrich 8,9,11,30
Wordingham, C. H. 26
World War I 38
World War II 38, 45, 69, 107, 108,
221
Xi-core 201,202
Young, Y. L., Jun. 66, 80
Zehden, A. 36-8,41,125
zig-zag track conductor 223
synchronous motor 227

