Laminate flooring-Lay it yourself! 
In today's trend of homely yet modern design is plenty of space for laminate 
flooring. The ease of maintenance and hygienic properties of this type of flooring 
are just two of the reasons that more and more people choose to go 'laminate'. It 
will be able to give you the feel of a wooden floor, without having to spend bags 
of money. And nowadays it is so easy to lay it yourself! 
 
With the development of the click-and-go laminates, you really don't need to be a 
professional to be able to lay your own floor. Which saves you a lot of money! In 
this guide we will give you a few handy pointers to laying your own laminate floor 
and how to care for it. 
 
What is laminate flooring? 
 
Laminate is a type of flooring that exists of different layers of material that all 
have different qualities. From top to bottom, in a typical laminate floor there are: 
a decorative surface (made of a resin-based melamine that is hard wearing), a 
wood-based core (which is the main component of a laminate floor), and a 
backing that is bonded to the underside of the core, which gives it its rigidity. 
 
Laminate flooring comes in all sorts of designs, mainly copying wood patterns and 
is produced in rectangular plank shape. But recently new designs have been put 
on the market, imitating slate and tiled flooring. Therefore these laminates have a 
square shape, but will still have the same main features of laminate flooring, 
namely durability, ease of maintenance and ease of fitting. 
 
Which flooring to choose? 
 
There are different types of laminate flooring, but both of them work with the 
tongue-and-groove principle and both of them are 'floating systems', which 
means that the floor is not attached to the under-floor, but is resting on the 
under-floor. First of all, there are two methods of putting the floor together: with 
glue and without glue. Glued flooring is put together by putting a bead of glue 
between the tongue and the groove. Glueless flooring is a system by which the 
panels are clicked together and gets more and more popular every day, as it is 
quicker and cleaner than the glued system. It is also possible to 'unclick' the 
panels and take them with you when you move. 
 
Laminate flooring comes in a lot of different qualities, thickness and water 
resistancy. Choose the best flooring you can afford and make sure the flooring 
you choose is appropriate for the room you're going to put it in. For example, you 
best use waterproof laminate flooring for the bathroom and the kitchen! Have a 
look around your local DIY stores, comparing qualities and prices to make sure 
you make the right choice. 
 
Tools and materials that you will need 
• 
Laminate flooring (!). Be sure you check and double check the size of your 
room and buy 5% more than you think you need. You will always need 
more for cutting and nobody likes going back to the DIY shed for one pack 
of planks! Besides that, when you do return, they might not have your 
colour match anymore!  
• 
Underlay (to make the floor sound proof and to provide insulation). Take 
5% extra of this as well.  

• 
Edging trim (a laminate flooring is not fixed anywhere, edging trim is used 
to keep it in place along the sides and to provide a neat finish). Take some 
more of this as well, as you will always have to cut around funny corners 
you hadn't anticipated.  
• 
Tape measure  
• 
Mask and goggles  
• 
Scissors  
• 
Circular saw/Jigsaw  
• 
Handsaw  
• 
Spirit level  
• 
Square  
• 
Nails/screws etc.  
Tools and materials that you might need 
 
When you have a concrete sub-floor: 
• 
Chisel  
• 
Hammer  
• 
Levelling compound  
• 
Bucket  
• 
Damp-proof membrane (for when you have tiles, asphalt/concrete or vinyl 
as your sub-floor)  
When you have a wooden sub-floor: 
• 
Hammer  
• 
Detector for pipes and electricity cables  
• 
Plane (for protruding areas)  
• 
Filler or levelling compound (for holes and hollow areas)  
• 
Pipe covers to neatly finish flooring around pipes  
How to start 
 
First of all you have to condition the flooring to the room's temperature and 
humidity. Leave it in its packing and lay it horizontally (to prevent bending of the 
laminate) for at least 48 hours before you start to lay it. 
 
Remove all the flooring you will not need anymore (like carpets, etc.). Leave only 
the sub-floor. You will now have the opportunity to access any under-floor 
electrics and plumbing, so take it! It will save you a lot of time in the long run. 
 
Determine whether your floor is level enough to start adding the underlay or 
whether you have to level it out first. Important! Not taking enough time to 
level the floor at this stage will later surface in a number of problems, like 
bending and warping of the boards and a general unevenness of the floor. This 
will reduce the enjoyment you will have from your floor and will also shorten its 
life expectancy. A floor is considered level when difference in height is less than 
1mm over a metre. 
 
To level a concrete sub-floor, you will use your hammer and chisel to chip away 
the protruding areas, and your levelling compound to fill any gaps. However, if 
they floor is generally not level, it is best to apply the levelling compound over 
the whole area, which will give a perfectly smooth finish all-over. A damp-proof 
membrane now has to be put in place according to the composition of the sub-
floor. 

 
A wooden sub-floor needs to checked on protruding nails and loose floorboards. A 
plane can be used for any uneven boards. Filler for smaller areas and levelling 
compound for larger areas can be used to even out the floor. 
 
What next? 
 
Put the under-floor down according to the instructions on the packet. As soon as 
you've done this, check whether the door will clear the final height of your floor 
by putting a laminate floorboard against the door. If the door gets stuck on the 
floorboard, now is the moment to remove the door and sand or plane away the 
excess in order to let the door open properly. 
 
Decide which way you would like to have your floor laid. It is recommended that 
the floor is laid at a 90o angle across the floorboards (if you have any) in order to 
reinforce the joints. Another solution might be to first apply a hardboard 
underfloor to the floorboards. This way it doesn't matter which way you lay your 
laminate. 
 
Use two spacers in one corner of the room in order to leave a gap between the 
floorboards and the wall, and lay your first board against it. Make sure it is 
aligned properly with the wall. Now you can start clicking the boards together 
until you get to the end of the first row, making sure you use spacers all along 
the entire wall. 
 
To cut the last board off at the correct point, place the board next to the flooring 
that is already in place. Make sure you allow for the spacers that need to be 
placed at the end of the row. 
 
If the cut-off of the last board of the previous row is longer than 300mm, you can 
use it to start the next row. It is important to create a staggered effect, as the 
boards shouldn't end at the same place. 
 
It is now easy to click and fit the biggest area of your room, and quite quickly it 
will look like you're creating something! The only areas you really have to take 
care of are around doors and pipes. Try to fit your floor as neatly as possible 
around your door mouldings. You might have to carefully saw into the moulding 
to ensure a snug fit. Use a laminate floorboard as a guide to show you how much 
you need to cut away. For pipes you have to measure the distance into the 
floorboard where the pipes will emerge (taking care to allow for a gap between 
the boards and the wall). Also measure the width of the pipe. Use a jigsaw to cut 
out the area around the pipe, starting at the edge of the board. This way you can 
remove the bit where the pipe will come through the board, and you can replace 
the bit behind the pipe (using a bit of glue to hold it in place). Use pipe covers to 
neatly cover around the pipe. 
 
After removing the spacers from around the floor, use edging trim around the 
room to neatly finish off the floor. 
 
Now you just have to give it a sweep and you're ready! 
 
Top tips 
• 
Have a good look around your local DIY sheds before you commit yourself 
to a particular type of flooring. Nowadays there are a lot of different 

designs and colours available, and there are quite a few offers on laminate 
flooring, so shop around and get yourself a good deal!  
• 
A shopping list is always a good idea!  
• 
Measure measure measure before you go to your DIY shed. And even then 
buy about 5% more than you need. Especially if you've never done 
laminate flooring before it helps if you don't need to worry about mis-
cutting a few boards. You don't want to go back for one extra pack just 
because you couldn't be bothered with it in the first place!  
• 
Always buy the right flooring for the right environment. Check whether the 
floor will be water resistant when you want to apply it to your kitchen or 
bathroom.  
• 
Plan any electrical or plumbing work ahead. When you remove your carpet 
or old floor, you have the easiest access to the wires and pipes under the 
floorboards, so do it before you lay your new floor!  
• 
Check whether the spacers are included in the pack of floorboards you're 
buying. They are handy tools to keep your floor in place while you're 
fitting.  
• 
Take your time while fitting the floor! Although you really want to finish it 
tonight, deep in your heart you know the floor will look a lot better when 
you sleep on it and look at it again with fresh eyes the following morning!  
• 
If you decide to go for a glued laminate floor, please keep the drying times 
in mind. This mainly determines the strength of the flooring.  
• 
If you decide to take the floor with you when you move (only possible with 
the glueless variant), be careful with unlocking the boards. The tongues 
snap quite easily if treated roughly.  
• 
Use a special laminate floor cleaner to optimise the shine and durability of 
your floor. Do not use any abrasive or bleach-based products.  
 

