
What Readers Are Saying About
Land the Tech Job You Love
Andy Lester has done what no one has ever been able to do.
He has written a software manual that teaches techies how to
land a great job. Done up with style and insight that speaks
clearly to programmers and other technical folks, this how-to
guide shows you how to design, code, debug, and run a suc-
cessful job-hunting project.
Nick Corcodilos
asktheheadhunter.com
The timing couldn’t be better for Andy Lester’s fantastic new
book, Land the Tech Job You Love. In these difﬁcult economic
times, a lot more people are competing for a lot fewer jobs, and
they’re going to need all the help they can get. Andy’s excellent
collection of guidelines and pragmatic advice may be the bible
we all depend upon.
Ed Yourdon
Author of Death March and developer of software
methodologies
A perceptive, practical, positive, and powerful guide to scoring
your next great tech job.
Karen Burns
Author, The Amazing Adventures of Working Girl:
Real-Life Career Advice You Can Actually Use
The people who have always stood out to me in interviews
were not always the most talented candidates but the most
prepared. This book will give you the tools, tips, and real-world
experience that are invaluable to getting hired. If you are going
to pick up one book on getting hired, this is the one you need.
Jason A. Crome
Partner, DEVNET, Inc.

This is a valuable, readable book that cuts through the normal
B.S. of job hunting. If you ever think you will need a job, do
yourself a favor and buy a copy of this book now.
Johanna Rothman
Author and management consultant
Land the Tech Job You Love is one part sound advice, one part
self-psychoanalysis, and one part wincing as you recognize
things you’ve personally done. I wish I’d had this years ago.
Dee Ann LeBlanc
Technical writer, Renaissoft
You don’t have to be unemployed to beneﬁt from reading
(studying!) this book. It’s a great book to read before you start
looking. Andy thoroughly analyzes the many issues involved in
the complex process of ﬁnding the job you will love.
Ilya Talman
President, Roy Talman & Associates
Andy has taken the mystery and guesswork out of the technol-
ogy career change. Essential stuff.
Rob Warmowski
Principal, South Loop Digital


Land the Tech Job You Love
Andy Lester
The Pragmatic Bookshelf
Raleigh, North Carolina
Dallas, Texas

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this
book, and The Pragmatic Programmers, LLC was aware of a trademark claim,
the designations have been printed in initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The Pragmatic Starter Kit, The Pragmatic Programmer, Pragmatic Programming,
Pragmatic Bookshelf and the linking g device are trademarks of The Pragmatic
Programmers, LLC.
Every precaution was taken in the preparation of this book. However, the pub-
lisher assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages that
may result from the use of information (including program listings) contained
herein.
Our Pragmatic courses, workshops, and other products can help you and your
team create better software and have more fun. For more information, as well
as the latest Pragmatic titles, please visit us at
http://www.pragprog.com
Copyright © 2009 Andy Lester.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy-
ing, recording, or otherwise, without the prior consent of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America.
ISBN-10: 1-934356-26-3
ISBN-13: 978-1-934356-26-5
Printed on acid-free paper.
P1.0 printing, May 2009
Version: 2009-6-12

Contents
Appreciations
11
Introduction
14
The Fireman Who Loved His Job . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
How This Book Was Born
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
A Disclaimer of Sorts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
What’s Inside? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Land the Tech Job You Love Online . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Go Love Your Job . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
I
The Job Search
20
1
The Foundation of Your Job Search
21
1.1
Be Honest with Yourself
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.2
Be Honest with Others . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1.3
Think Like the Boss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
1.4
Be a Problem Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
1.5
Sell Yourself
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.6
Tell Stories and Give Samples of Your Work . . .
31
1.7
Be Positive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1.8
Moving Ahead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
What Do You Want in a Job?
36
2.1
A Crash Course in Work Motivation Theory . . .
38
2.2
Dig In to What You’re Looking For
. . . . . . . .
39
2.3
The Motivation Worksheet . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.4
What Motivates You? A Dozen Factors to Consider 42
2.5
Now Go Beta Test Your Worksheet
. . . . . . . .
50

CONTENTS
8
3
Résumé Content: Getting the Words Down
51
3.1
Before You Write Your Résumé... . . . . . . . . .
52
3.2
Writing a Résumé Is Not Speedy
. . . . . . . . .
54
3.3
The Sections of Your Résumé
. . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.4
What to Leave Out of Your Résumé . . . . . . . .
76
3.5
Moving to Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4
Building Your Résumé Documents
80
4.1
The Three Versions of Your Résumé
. . . . . . .
81
4.2
General Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.3
Use Word’s Features Correctly and Effectively
.
84
4.4
Create an Effective Summary . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.5
Check Your Word Document . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.6
Build the HTML Version
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.7
Build the Text Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
4.8
You’re Ready to Move Forward
. . . . . . . . . .
93
5
Finding Your Job
94
5.1
It’s All About the People
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2
Where the Jobs Are . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
5.3
What to Find Out About a Potential Job . . . . . 108
5.4
Do Your Detective Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
5.5
Headhunters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
5.6
Work the Hunt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
5.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
6
Applying for the Job
124
6.1
Customize Your Résumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
6.2
Create a Cover Letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
6.3
Put the Package Together
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
6.4
Never Tell Anyone Your Salary History . . . . . . 131
6.5
And Now You Keep Looking
. . . . . . . . . . . . 134
II
The Interview and Beyond
135
7
Preparing for the Interview
136
7.1
Clear Your Schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
7.2
Prepare to Sell the Interviewer on You . . . . . . 137
7.3
Prepare to Answer Tough Questions . . . . . . . 137
7.4
Prepare a Relevant Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
7.5
Prepare Your Questions to Ask
. . . . . . . . . . 143

CONTENTS
9
7.6
Prepare to Get to the Interview
. . . . . . . . . . 148
7.7
Prepare What You’re Going to Bring with You . . 149
7.8
Preparation Is Half the Battle . . . . . . . . . . . 150
8
The Interview
152
8.1
Work Toward Your Goal of Getting an Offer . . . 153
8.2
Listen to Everything . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
8.3
Treat Each Person Like the CEO
. . . . . . . . . 156
8.4
A Walk Through the Interview . . . . . . . . . . . 158
8.5
Sell Yourself by Telling Stories . . . . . . . . . . . 161
8.6
Sell Yourself by Doing the Job . . . . . . . . . . . 168
8.7
Closing the Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
8.8
Phone Interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
8.9
The End of Your First Day . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
9
Handling the Tough Interview Questions
176
9.1
Never Give B.S. Answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
9.2
Never Complain or Disrespect . . . . . . . . . . . 177
9.3
Know the Red Flags the Interviewer Wants to
Uncover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
9.4
The Tough Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
9.5
Curveballs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
9.6
More Tough Questions: Exercises for the Reader 194
10 Too Much Information
196
10.1
Illegal Topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 196
10.2
Other Topics to Avoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200
10.3
Handle Inappropriate Questions Tactfully . . . . 202
10.4
Who Wants to Work for a Company Like That
Anyway?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
10.5
It’s All About Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
11 After the Interview: The Job Offer and Beyond
205
11.1
Send Thank-You Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
11.2
And Now You Wait...
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
11.3
Go for Further Interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
11.4
Give Solid References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
11.5
The Job Offer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
11.6
Leave Your Job Gracefully . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
11.7
Getting Rejected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
11.8
And the Cycle of Work Continues... . . . . . . . . 225

CONTENTS
10
12 Staying Hirable
226
12.1
Improve Yourself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
12.2
Improve Your Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
12.3
Improve Your Brand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
12.4
Always Look for Your Next Job
. . . . . . . . . . 241
12.5
It’s Never the End . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
A
Meaningless Clichés to Avoid
246
B
Résumé, Cover Letter, and Email Killers
247
C
Interview Killers
248
D
Web Resources
249
E
Bibliography
250
Index
252

Appreciations
In Behind Closed Doors [RD05], Johanna Rothman discusses
what she calls appreciations, simple but powerful messages to
let people know how they have affected your life. They take this
form: “[Person], I appreciate you for [something]. Its effect on
me was [whatever].” They’re a fantastic way to let people know
just what they mean to you, and to build relationships, both in
business and personal life.
I’ve titled this section “Appreciations,” instead of the usual
“Acknowledgments,” because acknowledgments is not strong
enough a word. Acknowledging someone sounds like rote, mun-
dane, minimal. You acknowledge you were informed of your
Miranda rights.
Herein I’d like to let some very important people know just how
much I appreciate their assistance, guidance, and support in
bringing this book to you, the reader. If you like this book and
you happen to meet or know one of them, please add your voice
to mine and share your appreciation.
Bill Odom, I appreciate how much common ground we shared
when we ﬁrst talked about the problems of hiring quality people.
If it had not been for that germ of an idea to teach the process
of getting a job or our ﬁrst conference presentation, this book
would not exist.
Seth Gumble, Kristen Henmueller, Adrian Howard, Pete Kraw-
czyk, Phil Morrison, Johanna Rothman, Ricardo Signes, and
Kate Thieda, who all contributed stories, I appreciate your
unique additions to the book. From the ﬁrst day I thought of
writing a book, I knew it had to have real stories, both good and
bad, to illustrate how best to ﬁnd a job and also for a little levity.
This book is all the richer for your tales.

APPRECIATIONS
12
Johanna Rothman, I appreciate your criticism and ideas and
having you as a cheerleader every day. Early in the formation of
this book, you sent an email saying “I’m rooting for you! WRITE
THAT BOOK!” I never told you this, but I copied that into the
book source ﬁle, a constant reminder of support when I some-
times (often?) didn’t feel like writing.
Pete Krawczyk, I appreciate your constant support and contri-
bution to this effort. Every forwarded blog posting, every sug-
gestion, and every idea of another nugget to add to this book
has helped improve what you now hold in your hands.
To my reviewers, Tony Bianchi, Karen Burns, Clarke Ching,
Jason Crome, Selena Deckelmann, Esther Derby, Paul Fenwick,
Zack Grossbart, Kim Gloff, Adrian Howard, Erika Jones, Pete
Krawczyk, Dan Lester, Gabrielle Roth, Johanna Rothman,
Ricardo Signes, Graeme Thomas, Rob Warmowski, and every-
one on the Pragmatic Job Hunting mailing list at the begin-
ning of this project, I appreciate the wealth of insights, correc-
tions, comments, and suggestions from each of you. Your pos-
itive comments and encouragement in the early stages helped
give us all the conﬁdence that we were on the right track.
Susannah Davidson Pfalzer, my cruel but fair editor, I appreci-
ate your guidance throughout the process of writing the book
and your patience when things took longer than either of us
would’ve liked. If not for you, this book would still be just an
ever-expanding ~/job-book/ideas.txt ﬁle.
Daniel Steinberg, I appreciate your feedback as I brought this
book home and for helming the new Pragmatic Life series. My
book is better because of your perceptive notes, and I hope that
my work here helps build a foundation for future titles with the
Pragmatic touch.
Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas, I’m grateful for your faith in me,
giving a ﬂedgling author a chance based on little more than
some presentation slides and a half-hour chat on the phone.
I also appreciate what a marvelous process for creating books
you’ve created for Pragmatic authors. It has eliminated the pain-
ful mechanics of book creation, leaving only the painful writing.
Allison Randal, I appreciate having a wise book editor who is
always willing to lend an eye to a problem. You have helped me

APPRECIATIONS
13
break through mental dams, providing new perspectives and
ideas on problems that stymied me and Susannah because we
were simply too close to the material.
Kim Gloff and Joy Williams, I appreciate your work on the devel-
opment of the icons that we planned to use in the book, espe-
cially Kim for creating them. Although we eventually decided to
use only one of the icons, going through the process with you
helped me identify the themes on which I wanted to focus.
Nick Corcodilos, I’m grateful for Ask the Headhunter [Cor97],
the book that made me rethink everything I knew about the job
search process. It helped me as a manager when hiring, and
it provided inspiration to write this book. I’m also thankful for
your pointed analysis of the CareerBuilder mission statement,
which gave me powerful evidence to help steer job hunters away
from the swamp of the job boards.
Seth Gumble and Debbie Schober, I appreciate your guidance
in my formative years of management and believing that this
programmer could make the transition to leader. Your patient
instruction—and
swift,
ﬁrm
corrections
when
necessary—
improved me, taught me all about the hiring process, and so
improved this book.
Damian Conway, I have always appreciated your genius at
programming and your inspiration as a speaker, but here I want
to appreciate how gracious a person you are. When I read your
thanks to me in the acknowledgments for Perl Best Practices
[Con05], I’d never felt so honored. I thought, “If I ever get to
write a book, I’m going to do my acknowledgments like that.” I
hope the others named here feel as honored as I did.
Carol Rios, I appreciate how you let me set up shop for hours at
a time at my second ofﬁce, Tacos El Norte in McHenry. I wrote
probably half of the book at table #5 in your ﬁne establishment.
Most of all, to my wife and best friend, Amy, and my daugh-
ter and Rock Band 2 band member, Quinn, I appreciate your
daily love and support and for making the nongeek parts of my
life so joyous. Amy, for all the times you took care of parenting
and housework when I was hunched over my laptop and for all
the times you urged me on when I said “I don’t even feel like
ﬁnishing the thing,” this book is for you.

Introduction
This book is about your happiness.
You spend half your waking hours at your job. That’s more time
than you spend with your kids or your spouse and even more
than time spent playing World of Warcraft. You can’t be happy
with your life when you’re spending so much time doing some-
thing you don’t love.
This book is here ﬁrst to help you be happy with your life by
helping you understand what you want in a job and then to
help you ﬁnd and land that job. My goal in writing this book is
to help you ﬁnd a job that you love as much as Ed Coughlin
loved his.
The Fireman Who Loved His Job
Ed Coughlin loved his job. He was a ﬁreman for the city of
Chicago for twenty-eight years and loved every minute of it.
It’s certainly not something that everyone is cut out for, but
he excelled at it, making the rank of captain. After retiring from
the Chicago Fire Department to the suburbs, he couldn’t leave
the life. He was a volunteer ﬁreman for a number of small towns
in the area and never lost touch with the friends he made.
In the too-short time that I knew Ed in his fading years, nothing
would bring a glint to his eye like recalling the time he spent as
a ﬁreman. He’d tell stories of the ﬁre calls as if they’d happened
yesterday and have everyone laughing with the tales of ﬁrehouse
antics. I know it was important to him that he made a difference
in countless lives, but I think that even more than that he just
loved the work, loved the people, and loved being a ﬁreman.
Many of us in the tech ﬁelds are like Ed the ﬁreman. Whether
programmer, system administrator, web designer, or some other

HOW THIS BOOK WAS BORN
15
technical specialist, we live similar lives. We have jobs that many
others would never want to do, and yet we thrive at them. Those
we serve are often highly appreciative. Our subculture is tightly
knit but misunderstood by the outside world. Most of all, we
love the work we do so much we sometimes volunteer to do it
just so that we can do more. Many of us see being professional
geeks as a calling—what we were meant to do. It’s just what
we are.
How This Book Was Born
This book started on January 14, 2004, after a Perl Mongers
meeting in St. Louis, Missouri.1 After the meeting, twenty of us
made our way to dinner. We sat at a long table, about ten geeks
to a side. Across from me sat fellow techie Bill Odom, and we got
to discussing the trouble we were having hiring qualiﬁed people
for our respective companies. We traded stories of bad résumés
and bad interviews. Someone asked for advice on how he could
do better on his résumé. Then someone else asked how he could
tell whether he should leave his job. Within ten minutes, we had
the entire table clustered around us, interested in job issues.
Bill said, “We ought to take our act on the road.”
Later, Bill and I discussed how we’d tapped into something. Peo-
ple in the group were unhappy with their jobs and looking to
change their situations. Conversely, Bill and I were dismayed
by how many otherwise qualiﬁed candidates come through our
ofﬁces screwing up their chances at getting something better.
Worse, we had people who interviewed with us who had no idea
whether the job for which they were applying was one they’d
enjoy. They were setting themselves up for failure.
As I drove back home from St. Louis that night, Ed Coughlin,
my wife’s father and the ﬁreman who loved his job so much,
passed away. At the wake, dozens of friends from his years in
ﬁre protection paid their respects and shared their stories of
how much Ed loved being a ﬁreman.
1.
Perl
Mongers
is
the
worldwide
collection
of
Perl
user groups.
Visit
http://www.pm.org to ﬁnd one near you.

A DISCLAIMER OF SORTS
16
In the weeks following that meeting, Bill and I put together a
talk for O’Reilly’s Open Source Conference. It was a hit, and I
gave the talk many times afterward at user groups around the
country. The success of those talks led to this book.
My wish is for everyone to love their jobs as much as Ed loved
his. I’m well on my way, having been a professional geek for
more than twenty-one years, and I wouldn’t trade it for anything
else. I hope that you can ﬁnd and keep the kind of happiness I
get from my working life and that Ed got from his.
A Disclaimer of Sorts
Books of career advice can’t be exactly about your situation.
As the author, I don’t know anything about you. I don’t know
your job situation, your history, your background, the type of
job you’re looking for, or what is important to you in life.
Don’t blindly follow the
directions in a book.
You’ll have to adjust some advice to
your given situation or your given loca-
tion. If you live outside the United
States, some advice may not apply. In
some European countries, it’s standard to include a photo with
a résumé, where in the United States it’s likely to get your
résumé thrown away. Even within the United States, behavior
at an interview in the Bay Area is likely to be very different from
at a company in Chicago.
And don’t forget what I hear at least once every time I give a
presentation about this topic: “I like how you approach this, but
you’re not like other managers! Most managers are clueless!”
So as the author, I don’t know you, I don’t know where you
live, and the hiring process in many companies is fundamentally
suboptimal.
And yet...
And yet, the principles apply. These techniques do work. The
stories that illustrate the chapters underline the basic applica-
bility of the ideas and practices.

WHAT’S INSIDE?
17
And yet, I do know a bit about you, because I’ve talked to many
technical professionals who are unhappy with their careers or
working to move to a better place.
And yet, most of this book does apply to you. Most of the ideas
are universal, crossing cultural boundaries. The guiding prin-
ciples of matching yourself to the right job, of putting yourself
in the shoes of the hiring manager, and of demonstrating your
value to the interviewer all form a bedrock base from which your
chances of getting a job and being happy with it are increased
one-thousandfold.
Read this book, and the other books you read on getting hired,
and consider how their advice apply to you. Take with you what
makes sense, and leave the rest.
What’s Inside?
This book is an interconnected network of ideas, all building on
each other. The ﬁrst two chapters lay the foundation of your
search and your happiness. Chapter 1, The Foundation of Your
Job Search, on page 21 discusses basic building blocks of how
to be successful in the job hunt and in ﬁnding the job you
want. The idea of “what you want” is so important, and so often
ignored by hiring books, that it gets its own chapter, Chapter 2,
What Do You Want in a Job?, on page 36. Even if you think you
know what you’re looking for in a job, you may be surprised at
aspects of your working life you haven’t considered.
The next two chapters discuss creating a stock résumé on which
you’ll base the custom résumés you send to companies. Résumé
writing is a two-step process, so is discussed in two distinct
chapters. The ﬁrst—Chapter 3, Résumé Content: Getting the
Words Down, on page 51—discusses only the words that you’ll
put on your résumés. This is to help steer you away from the
temptation of making the résumé look good and giving the con-
tent inadequate attention. After you have the words down, you’ll
use the ideas in Chapter 4, Building Your Résumé Documents, on
page 80 to build effective documents.
With a plan of what you want and a stock résumé, you can then
look to ﬁnding a job, Chapter 5, Finding Your Job, on page 94.

WHAT’S INSIDE?
18
Having found a job and company to pursue, you’ll move on to
Chapter 6, Applying for the Job, on page 124, ﬁnding the best
way to make your introduction to the company.
Once you’ve been called in for an interview, your approach
changes radically. You’ll change from seeking a job to working
to show the interviewer and company that you’re the right per-
son for the job and to ﬁnd out for yourself that it’s the right job
for you. In Chapter 7, Preparing for the Interview, on page 136,
you’ll learn how to put together your plan and materials to
make the run your way. Then, in Chapter 8, The Interview, on
page 152, you’ll learn how to work the interview and to make
sure it’s an opportunity to sell yourself as the best candidate,
rather than a simple question-and-answer session.
The next two chapters discuss what to say, what not to say, and
how best to say it. First, Chapter 9, Handling the Tough Inter-
view Questions, on page 176 gives solid advice on how to answer
those dreaded stumpers like “Where do you want to be in ﬁve
years?” Then, Chapter 10, Too Much Information, on page 196
gives rules on what you should not say at an interview.
Chapter 11, After the Interview: The Job Offer and Beyond, on
page 205 covers how to handle a job offer and how to make the
most of a rejection. And, since your next job is probably not
going to be your last, Chapter 12, Staying Hirable, on page 226
discusses how to make the most of your skills and career and
how they’re seen in the world so that the next time you need a
job the process won’t be so painful.
Finally, the appendixes give summaries of tips to make the most
of your job hunt and present traps to avoid. You may want to
skim them now to get a feel for what’s coming up. Have a look
at the inside front cover, too, for a list of rules to keep in mind
during your job search.
Throughout the book, callouts give you important ideas to
remember as your move forward. You’ll also see this icon of an
F on a report card. These mark potential failure points in the
process. Don’t repeat these mistakes others have made.

Land the Tech Job You Love ONLINE
19
Land the Tech Job You Love Online
Follow up your reading of the book by participating online. The
home page for the book is online at http://www.pragprog.com/
titles/algh/land-the-tech-job-you-love. You can submit errata from
that page, and you can also participate in the Land The Tech
Job You Love forum at http://forums.pragprog.com/forums/81.
I welcome your comments, suggestions, and stories about hir-
ing, either in the book forum or privately in email. I’d love to
know whether this book helped you and how I could have done
better.
Go Love Your Job
I know that many of you may be incredulous at the idea of loving
your job. Maybe you liked working with computers, but your job
has sucked the fun out. Your artistic side isn’t satisﬁed design-
ing boring websites. Your co-workers are obnoxious boors you
dread. I know the feeling. You’re not alone.
Life is too short for a job
you don’t love.
You’re not stuck. Other opportunities
are available for you, if you know where
to look and can work the hiring process
to your advantage and to the advantage
of the company that hires you.
This book will help you get that job you love.
Andy Lester
May 2009
andy@theworkinggeek.com

Part I
The Job Search

Chapter 1
The Foundation of
Your Job Search
A few basic principles should underlie your job search and carry
over into all aspects of your career:
• Be honest with yourself.
• Be honest with others.
• Think like the boss.
• Be a problem solver.
• Sell yourself.
• Tell stories.
• Be positive.
These
fundamentals
interrelate
and
build
on
each
other
throughout the rest of the book and your job search. You’ll need
to sell yourself as a problem solver, because you know that’s
what the boss wants, and you’ll do it by telling stories.
1.1
Be Honest with Yourself
There’s no better way to wind up in an unhappy situation than
to lie to yourself. What are your needs? What are your skills?
What do you want in a job? What do you want to avoid? What
really matters? Do you really need a given salary? How much
time can you spend commuting, away from your spouse and

BE HONEST WITH YOURSELF
22
kids? Can you actually do the job you have your eye set on? It’s
easy to fool yourself into accepting false answers when you’re
itching to get a new job. Far too many people wind up in ill-
ﬁtting jobs they hate because they’ve lied to themselves about
what was important and what they could do.
Lying up front won’t change the reality of your situation when
you ﬁnally get started at that new job. If you really hate work-
ing with Java, convincing yourself that maybe it’s not so bad
isn’t going to help you when you’re up to your elbows in it a
month into the new gig. If you’re not actually a Java expert and
you’ve fooled your boss into hiring you based on that premise,
the outcome isn’t going to be pleasant.
Over the years I’ve had dozens of conversations with people
asking for advice about their careers or whether a certain job
sounds like a good one. Typically, these conversations go like
this:
Steve:
Hey, Andy, I’ve got a second interview coming up with
WangoTech! They really seem to like me, and they pay well. I’m
ﬁnally going to be making what I deserve.
Andy:
Sounds cool, but I didn’t think they had an ofﬁce out
here.
Steve:
Well, it’s down in the city, which is a good hour from
Mayberry where I live. But I can listen to recorded books in the
car, so that won’t be so bad.
Andy:
I guess not. But it’s a programming job, right?
Steve:
The ad says that it’s for a “system administrator with
programming skills,” so I might not be doing programming right
off. But I’ll get some programming chops in, y’know?
Andy:
I guess there’s a chance. What kind of shop are they
like? I know you love your BSD. Can you at least run a Mac and
OS X?
Steve:
(sigh) I don’t think so. When they showed me around, it
looked like all Windows everywhere. One of my ﬁrst jobs would
be to convert the intranet sites from Apache to Microsoft IIS. My
boss-to-be said that the CTO back at corporate felt that open
source was inherently unsafe. But I could probably have a little
server as a skunkworks project.

BE HONEST WITH YOURSELF
23
Andy:
Back at corporate? How big are they? Your current shop
is, what, a dozen programmers and two sysadmins?
Steve:
Yeah, WangoTech is a big company. There’s corporate
and then three branch ofﬁces. The branch I’d be in has only 100
programmers. But that’s the smallest branch, so we’d sort of have
that startup feel!
Andy:
So, what I’m hearing is that you’re considering taking a
job with three times the commute, doing sysadmin work instead
of programming, and it’s in a big, corporate, all-Windows, open
source–unfriendly environment.
Steve:
I guess it sounds bad, but I’ll ﬁnally get paid what I
deserve.
Andy:
But I thought you liked it where you are now. Why aren’t
you paid what you deserve now?
Steve:
My boss is just an idiot. He doesn’t really respect me,
and he doesn’t think that my skills are up to snuff. My last review
I got a 2 percent raise, and that’s absurd. I’ve gotta get outta
there.
Andy:
It sounds like you don’t want that job but rather a differ-
ent job or, more precisely, a higher-paying job with more respect.
Steve:
Yeah, I guess. But this one sounds OK, doesn’t it?
Andy:
I guess it could be, but I’m not you. I will point out that
every downside I’ve mentioned has been countered with what
seems to me to be a half-hearted explanation of how it won’t be
so bad. Were I in your situation, I wouldn’t be so optimistic about
that. You really think you could do well administering Windows
and Exchange Server all day?
Steve:
Well....
If you’re not able to have this sort of inner dialogue with your-
self, ﬁnd someone who will be a good sounding board. It could
be your spouse, a friend, a co-worker, or even your parents.1 It
should be someone who will honestly but compassionately lis-
ten to and challenge your plans, without giving you the answers.
1.
I’ve found parents can be surprisingly wise. You may ﬁnd they grow wiser
the older you get.

BE HONEST WITH OTHERS
24
You’re looking for guidance, not someone who will tell you what
to do.
This inner honesty is crucial to assessing your goals and wants.
As technical problem solvers, we’re accustomed to searching for
the facts of a problem so that we can accurately solve and diag-
nose it. Without accurate facts, we solve the wrong problem or
make the original problem even worse. Without being true to
yourself, you do the same thing to your job search.
1.2
Be Honest with Others
Hiring books say it all the time, and I’ll continue to beat the
drum here: you must not lie or be false at any time. It is a sure
recipe for getting ﬁred or having a very unhappy relationship.
Don’t fudge about what you can do, about what you know, or
about what you’ve done in the past. Outright lies are easy to
avoid, of course. It’s the little fudging that’s easier to try to
get away with. Don’t think you can say “yes” to “Do you know
J2EE?” just because you’ve done Java and J2EE is Java. Don’t
think you can say “yes” because you can buy a copy of J2EE for
Dummies on the way home and you think, how hard can it be to
learn anyway? Don’t think you can say “yes” because you read
an online tutorial on J2EE and it looked pretty simple.
The problem with this type of factual lying, above any ethical
issues, is that your lie will be caught. The follow-up question
to “Do you know J2EE?” will probably be “Tell me about what
J2EE projects you’ve done,” and you’re stuck for an answer. If
it’s not in the interview, some day on the job the boss will come
to you with a J2EE problem, and you’ll be exposed as a fraud.
Both situations are far more uncomfortable and damaging than
saying “no” up front.
Lying lays land mines
that never go away.
Sometimes candidates will try to get
around unpleasant parts of their his-
tory. Maybe the résumé will say a posi-
tion was from 2001–2003, when it was
really only until 2002. Maybe when asked “Have you ever
been ﬁred?” a candidate will lie and say “no,” hoping that
the employer won’t follow up. These deceptions are insidious
because they follow the employee around forever. Say you’ve

BE HONEST WITH OTHERS
25
been on the job for a year, and one day out at lunch you men-
tion to a co-worker that you got ﬁred from a job a few years
ago. That co-worker mentions it to the boss, who now knows
that you’ve lied to him and either ﬁres you immediately or never
trusts you again.
My colleague Seth Gumble has a brutal story about a candidate
who was dishonest in an interview and how poorly it turned out
for everyone.
“I’ll Try Hard!”
by Seth Gumble, IT director
I’d hired a programmer to migrate from PostgreSQL to Oracle on
Solaris. I asked him in the interview “Do you know Oracle beyond
Oracle Applications?” He said he did. “It looks like you’ve done
most of your work on Windows. Do you know Unix?” Again, he
said he did. “So, if I sit you down to start migrating our Postgres
back end to an Oracle back end, all on Solaris, you can do that?”
He said he could.
The ﬁrst day, I show him his machine and give him his login. I tell
him where the directory with the data ﬁles is, but he types it
wrong. I tell him “You’ll have to back up a directory.” He doesn’t
know what I mean. I say, “Just type see dee dot dot,” and he
types out cd.. without the space, instead of cd ... We go around on
this a few times, and I have to explain that there’s a space after
the cd. It turns out that he’s never used a UNIX shell. He’s only
FTPed web pages to servers that happen to run UNIX.
I give him a day or two to try to catch on, but no luck. I call him
into my ofﬁce and explain, “Everyone is expecting me to move our
site to an Oracle back end. You are making no progress. Do you
think you’ll ever get there?” He says, “I’ll try hard!” I say, “I believe
you, but I don’t think you can try hard enough to get it done in
three months given where you’re at.” He agreed that I made my
expectations clear in the interview and that there was no way he
was going to be able to do it. He was terminated after that
meeting. I wound up having to do all the Oracle work myself
because of the time lost hiring this guy.
Clearly, the candidate was dishonest, but in what way? Was
he lying to himself, overestimating his abilities? Was he lying
to Seth, knowing that he didn’t have what it took but perhaps
hoping that he would be able to learn on the ﬂy, just by trying
hard, if only he could get the job?

THINK LIKE THE BOSS
26
The lesson is clear: the truth will come out. It’s better for all
concerned to be honest up front.
There’s one other way to be dishonest, and that’s to pretend
to be someone you’re not. You must be yourself at all steps
in the hiring process. If you live doing Extreme Programming,
don’t pretend that monolithic requirements documents make
you happy. When you become the Real You once you start work-
ing, both you and your manager are going to be sorely disap-
pointed.
1.3
Think Like the Boss
Put yourself in the shoes of your boss-to-be, the hiring manager,
or the person who is going to be making the decision about your
employment; this is the person for whom you’ll likely be working
for a long time. It makes sense to think exactly how she thinks.
What does she want in an employee? How can you make her life
easier? How can you make her look good? Your job is to make
her look good.
“Make your boss look good” sounds crass, conniving, or polit-
ical, but it’s not. It’s a mental shorthand for your higher-level
goals. Your immediate job may be to write code, design web
pages, or administer networks, but it’s all in the service of mak-
ing your department achieve its goals.
As a manager, my staff’s job is to make me look good. My job is
to make my boss, the senior director of IT, look good. His job is
to make the VP of IT look good. His job is to make the president
of the company look good. As each person meets the next level’s
goals, the organization’s goals are furthered. It’s the basis for
any hierarchical organization. Whether there are two levels of
hierarchy or ten in the organization, the principle is the same.
This makes it much easier to know how to deal with the com-
pany, and the hiring manager, when you’re trying to get hired.
You can focus with precision on what the hiring manager wants
and how she wants it. Of course, you want to have some idea of
what the company’s needs are in the large, but you should focus
on the hiring manager. You’ll need to know when you prepare
your company-speciﬁc résumé and prepare for the interview.

THINK LIKE THE BOSS
27
Understand the Hiring Process
In addition to understanding the boss’s high-level goals in the
company, you should understand the hiring process in gen-
eral. Hiring someone is expensive and is not undertaken lightly.
Labor costs are a signiﬁcant part of the cost of running a busi-
ness, and just getting the OK to hire is often a drawn-out pro-
cess for the manager.
The manager will have a speciﬁc need that she needs to sat-
isfy and will have to go to her boss with a proposal to add
head count to the department. She’ll have to show that the
increased productivity of the department will offset the addi-
tional costs of salary, beneﬁts, equipment, and space used.
Often, a pain point will be the trigger for the hire. Perhaps
she decides that the department needs a dedicated database
administrator because programmers are spending too much
time tending to the database to the detriment of programming
schedules. Maybe unacceptable tech support call times prompt
the addition of another support specialist. If you can ﬁnd out
what has prompted the hire (see Section 5.4, Do Your Detective
Work, on page 109), you can tailor your end of the process to
meet those needs.
Most hires won’t be for new positions but will be replacing a
previous employee who either left for a different job or was ﬁred
for not doing the job well enough. Finding out the background
to these two scenarios will also help you frame and aim the
process to your advantage.
Hiring someone is never arbitrary (at least in well-run compa-
nies). Understand the process, and use it to your advantage.
The Manager Wants to Hire You
Since you know that the manager has a problem to solve
and has jumped through hoops to get to the point where
she can start the hiring process and that the process is very
time-consuming, it follows that the hiring manager wants to hire
you. She might not want you speciﬁcally, but that’s why the
process is in place. She wants someone to be good enough to
meet her needs so that she can get back to the real work of the
department.

BE A PROBLEM SOLVER
28
We all have better
things to do than go
through interviews.
As you go through the process, remem-
ber that the process for the manager is
time-consuming and stressful, just as
it is for you. Everything the hiring man-
ager is doing is in the service of “I hope
that this candidate is the one.” Help her realize that you are.
Finally, read up on management and hiring as it applies to your
industry. Johanna Rothman’s Hiring the Best Knowledge Work-
ers, Techies, and Nerds [Rot04] is a great overview of the hiring
manager’s side of desk. It pays to understand what your coun-
terpart in the dance is thinking, and it may just give you some
empathy for her while she puts you through the wringer.
1.4
Be a Problem Solver
Ken Blanchard’s classic management book The One Minute Man-
ager [BJ82] is an allegorical tale of business life. In one part, an
employee comes to The Manager and says, “Sir, I have a prob-
lem,” to which he replies, “Good, that’s what you’ve been hired
to solve.” The employee came in looking for a solution to his
problem, and the boss reminded him that problem solving is
exactly why he is involved in the company at all.
Your boss-to-be is looking to hire you for one reason, and that’s
to solve problems for him. If all he needed was someone to do
grunt work, to crank out some code, to string cable, or to dis-
pense IP addresses, he could hire a trained monkey off the street
to do it. What he really wants is someone to take care of those
tasks and solve the problems that come up as part of them. He
doesn’t want someone who’s going to say “Boss, there’s a wall
in the way of my cable running; what should I do?” but rather
“I got the cabling completed, and I had a problem. Here’s how I
solved it.”
My Printer Ran Out of Ink
by Andy Lester, your humble narrator
When I invite a candidate for a face-to-face interview, I always tell
him to bring printed copies of sample code. I want it printed so
that we can look at the code at my desk and discuss it. One
morning, a candidate walked in at 9:10 for a 9 a.m. interview,
thrust an orange 3.5" diskette at me, and without apology said,

SELL YOURSELF
29
“My printer ran out of ink this morning.” Our interview was short
and perfunctory before I showed him out.
Let’s look at his sins. First, he was late, probably because he
hadn’t allowed enough time to get to the interview and for
anything that might have come up, as I discuss in Section 7.6,
Prepare to Get to the Interview, on page 148.
Second, in this short exchange he told me that he was not a
problem solver. He told me he was unable to perform a simple
assigned task and changed it to suit his own convenience. He told
me that he didn’t bother preparing for this part of the interview
until that morning. He told me that he didn’t have the foresight to
have spare ink cartridges. He told me he didn’t have the
problem-solving savvy to stop at an Ofﬁce Depot on the way to
the interview.
Worst of all, he gave me his problem. He said, “I am unable to
solve this problem, so I will give it to you. Here you go, Mr.
Manager, print the code off this disk that your ﬂoppyless
Macintosh can’t read.” Fortunately, I no longer had any interest
in his code or hiring him at all.
You’re probably acting like a problem solver already in your cur-
rent job and day-to-day life, but you must present yourself as
one to your future employer. Revisit your skills, and rethink how
you look at what you can do. Your coding skills aren’t as inter-
esting as how you applied those coding skills to an especially
difﬁcult project. Your ability to maintain the network isn’t as
interesting as how you’ve created backup systems and contin-
gency plans to head off future problems. Tracking project status
is one thing, but getting those projects back on track in the face
of crisis is quite another.
1.5
Sell Yourself
If you’re like many programmers I’ve met, you probably sneered
when you read that “Sell Yourself” heading. “Maybe for other
people,” you might have said,“ but I’m not going to sing and
dance for someone just for a job. If they don’t like me, that’s
ﬁne; I’ll go somewhere else.”
Or maybe you think that selling yourself shows weakness or
desperation. “If I go in there selling myself, they’ll think I’m just
a loser who has to talk about how cool I think I am.”

SELL YOURSELF
30
That’s not at all what selling yourself is about.
Selling yourself is
something you do every
day.
Selling
yourself
doesn’t
mean
to
present something false or to try to
get a job where you’re not qualiﬁed.
Indeed, doing so would violate two
earlier rules, “Be honest with yourself”
and “Be honest with others.” It’s about presenting the aspects
of you and your capabilities that might otherwise be unknown
to the person or company you’re interested in working with.
You’re making sure that people know what you want them to
know.
To a co-worker:
Let’s go to lunch. There’s a great Mexican
place over on Route 120.
To a friend:
Want to join our game night? We’ve got a good
group, and I’m going to be DMing a cool new campaign I’ve been
working on.
To your daughter:
Sweetie, would you like to go to the zoo
this weekend? They have a new dolphin exhibit.
In each case, each spoken proposition could stand on its own
(“Let’s go to lunch.”), but then evidence to support the proposi-
tion (“There’s a great Mexican place...”) is added. The speaker is
selling the proposition, but there’s nothing sleazy or desperate
about it.
At work, and in the open source community, it’s the same.
Present a proposition and sell it.
To a project team:
I’ll take care of the reporting subsystem.
I’ve written one before, and I’ve been familiarizing myself with a
few packages that we can use.
To a mailing list:
I think that we should use the FooTest
as the basis for the testing infrastructure. It scales to large test
suites, and it’s well maintained.
To your boss:
The team lead position is a natural for me.
Although I haven’t been here the longest, I’ve developed a great
rapport with the others, and you know that my estimation skills
are spot on.

TELL STORIES AND GIVE SAMPLES OF YOUR WORK
31
When you’re presenting a résumé, the proposition is “I think
you should hire me,” and the evidence is contained within your
résumé, your cover letter, and your conversations with those
who do the hiring. You’re selling yourself.
Some people are not used to this idea. Geeks are often shy, and
I’ve talked to many who have told me that it was hard to discuss
their talents without feeling like they were bragging. Women can
also run afoul of the perception, at least in the United States,
that an assertive woman can be seen as “pushy” or “bitchy.”
I understand these can be problems for some people. You still
need to overcome them to be able to express your talents and
history. If you aren’t able to present your best aspects to a com-
pany, to a hiring manager, or to your circle of contacts, then
you’ll have fewer choices and opportunities than someone else
who does. That person might even be less qualiﬁed than you
are, but because your light is hidden under a bushel basket,
nobody knows it.
The key is that selling yourself is an active pursuit. You’re work-
ing actively to make known your assets and qualiﬁcations, and
you’re not relying on being asked for them. As well, you may be
presenting qualiﬁcations that haven’t been asked for but that
would probably help the company.
1.6
Tell Stories and Give Samples of Your Work
The best way to sell yourself is to tell stories. Stories are evi-
dence of who you are, what you can do, and how you’ve done
it in the past. Samples of your work show that you’re able to
deliver the goods. Most important, stories and samples let the
person hearing the story make the assessment about you.
When faced with the daunting task of summarizing themselves,
whether on paper in a résumé or face-to-face in an interview, job
hunters often fall into the trap of trying to encapsulate every-
thing into a few simple, pithy phrases.
I’ve seen these meaningless chestnuts far too often:
• “I’m a hard worker.”
• “I have a strong work ethic.”

TELL STORIES AND GIVE SAMPLES OF YOUR WORK
32
• “I’m reliable.”
• “I’m a good listener.”
• “I work well with others.”
• “I take pride in my work.”
The hiring manager’s mental response, assuming his eyes
haven’t glazed over, is likely to be “You and everyone else, pal.”
Is there anyone out there who would not feel justiﬁed in using
all of these assessments to describe themselves?
Descriptions that can
apply to anyone are
worthless.
The next response to such vague sum-
marizations is “According to whom?”
A
“hard
worker”
at
a
big
faceless
corporation
or
a
government
9-to-
5
job
may
be
very
different
from
a
“hard
worker”
at
a
startup
or
at
a
video
game
company.
Instead of simply assessing yourself as a “hard worker,” give evi-
dence and let the interviewer make up her own mind. Include
points that make clear you were a hard worker, without you hav-
ing to say “I worked hard.” For example: “I recently completed
a ﬁve-month, 50,000-line conversion project. Even though we
lost one of the four team members with only three weeks left, we
pulled together to make the deadline.” Big project, hard work,
no self-assessment, just the facts, ma’am.
Strong work ethic? Explain it: “A few weeks ago, my team rolled
out an upgrade to Ofﬁce in our 300-seat location. We did it over
the weekend to minimize work disruption. Sunday night we had
to order in some pizzas, but Monday morning everyone was able
to come in and get work at 8 a.m. sharp.”
Every manager wants reliable employees: “My projects are con-
sistently done on time, never more than 10 percent over budget.
Here are the planned vs. actual charts for the last three projects
I worked on.” Then you can show the actual work products from
your portfolio.2
Working well with others is a hoary cliché, but it’s critical in
almost any job: “As a web page designer, I usually work with
2.
See Section 7.4, Prepare a Relevant Portfolio, on page 138.

BE POSITIVE
33
three or four different teams throughout the week. They’re all
very different in their makeup, but I work hard at ﬁtting in with
each as necessary. Ted in marketing even sent me a gracious
thank-you note for my work, which I was very proud of.” The
note itself would be good to have in the back of your portfolio.
When it comes to the pride you take in your work, you need not
explain at all. Your résumé and interview should be enough.
The pride you take in yourself and your accomplishments must
shine through without additional words being necessary.
Use recent examples when possible over stories from years past.
Emphasize teamwork and other people, which every manager
should have high on her list of important attributes. Document
facts that let the interviewer draw her own conclusion about you
and your value to her company. Her own opinion that you’re a
“hard worker” is far more valuable than your own proclamation
of it.
The previous examples were taken from an interview setting,
but they apply to any printed work as well. On a résumé, you’ll
have less room to stretch out verbally, but you can certainly
replace your “Reliable worker” bullet point with “Completed 90
percent of projects on time and never more than 10 percent over
estimates.”
We’ll look at more speciﬁcs in Chapter 3, Résumé Content: Get-
ting the Words Down, on page 51 and in Chapter 8, The Inter-
view, on page 152.
1.7
Be Positive
Every job book says to never badmouth a previous employer.
Hearing a candidate griping about the place they just left leaves
an interviewer wondering what she’ll be like once she’s joined
the team.
That’s good advice, but it’s not enough. You must be unfailingly
positive in all your dealings.
Nobody likes a complainer, except for people who are no fun to
work with anyway. People who complain are like Debbie Downer
from Saturday Night Live, who always has something negative to
say, no matter the topic.

BE POSITIVE
34
Her morose whining was played for laughs, but it was funny
only because we’ve all heard people like this too often:
J. Random Hacker at lunch with his buddies:
I can’t
believe how dumb the marketing department is. They’re still try-
ing to run Windows Vista on three-year-old Pentium IIIs. Not that
we have it much better since we’re stuck with....
What you may see as just commiserating with your buddies,
or “blowing off steam,” is likely demoralizing to others and cer-
tainly does nothing to build up your own morale. It might feel
good in the short term, but over time it’s a deﬁnite negative
both to you and your team. People will remember your nega-
tive attitude over the long term, including your manager. A good
manager will do whatever she can to keep toxic attitudes out of
the workplace, and that includes you and your griping.
Whiners tell the world, “I
don’t control my life.”
Whiners also come across as people
with an external focus of control, acted
upon by the world, rather than acting
upon the world themselves. Blamers
are the people who see problems as not theirs to deal with and
put the problem on others. The last thing you want to be seen
as is a complainer.
The best way to start being positive is to not discuss prob-
lems that have no direct bearing on you or that you cannot ﬁx.
There’s no point in worrying about the problems of others.
When discussing problems that do relate to you, then discuss
what you’ve done to ﬁx them or how you’ve gotten work done in
the face of the problem. Problems you’ve faced in the past will
come up in an interview, and you need to explain how you’ve
worked to solve them, even if you were unsuccessful.
Interviewer:
It sounds like your department had problems
with losing track of bugs. That must have been frustrating.
You:
It was. We even had the head of accounting come over and
chew out our team leader because we lost track of a showstopper.
I had tried for weeks to get my boss to let us set up an instance
of Bugzilla, but he said we couldn’t even think about it until the
end of the project. So, I got together with the guy in the next cube
and tracked bugs via text ﬁles in a Subversion project. It was
low-tech, but it saved us some real time.

MOVING AHEAD
35
Note how here even though your boss has frustrated you, you’ve
explained the solution you made happen in spite of it. You
haven’t said “Boy, my boss made a bad decision,” even though
you may have said or thought it at the time.
More important than maximizing your employment options, fol-
lowing the “Be positive” rule will probably make you a happier
person over time.
1.8
Moving Ahead
I’ll refer to these rules throughout the book, but none is more
important than “Be honest with yourself.” Keep it in mind as
you start the next chapter.

Chapter 2
What Do You Want in a Job?
I was ready to leave my job. I had reached a plateau in my pro-
fessional development at my company. My boss clearly had no
interest in using any more of my skills. I reported to the depart-
ment head, and it seemed likely that he was going to install a
new supervisor over me. The writing was on the wall, so I started
looking.
My job was doing web applications in ColdFusion under Win-
dows, and I was itching to work with Perl in Unix or Linux. One
Sunday as I scanned the Chicago Tribune’s listings, I saw a job
that spoke to me.
Perl programmer wanted with web application experi-
ence. We use mod_perl under Solaris.
It sounded perfect! I contacted the recruiter offering the job,
and he brought me down to his ofﬁce to meet with him the
next morning. The recruiter thought I was a good candidate and
sent me to the far outreaches of Chicago to meet with the hiring
manager at 1 p.m. We hit it off, and by 4:30 p.m., before I’d even
reached home, I had a job offer for 20 percent more than I was
making. I was ecstatic and accepted immediately. A few weeks
later, I started at my new position.
Fast-forward two months. I was miserable. One morning I called
my wife, and as we talked about my dissatisfaction, I realized
that my situation was such that it couldn’t possibly get better. I
walked into my boss’s ofﬁce and said, “I’m sorry, but I have to
leave.” He tried to get me to stay, but I knew it couldn’t work.
Ten minutes later I’d packed up my stuff and was out the door.

CHAPTER 2. WHAT DO YOU WANT IN A JOB?
37
That decision cost me. I had no other job lined up, and I’d over-
estimated the ease with which I could get hired. Worst of all, it
was early December. Businesses all but shut down in December
when it comes to hiring as managers and decision makers go on
holiday vacations. I was glad to be out of that situation, but it
cost me a few months of salary.
What went wrong? I ask audiences for their ideas when telling
this story at conferences. I’d had a great programming job doing
what I wanted, and I was making great money at it. What could
have been so terrible? Why was my situation so grim? What
made me up and quit? And how had I not realized that it would
be so bad? Audience members offer a wide range of suggestions:
• “Your boss was an idiot.”
• “It was all death march projects.”
• “You weren’t working on any projects at all.”
• “The company was poorly managed.”
• “It was maintenance programming only.”1
• “The hours were awful. You worked lots of overtime.”
• “It was a terrible location, and the commute was brutal.”
• “The company was insolvent and was going to go under
soon.”
• “You weren’t allowed to work with open source.”
• “Your co-workers were jerks and idiots.”
• “You weren’t actually qualiﬁed for the job.”
• “You didn’t get to use any creativity.”
• “They had unreasonable expectations of you.”
None of these was the problem. Although the commute was
rough, I could live with that if I was otherwise happy with the
job. No, the problem was that I wasn’t interested in what the
company was doing, and I wasn’t part of a team.
I’d accepted a job working for a ﬁnancial services ﬁrm. There
were a dozen investors watching quote boards and CNN all
day, ﬁguring out how to play the markets. The aura was one
of extreme competitiveness. Aggressive macho posturing per-
meated everything. Worse, there was no sense of teamwork. I
1.
I say that all programming is maintenance programming, but that’s a topic
for another book.

A CRASH COURSE IN WORK MOTIVATION THEORY
38
worked on solo projects, and half the team would only talk to
people of their own nationality.
More important, I didn’t have any interest in the industry. I’d left
a company that wrote software for children’s libraries, which I
found very fulﬁlling, and gone to one that made money for rich
people.
I have nothing against making money, and I’m glad that my
401(k) fund is managed by people who love it, but I know (now)
that it’s not the industry or environment for me.
The lesson here is “Don’t take a job that doesn’t give you what
you want.” The underlying corollary is “You can’t get what you
want ’til you know what you want.” But how do you know what
you want, what’s important, what matters? That’s the focus of
this chapter.
But before we go on, let’s have a little crash course in human
motivational theory.
2.1
A Crash Course in Work Motivation Theory
In 1943, psychologist Abraham Maslow popularized the concept
of a hierarchy of psychological needs for humans. He proposed
that humans have basic needs that motivate them, grouped into
six categories. From highest and most advanced, to lowest and
most basic, they are as follows:
• Self-actualization
• Cognitive
• Ego/esteem
• Social
• Safety
• Physiological
Maslow discussed these in general terms of the natural world,
but they apply to your working life as well. For example, the
“Safety” need may not refer to physical safety at a desk job,
but job security certainly may. For more on his hierarchy, the
Wikipedia article2 is a ﬁne introduction.
2.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow%27s_hierarchy_of_needs

DIG IN TO WHAT YOU’RE LOOKING FOR
39
Similar to Maslow’s hierarchy, Frederick Herzberg’s Motivation-
Hygiene Theory3 looks to explain what motivates workers. He
found that some some aspects of a job are motivators; that is,
they encourage workers to do more. Other aspects are hygiene
factors, such that their absence will result in dissatisfaction,
but their presence is not a motivator. For example, getting paid
and having reliable equipment are hygiene factors, not motiva-
tors. Interesting work and being able to learn new technology
are usually motivators.
Although Maslow and Herzberg’s theories are similar, Herzberg’s
categories are not a simple superset of Maslow’s. Although
“basic needs” roughly equates to “hygiene factors,” and “growth
needs” equates to “motivators,” there is overlap. For example,
Herzberg would say that esteem from colleagues is a motivator,
but Maslow calls esteem from others a basic need.
As you consider what is important to you in a job, consider
each aspect of a job and where it ﬁts in Maslow’s hierarchy and
whether it’s a hygiene factor or motivator for you. I ﬁnd that
these two categorizations help me see working life more clearly.
2.2
Dig In to What You’re Looking For
Now that we have a foundation to understand your motivations,
let’s look at possible factors that go into your vision of what a job
should be. I’m going to list a dozen or so motivators and condi-
tions that may or may not enter into your decision-making pro-
cess about the job hunt. This list is only partial, because I can’t
possibly know your situation, or anyone else’s. The list shows
some of the more common ones, but they’re starting points. You
have to examine your own situation, your own life, and your
own ideals.
“Should” puts others in
control of your life.
As you examine your life, your job, and
your job hunt, be wary of the word
should cropping up in your thoughts.
It’s an insidious word that can steer
you wrong, using your understanding of how others perceive
you to drive your life. Take the simple sentence “I should learn
3.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motivator-Hygiene_theory

DIG IN TO WHAT YOU’RE LOOKING FOR
40
Java.” Replace the word should with something more speciﬁc,
more descriptive. Is your “should” a positive one?
• “I would like to learn Java.”
• “My career options get broader if I learn Java.”
• “I can make more money if I learn Java.”
Or is it a negative “should,” based on what you think others
think and imagined norms?
• “I’ve been programming for ten years; I should know Java.”
• “I think that most other people know Java, so I should,
too.”
• “I’m embarrassed that I don’t know Java.”
You can replace “knowing Java” with “making $100,000/year”
or “being in management,” but the results are the same: living
by “should” lets your life be controlled by others. The negative,
imagined “shoulds” allow the expectations, real or imagined, of
other people dictate your life.
As you read through this list, be completely honest about your
motivations and your concerns. Your future job is a relation-
ship far too important to let it be tainted by self-delusion. It’s
no different from assessing what’s important to you in a roman-
tic relationship. Maybe you’re only attracted to tall blondes or
you don’t like being around people who drink or you want your
mate to share your religious beliefs. You may think “That’s shal-
low thinking” or “That shouldn’t matter if everything else about
my mate is good,” but countless marriages have wound up in
divorce because of exactly that sort of wishful thinking. In the
same way, it’s foolish to think that your loathing of Windows,
your need to be a big ﬁsh in a small pond, or speciﬁc salary
requirements can be ignored in the long run.
Consider also that not all your motivations have to be satisﬁed
by your day job. Perhaps you can scratch some of your itches
outside of work. In my off hours (and some of my on hours),
I’ve worked for the Perl Foundation doing public relations work,
as well as many more hours working on various open source
projects, and I ﬁnd that this serves my internal needs.

THE MOTIVATION WORKSHEET
41
My Extra-curricular Activities
by Ricardo Signes, programmer, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
Not only do I use extra-curricular activities to do some of the
work-like things that I want to do, but I sometimes think that’s a
better plan. I want to play with different programming languages
or language libraries from time to time, but work is not always
the place for that. I futz around with Haskell, Scheme, or Erlang
in my off time to make sure that work is always a place with
consistent standards (thus scratching the “work should be sane”
itch!).
I also like to teach other people how to do what I do, but my
company is small and doesn’t have any real junior programmers.
I make do by speaking at conferences and user groups. I get to
teach a lot more people that way, and I get free admission or a
free beer!
Finally, none of these needs stand alone. Each is related to
something else, in a web of interconnected motivators.
2.3
The Motivation Worksheet
Take some time to make a worksheet that’s a brain dump of
your motivations. This worksheet will act as a guide for you
as you search for jobs and a sort of compass for keeping you
on track as you evaluate opportunities. It will be a snapshot of
what matters to you in those times that you might otherwise
forget.
As you go through the process, think about your needs without
looking at them under the harsh light of “reality,” where you’re
likely to say, “What are the chances of my actually getting a job
as a game designer for Linux making $100,000/year?” You’re
looking only at your motivations, not ﬁnding a job out of them.
You especially want to go through this worksheet exercise before
you are looking at a speciﬁc job, if possible. Your self-reﬂection
may wind up ﬁltered by a situation at hand.
Your worksheet need not be complicated. It can be a simple
list of factors and some sort of indicator of relative importance.
There’s no wrong way to do this, so long as it’s honest and ﬁts
your needs.

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
42
Here’s what a worksheet for me would look like today in 2009
and twelve years earlier in 1997. I’ve listed many factors and
assigned a relative importance from 1–10 for each. A 10 is effec-
tively mandatory, and a 1 is almost inconsequential. Of course,
you can add or remove whatever factors you want. It’s your
worksheet.
Andy’s Needs
2009
1997
Salary
7
9
Good health beneﬁts
10
3
Location
6
2
Strong team, co-workers
10
4
Contributing to open source software
6
2
Using non-Windows technology
9
0
Autonomy
7
10
...
...
Note how as my life and career change, the importance of cer-
tain factors change as well. Ten years ago, I didn’t care about
good health beneﬁts, but I didn’t have a child, either. Money
was more important then than now, because I used it as a sort
of benchmark to see how I was doing in life. I’ve learned a bit
more since then.
2.4
What Motivates You? A Dozen Factors to Consider
Here’s a list of factors that most people ﬁnd important to con-
sider as they search for a job. I urge you to have pen and paper
at hand as you read and jot down what matters to you and
a relative importance for each item. In addition to the factor’s
importance, note the speciﬁcs of what is necessary for you.
Money
Money is perhaps the most obvious motivator, but it’s not
always a matter of how much you can get. Money also comes
in many different forms.
You need to know what your ﬁnancial requirements are, and
that means you must know what minimum base salary you
need. Sometimes people say “Salary isn’t important, as long as
the work is interesting,” but that’s just not true. Maybe you
don’t have to make $200,000/year, but you wouldn’t work for

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
43
$5/hour as long as the work was interesting, would you? You
need to know what your bottom-line minimum is.
Money may not just be salary. Some companies may pay a
yearly bonus, which may or may not be based on performance
of either you or the company. Some may pay a signing bonus.
All these factor into your total monetary compensation. Add a
401(k), discussed below, and you have many variables to juggle.
What to know: what minimum salary you require and what
range you expect to make.
Beneﬁts
Other forms of compensation ﬁgure into your ﬁnancial needs.
Maybe you have a family with speciﬁc health-care needs, so
the type of health insurance offered makes a difference. To a
healthy, single 25-year-old, this may be nearly irrelevant, com-
pared to a 40-year-old with a 6-year-old daughter. The differ-
ences between HMO, PPO, and other group health insurance
plans may make a big difference in your long-term happiness
with a company.
Retirement plans like 401(k) and 403(b) that a company pays
into are effectively free money. A job paying $50,000 that lets
you max out your 401(k) at 10 percent that matches dollar
for dollar is actually paying you $55,000. You’re receiving only
$45,000 since $5,000 comes out of your paycheck, but $10,000
is going into your 401(k) account.
Stock and stock options are deferred compensation that relate
to how well the company is doing. You may be offered perks like
health club memberships, company cars, discounts on products
the company sells, and so on. The number of ways that you can
be paid are endless.
What to know: beneﬁts you must have, including any speciﬁcs
about types of health coverage you must have; amount of 401(k)
participation you want to take advantage of; and any beneﬁts
important to you.
Location
Your workplace’s location is relevant in both a macro and micro
sense. In the macro sense, if you’re in Iowa and plan on staying

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
44
there, you’re not going to be searching for jobs in California
(or at least jobs that require you to move to California). Your
macrogeographic requirements may be based on family, climate,
or any of a number of different factors.
In most cases, you’ll probably be looking for a job in the same
general geographic area, but there are considerations there as
well. Maybe you don’t want to have a commute longer than
thirty minutes or to have to ﬁght city trafﬁc. Maybe a job in the
hustle and bustle of a major city is something you can’t bear to
imagine. Before you say “an hour in the car isn’t so bad,” con-
sider that hour every morning and then every night on the way
home after a hard day. For rail commuters, ask your commut-
ing friends how many actually use the train time to “catch up
on some reading.”
What to know: how far you are willing to commute every day,
in terms of both distance and time, and in what form of
transportation.
Pride and Prestige
For some, the allure of having a Google business card or being
able to say “I work for Apple” can be intoxicating. If you’re one
of those people, make sure you look at the situation with open
eyes. Maybe you have sights set on Google, but once you look
at it, Yahoo! is just as cool. The work itself may be the source of
your pride. It may not matter if you’re working at Apple if you,
or your friends, see your work as boring old sysadmin work.
If you think this sounds egotistical, stop and make sure that it
doesn’t apply to you. Recognition from one’s peers is a powerful
motivation, and there’s nothing wrong with it. Be honest with
yourself in your assessment of what drives you.
Know your internal
motivators.
Maybe it doesn’t matter what the work
is if you can’t tell anyone. I have a
friend who worked at a major hardware
company who was telling me of work
she was proud of but she couldn’t show me, because restrictions
prohibited her from showing anyone outside of the company.
What to know: your internal motivators.

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
45
Important Work
After my two-month stint at the ﬁnancial services company, I
realized how important it was that my work was fulﬁlling to me.
I felt good in what I was doing, helping school libraries, in a
way that wasn’t there in a ﬁnancial company. My friend Tom
Limoncelli took a pay cut to work for a presidential candidate
he believed in (see Section 10.2, Politics, on page 201). Your
motivators may be different.
At the other end, perhaps you don’t have any real motivators
in who you would want to work for, but there are certain com-
panies you would not work for, such as a military contractor,
a tobacco company, or a seller of pornography. Although these
may not be worth noting on your initial self-assessment of what
you want, if you come across a company that raises this sort of
ﬂag in your mind, examine it carefully.
The type of work may make a difference as well. Perhaps you
want to work on projects only for products or services that the
company sells. Maybe you don’t want to work on accounting
applications because that’s only back-room programming that
isn’t very important, or maybe you see accounting applications
as a way to use your skills at envisioning information to help
management increase proﬁtability.
What to know: what “important” work looks like to you.
Type of Work to Be Done
The type of work may be different from what work is impor-
tant. Programmers are often motivated by sexy products and
projects. Maybe you’re the kind of programmer who hates work-
ing on back-end program internals, and you want to work only
on sexy interfaces. Conversely, you could be like me, thriving
on building infrastructure and tools on which others can hang
their sexy interfaces.
Either way, it’s something you’ll want to know about by the time
you leave the interview, if not before.
What to know: the kinds of projects that excite you and make
you want to come to work each day.

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
46
Company Size/Department Size
Size of the company usually has a big effect on how things are
done. Bigger companies tend to be more rule-bound. Smaller
companies usually give employees more autonomy. Bigger com-
panies may have more room for advancement, but it may be a
more political process than in smaller ones. Bigger companies
typically have onerous IT departments that lock down every-
thing related to computer hardware and software. Smaller com-
panies may not care what you run on your desktop.
On the personal level, you may be the type of person who wants
to be a big ﬁsh in a small pond. You love it when people say,
“I don’t know; go ask Susan about that, she’s the expert.” Con-
versely, you may prefer to go through your day just getting your
work done and not standing out.
What to know: how big a company, a department, or a team that
you want to work for.
Your Co-Workers
Do you need a well-oiled, high-performing team to make your
life complete? Or can you get by with co-workers who ﬂy below
your soaring heights? How important is it to have co-workers
who are more talented than you to challenge your skills? Do
you get along with everyone? Or will one jerk on the team ruin
your whole day?
The importance of social interactions at work can’t be ignored.
You may think this: “I have a job to get work done, not have
a social club.” Although that may be true, Maslow still puts
it as one of the four basic human needs, not one of the two
higher-order growth needs. You’ll be with your co-workers for
forty hours a week or more, which may well be more waking
hours than you spend with your spouse. Don’t discount this
one. On the other hand, bad people come and go through good
companies.
Technical challenges from one’s co-workers can also be an
important part of job satisfaction. I’ve talked with many dissat-
isﬁed people who complain with this: “I hate being the smartest
person in the place.”

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
47
What to know: who you want to work with and who you want to
avoid.
Technology Used
Nothing affects a techie’s day-to-day work life more than the
tools she has to use. Unless you’re ambivalent and are just
as happy working in Windows with Visual Studio as you are
running Emacs under Solaris, dig into this in your interview.
(See Section 7.5, Prepare Your Questions to Ask, on page 143.)
However, don’t expect that the company will match your desires
exactly. Maybe they use ksh instead of bash, or maybe they’re
running on Macintoshes instead of Windows (if you’re lucky!).
Any new job is going to take some adjusting to, and tech differ-
ences are part of that.
In fact, you may speciﬁcally look for differences as a motivator
for the job. Maybe you’ve used only Linux in the past and the
chance to work in a BSD environment would be a great addition
to your résumé.
Sometimes the technology may be very limiting. Perhaps all
machines in the company run only a very speciﬁc version of
Windows, and free software is unheard of. Conversely, but also
limiting, employees of the Free Software Foundation only use
software that matches certain stringent licensing requirements.
What to know: what systems, languages, and other tools you
enjoy using. What you want to learn going forward.
Autonomy and Direction
Techies tend to crave independence and autonomy more than
most, sometimes to the degree where there can be grave mis-
understandings between the employee and management. Some
programmers consider a daily check-in from a project manager
to say, “Hey, how’s the project going?” to be “micromanage-
ment.” On the ﬂip side, I’ve worked where management was so
hands-off that management let the programmers do whatever
they wanted and hoped that something good came out of it.
What to know: imagine what a good relationship with manage-
ment means to you.

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
48
Dress Code
This is much the same as autonomy, but it’s such a common
concern among tech folks that it deserves a note of its own. The
war with management over dress codes has been around since
the ﬁrst programmers came to work in torn jeans and a ﬂannel
shirt. Techs tend to hate ties and prefer to dress casually. The
business world has drifted away from the button-down dress
codes of decades past, and not just for programmers.
How comfortable do you have to be? Do you bridle at the thought
of management telling you what you can and can’t wear? Any
job at all, unless you work out of your house, is going to have a
dress code of some kind, even if unwritten. Is it that important
to be able to wear your Slayer 1997 tour T-shirt to work? If
so, you limit your options, but make sure you know that about
yourself.
What to know: your sartorial minimums. Whether you can get
by wearing a tie every day. What about Dockers? Pantyhose?
Working Hours
Day in, day out, you’re going to have a schedule of some form.
How much does the company’s schedule mesh with when you
want to work?
Rigidity of the working schedule may make a difference. Can
you work Monday through Friday from 7:45 to 4:15? How about
whenever you want, so long as the work is done? Chances are
you’ll get something that’s somewhere in the middle, although
sysadmins and help desk staff with outward-facing responsibil-
ities often have less ﬂexibility.
Are you able to do weekend and after-hours work? What is
“after-hours?” How much are people expected to work if not a
rigid set of ofﬁce hours? Are you seen as a slacker for working
fewer than ten hours each day? What about being on call? Will
you have to be available for crisis handling, even on a rotating
basis?
Flexibility with family can be critical. Can you take some hours
in the afternoon to go to your kid’s doctor appointment, or does
it require paperwork and invocation of the Family and Medical

WHAT MOTIVATES YOU? A DOZEN FACTORS TO CONSIDER
49
Leave Act? What the job ad calls “family-friendly” may not meet
your expectations.
What to know: you and your family’s requirements for how
much time you can spend at the ofﬁce and how ﬂexible you
need your company to be in relation to working hours.
And Many, Many More
The previous dozen issues are just to get you thinking about
commonly considered aspects of employment. This list is hardly
inclusive. Here are some others that may trigger ideas for your
worksheet:
• Fun factor: Is the work fun or a drudge?
• Career advancement: Do you have a path to advance in the
company? Or does that not concern you?
• Responsibility and/or power of the position: Is it important
for you to lead, or are you happy creating the work?
• Personal growth/training/education: Where do you want
to grow personally? Will the company support that?
• Company stability: Is the company likely to be around in
the long term? What’s your tolerance for risk?
• Industry stability: Is the industry stable or subject to ﬂuc-
tuations in the economy?
• Stepping stone to future jobs: Do you need a certain kind
of job to reach future goals?
You’ll come up with more as you work on your sheet. You’ll come
up with even more as you search for a job. You’ll ﬁnd yet more
as you interview for a job. It’s a never-ending project, and you
should treat it as such. Add and remove factors from your list,
and change rankings as your discover more about yourself. Peo-
ple change, perceptions change, and certainly the job market
changes.
Understanding what you want is an iterative process, just like
writing software. You’ll create a ﬁrst version, use it, see what
you don’t like modify, and repeat.

NOW GO BETA TEST YOUR WORKSHEET
50
2.5
Now Go Beta Test Your Worksheet
Your alpha test for your worksheet is to run it past a spouse
or close friend. Now comes the real test: searching for a job.
Although you won’t necessarily use the sheet of paper as a
checklist while job hunting, going through the steps of creating
that physical object will likely have helped clarify the most
important aspects in your mind. Now you’re ready to start
looking.

Chapter 3
Résumé Content:
Getting the Words Down
Conventional wisdom says it’s deceptively simple to write your
résumé: ﬁgure out your objective, list your college degree, jot
down the jobs you’ve had, put some bullet points with “action
words” under each job, and slap “references available upon
request” at the bottom. If inspiration isn’t coming to you, you
can model it on one from a book with a title like 1,001 Résumés
for All Occasions. Voilà! You have your résumé!
Wrong, wrong, wrong!
Your résumé is far too crucial to your job search to leave to such
a slapdash approach. Remember that you’re selling yourself.
Your résumé is your most important selling tool. It’s there in
your place, telling your potential employer about who and what
you are, when you’re not able to do it yourself. More people will
see your résumé during the hiring process than will meet you.
Your résumé has to work on two different levels. First, it must
be clear enough for the hiring manager, or whoever screens the
résumés for him, to ﬁnd the good stuff in it and to decide to put
you in the “Maybe” pile. When I go through résumés, they’re in
my email inbox, and as I go through them, I make an initial
cut: it’s worth printing to paper, or it’s not. Anything that isn’t
immediately obvious to me as being at least a viable candidate
for a job is deleted and never looked at again.

BEFORE YOU WRITE YOUR RÉSUMÉ...
52
After the initial yes/no ﬁltering process, your résumé and cover
letter will be referred to often throughout the rest of the hiring
process. The hiring manager will take notes on it and will pass
copies around to others involved in the process. Depending on
the hiring process of the company, it may get passed all the way
up the chain of command to the company president for ﬁnal
approval. Your résumé may be scrutinized by dozens of people,
many of them perfectly happy to notice and point out its ﬂaws.
3.1
Before You Write Your Résumé...
Before we think about the parts of your résumé, remember this:
you’re probably going to need it in three formats: Word for most
companies of any size, plain text, and HTML for your website.
I know it may make you cringe to have repeated data. Most
techies are interested in doing things as efﬁciently, and with
as little rework, as possible.1 You’re not alone; it hurts me to
have to have multiple copies in multiple formats, too, but it’s
the way it is. I know that Word, especially, is an odious format,
but unless you’re dealing only with a very few companies and
they’re especially anti-Microsoft, you’re likely to be asked for a
Word document. So, in this chapter we’ll focus on writing the
textual part of your résumé before worrying about speciﬁcs of
visual presentation.
We’re still going to cover presentation, because presentation is
content, especially for a job as detail-oriented as a technical job,
but not until we’re sure what you want to say. For now, just
think of your résumé as plain text, with abstract organization
like “sections” and “headings” and “bullets.”
For now, just think text.
Prepare to Write More Than One Résumé
You’re also not writing your résumé, singular. You’re writing the
base from which you’ll create specialized résumés for each job
you apply for.
1.
Larry Wall, the creator of Perl, says the three virtues of a programmer are
laziness, impatience, and hubris. Minimizing rework is the best kind of laziness.

BEFORE YOU WRITE YOUR RÉSUMÉ...
53
If you’re applying to more than one job, you need to have more
than one résumé. Different jobs and different companies all
have different requirements. Even if you’re applying for two jobs
both called “applications programmer” at the same company,
they’re not the same job.
I often get asked for résumé help, and it’s always a vague
request: “How does my résumé look? Is this good? Should I
change anything?” My answer is always the same: “What’s the
job you’re applying for?”
A résumé must speak to its speciﬁc audience, tailored both for
the company you’re applying to and for the speciﬁc job you’re
looking to do. Say you’re looking for a job as a Unix system
administrator. The résumé you send with your cover letter may
be tailored differently if you’re applying to a small startup than if
you’re applying to the corporate headquarters of a large insur-
ance company or the information services department of your
local community college.
The details of the position will also dictate how your résumé
looks. If the job ad states that you need to have a Microsoft
Certiﬁed IT Professional (MCITP) certiﬁcation, then you’d better
put the details of your MCITP near the top of the résumé. If
you were applying for a Unix sysadmin position, your MCITP
would be noted in a section of “training and accomplishments.”
And if you were trying to work for an organization like the Free
Software Foundation, you might even leave the MCITP off your
résumé entirely.
For now, keep notes on everything that could go on a résumé for
you, even if it’s not directly related to a position you have your
eye on right now. Keep a notes ﬁle that you can refer to so that
you can swap in and out relevant data when the time comes.
Don’t Fear the Résumé Police
Job hunters seem to think that the Résumé Police are out there.
Truncheons in hand, magically seeing every résumé written,
these ofﬁcers of conformity seek out and punish those who do
not follow the Golden Format when writing a résumé. At least,
that’s what it seems like when people ask “What order do my
jobs have to go in” or “Is it OK if I make it longer than two
pages” or “Do I need to have an ‘Education’ section?”

WRITING A RÉSUMÉ IS NOT SPEEDY
54
There’s no one “right”
way to write a résumé.
I
promise,
the
Résumé
Police
do
not exist. Your ninth-grade English
teacher,
who
made
sure
that your
research paper had a bibliography that
exactly matched a certain style, will not be scrutinizing your
résumé.
There’s no law that says you must have certain sections, in a
certain order, or that you have to list the months as well as the
years when listing positions. Although there are certain conven-
tions followed and certain sorts of information that people will
expect to be able to ﬁnd on your résumé, you need not fear the
swift wrath of Mrs. Cruella and her Red Pen of Correction.
Question everything about your résumé and how it’s con-
structed, even what you ﬁnd in résumé books, even this book.
Let your own judgment be the ultimate guide.
3.2
Writing a Résumé Is Not Speedy
This is a long process. You’re not going to write a good résumé
in one sitting. You’re not going to assemble a good portfolio of
your work, which I’ll discuss in Section 7.4, Prepare a Relevant
Portfolio, on page 138, all at once. You’re not going to make a
list of what you’re looking for in a job in one sitting. They may
take days, with an initial burst of activity, and a week or two of
updates as you think more about it.
Start writing your résumé immediately, if you don’t have one
already, but come back to it frequently. Keep a scraps ﬁle of
items you’d like to add to the résumé or that you’ve removed
as irrelevant. Tend to your base résumé like a garden, planting
new items and removing old items, as you think of them.
Take notes of what you see around you in your job search. Are
certain buzzwords more popular in ads? Perhaps those are the
aspects of your résumé to play up. Evaluate the reaction to your
résumé after each interview. Don’t let your résumé fall into dis-
repair and irrelevance.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
55
3.3
The Sections of Your Résumé
Even though there’s no one right way to do a résumé, the
résumé reader will expect there to be certain information about
you. Therefore, your résumé should contain, at minimum, the
following sections:
• Contact block
• Professional summary
• Work experience
• Education
• Other achievements outside of work (optional, if your work
experience is thin)
• List of buzzwords and skills
These are the areas that employers are looking for and ﬁnd to
be most important. The order of sections in your résumé should
be determined by their relative importance. Put more important
sections toward the top of the résumé, where they’ll be more
likely to be seen.
The most important text in your résumé is your contact infor-
mation, so that is always ﬁrst. Without a way to contact you,
there’s no reason to have a résumé.
After that, you’ll have a professional summary that lets the
reader see you in a nutshell. Beyond those two, the order
depends on your background and the job for which you’re
applying.
Let’s look at each of these sections in depth.
The Contact Block
The contact block usually doesn’t get much thought, but it’s the
most important part of the résumé. If the company can’t contact
you, you can’t get hired.
At the very least, the top of your résumé needs to have your
name, email address, phone number, and street address. If
you want to list two phone numbers, one land and one cell,
that’s OK. Don’t bother with more than that, and certainly don’t
include a fax number.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
56
What Name Should I Use?
Think about what name you use on your résumé if you
have more than one. My given name is Andrew Lester,
but I’m Andy to everyone except the government, so
Andy is the name I use on my résumé. More impor-
tant, Andy is the name that you’ll ﬁnd me under when
searching the web for what I’ve blogged, code I’ve
written, and so on.
If you have a married name or a hyphenated name, put
on the résumé the one that gives the hiring manager
the best chance of ﬁnding good information about
you on the Internet. If your legal name is Margaret
Smith-Widget but on LinkedIn and elsewhere you go by
Peggy Widget, then searches by interested employers
are going to come up empty.
Absolutely do not list your current work number as a contact
number. Set up voicemail on your home number if you must,
but you don’t want to be taking job-hunting calls at work.
The Professional Summary
An “elevator pitch” is a high-level overview of something such
that you could explain it to someone during a ride in an elevator.
The pitch encapsulates something you want to sell into a brief
explanation. It could be a product, a project, your company, or,
in this case, you as a job candidate. The key to the elevator
pitch is that the recipient’s time is short and very valuable, and
brevity is a must if you’re to ﬁt in the most important aspects
of your proposal. Details can come later, once the prospect is
interested.
Imagine you get on the elevator, and there’s a hiring manager
who recognizes you as a candidate because you have a big name
tag that says Bob Smith. “You’re interested for working for us,
Smith? Tell me about yourself, but make it quick! I’m busy, and
we’ll be at my ﬂoor in twenty seconds.”

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
57
Get a Decent Email Address
Any email correspondence to a prospective employer
should be from your personal email address. Don’t
even think of sending mail from your current job’s email
address. Your current employer may well be monitor-
ing email, but worse, few things are tackier than get-
ting email from bob.smith@bobscurrentcompany.com. If
you don’t have your own email address, go to Google’s
Gmail∗and sign up for a free account.
Before sending mail, consider that your email address
is part of the presentation of who you are to your
future
employer.
If
your
current
email
address
is
mr_beer_bong@gmail.com, get a second one for business
correspondence.
∗.
http://gmail.com
You give him your elevator pitch. You tell him, “I have twelve
years of software development experience, eight of them in your
industry. I’ve led teams before, from three to eight members. I’m
an expert in Perl and have written seven modules for the CPAN.
And, I’ve had a couple of articles published in magazines like Dr.
Dobbs and The Perl Journal.” DING! The elevator car stops, and
the hiring manager steps toward the opening doors. “Sounds
good, Smith, I’ll look into you more closely.” Turn this scenario
into printed words on a résumé, and you have your professional
summary at the top of your résumé.
You may get only twenty seconds of skim time to make an
impression on the person reading your résumé before she moves
on to the next one. Whether it’s the hiring manager herself or
someone in human resources ﬁltering out submissions, time is
critical.
No one will read your
résumé word for word
unless he’s given a
reason to do so.
Someone looking at your résumé needs
a reason to read the whole thing. Any-
one advertising for a job is inundated
with résumés. Imagine a hiring man-
ager who’s put an ad in the Sunday
Chicago Tribune or placed an ad on

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
58
Monster. Overnight, he may have an email inbox with 100 to
200 résumés. Now he has to weed through all the junk that
has been sent to ﬁnd the good stuff. That junk can include
entirely unqualiﬁed candidates, sales reps from offshore out-
sourcers looking for business, people who are geographically too
far away, and so on.
You may be a unique and beautiful snowﬂake, but the hiring
manager is swamped with a blizzard of snowﬂakes that all look
the same to him. Your job is to catch his eye. That’s why a ﬂuff-
free summary of who you are, and what speciﬁc value you will
bring to the reader, should be the ﬁrst thing he sees on your
résumé.
Note how everything you said in your elevator pitch was a
demonstrable and quantiﬁable achievement and entirely free
of ﬂuff. At no point would you say, “I’m a hard worker, sir!”
because he’d growl back “Yeah, you and everyone else, Smith!”
(See Appendix A, on page 246, for more to avoid.) You also didn’t
list every language that you’d ever read an article on or every
operating system you’d ever typed a command into.
For a quick way to write your summary, start with three or four
bullet points:
• Summary of experience
• Two or three different points of expertise
• College degrees and/or certiﬁcations, if they signiﬁcantly
add to your appeal
Summary of Experience
Probably the most important item to get out in front of the hiring
manager is your level of experience, expressed in years of work,
or months if fewer than two years. The hiring manager has a
good idea of what she’s looking for in a candidate, and years of
experience is probably at the top of that deﬁnition.
The experience bullet will tell how long you’ve been working in
the ﬁeld, with speciﬁcs of industry or type of work if possible.
Here are some examples:
• Three years of Solaris system administration for a Fortune
500 company

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
59
• Seven years software development in C/C++ writing library
automation software
• Five years of user interface design
The speciﬁc wording of these bullets may change depending on
the target of your résumé. You want to emphasize certain parts
of your background as they relate to the job you’re applying for.
For example, if you worked for Nokia and you’re applying for
a job with Motorola’s cell phone division, emphasize that your
background is in the same area of expertise:
• Five years of user interface, with four on mobile phones
If the industry you’re applying for matches part of your back-
ground, then call attention to that. Applying in the real estate?
Then maybe your background in the ﬁnancial industry is worth
noting:
• Seven years Windows network administration for New York
investment banks.
Anything you can do that shows that you are a good match
for the target employer is worth highlighting. Hiring managers
will tend to hire people familiar with the speciﬁc situation being
hired for. Here are some other examples of similarities you may
be able to draw attention to:
• Tools used
• Industry worked in
• Types
of
users
supported
(Artists?
Accountants?
Executives?)
• Geographic area worked
• Size of company
• Size of department
• Size of team
Don’t forget who you’re selling this résumé to. Even something
as basic as your summary of experience may vary depending on
the target of the résumé. What may be an unnecessary detail in
one scenario may be what catches the eye of a hiring manager
in another. You must know your target.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
60
Main Expertise
Your expertise is where you explain your top technical skills,
quantiﬁably if possible. Be as speciﬁc as you can, unless your
expertise is that your knowledge is broad. For example, it might
be one of these:
• Extensive work with Ruby, including two years of Rails
• Expert Solaris sysadmin, supporting more than 200 work-
stations
• Managed work teams of three to eight developers and
testers
• Three years experience writing 100-to-300-page manuals
with FrameMaker
• Tested software on platforms from Red Hat Linux to Mac
OS X to Windows XP
• Taught more than ten different training classes to groups
of up to 100 students
Note how each of these is brief, quantiﬁable, and speciﬁc.
Other Expertise
You may have other areas of expertise that are worth mention-
ing, maybe only for a speciﬁc target company. Examples might
include the following:
• Fluent
in
Spanish,
including
some
error
message
translation
• Active in open source development, including acting as Perl
6 project manager
• Extensive experience with gravel pit management software
An objective is a waste
of prime résumé real
estate.
What if you’re fresh out of school
and don’t have professional experi-
ence? Some books say that you can
use an objective instead of a profes-
sional summary if you don’t have an
extensive background, but I disagree. An objective makes your
wants most prominent, rather than what you can do to help
the employer’s needs. Instead, turn your school or hobby expe-
rience into summary bullet points, and add one bullet for the
direction you’d like to go. For example:

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
61
• Recent graduate of Illinois Institute of Technology, com-
puter science major, with 3.43 GPA
• Two years of work on open source projects, including Perl
6 and Ruby on Rails
• Frequent leader of class projects, from two to six students
• Looking to work for a small startup or with music and
audio recording
This ﬁnal bullet may smell like the dreaded objective, but in this
case, some sort of directional statement is important, because
the hiring company won’t know where you’re going.
Double-check your synopsis. Does it stand alone? With nothing
else on your résumé but your name, email address, and synop-
sis, could you see getting an interview? If so, you have a strong
synopsis.
Work Experience
Your past work experience is the best predictor of future job per-
formance, and that’s what you’ll explain next. The work expe-
rience should be the largest part of your résumé, unless you’ve
never had a relevant job before.
Here’s the rough outline form of your work experience section:
Conglomerated Frobbitz, Inc., Lincoln, NE (2005-present)
CFI is a leading distributor of replacement parts for widgetrons.
Lead software architect (2007-present)
* Led team of five creating framework for testing of software.
This framework became the standard testing tool for CFI,
testing more than 6M lines of code daily.
* Established requirements for...
...
Programmer (2005-2007)
* Coded and testing widgetron design software in Java as part
of team of seven.
* Built command-line tools to....
Feed Lot Solutions, Milford, NE (2004-2005)
FLS produces farm management software for feed lots in the US,
Canada, and Australia.
Programmer
* Designed forms and coded business in Visual Basic for core
product, CowTracker Plus

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
62
* Instituted bug tracking software to replace ad hoc Excel
spreadsheets that FLS had been using
....
Southeast Community College, Milford, NE (2002-2004)
Computer lab assistant
* Answered technical questions about...
* Helped first-year programming students with...
The company heading is simple: name of the company, where it
is, and when you worked there. If the company is a large one,
specify a branch or division to let the reader have some idea of
what your work group did. If you worked at General Electric,
don’t leave the reader wondering if you worked on lightbulbs or
aircraft engines. If the company is unlikely to be familiar with
the reader, then it’s nice to include a short description of the
company to give a ﬂavor to your background. This can be left
out only if you’re short on space, if the target company is in the
same industry, or if they’re widely known.
Your résumé is not a
reference sheet.
Note that you are not including infor-
mation such as phone numbers, street
addresses, or any of your contacts at
the company. Don’t try to make your
résumé do double duty as your reference sheet. You may, if
the website is relevant to the job search, include the company’s
URL. Don’t bother if the company is well-known.
List the dates of employment for the position, but don’t waste
space by including the months. If you’re still working, leave the
ending year off or say “(2007-present).” Certainly don’t say why
you left the position on the résumé. I’ve seen people write things
like “(2002-2004, company downsized).” That downsizing infor-
mation isn’t relevant to your skills, so leave it out. If an inter-
viewer wants to know why you left a company, she’ll ask.
The bullets underneath each company tell what you accom-
plished at the company:
Position: System administrator
* Managed 150-seat, 10-server Windows network infrastructure,
including Exchange Server and Microsoft SQL Server.
* Provided second-tier technical support for the help desk.
* Created disaster recovery plans and upgraded old backup plans.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
63
The Power of Open Source to Your Career
Open source software projects not only power much of
the Internet, but they can give a boost to your career,
especially when you’re just starting out. They can also
give you that important experience and sample work
to give as you start your job search.
Working on an open source software (OSS) project,
either your own or an existing project, is real work expe-
rience. It shows that you’re able to create code, work
on a team, and get along with others. It leaves a trail on
the Web that an employer will be able to ﬁnd and see.
Open source project work also gives you real examples
of your skills that you are free to show to anyone. At
conferences, after I say to bring a portfolio of work to
interviews (see Section 7.4, Prepare a Relevant Portfo-
lio, on page 138), someone will always complain with
this: “I can’t show samples of my work, because all the
code I write is proprietary.” That’s too bad, because it
puts them at a disadvantage. OSS is an ideal solution,
because it’s a way to show your chops publicly.
Your contributions need not be large, and they might
not even be code. You can contribute documentation,
add pages to the project wiki, or just answer questions
on a mailing list. The key is that you’re giving back value
on real programming projects in a demonstrable way.
If you’re not involved in open source yet, ﬁnd a project
that interests you today. Visit Google Code∗or Source-
Forge,† two huge repositories of open source projects.
Your career will thank you.
∗.
http://code.google.com/
†.
http://sourceforge.net

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
64
* Specified, planned, and rolled out Active Directory integration
across the enterprise.
* Established and reached service levels of 99.99% uptime.
* Created dedicated Linux backup server with Quantum tape backup
unit. This reduced human backup costs by 80%.
Start by explaining what position you held at the company. If
you had an ofﬁcial title, use it on the résumé, because the hir-
ing company may call to check your employment history at your
old company and may be concerned if the titles don’t match. If
your title is vague, like when I was once a “Member of Technical
Staff,” you may want to parenthetically add your own descrip-
tion of the position, like “Member of Technical Staff (product
release manager).”
Highlight advancement
by listing different
positions.
If you’ve held two radically different
positions at a company, don’t try to
combine them into one section. Repeat
this section for each position. You want
your advancement or job shift to stand
out and to tell the story. In the previous example, the résumé’s
author started as a programmer and became a lead software
architect. That’s a big jump in responsibilities and should be
highlighted.
This is also the case if you changed the type of work in a lateral
move. For instance, you might list 2001–2003 for programmer
and 2003–2005 for sysadmin, even if they were both at the same
level of responsibility.
Your bullet list for the position should give interesting, useful
information about the work you performed and beneﬁts that
you brought to the company. Write short, punchy sentences
that describe actions. Don’t say “I did this, I did that,” because
the reader knows who the subject of the sentence is.
Note how the bullets in the example go from the general to the
speciﬁc, from the most important to the least important. This
is just like everything else on your résumé. Each bullet gives
a speciﬁc description of the work being done, using the active
voice. Each bullet uses an active verb to describe what was
done. You say you “provided support,” not “was the help desk
guy.” Describe it in terms of what you did, not what you were.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
65
How many bullets should you have? It varies widely, depending
on how much responsibility you had, how far back the posi-
tion was, and how relevant to your current position it was. Your
most recent job should probably have at least four to six bullets
unless you were there for a very short time. On the other hand,
my ﬁrst full-time programming job back in 1986 gets two bullet
points at the tail end of my résumé.
Coming up with your bullets is the toughest part of the entire
résumé process. I recommend that you start it early; just scrib-
ble ideas on a sheet of paper that you carry with you. Don’t
worry about order or phrasing at this early phase. Write down
everything you can remember doing, and worry about pruning
later. It’s far easier to get rid of extra information than to come
up with one more bullet at the last minute.
Focus on the story, not
speciﬁc buzzwords.
Résumé books often talk about the
importance of using “action words” in
your bullet points. They’ll list pages of
words you can use in your résumé to
sound like you were effective: analyzed, compiled, coordinated,
drafted, devised, implemented, blah blah blah. Although it’s
true that you want to use active verbs, as I noted earlier, don’t
get hung up on which snazzy word you use. Instead, focus on
the details of the work, getting as speciﬁc as possible.
Details include numbers. If you can quantify some value that
comes from the work you did, it gives weight to the value that
provided. Even if you weren’t the only person working on a
project, you can still discuss your involvement. Here are some
examples:
• Increased trafﬁc to website 50% over six months by (and
list the actions you took to make it happen)
• Led teams of four to six programmers
• Created new task tracking system that reduced schedule
creep by 40%
• Installed new routers that increased throughput 25%, vir-
tually eliminating the 20% of help desk calls related to net-
work responsiveness
• Reduced open ticket backlog from 500 to 20 in three
months.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
66
• Refactored codebase to take advantage of standard C++
libraries, reducing total LOC from 100,000 to 70,000
Quantiﬁable claims are
powerful.
Quantiﬁable claims are of particular
interest to an interviewer and will likely
be discussed in the interview. Make
sure that you can back up the num-
bers you’re claiming, and don’t fudge. If you must use an esti-
mate, make it clear that it is an estimate, and give the source
of the estimate: “Implemented a new asset tracking system. The
warehouse manager estimated this reduced paperwork by 75%.”
Where possible, specify numbers as percentages and trends
rather than absolute numbers. Saying “increased web trafﬁc by
10,000 hits/day” doesn’t give any sense of scale, but “increased
web trafﬁc by 40%” does. Also specify time spans. “Increased
website trafﬁc by 40%” doesn’t specify the time it took to make
the change and leaves the reader wondering. In a week? A year?
The timeframe makes a difference.
But what if you don’t know the numbers? Then you’ll have
to do without but with much less impact. Take this opportu-
nity now to remember to update your résumé with metrics like
this as often as possible. (See more about using your résumé
as a résumé tracking tool in Chapter 12, Staying Hirable, on
page 226.)
Value for the Employer
As you create bullets for each position, emphasize actions you
took or were involved in that improved the company, the depart-
ment, or the product. Even in the most mundane of positions,
chances are you did something to improve things.
I was working with my friend Kirrily Robert to revise her long
and varied résumé. In all jobs but one, she listed ways that
she had improved things, whether creating coding standards
or being a one-woman system administration department. One
job, however, stuck out. The two short bullets describing it were
bland and uninteresting.
Andy:
I’d be more comfortable if this position somehow tied to
business value. Were you designing stuff from the ground up?

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
67
The Guy Who Drove the Mosquito Truck
One common bit of wrong-headed advice is that gaps
in your employment history are poison. I once got a
résumé where the ﬁrst job in the candidate’s work his-
tory, an inch of the most valuable visual real estate on
his résumé, was driving the mosquito spray truck for his
town. He had more than a decade of programming
experience, but apparently he’d been unable to ﬁnd
a job for two years. I guess he ﬁgured I wouldn’t see a
gap in his employment history if he put down that he
was the mosquito truck driver. In fact, you don’t need
to explain employment gaps in your résumé. If an inter-
viewer is interested in details, she’ll ask at the interview.
He’d also apparently read the common knowledge
that you must always use action words to describe
your job responsibilities, with descriptions like “Precisely
followed planned routes to deliver proper amount of
spray” and “Accurately logged all activities.”
Although it’s true that you always want to show how you
provided value to your employer, the ability to follow
routes and keep logs is not one that I, hiring a program-
mer, am at all interested in. I certainly don’t want to see
it as the ﬁrst thing on a résumé. Employers understand
that sometimes it’s hard to get a job, and if you have
to drive the mosquito truck or sell appliances at Sears
to make ends meet until your next programming job, so
be it. Just don’t make us read about it.
Kirrily:
Nah, it was maintenance and the odd new feature. All
very back end and unsexy I’m afraid.
Andy:
Did you do anything cool at that job? Inﬂict coding stan-
dards? Set up bug tracking?
Kirrily:
Nope and nope. Managed to write some automated
tests.
Andy:
Did they have any before you started there?
Kirrily:
Yes, just not good ones. They spat out reams of text
you had to parse for yourself, and Perl’s Test::Harness couldn’t
run them properly. I ﬁnally got them to run right.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
68
Andy:
Aha! So you “overhauled the automated unit test suite to
conform to the Perl testing standards.” There’s your improvement.
Note how with a bit of digging, we turned up a valuable bit of
her background that would have gone unmentioned. That one
bullet now shows the résumé reader that Kirrily understands
unit testing and Perl’s testing framework and that she has a
nose for improvement.
Education
The basics of the “Education” section are to show the names
of the institutions of higher education you’ve attended and the
degrees received at each. You can also list individual courses of
interest and your GPA if it’s worth noting.
Master of Computer Science (emphasis on algorithms),
University of Chicago, 2002
Bachelor of Arts, American Literature, Poughkeepsie Col-
lege, 1998
Note that we’re talking about “higher education,” which means
“not high school.” Employers assume you’ve completed high
school, so you need not specify that you have, or have not,
done so. In fact, listing your high-school education only draws
attention to your not having college. You especially don’t want
to include anything about high school if you only have a GED
(General Equivalency Diploma).
If you’re currently working toward a degree, treat it with the
expectation that you’ll be graduating on time:
Bachelor of Science, Scranton Technical Institute, 2010
(anticipated)
If you don’t have any degrees, you can still list schools you’ve
attended and classes you’ve taken. Maybe you’re just starting to
work on a degree. List relevant courses you’ve taken.
Working toward an Associate of Science in Management
degree from McHenry County College by taking evening
classes. Courses taken include Principles of Management,
Management Theory in Practice, and three semesters of
Business Accounting.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
69
Keep certiﬁcation
classes under
“Certiﬁcations,” not
“Education.”
Other forms of education may be rele-
vant as well. Perhaps you took a week-
long training class in systems adminis-
tration. That’s certainly worth putting
in your “Education” section. However,
if it was part of your certiﬁcation pro-
cess, put it in your “Certiﬁcations” section, as I’ll discuss in the
next section.
Training courses:
• Principles of Web Security, 2006, three-day training
course from TechShield Education
• Extreme Programming: A Week Hands-On, 2005, ﬁve-
day lecture/lab from XP Partners
If you have no college work at all, and no relevant education,
just leave the “Education” section out entirely, and use that
space to tell other wonderful things about yourself. How much
you emphasize your education, both in terms of amount of detail
and positioning on the page, may depend on the company you’re
applying for. A Silicon Valley startup may be far less interested
in your degrees than a research institution or indeed any edu-
cational institution. On the other hand, what if that institution
is a prestigious one like MIT? The nature of the job may also
be relevant. A high-level planning and research position may
need more emphasis on education than an entry-level system
administrator.
Certiﬁcations
Certiﬁcations can be an efﬁcient, accepted way of showing that
you’ve achieved a level of proﬁciency in your chosen area, or
they can be useless noise that make it look like you’re trying to
be more impressive than you really are. The key is for you to
know the difference.
In some areas, like Microsoft-heavy shops, having certiﬁcation
as a Microsoft Certiﬁed Systems Engineer (MCSE), the prede-
cessor to MCITP, carries a lot of weight, if not actually being a
hiring requirement. I’ve seen many MCSEs put it in their con-
tact block, as in “Bob Smith, MCSE,” and include a little graphic
from Microsoft that says they’re properly certiﬁed. The Microsoft
certiﬁcations are well-respected in that sector of the computing

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
70
world, so it makes sense to play them up. If you’re hiring for a
sysadmin in a Windows shop, it probably makes sense to put
a “Certiﬁcations” section above your “Education” section and
maybe even your “Professional Experience” section. The same
would hold true if you have a generally accepted certiﬁcation,
such as a CCNA or CCNE from Cisco.
On the other hand, applying for a position at an all-Unix shop,
where they like to say that MCSE stands for Minesweeper-
Certiﬁed Solitaire Expert, you’d give less weight to that MCSE.
It’s still relevant as an achievement in your background but of
less relevance to the employer. You’d probably want to move it
down in importance on the résumé.
Finally, some certiﬁcations don’t carry much weight at all. For
example, there are no generally accepted certiﬁcations for Perl
programmers. Nonetheless, I’ll see people cite having been cer-
tiﬁed as “scoring 92 percent in Perl at SomeTestingSite.com,”
where the site is one of those offering poorly written tests appar-
ently written by freelancers skimming a language manual.
Make sure you can back up your certiﬁcations and education.
I’ll see expertise mentioned in “Certiﬁcations” or “Education,”
but without experience on the résumé to back it up. That smells
like a résumé author trying to show that he’s something he’s
not. If you’re going to make claims about yourself with certiﬁca-
tions, make sure you understand what you’re claiming. If not,
leave it out.
Finally, don’t list hokey online societies and classes that offer
negligible value. Don’t list yourself as a member of the HTML
Writers Guild, for example, when all it takes to be a member is
$40/year.
Honors, Awards, Activities, and Memberships
A section on awards and honors can be a great way to highlight
some of your achievements that don’t ﬁt into any other head-
ings. It’s also likely to be read because it’s there, just like the
“P.S.” at the end of advertising letters.
Professional awards may include an honor bestowed by an orga-
nization, such as the SourceForge Community Choice Awards
for outstanding open source software, or one given by your

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
71
company, such as the Acme Corporation Leadership in Action
award. Unless the award is widely known, it’s worth explaining
the honor in a line below the bullet.
Don’t list an award unless it is special and meaningful. If the
Leadership in Action award is given to only three people in the
10,000-person corporation, then it’s quite an honor. However, if
it’s “awarded” to anyone with 90 percent or better attendance,
then it’s hardly special. Chances are you’ll be asked about these
awards and honors during the interview, so make sure you don’t
list something where you’ll look foolish trying to explain why it’s
an honor to receive it.
Academic examples include making the dean’s list or being
awarded a scholarship. List the year or years in which the
honor was awarded. In the case of a scholarship, do not list the
dollar amount of the scholarship.
For professional activities, you can list groups of which you’re
a member. Even when referring to well-known groups like the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), spell out the full
name. Don’t list the HTML Writers’ Guild, and please don’t list
your World of Warcraft clan, even if coordinating weekly dun-
geon raids requires organizational skills.2
Awards
• Dean’s List, 2002–2003
• Microracle Technical Scholarship, 2005
Honors
• White Camel award, The Perl Foundation, 2005 One of
3 given for outstanding service to the Perl community
Whatever you put in this section, make sure they’re meaningful.
Remember back in the late 1990s when websites had absurd
badges saying the site was deemed “Top 5% of the Web,” what-
ever that meant? That’s what you want to avoid.
2.
I
swear
I
am
not
making
up
this
example.
See
http://beyond-summit.blogspot.com/2006/09/would-you-put-wow-on-your-resume.html.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
72
Other Achievements
Listing outside achievements can be a great way to show that
there’s more to you than your core skills, but only if you have
limited experience. If you’re fresh out of school or have been
working for only a few years, then you may need to turn to non-
work activities to show your skills. If you have a good solid work-
ing background, then outside achievements will just be noise.
List outside
achievements only if
your work experience is
weak.
If you do decide to list achievements,
then remember that you are showing
“achievements,” not “things I like to
do.” Say you’re a fan of renaissance
faires. Dressing up at the ren faire
every weekend isn’t an achievement,
but acting as treasurer for East Poughkeepsie Renaissance
Faire Fans is. Turn it into an example of your skills and how
you’ll help the company, like so:
Outside activities:
Treasurer, East Poughkeepsie Renaissance Faire Fans (2004–
present)
• Responsible for all cash ﬂow and tracking of accounts
for this 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organization.
• Created yearly accounts of all monies per U.S. law.
Even if 99 percent of the money involved with the running of
the East Poughkeepsie Renaissance Faire Geeks is collecting
dues throughout the year and buying beer for the midwinter
beer bash, you’re showing responsibility and ﬁnancial savvy
that may count for something in the eyes of the reader.
Here are some ideas to get you thinking how to present them.
Instead of...
Say This...
I like painting.
Self-taught painter with oils and water-
colors. My piece “Night In a Cave” won
third place in the 2004 Boston Cavalcade
of the Arts.
I like playing chess.
I’m an avid chess player. When I left Stan-
ford in 2002, I was the ﬁfth-ranked player
in the All-Campus Chess League.

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
73
Instead of...
Say This...
I like rock climbing.
Rock climbing is a passion. The group
I
helped
organize,
Flatlander
Rock
Climbers, is going on our ﬁrst expedition
to the Painted Desert in Arizona in March
2010.
I play banjo.
I’ve played banjo since I was eight. I
play with the local Dixieland band Fire-
ball Eight, where we play McHenry Fiesta
Days each year.
In each of these cases, they may not be huge achievements, but
they show that you apply yourself in your hobbies. As always,
it’s a matter of selling yourself and bringing to light what you
have to offer.
Remember with topics not directly related to your job responsi-
bilities that it may cross the line into Too Much Information, as
discussed in Section 10.2, Other Topics to Avoid, on page 200.
Treasurer for the local ren faire group may be innocuous, but
treasurer for the local chapter of Greenpeace or the National
Riﬂe Association may put off the reader. Balance the risk with
the rewards.
Buzzwords and Skills
Somewhere near the bottom of your résumé, include a section of
a list of skills and buzzwords that you know. This list exists only
to appease automated keyword checkers and human résumé
screeners unfamiliar with your area of expertise. It also helps
your online footprint so that people searching the Web or a com-
pany’s résumé database will be more likely to ﬁnd your résumé.
Say you’ve got a bullet point in your “Experience” section like
this:
• Created applications for company intranet such as
phone listings and in-house repair tracking using Perl,
the Catalyst framework, and an Oracle back end.
That gives the high-level view but doesn’t ﬁll in as many buz-
zwords as possible. If you’re writing in Perl to a database, you’re
using DBI and other CPAN modules and writing SQL queries.
You need not explain that level of detail in the “Experience”

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
74
section, but you can now include bullets in your “Buzzwords”
section like this:
• Perl: CPAN modules, DBI, Mason
• Databases: Oracle, SQL
Now if someone is searching the Web for “résumé Perl SQL,”
she’ll get a hit on your résumé. Without your “Buzzwords” sec-
tion, your résumé would not have been found. Many companies
may have human screeners who do the same thing. The hiring
manager may say “I gotta have someone who knows Perl and
can write SQL.” To you, it’s obvious that if you’re using Oracle,
you’re writing SQL, but to the HR clerk, it’s not.
Put as much detail as is relevant into your buzzword bullets.
Details help reinforce your credibility and give the reader a
better feel for what you know. For example, rather than say
you have experience administering “Windows servers,” specify
“administered Windows NT, Windows 2000, and Windows 2003
servers.” Note how I’ve spelled out each version of Windows,
instead of saying “Windows NT, 2000, and 2003,” so that some-
one searching for “Windows 2000” will match that string.
On the other hand, irrelevant details are a nuisance and make
the list harder to read. If you’re just saying that you’re proﬁcient
with Windows as a user, specify only “Windows XP” and not
the older versions. Nobody cares if you’ve been a Windows user
since Windows 3.1.
How do you know when to be detailed and when to cut it short?
If it relates to your core skills, then give details. If it’s merely
a side part of your knowledge, be sparse. A programmer might
make mention of knowing how to use Microsoft Project, but a
project manager would be wise to specify versions of Project
she’s worked with.
One of the places I see people go overboard the most is in list-
ing Unix-like operating systems they’ve worked on. For most
programmer positions, specifying that you’re comfortable with
Linux and Solaris is enough, but I’ve seen people list individ-
ual Linux distributions (Ubuntu, Debian, Red Hat, Slackware)
and even versions of distributions (Slackware 8.1, 8.2, and 9)!
On the other hand, for a system administrator, this may make
sense. On the third hand, at the time of this writing, Ubuntu is

THE SECTIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
75
white-hot, and a programmer might be wise to make mention
of it in her résumé. Bottom line: consider the audience for this
speciﬁc résumé.
A ﬁnal note: I suggest you label this section “Buzzwords,”
because it shows that you’re aware that it is an artifact of the
keyword index-driven nature of the job world. If the thought of
a résumé with a “Buzzwords” section horriﬁes you, you might
go with “Detailed Skills List.” Whatever term you use, make it
clear that it’s not required reading.
Can I Have Other Sections?
Absolutely! The Résumé Police will not be knocking on the door
if you add something outside the standard “Education,” “Expe-
rience,” and “Achievement” sections. On my own résumé, I have
sections for “Publishing,” about various books I’ve worked on;
“Open Source,” where I list projects I’ve worked on; and “Pre-
sentations & Papers,” for talks I’ve given at conferences and
user groups. None of those would ﬁt neatly into “Experience,”
so why try to shoehorn them in?
Branch out a little! Give the reader something interesting to
remember from your résumé. Maybe you wrote some software
on the side, so add a “Software Written” section. How about a
section called “Why I Love Programming,” listing your top ﬁve
bullets about what you love about your profession? Whatever
section you add should look like a section so as to be clear that
it’s not a continuation of the section preceding it, but beyond
that, put in whatever you want.
What Order Should the Sections Go In?
Put the most important and impressive section, as it relates
to the job you’re applying for, as the ﬁrst section after your
summary.
Is your education the best part of your background? Put that
up ﬁrst. If instead your work experience is your strongest asset,
then put that up ﬁrst. Temper that with what the employer may
ﬁnd to be most important. If you’re applying to work for a school
or university, you may want to put education ﬁrst. What if you
went to MIT instead of McHenry County College? If you’re apply-
ing to work for the Free Software Foundation, you might have

WHAT TO LEAVE OUT OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
76
a section called “Free Software Work” before anything else. The
only Résumé Police is the recipient of the résumé.
3.4
What to Leave Out of Your Résumé
When people copy from other résumés without thinking about
it, they carry around baggage that doesn’t make sense to
include, simply because they saw someone else do it. Every word
on your résumé must have value and not detract from the rest.
Here’s a partial list of what to leave out.
Anything You Can’t Be Asked in an Interview
There are topics that U.S. law prevents an employer from ask-
ing you about in an interview, such as religious afﬁliations and
national origin. Chapter 10, Too Much Information, on page 196
covers these in depth. If you can’t be asked about it in your
interview, don’t put it in your résumé.
Photo
In many European countries, it’s common to attach a small
photo of yourself to your résumé. In the United States, don’t
do it. It has no bearing on your job, and unless you’re applying
to be a model, it’s not a job qualiﬁcation.
An Objective
An objective is the worst thing to have at the top of your résumé.
It’s in the most important real estate of your résumé, and
it’s ﬁlled with information that belongs in your cover letter, is
redundant to the rest of the résumé, or has no meaning whatso-
ever.3 Here’s a sample objective from someone who thinks they
need an objective but no idea why:
OBJECTIVE: To acquire a challenging position in the ﬁeld of
information technology and to contribute my skills to busi-
ness development.
This objective says mostly nothing, and what it does say is self-
serving. The very word objective says, “This is what I want,”
3.
You’ll read more about how to write an effective cover letter in Section 6.2,
Create a Cover Letter, on page 127.

WHAT TO LEAVE OUT OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
77
rather than how the writer can help the reader’s company.
Everyone wants a “challenging position,” and it’s obvious it’s “in
the ﬁeld of information technology” if you’re applying for an IT
job. It’s so vague it sounds like the writer will take any job in IT.
Here’s an excerpt from another objective from an actual résumé:
“I am conﬁdent that my experience and education, cou-
pled with an eagerness to learn and a motivation to suc-
ceed, would contribute to a productive association with
your company.”
The writer says “my experience and education,” which is redun-
dant to the rest of the résumé. Stock phrases like “eagerness to
learn” and “motivation to succeed” are the résumé equivalent of
“enjoy long walks on the beach” in a personal ad.4
Worst of all, the statement is baseless. How can the writer be
“conﬁdent that my experience...would contribute to a produc-
tive association?” The writer probably knows next to nothing
about the speciﬁc needs of the company to which he sent the
résumé, so how can he have this conﬁdence?
The one case that I could see having an objective is when you
don’t know where you’ll be showing your résumé. For exam-
ple, if you’re relatively new in your career and you’ll be handing
out dozens of résumés without cover letters at a job fair, some
people say an objective can help the recruiter remember what
direction you’re looking to go. In that case, incorporate it into
your professional summary as detailed in Section 3.3, The Pro-
fessional Summary, on page 56.
Lists of Hobbies and Interests
Usually these come out as “Interests: music and reading.”
Whoop-de-do, everyone likes music and reading. If you feel that
your hobbies are somehow related to the job or will give you
some kind of “geek cred,” then create a section on your résumé
for non-work-related achievements, as described in Section 3.3,
Other Achievements, on page 72. Simply listing your hobbies is
not useful.
4.
See Appendix A, on page 246, for more of these empty ﬁller phrases to avoid.

MOVING TO CONSTRUCTION
78
“References Available Upon Request”
The worst example of “cargo-cult” résumé writing, where peo-
ple do what they’ve seen on other résumés without thinking
about why they’re doing it, is putting “References available upon
request” at the bottom of the résumé. It’s unnecessary to say,
and it takes up valuable space and visual real estate.
Every hiring manager assumes that you’ll have some references
to provide when the time comes in the hiring process (and see
Section 11.4, Give Solid References, on page 209 for how to do
that). You need not worry that someone reading your résumé
will say “Jenkins here looks good on paper, but she doesn’t have
references available upon request.”
Irrelevant Work Experience
My ﬁrst real job was at a McDonald’s at age 16. It doesn’t help
me as a programmer, so I leave it off my résumé. The only reason
to put unrelated work experience on your résumé is if you’re
just starting out and it’s your only work experience. See also
the sidebar on page 67 for another tale of irrelevance.
Consider carefully what you consider irrelevant. If you’re apply-
ing to be a systems administrator, a job as a hardware engineer
is probably relevant, but you’d want to leave out your experi-
ence as a chef. However, if you were looking to be a team lead
for programmers, that experience as a chef, managing a group
of people, would certainly be worth noting. Don’t bother with the
technical details of the kitchen experience, but do look at what
analogs exist with the job you’re applying for.
Also, “irrelevant” is not the same as “outdated.” You may have
started writing Apple Pascal code on an Apple II in the mid-80s,
but that’s worth a couple lines at the bottom of your résumé to
show the breadth and duration of your experience. However, list
it only within the context of the position and without going into
too much detail.
3.5
Moving to Construction
By now, you should have a good idea of what you’ll be including
in your base résumé. You’ve identiﬁed what you’ll be listing in

MOVING TO CONSTRUCTION
79
each of the major sections of your résumé, and you should have
some idea of how they support each other.
You’re thinking in terms of sales value, in letting the reader
know who you are and what makes you special. You’re comfort-
able writing about your achievements, and you have achieve-
ments on the brain, because that’s all that matters. You’re also
keeping an eye out for anything that doesn’t help move you
toward getting the interest of a hiring manager at your future
employer. Omit needless words!
You probably also have some other notes, bullets, and text that
didn’t feel right in your base résumé but you don’t want to throw
away. Perhaps you have a scraps.txt ﬁle in your résumé direc-
tory. You know your résumé will change for each job you pur-
sue, although the basic framework will probably be the same,
so you’re keeping notes and ideas for when they might come up.
With all the building blocks of your résumé at hand, move for-
ward to résumé construction.

Chapter 4
Building Your
Résumé Documents
In the previous chapter, we looked at the textual content of your
résumé. You should have a decent collection of text and notes
that you want to let your future employer know about you. You
should have a good idea of the order of importance and what
you want to emphasize. Now it’s time to put the pieces together.
Keep four basic rules in mind when building your résumé:
• It is your ﬁrst work product for your new company.
• It will be seen by more people than you expect.
• It must be perfect.
• Presentation is content.
Your résumé is a work
product.
Your
résumé
gives
each
reader
an
impression of the type of work you can
do and the pride you take in that work.
Lack of pride in the work you’ve done
will show. You’re in a technical, detail-oriented industry, and
your résumé and attention to detail must reﬂect that if you’re to
show yourself as a detail-oriented worker.
In addition, use the speciﬁc tools properly. Use Word as a word
processor, not just a fancier version of Notepad. Show that
you’re able to use HTML properly if you’re at all involved with
the Web. If your résumé says that you create neat, clean C++
and Java code but your HTML code is ugly slop, you undermine
your message.

THE THREE VERSIONS OF YOUR RÉSUMÉ
81
In our industry, the document isn’t just what prints on the
paper or renders in a browser window, but the entire electronic
ﬁle. Show that you’re a power user of the tools at your com-
mand. If you think that no one will look at the internals of your
document, think again. Maybe nobody in HR will, but there’s a
good chance that someone in a more technical role will.
Finally, if you’re one of those people who thinks of “content” as
different from “presentation,” now is the time to disabuse your-
self of that notion for the sake of both your résumé and your
career. Don’t think that because you’re interested in a program-
ming job that visual design is irrelevant. Presentation is con-
tent, and your résumé is more than just the words contained
on it. If it weren’t, magazines would all use monospaced type-
writer fonts, and we’d still be using Gopher instead of the Web.
The text in your résumé may be perfect, but if it’s unattractively
presented, people are less likely to read it.
4.1
The Three Versions of Your Résumé
Plan on making three versions of your résumé: one in Word, one
in plain text, and an HTML version for your website. It’s nice to
send PDFs of your Word documents if that’s an option for an
employer, but I’ve never seen a job ad that required a résumé
in PDF.
“Aw, man,” I hear some of you saying, “three formats?” Yes,
you’re going to have to be able to send off a copy in Word when
it’s asked for. You’re also going to want a copy in plain text to
send to companies that don’t want attachments or if you’re post-
ing into a little web form on some job site. Finally, you’ll want a
copy up on your website for Google and all other search engines
to ﬁnd.
Some of you may hate Microsoft and hate Word documents.
Richard Stallman has written extensively about how he thinks
that Word documents limit freedom.1 You may even agree with
his ideas. The pragmatic job hunter will set this aside.
1.
See
his
“We
Can
Put
an
End
to
Word
Documents”
at
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/no-word-attachments.htm

GENERAL GUIDELINES
82
Most places you’ll apply to will ask for a résumé in Word format.
They probably ﬁnd it easiest to deal with or have a process that
relies on Word documents. Maybe it’s automated software that
scans for keywords. Who knows? All that matters is that com-
panies ask for Word documents, and your job is to give them
what they ask for. Use OpenOfﬁce if you like, available for free.2
It will generate documents in Word format, and you won’t have
to soil your computer with Microsoft code.
If a potential employer asks for Word and you send a PDF or a
text ﬁle, you’ve told him this: “I am unable to follow directions
on my ﬁrst assignment.” Don’t second-guess your future hiring
manager or presume to know better how things should be done.
Don’t let your personal preferences over software usage scuttle
your chance at a job.
If you ﬁnd Word to be such an odious ﬁle format and you think
that any company that requires its use in a résumé is run by
idiots, then you and that company are not a good match. Don’t
bother sending the résumé. Move on to another option.
4.2
General Guidelines
Some rules apply regardless of the format you’re writing. Here
are some to keep in mind.
Your name must be the ﬁrst thing the reader notices and can
easily ﬁnd. If you have any multipage documents, your name
and contact information must appear on each page. Your name
should be the biggest thing in the contact block. Use a strong
sans serif typeface, and put your name in bold and a few
point sizes bigger than the rest of the contact information. You
want it to stand out on a stack of papers. Whether it’s left- or
right-justiﬁed doesn’t much matter, as long as your name is on
the top.
Font choice is not the
place to get creative.
Use exactly two fonts. Use a sans-serif
font like Tahoma, Arial, or Geneva for
your headings, and use a serif font like
Times New Roman for everything else.
2.
http://openofﬁce.org

GENERAL GUIDELINES
83
Keep your body text at a size between 9 and 12 points and
slightly larger for headings. Some say, “I like sans-serif for body
text better; I think it looks nicer,” but this most basic rule of
typography still holds. Take a look at this book you’re reading
right now if you don’t believe me.
When you choose fonts, choose common ones that are likely to
be on the recipient’s machine. You may have a stunning sans
serif font that is just perfect in your headings, but it won’t mat-
ter when the reader opens a Word document and gets a “Could
not ﬁnd font Astrocardigan Sans” dialog box. The reader’s web
browser will not even ask and will replace the fonts you lovingly
chose with its best guess. Unless you’re printing out a docu-
ment on paper, stick with the boring but ubiquitous standbys
like Times New Roman, Arial, and Tahoma.
Don’t justify your paragraphs. Justiﬁcation is when your word
processor adjusts spacing between words to make each line of
a paragraph the same length as the others, giving a smooth
right margin. Look at the lines in this paragraph for an exam-
ple. In books you want justiﬁed margins, but there’s nothing
wrong with a ragged right margin in a résumé. Justifying may
make your word processor introduce weird spacing artifacts.
Deﬁnitely do not try to justify a text-only document in a ﬁxed-
width font.
Spell everything perfectly. Be especially careful with acronyms.
Know when to use capitalization and periods. For example, Java
and Perl are not acronyms and are not spelled JAVA and PERL.
Misspellings other than case also mean that your keywords
won’t get properly indexed by automated résumé software. Spell
out acronyms on ﬁrst use unless they’re well-known enough to
stand on their own (IIS, SQL, HTML).
Don’t use all capitals, even in headings. It’s enough to make a
heading of “McHenry Tool & Die” without making it “MCHENRY
TOOL & DIE.” The problem is not that all caps is seen as shout-
ing, as the old email canard goes, but that it’s not correct written
English.
Don’t put any graphics in your résumé, with the exception of
badges related to your certiﬁcations, and then only if the certi-
ﬁcation is a key part of your qualiﬁcations. If you’ve earned the

USE WORD’S FEATURES CORRECTLY AND EFFECTIVELY
84
right to display a certiﬁcation logo and you’re looking for a job
where that’s a primary qualiﬁcation, then go ahead and include
it in your résumé, probably as part of or near the summary.
Other than that, leave the graphics out. They’re just noise.
Consider the overall visual impact of your résumé. Think about
what the reader will see as a whole. What words appear imme-
diately? Your name should be immediately obvious, as well as
who you are.
4.3
Use Word’s Features Correctly and Effectively
Most of your time should be spent on the Word document. It’s
probably the one that most people will be seeing and that you’ll
fuss over the most. Consider the Word version of your résumé to
be the master. However, it’s likely there may be detailed informa-
tion on the HTML version of your résumé that you keep on your
website that won’t ﬁt on the printed Word résumé. On mine,
these include open source projects I’ve worked on, presentations
I’ve given, and articles and books I’ve worked on. This would be
too much detail for the print version, but on the Web you can
stretch out a bit.
I’m not going to explain the details of using Word or OpenOfﬁce
in this chapter. I’ll assume that you’re able to make your way
around one of the most commonly used software packages in
the world.
Don’t use the résumé templates that ship with Word. They vio-
late many of my rules, such as including objectives and using
sans serif typefaces for body content. However, the document
ﬁles themselves are good examples of how to use named styles,
discussed in a moment.
Here are Word-speciﬁc guidelines to follow.
Use Named Styles
Just as in HTML pages where you don’t want to use presen-
tation markup when you can use CSS, you should use Word’s
named styles feature. You need not limit yourself to the styles
that Word provides, although they make sense to look at. Using
named styles also encourages a consistent look across your

CREATE AN EFFECTIVE SUMMARY
85
entire résumé, so you won’t be tempted to make body text in
“Experience” be a different font than body text in “Education.”
Use Tab Stops, Not Spaces
Word uses tab stops for positioning elements. When you hit
Tab , Word positions you to the next tab stop, which may or
may not be a half inch in from where your cursor was. Each tab
position can be left- or right-justiﬁed or centered. You can set
tab stops for a given style in the Format Style dialog, but more
likely you’ll use what Word gives you.
Use the Spell Checker
Make sure that the spell-check-as-you-type feature is turned
on. Think of it as unit testing for your words, and the sooner
you discover a bug in a sentence, the better. Misspellings are
the easiest way to get your résumé ignored, so take advantage
of the tool. It’s not the only tool, though. You’ll still need to use
your eyes, and those of other people, to ensure you have no
typos.
Use the Header/Footer Feature
Multipage résumés have a way of getting their printed pages
separated. Your résumé needs contact information on every
page, and Word’s headers feature lets you do it easily and con-
sistently. Let Word worry about where the page breaks fall.
When entering information in the header of your résumé, be
sure to use the preset tab stops to let Word take care of the
ﬂush right margin.
4.4
Create an Effective Summary
The summary is where you’ll be grabbing the reader’s eye. Start
with the bullets you wrote back in Section 3.3, The Professional
Summary, on page 56, using Word’s List Bullet style. Don’t give
the summary a heading, because it’s obvious what it is.
Here’s an example of a summary that boils down the qualiﬁca-
tions to the most important high points, with little detail:
• Seven years’ experience in all facets of large website
production.

CHECK YOUR WORD DOCUMENT
86
• Led team of ﬁve designers creating Flash content for auto-
motive websites.
• Installed and maintained content management systems
such as Vignette and Bricolage for production staff of 20.
• Accomplished
author
of
technical
documentation
in
French. Also ﬂuent in Japanese.
Now, call attention to the most important words. Set them in
bold to jump out at the reader. Consider which are the most
important words for the reader to know about you in the ﬁrst
few seconds of looking at your résumé.
• Seven years’ experience in all facets of large website
production.
• Led team of ﬁve designers creating Flash content for
automotive websites.
• Installed and maintained content management systems
such as Vignette and Bricolage for production staff of 20.
• Accomplished author of technical documentation
in
French. Also ﬂuent in Japanese.
Note how the words are exactly the same, but the bolding of the
keywords draws the reader to what’s most important, helping
her to the really good parts. You’re trying to grab attention and
to do it legitimately.
Don’t overdo the bold, or you’ll turn everything a mass of dark
blobs. In the previous example, if you were applying to a com-
pany that specialized in the automotive industry, you might bold
automotive websites in favor of other keywords in that bullet.
As with everything, it all depends on the target company and
the speciﬁc job.
4.5
Check Your Word Document
Before you do any other check, run a spell check on your
résumé. Even if you don’t make mistakes, even if you’ve had as-
you-type spell checking turned on the whole time, run a spell
check anyway. It’ll take just a few seconds and may save you
from getting your résumé thrown away.

CHECK YOUR WORD DOCUMENT
87
What About Pink Paper?
You want your résumé to get noticed and to get read
by the hiring manager. Some conventional wisdom says
that it’s a good idea to use noticeable paper, like pink
or orange, so that your résumé shows up in a stack of
résumés and is more likely to be read. It’s not. It just
makes the reader think you’re a chump for believing
that bit of conventional un-wisdom.
When you print your résumé to bring to the interview,
print it on white, off-white, or cream-colored paper. You
can get nice résumé paper at the local ofﬁce store. Use
black ink or toner.
You’ve done all the typing there is to do for now. It’s not enough
for your Word document to look good on the screen. It has to
look good on paper and has to be able to make the trip to paper,
as well. I’ve received countless résumés where the candidate
looked interesting enough that I wanted to print out the résumé,
and when I did, I got warnings about the document not ﬁtting
on the page, or the page breaks would be wrong and one page
would creep over to another. Don’t let it happen to you. Print the
document, and look at it on paper, just as you hope the hiring
manager will.
Here’s how I do it:
1. Print the document on your printer.
2. Get a red pen to get in a high school English mind-set.
3. Go far away from the computer to get a fresh perspective.
4. Scrutinize for errors. Imagine you’re an employer looking
at this knowing nothing else about you.
It can be hard to get separated from your perspective. It’s like
those times where you’re hunting for a bug for hours, and as
soon as you get someone else to look for it, she’ll see the prob-
lem. Stand back from your work as much as you can.

BUILD THE HTML VERSION
88
Have someone else look
at your printed résumé
for fresh perspective.
Give a printed copy to a friend, and see
what he ﬁnds. Give it to your spouse or
your parents. The programmer’s prin-
ciple of “Given enough eyes, all bugs
are shallow” applies here. The more
people who look at your printed output, the more likely someone
will catch a mistake.
Once you’re sure it looks good on paper, test that it looks good
printed from other computers besides yours. Email the .doc ﬁle
to a friend to make sure it looks OK on a computer other than
yours. Best of all is if your friend has a different operating sys-
tem, a different printer, and none of your fonts. Or maybe take it
on a thumb drive to Ofﬁce Max and have them print it there. Try
to simulate what will happen when a potential employer prints
your résumé.
4.6
Build the HTML Version
The web version of your résumé is as much of a calling card as
the Word version, but far more people will see it. Even though
you’re probably not going to send anyone a copy of this docu-
ment, it will still be on the Web standing in your place repre-
senting you.
Although you want to always tailor a résumé to send to a poten-
tial employer, your résumé on the Web will be generic. Since
anyone can access it at any time, you won’t be customizing it
for each potential employer. Fortunately, since it’s a web docu-
ment and you’re not as worried about space usage or ﬁtting the
résumé to a page or two, you have room to stretch out and don’t
have to make as many hard decisions such as whether these
bullets here are more important than those bullets there.
The ﬁrst use of your web résumé is as a substitute for your
employer-speciﬁc résumé. Potential employers are likely to pass
around URLs rather than a Word document. Yes, even if the
application process requires sending in a Word document. It’s
easier to pass around a URL rather than a ﬁle attachment. The
people looking at your web résumé may also not have had any
contact with you and are looking for candidates.

BUILD THE HTML VERSION
89
Your web résumé also is for employers to ﬁnd out about you
and your skills. You never know when opportunity might come
knocking, and having your résumé out on your personal web-
site is an ideal way to keep that door open. This is one reason
to make sure your “Buzzwords” section is populated with as
many relevant terms and synonyms as you can. It’s also why
you want to make sure the <title> tag of your web document is
as descriptive as possible.
Your web résumé is absolutely not a substitute for following
directions when applying for a job. If an ad says to send in a
copy of your résumé and you reply with “see my résumé at such-
and-such URL,” your application letter will win an instant trip
to the trash can.
Your online résumé must be easily accessible and usable by
anyone in the world. In general, keep things simple. Make sure
that it prints nicely. This doesn’t mean you need fancy format-
ting or to make it all ﬁt on a page a certain way, but it does
mean that your readers must be able to print it to a printer. Web
designers, this means that if you have a Flash version of your
portfolio, you still must have a plain old HTML and CSS version
of the résumé that a reader can print easily from a browser.
The résumé must also be easily bookmarkable, and the reader
must be able to copy and paste the URL from a browser without
any hassle. This means your résumé page must not be sur-
rounded by frames and not require an HTTP POST to get to it.
Your résumé’s URL should also be as short as possible, just like
any URL you’d like people to be able to recall from memory. Put
it in a directory of its own so there’s no ﬁlename or extension
to remember. It’s better to have http://example.com/resume/ than
http://example.com/~steve/personal/resume.jsp.
Construct Your Web Résumé
Don’t let Word create
your HTML for you.
The ﬁrst rule of web résumés: do not
use “Save As HTML” from Word. Word
attempts to replicate the printed look
in HTML, instead of creating a web-
based document. The HTML that Word generates is ﬁlled with
Microsoft-speciﬁc markup that lets everyone know that you just
did a “Save As HTML.” Don’t do it.

BUILD THE HTML VERSION
90
Create the HTML for your web résumé with a good web author-
ing tool, or write it by hand. You’re going to look at the ﬁnal
HTML code anyway, so you may just want to write the HTML
by hand. It’s the twenty-ﬁrst century, and everything is on the
Web. Every techie should know HTML, even if it’s not a core job
skill you’re looking to use.
Start your document like this:
<html>
<head>
<title>Resume of Susan Reed: Unix System Administrator and Team
Lead</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Resume of Susan Reed: Unix System Administrator and Team
Lead</h1>
<p>
Susan Reed<br>
123 Sesame St.<br>
Lexington, KY
53121<br>
susan@example.com<br>
http://example.com/resume/
</p>
<h1>Experience</h1>
<h1>Education</h1>
<h1>Awards &amp; Honors</h1>
<h1>Buzzwords</h1>
</body>
</html>
Now you have a general skeleton to start with. Note how the
<title> tag is the ultimate summary of you. It’s a one-line ver-
sion of your entire résumé, even smaller than your summary.
It’s what will show up in web searches when people try to ﬁnd
you, or people matching your qualiﬁcations. Then, repeat it as
your ﬁrst <h1>, since the <title> tag doesn’t show up on the
page, only in the web browser’s title bar. You want it in both
places.
From here, it’s like you did your Word doc: use only the logical
markup of tags such as <h1> for headings and <ul> and <li>
for your bulleted lists. Fill in the rest of your sections of text, but
don’t worry about how it works yet. The styles will come later.
Since you’re writing the web version, you may want to sprinkle
hyperlinks throughout the document, perhaps to projects you’ve

BUILD THE HTML VERSION
91
worked on or smaller employers you’ve worked for. However, you
don’t want to detract from your résumé by adding unnecessary
links. If you went to Podunk State College and the reader wants
to ﬁnd Podunk’s website, they’ll be able to ﬁnd the website easily
enough. If you worked for Motorola, trust that the reader knows
who that is.
Now that the text is all created and HTML is in place, it’s time to
do some stylistic formatting with Cascading Style Sheets (CSS).
CSS allows you to modify the physical presentation of your logi-
cal markup like Word’s styles do. Doing stylistic formatting with
CSS is the ﬂexible way to do formatting, and it shows that you’re
aware of how things are done on the Web these days. As with
Word and HTML, I’m not going to explain here how to use CSS.
Plenty of books and online tutorials can give you the basics.
Make sure that all your CSS is kept in the HTML ﬁle itself, inside
the <head> tags, rather than in an external .css ﬁle. This makes
sure that if someone saves a copy of your .html ﬁle, they get the
CSS with it.
The stylistic rules for your HTML résumé are the same as for
the Word document. For example, use a sans serif font for the
headings and a serif font for the body text, and use fonts that
are likely to be available for the user.
Quality Control on Your Web Résumé
The web résumé is even more likely to come under scrutiny than
your Word document, especially if you’re applying for a job that’s
at all web-related, so quality control is crucial.
Your HTML must be absolutely correct. Use a validation tool like
HTML Tidy3 to validate that the HTML is correct. HTML Tidy
can also reformat your HTML code so that it’s indented and
formatted properly, like a carefully prepared HTML document
should. You can also use the online W3C HTML validator4 and
the W3C CSS validator.5
3.
http://tidy.sourceforge.net
4.
http://validator.w3c.org
5.
http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/

BUILD THE TEXT DOCUMENT
92
Regularly check the links in your résumé to make sure they
don’t get out-of-date, and that the URLs they refer to are still
valid.
4.7
Build the Text Document
You may never need a text-only version of your résumé, but
when you do, it’s important to get it right. Once you come up
with one, keep it handy. You want it to look formatted nicely
enough to see organization, but without going too far into the
ASCII art world.
You’ll use your text résumé in two places: email and online
forms. In email, you may be asked to include a text-only version
of your résumé with an email. If the ad says “Include résumé
(no attachments),” they want it text-only, inline in the email. If
you’re putting your résumé anywhere online, whether a hiring
company’s website, a job site like Monster, or a community web-
site like SourceForge, you’re going to need a text-only résumé.
Your text résumé will have all the same content as either of
the other forms, but the only formatting you’ll do will be with
horizontal spacing for indents and asterisks as bullets. Don’t try
to approximate any other formatting, such as underlining with
underscore characters. Each line of the résumé will end with a
hard return (line feed in Unix, CR/LF in Windows) so that there
is no word wrapping when the reader looks at it. You’re deﬁning
the word wrapping at the time of editing. Your main goal is to
make it reasonably likely that it will look OK when the recipient
reads it, without getting mangled.
The easiest way to start a text version of your résumé is by run-
ning the HTML version through Lynx. Lynx6 is a freely available
text-only web browser that ships with many Unix-like operat-
ing systems. Lynx helps here because it can save a copy of a
web page, rendered to ﬁt in a speciﬁed width of monospaced
columns.
6.
http://lynx.browser.org

YOU’RE READY TO MOVE FORWARD
93
It will turn your HTML résumé like this:
<h2>Technical Skills</h2>
<p>
Perl
<ul>
<li>Ten years Perl experience</li>
<li>Responsible for more than
<a href="http://search.cpan.org/~petdance/">twenty
other modules</a></li>
<li>Regular contributor of patches to the Perl core
</ul>
into this, which you can use as the base for your text-only
résumé:
Technical Skills
Perl
* Ten years Perl experience
* Responsible for more than twenty other modules
* Regular contributor of patches to the Perl core
If you have Lynx installed, call it like this: lynx -dump -nolist -
width=70 your-resume.html. The option -dump tells Lynx to save the
rendered text, -nolist omits the list of hyperlinks, and -width=70
says to not print wider than 70 characters across. The Lynx
default of 80 characters is too wide, because you want to make
sure that your text-only résumé doesn’t get word-wrapped when
you send it in email.
4.8
You’re Ready to Move Forward
Now you have the foundation of your tools for telling employ-
ers about who you are. Your résumé tells about you in words
describing you and your skills and about how you view your
work by being a solid, competent work product. Nobody expects
to be wowed by the look of a résumé, so you’re going for good
basic work.
Now it’s time to ﬁnd the jobs that interest you and do some work
to get hired.

Chapter 5
Finding Your Job
So far, everything I’ve discussed has been in your control. It has
been about what you want and how you present your back-
ground. Now the rest of the world comes in to the picture. Now
you must ﬁnd the job.
Searching for a job can be frustrating as you run up against
dead ends or exhaust the list of possibilities that you’ve found
without ﬁnding what you want. There can be a feeling of dread
when you come to the end of the job listings and you still
haven’t found what you’re looking for. Fortunately, it’s usually
not as bad as you fear. The sources of jobs are inﬁnite if you
spend enough time meeting new people, sending email, contact-
ing friends, and searching the Web.
As you read this chapter, remember that ﬁnding the job and
applying for the job are closely related. Finding the job is also a
process of ﬁnding out about the job. You’re researching what it
will take to apply for and interview to do the job. Make sure that
you read both this chapter and the next, Chapter 6, Applying
for the Job, on page 124, before you start the job hunt.
5.1
It’s All About the People
Before you start googling for java jobs Cleveland, before you
start building systems to keep track of search engine hits and
RSS feeds of job boards, and so on, stop and remember the most
important aspect of ﬁnding the job.

IT’S ALL ABOUT THE PEOPLE
95
Your most important tool in ﬁnding a job is relationships with
other people. The best way to use that tool is with direct conver-
sation. In all your search activities, prefer to work directly with
other people. When working with others, choose a phone con-
versation over email and a face-to-face discussion over a phone
conversation.
For geeks who prefer to work with computers or to have con-
versations over email or IM, this can be a daunting proposition,
but it’s one you must make happen, for a number of reasons.
The “hidden job market” accounts for 60 to 80 percent of jobs.
These are jobs not advertised to the world. They might be inter-
nal transfers in your own company or jobs where the employer
doesn’t bother running an ad. Job advertising is not cheap, and
an employer can save a few thousand dollars in advertising by
going with a candidate who someone already knows.
Second, people are more likely to want to help if they talk to
you directly. The personal approach gives them a face to under-
stand, a person with whom to empathize. Imagine that you get
email from someone at work asking for help with a problem,
and compare that with her coming to you to ask you directly.
Chances are you’re more likely to act on the in-person request.
Third, face-to-face dealings have far more bandwidth than elec-
tronic communication. Your essential humanity comes through
over the phone more than in text, because the other person
can hear you, receiving more information. They can get mood,
expression, and nuance in your voice in a way that plain old
text doesn’t convey. Similarly, the massively larger bandwidth
of communicating in person trumps the telephone.
All this increased bandwidth and conversation, without the
constraints of having to communicate through our ﬁngers,
increases our chance for luck—for serendipity to strike. Free-
ﬂowing conversations trigger ideas in our brains that might
never happened. “You know, I just realized, I think my col-
league Steve was saying something about his brother needing a
computer person....” Increase your luck, and you may just ﬁnd
the job.

IT’S ALL ABOUT THE PEOPLE
96
Chance Favors the Prepared Mind
One evening on a commuter train, my prepared mind
and willingness to talk to other people helped me get a
job ﬁlled.
I was taking the train to my home outside Chicago,
and I noticed a woman reading Webmaster in a Nut-
shell [SE99]. As the train emptied over the next hour,
I realized that she probably lived within a reasonable
commute distance from McHenry and might be inter-
ested in working for my company. I decided to go talk
to her.
I handed her my company business card and said, “Hi,
my name is Andy Lester, and I’m guessing from your
book that you do web work. Do you know anyone who
might be looking for a job out in McHenry County?” As it
turns out, she was herself looking for a job. I talked about
what the company did, she was interested, and after a
few interviews, she came on board.
You may say this story is about plain old dumb luck, and
you’d be right. However, we can increase our chances
of ﬁnding luck by getting out in the world to meet with
people. Further, while you see a chance, take it. Even
a slim chance is better than a zero chance from doing
nothing.
Ask People for Help
If personal contacts are the most important part of your job
search, then it makes sense to start with them ﬁrst in your
searching. How do you use this resource?
At no point in your search are you asking anyone “Can you
give me a job?” It sounds like you’re asking for a handout, for
charity, to be given something for nothing. People will ﬁnd this
offensive. Instead, what you’re asking for is a little bit of help
with ﬁnding a job. People want to help and share knowledge,
but they don’t want to give you everything.

IT’S ALL ABOUT THE PEOPLE
97
Think back to when you’ve been on a tech mailing list or bul-
letin board and someone posted a question asking “Can some-
one give me a shell script that backs up my server to a remote
host?” The response is usually swift, unforgiving, and acerbic.
Compare with someone saying “I’d like to send the contents of
a server to a different host as a low-cost backup, but I’m not
sure what’s best. Is rsync the way to go, or is there a better solu-
tion?” When you show that you’re asking for a hand up, not a
handout, people are more willing, even eager, to help.
It’s also important that you not ask anyone to do anything
for you or to give them assignments. There’s a big difference
between “You said before your uncle Steve was a programmer;
could you give me his phone number or address?” which is a
simple request for information, and “Could you give your uncle
Steve a copy of my résumé?” which is now giving the person an
assignment, having him or her act as messenger and intermedi-
ary. The latter request often leads to uncomfortable situations,
and I always refuse them.
How to Ask for Help
Just about anyone you know can help with your job search.
Here’s a tiny list:
• Your parents and every relative you know
• Members of technical mailing lists you’re on
• Your friends at church
• Your neighbors
• The barista who makes your coffee every morning or the
guy who runs that little record store you like
• Your Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn contacts
• Readers of your blog
• Former co-workers1
1.
I don’t recommend discussing your plans to leave a company with current
co-workers, even if you’ve always commiserated with how much you hate the
place. It takes only one loose-lipped colleague to accidentally say, “Yeah, Karen’s
looking for a job, too” to get you ﬁred.

IT’S ALL ABOUT THE PEOPLE
98
• The reference librarian at your local public library who you
chat with while looking for job-hunting guides
• Someone on the train reading a book or magazine that
relates to your area of expertise
Given the varied relationships you have with these people, your
conversations with them will be different, but the question you’ll
ask will always be based on the core of “Can you point me
to someone who could help me with my search?” It’s a low-
pressure question that doesn’t ask for much but leaves open
the entire range of possibilities for the person to help however
he or she may feel comfortable with.
Your conversation doesn’t have to be a big deal. You’re just ask-
ing for a pointer to someone else.
You:
Hey, Rick, I don’t think I told you, but Yoyodyne laid me
off last week.
Rick:
Geez, that’s gotta suck. I guess it was good I left when I
did. What are you doin’?
You:
I had an idea it was coming, and so I’d been working on
keeping my résumé up and checking some job boards. Now it’s
more serious, of course. I wanted to ask whether you’d heard of
any places looking for a good DBA or anyone who could help point
me in the right direction. Most of the DBA positions I see posted
are for Oracle, and I’d like to stay with SQL Server if I could.
Rick:
No, I really don’t. I know that at my new place we don’t
even have dedicated DBAs. But I’ll keep an eye open for you. Give
me your email address again in case I hear anything.
See how you’re just asking for a pointer, no pressure, not asking
for Rick to actually do anything for you. You’re also showing
that you’ve been doing work yourself and that Rick would be
helping you along, not doing the bulk of the work. Whether or
not Rick has anything for you today, the exchange has great
value, because Rick now knows you’re looking.
Don’t forget Aunt Edna.
This simple exchange is all there is
to it. You will adjust accordingly when
talking to Aunt Edna and not bother
with tech details, but the core is the same: “Can you suggest a
contact to help me get closer to my goal?”

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
99
Have these conversations. Make them part of your life. You
will grow more comfortable having them, and you will increase
your luck.
5.2
Where the Jobs Are
There’s no single source for ﬁnding the job you love. Use every-
thing together, from newspapers and job sites to working your
personal network to everything in between.
As recently as ten years ago, the classiﬁed ads in your local
newspaper were the single most important source to look for
a job. In fact, even in Chicago with two major newspapers,
only the Tribune was worth looking in, or maybe a local
suburban paper. Monster was just starting to gain traction.
Today, the options have exploded in number and focus, and
the Internet has increased the human networking possibilities
exponentially.
Employers
If you know you want to work at a speciﬁc company, or are
interested in them, of course you know that’s the best place to
start. Visit its website and search its Careers, Jobs, or Positions
Available page. But don’t stop there.
Search the Web for job ads for this company. It’s entirely
possible that the company’s own website doesn’t have the
most recent information on the website, but a job board like
CareerBuilder may. Conversely, it’s possible that a position has
recently been ﬁlled and removed from the company website but
is still available on Dice or Monster.
Even if the job seems to have been ﬁlled, go ahead and apply
for it anyway. See the next chapter, Chapter 6, Applying for the
Job, on page 124.
Local Resources
If you know you’re looking in a given geographic area, the
ﬁrst place to check may not be a search engine but a decid-
edly old-school source: the local Chamber of Commerce. The
Chamber of Commerce is a business network created for a

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
100
given city or regional area, and member businesses join to pro-
mote themselves and make contacts. The chamber’s website
will have member directories and, in many cases, job listings.
Many of the businesses will not be ones that have any poten-
tial for you, since everyone from the local ﬂorist to the single
guy with a driveway resurfacing truck will be a Chamber of
Commerce member. However, most companies with more than
twenty employees or so have IT needs of some kind or another.
Don’t stop with the Chamber of Commerce website, however.
Each Chamber of Commerce will have an ofﬁce staffed by real-
live humans whose job it is to help member businesses, and
part of that is ﬁnding talent. The people working for the local
chamber know the area well, know the businesses, and can pass
along information that you won’t get online. If possible, visit in
person or make a phone call.
You:
Hi, my name is [your name]. I’m looking for a job here in
Waterford. I was wondering if I could have a few minutes of your
time?
Carol:
Sure, I’d be glad to help out. I’m Carol Danvers, and I’m
in charge of business relations. What are you looking for?
You:
I have seven years of experience in computers [no need
for speciﬁcs here] working for advertising ﬁrms. I checked out the
Chamber website, and so of course I noticed Waterford Marketing.
I’ll be talking to Dan Fielding, their president, tomorrow.
Carol:
Oh, good, Dan’s a great guy. I’ve known him for years.
Tell him I said “hi.”
You:
I’ll do that. [And make sure you do!] Are there other com-
panies in the area that I should look at ﬁrst?
Carol:
Let me think...I was at a meeting last month with Warren
Worthington. He’s the vice president of First Bank of Waterford,
and he was telling me about some new computer system they
were having some growing pains with. You know who else might
be interesting? Anderson Manufacturing out on Highway 47 is in
the middle of expanding their factory, so I know they’re growing.
There might be some possibilities there, too.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
101
You:
These are great, thanks very much. [You are writing these
down!] I appreciate your time. Here’s my business card, if any-
thing else comes to mind, I’d really appreciate it you’d let know?
Carol:
Sure, and do you have a copy of your résumé just in
case?
You:
Absolutely. Here are three copies. Thanks again very
much for your time.
Note that you’re making everything as easy as possible for your
contact. First, you’re explaining that you’ve done your own
homework. You know how annoying it is to get tech questions
on mailing lists from someone who wants you to do all his work
for him? The same goes for other people as well. Here, you’re
letting the contact know what steps you’ve taken yourself.
Second, you’re keeping everything high level. No need to explain
that you’re experienced in Windows Server 2003 and 2008,
looking for a 100-seat shop to admin. All your contact needs to
remember is “computer person.” Third, what you’re asking for
extremely simple: pointers to other people. Finally, leaving your
business card2 and copies of your résumé means that passing
on your information is simple.
Don’t be discouraged if the jobs you see aren’t a speciﬁc match.
Try to get in to see a recruiter. If it’s a company you want
to get into and you’re good, then it may turn into something
good. This is especially true for some larger companies such as
Google. Google typically lists jobs that they need to have ﬁlled,
but when you actually apply and interview, they may decide that
they like you better for a different position. This can be good or
bad, depending on whether it ﬁts your goals. Just don’t be sur-
prised if it happens to you. Don’t be afraid to ask a recruiter or
manager for clariﬁcation in their goals.
Job Boards
To the techie looking for a job, job boards like Monster and Dice
can seem ideal. It’s all online, where we’re most comfortable,
and the jobs are searchable with database selection ﬁelds. The
attraction of setting a few ﬁlters and narrowing down the ﬁeld to
2.
Don’t use a business card from your current employer. Get your own made
at a local print shop for ten bucks.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
102
give you a few jobs that ﬁt your interests and criteria is appeal-
ing, almost like ordering from the drive-thru at McDonald’s.
You:
Uh, yeah, I’d like to get a Java programming job, I’m in
the Cincinnati area, I need to make $75,000, and I have seven
years of experience.
Job Board:
Did you want a hot apple pie with that?
You:
No, but I do want a company with fewer than 100 employ-
ees.
Job Board:
Thank you, please pull around for your six search
results and to upload your résumé in a plain-text format that will
mangle your formatting.
It may be as easy as ordering at McDonald’s, but the chances
aren’t good you’ll get a gourmet-quality job.
This kind of approach is great for buying things online. If you
want to buy a new printer that prints ten pages per minute,
prints double-sided, and is within a certain price range, it’s a
great way to do it. You get your two or three choices and then
choose from the few.
The problem is twofold: you’re not an interchangeable product,
and neither is the job.
Job boards reduce the job-hunting process to moving around
interchangeable people into interchangeable jobs. For many
companies that have hundreds of similar positions to ﬁll, this
is how they have to do it. They put out generic job descriptions
and comb through applicants searching for you like you’re that
10 PPM double-sided printer for less than $400.
Posting a résumé on one of the megaboards will certainly get you
attention if you have decent qualiﬁcations, but it may be more
attention than you’re looking for. Recruiters who see you as a
number will email or call you, trying to ﬁt you into a position for
which you may have no interest.
Never forget that the big job boards aren’t there to help you
get a job. They exist to sell ad space. CareerBuilder, one of the
largest job boards, states it proudly in its mission statement:
“Our mission is to be the global leader in online
recruitment advertising by being an employee-driven,

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
103
customer-focused organization that provides the best
rate of return to our stakeholders.”3
Commercial job boards
are there to sell ads, not
help you.
There’s nothing in there about you
and your job. CareerBuilder is focused
on “online recruitment advertising.” It’s
there to put job ads in front of your
face.
The Hard Numbers on Job Boards
So, you may think, “Fine, the job boards sell ads, but aren’t they
good at getting people jobs?” The numbers don’t seem to say so.
As part of their yearly Source of Hire study,4 in early 2008 Gerry
Crispin and Mark Mehler collected data from ﬁfty-nine large
high-proﬁle companies describing the sources of their hires. The
numbers don’t look good for the job boards.
Source of Hire
External Hires from This Source
Niche job boards
0.7%
http://hotjobs.com
1.0%
http://careerbuilder.com
4.5%
http://monster.com
5.0%
Company website
14.0%
Referrals from people
28.7%
Job boards should not
be your primary focus.
These statistics may not matter to the
question of whether CareerBuilder is
fulﬁlling its mission of being the “leader
in online recruiting advertising,” but
they don’t speak well of its value to you, the job hunter. The
top three job boards combined don’t deliver hires to companies
as well as the company’s own website, and referrals still dwarf
all four of those sources.
Similar statistics gathered for only the tech industry or with
smaller ﬁrms might give slightly different numbers, but I sus-
pect they won’t be that much different. The conclusion seems
clear: job boards can be part of your job search but should not
be the primary focus.
3.
http://www.careerbuilder.com/share/AboutUs/, January 3, 2009
4.
http://www.careerxroads.com/news/SourcesOfHire08.pdf

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
104
Even if they don’t deliver candidates, Monster and the like can
still be valuable to the job hunter. If nothing else, they are excel-
lent research tools for getting a sense of the job market and what
employers are looking for, especially in a given geographic area.
When researching your next move, this sort of data aggregation
and drill-down is ideal. It’s a case where you do want to look at
the jobs available as an impersonal aggregate.
One of the problems with the database-driven approach to col-
lecting job candidates is that each job has to ﬁt into a well-
deﬁned bucket, and jobs rarely do. For example, when I go to
http://job.com, I’m asked what state I want to search. Where I
live in northern Illinois, a job in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, is no
farther than a job in Chicago, Illinois, but I don’t get to choose
multiple states. The job categorization is worse. I’ve spent the
last seven years working as a computer programmer and man-
ager for an e-commerce website. The site offers me a drop-down
labeled “Job Category.” Which of these do I choose?
• E-commerce
• Information Tech/Computer
• Internet/Web
• Management
Any of the four categories would be appropriate, so I have a 25
percent chance of hitting the one that someone looking for my
skillset will check.
Still, job boards can be an important part of your job search.
The following are some of the different types of boards you can
use. I don’t discuss features of any individual boards, because
chances are that as soon as this book is printed,5 the site will
change. It’s best that you try some out and see which you feel
most comfortable with.
Don’t worry too much that you’re missing something on the
board you’re skipping. These competing boards have lots of
overlap, at least with the biggies like Monster and Dice.
5.
Or as soon as the gerbils at the Pragmatic Bookstore ﬁnish hand-crafting
the PDF with their teeny-tiny gerbil hands.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
105
• General job boards: http://monster.com, http://careerbuilder.
com, and so on
For a while, Monster was the canonical job board. Monster
and now CareerBuilder cover the entire range of employ-
ment, meaning you can search for a job as a janitor in
addition to a programmer if you want. However, if you’re
looking for a job far from your current location, that may
be a place to check.
• Techie-speciﬁc:
http://dice.com,
http://computerjobs.com,
and so on
Dice is the current king of tech job boards, but there are
plenty of others like http://computerjobs.com that are worth
checking out. One nice part of computerjobs.com is its use
of DNS, so http://linux.computerjobs.com automatically gives
you Linux jobs.
• Technology-speciﬁc: http://jobs.perl.org, http://jobs.rubyinside.
com, and so on
Job boards tied to a speciﬁc technology, whether Windows
sysadmins or Perl programmers, often have the advantage
of doing the job search focusing for you, by virtue of their
clientele. They also often have the advantage of being main-
tained by fans and devotees of the technology, so the qual-
ity of candidates ought to be higher. If you know that you’re
looking for a job focused on a speciﬁc language, start with
boards like these.
• Local general boards: http://craigslist.com, your local news-
paper’s website
Craigslist and your local newspaper have the advantage of
narrowing your search geographically without having the
vagaries of the “within N miles of your ZIP code” job list-
ings that most job boards have. Craigslist also happens to
be free for employers to post their jobs, so it may be the
ﬁrst place that an employer will post. A check of Craigslist
should always be a regular part of your job search.
• Industry-speciﬁc boards
If you want to focus your search on a speciﬁc indus-
try, there are plenty of boards out there that target that.

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
106
For instance, if I wanted to work in the insurance indus-
try, http://insurancejobs.com currently shows three IT jobs
in Illinois. Dikel & Roehm’s Guide to Internet Job Search-
ing [DR08], updated yearly, lists hundreds of websites like
these.
• Aggregators: http://simplyhired.com, http://juju.com, and so
on
Aggregators like SimplyHired gather jobs from the job
boards all over and allow you to search them at one go. The
idea is that you’ll ﬁnd the job you want in a single place,
rather than having to visit all the job boards that the aggre-
gator scrapes. In a search for Perl jobs in Chicago, the ﬁrst
page of results at SimplyHired gave me jobs from Dice, Net-
Temps, jobs.perl.org, ComputerJobs.com, and HotJobs.
The prospect of searching through dozens of job boards
at once may seem simple, but you’re still having to sift
through job ads that may or may not apply to you. It may
turn out to be simply growing the size of the haystack in
which to ﬁnd the needle.
Newspapers
Newspaper classiﬁeds are still worth checking. Don’t fall into
the trap of thinking that a forward-thinking, technologically-
savvy company wouldn’t bother with print advertising. However,
newspaper ads should should not be your ﬁrst choice.
Print ads can also be troublesome because of overlap with web-
sites. Most newspapers publish their print ads on their web-
sites, but this is not always the case. It may be an option that
the listing employer chooses not to use. You’ll need to be careful
tracking the jobs you respond to in order to avoid responding to
the same ad twice from two different sources.
One big advantage of newspaper ads is to get a high-level visual
view of what’s available in your area. Say you’re looking to do
Perl or PHP work and it feels like the available positions adver-
tised are outside of these areas. You could do some Java, but
you’d rather not. All Windows- or mainframe-based jobs are def-
initely a big “no.”

WHERE THE JOBS ARE
107
Don’t Job Hunt on Company Time
Never conduct your job search on company time or
using any company resources. Never mind the ethical
issues of getting paid by your current company to ﬁnd
work at another, it’s also a great way to lose your current
job a lot sooner than you wanted. It’s especially tacky
to use your company email account for any correspon-
dence.
Here’s an exercise to try. Go through the ads in the Sunday
paper of your nearest big city, and mark each ad according to
your level of interest. For each Perl or PHP ad, mark it with a
green letter “P” if it’s something you’d be interested or qualiﬁed
for, and use a red “P” if you’re uninterested. For the Java posi-
tions, mark a big red “J.” If it’s a job that sounds interesting,
but for which you don’t have the skills, mark a purple “U.” All
the other ads, leave unmarked.
At the end of the process, you have a low-tech but quantitative
view of the jobs advertised in your area. Where you see green,
you see potential jobs that you’d be happy with. Red shows
where you could get by if you had to but would rather not. Pur-
ple means a job you could take if you had better or different
skills. No color means there’s no possibility there for you.
Now, take a look at the grid of colors in your mini art project.
What do you see most? If you have many red “J”s or “P”s,
ask yourself whether you’re being too picky in what you select.
If you’re awash in purple “U”s, you could probably stand to
broaden your horizons. If very little of the paper is marked at
all, it’s probably a combination of both.
With so many sources of job leads, your job leads are multiplied,
but this also means you’ll need to be careful to not follow up
on leads twice. There is no single source of all job listings, even
the job listing aggregators. Your hunting will necessarily include
seeing many of the same jobs over and over. Keep careful notes
on the jobs you ﬁnd to ensure that you don’t follow up on the
same job twice. See Section 5.6, Work the Hunt, on page 120 for
more on doing this right.

WHAT TO FIND OUT ABOUT A POTENTIAL JOB
108
Always be looking for
your next great job.
Always be passively checking these
sources of job leads, even if you’re per-
fectly happy at your current job. Set
up an RSS feed in your newsreader for
jobs matching your interests, or sign up for email alerts for
appropriate jobs. CareerBuilder has a good email alert system
that sends out recent job listings, sorted by distance from my
home ZIP code. It’s trivial for me to scan the listings in my inbox
every few days.
There is no sin in keeping an eye open for better possibilities. It
keeps you looking out for what could be better and lets you be
conﬁdent that your current position is the best there is.
Read Section 12.4, Always Look for Your Next Job, on page 241
for more.
5.3
What to Find Out About a Potential Job
When you’ve found a job that looks like it’s interesting, the
search is only half over. Now the research phase begins.
Don’t even think about pursuing a job lead without research-
ing as much as you can about the company. You have two big
questions to answer about the company:
• Does it seem likely that I would want to work for this
company?
• How does the company make money, and how do I help
it make more money? Corrolary: what questions do I need
to ask before the interview to ﬁnd out the answer so I am
prepared?
Are You Likely to Want This Job?
The ﬁrst question is to determine whether it’s worth pursuing
the company at all. If you don’t think it’s likely you’ll want to
take the job, then don’t waste your time and patience. Unless
you have very low standards, there aren’t 100 jobs out there
that will ﬁt your needs, so you must focus only on the ones that
matter. It’s better to spend serious amounts of time on a job
where you’re great for each other than three or four that are
only so-so. A few hours of research up front is far better than

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
109
wasting days of preparation and interview or, worse, actually
taking a job that’s a good ﬁt for you that you wind up leaving in
a month or two.
How Does the Company Make Money, and How Can You
Help Make More Money?
If you decide you want the job, move on to these questions:
What does the company make? What services does it provide?
Who are its customers? How has business been? Who are its
competitors? How is it using technology? Is your position using
new technology? Is the technology new to the company?
This part of the research requires you to wear your “Think like
the hiring manager” hat ﬁrmly atop your head.
5.4
Do Your Detective Work
No job ad or lead from a friend is going to include all the infor-
mation to answer all your questions. You’re going to have to do
some work on your own.
This detective work can be time-consuming, but it’s a fantastic
investment. If your research turns up a nugget of information
that lets you tailor the interview exactly to the needs of the com-
pany and you land the job because of it, that’s a huge payoff.
If, on the other hand, you discover something horrifying that
saves you from pursuing a job that would have had you run-
ning screaming after two weeks, that’s an even bigger payoff.
Never pursue a job
without researching the
company.
Many interviewers, including me, will
ask about how the candidate has pre-
pared for the interview. It could be
implicit like “So, what do you know
about Yoyodyne?” or it can be explicit
as in “Tell me what you did to prepare for this interview, includ-
ing any research you did and what you found.” You’ll look
like a chump if your answer comes down to “Uh, I just kinda
showed up today.” Even if you’re not asked about your research,
research is excellent anti-chump protection.
The company will research you before calling you in for an
interview or even a phone screen. You owe it to yourself to do

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
110
the same research on the company. The company calls it “due
diligence,” and you should, too.
The Company Itself
The place to start is also the most obvious. Read the company’s
website, with an eye to answering your two big questions.
Read every page you can with titles like these:
• Contact
• About Us
• For Investors
• Media Relations
• Jobs
These pages show how the company wants to present itself to
the outside world. They are your ﬁrst indication of what the
company ﬁnds important. Use these pages to answer these
questions for yourself:
• What does the company create or sell? What services does
it provide?
• Who are the company’s customers? Does it sell to con-
sumers or other businesses?
• How big an operation is it? Regional, national, multina-
tional? Is it part of a larger corporate parent?
• How long has the company been in business? What
changes has it gone through over time?
• If it’s a publicly traded company, look at its annual
reports. How has it fared over the past ﬁve years? Why?
Take these questions seriously, and don’t just gloss over the
answers. You should be talking about them in the interview.
Anyone can walk in having glanced at the website and think “I
guess these guys sell farm stuff.” It’s quite another to be able
to talk to your interviewer about how the company sells feed
systems to cattle farms mostly in the southwest United States,
although business has been off in the past year because of a
drought. It also opens up other questions for further research.
There are also plenty of questions to think about that relate to
your decision as to whether this company would be one you’d
like to work for.

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
111
For example:
• Is the company’s business interesting to you? Why or why
not?
• What does the company show off most? Where is the com-
pany’s pride? If the site talks about valuing people, is it
using stock photos or real customers and real employees?
• Are you likely to know any of its customers or anyone in its
target market you could talk to? Maybe your Uncle Steve
in Albuquerque knows some cattle farmers who have opin-
ions about your prospective employer.
Ask critical questions as well. Why is the company hiring so
many programmers? Has there been a lot of turnover lately?
That’d be a good thing to ask. Why is the company advertising
for three vice president positions at once? Is there upheaval in
the higher ranks? Again, that may be a good question to ask to
get a sense of the stability of the company.
Finally, you may also get information from the public relations
department of the company, if it’s large enough. Although typ-
ically geared toward media requests, the PR department can
handle questions about the company’s operations, and so on,
but don’t expect to ﬁnd too much more than is available pub-
licly online.
Your Contacts
Revisit the list of people you talked to when you ﬁrst started
looking, discussed in Section 5.1, How to Ask for Help, on
page 97. Go back to those people and see whether anyone has
the scoop on the job or company you’re looking at. As with ask-
ing for help, you’re just going to ask a few low-key questions that
are openers for information about the company. You might drop
an email to your friend Doug and say, “Hey, Doug, I’m looking
into a job over at Yoyodyne and wanted to get some insight to
what it’s like over there. Do you know anyone who works there?”
That same request can be forwarded to mailing lists that might
be relevant. If you’re on a local techie mailing list, say, for the
Poughkeepsie PostgreSQL Users Group, post a brief note to
the list.

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
112
I’m looking around for jobs, and I’ve seen an interesting
position available at Yoyodyne (include URL). The ad says
that it would include some PostgreSQL administration. Has
anyone here worked for Yoyodyne and would be willing to
answer a few questions about it? These are some basic questions:
* What did you work on while you were there?
* Did you like it?
* What can they improve in?
* Would you recommend them as an employer?
Of course, if you’d rather not reply in public, please
email me directly at andy@theworkinggeek.com, and I’ll
keep the comments confidential.
Thanks for any help you can provide.
As with any other request for help, keep the requests simple
and not overwhelming, and provide other options to encourage
people to respond.
Not-Quite-Random Web Searching
Once you’ve read the company website and you’ve gotten the
ofﬁcial line about what the company is and does, now it’s time
for the real web detective work for information about the com-
pany on the Web that it can’t control. You’re going to search for
references to the company, both by name and by references to
its website.
Communications from
employees speak
volumes about a
company.
Start with a Google search for the
company name itself: example.com. If
you ﬁnd an email address, search for
that and see what the person might
have to say on sites other than the
parent site: bob.smith@example.com -
site:example.com. This will search for the email address, but
exclude hits on example.com itself. Also look for sites that
link to the company’s site, and see what they have to say:
link:example.com.

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
113
Check Google Groups6 and other mailing list archives. If you
can turn the email address of someone who works in a technical
area at the company and then search for his or her postings to
technical mailing lists, you can get quite an impression of what
things are like.
To: mysql-help@...
From: bsmith@example.com
Subject: Help w/mysql URGENT
Date: (a few months ago)
Hey can anyone help with mysql perms. I am dba for my company
and we have a mysql install and i think i f\$\#*!ed something
when i installed a patch lol!
i am trying to go 2 the company dir. page on the intranet and i
keep getting some kind of permison errors. what should i do?
This example is cartoonishly bad, but not at all implausable.
The author of that email does not give a good impression about
himself or the company he works for, since them employ him.
However, don’t discount a company because of one bad email
or one bad employee. It’s one view of the company, and, who
knows, maybe the job advertised would include replacing that
guy. Then again, a company that hires people like that may
have problems endemic throughout the organization.
If the company has multiple domain names and presences,
check those as well. Grain Delivery Co. might be graindelivery-
inc.com on its main website but might also have a separate web-
site at graintoday.com that is more customer-facing, perhaps a
customer portal. Check for links to and email addresses from
that domain as well.
Check alternate spellings and misspellings. I work for Follett
Corporation, but plenty of people online spell it “Follet,” with
only one T, and many people call it “Follett’s.” I’d be searching on
both those variants if I were researching a job here. Of course,
don’t stick to Google. Even though it’s the most popular search
engine, others like MSN Live Search will probably have pages
that Google does not.
6.
http://groups.google.com

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
114
Here are some questions you won’t get the answer to on the
company website but may well discover with some vigorous
work on Google:
• Have there been layoffs recently? How often do they hap-
pen? At some companies the layoffs are a quarterly fear
festival.
• What’s it like to work there?
• Do employees from the company seem unhappy?
• How has technology changed over time?
Check Out Their Operations
If the company has any presence available to the public, check
it out. If they’re a retail operation, visit one of their stores. Is
the store dirty? Do they do things on the cheap? If a company is
going to go cheap on its customer-facing aspects, it’s not likely
they’ll be spending the dollars necessary to get you a fast desk-
top machine or the server power you need.
Chat up one of the employees about how he or she likes it there.
Sure, a back-ofﬁce sysadmin job is very different from someone
working in front-line retail, but surly attitudes and disaffection
are often endemic throughout an entire company.
Call the customer support line or a sales phone number with
some questions about the products that they sell. Does the per-
son seem knowledgeable? Happy? Is the person someone you
would enjoy working with? You very well may be if you work for
that company.
As with any other research you do, nothing you ﬁnd should
necessarily be a deal-breaker, making you turn away from the
company as a potential employer. However, consider the trends
that you see, and add questions to your list to ask at an inter-
view. You might ask something like “I stopped by the storefront
on Elm and heard a clerk griping about the cash register being
old and always broken. Do you run into that sort of situation in
IT as well?”
Current and Former Employees
Probably the most valuable source of information about an
employer is from someone who has worked there. If you know

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
115
someone who works at the company, then you’ve got it made.
You can ask all your tough questions. But what if you don’t
know anyone there? How do you ﬁnd them?
Some applied web searching will probably turn up some employ-
ees. Once you ﬁnd someone you know works there, you’ve got a
thread to hold on to. Maybe you’ll ﬁnd the person’s blog, where
he gripes about some dumb new policy at work. You might ﬁnd
a mailing list thread that gives insight into what operations are
like there.
When you do ﬁnd an employee, keep track of this crucial lead.
Track URLs that you’ve found so that you can refer to them
later if necessary. Chances are you’ll want to do further research
without wasting time re-googling the same pages. This is espe-
cially true if you’re researching a company that you’d like to
work at but that doesn’t currently have any openings.
Finding a home email address is the best of all. Go ahead and
send a polite email to the person asking for their impressions of
the company and working there. Also include a request for help
as discussed in Section 5.1, Ask People for Help, on page 96.
Here’s an example:
Subject: Looking for advice about working at Yoyodyne
Hi, Bob,
My name is Andy Lester, and I’m considering applying for a
programming position at Yoyodyne (include URL for the ad).
I see from your post to the Solaris Administrators Forum
(include URL) that you work there, or did in the past. From
your posts on the forum, you seem like you’d be willing to help
with some questions I had about Yoyodyne. I’d like to ask for
any advice or insight that might help me in my search.
What can you tell me about your time there? Do you like working
there? What didn’t you like?
What sorts of projects were you
working on? Most of all, would you recommend them as a place
to work?
If there’s someone else who might be a better person to ask, can
you please point me to him or her? Also, if you’d rather not
discuss this in email, I can be reached at 815-555-1212.
Thank you very much for any assistance you can provide.

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
116
Notice a few things from this sample. First, never send an email
like this to someone’s work account. Many employers moni-
tor employee email. Make sure that your email doesn’t look or
sound like automated spam, or it may get deleted unread. A
subject like “Advice” from an unknown mail account may well
make the recipient think it’s spam.
Make
sure that the recipient doesn’t
feel
like
he’s been
spammed. Make it clear that you’re not just shotgunning this
request to everyone you can. Also make clear that this email is
business-only, too, especially if you’re mailing someone of the
opposite sex.
Pick a handful of open-ended questions that are most important
to you. Don’t overwhelm the person with questions, or you lower
his likelihood of replying to you. However, always end with the
most important question: “Would you recommend it as a good
place to work?”
Provide the recipient an alternative to mailing you back, too.
Note how the example lists a phone number and a request for
another person’s name. This gives the person a way to help that
might feel less awkward.
If the person writes back, thank him or her for their time, no
matter what it is that they say. Even if you get back a “I’d rather
not discuss Yoyodyne because...,” you still write back and say,
“I understand completely, and I thank you for your time and
wish you good luck in the future.”
Blind-mailing an employee or former employee is high-risk,
high-reward. You may well get back nothing, but if you do, the
payoff is fantastic.
Social Websites
The explosion of social websites like MySpace and Facebook has
spawned business-oriented websites, too. The biggest, LinkedIn,
is an ideal source for ﬁnding people who work at, or have worked
at, your company of interest.
LinkedIn isn’t just a big index of email addresses so you can
mail your questions to people, but it’s a start. There are rules
about how you can contact other LinkedIn members based on
how many degrees of separation away from you they are, but at

DO YOUR DETECTIVE WORK
117
the very least you can usually get names for further detective
work. LinkedIn proﬁles also include endorsements from others.
These can also give you insight into the processes about the job
you’re looking at.
If you can ﬁnd the hiring manager for the position you’re looking
at in LinkedIn, you’ve hit pay dirt. Find out about his or her past
history. Is she new to management? What did she do before the
current job? What do her people think of her?
Even without contacting the people involved, LinkedIn can be a
great source of information, as Pete found:
The Value of Turning Over Some Rocks
by Pete Krawczyk, Developer, Wonder Lake, Illinois
A friend of mine, “John,” got a call from a headhunter to interview
with another company, “Acme Widgets,” for a similar position.
After the phone screen, John asked my opinion about the
company.
I hadn’t heard of Acme Widgets before, so I did a simple Google
search. After that, I did a LinkedIn search to see whether I knew
anyone from Acme. Even though I didn’t, I saw one of the
“co-founders” had been working there for 16 months. When I
mentioned this to John, he was surprised. “I’ve been told longer,
like since around 2000.”
I showed John what I found and how I found it. Further research
showed several people who worked at Acme less than a year,
suggesting a high turnover rate. After our research, John decided
to go ahead with the phone interview, but now he was armed with
better questions about the company. “I was told they were
incorporated earlier,” John said, “but that was the headhunter,
and I found him to be like a used-car salesman.”
Other social websites are worth investigating as well but are
less business-oriented. Poke around Facebook for a while, and
you may ﬁnd as many contacts as on the websites aimed at
the business networking user base. Of course, by the time you
read this, there may be other social networking sites that have
popped up to peruse.

HEADHUNTERS
118
5.5
Headhunters
Conventional wisdom makes the idea of working with a head-
hunter an appealing one. You visit the headhunter, you hand
over a copy of your latest résumé in Word format, and the head-
hunter ﬂips through his ﬁle of job openings, looking for the one
that’s just right for you. “Ah, here we go,” he beams, “an easy
9-to-5 job paying an absurdly high salary, but they’ve been wait-
ing for someone with exactly your skills!” Boy, that was easy.
If only it were so.
To get the expert view on headhunters, I spoke with Nick Cor-
codilos, host of http://asktheheadhunter.com and author of Ask
the Headhunter [Cor97]. He told me that the misconception that
most people have is that headhunters ﬁnd jobs for candidates.
That’s backwards. Headhunters are paid by employers to ﬁnd
people to ﬁll speciﬁc positions.
This certainly didn’t match up with my understanding of how
headhunters worked. They usually seemed like commodity bro-
kers, trying to shufﬂe job candidates through the system how-
ever they can. I get an average of two or three cold calls on
my work phone, and at least a dozen emails, from headhunters
every month. If I talk to one, I can hear he’s in a big bullpen, a
room full of other headhunters, all working the phones. He asks
whether I’m looking for any new opportunities, can I send him
an updated copy of my résumé in Word format, and do I know
anyone else who might be looking for a new job? These guys
are playing the numbers, the same mathematical formula that
keeps spammers in business, because it doesn’t matter how
many people you bother if you get that one hit.
Corcodilos explained that these guys are from employment
agencies and are not what he calls headhunters. They play both
sides of the hunt, for both employer and candidate, circulating
résumés of people who come in looking for a job. They’re work-
ing the process by numbers, trying to get as many résumés in
front of as many hiring authorities as possible. In short, they’re
not doing anything more than you could do yourself.
Headhunters typically are paid a signiﬁcant percentage of the
position’s salary + bonus, from 15 to 25 percent. For an
$80,000/year programmer, that can be up to $20,000. At those

HEADHUNTERS
119
Never Pay to Find a Job
Headhunters, employment agencies, and the like are
hired by and paid by the companies with the jobs. A
legitimate agency will never ask you to pay a fee for
distribution of your résumé or contacting a company. If
you’re ever asked for money of any kind from a head-
hunter, walk away immediately.
kinds of fees, I’d have thought that it would only be high-level
positions that get headhunted, but Nick says it could be anyone
from a mid-level programmer all the way up to VP-level position.
So if it’s a matter of being sought by headhunters, what should
you do to be noticed? Corcodilos says that you need to be some-
one known in your industry, someone that people know as an
expert, a top-level performer that will justify the price that the
headhunter is charging for bringing you to the attention of his
client ﬁrm.
None of this is to say that headhunters have no value to you.
A headhunter who knows you and knows your qualiﬁcations is
a headhunter who can turn to you when faced with a job that
matches up with you. There can be value in having a relation-
ship with a headhunter. The trouble can be ﬁguring out who to
work with.
There’s one headhunter I’ve worked with over the last decade,
and he emails me every year or so to see how things are going.
We exchange some email where I tell about what I’ve worked
on recently, and he talks about the state of the job market as
he sees it and what the trends are. It’s strictly informative, and
he’s not trying to sell me on any gig. Similarly, if I know anyone
looking for jobs in the industries he specializes in, I’ll send them
his way.
I don’t expect anything from him, nor he from me, but we both
know each other well and know that if there’s a match for what
we need, we can turn to the other. It’s like buying a lottery
ticket. It doesn’t cost a lot, and it might just pay off. Just don’t
rely on it.

WORK THE HUNT
120
5.6
Work the Hunt
Now it’s time to get to hunting and search for the job that suits
you. As a techie, you have a better-than-average understanding
of the Internet and of tracking data, so use it to your advantage.
You can use the tools or create your own,7 better than the aver-
age person, so do it. You’re going to use the Web for research,
but you also need to track your search.
You need to track every aspect of your job search, including both
actions you’ve taken and what you’ve learned. As you search for
companies worth your time and make contacts with the people
therein, log what you do in exacting detail. It’s important that
you know what you’ve said to people and discovered about the
company so that you don’t embarrass yourself by seeming that
you don’t know what you’re doing. Imagine this phone conver-
sation where you’re called at home by the hiring manager who
wants to do a phone screen:
Hiring manager:
Hello, is this Bob Smith? I’m Doug Jones
from Yoyodyne, and I’ve calling about the job you applied for. I’d
just like to ask you a few questions if you have some time.
You:
Sure, that’s ﬁne. Now, Yoyodyne, you’re that web adver-
tising company down in Greenville, right?
Hiring manager:
Mmmm, no, we’re a plumbing supply distrib-
utor in Lakemoor.
You:
Oh, right! You’re the place that...I think it’s my brother-in-
law, Dave, works there, probably in accounting.
Hiring manager:
Hmmm, I know everybody in accounting,
and there hasn’t been any Dave that I know of. So, I had a few
questions. First, I’m interested in your background using Visual
Basic.
You:
Oh, what résumé do you have? I think you might have an
old one. I mean, I know Visual Basic, but it’s not really a strong
point. Lately I’ve been doing more with Oracle. Does the résumé
you have say...?
7.
If you create a tracking system of some kind, you’ve got something for your
portfolio. See Section 7.4, Prepare a Relevant Portfolio, on page 138.

WORK THE HUNT
121
This conversation takes place over the phone, but it just as eas-
ily could have been at the interview. It shows you as the can-
didate to be ill-prepared and unorganized. How do you avoid
this?
Keep meticulous notes, and keep them ready for easy access.
How you keep them is up to you, but they need to be easy to
refer to. Start by keeping notes about every aspect of the com-
pany. If you ﬁnd interesting information on the Web, for exam-
ple, copy & paste it into your notes and keep the URL. Keep
all copies of documents that you send out, including emails,
résumés, anything. Since you’re not going to be sending out
canned résumés and canned application letters (Chapter 6,
Applying for the Job, on page 124), you’ll need to know what
you sent to each company, and you’re just not going to be able
to keep it all in your head, especially if you’re nervous. Keeping
detailed notes lets you print them out and bring them to the
interview, too. Take a look at how that embarrassing phone call
would have gone with careful note taking.
Hiring manager:
Hello, is this Bob Smith? I’m Doug Jones
from Yoyodyne.
You:
Oh, yes, thanks for calling. I’d love to talk, but right this
second isn’t great. Can I please call you back in ﬁve minutes?
Of course, Doug says that you can call back in ﬁve minutes. You
grab your notes, open your saved Word documents, and call him
back in exactly ﬁve minutes.
You:
Thanks again for calling, Mr. Jones. How are things in
the plumbing supply business? My sister-in-law, Amy Egan in
marketing, says she’s being kept pretty busy.
Hiring manager:
You’re related to Amy? She seems like a
great addition to that department, although we don’t talk much.
Mostly I’ve been working on migration to Oracle Forms, and that’s
what I wanted to talk to you about.
You:
Yes, it was one of the things that stood out in your ad
in the Northwest Herald, that you were looking for expertise in
Oracle Forms. If you have a copy of my résumé there, you’ll see
that I’ve spent the last two years in a situation that sounds much
like yours....

SUMMARY
122
This conversation went well, but it was all because of the prepa-
ration and note taking that led up to it. Consider all the facts
that you were able to recall from your notes:
• What the company does
• Who you know at the company
• How you found out about the job
• What interested you in the job
• The exact résumé and cover letter that the person at the
other end of the phone is looking at
As you track the jobs you’re interested in, be aware of dupes. So
many of the jobs listed online are reposts of other jobs that it’s
easy to get confused on what’s what. You don’t want to apply for
the same job twice by mistake. If you ﬁnd a job you’re tracking
in a second online source, just make a note of it. Make sure
you keep track of the full URL for the job, not just “Found it on
CareerBuilder.”
You’ll also keep track of all interactions with anyone about the
job or the company. If you talk to someone at the company,
such as doing research on it before applying, log it. If you send
a résumé and cover letter, log it and keep a copy of the exact
documents you sent. If you talk to someone about the company,
even if she doesn’t work there, log it. It’s much better to be able
to say at an interview “I’d spoken to Kristen Henderson over
at Yoyodyne about how she’d heard about your Linux upgrade
project” than to be mumble-mouthed and saying “Oh yeah, I
talked to...oh, what was her name, she was talking about some
Linux thing you did that was cool....”
This kind of tracking may seem tedious at the time, but the
payoff will make it worthwhile.
5.7
Summary
The searching process may be the longest, and most dispiriting,
part of getting a new job, but don’t let it get you down. Turn the
process into a project like any work-related project. Track your
progress and measure your results so you can see how things
are going.

SUMMARY
123
Most of all, don’t rely on others such as employment agencies
or job boards to ﬁnd your job for you. Blind luck may well favor
you with a fantastic opportunity, but you have to help yourself
along the way.

Chapter 6
Applying for the Job
Applying for the job is often your ﬁrst contact with the company.
You’re going from outside observer to active participant in the
process. How you apply, what you send, and every interaction
you have with every person along the way is evidence showing
those you hope to work for what kind of work you do and what
you’ll be like to work with. Make it your best.
This process cannot be done by rote, where you send out Yet
Another Résumé to Yet Another Company. First, mass-mailed
résumés have a stink about them that hiring managers can
smell. The odor of mass-produced generic blather is a turnoff
for anyone who wants to get an enthusiastic employee who will
ﬁt with the team. Second, putting your personality and speciﬁcs
about how you view a given opportunity forces you to consider
carefully whether this job is one for you. If you can’t come up
with two paragraphs in a cover letter that explains why you are
a good match for this job at this company, then you probably
shouldn’t be applying.
There aren’t 100 jobs
that are a good ﬁt.
Applying for a job is not a game of num-
bers. Spraying your résumé across the
Internet in the hopes of getting a nib-
ble just doesn’t work, because for every
job you send off a bland, uninteresting cover letter to, there are
100 other dopes doing the same thing.
Don’t apply for every job you see that might ﬁt. Instead, focus
on the ones that matter, and put everything you can into them.

CUSTOMIZE YOUR RÉSUMÉ
125
6.1
Customize Your Résumé
You have a great basic résumé, but that’s only the ﬁrst step.
Now you customize it.
The résumé is the workhorse of your application package. As
I emphasized back in Chapter 3, Résumé Content: Getting the
Words Down, on page 51, every résumé you send must be cre-
ated with the speciﬁcs of the company and position for which
you’re applying. Bring out the parts of your background that
will help the hiring manager most.
Take a copy of your stock résumé and see it through the eyes of
the hiring manager for the job for which you’re applying. Think
about what on your résumé will be most important to the man-
ager and to the company and how they can use you in their
business. You’re going to take these words and make them bold
to draw attention to them in the initial scanning of your résumé,
as explained in Section 4.4, Create an Effective Summary, on
page 85.
Start by checking the job requirements. Say you have a job ad
looking for ASP.NET and SQL Server experience, so those are
your ﬁrst two callout words. In the “Summary” section of your
résumé, make those two strings, “ASP.NET” and “SQL Server,”
and only those two strings, bold. Chances are they’re already
bolded if you’re starting with a stock résumé.
Find other words and concepts in your résumé that correspond
to what the company is looking for. You’ll probably have words
and phrases to emphasize that are not explicitly stated in the
ad. If they’re looking for a senior project manager, then high-
light your many years of experience. If the company is in the
ﬁnancial industry, then drawing attention to jobs you’ve had in
the ﬁnancial or related industries is appropriate.
This is where researching the company before applying pays off.
If you ﬁnd out, say, that the company takes on mostly govern-
ment contracts and you have experience in that area in your
past, then bold it in your résumé. You’ll have an edge over other
applicants.

CUSTOMIZE YOUR RÉSUMÉ
126
Highlight key words, but
don’t overwhelm.
Be judicious
in how much bolding
you do. Making too many words bold
diminishes the effectiveness, like high-
lighting entire paragraphs of textbooks
instead of key words or sentences. You want the reader’s eye
drawn to the bold words as the most important ones on the
page.
Anywhere you’ve quantiﬁed your value in the résumé, such as
in bullets for a given position, you have an excellent candidate
for bolding. Don’t bold the entire bullet, just the juiciest part.
The reader will read the rest for the context. Phrases like these
are great to call attention to:
• Introduced test-driven development that reduced defects
by 27% per KLOC
• Saved $19,200 in two years by converting servers to Linux
• Redesigned website led to 43% more trafﬁc and 18%
higher clickthrough in the ﬁrst six months
As you select these items to highlight, make sure that you can
discuss them in an interview or a phone screen, because they’ll
likely be top questions for the interviewer. “You say you saved
$19,200 by converting to Linux. Is that just licensing costs or
total cost of ownership? How did you measure those costs?”
Maybe it was your boss who came up with that ﬁgure to trumpet
in the company newsletter, but you’d better to be able to discuss
it more intelligently than “I dunno, that’s what my boss said.”
Don’t be afraid to add or remove content from your résumé.
Build up the jobs that most closely relate to the position or that
help you best tell the story of how you’ll help the company and
whittle away at the jobs that don’t. There’s no rule that all sec-
tions of your résumé must contain equal numbers of bullets or
the same amount of space on the page.
However you juggle the words, you should probably have two to
four words or phrases in your summary that are bold because
they directly relate to the job. If not, there’s a disconnect.
Either you’re not qualiﬁed for this job because the important
parts of the job aren’t worthy of placing in your summary, or
you haven’t organized the résumé well. Modify the résumé, or
reconsider the job.

CREATE A COVER LETTER
127
6.2
Create a Cover Letter
Rule #1 for cover letters: “Write one.” Many people ask, “Do I
have to send a cover letter if they don’t ask for one?” I can
only answer with, “Only if you want a better chance of getting
the job.”
The cover letter introduces yourself to the reader and tells her
things that might not be on the résumé or highlights those that
are. A cover letter is personalized. That’s not to say that you
shouldn’t personalize the résumé, but the cover letter is more
conversational and allows you to stretch out some more than a
résumé.
The reader of your cover letter should be convinced that you
are interested in the job. The hiring manager reads more than
enough form letters all day from mass-mailers who are just
looking for any old job.
Your job in a cover letter is to introduce yourself to the hiring
manager and give some context for you and your résumé. The
cover letter should do the following:
• Explain where you found out about the job
• Explain what you bring to the company and how it ﬁts with
what you’re looking for
• Show that you have researched the company
• Tell about any contacts with people you may have at the
company
• Show that you care enough about this job to send a per-
sonal letter and show that you want not just any, but
this job
Here’s how not to do a cover letter, an example I received while
looking for a programmer:
Dear Prospective Employer,
Your Advertisement on jobs.perl.com for a
Sr. Prog. for library book wholesaler
caught my attention. I would like to apply. I am confident that
I can perform the job effectively. My background and career
goal, seem to match the job requirements well.

CREATE A COVER LETTER
128
This letter tells plenty about the author, none of it good:
• He’s indiscriminate, throwing his résumé out to anyone
where he ﬁnds an ad. He’s probably desperate.
• He’s careless. “Sr. Prog. for library book wholesaler” was
the title of the job posting, not the name of the position.
The actual website was jobs.perl.org, not jobs.perl.com. Plus,
there are errors in English mechanics.
• He doesn’t care about the quality of his work sending out
such an obvious form letter. He didn’t even try to disguise
it, expanding the text of the web-scraped job description.
• He can’t honestly suggest that he can “perform the job
effectively” without knowing anything about what the job
entails.
Now compare that atrocity to this positive example I made up:
Dear Mr. Lester,
My colleague Richard Dice referred me to the job recently
posted on jobs.perl.org.
I believe that I can help Elsinore
Brewery with my skills, including:
* Four years of database app development, including...
* Three years Perl experience, including two CPAN modules
(http://...) that extend the DBI database layer by...
* A BS in computer science from the University of Illinois.
I’m also a bit of an amateur zymurgist and have brewed beer in
my basement for the past five years.
I look forward for a chance to meet with you to discuss
your needs and how I can help you and Elsinore Brewery.
Sincerely,
Bob McKenzie
Note how this letter hits all the good points of a cover letter:
• Introduces the writer to the reader and establishes a con-
nection to a mutual friend

CREATE A COVER LETTER
129
• Shows that the writer is familiar with the company and is
interested in this speciﬁc job
• Summarizes his work experience, perhaps even repeating
the summary from the résumé, to explain the key beneﬁts
of hiring him
Don’t get too tricky in your cover letter. It’s good to make a per-
sonal connection, but without giving up too much information
(refer to Chapter 10, Too Much Information, on page 196). Con-
sider that the cover letter is going to color how you’re perceived
from that point forward. It is your introduction to the company.
Consider how you’ll be
remembered.
Take a look at this excerpt from a
cover
letter
I
received.
The
candi-
date didn’t have a strong programming
background,
so
he
explained
other
parts of his varied background that might bring value to the
position:
I am much more than a programmer. In my long
and varied work history, I have performed such jobs
as knife salesman, manager of a hardware store, a
neurological lab assistant who was responsible for
extracting retinas from bovine eyes, ﬂower delivery
driver, and retirement home activities director, all of
which make me a well-rounded candidate.
It might be a decent strategy. He’s showing he has a wide variety
of experiences in his background. But when you read that, what
sticks in your mind?
“I am much more than a programmer. In my long
and varied work history, I have performed such jobs
as knife salesman, manager of a hardware store,
a neurological lab assistant who was responsible
for extracting retinas from bovine eyes, and...blah
blah blah....” Holy cow, this guy was a cow eye
sucker!.
How do you get past that? From that point on, it’s all I could
think about. If I actually hired him, he’d forever be known as
the cow eye sucker guy.

PUT THE PACKAGE TOGETHER
130
Your cover letter must keep your beneﬁt to the company at the
forefront. It may be appropriate to mention what your goals are,
but that must be kept secondary to what the company needs.
I’ve seen too many cover letters like this:
I saw your ad for a Windows system administrator in
the Herald this weekend, and I knew I had to respond.
I’ve been looking for a Windows admin position near
Poughkeepsie, and this job sounds perfect for me.
There’s nothing wrong with discussing what attracted you to the
job in the cover letter, so long as it is discussed as of secondary
importance to what the company is looking for. In the previous
case, the writer is most concerned with how easy his commute
would be, with no mention of the beneﬁts to the company. Men-
tioning the commute is ﬁne, so long as it as at the end of the
cover letter, after the company’s needs have been discussed.
6.3
Put the Package Together
What you send as you apply for a job will vary, but the overrid-
ing rule is “Follow all directions exactly.” When the job ad says,
“Please send a cover letter and résumé in Word format to...,”
then by golly you send a cover letter and résumé in Word for-
mat. Don’t substitute a PDF for Word or put it all in plain text
because you think that’s what makes more sense. The company
speciﬁed Word for a reason, and their reason trumps any you
might have.
If the ad doesn’t specify how you should apply, assume this:
• You’ll send a cover letter in a plain-text email, with the
name of the position in the Subject ﬁeld.
• Your résumé attached to the email as a ﬁle attachment in
either Microsoft Word or PDF format, with your name in
the ﬁlename, such as bob-smith-resume.pdf.
Name ﬁle attachments
to make life easier for
the recipient.
File naming is important because it
helps the résumé weeder keep track of
the attachments. It may be meaning-
ful to you on your machine to have a
ﬁle called resume.pdf, but consider the
recipient who has a dozen ﬁles all named resume.pdf.

NEVER TELL ANYONE YOUR SALARY HISTORY
131
Most important, if you don’t do exactly what an ad tells you
to do, the employer will know, and what they’ll know is “This
person is unable to fulﬁll his ﬁrst task as assigned.” Don’t screw
it up.
There’s one exception to following the ad’s instructions, and
that’s in sending a salary history: don’t do it.
6.4
Never Tell Anyone Your Salary History
Somewhere along the line, you may be asked what you were
making at your last job. Don’t give out that information. When
a company is asking for your salary history, they’re looking to
make an easy decision based on the information, and it is never
to your advantage.
Say you’re applying for a job where most of the other sysadmins
are getting paid $70,000/year. If they company knows you’re
making $80,000 now, chances are you’ll be out of the running
immediately. If they know you make $60,000, the hiring man-
ager may think, “This guy will probably take $65,000 and be
happy with it, and we can save $5,000.” You’ll wind up making
less than you’re worth. Then, when you ﬁnd out you’re under-
paid, you leave the company unhappy. Nobody wins.
Don’t feel guilty at declining a request for salary history. You
are under no obligation to do so. Sometimes an employer will
say “We have to have an idea what to pay you,” but that’s just
crap. Here are some reasons why:
• The value to the company of work to be done by you cannot
be determined by what someone else paid you.
• Previous salary is a terrible indicator of potential future
value.
• Your previous compensation might not have been all
salary.
• You could have been underpaid or overpaid at your last
job.
• Your reasons for wanting a change in pay are your own
business.
• Giving out salary history makes it tempting to lie to make
some more money.

NEVER TELL ANYONE YOUR SALARY HISTORY
132
Isn’t It Rude to Say “That’s Conﬁdential?”
Saying “My salary history is conﬁdential” may feel rude,
but it’s absolutely not. Our society has just trained us to
think that everything is everyone else’s business.
To many Americans, the idea of keeping things private
may seem strange. We live in a society where “reality”
TV shows purport to show private details of their sub-
jects’ lives. Political discourse can revolve around details
of sexual escapades of politicians.
Online, many treat their lives as an open book. Our Twit-
ter updates may announce a trip to the bathroom. A
co-worker might discuss his recent surgery over lunch.
Single people get asked “So, when are you getting mar-
ried?” And married people get “When are you having
kids?” There seems to be no line of privacy that some-
one won’t cross.
Therefore, it might feel strange, even rude, to turn down
a request for information about ourselves. Everything
else in the job process is out in the open, so how can
you explain that you won’t tell someone what you were
making at your last three jobs? Don’t think of it as “pri-
vate” but as “conﬁdential.”
“Conﬁdential” lends an ofﬁcial air to your refusal. It’s
almost as if you’re saying “Rules outside of my control
prevent me from saying.” You need not explain that
they’re rules you’ve imposed yourself.
There’s a simple way to avoid this mess. Tell anyone who asks,
“I’m sorry, but that’s conﬁdential.”
The word conﬁdential can be your armor against questions
you’re not going to answer. If pushed as to why it’s conﬁden-
tial, you need only say, “That’s not something I discuss with
anyone.” It’s a perfectly polite answer, and you need to be ﬁrm
about it. Practice it if necessary. Chances are good you’ll be
asked, and it’s best to be prepared. Giving up your salary his-
tory never is to your advantage, so be strong and ready when
the question comes.

NEVER TELL ANYONE YOUR SALARY HISTORY
133
The speciﬁcs of declining a request for a salary history, or indeed
past pay stubs as proof of your salary history, depend on the
request.
Answer a request for
salary history with a
salary expectation.
If a job ad says, for example, “send
résumé and salary history to...,” then
send your résumé and cover letter as
you would any other job. In the cover
letter, include a paragraph at the bot-
tom saying “My salary history is conﬁdential. Based on my
understanding of the position, the current job market, and
experience and talents, I’m expecting that a salary between
$X,000 and $Y,000 per year will be appropriate.” Note that
you’re speciﬁcally declining the request for salary history,
because you don’t want the recipient to think that you didn’t
notice it. You’re standing on principle, not being sloppy.
If you have to ﬁll out an employment form and a box asks
for your pay rate at each of your last three jobs, write “Con-
ﬁdential.” Alternately, you can cross out “Salary Received”
and
replace
with
“Salary
Expected”
and
list
your
salary
requirements.
If asked in an interview, do the same as you would in the earlier
cover letter. Explain that “I’m sorry, but my salary history is
conﬁdential. Based on my understanding of....” Remember to
be polite but ﬁrm.
You can always discuss your salary requirements when asked.
At some point, the topic of salary is going to come up.1 You can
discuss your salary expectations, but not your salary history.
The history is nobody’s business but yours, while your expecta-
tions are the very topic at hand.
But what if they insist? What if the interviewer says “It’s our pol-
icy that we have to have salary history as part of the process”?
What if the ad says “Résumés without salary history will not be
considered”?
1.
See Section 11.5, Negotiate the Offer, on page 215 for more about salary
negotiations.

AND NOW YOU KEEP LOOKING
134
Well, what if they do? They’re telling you that their hiring pro-
cedures revolve around making sure that they have the upper
hand in salary negotiations. Is that a company you want to work
for? Either you can do what they want and start the hiring pro-
cess at a disadvantage, instead of as partners working together,
or you can ﬁnd another company. The choice is up to you.
6.5
And Now You Keep Looking
Now you’ve sent off your email, or faxed a résumé, to the job of
your dreams. Now what?
You keep looking. Nothing has changed until you get an inter-
view, get an offer, and accept a new job.
Don’t sit by the calendar, counting the days since you sent off
your magic email, trying to ﬁgure out how long it will take them
to get back to you. Keep plugging on looking for a new job.
If you don’t get an acknowledgment of receipt of your résumé
and cover letter within, say, a week or two, you can go ahead
and send a follow-up letter asking for conﬁrmation. However,
once you’ve received conﬁrmation that your résumé has arrived
safely, don’t follow up again. If they want you, they’ll contact
you. Not hearing back from an employer may mean they’re not
interested or that they haven’t gotten around to going through
résumés yet. In either case, let it lie.
Of course, you hope you’ll get contacted for an interview, and
preparing for that interview is the subject of our next chapter.

Part II
The Interview and Beyond

Chapter 7
Preparing for the Interview
Since your job interview is your ﬁrst day at your new job, it only
makes sense that you’d want to prepare for it. You wouldn’t roll
out a new software package without preparation or make server
changes without adequately testing, and so too it must be with
your job interview.
Your assignment at your job interview is twofold: show the hir-
ing manager that you are the person for the job, and verify to
yourself that this is the job you want.
The ﬁrst thing you must project, however, is that you are pre-
pared for the interview. The interviewer is spending a lot of his
time preparing for this interview, and it’s critically important
that you make clear that you take it as seriously, and it is as of
much importance, as he does.
Here’s the minimum you need to prepare for the interview:
• Clear your schedule.
• Prepare to sell the interviewer on you.
• Prepare to answer tough questions.
• Prepare your own questions to ask.
• Prepare a relevant portfolio.
• Prepare to get to the interview.
• Prepare the things you’re going to take with you.

CLEAR YOUR SCHEDULE
137
7.1
Clear Your Schedule
Here’s a scenario for ﬂushing your job prospects away: the
interview’s going great, the hiring manager seems to enjoy your
work, there’s real interest on both parties, but then “Gosh I’d
love to meet the president of the company, but my baby-sitter
is only able to stay until 5 p.m.”
Treat your interview like it’s the only thing that matters in life,
because right then it is. Don’t be worrying about time con-
straints. Just clear your schedule so you can put all your atten-
tion on the interview. Not only is watching the clock rude, but
it also means you’re not going to be 100 percent for the inter-
view. Plus, if the interview runs long, that’s usually a good thing,
because they’re interested in you.
7.2
Prepare to Sell the Interviewer on You
You’ve already thought about being the right person for the
job because you submitted a résumé tailor-made for the job
in question and a cover letter that’s personalized about you and
your ﬁt with the company. That’s a start, but the amount of
information you can convey in a one- or two-page résumé and
a cover letter is pretty small. The conversations at your inter-
view will be far larger than that. All the detail you had to leave
off your résumé about the death march project you saved from
ruin or the network upgrade you pulled off will probably be the
meat of the conversation.
Remember always that it is a conversation. You aren’t just
answering questions like a suspect hauled in for police ques-
tioning, even if it feels like that. In fact, sitting quietly and only
answering what’s been asked is an ideal way to lose the inter-
view by showing the interviewer that you have no thoughts of
your own or that you’re too afraid to speak to her.
7.3
Prepare to Answer Tough Questions
You’re going to be answering questions, and they’re not all going
to be simple “Do you know Unix?” See Chapter 9, Handling the
Tough Interview Questions, on page 176 for in-depth discussion
of these and others, but at the very least be able to answer

PREPARE A RELEVANT PORTFOLIO
138
the following questions as they relate to the speciﬁc job and
company:
• Tell me about yourself.
• What do you know about our company?
• What is your greatest strength?
• What is your greatest weakness?
• Why do you want to work for us?
• Why should we hire you?
• Where do you see yourself in ﬁve years?
You’re going to get every one of these questions, or a variant of
them, in the interview. Know how you’re going to answer.
7.4
Prepare a Relevant Portfolio
Imagine a restaurant owner hiring a chef. The owner grills the
candidate on his skills, asking “Can you make chicken pot pie?”
“Oh, sure, no problem,” he replies.
“How’s your lasagna? Enchiladas? Pad thai?”
“Fantastic, without peer!”
“Can you make baklava?”
“Butter soft and ﬂaky!”
“Great! You’re hired!”
How can the restaurant owner possibly know the chef can cook
what he says he can? More important, why would you hire a
chef without tasting his cooking?
Now turn that into a programmer interviewing for a job. The
hiring manager asks, “You can do Perl, right? Perl objects? How
about SOAP? DNS queries? Third normal form database struc-
tures? Recursive descent parsing?”
“Done ’em all.”
“Do you write clean code? Good documentation?”
“Oh, of course!”
“Great! You’re hired!”

PREPARE A RELEVANT PORTFOLIO
139
As absurd as it was for the restaurant owner to take the chef’s
word at face value about his skill, it’s absurd for hiring man-
agers to hire without seeing the candidate’s skills in action. In
the hiring process, however, it can be effectively impossible to
demonstrate your skills. While the smart chef might bring an
array of dishes to taste, a sysadmin isn’t going to be able to
create a thousand-node network on demand.
A hiring manager who wants to get a real feel for her candidates’
skills will ask for examples of work. When I was hiring program-
mers, I told every candidate that I called in for a face-to-face
interview to bring in code samples, printed on paper, so that we
could discuss them during the interview. Unfortunately, I was
deﬁnitely in the minority. Ilya Talman, one of the top technical
recruiters in Chicago, told me that he estimates only 15 percent
of hiring managers ask to see samples of work.
This gives you, the pragmatic job hunter, an edge. You’re going
to bring work samples, even if you’re not asked for them.
Use examples of your
work to gain an edge
over other candidates.
Imagine two programmers interviewing
for the same position, with the same
skills, and equally suited for the work
to be done. Now imagine that the sec-
ond programmer is able to show the
hiring manager examples of relevant work that apply to her spe-
ciﬁc needs. She’ll pick the candidate who is able to show what
he’s done, because she can be more conﬁdent in the quality of
his work and that he’s actually done what he claims to have
done.
Bringing sample work gives a strong message that you’re serious
about this job and that you’ve committed time and energy to the
process. You’ve created a work product in itself, well prepared
for your ﬁrst day on the job.
Even if the hiring manager doesn’t ask for sample work, bring
some anyway. You want to stand above all the other candidates,
and in an environment where such deliverables aren’t expected,
a portfolio puts you head and shoulders above the competition.
If two project managers are being considered for a position and
their skills are roughly the same but one has an attractive, com-
prehensive portfolio of his work, with actual project schedules,

PREPARE A RELEVANT PORTFOLIO
140
requirements documents, and post-project evaluations, who’s
going to get the job?
What Goes in My Portfolio?
Unlike your résumé that tells how great you are for the job, a
portfolio shows it. It will be ﬁlled with examples of your work, as
well as documentation of your working past. The portfolio will
help the hiring manager understand what you’ve done in the
past and how you’ll help her company moving forward.
The work that you bring should relate to the job you’re inter-
viewing for, but don’t limit yourself. For a Java database pro-
grammer job, you’ll want to bring code that shows your Java
and database chops, but don’t stop there. Include some Ruby
code, maybe some cool command-line utilities, and some low-
level C code for graphics manipulation you did for a game. Bring
database schemas you’ve created and documentation you’ve
written. Show depth of experience in Java database program-
ming but breadth of experience elsewhere.
Your portfolio must showcase your best work. Don’t bring in
something that can’t stand on its own. Too often I’ve looked
through a candidate’s sample code only to have it disclaimed:
“Oh, that’s just a little shell script I had to write once for doing
some backups.” If you’re not proud of it, don’t bring it.
Here are examples of work products to bring:
• Source code listings (syntax highlighting can make things
easier to read):
• Screenshots
• Network diagrams
• Disaster recovery plans, backup plans, and so on
• Database schemas
• Documentation
• Project schedules
• Websites, both screens and HTML code
If you have work products that cross functional boundaries,
include them! Sysadmins who have written impressive shell
scripts should deﬁnitely include them. Programmers who can
draft project schedules should include those, and so on.

PREPARE A RELEVANT PORTFOLIO
141
These work products should be created solely by you or else
prominently disclaimed in writing. Something as simple as
“Written with another sysadmin” at the top of the ﬁrst page of
the document should be ﬁne. The key is that you don’t want it
to come back that you misrepresented the work as being only
yours if it’s not.
Of course, never bring anything proprietary or conﬁdential. For
some things like source code, this can be a sticking point,
whereas for a project schedule it might be less so. You want
to highlight your abilities, not get yourself a lawsuit.
Open source work is
ideal for your portfolio.
One way to make sure you don’t run
afoul of conﬁdentiality issues is to
stock your portfolio with contributions
you’ve made to open source projects.
If you’ve contributed only parts of code to an open source
project, print out the parts you’ve done, and denote them as
such. Remember that your contributions might not just be
code but could include documentation, design plans, sched-
ules...whatever.
Portfolios can also include nontechnical documents, such as:
• Performance reviews, with any mentions of salary redacted
• Letters of recommendation
• Any assessment of your work, such as blog postings about
an open source project you worked on
As with the technical documentation, make sure nothing is
proprietary.
Construct Your Portfolio
The ideal portfolio will be a three-ring binder with your name
and contact information on the front. The pages will be divided
into sections with labeled tab dividers to make it easy to ﬁnd
content later. You want to leave it behind with the hiring man-
ager so she can refer to it later while pondering your awesome-
ness and so she can show others.
Knowing that you may have to create multiple portfolios for
future interviews, I suggest you create one master portfolio with
all your possible content and then make copies from those when

PREPARE A RELEVANT PORTFOLIO
142
you have a portfolio to create. You can easily pick and choose
from what in your background is relevant to the job you’re
applying for.
The portfolio, even a humble three-ring binder, should still be
a quality job. You don’t need to have any fancy square-binding,
but it should still look neat. The info page you put on the front
should look neat and professional, just like your résumé.
As you put together the pages that go into the binder, it’s bet-
ter to err on the side of too many examples than too few. The
tabbed dividers will make it easy for the reader to ﬁnd what’s
interesting. On the other hand, don’t overwhelm the reader with
paper. You don’t want to include 100 pages of some database
abstraction library you wrote, just for the sake of completeness.
The ﬁrst ten to ﬁfteen pages will probably be enough to show
the reader what you’re capable of.
When you’re done putting it all together, stick in one ﬁnal page
as the ﬁrst page: a copy of your résumé.
Create New Work for the Portfolio
Sometimes the best item in a portfolio isn’t existing work at all.
You may want to look at creating something speciﬁc for a given
interview. Consider my friend Kate’s story:
Kate’s Quick Reference Card
by Kate Thieda, independent business owner, Durham, North
Carolina
I applied to a tech company as a production manager for their
main product, quick reference cards for programmers, but I was
discouraged. After over a year of frustrating job searching, I had
almost given up. I knew that with the ﬁerce competitiveness for
jobs, I had to do something to stand out from all the other
candidates.
I decided to make my own cheat sheet, using the look and feel of
the company’s product. I followed their formatting as closely as
possible and ﬁlled it with information about myself, a sort of a
“cheat sheet” for them to remember me and my qualiﬁcations
after the interview. I listed all my skills relevant to the position,
quotes from my supervisors from performance reviews, and other
tidbits that mirrored what they had on each of their cards. As

PREPARE YOUR QUESTIONS TO ASK
143
with all interviews, one of the ﬁrst questions was, “Tell us why
you think you’d be good for this job.” I pulled out the card, and
they had the answer in their hands. Two days later, I got the job.
Consider the impression that must have made with that version
of the company’s product that related exactly to her. In a few
hours of work, Kate created something that said she was famil-
iar with the company and what it did, she had an eye for detail,
she wanted that job, and she was willing to go above and beyond
the normal expectations of a candidate to get it. It’s no wonder
they hired her.
Do I Really Have to Do All This?
It depends on you. Do you really want this job? Do you want
to separate yourself from the guy after you who doesn’t have a
portfolio?
Beyond showing quality work, a portfolio says, “I want this job.”
The message is inescapable. The cost of a portfolio might be a
few hours of time and maybe $10 of photocopying and supplies
at an ofﬁce-supply store. You’d be hard-pressed to ﬁnd a better
return on your investment.
7.5
Prepare Your Questions to Ask
Since the job interview is a two-way process, you should have
questions for the interviewer and potentially for other people
there who aren’t your manager-to-be. In fact, a candidate who
doesn’t have questions during the interview raises a number of
questions with his silence: “Does he not care about what the
job will be like?” “Is she not interested in this job?” “Maybe he
thinks this job is just another stepping stone to something else.”
“Seems like she can’t be bothered to think ahead about how this
job might work out.”
Asking questions shows that you’re interested in the position
and that you’re not cruising through life. The interviewer has
invested time and energy in getting you into the interview room,
and it’s a nail in your cofﬁn to give the impression that you’re
not being interested in determining whether the position you’re
applying for is appropriate.

PREPARE YOUR QUESTIONS TO ASK
144
Always take a list of questions with you to each interview.
Most interviewers will be happy to answer questions through-
out the interview, provided that they are relevant to the current
discussion.
Hiring manager:
...and so our work day is typically 8 a.m. to
5 p.m., although of course there are times we need to work longer.
You:
Absolutely, these things can come up. How often is that,
typically?
Some interviewers may not like to have their ﬂow interrupted.
If you ask a question and it seems unwelcome, thank the inter-
viewer for the answer after he’s ﬁnished, check it off your list,
and save the rest for the end.
You need to be careful when asking some of the questions that
relate to you and what you can expect out of the job. You want
to keep emphasis in the interview about the company and how
you’ll help it, but it’s OK to ask about the day-to-day technical
aspects of the job. Absolutely do not ask about salary or bene-
ﬁts. That is for a job offer.
If in your interview a question on your list is answered, then
make a check mark on the list. When the interviewer asks at
the end if you have any questions, you can refer to your list and
ask. If at the end of it all, all your questions have been answered,
you can still recap the questions you had and what the answers
were.
Hiring manager:
Do you have any questions for me?
You:
Let’s see, you talked about the workday being 8 a.m. to
5 p.m. and talked about the beneﬁts program. Does the company
contribute to any open source projects?
Even if all your questions were answered in the course of the
interview, show that you came prepared by recapping your
answered questions.
Don’t have a stock set of questions you ask at every interview.
The questions you ask should reﬂect your interest in the com-
pany and make it clear that you have researched the company
and have really thought about the interview process. For exam-
ple, you might ask, “What kinds of challenges have you had sell-
ing a product that’s available as open source?” or “How do you

PREPARE YOUR QUESTIONS TO ASK
145
sell books to the school market when everyone already knows
about Amazon.com?”
It’s OK to ask questions about things that relate to you, but
also ask some that make it clear that you’re thinking about the
beneﬁts you can bring to the company. If everything you ask is
about vacation and working hours and whether you’re going to
have to wear a tie, it’s going to be off-putting to the interviewer.
Find a balance between your personal concerns and questions
about the company.
Finally, make sure that your list is written down, even printed.
No matter how good your memory is, when you’re on the hot
seat, you’re likely to forget. Don’t be embarrassed to bring
in a sheet of paper with questions. Indeed, it shows your
preparedness.
What Will a Day Be Like?
You want to know what’s going to be expected of you day to day.
Many other questions may build off of this. Two very different
answers from two different programming managers may be as
follows:
Hiring manager:
Every Monday we have our 9-to-11 staff
meeting that all eighteen of us attend. Sometimes it runs into
lunch. It’s where I explain what we’ll be doing the coming week
and lay out performance goals for everyone. Other days, I expect
that everyone is at work at 9 a.m. sharp. Lunch is from 12:30 to
1. End of the day is at 5, and I expect a recap of the day’s events
before everyone leaves.
Or you might get this:
Hiring manager:
Around 9 a.m. most days the project teams
have a ﬁve-minute stand-up meeting to start the day. We’ve found
that this helps everyone get in sync with the people who matter
most, and it helps clear out the morning cobwebs. Different teams
have different styles. Some do pair programming, and some work
solo. It really depends on who’s on the individual team.
The ﬁrst manager is clearly interested in making sure things
run according to a speciﬁc set of rules. He’s very much into
command and control. The second is more likely to let things

PREPARE YOUR QUESTIONS TO ASK
146
happen however they happen. Neither answer is better or worse
other than for what’s important to you.
What Are the Hours Like? How Often Are You Working
Overtime? Weekends?
This can be touchy, because you don’t want to come across like
a lazy, self-serving jerk. However, there’s nothing wrong with
wanting to know what will be expected. It’s best to simply ask
and note the answer, without comment. The time to negotiate
the parts of the job that you don’t like are after you have a job
offer, not before.
Remember that you’re not there to give the interviewer your
problems, so avoid this:
You:
How much overtime is there? I’ve got a bowling league on
Wednesdays, and sometimes I have to pick up my grandma to
take her to get hair done at Field’s on Saturday mornings; she’s
been going there for more than thirty years, you know....
However, there are cases where there may be a deﬁnite need
that must be addressed and should be discussed forthrightly. I
once interviewed a programmer who was an Orthodox Jew and
had to be home on Fridays before sundown (see Section 10.1,
Religious Afﬁliations, on page 198 for details). If he’d turned out
to have been qualiﬁed for the position, I’d have found a way
to work around this scheduling limitation. Different situations
may not have that ﬂexibility.
This is also a great example of being a right ﬁt for the company.
This man’s faith was paramount to him, and a company that
required him to work outside the restrictions of his faith would
not have been right for him.
This is also an example of a rare case where it’s appropriate to
discuss religion in the workplace.
What Sorts of Projects Will I Be Working On? What Do You
See Me Working on My First Week? Month? Year?
You need to know what sorts of things will be expected of you,
to know how it ﬁts your style.

PREPARE YOUR QUESTIONS TO ASK
147
A big red ﬂag is if the manager doesn’t have an answer, like this
manager interviewing a sysadmin:
Hiring manager:
I’m not really sure right now. I know that
Dave needs some help with day-to-day operations over on the
database side, but I haven’t worked that out just yet. He’s doing
Oracle, or maybe it’s DB2 now.
It’s far better to get an answer like this:
Hiring manager:
Right now, I’ve got to get our backups under
control. They’re taking six hours overnight, and when they run
past 8 a.m., it really affects system throughput for all the Oracle
users. So, the ﬁrst thing I need is to have you implement an auto-
mated backup server, probably a jukebox. After that, we need to
upgrade to Oracle 10 for our main development server. I can’t let
you keep this, but here’s a look at our plan for the rest of the ﬁscal
year....
The second manager has told you a lot. She’s on top of the com-
pany’s IT needs, and she has plans for the future. Most impor-
tant, you’re probably not going to be sitting around twiddling
your thumbs on your ﬁrst day. She’s probably a good person to
work for.
Is This a New Position, or Is It Replacing Someone?
If the position is a new one, then there’s growth in the depart-
ment. Follow up by asking how much growth is planned.
If you’d be replacing someone, ask to hear about that person,
such as “Tell me about Dave. What did he bring to the com-
pany?” It should give you some idea of the shoes you’d be likely
to ﬁll if the previous employee was highly regarded or what to
avoid if not. Note that you’re not asking for dirty details of Dave’s
departure but giving the interviewer room to tell if he chooses.
Tell Me About the Team I’d Be Joining
This shows that you’re serious about getting along with others,
as well as giving you background to decide whether it’s a team
you’d want to join. If the hiring manager doesn’t give much of an
idea of how the team interacts, dig further with “Does everyone
eat lunch together” or “Do people on the team hang out after
work?” As always, there’s no right or wrong answer that you

PREPARE TO GET TO THE INTERVIEW
148
want to hear back from the interviewer, but those two questions
will likely get at the core of what you want to know.
Other Questions You May Want to Ask
The previous questions are just a start to give you an idea of
questions that may aid with your assessment of the company
and that help show that you’re engaged in the interview and
think like a businessperson. Here are some others:
• How much interaction with the rest of the company is
there?
• What has turnover been like in the department? The com-
pany?
• What are the future plans for the department? The com-
pany?
• How many positions are you hiring for?
• How do I deal with outside projects?
• Are there prohibitions on outside projects? Is there some
sort of intellectual property agreement?
• Do you use open source software? Do you contribute to
open source? How? Are there restrictions?
• How long have you been here? Tell me about your time at
the company.
• How do you like it here?
• What would you do differently if you could?
• What challenges is the company facing? The department?
• How do you do performance reviews?
• Who do I report to? Who does she report to? What’s the org
chart look like?
7.6
Prepare to Get to the Interview
All your preparation goes down the toilet if you’re late for the
interview. Being late is, for most interviewers, a black mark from
which you are unlikely to recover in the job race. Make sure you
can get to the interview in plenty of time.
First, ﬁnd where you’re going, before the day of the interview, so
you have plenty of time to plan. Take into account all of these
factors when planning your trip.

PREPARE WHAT YOU’RE GOING TO BRING WITH YOU
149
• Is it in an unfamiliar city? Or a part of the city you don’t
know?
• What’s trafﬁc like at that time of day?
• Is there construction?
• Will you have to ﬁnd parking?
• Is it in a big building? You may wind up taking ten minutes
between the ground ﬂoor and the company’s ofﬁces from
elevator congestion.
Coming into the interview saying “Aw, man, sorry I’m late; trafﬁc
was so bad” won’t let you off the hook. The hiring manager can
get to work on time, so you can, too.
The best way to plan is to make a practice trip. If you’re driving,
drive to the interview the day before, at the same time that the
interview will be, so you can see for yourself what trafﬁc and
parking are like.
Leave yourself an extra 25 to 50 percent of your estimated time
to get there as buffer time. Bring a book to read in the parking
lot or a nearby coffee shop in case everything goes right and you
have time to kill. Better still, go over your questions, portfolio,
and notes about the company, so you’re as prepared as can be.
7.7
Prepare What You’re Going to Bring with You
Get ready early for the interview. Don’t sink the interview by
bringing the wrong things and showing up late. Here’s the start
of a checklist:
• At least ﬁve extra copies of your résumé: Make sure it’s the
one that’s tailored to the company. You’ll refer to it during
the interview, and the interviewer may not have his copy
handy. And you’ll want to give one to various people you
meet.
• Pen and paper: You’re going to have to ﬁll out forms, and
you’re going to be taking notes.
• Directions and a map: Even if you drove it already or you’re
sure you know where the place is, bring printed directions
in case you get lost or confused.

PREPARATION IS HALF THE BATTLE
150
• A full tank of gas: You’ll have enough to worry about on
the way to the interview without being concerned about
running on empty.
• Comb, makeup, and so on: For last-minute touch-ups in
the parking lot or the lobby restroom.
• A bottle of water: You may want to bring a small bottle of
water, if you’re discreet about it. Talking for hours tends to
make one thirsty.
This list is not all-inclusive but is meant to give you ideas. It’s
all about being prepared and how you do that best is up to you.
What Not to Bring
Then there are things you’re just not going to have with you,
lest they distract from your all-important business meeting.
• Any other person: This includes parents, spouses, chil-
dren, whatever. The interview is your show, and anyone
else is a distraction, even if you think they’re going to
wait in the lobby. See Section 7.1, Clear Your Schedule,
on page 137 for more.
• Gum or cigarettes: You’re not going to chew gum or smoke.
Even if you think you can get away with a cig outside before
the interview, you’re going to smell like smoke. Don’t do it.
• Food or drink: The last thing you need is coffee spilled
down your shirt or crumbs on your skirt.
• An unsilenced cell phone: Few things are ruder than a
phone call in the middle of the interview. Make sure it’s
silenced, or leave it in the car. What phone call could you
be expecting that’s more important than the job interview?
In all these examples, note that the two goals are to present
yourself the best way possible and shut out all noninterview
distractions.
7.8
Preparation Is Half the Battle
Preparing for the interview is the best way to improve your
chances of landing the job. When you’re well-prepared, you’ll be

PREPARATION IS HALF THE BATTLE
151
calmer, and you’ll enjoy the process more. When you’re calmer,
you’ll do better.
Preparing for the interview also means that you will look like you
prepared for the interview. When you’re fumbling for answers or
paperwork in the interview seat, it leaves a bad impression with
the interviewer.
Finally, after you’ve read the next chapter, Chapter 8, The Inter-
view, on the next page, come back and revisit this chapter in
light of any new ideas you pick up from there. That chapter and
this go hand in hand.

Chapter 8
The Interview
Many people hate job interviews, and you may be one of them.
You feel like you’re on trial, or you’re being interrogated. You’re
afraid of making a mistake. You’re afraid of not knowing the
answer to a question or of giving the wrong answer to a question
and losing the job.
Others feel more nonchalant, where they sit and politely answer
the questions and have a sort of que sera sera attitude. What-
ever happens happens, so there’s really not much to worry
about, right?
Neither approach is a good one.
The hiring manager
wants to hire you.
The hiring manager wants to hire you.
She wants you to be the one candidate
to solve her problems, to end her quest
for the perfect candidate. She wouldn’t
have brought you in if she didn’t think that you could be that
candidate. She would rather being working on projects, helping
the company make money, than interviewing yet another
candidate.
An interview can be as draining on her as it is for you. Each
interview eats up hours of her day, and the hiring process is
expensive. Nobody does it just for fun.
For the nonchalant, leaving your fate in the hands of others
is counterproductive. Not only is it a sad way to go through
life, but it will come through in your interview. No one wants a
programmer, a system administrator, or a tester who is unable
to take charge of the problems facing him. You have to show the

WORK TOWARD YOUR GOAL OF GETTING AN OFFER
153
hiring manager that you are the best person for this job. You
must be an active participant in the interview if you’re to have a
real chance of getting hired.
The interview is your ﬁrst
day of your new job.
No
matter
your
outlook,
always
remember that a job interview is a
business meeting with the potential
employer. Just as your résumé is your
ﬁrst work product for your new employer, your interviews are
your ﬁrst business meetings. They’re also about you, as the
candidate, interviewing your prospective new employer about
things that are important to you. Both parties come to the table
as equals.
When you come to the interview prepared, as discussed in the
previous chapter and ready to answer the tough questions,
which I’ll discuss in the next, you won’t feel so much like you’re
on trial, and you’ll be ready to take control and present the best
face possible.
8.1
Work Toward Your Goal of Getting an Offer
Your primary goal at a job interview is simple: get a job offer,
or move to the next step in the process to getting a job offer.
Chances are you won’t get offered a job on the spot, but you’re
there to convince those you meet that you’re the best ﬁt for the
job. You want to impress them enough that when the decisions
are made in the hours or days after your interview, the decision
is obvious: offer you a job.
Too often, I’ve had candidates sit across my desk as if their
assignment at a job interview is to show up and answer ques-
tions. Certainly, you must show up, and you must answer
questions, but that’s not sufﬁcient. Compare these two goals:
“get a job offer” and “answer questions.” Answering questions is
passive, leaving you in a subservient position. It’s a terrible way
to approach the interview. On the other hand, “get a job offer”
is active and helps you think of yourself on equal footing with
your interviewer. Take charge of what happens, rather than
hoping that Fate smiles on you, allowing you to have gainful
employment.

LISTEN TO EVERYTHING
154
Note that “get a job offer” is not “ﬁnd out details about the
offer.” You’re not there to ﬁgure out what you could make, how
good the beneﬁts are, or where you’re going to sit. Those are for
consideration after you have the offer. You can still ﬁnd things
out along those lines, but they are secondary to getting the
offer. Without a job offer, the questions of pay and beneﬁts are
irrelevant.
8.2
Listen to Everything
There’s an old saying: “Listening is twice as important as speak-
ing, so God gave us two ears and one mouth.” Even if you wind
up doing most of the talking at an interview, the importance of
listening can’t be overstated.
Interviewers ask questions for a reason. What you’re being
asked can tell you more about an organization than hours of
research. At the very least, you have topics to follow up on later
in the interview.
Try to understand the
reason for each
question asked.
If the hiring manager asks about your
skills with the Apache Tomcat appli-
cation server, it’s not because she’s
pulled buzzwords out of a book called
101 Hot Buzzwords to Ask Job Candi-
dates. She has tasks and problems, and she wants you to solve
them, so you’re going to explain how you can help her using
your knowledge of Tomcat, if you can. Then, you’re going to syn-
thesize that knowledge with what you already know about the
organization and can follow up. If it’s a Java shop and they’re
not using Tomcat already, you might ask, “Are you considering
a move to Tomcat?” If it’s not a Java shop, there’s an even wider
range of possible reasons. The key is to engage in discussion
about your skills and the problems you can solve with them.
When future peers ask questions, it’s an opportunity to learn
about the organization in a way that you might not get without
working there. Those peers are wanting to make sure that you’re
not going to cause any problems for them, and their questions
will likely reﬂect that concern. Further, these interviewers are
less likely to be...tactful about their queries, and that openness
can work to your advantage.

LISTEN TO EVERYTHING
155
A panel of peers might probe at your coding style, for exam-
ple. It might be vague, like “Tell us about your coding style,”
or pointed as in “You’re not married to any dogmatic program-
ming style guides, are you?” Clearly, there’s something behind
the question, so answer their question, and ask your own.
Future peer:
What books have been especially helpful to your
programming career?
You:
I’ve learned from and been inﬂuenced by a number of
books, such as Code Complete1 and Perl Best Practices2. I’m
especially a fan of Code Complete’s take on variable naming.
I think every programmer should memorize them. But I’ve also
been around enough to know that once you know the rules, you
learn to know when to break them, because life is never as clean
as we’d like. Have you guys had problems in the past with stylis-
tic clashes on the team?
Future peer:
Yeah, well, let’s just say that there are those on
the team who take a certain book as gospel, no matter what any-
one else says or what the project is.
Others:
<snickers and chuckles>
One little question turns over a rock of dissension and unhap-
piness in the team. Note also that it’s important to turn over
the rock and ask your follow-up question, rather than assum-
ing “Kathy asked about coding style, and the others laughed, so
I bet there’s a problem there.” Don’t assume.
You:
Sounds like that has been a problem. How have you han-
dled it?
Finally, your listening should probably extend to paper, where
you write down notes about what’s been said. You don’t want to
derail a conversation in order to write down complete thoughts.
A simple “MS Ofﬁce remote problems” jotted on your notepad
may remind you later in the day to bring up your expertise in
supporting Microsoft Ofﬁce with a large distributed sales force.
1.
Code Complete [McC04]
2.
Perl Best Practices [Con05]

TREAT EACH PERSON LIKE THE CEO
156
8.3
Treat Each Person Like the CEO
An interview is all about the people. If everything about you
could be expressed on a piece of paper and there was no need
to interact directly with other humans, there would be no need
for this chapter at all.
Pay attention to how you meet people. The old saying of “You
never get a second chance to make a ﬁrst impression” is
repeated for a reason. When you meet someone, remind your-
self “I need to make a good impression.” Shake hands with the
person you’re meeting, unless physical positioning prevents it,
such as with a receptionist sitting behind a desk. Introduce
yourself by both ﬁrst and last name, and explain why you’re
there.
Someone in the lobby:
May I help you? You look like you’re
waiting for someone.
You:
Yes, I’m Susan Candidate. I’m here to meet with Mike
Manager.
This goes for anyone you’re introduced to. If it’s obvious what’s
going on, like you’re clearly there for an interview, say some-
thing about what you’ve seen so far.
Peter Programmer:
[Sticking his head in manager’s ofﬁce]
Mike, just wanted to say that we’ve started the test load on
Muskrat.
Mike Manager:
Hey, Peter, glad you’re here. Susan is inter-
ested in the database administrator position, and we were just
talking about your project.
You:
[standing] Hi, Peter, I’m Susan Candidate. [shaking Peter’s
hand] Mike was saying that Muskrat has some messy legacy
data.
These ad hoc introductions are common. Even if you’re only
talking to a single manager, you’ll run into many other people
along the way. You might talk to the receptionist, ﬁll out forms
for someone in human resources, and get seen by a half dozen
people as you walk to the manager’s ofﬁce. At some point, some-
one might interrupt the interview to ask a time-critical question.

TREAT EACH PERSON LIKE THE CEO
157
How to Shake Hands
Shake hands with someone by grasping their hand in
yours, your thumb webbing against his or her thumb
webbing. Squeeze ﬁrmly while you raise and lower your
hand once or twice. Then let go. All the while, you
should be looking your shaking partner in the eye.
Note that “ﬁrm” does not mean “crushing grip,” nor
does it mean “dainty,” “limp,” or, worst of all, “dead ﬁsh.”
Women, especially, don’t offer the ends of your ﬁngers
to be squeezed passively. Be a partner in the hand-
shake.
If you’re seated, stand up to shake someone’s hand.
Traditionally, women have stayed seated to shake
hands, but there’s no reason not to stand. Stay stand-
ing until the other person has taken a seat or left.
Later, the manager might call someone else in to discuss a facet
of the job.
Every person you meet
could make or break
your chance of getting
the job.
Every one of those people is effectively
an interviewer. Each person will form
an opinion about you and about how
you act or speak, and it may reﬂect on
you later in the process, either posi-
tively or negatively. You may not have
any way of knowing who these people you meet are. That guy in
sweats stopping your interviewer for a quick question in the hall
just might be the company president. You have to treat everyone
as if they could help or hinder your job search.
One other note on getting along with others: don’t swear. As you
get into the interview, building rapport with your interviewer or
others in the company, conversation will become more relaxed.
Maybe you’ll be exchanging horror stories with the manager,
and he’ll drop a few four-letter words in his conversation.3 Don’t
think “This guy’s cool; I don’t have to watch myself” and that it’s
3.
There’s an old maxim that says “Profanity is the one language all program-
mers know.”

A WALK THROUGH THE INTERVIEW
158
OK to start using profanity. Not everyone you meet with may feel
the same way. Stay professional.
8.4
A Walk Through the Interview
There are as many different interviews as there are companies
that hire people. Your interview might be one-on-one, as part of
a panel, over the phone, or at a coffee shop. Certain principles
apply no matter what. Let’s walk through the interview with
these universal principles in mind.
Arriving at the Interview
Arrive at the interview at least ten minutes early, pen in hand.
Chances are good that you’ll ﬁll out an application or other
paperwork before you meet the hiring manager. Allow time for
this paperwork before the scheduled start time.
More important, being late for an interview is just about an
unforgivable sin. The interviewer’s time is valuable, and arriving
late is an insult to the person who’s there on time. You’re say-
ing “My time is more valuable than yours.” Arrive early to make
sure this doesn’t happen.
Of course, “showing up” means “showing up prepared, both
mentally and in what you bring with you,” as discussed in
Section 7.7, Prepare What You’re Going to Bring with You, on
page 149.
The Receptionist
As you walk in, get a feel for your surroundings. Is there expen-
sive art on the walls in a well-appointed lobby? Is it a startup in
a cheap ofﬁce storefront with beanbag chairs on the ﬂoor?
Find the receptionist. If there’s not a dedicated person perform-
ing the role of a receptionist, the ﬁrst person you see will effec-
tively be your receptionist. Note that I said the ﬁrst person, not
the ﬁrst woman. If you bypass a group of men to speak to a
woman, you’ll be remembered but not positively.
You must be unfailingly pleasant and polite to this person,
because there are no second chances at a ﬁrst impression.

A WALK THROUGH THE INTERVIEW
159
Chances are the receptionist will have feedback about you to
pass on to whomever is involved with hiring you.
After every interview, after the candidate has left the building, I
immediately ask the company receptionist for her thoughts, as
well as opinions from anyone else he may have met.
Initial Introductions
After a while in the lobby waiting patiently, it’s time to meet the
interviewer. This is where the real work begins.
When you ﬁrst meet the interviewer, introduce yourself and
shake hands if offered. There may be a bit of small talk, and
you should ﬁnd out what you’re going to be doing at the inter-
view and who you’ll be meeting with.
Interviewer:
Hi, Steve? I’m Todd Trainer, and I’m one of the
recruiting specialists in HR. I trust you found us OK?
You:
Hi, Todd, I’m glad to meet you. Thanks for taking the time
to meet with me today. The directions on the website were great,
and I checked Google Maps as backup. I take it I’ll be meeting
with Mr. Weston a little later?
Interviewer:
Yes, the way we like to do things is that you and
I will be getting some paperwork done, and I’ll explain a little
about Conglomco. Then I’ll take you to meet with some of Bob’s
staff, and at 11 you’ll be meeting with Bob in his ofﬁce.
Note that everything is ﬁne, no matter what. Do not give into
the temptation to gripe to say, “Yeah, the directions were ﬁne;
I’m just glad I got here through all the trafﬁc!” Nobody wants a
griper, even in tiny doses.
As you’re being told about the plans for the interview, don’t be
afraid to write them down. You’re likely to forget something, and
it’s better to be able to refer to “Mr. Trainer”4 instead of “the man
who met me out in the lobby, from HR I think?” Keeping notes is
a good sign, because it says you’re actually interested in what’s
happening and doing a good job at it.
4.
Always refer to each person as Mr. or Ms. Lastname unless the person specif-
ically says to call him or her by another name.

A WALK THROUGH THE INTERVIEW
160
On the other hand, writing everything down can come across
as antisocial or more concerned with the notes than with the
conversation. You want to take notes, not court testimony. Also,
it’s polite to ask whether anyone objects to your taking notes.
Opening the Interview
The interviewer will probably open with a little background
about the company, explain what they do, and maybe discuss
the industry if it’s new to you. He’ll talk about the department’s
role and responsibilities in the company. Listen. Listen very
carefully, because this is what you must address. Make regular
notes so that you don’t forget what it is you wanted to discuss
or ask about and so that you don’t spend all your brain cells
remembering what you wanted to say, instead of using them to
listen to what is being said.
The interviewer will probably give you a chance to discuss your-
self, your history, and your skills in an introductory way. He
may say “How’s the job search going?” or “You’ve got a lot of
different experience here,” or even leave it wide open with “So,
tell me about yourself.” This is where you lay out a brief history
of yourself, highlighting the most important skills you offer, as
they relate to the company.
Interviewer:
...so with the offshore competition, management
is watching costs like crazy, but the merger still leaves us almost
doubling the number of users we have to support. But enough
about us, tell me about you.
You:
Well, after I graduated from Northwestern with a degree
in computer science and a minor in business, I spent a few years
working various system administration jobs, getting my feet wet,
and getting exposed to as many different operating environments
as I could. Those are the bottom three jobs on my résumé. The
last four years I’ve been working for Parsleytronic, working on
integrating Windows and Solaris environments. Integrating the
sales and engineering sides of Parsleytronic, with only a minor
increase in the IT budget, sounds a lot like what you’re going
through with your merger. How has the merging of the companies’
IT departments been going?
Note how you’re answering the question and showing your past
experience with something similar to the job you’re applying for,

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
161
if not exactly the same. You’ve recapped the high points of your
résumé, even though they’re on the résumé already. Maybe he
never noticed that minor in business before. Maybe your résumé
wasn’t clear enough that you were integrating Windows and
Solaris. The recap helps make sure your points are made.
Somehow you want to tie yourself to the needs of the company
and the hiring manager, even if only to just show interest in
what’s going on. Maybe your background isn’t as good a ﬁt as
in the previous example, but you’re not out of luck.
You:
...and then I’ve been at ShmooCo since 2004 working
on engineering applications for brake subsystems. I’ve certainly
had my share of challenges in my past, but your merging of the
departments sounds like a big one. I’d like to hear more about
how that’s going.
I’m sure there’s a skeptic reading this saying “Boy, that would
make you sound like a total suck-up.” It would if it were insin-
cere, but it won’t be. You’re going to be very interested on your
ﬁrst day of paid employment, right? So, be interested right now
at your ﬁrst meeting with your potential new boss. If you’re not
interested in the hiring manager’s company, his problems, or
his concerns, then you’re in the wrong interview.
We’ll delve further into how to open the interview in Section 9.4,
Tell Me About Yourself , on page 179.
8.5
Sell Yourself by Telling Stories
Getting the job offer requires selling yourself. It’s the active part
of “get a job offer,” and it’s what can make the difference between
getting the job you want and losing out to someone who took the
time to do the right kind of selling.
Selling yourself isn’t evil, it isn’t creepy, and you don’t have
to feel like a used-car salesman. It’s just putting forth the
information about yourself that the interviewer may not know.
If the interviewer never asks about your hot skills in auto-
mated testing, project estimation, or administering web server
clusters, it’s your responsibility to bring them up.

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
162
Bring up skills that show
you in your best light.
Don’t assume that because a given skill
is listed on your résumé that the inter-
viewer will delve into it in the interview.
The interviewer has probably not mem-
orized the entire thing, no matter how interested she is in you.
In fact, the things that stick out in her mind are the items that
she sees as important, and you may be able to raise awareness
of the other good aspects of your background.
The core of selling yourself is telling stories, preferably spe-
ciﬁc,
quantiﬁable
stories
that
don’t
ﬁt
on
your
résumé.
Instead of answering questions as simple, matter-of-fact yes-no
exchanges, like so:
Interviewer:
Do you know Perl’s testing framework?
Weak answer:
Sure, we use it all the time.
turn the question into a jumping point for you to tell a story
about the topic:
Strong answer:
Yes, very well. I started out using Test::More
when I was writing my own CPAN modules, just testing the
module I’d written. From there I wrote my own testing add-on,
Test::Wango. Now, we use the Test::More framework and the TAP
protocol for testing about one third of our internal applications,
and the plan is to be at 100 percent by the end of the year.
The latter answer shows the depth of your knowledge and opens
up a world of discussion. If nothing else, it gives you the oppor-
tunity to teach the interviewer something he didn’t know him-
self. Maybe he’d never heard of TAP or never realized that you
could test more than modules with Test::More.
He wouldn’t have asked, “Do you know the TAP protocol?”
because he didn’t even know it existed. You may have just
shown the interviewer that you are even better at a given area
than he or his current staff are, and that’s a great position to
be in.
The latter answer also gives you a chance to show your enthu-
siasm for the topic at hand. A good manager loves to see pas-
sion and excitement for a topic, and that ﬁrst bland answer just
doesn’t expose any. Selling yourself is about answering more

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
163
Don’t Play the RTFM Game with Your Résumé
RTFM means “Read the Freaking Manual,” often said to
someone online who has asked a question where an
answer to that question happens to exist elsewhere. It’s
an attitude that will crush your chances at getting a
good job, as well as getting along with others.
Tech people often think “If someone asks me about
what has already been written, it’s an imposition or
even an insult,” They’re not afraid to let that attitude
show. The thing is, people will see you as a jerk, which
is the last thing you want.
Maybe an interviewer will ask “You know Oracle, right?”
If your response is “Yeah, it’s right there on my résumé,”
you’re saying “RTFM.” RTFM assumes that the person is
stupid or lazy. Your interviewer is neither.
Maybe he just missed the Oracle part. Maybe he barely
skimmed your résumé. Maybe you forgot to put it in
there yourself. Putting him on the defensive by pointing
out that he missed it serves no one.
You were probably asked “You know Oracle, right?” as
an open-ended entry into a conversation about your
Oracle skills. Assume this is the case. Come back with
“Yes, I’ve worked with Oracle back at Yoyodyne. We
had quite a data warehouse going, although we had
some startup problems. Boy, I could tell some horror sto-
ries, but I learned a lot. Are you looking to start working
with Oracle?”
It’s not an annoyance; it’s an opportunity to sell yourself.
than the simple question with the information that your inter-
viewer really wants to know, even if he doesn’t know it at the
time he asks.
Ask Questions
Not only does your boss-to-be need to know whether you’re a
ﬁt for the company, but it’s just as important that you get to
know the company and your boss-to-be so that you can decide
whether the job is a ﬁt for you. You should ask questions of

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
164
your interviewer throughout the interview process, when it feels
natural in the course of conversation. The questions you ask
should also help show your interest in the job.
• “You’ve said you’re moving to all Perl from PHP for your
web applications. Why is that, and how is that conversion
going?”
• “It seemed pretty crazy out in the programmer ofﬁce when
you showed me around. Is this common? Is there a big
project wrapping up?”
• “I notice some books on Oracle on your shelves, but you’re
a PostgreSQL shop. Are you looking to convert?”
Of course, you’ll have a list of questions that you wrote before
the interview, as discussed in Section 7.5, Prepare Your Ques-
tions to Ask, on page 143. If you can work them in conversa-
tionally, then mark them off your list as you go. Don’t be embar-
rassed about having a list.
Do not bring up salary or beneﬁts in an interview. That is for
the job offer stage and will be discussed at that point. If the
interviewer brings up salary or beneﬁts, then follow his lead, but
don’t probe yourself. Leave discussion of these crucial matters
for the offer stage. Your job is to get the offer, not discuss what
an offer might contain.
I can’t emphasize enough how important it is to leave money
out of your interview process. I know it can be aggravating and
your patience may be thin and you really want to know how
much you’re going to make, but don’t give in. Don’t try to say, “I
don’t want to waste anyone’s time here, so how much is this job
paying?” It won’t work. At the very least, you’ll sound like the
money is more important than the work.
Handle Technical Questions
The technical questions will probably be the easiest part of the
interview, because they’re the most easily answered. Either you
know the answer or you don’t. When asked about a technical
issue, you usually don’t want to answer with a simple “yes” or
“no,” because that’s probably not what the interviewer is looking
for. You also want to take the time to try to sell yourself a bit.

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
165
Interviewer:
Do you know any Ruby?
Weak answer:
Yeah, some.
Strong answer:
Some. Back at Peekax Research, we had a
little project to decide on a new web framework. I was on the
team looking into Rails and got pretty well immersed into some
of the dark corners of Ruby. We went with J2EE, but I’d do more
Ruby work in a heartbeat.
You can also see how more detailed answers help eliminate any
confusion. The simple answer without evidence is open to misin-
terpretation. Chances are that what you consider knowing Ruby
“some” will not be what the interviewer thinks. Even if the ques-
tion is about a skill that isn’t core to your job, which is likely
the case for such a simple question, you don’t want to have the
problem in the future of misconceptions about your knowledge:
“What do you mean you don’t know how yield works? You said
you knew Ruby!”
As you tell the story about the work, take responsibility for what
you did. Don’t be vague and mushy about the work that you did
and the roles you played. You are selling yourself speciﬁcally,
not the place that you worked for.
Interviewer:
What work have you done in Ruby?
Weak answer:
At my current job, we’ve developed four basic
internal CRUD applications in Ruby on Rails, and we even pub-
lished a package of math functions to RubyForge.
Strong answer:
I was on a team of three developers who
created four CRUD applications in Rails. We’d been using .NET,
but I convinced my boss to let us give Ruby a try. I also went
through some hoops to get management to let us release one of
our math libraries as a gem on RubyForge. It’s called Arithmegoo,
and it’s had a few hundred downloads so far.
Note the strength of taking responsibility, of saying “I did this.”
Even as part of a team, you are not an amorphous blob of work-
ers. There are actions that you have taken.
Note also the difference between giving a vague overview and
telling a story with details. Details make the story come alive.
Details give authority to your words. Details engage the listener.

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
166
Be sure to listen to and pay attention to the interviewer. She
may not be looking for a long answer. If your tales of how many
gems you’ve published on RubyForge are making the interviewer
get that faraway look as she loses interest, cut them short. Of
course, this is also true of the entire interview process.
Sometimes the answer to the question is a “no,” and you need to
basically say that. You never want to pretend you know things
that you don’t, but you don’t have to just say, “No, I don’t know
about that.” Here are three responses that are better than “no,”
in order of preference.
1. Discuss something you’ve done similar. “I haven’t used
LDAP, but back in 2006 at Yoyodyne, I set up and adminis-
tered Active Directory for a 2,500-person company.” Make
sure you don’t tack on something like “... and LDAP’s
pretty much the same as Active Directory,” with the impli-
cation “If you can do LDAP, you can do Active Directory.”
Maybe the interviewer sees LDAP as vastly inferior to Active
Directory. Just provide the facts, not the value judgments.
2. Show that you’re at least familiar with the name. “No,
I haven’t. Are you doing some sort of enterprise-wide
directory integration?” You’re showing that you have some
understanding of how it’s used, and you’re getting more
information. It may turn out that you have a different,
similar experience and can turn this into answer 1.
3. Ask what it is and how it’s used. “I’m sorry, no, I haven’t
even heard the term. What is LDAP, and how are you
using it?” You’ll show interest in learning more, and may
ﬁnd out that it’s similar to something you’ve done before
and can upgrade your answer to answer 2.
Please don’t use the cliché “No, I don’t, but I’m a quick learner!”
It’s good to try to turn a negative into a positive, but “I’m a quick
learner” says nothing.5 Use one of these three answers.
How to Use Your Portfolio
If you’ve created a portfolio of work, as discussed in Section 7.4,
Prepare a Relevant Portfolio, on page 138, use it throughout the
5.
See Appendix A, on page 246, for more of these clunkers.

SELL YOURSELF BY TELLING STORIES
167
Don’t Panic!
Don’t think of each question as a question that you’re
doomed for not knowing, to be ﬂung from the bridge for
not knowing the airspeed velocity of an unladen swal-
low. I once asked a candidate, out of the blue, if he
knew anything about LDAP. I thought he was going to
have a heart attack as he stammered out his “Uh, uh,
no, but, uh, I can learn pretty quick!”
Chances are if you’ve been called in for an interview,
you’ve got the minimal skill set that they’re looking for.
interview but carefully. It’s a tool to help explain and illustrate
but not the focus. You and your skills are the focus.
Remember that you are going to leave the portfolio behind at
the interview. If she wants to mark up or make notes on your
portfolio, that’s ﬁne, because it’s hers to keep. It’s well worth it
to be able to have this exchange:
Interviewer:
Now,
I
see
here
[pointing
with
pen]
that
you’re...oh, wait, can I write on this?
You:
Absolutely, I brought it for you to keep.
The best way to use your portfolio is as an illustrative tool to
help show details about projects and technologies you’ve worked
with.
Interviewer:
Have you had to maintain combined Windows
and Linux networks?
You:
Absolutely. Most of the time it’s been working on exist-
ing networks, helping get them in to shape, checking for security
holes, and so on. Once I had the luxury of designing a homo-
geneous network [ﬂipping to “Network diagrams” in your portfo-
lio], and I took the lessons from the previous years’ work and
designed this [showing the diagram to the interviewer].
As you show your portfolio to the interviewer, keep a running
checklist, on paper or in your head, of which areas you’ve had
to show. Chances are you won’t have an opportunity to show off
everything in the portfolio, so you’ll want to know what else you

SELL YOURSELF BY DOING THE JOB
168
deﬁnitely want to draw attention to. If it has to wait until the
end of the interview, that’s OK. You can work them into your
closing questions and comments.
You:
A couple items we didn’t discuss in my portfolio that might
be of interest are this database abstraction framework I created
and some of the feedback forms I got from a training class I
taught. You mentioned training problems brieﬂy, and I thought
that might interest you. I brought this copy of the portfolio to leave
here.
Wrapping up is covered in more detail in a moment.
8.6
Sell Yourself by Doing the Job
The best way to make an impression in an interview is to actu-
ally do the job that needs to be done and show that you can do
it well. It’s not always possible, but when you can, the payoff is
huge.
Phil Morrison tells of an interview where he clearly demon-
strated his expertise and landed the job.
The Whiteboard Solution
by Phil Morrison, system administrator, Milton, Florida
I’d been approached by a recruiter for a position, and the
recruiter came to the interview with me. There were six people in
the interview, asking me very speciﬁc questions on how I would
handle merging another company’s Active Directory. It was
obvious that they were about to undergo such a task and did not
know where to begin. I had just recently been involved in a
massive AD migration and asked them whether they would like
for me to draw out a possible design on the whiteboard.
I drew out how I would set up the AD along with child domains,
site connectors, and so on. This brought more questions, and I
answered and added more detail to the drawing, explaining why
this was the best practice, positioning them for future expansion.
They asked whether I had any experience in delivering software
via GPO to the desktops. I smiled and outlined the three tiers of
software. I explained the concept of “thirty minutes ﬁx or reload,”
the motto at my last job. I showed how they could build images
that could rebuild a desktop along with all the software, detailed
out roaming proﬁles and redirected document shares so that

SELL YOURSELF BY DOING THE JOB
169
literally within thirty minutes they could rebuild a desktop with
no data loss. I told how it could be automated so no technician
would have to go onsite.
I was drawing like mad, mostly with my back to the room, adding
things as the questions were asked and explaining each
component. When I was done I turned and caught most of the
room looking in dazed fascination at the board (all except the
recruiter who was grinning like a Cheshire cat).
I asked if they had any additional questions, and they all shook
their heads slowly while looking at the whiteboard, then me, and
then back at the whiteboard.
They started asking me the HR-type questions, like when I could
start if I was chosen. While I explained I could start tomorrow,
someone noticed that the recruiter was erasing the drawings from
the white board and said, “Hey, we need those!”
The recruiter answered, “No, what you need is Phil’s expertise.”
Afterward, we said our goodbyes, and the recruiter and I headed
off to have lunch and discuss the interview. As we are buckling
our seatbelts, his phone rang, and it is the client saying that they
want me to start the next day.
Note how Phil demonstrated his expertise to the interviewers.
He was careful to not overstep his position as a guest but rather
asked if he could provide input. He demonstrated that he knew
how to solve their problem, the speciﬁc problem they were fac-
ing. He clearly explained the solution to the problem in a way
that everyone in the room could appreciate, if not understand.
You won’t always stumble into a scenario like Phil’s, with a prob-
lem begging for a solution. You’ll have to make your own luck.
With a little research and understanding of the company and
your discussions during the interview, you can create your own
scenario that lets the hiring manager see, in a concrete way,
that you can do the job.
During the interview, ask about the problems that the company
or the department is having, related to the job you’d like to be
doing. Here are some examples:
• Are their projects behind schedule?
• Are daily server operations taking up too much time?
• Should trafﬁc to the website be higher?

CLOSING THE INTERVIEW
170
Then, turn the interview into a working meeting where you dis-
cuss the problem and your solutions for it, just like Phil did. If
you can tie it back to something you’ve done in the past, even
better. You’ll be pointing at a past success.
Find out what’s been tried so far to address the problem. Ask
what is keeping it from being dealt with now. Is it stafﬁng? Bud-
get? Just popped up out of nowhere? Work these concerns into
your solution.
Describe a plan for addressing the problem the hiring manager
has, on a whiteboard or on paper, so that the two of you can
discuss it and he can see it. That’s what made Phil’s story so
effective. Seeing is more powerful than hearing.
Present the solution as something you are willing to take
responsibility for. Make it clear that you would take care of it
if given the chance. You want the manager to be able to see that
hiring you would get this speciﬁc problem handled. You’d be
going from someone who could do a job to someone who could
fulﬁll a speciﬁc role in the enterprise.
For
more
on
this
technique,
check
out
Ask
the
Head-
hunter [Cor97].
8.7
Closing the Interview
As you get to the end of your interview, you have three crucial
steps:
1. Ask ﬁnal questions.
2. Ask for the job.
3. Ask for next steps.
Ask Final Questions
The interviewer will probably ask whether you have any other
questions. Go through your list, and ask those that you haven’t
been able to ask conversationally. If all the questions have been
answered, then brieﬂy recap what they were as go through the
list to show that you did indeed bring questions with you.
You:
Let’s see...we talked about the network infrastruc-
ture...talked about how I would be allowed to work on open

CLOSING THE INTERVIEW
171
source projects...reporting structure...no, that about covers it,
thanks.
Ask for the Job
Now you must ask for the job, explicitly. It may feel awkward
to do this or seem like it’s pushy or egotistical to come out and
say, “I want this job,” but you must do it. You can blow an oth-
erwise fantastic interview by seeming indifferent to the prospect
of working for the company.
You:
I wanted to thank you for the time today, and I’m very
excited about the prospects. This is a job I’d like to work on I
think I can bring a lot to help the project management team, and
working in the sporting goods industry would be a dream for me.
Do not shirk this all-important wrap-up step. Don’t delude
yourself into thinking “Of course I want the job, or else I
wouldn’t be here.” What you see as obvious may look like indif-
ference to the interviewer. Don’t worry about being too enthusi-
astic by asking to move forward. Part of what you’re being inter-
viewed for is your enthusiasm and interest in the company, the
department, and the team. Enthusiasm is a huge asset.
Asking for the job also tells them that even after all you’ve
found out about the company and the job, you’re still interested
in moving forward. An interviewer might well think that you
don’t seem like you’re interested, which is tragic for you if you
actually are.
If you’re not comfortable with the idea of expressing your inter-
est in such a straightforward way, practice. Write a little prac-
tice sentence, and practice with someone else. Role-play it. Do
whatever it takes to get you to be able to show that interest.
There is one time when it is OK to not ask for the job, and that
is if you’re not really interested in the job. You don’t want to lie
and pretend that you’re more interested than you really are.
Ask About Follow-Up
Finally, ask about follow-up. Ask about what the next steps in
the process are and when you can expect them to happen. It
can be very simple.

PHONE INTERVIEWS
172
You:
So, what are our next steps? What timeframe are we look-
ing at?
Interviewer:
Well, we’ve got a another week of interviews, and
then we look at them as a group, so probably the next two weeks
you should hear from us.
You:
That sounds ﬁne. If I don’t hear back by the 18th, may I
call you? Is this number on your card best?
This part is purely for your beneﬁt, so you may omit it if you
don’t really care about waiting. However, if you’re like most peo-
ple, after a while you’ll wonder “Have they forgotten me? Are
they just taking a long time?” There’s no such thing as a “usual”
amount of time it takes to hear back, so it’s up to you to ask
before you leave. This is also a good time to ask for a business
card, if you haven’t already been offered one, to make sure you
have all the contact information you need.
Debrief Yourself
The interview process isn’t over when you shake the inter-
viewer’s hand and walk out the door. You need to debrief and
follow up.
After the interview, review your notes. Note important things
that were said, impressions you had of people there, and what
you thought you did right or wrong. Most of all, get your gen-
eral impression of the job and the company so you can evaluate
whether it’s some place you’d want to work. You’re not trying to
make a decision at this point, but you want to get these facts
and ideas down on paper while they’re still fresh in your head.
Write down everything, even if you think it’s not that impor-
tant. You may be surprised at how glad you are for a snippet of
information a week or two down the road.
Tell someone else about your interview. It could be your spouse,
a friend, or even your parents. Talking about it will bring more
ideas forward, and you’ll want to jot these down as well.
8.8
Phone Interviews
When you’re interviewing by phone, your interviewer can’t see
you, so keep in mind a few techniques that will help you stand
out to your interviewer.

PHONE INTERVIEWS
173
The Phone Screen
The phone screen is a sort of mini-interview usually used to do a
basic check of your skills and background before taking the time
and expense of having a face-to-face interview at the company.
Usually it will involve just one person from the company talking
to you on the phone, one-on-one. The goal is to spend ﬁve or ten
minutes up front before committing to a bigger process.
Typically, the manager or HR representative will ask a few basic
questions like “You say on your résumé that you know Java.
How long have you been using it?” and “Which Linux distribu-
tions are you most familiar with?” They won’t be too tough, and
they are usually simple statements of fact.
Even though it’s called a “phone screen,” don’t be fooled. It’s an
interview, so treat it with the gravity and seriousness of a full
face-to-face interview, maybe even more. One slip or one snarky
comment can doom your chances of moving forward with an
interview. I once called to do a phone screen and set up an
interview time with a candidate who let me know how disgusted
he was with his current co-workers. I never set up the interview
with him.
Take the phone screen seriously. If at all possible, you should
be in a quiet room away from distractions. Have someone take
care of the kids, so you’re not having to hiss “Shhh, Daddy’s on
the phone” at them.
When you’re on the phone, stand. You’ll project more energy
than if you’re sitting.
The phone screen is a great tool. It’s a low-cost, low-commitment
way to test the waters of compatibility. Consider it a rapid pro-
totype of the full-blown interview.
The Telephone Interview
The telephone interview is a regular interview, but it takes place
at a distance, instead of face-to-face. It is nothing like a phone
screen, other than happening to be conducted over the phone.
The biggest challenge on a phone interview is that neither you
nor those you’ll be interviewing with can see facial expressions
of the other parties involved. Seeing people’s faces is a big part of
listening, and without that ability everyone is at a disadvantage.

THE END OF YOUR FIRST DAY
174
When you’re having a phone interview, spend more time being
explicitly clear about what you’re saying. It may be useful at
times to restate the speaker’s words to make sure that you
understand what’s being said.
You:
So, to summarize, your project estimates are not very
good, and you’d like those improved, but your number-one goal
for this project manager position is to improve visibility and com-
munications with upper management. Is that about right?
Interviewer:
Yeah, that’s about it.
You:
Well, I understand the need for visibility. Management
needs to know how projects are going and have quite a bit of
experience in creating project dashboards....
Avoid making jokes in any part of the interview process, because
of the ease with which you can inadvertently offend or insult
someone. This is especially true with the telephone interview.
It’s hard to tell what’s a joke over the phone, and you don’t
want to be misinterpreted. Smileys were invented because the
lack of facial expressions in email makes it hard to tell where
jokes are. You don’t have smileys on the phone.
Don’t try to have it in a Starbucks or while you’re watching the
kids or in an empty conference room at your current employer
on your lunch hour. Use a landline instead of a cell phone, so
you don’t get a dropped call. Don’t have the interview at your
current job, even if you have a private ofﬁce.
As with the phone screen, set aside time and space. Prepare for
the phone interview like you would any other interview. Assem-
ble your materials, like a copy of your résumé to refer to. Be at
a net-connected computer, but close your IM, IRC, and Twitter
clients. Give the interview your full attention.
8.9
The End of Your First Day
There, that wasn’t so bad, was it? Interviewing can be a chore,
or it can be a joy—an exploratory look at another company or
another culture. Granted, having your future employment on
the line can add a bit stress, but if you keep the right perspec-
tive, it need not be so bad.

THE END OF YOUR FIRST DAY
175
Remember, it’s your ﬁrst meeting with your new employer.
You’re there to show what a good job you can do at her com-
pany, in her department, on her problems. You want to help,
and you’re going to show what a good job you can do.
Now that you know how to handle the interview, move on to
preparing to answer tough interview questions.

Chapter 9
Handling the Tough
Interview Questions
Job interview–related threads on sites like Slashdot1 and Red-
dit2 are ﬁlled with comments from disgruntled tech workers who
ﬁnd stupid and offensive any question not directly related to job
performance. These commenters will accuse managers of ask-
ing these tough questions only because they’re in one of the
aforementioned books.
Although it’s possible that your questioner is a clueless robot,
chances are that the questions being asked have proven to ﬁnd
effective answers in the past for her. Put yourself in her shoes.
She has to ﬁgure out whether you are technically competent to
do the job and if you’re going to ﬁt with the rest of the depart-
ment and the company. Your technical competence is relatively
easy to assess compared to how well you’re going to play with
others.
As you read this chapter, step back from your position as inter-
viewee, and see these questions through the eyes of the inter-
viewer. Try to understand how they’re speciﬁcally being used
so that you can aim your answer at what the interviewer really
wants to know. Once you understand the purpose, answering
becomes much easier.
1.
http://slashdot.org
2.
http://reddit.com

NEVER GIVE B.S. ANSWERS
177
9.1
Never Give B.S. Answers
There are hundreds of books on interviewing, many speciﬁcally
providing lists of “tough interview questions and the answers
that will get you the job,” or similar breathless claims. I’ve read
through at least a dozen while writing this book, and I haven’t
seen one yet that didn’t advocate giving a B.S. answer at least
once.
These books all espoused reasonable principles, like never being
negative and not coming across like a complainer, and I can’t
argue with any of that. However, when it gets down to lying, the
interviewer is going to know. For example, in one book I won’t
name, I found this example, paraphrased:
Interviewer:
Tell me about a decision you made that your boss
disagreed with.
Bad:
When I gave notice at Yoyodyne, my boss didn’t want me
to leave.
The answer is obviously B.S., even if it’s factually true. It’s not
what the interviewer wanted to know, and you know it. It’s also
disrespectful, because it treats the interview like a game, where
the interviewee tries to outfox the interviewer. It deliberately
ignores what the interviewer is asking for. The interviewer is
not going to think “Wow, if that’s all they disagreed with, this
guy must be good!” In fact, any good interviewer is going to
say “Yes, of course he didn’t, but how about another example
besides that?” Curses, your memorized clever answer has been
foiled!
The key to any question is to answer truthfully, from the gut,
with an eye to how to help the manager and the company.
Working to help the manager and the company will be your job
if you’re hired, and so too it is your job now. Prevarication or
shading of the truth will only come back to hurt both of you.
9.2
Never Complain or Disrespect
Whatever comes out at an interview, do not gripe, and do not
disrespect anyone. If you badmouth your boss, your hiring man-
ager has to assume you’ll be badmouthing her before long, too.

KNOW THE RED FLAGS THE INTERVIEWER WANTS TO UNCOVER
178
Even if you complain only about your current co-workers, you
mark yourself as a whiner.
Gripers and whiners are toxic to a team and time-consuming to
maintain. Any good manager will avoid them. Many of the ques-
tions in here are designed to dig at your tendency to complain.
It doesn’t matter how justiﬁed it is or if you say, “I don’t like to
complain about my co-workers, but....” If you’re going to com-
plain about other people, you might as well end the interview
right there.
When you do answer questions that involve something negative
(your greatest weakness, a project that went bad, a jerk on the
team), include a follow-up explanation about how you worked
to improve the situation.
9.3
Know the Red Flags the Interviewer Wants to Uncover
In addition to making sure you have the technical chops to do
the work, the hiring manager wants to ﬁnd out whether you’re
going to be a liability to hire. She’s looking for warning signs
that you could be a big risk. Many of the questions here try to
ﬁnd that out in order to give you a hole to fall into. Make sure
you don’t fall into the traps, and work to reassure the manager
that you’re not a risk.
Many of these dangers go together or are opposites of each other.
As you read through this list of traits the interviewer is trying to
avoid, ask yourself whether you ﬁt either extreme.
• Candidate needs constant direction? Or cannot take direc-
tion from superiors?
• Doesn’t take responsibility for actions and decisions? Or
tries to take on too much responsibility or too many tasks?
• Refuses to ask for help? Or unable to work without con-
stant hand-holding?
• Is a know-it-all? Or knows too little and is dangerous?
• Belligerent? Or wimpy?
• Blames others?
• Doesn’t work on self-improvement?
• Gets bored easily?
• Uncommitted to the job?

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
179
Recognize yourself, even a little? Work on changing those neg-
ative behaviors in the long-term, but also beware of questions
that seek to uncover these ﬂaws.
9.4
The Tough Questions
The questions here are not meant to include all the tough ques-
tions you’ll be asked. Indeed, the intent is to get you thinking
about how you discuss the job and your qualiﬁcations, instead
of what practiced speeches you can prepare.
Again, remember that the job interview is a meeting on your ﬁrst
day of the job. Your primary focus is what you can bring to the
hiring manager and the company.
Tell Me About Yourself
This is the most important, and potentially toughest, question
you’ll be asked. If you’re prepared for only one question, make
it this one. All the other questions may or may not get asked,
but this one is in every interview, even if not in these words. It’s
the classic opener that gives room for you to explain all the good
things about you.
It’s an essay question, not multiple choice. You’re being asked
to talk extemporaneously about who you are and what you can
offer to the listener. It’s an answer you must plan.
This is the worst answer, the one that says you haven’t prepared
at all:
Interviewer:
Tell me about yourself.
Bad:
What do you want to know?
This says you know nothing, or can deduce nothing, about what
the interviewer is looking for in a candidate. It says that you
have done nothing to think about why this job is a good ﬁt for
you. The interviewer may as well end the interview right here.
How much should you say? Talk for about thirty seconds on the
high points about yourself. You want to give plenty of good start-
ing points, without making the listener bored. You’re basically
putting your résumé’s summary section into narrative form.
Bad:
I started out as a child...

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
180
Bad:
I’m a programmer. Well, not now, really, because I’ve been
out of work since January. Not much opportunity to do any pro-
gramming at home. I’d really like to get this job because I don’t
think I have to tell you that it’s hard to pay the mortgage without a
paycheck, right? Oh, and my hobby is learning archaic program-
ming languages.
Good:
I’ve been a system administrator for seven years now. I
started out maintaining a small ten-seat shop with one Windows
NT server. Now we have a mixed Linux and Windows network
with 150 users in an NT Windows domain hosted by Samba. I’m
doing some programming, too, beyond shell scripting. I’ve written
some plug-ins for the Nagios monitoring service and have con-
tributed patches to Bugzilla. I’ve been working in the marketing
industry for my entire career, so I think it’s time to branch out.
Working for Yoyodyne would be a great shift.
Now you try it. Write down a paragraph, like the previous one,
giving how you would answer the question. Use complete sen-
tences, not just bullet points. It will be a stock answer that’s
not tuned for any speciﬁc job or company, but that’s OK for this
purpose.
No, really, go do this. Use a blank page in the back of the book
if you like.
Now read it out loud. Time yourself and see how long it takes.
Is it about thirty seconds in length? If it’s a minute, you may be
giving too much detail. If it’s less than thirty seconds, chances
are you’re leaving out good stuff.
Practice your answers
out loud to get
comfortable with them.
Do you feel comfortable reading these
words? They should be ﬂuid, and you
should be comfortable with the idea of
selling yourself and of talking about
how good you are. Read them to a
friend, and ask whether you sound normal or if you sound
uncomfortable. You’re not practicing lines for a play, but it is
practice. You’re preparing the pathways of your brain for saying
these sentences.
To make it even tougher, the answer to “Tell me about yourself”
is different every time. How you answer will vary depending on
who you’re talking to and at what stage in the interview process

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
181
you’re at. Consider the differences in your answer if you’re in
each of the following situations:
• Talking to an HR screener: Play it safe. Talk about years
of experience and the different companies you’ve worked
for. Talk about high-level qualiﬁcations (databases, Linux)
over speciﬁcs (Oracle and Postgres, Red Hat and Ubuntu).
Exception: Mention speciﬁc technologies listed in the ad
where appropriate.
• Your future teammates: Talk nitty-gritty of technologies,
throwing out relevant buzzwords to spark conversation.
• Nontechnical
management:
Emphasize
achievements,
projects, and business value provided. Keep buzzwords
minimal.
• Your boss-to-be: Make it a bit of everything, with an addi-
tional emphasis on teamwork and soft skills.
Your answer may change depending on the company you’re
talking to and the job you’re applying for. If there’s an emphasis
in the job ad for a speciﬁc technology, then play that up. If you
have experience in the given industry, then mention that as well.
This question may come in different, more direct phrasings,
such as “What makes you the best candidate for this job?” For
a story of great success in answering that, see the story Kate’s
Quick Reference Card on page 142.
What Do You Know About Our Company?
This is one I like to start with, because it lets me get a sense
of how prepared the candidate is for the interview. Does the
candidate treat this as just another interview, or is he specif-
ically interested in working for my company? Has he done his
homework and investigated the company? For the candidate,
it’s should be an opening to talk about yourself in return and
ﬁnd out about the company’s needs.
Bad:
Uh, not much, really. I thought your website was cool.
Good:
HoseCo creates hoses and ﬁttings for industrial appli-
cations. You’ve been around since 1954 and moved to this loca-
tion in the 1970s. I’m interested in if you supply the aerospace

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
182
industry? I spent a year working for Boeing’s heating and cool-
ing division when I was a consultant, and it was fascinating. The
website uses JSP, but the online product catalog seemed to be a
CGI application. Is that in Perl? You’ve also opened a second plant
in Cincinnati, which must be a good sign for how the company is
doing. What sort of communication links do you have between
here and Ohio?
From answering one question, you’ve shown that you are pre-
pared and that you’re thinking like the manager, and you’ve
brought up part of your background that could have real bene-
ﬁt for him.
What Interests You in This Job?
All other things being equal, nobody wants to have an employee
who’s indifferent to the job or the company. More important,
you shouldn’t want to take a job that isn’t interesting to you. If
you can’t answer this one for yourself, you shouldn’t apply for
the job.
Bad:
Well, it’s close to my house.
Even if it’s important to work near home, that shouldn’t be
expressed as your primary concern. Always put the company
ﬁrst. This question is also the ideal place to bring up any
connections you may have to the company or anyone in the
company.
Good:
I’ve always loved cars, so working for a company that
makes brake parts seems like an ideal ﬁt. The job ad talked
about using Ruby on Rails, which I’ve been wanting to work
with. My experience has been with Java Struts. Also, my friend
Susie Derkins over in Accounting says that it’s a great place to
work. She was telling me about how the company is very family-
friendly, plus you’re only about ten minutes from my house. Alto-
gether, it sounds ideal.
What Is Your Greatest Strength?
When it comes at the beginning of the interview, treat it as a
focused version of “Tell me about yourself.” Later in the inter-
view, it’s probably an attempt to assess how you see yourself.
In either case, pick something that you’re good at, and give

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
183
examples that back it up. Better yet, pick one hard and one soft
skill and play them up.
Bad:
I’m a hard worker. (So is everyone, pal.)
Bad:
I’m a really good programmer. (This is vague, unsupported
by detail.)
Bad:
I’m like a human ASCII chart! I can tell you the hex value
of any given character! (Yeah, so what?)
Good:
I’m calm and focused in crises, and few things frustrate
me. People have told me that they’re amazed at how well I han-
dle stressful situations, which you well know can happen to us
system administrators in the blink of an eye.
Good:
I have a knack for data abstraction. Creating database
schemas, writing APIs...that sort of thing just comes naturally to
me. It’s my favorite part of the job.
Don’t worry about which strength of yours is the absolute great-
est. Indeed, you’ll choose the greatest strength for this company
in this interview.
What Is Your Greatest Weakness?
This is the question people seem to dread most. The interviewer
wants to see whether you’ll say anything damning that makes
you unsuitable for the job. You’re not going to say anything like
that, of course. Just don’t let it take you by surprise, sitting in
the interviewer’s ofﬁce pondering the question.
Most books suggest a snappy answer like “I work too hard” or
“I get frustrated when people don’t work as hard as I do” or
“I’m a perfectionist.” Those answers are good from the perspec-
tive of picking a negative and turning it into a positive, but they
have two problems. First, they may not be true for you, meaning
they’d be lies. Second, and worse, they are B.S., and the inter-
viewer knows it. It has the stink of prefabricated dishonesty.
Take the question head-on. Treat it as if you’d been asked “What
would you like to improve about yourself, and how are you work-
ing on it?” Be sure to make the improvement be something with
you, not sound like you’re blaming other people for your prob-
lems. Choose a technical weakness, not a personal failing or
character ﬂaw.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
184
Bad:
I get frustrated when people don’t work as hard as I do.
(Stock B.S. answer, plus ﬁnds fault with other people.)
Bad:
I’m a perfectionist. (Stock B.S. answer, plus what are you
doing about it?)
Bad:
I really hate testing my code. (Huge failing for a program-
mer.)
Good:
I don’t know enough JavaScript and Ajax. All my web
programming work has been server-side, but Ajax technologies
are clearly going to continue to dominate. I picked up a copy of
Pragmatic Ajax the other day, and I’m working my way through it.
Why Should We Hire You?
Assuming this question comes at the end of the interview or at
the start of a second interview with a higher-up, it’s your invi-
tation to summarize yourself. Recap what you’ve discussed ear-
lier in the interview, with new emphasis on what you’ve learned
about the company’s business needs and problems it needs to
have solved. Give examples of speciﬁc actions you could take
once on board: “You mentioned the problems your program-
mers were having with database normalization, and I know I
could help there. Last year I led a team of DBAs who....”
Some people are intimidated by the phrasing of the question. It
sounds a lot like “What’s so great about you, pal?”—a challenge
thrown down to the candidate. Don’t think of it that way. Think
of it as an aggressively worded version of “Tell me about your-
self,” and you’ll do ﬁne. If the question comes as a sort of opener
to the interview, follow up with something like “Of course, those
are only a few of the things I would bring, but I’d like to know
more about the challenges your company and department face
to know how I can help best.”
Tell Me About a Project That Didn’t Go Well
There are usually no right or wrong answers to questions like
this one. The interviewer is hoping to see how you handle prob-
lems and deal with adversity. Stories are crucial here. If you get
asked “Did you ever have X happen?” you treat it as “Tell me a
story about how X happened.”

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
185
This question works on two levels. The manager wants to see
how you handle the downsides of day-to-day life and to see
whether you’re a blamer. Will you tell about your own short-
comings or pin them on others. It’s best to explain the problems
on both sides of the situation, but without blaming others. Con-
sider this standard gripe presented as an answer:
Bad:
Oh, sure, which one? The web group always has to deal
with last-minute train wrecks when the marketing department
comes running with some last-minute crazy project that has to be
done by some dumb arbitrary deadline. Then, when they don’t
get what they want in the timeframe they want it, they blame us
and try to make us look like chumps. It’s not our fault that they
can’t plan ahead!
This question is usually followed up by “What did you learn from
this situation?” or “How have you changed things to prevent this
in the future?”
Bad:
Not really much to learn. I guess we just have to tell the
marketing department they can’t have everything they want just
because they want it. I’d like to give the marketing director a good
book on how software projects actually work!
Everything in these answers places the blame squarely on the
shoulders of others and adds insulting language. The interview-
ers know that the candidate is likely to whine and malign if she
comes on board. And who should improve? Not the candidate!
It’s the marketing director who’s at fault!
Instead, consider this answer about the same situation. It
describes the situation without ﬁnger-pointing or rancor.
Good:
Lately we’ve had some challenges with the marketing
department. The new director has some aggressive plans for the
website, often tied to immovable dates like trade shows. The ﬁrst
time we didn’t get the changes in place when he wanted, there
was a lot of frustration. He felt let down by the web group, and
we felt like his requests were unreasonable. Clearly, there wasn’t
enough communication between our groups.
Now, anticipate the follow-up without being asked for it.
Good:
After that ﬁrst mess, we all got together and talked about
what happened. We were glad to have the new initiative from

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
186
marketing, but we needed to negotiate on future projects to make
sure that goals were reasonable. There was resistance, but when
the director saw that we were on his side, we got some real
progress.
Tell Me About the Biggest Mistake You Ever Made
This question probes at two areas. First, it addresses the han-
dling of blame like the “project that didn’t go well” question.
Second, it gives a feeling of how much real experience the can-
didate has.
Real work means mistakes. If you’re not making mistakes,
you’re not trying hard enough. Unless you’re in an industry
where mistakes are truly unacceptable, like health care or ﬂy-
ing things, mistakes are part of life. They’re also part of learning
and growing in your ﬁeld.
Pick a story that demonstrates that you can accept responsibil-
ity for your human mistakes. Anticipate the follow-up question
“What did you learn?” in your answer.
Bad:
I dunno, I guess I don’t make many.
Bad:
I reformatted my C:\ drive once. That was pretty dumb.
Good:
We were cutting over to a new mail system, and I was
using Perl to read from Notes and write to Exchange. Monday
morning, angry users found that their archive folder hierarchies
had been transferred incorrectly. All messages in their archives
were put in a single folder, and it was too late to rerun the conver-
sion. From then on, I promised myself that any data conversion
project had to have a post-conversion veriﬁcation step before I
could say it was done.
What Would You Do If...
This is usually presented as a scenario that has no obvious good
course of action to see how you handle adversity and solve prob-
lems. Even if the problem itself is technical, it’s usually non-
technical judgment that you’re asked about. Examples might
include the following:
• While doing a company-wide software update on users’
machines, you discover a folder of pornography. Of course,
porn on computers is a violation of company policy. The

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
187
user is fairly new to the company, and he seems like a nice
enough guy. What do you do?
• You’re in code freeze, two days before you’re to ship a major
release, and you discover a bug in a co-worker’s code.
You know he’s had problems with his quality in the past,
and he’s afraid of getting a poor review. You could ﬁx the
bug easily without telling anyone, but at this point in the
project, all code changes are supposed to be OKed by the
project manager. What do you do?
• We’re a small company, and the president of the company
comes to you, furious about the website. He insists that the
user registration form should use radio buttons instead of
drop-down lists. He wants you to change it by the end of
the day. You’re technically capable of making the changes
and putting them in production, but it would go against
the process the department has in place. Oh, and your
boss is on vacation. What do you do?
In all three cases, there’s no deﬁnitively correct answer. The
interviewer is probably more interested in your thought process,
so make sure you explain it.
Good:
Certainly, I don’t want to get the guy in trouble, and it
would be easy enough to delete his porn folder and warn him
that it’s a violation of policy. On the other hand, policy is policy,
and it’s not up to me as a support tech to decide what rules to
enforce. In the end, I guess I would need to... (and then explain
why).
Part of what the interviewer may be looking for is in how you dig
more into the problem. Perhaps what your interviewer is looking
for is for you to ask “How bad is the bug?” Go ahead and ask for
more information about the situation. On the other hand, it’s
not a game where you ask twenty questions until you’re able to
derive the answer to the mystery. You must answer the question
decisively.
These “What if?” questions can be a beneﬁt for you. They’re
likely to be based on a real problem that the manager has had
in the past. It gives you an insight to the manager, and it gives
you room to follow up. After you’ve given your answer, ask about
the question.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
188
Good:
I’d make the president’s changes, but I’d make sure I
had the old versions of the code stored in version control if we
needed to reverse the changes after my boss got back. It’s a tough
situation. Is this sort of scenario something that the department
has had to deal with before?
You’re not asking what the manager thinks the right answer is,
but you may very well ﬁnd out. He might say, “Yeah, our VP of
sales has pulled this sort of power play in the past, and everyone
knows to pass the buck to me, no matter what.”
Note that in the previous example, your answer differs from
what the manager wants to have happen, but that’s probably
OK. It’s your decision-making process that’s being tested here,
not the absolute correctness of your choice.
Questions like these can also be a test of how you would fare
with the company’s culture. You might ﬁnd that the organiza-
tion always follows the process exactly, and you think it would
have been more pragmatic to give the president what he wants.
That mismatch is better to ﬁnd out now. Answer from the gut
without wafﬂing.
Do You Prefer to Work on Teams or Solo?
Autonomy and teamwork are two sides of the same coin. A man-
ager has to have people on the team who can do their work
without having to be led all the way. On the other hand, an
employee who is unwilling or unable to work with others on a
team, or cannot take direction from the manager, is often a net
negative on productivity. The only bigger waste of a manager’s
time than hand-holding an employee is having to deal with per-
sonality conﬂicts between team members.
Be careful how you answer this question. Don’t make it sound
like you’re incapable of working other than in your preferred
context. As with most answers to questions like this, the answer
shouldn’t be simple A or B, but give examples.
Interviewer:
Do you prefer to work on teams or solo projects?
Bad answer:
Oh, good Lord, solo projects, please.
Almost as bad:
I ﬁnd that my best work is done when unen-
cumbered with others.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
189
Good answer:
Everything depends on the project. If I’m writing
a one-off utility, it usually makes more sense to do it solo, maybe
with a colleague’s once-over to make sure I haven’t missed some-
thing. Larger projects, of course, require a team, and whether
tasks are done alone or in pairs depends on the nature of the
task. I guess I prefer the raw speed I can usually get working
solo, but most of the time, a team is what’s required.
What Do You Want to Be Doing in Five Years?
This is it—the most dreaded interview question, based on the
number of people I see griping about it online and to me in
person.
As much as people hate this question, the candidate’s response
can indicate a lot about how forward-thinking and business-
minded
he
is.
Consider
this
example
of
a
short-sighted
candidate.
Guess My Favorite Language!
by Adrian Howard, developer, Dorset, England
When I ﬁrst started interviewing programmers, I was surprised by
the folks who didn’t prepare and think about the interview at all.
The ones who had done no research on the company. The ones
who hadn’t thought about how their skills could be applied to the
job. The ones who didn’t seem to have a thought in their head
outside of a particularly narrow technical area.
One guy stands out in my memory. When he came for his
interview during the meet and greet, I asked him what books he’d
been reading recently. He said he’d just picked up a book in
Visual C++. Fair enough.
During the interview I asked what he saw himself doing in the
role. He said “writing Visual C++ applications,” even though we
actually hadn’t decided on an implementation language for the
project. He made no mention of how this would relate to the
product at all. He was worrying me a little.
Near the end of the interview I asked what he saw himself doing
in ﬁve years time. He said, you guessed it, “Hopefully developing
in Visual C++.” Now I was scared. This person’s entire focus and
long-term plan was working in a single language on a single
platform.
He got a polite rejection letter.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
190
You’re not getting hired just for today but for the foreseeable
future. If your interviewer does not ask this question, or some-
thing similar, it may indicate that he’s not interested in your
long-term growth, your future at the company, or the future
direction of his team. This is someone you may not want to
work for.
Interviewer:
What do you want to be doing in ﬁve years?
Bad:
I dunno.
Bad:
Who can tell? This is the computer industry, and any
answer I give you will be wrong because technology moves so
quickly.
Good:
As far as my career, I’d like to be in some sort of team
lead position, but I’m not sure that management is for me. Tech-
nologically, it’s hard to give speciﬁcs, of course, but my two
main interests in the future are in social networking and large
databases. I’ve always loved playing with large datasets, and
the explosion of sites like Facebook I think can be transferred to
business as well. Have you explored any sort of social network-
ing here at Yoyodyne?
Answer the question
with what you know, not
what you think they
want to hear.
There’s not a right or wrong answer.
If you have no interest in leadership,
then don’t think you have to lie and
say “I’d like to be leading a team of pro-
grammers” or else be tagged a slacker.
Besides, what if the interviewer isn’t
looking for someone to be a leader?
Good:
Something different from the job I’m interviewing for
now, somewhere in this company. I’ve found that I work best
as a generalist, not a specialist, and that my drive for new skills
leaves me itching for new challenges every two to three years.
Even if you have little or no work history, you still should have
an eye to the future.
Good:
Since this will be my ﬁrst full-time job, it’s hard to know
what to expect. I’d like to think that I’ll have worked on a number
of successful projects for the company, had a promotion or two,
and learned a lot about system administration along the way.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
191
Most of all, be able to answer the ﬁve-year question for yourself
before you even consider going on an interview, because if the
job you’re applying for doesn’t ﬁt that ﬁve-year vision, you’re
headed down a dead-end road.
Why Do You Want to Work for Us?
This one shouldn’t even be a problem, if you’ve been picky about
going on your interviews. You should know the answer before
you ever get to the interview stage. Make sure that the primary
reason you give is something about the company. After that,
you can discuss what’s important to you. As always, put the
company ﬁrst in your answers.
Bad:
I dunno, it just seemed cool.
Weak:
I’ve always loved programming. (This doesn’t address
why this company over others.)
Good:
Administering a network as big as you have here will
be a great stretch for my skills, and I’m sure I’ll learn a lot. Plus,
ever since I was a little girl, I’ve loved airplanes, so the aerospace
industry feels like a great place to work.
Why Are You Leaving Your Job?
This can be a mineﬁeld. Be careful how you tread. You’re going
to be explaining why you are unhappy with a given situation,
but don’t complain. No matter what, do not blame others for
your unhappiness.
Obviously terrible:
My boss is a jerk, and the rest of my team
are a bunch of incompetent boobs.
Just as bad:
Well, let’s just say that my boss and I have dif-
ferences. He’s an OK guy as a person, but we just seem to clash
on a lot of things. I also hate to say it, but he hasn’t hired the best
programmers. I love my co-workers to death, but it’s frustrating
to work with people who can’t seem to get anything done all day.
Soft language can’t
hide a griper or blamer.
The second example is softer language,
but it’s just as damning to you. You’ve
explained that other people are the
cause of your problems and unhappi-
ness. You are a whiner.

THE TOUGH QUESTIONS
192
Good:
I feel like I’m at the end of the road at Yoyodyne. All
the projects we’ve been working on have been maintenance on
existing systems, with nothing new. I need more challenge in my
day-to-day life. I’ve talked to my boss, and he says that there’s
nothing he can do. I’ve learned some Ruby at home, but that’s
just not enough stretching for me.
Good:
I need some place closer to home. When I started there
three years ago, the hour-and-a-half commute didn’t bother me.
Now I ﬁnd that the time on the road is such a drain on time with
my family, plus it’s getting more and more expensive. Of course,
distance isn’t the only thing that matters, but I have to say I was
excited to ﬁnd an opening that seemed like such a good ﬁt here
at Yoyodyne, and only ﬁfteen minutes from home.
Good:
My contract is up at the end of June. I looked into other
openings at the company, but nothing was a ﬁt for my skills and
background.
Good:
My salary is not at all in line with what someone with my
skills and background should be making. I’ve checked a number
of different salary surveys and compared to some cost-of-living
indices. I like what I’m doing, but my boss says that the com-
pany’s salary structure has no wiggle room on this. (But be pre-
pared for the follow-up “Then why did you take the job?”)
The last example shows a case where it’s safe to discuss salary,
because it’s in direct response to a question from the inter-
viewer. Note that the answer doesn’t take the next step and ask
“So, how much is this job paying, anyway?”
In all cases, you’re stating the facts without rancor or blame.
In the case of a contract ending, you don’t even need to make
much explanation: there’s just no more work.
Do You Have Any Questions for Me?
Unless you’ve been talking for hours, you’d better have ques-
tions to ask. See Section 7.5, Prepare Your Questions to Ask, on
page 143 for details.

CURVEBALLS
193
9.5
Curveballs
I was on panel of four technical managers and company vice
president interviewing a candidate for the director of informa-
tion technology. The candidate told us about his background
as an IT director for a hospital and the achievements that he’d
made during his time there. They’d installed a new phone sys-
tem and PBX, upgraded server infrastructure, and overhauled
the help desk. As his direct reports-to-be, we were concerned
about his management style, about how he’d run the depart-
ment, and so on. There were lots of fuzzy nebulous questions
thrown around for an hour, and then Jerry throws out a beauti-
ful curveball. “How many 64K channels in a T-1 line?” We were
all taken aback, no one more than the candidate. We sat expec-
tantly awaiting the answer.
To his credit, the candidate immediately came back and said, “I
don’t know, but I’d know who on my staff to ask for the answer.”
It was a good, standard answer for someone in his position, but
it was a nail in his cofﬁn.
After the interview, Jerry explained his question and why the
answer was so damning. He told us “I got the sense early on
that he was very hands-off, not interested in IT itself. The T-1
question should have been easy for someone who had overseen
the replacement of a phone system at a hospital, but he had no
idea.” I laughed and said, “I didn’t know the answer, and I’m no
telecommunications guy, but I knew a T-1 was 1.5Mbps, and so
I quickly did the math and ﬁgured it was twenty-four.”
Ask for answers to
questions you don’t
know the answer to.
Jerry
conﬁrmed
my
calculations.
“You’re right, but this guy didn’t even
try to ﬁgure it out. Worst of all, the
candidate didn’t care. He never asked
what the answer was.” We all thought
about that for a bit, and our boss, the hiring manager for this
position, said, “You don’t always have to know technical details
at a director level, but you can’t be that detached, at least at
this company.”
There are a few lessons here. First, always ask for the answer
to a technical question you don’t know. I would hope that this
is part of your geek nature, but if it’s not, make it part of how

MORE TOUGH QUESTIONS: EXERCISES FOR THE READER
194
you live. It will help you for the rest of your career, not just
interviewing.
Second, interviews are as much about ﬁt as technical know-
how. You can argue whether an IT director needs to know the
nitty-gritty of how things work under his command or whether
it’s best to be hands-off, but that doesn’t matter in this case.
What we discovered throughout the interview was that he was
not right for the company. Your interviews will be about ﬁt as
well, even with the hard technical questions.
Third, never forget the vast difference between what you mean
to say, the words you actually say, and what those words tell
the listener.
9.6
More Tough Questions: Exercises for the Reader
Now that I’ve shown some examples of tough questions, and
how to answer them to let the hiring manager know what she
wants to know, I’ll leave the following as food for thought. All of
these are good examples of questions that managers use to dig
into how a candidate will handle conﬂict and adversity and to
assess cultural ﬁt:
• Tell me about a time your work was criticized unfairly.
• What is something you’ve disagreed with your boss about?
• How do you deal with people you don’t like?
• What did you like best about your last job? Least?
• How do you handle pressure?
• How long have you been looking? How’s the job search
going? What’s the market like out there?
• How are you going to like working at a little company like
ours, after spending years at MegaCorp?
• Tell me about a team member you just couldn’t get along
with.
• Tell me what you think of your boss. How do you and your
boss get along?

MORE TOUGH QUESTIONS: EXERCISES FOR THE READER
195
• What during the workday motivates you? What demoti-
vates you?
• What’s an example of something you don’t like about your
current job? What would you do to change it?
Answer each question, perhaps on paper, and look back at it
from the perspective of the interviewer. Does it show you in
your best light? How else might an interviewer interpret your
answer? Can you reduce the chances of your answer being mis-
interpreted?
Job interviewing isn’t easy, but these exercises should help give
you the mental practice to do your best.

Chapter 10
Too Much Information
Imagine yourself in a job interview, where you’re just making
introductions. The interviewer explains a bit about the company
and asks the classic opener, “So, tell me about yourself.” Try-
ing to give the interviewer an idea of what a determined, hard
worker you are, you open with this:
After my wife and I arrived here in Ohio from Ger-
many at age 35, I trained my son to play piano. He
even performed at our church.
Your intent was to show that you’re a committed family man
with strong roots in your heritage, that you have the skills to
raise a child, and that you’re active in your church community,
right? In fact, the result of your little bit of exposition probably
will be to make the interviewer very nervous. It may even
exclude you from a job. That one little sentence covered ﬁve
bits of information an employer can’t ask you, because it’s
illegal in the United States to discriminate based on (among
other things) marital status, country of origin, age, family, or
religious afﬁliations.
In all communications with the company, whether in person, in
email, or on paper, keep things professional and factual. Any-
thing else is TMI: Too Much Information.
10.1
Illegal Topics
In the United States, discrimination laws are speciﬁc. A number
of factors relating to an employee or potential employee can-
not be used as the basis for discrimination. For example, an

ILLEGAL TOPICS
197
employer may not decide against hiring a candidate because the
candidate practices a certain religion, is from a certain country,
has children, or is of a certain age. Every employer is aware
of these laws, and the vast majority are careful to make sure
that not only are no decisions made that break the law but also
to avoid even the possibility that someone could think an illegal
hiring decision was made. No employer wants to invite a lawsuit.
Just as the company must not bring up any discussion of these
forbidden topics, do not discuss them yourself. You may not
have any nefarious reasons for bringing them up, but the inter-
viewer may rightly wonder “Why is this guy telling me he’s His-
panic? Is he trying to put us in a situation where he can claim
discrimination if we don’t hire him?” The rule to follow is this:
“If it’s not legal for the company to ask you about a given piece
of information, don’t volunteer it.”
The following are most of the classes for which it is illegal to
discriminate based on in the United States.
Race and Ethnic Background
We’d be horriﬁed if an interviewer asked something as brazen as
this:
Bad Interviewer:
Were either of your parents Hispanic?
But what if my friend Pete Krawczyk went to an interview and
was asked this:
Bad Interviewer:
Krawczyk...is that Polish?
Was the interviewer making small talk, or was he trying to deter-
mine that Pete was Polish and therefore an unﬁt candidate? I
would hope the former, but it doesn’t really matter: it’s not a
topic for discussion.
Even if you feel like your ethnic background is incredibly
obvious, because your name is Gloria O’Connell or Yaakov
Sloman or Kevin Falcone or Ricardo Julian Besteiro Signes, or
you think “Of course anyone can tell that I’m black,” it’s not a
topic for discussion.
Not all cultural discussions are forbidden. Feel free to discuss
areas of travel and study of other countries and cultures, as
long as your personal background does not enter into it.

ILLEGAL TOPICS
198
Good:
I spent a year studying architecture in Naples and Rome.
There’s a beauty being there that you can’t get out of pictures.
TMI:
I spent a year studying architecture in Naples and Rome.
I really felt connected to my ancestors.
Sometimes a job qualiﬁcation, or something you bring to the
position, will dance dangerously close to a forbidden topic. Dis-
cuss legitimate topics, but be careful.
Good:
I understand the company is working a lot with clients
in Mexico. I speak ﬂuent Spanish.
TMI:
I grew up with Spanish as my ﬁrst language.
Religious Afﬁliations
Not only are your religious beliefs a protected class under U.S.
law, but they’re also a hot topic that may sway a potential
employer against you. Even if you feel you’re part of the main-
stream, such as if you’re a Christian in the United States, any
discussion of your religious beliefs is inappropriate and will
probably work against you.
The only case when your religious background is appropriate for
discussion is when it may have an effect on your ability to do the
job. For example, I interviewed a candidate whose Jewish faith
required he be home each Friday before sundown to observe the
Sabbath. He handled the situation beautifully. He waited until
the end of our interview to bring it up, since there was no reason
to bring up a potential negative early on in the interview. We dis-
cussed it frankly and respectfully. He explained that he would
probably need to leave by 5 p.m. on Fridays in the summer and
2 p.m. in the winter if he was to be home before sundown and
would then be unavailable to work until Sunday. Most impor-
tant, he assured me that he would work as necessary to make
up the time the rest of the week. At no point did we discuss
the religious aspects of his needs, only that they were there and
whether the working requirements of the position could accom-
modate them.
Consider what obligations you may have that may fall out-
side the mainstream of U.S. legal holidays. Do you need off for
Passover and other Jewish holidays? Need prayer times dur-
ing the day? These all affect your work throughout the day

ILLEGAL TOPICS
199
and should be discussed honestly. If it’s possible, leave out the
details of why, and stick only to the work details:
Interviewer:
Sometimes we have projects that require weekend
work. Do you have anything that would affect your availability?
Good answer:
I have personal obligations on most Sunday
mornings.
TMI answer:
I teach Sunday school most Sunday mornings
over at Holy Apostles.
Family, Children, and Pregnancy
Family is one of those topics that is hard to avoid if there’s any
discussion of your nonwork life, but it’s also potentially the most
damaging in the eyes of an unenlightened interviewer.
An interviewer might fear that a parent of ﬁve children will need
to take off more time from work than someone with no children
or that a married candidate won’t be able to burn the midnight
oil as much as one who is unmarried. Maybe there’s a fear that a
pregnant woman will need too much maternity leave or that co-
workers won’t want to work with a pregnant woman. These are
not legitimate reasons for discrimination under U.S. hiring law.
Avoid bringing up family.
I’m not suggesting that you remove all
traces of your family. You don’t need
to remove your wedding ring before an
interview. Still, avoid bringing up family if you can, and be wary
of an interviewer who asks.
Age
Your age is a factor that has no bearing on your abilities and
so is illegal to ask about. Be sure to leave out any mentions of
facts that might peg your age at a given number. When listing
your college experience, list only degrees attained or coursework
completed, but without mention of years. If for some reason high
school is discussed or is required on an application, give only
the name and city of the school, not the years you attended.
Health and Physical Factors
In tech jobs, your physical health usually doesn’t enter into
the job requirements. The exceptions may be for tech support

OTHER TOPICS TO AVOID
200
or sysadmin positions with certain physical requirements, like
being able to string cable or lift equipment up to ﬁfty pounds.
If you have certain health accommodations that would need to
be made, then it makes sense, later in the interview process, to
ask what sort of physical requirements there may be. If there
are health issues that would prevent you from performing one
of the duties, or that would affect your day-to-day work, discuss
only the effects on the job, not the cause.
Interviewer:
Sometimes we have to work late. Is there any-
thing that would affect your availability?
TMI answer:
I have dialysis therapy every Tuesday and
Thursday at 5 p.m.
Good answer:
I have personal obligations on Tuesday and
Thursday evenings, but beyond that, I don’t see any conﬂicts.
Any Other Illegal Topic
I’ve only skimmed the biggest no-nos of what can’t be discussed
in the hiring process. These are guidelines to keep in mind and
are certainly not authoritative. To ﬁnd out more, visit the U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s website1 or your
local public library for state-speciﬁc details.
10.2
Other Topics to Avoid
It’s not just the illegal topics that should be left out of the
job-hunting process. Here are some other areas of discussion
that should be avoided. It’s not just the hot-button topics you’d
expect, either.
Your Financial Information
Many companies will ask for your salary history to try to ﬁgure
out how little they need to pay you or to decide whether you’re
“overqualiﬁed” for the job. Do not tell them. For more about
why to keep your salary history to yourself and how to do so
politely, see Section 6.4, Never Tell Anyone Your Salary History,
on page 131.
1.
http://www.eeoc.gov

OTHER TOPICS TO AVOID
201
Sexual Orientation
Although sexual orientation is not a federally protected class
when it comes to employment opportunity, some states or local-
ities may have their own laws protecting discrimination based
on sexual orientation. Legal issues aside, any discussion of sex
or sexuality is inappropriate. It’s also one of the easiest ways to
offend a potential employer.
Politics
Politics is the other old standby, along with sex, of what to never
discuss at the ofﬁce. Republican? Democrat? Vote ’em all out
regardless? Discuss it outside of work.
The exception to the politics rule is if it applies directly to your
professional background. For example, my friend Tom Limon-
celli2 believed strongly in Howard Dean’s presidential bid in the
2004 campaign. He believed in it so much that he worked as a
system administrator for the campaign for nine months in 2004.
Certainly, this is a valid item for Tom to put on his résumé. That
said, I would hope that Tom would keep discussion of this work
background in an interview strictly to the work aspects of this
part of his employment history.
On the ﬂip side, another friend, Dave Rolsky, works with a num-
ber of animal rights organizations and doesn’t mention any of
them during the job-hunting process. However, he does list on
his résumé his work for a vegetarian restaurant search engine,
because it demonstrates his skills as a web programmer.
You may think “Why keep it a secret, if it shows up in my Google
footprint anyway?” It’s not that you’re keeping your life a secret,
or hiding it, but rather that you’re not bringing up potential
distractions. If in doubt, keep things strictly business.
Clubs and Organizations
Sometimes you may feel like giving a little more background
about who you are outside of work, but this sort of information
may inﬂuence someone against you and probably won’t help
you anyway.
2.
Tom’s Time Management for System Administrators [Lim06] is a great book
for everyone who has too much to do and not enough time to do it.

HANDLE INAPPROPRIATE QUESTIONS TACTFULLY
202
Clubs and organizations often have political overtones. Maybe
you enjoy skeet shooting, which might make someone think
you’re a member of the NRA and a staunch defender of the
absolute freedoms of the Second Amendment. Perhaps you also
play in a Megadeth cover band or sing in a community choir,
which may give someone the impression that you’re a drug-
addled burnout or a religious zealot. All of these have potential
of tipping someone’s opinion against you, so unless they apply
directly to your professional background, don’t discuss them.
With all of these topics, it can be a judgment call as to where it’s
appropriate to bend these rules. Maybe you think your experi-
ence in community theater helps your work as a project man-
ager. As always, use your own judgment over what anyone else
says, even this book.
10.3
Handle Inappropriate Questions Tactfully
Chances are that somewhere in your job hunting someone is
going to ask you an illegal, or at least inappropriate, question.
Johanna Rothman has heard some doozies.
“Are You Pregnant?”
by Johanna Rothman, speaker/author/consultant, Boston,
Massachusetts
I was looking for a job in the months after I was married, and I
was astonished at the comments. “Wow, what a rock,” said, one
interviewer. “Thank you, my husband has great taste.” One HR
person looked at my engagement ring, which is really not that
big, and said “You don’t need to work, do you?” “Sure I do,” told
her, “I’m keeping him, not the other way around.”
At one interview, the hiring manager asked, “Are you pregnant?” I
was ﬂoored and said, “No. Why do you ask? Is my stomach fat?”
The hiring manager said, “Oh, you can’t catch me with that one;
that’s like the ’Are my hips too big in this dress?’ question from
my wife.” I laughed so hard I thought I would lose it. Then I said,
“Gotcha. Now you owe me big, because you just turned this into a
sex discrimination case.” He literally paled, and I pealed off into
laughter again. I’m pregnant just because I got married? Please.
One does not cause the other.
As satisfying as I’m sure it was for Johanna to put the guy in his
place, I’d suggest a more low-key response should you ever be in

WHO WANTS TO WORK FOR A COMPANY LIKE THAT ANYWAY?
203
a similar situation. Johanna later added, “Humor in person can
work to defuse potential discriminatory situations. But, don’t
use humor early in the interview before you’ve built rapport.”
Give the interviewer the beneﬁt of the doubt, that it was an
honest mistake, not an attempt to ﬁnd out information to use
against you. An interviewer idly saying “Krawczyk...is that Pol-
ish?” probably meant it as friendly small talk, especially if he’s
doing his best to pronounce it correctly.
Give the interviewer the
beneﬁt of the doubt.
You want to handle the situation grace-
fully. There’s nothing to be gained by
putting the interviewer on the defen-
sive. You also don’t want to weaken
your position by answering the inappropriate question. Since
you’re going off the assumption that the interviewer made an
honest mistake, there’s no need to be defensive.
Answer the question with another question:
Interviewer:
I’m glad to meet you, Amanda. My daughter’s
name is Amanda, too. Got any kids yourself?
You, without venom or sarcasm:
With so much to talk about
this afternoon, I’d rather talk about the job and my qualiﬁcations.
I did notice what looked like some workers stringing cable. Are
you expanding bandwidth for the building?
Do not use a sarcastic tone. You don’t want to be aggressive or
make the interviewer feel stupid. If he realizes his error, he’ll
be embarrassed enough as it is. Note how by side-stepping to
another topic, you’ve left the interviewer a way to move forward
and leave his gaffe behind. You’ve also turned it to your positive
by showing that you’re paying attention. Little details like this
are a great way to move conversations forward and show your
interest in the company.
10.4
Who Wants to Work for a Company Like That Anyway?
You may be thinking “If a company is clueless enough to not
know about Equal Employment Opportunity laws, or an inter-
viewer really thinks he’s entitled to know my marital status,
would I really want to work for them anyway?”

IT’S ALL ABOUT FOCUS
204
It’s a fair question, but the time to ask it is after you have a job
offer, not in the middle of an interview. The goal of an interview
is to get a job offer or to move on to the next phase of the hiring
process. You have nothing to lose by going ahead with an inter-
viewer who makes mistakes like these, but everything to gain by
leaving your options open.
10.5
It’s All About Focus
While all this talk about illegal and inappropriate questions may
be intimidating, the point is not to worry about what not to say
but to maintain focus on what really matters. You’re sending in
your résumé, or participating in an interview, to show the hiring
manager that you can do the work that needs to be done and
that you can do it well. Anything else may well be too much
information.

Chapter 11
After the Interview:
The Job Offer and Beyond
The interview is out of the way, but what next? It could be just
about anything: a quick job offer, more interviews, or weeks of
agonizing waiting. Maybe it will be more interviews followed by
weeks of agonizing waiting.
This part of the employment process can be the toughest to play.
Rejection is a likely outcome of your interaction with the com-
pany, but it need not be the end of your chances at employment
there. You may get a job offer, but it may not be one you want to
accept without careful research and negotiations. How you han-
dle these interactions with the company can affect whether you
get the job and how you’re perceived once the job starts. Most
important, how you handle leaving your old company can have
effects, both positive and negative, on your career and future
job prospects years down the road.
11.1
Send Thank-You Notes
The day of the interview, or the day after at most, send a thank-
you note to the hiring manager. You want to thank her for her
time and her interest and express again your interest in the job.
It doesn’t have to be fancy or long.

AND NOW YOU WAIT...
206
For example:
Dear Mr. Manager,
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today.
I enjoyed the interview and tour and discussing your
database administration needs. I’m even more conﬁ-
dent after our discussion with Peter Programmer that
I would be a valuable addition to the Yoyodyne team.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
Susan Candidate.
Write this note on a simple note card, not in email. You can get
a box of note cards at any drugstore for a buck or two. Address
it to the manager at the company. The physical note card will
help keep you in the mind of the manager and will help you
stand out from the rest of the candidates who have interviewed
with the manager. If you’ve met other signiﬁcant people at the
interview, such as being part of a panel interview, then go ahead
and send thank-you notes to all of them.
Thank-you notes are an
opportunity.
Sometimes people will ask “Do I have to
send a thank-you note to so-and-so?”
but that’s the wrong attitude. Turn
that around into “Do I get to send a
thank-you note to so-and-so and provide another opportunity
to make a good impression on him or her?” Always be selling
yourself.
11.2
And Now You Wait...
You’ve had the interview, you think it went well, but now what?
“When can I expect to hear back,” I hear you asking. “How long
should it take? What’s average to get a response from an inter-
view? It has been a week...is that a good sign or bad? For the
love of God, Andy, soothe my frantic worries with clear answers!”
I’m sorry, Gentle Reader, but I can’t.
There’s no such thing as “average.” I once had a job offer before I
got home from the interview. Sometimes you’ll never hear back.
The sad truth is that you’re going to have to wait for a while, and
it probably will be more than you want. Double that amount

AND NOW YOU WAIT...
207
of time for waiting if you’re job hunting in late November or
December when people go on vacation and corporate wheels
turn slowly.
Consider the amount of calendar time that can pass. If the posi-
tion you’re applying for is open to the world and the hiring
manager has dozens or hundreds of résumés, chances are she’s
interviewing at least three or four likely candidates. Those inter-
views don’t come easy, since schedules have to be arranged. It
will likely be days, if not weeks, before all the interviewing can
be done.
There are two ways to know when you can expect to hear back:
ask at the interview, or ask after the fact. Asking at the inter-
view, as discussed in Section 8.7, Ask About Follow-Up, on
page 171, is the least stressful way to do it, and it shows that
you’re forward-thinking.
If you’re past that stage and you haven’t heard back but are
you’re wondering when you will, you can contact the hiring
manager or the HR department, depending on who drove the
interview. There are three ways you may make this contact
safely:
• Call the hiring manager, speak to her, and ask her.
• Call the hiring manager, get her voicemail, and ask her.
• Email the hiring manager and ask her.
Those are your three choices, and they are mutually exclu-
sive. Do not, for example, leave a voicemail and send email,
because that crosses from “legitimate question” into “annoying
and pushy.”
Regardless of the form of communication, you need to express
your desire to move forward, offer to help in any way, and ask
for some kind of timeline when you could expect to hear back.
Refer to Section 8.7, Ask About Follow-Up, on page 171 for an
example.
The only question is “How long should I wait?” I’d suggest wait-
ing at least a week, before you get too impatient. The best solu-
tion, of course, is to ask before you leave the interview.
Waiting doesn’t mean that you’re not still working on your job
search, however. You can still be looking for other opportunities,

GO FOR FURTHER INTERVIEWS
208
further researching the company in preparation for a second
interview, or investigating salary norms for the industry and
location of the company, in preparation for a job offer.
11.3
Go for Further Interviews
A second interview is a great sign. It means you’ve passed the
initial technical screening. The hiring manager is interested
enough to spend more time taking a look at you. Typically the
ﬁrst interview is with just one or two people, and the second
interview (and third and fourth...) will be with more and from a
broader circle. Whereas the ﬁrst interview probably centered on
technical skills, the second will probably be more about team ﬁt
and you as person.
The rules for interviews after the ﬁrst are the same as before,
but the interview will probably be tougher on you. You’ll have to
meet more people, and it may well be frustrating answering the
same questions as before. Don’t look at these repeated ques-
tions as annoyances. Instead, see them as more opportunities
to sell yourself on how great you are for the position. Every time
you’re asked “So what did you do at your last company,” it’s
your time to shine. You can tailor your answers to the audi-
ence as well. The way you answer about your last job should
probably be different when you’re telling a fellow system admin-
istrator than when you’re telling your boss-to-be and different
from when you’re telling the vice president.
The interview with the president or vice president is a curious
custom. I’ve seen many situations where everyone to be hired
must have an interview, even if only for ﬁve or ten minutes,
with someone from upper management, typically the vice pres-
ident of IT or, if the company is small enough, the president.
Although meeting with someone that high in the company hier-
archy can be intimidating, don’t worry. Typically, the executive
will impress upon you the importance of your position and your
department on the future of the company, and you’ll get tossed
a few simple questions. Unless you do something like insult his
mother, you’ll be ﬁne.
Even with the likely emphasis on team ﬁt and personality, pre-
pare for the subsequent interviews with the same diligence you

GIVE SOLID REFERENCES
209
applied to the ﬁrst. Bring whatever you brought to the ﬁrst to
the second. Your meetings with the new people are ﬁrst inter-
views to them.
11.4
Give Solid References
At some point before you get a job offer, you’ll probably be asked
for a list of employment references. You don’t have to have a
special format where it looks nice like a résumé. Emailing the
hiring manager or HR department is probably all you need to
do. Don’t be surprised by this important part of the job hunt.
Your references could be the deciding factor in whether you land
a job.
Typically, your references will get checked after you’ve had an
interview or two and the hiring manager is ready to give you a
job offer or is narrowing down candidates. Reference checks are
very time-consuming in terms of calendar time, since the people
involved may not be available for days, so they’ll be saved until
last. There are two ways to check references: the HR way and
the hiring manager way. Either or both may be used on you.
The HR way is to call up past employers to verify your past
employment, that you worked the time you said you did, and
that you had the title you claimed. It’s entirely factual and free
of judgment. This kind of checking is easy in the United States,
because it’s unlikely to cause any problems.
The hiring manager way is more typically used for higher-level
positions and is about judgment about your capabilities. In the
United States, some employers are wary of giving out this type
of information for fear of lawsuits. Some companies may forbid
managers from giving references and require that all requests
for references be sent to the HR department. This type of refer-
ence is what I’ll be talking about in this chapter.
The questions a hiring manager will ask your references are
likely to be the same questions he asked you at the interview,
but asking a third party. “What was Bob like to work with?”
and “What was Bob’s greatest strength?” and “Did he do better
with teams or alone?” are all questions you’ve likely heard at
the interview, and your references will probably will hear them
as well.

GIVE SOLID REFERENCES
210
Unfortunately, reference checking is often the slowest part of
the hiring process and can be the most frustrating for both the
hiring manager and the candidate. Many times I’ve been eager
to talk to some references about a candidate I was considering
hiring but had to wait days to get in contact with the references
or to schedule time when the two of us could talk.
Who Should I Use as a Reference?
The best reference you could possibly have would be your most
recent manager, who has had to lay you off because of circum-
stances beyond his control. He’ll lament your departure and will
sing your praises because he wishes that he could continue to
have you on the staff. He’ll emphatically declare that if he could
hire you back, he would. That’s usually not possible, so who’s
next?
Barring the ideal case already mentioned, who should you refer
your future boss to for conﬁrmation of everything you’ve dis-
cussed in the interview? Consider the questions that will be
asked of your reference. Start with the ideal reference and work
backwards from there. A former boss, former co-workers, and
even current co-workers are your main pool to choose from.
Think of people who can attest to the work you’ve done in the
past. If possible, include people you’ve reported to, people who
have been your peers, and, if possible, people who have reported
to you. This could include members of teams you’ve been the
lead on.
Do not use relatives as references. These are business refer-
ences, not personal references like you might put on a college
application. Unless you worked directly for or with the relative
in question, they will not be able to supply the information the
hiring manager is looking for. Even then, a relative’s assess-
ment of your work is likely to be dismissed as being prejudiced,
and you’ll probably look foolish listing your uncle on a reference
sheet. Best to ignore the relative altogether.
Being a friend of yours is not enough to be a reference either,
unless your friend is someone you’ve worked with and can dis-
cuss your work. In fact, considering that many of the friends
we make in life are people we’ve worked with or for, it would be

GIVE SOLID REFERENCES
211
difﬁcult to get a list of references that didn’t include at least one
person we would call a friend.
The references you present to a company that asks for refer-
ences may change depending on the type of job you’re applying
for. If I were applying for a programming or managerial job, I’d
list my current boss and co-workers. However, if I were to apply
for a job as a programming instructor, I’d include the conference
chairs of the conferences I’ve spoken at over the past decade. As
with everything, there’s no one-size-ﬁts-all answer.
Consider how your
reference will represent
you to the company.
Acting as a reference is a big responsi-
bility, and you want to make sure that
whoever you ask is someone who will
represent you well. Consider how this
person is going to sound on the phone
or in email to the person from your new company who calls to
ask about you. If you wouldn’t be proud to introduce someone
at the new company to your potential reference, you probably
want to rethink your choice.
If your colleague agrees to be a reference, thank her profusely,
and discuss what she might want to talk to a company about.
“Remember that GUI enhancement project we worked on a few
years ago? How well that went, even though the requirements
from marketing kept changing every week? I think that would
be a good thing to bring up if possible.” In a way, a reference
check is a mini-interview, and you want to help your colleague
be as prepared as possible.
If you’re working in open source or other community projects,
don’t overlook the potential of references from there. Although
probably not as valuable as the endorsement of a boss or co-
worker, the projects you’ve worked on outside of your normal
9-to-5 job are still valuable work experience.
How to Create a Reference Sheet
Creating a list of references doesn’t require any creativity or spe-
cial formatting. Just give the facts that the reference checker
will need to make an effective reference check. For each refer-
ence, you’ll need to list at least the following:
• Full name

GIVE SOLID REFERENCES
212
• Position and current company
• Email address(es)
• Phone number(s)
• How you know the person and what work you’ve done
together
Here’s a sample of what you might do:
Maggie Majercik
Director of Internet Operations
ExampleCom, Inc.
Work: 815-555-8324
Cell: 608-555-9431
maggie@example.com
Maggie was my boss from 2005 to 2008 before she left Yoyodyne.
She is currently working for ExampleCom.
Ronald Barker
Database Administrator
Yoyodyne
Cell: 414-555-2173
rbarker@localisp.com
Ron is a member of my department at Yoyodyne.
We've worked together
on various projects since 2006.
Email will be the best contact method for Ronald.
Note how you’ve provided everything that the reference checker
might need to know to do the reference check and have given
some background. In Maggie’s case, that she has a director-level
position should lend some weight to her words about you, so she
should be your top reference. In the case of Ronald, you’ve given
only his home contact information, because you don’t want your
employer-to-be to be calling your current workplace to get ref-
erences. The hiring manager will respect and understand this,
so just spell it out explicitly.
Whatever information you put on the sheet for the person acting
as a reference, make sure that person veriﬁes it ﬁrst.
Before You Hand Over Your Reference Sheet
Do make sure that you let your references know that they may
get called. Do this every time you provide them as references,
just to make sure that they’re not surprised to get a call or

THE JOB OFFER
213
email. It also helps ensure that your reference isn’t unavailable
for some reason. You also can help your reference know what to
expect. Your communication can be as simple as an email:
You, in email:
Hey, Bob, things are going well with my talks
with Yoyodyne. I’ve gone through three interviews, and they just
asked for references, so I gave them your name. The manager,
Sarah, has had some team issues, so she may ask a lot about
team ﬁt. I told her that since you and I had been on so many
teams together, you’d be an ideal contact. As always, thanks for
helping me out in my search.
That email is short, simple, and crucial. It gives Bob a heads-up
that he may get a call. It gives him background on what to
expect. Most of all, it shows your appreciation to Bob for
performing this crucial role. You don’t want to neglect your
references and have them unwilling to perform this valuable
service. Good references are gold, so maintain them.
Make sure that your references have actually received the email
and are available. Ask for an acknowledgment. If your reference
is spending two weeks in Europe and not checking email, you’ll
want to use someone else, so the manager who wants to hire
you isn’t sitting waiting to contact your reference.
11.5
The Job Offer
When the job offer comes in, you’ll be excited. It might be by
email or a phone call, or they might call you back in to the ofﬁce
to make the offer in person. No matter how the offer is made,
there’s only one way to respond to a job offer.
You, even though you’re excited:
Thanks very much, I’m
glad we’re at this stage. Of course, I’ll need some time to examine
the offer. When would be a good time to talk to you tomorrow?
You thank the hiring manager or HR representative graciously,
express your happiness at having moved forward, and then you
do not accept the position yet. I don’t care if the money’s good and
it’s a great place to work and your rent is due in a week—do not
accept on the spot. The job offer can wait twelve to twenty-four
hours.

THE JOB OFFER
214
You need time to evaluate the offer in its entirety. Of course, you
wouldn’t have gone this far if you didn’t want the job, but it’s
time to make your ﬁnal moves. The decision to take a position is
a big one and shouldn’t be taken lightly. For those with spouses
or other family to contend with, the need for reﬂection is even
greater.
Don’t worry about the company needing an answer right away.
Any reasonable manager will understand wanting to wait a day
or two. He’ll probably ask for some kind of deadline (“So, can
I hear back from you by Thursday noon?”), which is certainly
reasonable to not want to be left hanging. If you do get pressured
to take the position immediately, look at it as a red ﬂag that may
point to something more troubling.
What to Ask About
Now that you have the job offer, the rule of “Everything is about
the company” is reversed. Now is the time to ask all the details
and speciﬁcs that you want to know. Examples may include the
following:
• What are the expected work hours? Is there a set minimum
of hours you must work?
• What are the details of the beneﬁts? Tuition reimburse-
ment? Matching charity donations? Any perks like a com-
pany laptop?
• Are there expected days you must work or travel you must
take? Maybe a yearly trade show everyone goes to?
• What’s the dress code like?
Most of these questions are likely answered in the company’s
employee manual, if it has one. Ask to see it. Take home a copy
if they’ll let you. This will give you excellent insight into the
culture of the company and what’s expected.
There’s nothing wrong with making sure you have answers to
all your questions. Assume nothing. If, for example, dress code
matters to you, don’t assume that you can dress the way you
saw everyone, because it might have been Hawaiian shirt day
and everyone is normally in a suit and tie. The time to ask is
before you start the job.

THE JOB OFFER
215
Check the health beneﬁts very carefully, assuming the company
offers them. Ask to see the speciﬁcs of the health coverage. The
HR department should be able to give you details. The health
coverage is part of the total compensation you earn and should
be factored into the total dollar value of the job. If you go to
another company for a salary increase of $5,000 per year but
their prescription drug coverage doesn’t cover your maintenance
medications and you wind up paying $250 per month out of
pocket, it’s really only a $2,000 increase.
Consider your future needs as well. If you and your spouse have
been trying in vain to have a child and have considered fertility
treatments, an insurance policy that covers fertility treatments
could be worth tens of thousands of dollars.
Negotiate the Offer
The best way to negotiate salary is not to negotiate. Negotiating
salary starts out both parties to be at odds with each other.
Say you get an offer for $60,000 per year. Ask yourself, “Is
that enough for me to take this job?” The question shouldn’t
be “Could they be paying me more?”
First, the entire back and forth of negotiating a salary is at its
core a competitive one. You’re trying to get more from them;
they’re trying to get more from you. It starts out the relationship
on a combative stance.
Second, the company is foolish to try to underpay you. It’s just
not in its best interests long term. Say that you’re going to
be doing a job worth $60,000 to the company, and that’s an
appropriate salary for that geographic area. If they offer to pay
you $55,000 for the job and you accept, then you’re underpaid.
You’re going to know that you’re underpaid, if not at ﬁrst, then
when you sniff around. You’re going to look for a higher-paying
job, where you’ll be paid the $60,000 you’re worth, and you’re
going to be unhappy with the company. Eventually, you’ll quit,
and the company has to go through the hiring process again.
I hear some of you asking “But what if the people at the company
aren’t that smart?” Then it sounds to me like it’s not a company
you want to work for—a company that would save a few thou-
sand dollars a year and risk throwing away its investment.

THE JOB OFFER
216
Once you have an offer and you’ve spent a day thinking about
it, you have three choice: make a counteroffer, decline the offer,
or accept the offer.
Make a Counteroffer
If the offer tendered isn’t what you need, usually because
the pay is too low or there are work requirements that won’t
work for you, then you turn down the offer and explain what
your requirements are. It can’t hurt to ask, if your request is
reasonable.
Salary too low:
I appreciate the offer. I’d love to work for Yoy-
odune, but to make this move, I’d need to be at least at $67,000.
Is there something you can do to help make this work out?
Not enough vacation:
I’m afraid that I’m not going to be able
to make this move with the offer as presented. I’d love to work at
Yoyodyne, but one week of vacation isn’t going to work for me.
Can we do something to make this work for both of us?
Note how you’ve stated the problem clearly and anticipated the
follow-up question of “What do you need?” This puts the ball
back in their court. You may get an answer of “I’m sorry to hear
that; that’s the best we can do,” or you may hear “Let me go back
to HR and see whether there’s any wiggle room on the vacation
policy.”
Your reasons for your
requirements are yours
alone.
Please do not imagine that you are
obligated to account for your requests.
You do not need to, and indeed should
not, explain your logic for your salary
or other requirements. Explaining the
logic behind these requirements leaves open the door for negoti-
ation, and they’re not open for negotiation. Maybe you’ve got
a kid who needs a new pancreas, you’ve got an expensive
mistress, or maybe you just like to roll around in cash like
Scrooge McDuck. Your requirements are your requirements,
and if you’re comfortable with them, they must be as well.
Decline the Offer
Sometimes you just have to say “Thanks, but no thanks.” Maybe
the compensation isn’t what you need, and the difference in pay

THE JOB OFFER
217
is one that you’re sure won’t be surmountable and you don’t
want to look greedy. Perhaps you’ve uncovered parts of their
culture or the job duties that have helped change your mind
about wanting to work there. Your need only decline the offer,
not unlike the counteroffer, but without leading to what might
make it possible. Give some indication of why, but no speciﬁcs.
Salary too low:
I appreciate the offer. I’m afraid that I’m going
to have to turn it down. The salary is just not where I need it to be.
Insufﬁcient beneﬁts:
I’m afraid I’m going to have to turn this
job down, as much as I would love to be part of Yoyodyne. The
beneﬁts package isn’t what I’ve become accustomed to.
If you’re asked speciﬁcs, you need only repeat the basic com-
plaint or a slight variation: “It’s just not where I needed; we have
a pretty big difference between the offer and my requirement.”
Make sure that you’re not casting aspersions on the company
by saying anything like “You guys don’t pay very much.” You’re
just describing a difference, not ﬁnding fault.
If there are other, less quantiﬁable issues, they should be
described as well, but remember to keep it as description, not
accusations. Again, you need not spell out speciﬁcs.
Good:
I’m afraid I’m going to have to decline. I’ve thought about
where I’m going in my career and reexamined all that I’ve learned
about Yoyodyne over the past few days, and I just don’t see us
as a long-term match.
Bad:
I’m afraid that if I come on board here I’m going to wind
up doing 90 percent grunt sysadmin work and little to no pro-
gramming.
Good:
I’ve met quite a few great people here at Yoyodyne, but
I’m afraid I wouldn’t ﬁt in well here. I’m going to need to ﬁnd a
team that’s a better match.
Bad:
Half your programmers turned out to be real jerks, and
you, as boss, seem to have done nothing about it.
If the problem is with culture or the job, for example, be pre-
pared for the reasonable question, “Why did you let things get
to the point of an offer?” If you know a company isn’t a ﬁt, let
them know. It’s only fair.

THE JOB OFFER
218
Accept the Offer
If the offer is to your liking, then go ahead and accept. No need
to dance around what you didn’t like. However, you’ll probably
need to negotiate your starting date. Although it’s custom to
give your old employer two weeks’ notice before leaving, there’s
no law that I’m aware of that mandates that. Since you don’t
want to burn any bridges and you want to be well-remembered,
that two-week buffer is one that makes sense. If that works out
with your new employer, then so be it. If they want you to start
sooner, you need to balance the needs of your new employer
with your need to keep in your old employer’s good graces.
Always get an offer in
writing before taking
action.
Never accept an offer without seeing a
written offer. Never give notice at your
old employer without the written offer
in hand. Verbal offers can easily be
rescinded. Get an offer letter from them
that spells out, at the very least, your annual salary, your bene-
ﬁts package, any additional perks, and your starting date. Make
sure the printed letter matches your expectations. This isn’t a
matter of trust or mistrust but of making sure there are no mis-
understandings. If you’re at all unsure of something, ask. Maybe
you get a week of vacation the ﬁrst year, but is that ﬁrst calen-
dar year or ﬁrst year of employment? Oh, ﬁrst ﬁscal year? Good
thing you asked!
Make sure the offer is from the HR department or an ofﬁcer
of the company, not just an email from the hiring manager. It
would be tragic to ﬁnd that you’d resigned your old position,
only to ﬁnd that the hiring manager at your new company didn’t
have the authority to extend the offer to you and, oh, so sorry,
that offer isn’t valid.
Until you have the offer in writing, don’t breathe a word to
anyone that you’ve accepted the job, because until you have the
offer, you really haven’t. Don’t tell your buddy at the next cube
over, and certainly don’t start packing up your cube thinking
no one will notice. You have clearance from me to tell your
spouse and your mom if you have to. That’s it.
When you ﬁnally have a written offer, it’s time to resign.

LEAVE YOUR JOB GRACEFULLY
219
11.6
Leave Your Job Gracefully
Leaving a job isn’t just a matter of telling your boss you quit.
It’s a stressful action for all involved, both you and your boss.
Handle it carefully just as you’d handle any other business
situation. Your actions here can give you a terrible reputation
or can make friends for a lifetime.
Write a simple, brief resignation letter. As always, include no
judgments and include only the absolutely necessary facts.
October 31, 2009
Dear Arthur Carlson,
I will be resigning my position as System Administra-
tor II for Cincinnati Radio Holdings. My last day will
be November 14, 2009.
Don’t explain your departure. Date the letter, print it, and sign
it. Present it to your boss. Congratulations, you’ve just resigned.
Now that you’ve resigned, there’s no going back. I hope you got
the new job offer in writing.
Decline Any Counteroffer
Your current employer may try to entice you to stay, usually by
offering you a raise. Don’t take it. Taking a counteroffer is about
as bad a career move as you can make.
First, before your resignation from Company A, you accepted
an offer from Company B to go work for them. To accept a
counteroffer from Company A means you must go back on your
promise to Company B. Imagine if you’d had an offer rescinded
on you. That’s how Company B will see you.
Second, your time at Company A will probably be short-lived.
You’ve just told your boss that you want to leave, that you’re
itching to go, and that you can be bought off with a salary bump.
You can bet that they’ll be looking for replacements as soon as
possible.
And that raise they offered you? That’s actually an advance on
your future pay raises. And why are they willing to give you

LEAVE YOUR JOB GRACEFULLY
220
a raise, anyway? Either they must have known that you were
underpaid and now they ﬁgure that now is the time to give you
what you’re worth, or you’re going to lose out on future income.
Either way, they don’t have a special fund called “Money for
employees we need to convince to stay.” My friend and colleague
Kristen Henmueller found this out.
You Always Pay for the Counteroffer
by Kristen Henmueller
When I told my boss I was resigning, she turned white. As the
only web designer at a large retail operation, with more than ten
years of experience with the company, they couldn’t lose my
knowledge and experience. She asked what the new company
would be paying me, and I told her. Later that day, she came back
offering me the new salary if I stayed on board.
I liked the company I worked for, and I was comfortable with the
work I was doing. Quite frankly I was a bit terriﬁed of starting a
new job. One of the biggest reasons I wanted the change was for
the bump in salary. This seemed like the best of both worlds, so I
agreed to stay on.
I shouldn’t have been surprised when I heard from HR the next
day. While they would be able to give me the new salary, my job
title and pay grade would be lowered. And although I would be
getting the higher salary, it was at the top end of the new, lower
pay grade. This would directly impact the potential for raises I
would have in the future. With a sinking feeling, I realized I
shouldn’t have taken the offer. Fortunately, I quickly found a
third job, and this time I stuck to my guns.
Kristen was lucky here. How much do you want to bet that Kris-
ten would have been let go once her department’s crunch time
was over? What kind of relationship could she have expected
with her boss?
Don’t give into the temptation to go back to the job you’re com-
fortable with for more money. Decline the counteroffer.
Be Well Remembered
Once you’ve given your resignation, your goal until you leave
the company is to be well remembered. You want people to say
“Ol’ Steve, he was a good guy.” Leave graciously, and burn no
bridges.

LEAVE YOUR JOB GRACEFULLY
221
Don’t go out in a blaze
of “glory.”
No matter how much you may enjoy
the thought of telling your boss just
how stupid he is, how poorly he runs
the department, and how you can’t
wait to hear how they’ll manage without you, keep it as a
thought. There’s no good outcome of your actions, and they
can only hurt you. Sending a long, rambling email telling your
soon-to-be-ex co-workers about how you’re glad to be leaving is
pointless and destructive.
People have long memories. We work in an extremely well-
connected industry. Send a letter complaining about how terri-
ble the company is, and that’s how you’ll be remembered. Every-
thing good you’ve done will be eclipsed by your noisy departure.
Chances are it will get around.
Spend your remaining time at the company working on relation-
ships you want to maintain after you’re gone. Get contacts and
home email addresses for the people who can help you, and who
you can help, in your future travels.
Avoid the Exit Interview
At many companies, when you leave you’ll stop by HR to take
part in an exit interview. You’ll typically be asked questions,
either verbally or in a questionnaire, about your departure, how
you were treated, and what the company could do to improve.
It’s presented as a way to get things off your chest, to let man-
agement know how you really feel, and to unload.
Don’t do it. You have nothing to gain by going through this pro-
cess and can only lose.
First, expect that everything you say will get back to the people
you’re discussing. Your exit interview is in effect the same thing
as telling off your boss, which I just counseled against. You may
be promised that the information will be kept conﬁdential, but
someone besides the HR clerk has to see it, right? Even if it’s not
direct information, it’s not too hard to ﬁgure out where negative
comments came from. When you tell HR that your now-ex boss
takes a lot of long lunches and is terrible at running meetings,
and a few weeks later she comes under scrutiny for those things,
it’s easy to connect the dots.

GETTING REJECTED
222
Second, if you ﬁnd yourself wondering “Why are they asking me
this now, when I’m leaving?” you’re on to something. The time
to discuss these issues is long past. If you’re leaving because,
for example, your boss has no interest in helping you with your
career, it does you no good to complain about it now. That ship
has sailed.
So, what do you say at the exit interview? Simply say, “I don’t
have any comments to make,” and leave it at that.
If you’re waiting for the exit interview so that you can say good
things about someone at the company or how things are run,
then do so directly. Write a letter or email, or tell the persons
directly, expressing your gratitude and appreciation for what
they’ve done and how you’ve appreciated it. This is core to
maintaining a healthy network of contacts.
For more about exit interviews, and the potential legal risks,
read Nick Corcodilos’ article “Exit Interview, Stage Right.”1
11.7
Getting Rejected
Rejections happen. Despite your best research, a stellar résumé,
a wonderful interview, and fantastic references, you’re going to
get word back that you didn’t get the job you wanted. If it’s
after a ﬁrst interview, you may get a form letter from the HR
department saying “We’ve decided to go to in a different direction
ﬁlling this position.” If it’s after a second or third interview, you’ll
typically hear back from the hiring manager directly.
I won’t pretend that rejection doesn’t suck. At the very least, it’s
disappointing, even if you ﬁgured you weren’t that interested in
the job anyway. It can hurt your feelings, too, and that’s OK,
because, hey, you’re human. Business is business, but you’re
not a robot.
For what it’s worth, it’s no picnic for the person doing the reject-
ing. Only the coldest, most jaded hiring manager isn’t bothered
by turning down candidates. Even if the person is a lousy candi-
date and entirely unpleasant, it’s no fun calling up to say “Sorry,
but no.”
1.
http://www.asktheheadhunter.com/haexit.htm

GETTING REJECTED
223
Rejection Whittles Down the Options
Getting turned down can be the best thing that happens to you
on your job hunt, because it’s one job eliminated from the ﬁeld
of contenders that is, by deﬁnition, not the right job for you.
Remember that a job is a relationship. Both parties have to want
the relationship to work in order for the relationship to be a
successful, satisfying one. If one party doesn’t want the rela-
tionship, then it’s not going to work. As frustrating as it is to be
told “no,” at least it’s one fewer possibility to have consider.
Get the Most Out of Rejection
It’s often possible to get something good out of the situation,
however, by asking the hiring manager for advice. You may
gain contacts and may even ﬁnd out what speciﬁcally was
lacking that knocked you out of the running. You just need to
be very careful with your contact at the company, who will be
uncomfortable at the time, since he’s just had to turn you down
for a job.
At some point after the rejection, either at the time of the rejec-
tion or a day or two later if it’s not comfortable at the time of
rejection, ask the person rejecting you for some help. Let’s say
that the hiring manager has called you up to give the bad news.
Your conversation might go something like this.
Manager:
Bob, thanks for the time you’ve spent coming to
meet us. After this round of interviews, we’ve decided to go with
another candidate for the position.
You:
Thanks for calling me, Tim. Of course I’m disappointed,
because Yoyodyne seems like a great place to work, and I enjoyed
meeting with Julie and Marsee. It sounds like you’ve got the right
candidate, though, so I’m glad that’s worked out for you.
Note how you’re expressing disappointment, in effect reiterat-
ing “I do want the job” and helping make the manager more at
ease. You’re helping him breathe easier and diffusing the ten-
sion. This ought to let him open up a bit.
At this point, having done the dirty deed of rejecting you, the
manager may want to hang up quickly (“Well, thanks again for
your interest.” <click>) or may be conversational and open to
your questions. If it feels like the latter, you can try to tactfully

GETTING REJECTED
224
and carefully probe a little to ﬁnd out what the other candidates
had that you didn’t or what made them a better ﬁt. Note that
you are not asking “Why didn’t you pick me?” or “What was
wrong with me?” or even “What skills was I missing?” Those are
questions that are inherently negative, making them harder to
answer. Instead, make them positives, without getting personal.
Also, do not ask who got the job, because that’s none of your
business.
Manager:
Yes, I think the choice we’re leaning toward is going
to work out well. You were in our top three, though.
You:
Thanks, I’m glad to hear that. If I could ask, what gave
the winning candidate the edge?
Manager:
Well, there were a lot of things. The big one was
Oracle. As you know we do a lot with Oracle, and although your
SQL knowledge in MySQL was strong, we just felt better with
someone with more background in Oracle speciﬁcally.
You:
Absolutely, I can understand that.
Note that you absolutely are not disagreeing or arguing over the
decision.2 Absolutely do not argue with the information you’ve
just been given. Do not try to convince the interviewer that you
could learn Oracle if you were just given the chance. The choice
has been made, and you must respect it, even if you’d rather
have it another way or even if you think the choice was made
on faulty assumptions. To do otherwise is extremely disrespect-
ful and makes you look like a whiner. It gives you the stink of
desperation.
Now, you can ask for advice and guidance. People like to help
other people but don’t like to be asked to be given something, so
walk the careful line between the two. Ask for guidance in your
further path.
You:
Knowing what you know about me and my background,
do you have any advice on how I might advance in the future?
Manager:
Not a lot. I liked what I saw, but this other candidate
was just a better ﬁt. Some more up-to-date Java knowledge might
2.
Similarly, this is the same approach to take with getting ﬁred.

AND THE CYCLE OF WORK CONTINUES...
225
help. There are some amazing things happening in on the Apache
Tomcat project that you might want to take a look at.
You:
Thanks for that, I’m making a note of it. I appreciate you
taking the time to talk to me today. Good luck!
If you feel that you have built up some sort of rapport with the
hiring manager or where you’ve come in for a second interview
but didn’t make the ﬁnal cut, ask for a referral somewhere else.
You can ask, “Do you know of any other companies that might
make use of my skills?” If you’re a good candidate but not right
for that job, the hiring manager may help by referring you to
another company. She helps herself and her network by sending
a qualiﬁed candidate to a colleague.
Be careful that you don’t come across as pushy or sounding
like you’re owed something. You’re asking for a favor, one of a
pointer to another company. You don’t want to sound like you’re
saying “Can you get me a job somewhere else?”
11.8
And the Cycle of Work Continues...
We’ve walked through the hiring process from head to tail. We’ve
covered everything you should need to get and land a job you
love and how to move forward to your next job. Going through
this process is always time-consuming and usually more than a
little stressful. It’s one of those parts of life where you can look
back and say “I’m glad that’s over with.”
But it’s never over.
No matter how great your new job is, you’re going to need
another one again in the future. Nobody stays at their job for-
ever these days. Knowing that, you can optimize your working
life and career now to make the next time easier. That’s what
the ﬁnal chapter is about.

Chapter 12
Staying Hirable
So you have a good job. You’ve gone through the hunting and
the résumés and the interviews and the references and ﬁnally,
ﬁnally, you’ve landed the job you want at a company you’ve
always wanted to work for. You can ﬁnally relax and forget about
the tiring job search.
Sure, put the job search out of your head for a few weeks, maybe
a month. Put yourself 110 percent into starting out on the good
foot and making a splash at your new gig. And then put your
job hunting hat back on. Preparing for the next job is what this
chapter is about.
“But I love my new job!” I hear you say. “I just went through
this book about getting hired, and now you tell me to plan for
my next job?” Indeed I am.
Unless you’re nearing retirement, you’ll be changing employers
in the future. No matter how much you love your new job, can
you actually see yourself staying at the same company for the
rest of your working life? Even if you can imagine such a future,
it’s not entirely in your control.
You can get the rug pulled out from you in a number of ways,
none of which you can control. Consider this short list of sce-
narios that can change your view of your job, if not have you on
the street against your will:
• Your boss decides that all programming is going to be done
in Java from now on, and you’d rather have a tooth pulled
than write Java.

CHAPTER 12. STAYING HIRABLE
227
• The company outsources the work your department is
doing.
• Your boss is replaced by someone you can’t stand.
• A new vice president of IT comes in and decides to “clean
house,” starting with your department.
• The company decides to move to new headquarters that
make your commute unbearable, or even to another state.
• Someone has it in for you and manages to get you ﬁred
for some petty offense, or your performance isn’t what you
thought it was and you’re let go.
• A massive recession spurred by the collapse of the bank-
ing and automotive industries also causes your company’s
sales to drop signiﬁcantly, and you get caught in across-
the-board layoffs.
Your need for another job is a “when,” not an “if.” And since you
know that you’re going to need another job in the future, you
might as well get started on it right now.
Internalize the need to take care of your career, your future jobs,
and yourself. It’s your responsibility, and no one else’s. Please
don’t fall into the trap of thinking that your employer will take
care of your career planning or that your “career path” at work is
necessarily what’s best for you. Many organizations have career
advancement programs, where employees can work to make a
career path for their future advancement, and if they do, that’s
great. However, consider that the company will be aiming your
career advancement in a way that ultimately beneﬁts the com-
pany best. That may or may not be what’s best for you and your
career.
No matter your current
job, you’re working for
yourself.
No matter what your current job is,
you’re working for yourself. Consider
yourself as working for You And Your
Family, Inc., and you’re a contractor to
whomever your current employer is.
The three steps to keeping yourself hirable are these: improve
yourself, improve your network, and improve your brand.

IMPROVE YOURSELF
228
12.1
Improve Yourself
Anyone in a technical capacity, from programmer to system
administrator to project manager to graphic designer, is in an
industry that is constantly innovating and constantly adding
new features and capabilities to the world around us. If you’re
not learning something new, you’re falling behind the competi-
tion. You may not have the competition now, but you will when
that next job comes along.
I’m sure that you understand much of this, because I know
you’re willing and able to improve yourself. That you are reading
this book proves it. If you knew everything and if you thought
you were the best you could be and had nothing new to learn,
you wouldn’t waste your time reading these words.
This self-improvement is not cheap.
Some
paths to self-
improvement will take more time than others, and some may
cost money. As with most things in life, you’ll get more out
when you put more in. Just remember that your investment
pays dividends, often right away. Maybe you’ll ﬁnd out about a
new project-tracking system or application framework that you
can use in your current job. When you’re working at improving
yourself, people notice as well. This helps improve your brand-
ing at work, as I’ll discuss in Section 12.3, Improve Your Brand,
on page 237.
When I talk about self-improvement at conferences, I’ll often get
someone protesting “But my boss doesn’t give us any time to
work on side projects” or “We’re not Google, and we don’t get
one day a week to work on side projects!” That’s the case for
most IT folks, and still people manage to improve their skills.
You’re the only one in charge of your career, and complaining
“I never was given a chance to improve myself” is cold comfort
when your skills are out-of-date and you can’t get the job you
want.
Jump-Start Your Self-improvement
These exercises and activities will help you improve your skills.
Each includes a writing, helping, or teaching component, for
two reasons.

IMPROVE YOURSELF
229
Teaching is the best way
to understand a topic.
First, one of the best ways to improve
your learning is by teaching it to some-
one else. The expectation that we’ll be
teaching someone else improves our
comprehension and retention. We think more about what it is
that we’ve been reading or learning.
Second, writing is a crucial skill that everyone can do a bet-
ter job at. Think about how much of your communication with
others is written text. The importance of being able to use the
written word has never been greater.
• Start a blog. See Section 12.3, Build an Online Presence,
on page 239 for details.
• Join a mailing list for discussion of a technical topic of
interest to you, preferably one that is new to you. Better
still, create one of your own. Yahoo! Groups1 and Google
Groups2 let you create one for free in seconds. Get a dozen
of your friends and colleagues to join to get things going.
• Learn a new programming language. Write a small but
meaningful program with it. Use features not available in
your language of choice. What don’t you like about the new
language? Think about why that feature exists. Write about
it.
• Install a new OS. Is it better or worse than your OS of
choice? Why are the differences from your current OS
there? What makes things easier? Write about it.
• Follow a new blog. Read the previous twenty or thirty
entries. Is the author brilliant or full of crap? How does her
writing style change? What can you learn about improv-
ing your own blog? Pick a great entry, link to it, and write
about it.
• Install a new software package or program for your desk-
top. Think about what you like and don’t like about it.
Think about how you’d improve it. Think about what ideas
you can use yourself. Write about it.
1.
http://groups.yahoo.com
2.
http://groups.google.com

IMPROVE YOURSELF
230
• Join a new technical mailing list or message board. Lurk
and listen before posting, trying to absorb the culture.
What do you think of individual members? Are they people
you’d like to work with? Why or why not? Write about it,
without getting too negative and without calling out spe-
ciﬁc people.
• Join a mailing list or message board related to your
customers’ interests. If you work for a distributor to
restaurants, ﬁnd a message board for restaurant owners
and management. Lurk silently. Resist the temptation to
defend your company when it gets bad-mouthed. Listen
and think about what you can do to improve things for
customers. Write about it.
• Subscribe to a business magazine like Forbes, Business
Week, or Inc. Find at least one article that pertains to your
company’s business. Tear it out, and pass it around the
department. Write about it. Read the ads, which are a fas-
cinating window into a culture. Find one that amuses or
horriﬁes you. Write about it.
• Read a new book on a job or industry radically different
from what you know. Try to understand the surround-
ing culture. It could be mortgage risk analysis, police dog
training, silversmithing, child care, textile production, or
forestry. What are the similarities to your job and indus-
try? What lessons can you take away? Write about them.
• Check out a recorded book from your library, and listen to
it on your daily commute. Business books are good, but
history is ﬁlled with lessons and problems amazingly simi-
lar to our life today. The next time you feel frustrated about
management at work, listen to a military history, and hear
how your company’s leadership could be better or much
worse. Write about it.
• Take a class. Your local community college probably has
something to offer you in a class you can attend once or
twice a week at night after work and at a relatively inex-
pensive cost. Pick something that will help you during the
day at work, or pick something that you’d always wanted
to learn about but never had a chance to. Write about it.

IMPROVE YOURSELF
231
• Help your children with their homework. What did you for-
get since you were in school? What are they learning that
you never did? What are they learning different from what
you learned? Write about it.
• Stretch out at work. Take on a project that requires you
to jump in and learn something new. Maybe it won’t be a
project ofﬁcially assigned to you, but that still has beneﬁt
for you, your department, or your company. Write about it.
• Read. Read. Read. Read as much as you can about as
many different things as you can. Then write about it.
Use Your Résumé as a Tracking Tool
Aim to have something interesting to add to your résumé every
three months, or every six months at the most. It doesn’t have
to be a new title or promotion, but your job should be challeng-
ing and different enough that you’re not doing the same stuff
for half a year. It might be a new job responsibility or a new
project. Maybe you put together some new system that saved
the department a few hours a week in tracking time. Whatever
it is, if it provided value to the company, it’s résumé-worthy. If it
improves who you are as an employee, it’s also résumé-worthy.
If you can’t add
anything to your résumé
semi-annually, you’re in
a rut.
The résumé rule isn’t absolute, but it’s
a relative indicator. If you’re not able to
add anything to your résumé, chances
are that you’re stuck in a career rut.
Your skills are probably getting rusty,
and it’s imperative that you take care of
the self-improvement on your own. You may also want to reeval-
uate the job you’re in. If you’ve done nothing résumé-worthy
in six months, are you getting enough challenge to make you
excited to go to work? Only you can answer, but use the résumé
rule as your ﬁrst warning ﬂag.
However you get your self-improvement, whether from work or
outside (or both!), keep track of it so you can see your own
progress. You may not want to bother noting on your résumé
that you ﬁnished a semester class in ancient Greek history,3
3.
Although you certainly would if it were an accounting class.

IMPROVE YOUR NETWORK
232
but remember it yourself, and feel good about what you’ve done.
And then go do something else. Lather, rinse, repeat.
12.2
Improve Your Network
As I discussed in Section 5.2, Where the Jobs Are, on page 99,
other people are the most helpful tool you have to ﬁnding your
next job. Maintaining a solid network of contacts, of people who
are willing to help you out, may be as important as any other
area of self-improvement. You might have the best skills, but
they’re not much good if you can’t ﬁnd the job you want. A good
network will help you ﬁnd the job you want and sometimes even
get hired.
Getting a job is about
who you know and
what you know.
Your skills and personality may win
you the job once you interview, but you
have to get the interview in the ﬁrst
place. Having a rich set of contacts is
twice as likely to get you that interview
than any other approach. (Refer to the study in Section 5.2, The
Hard Numbers on Job Boards, on page 103 for the math.)
That foot in the door is no guarantee of a job, of course. No com-
pany worth working for is going to hire someone simply because
of who the candidate knows. However, for the hiring manager,
the value of a recommendation from a trusted colleague is huge.
All other things being equal, I’m going to want to hire someone
recommended by someone I trust before I get someone green
from the streets.
Your contacts are real people who know you. They know that
helping someone else is a great way to get helped yourself
later. Your business contacts need not be what you would call
“friends,” people you would go have a beer with, to provide
you value. Your colleague may just be someone you’ve done
work with, or worked for, and you have a valuable business
relationship.
Building a Network
It should be clear by now that people are crucial to ongoing
career choices. They lead you to the good jobs and help you
get them. Having a large, varied network of people who know

IMPROVE YOUR NETWORK
233
and trust you may well be the number-one determinant of what
options and jobs you have available to you in the future.
You get part of your network by default. People you’ve gone to
school with, or worked with in recent years, are the core of your
business network. Family members as well are excellent con-
tacts when it comes time to look for a new job in earnest.
This core of contacts is not enough, however. Everyone else has
co-workers, school alumni, and family members to help. You
want a bigger, more helpful network than the other guy. You
also want to meet new people and have new contacts. Your co-
workers, family, and school friends are all based in the past.
Building a network is about moving into the future.
“That’s great, Andy,” I hear you say, “but I’m not a social kind
of person. I’m not very outgoing, and I don’t have time to work
on that.” I understand that concern. I wasn’t always outgoing,
either. I can only ask “Can you afford not to expand your
network?”
I’m not suggesting that you change who you are but rather
how you view others around you. The rest of the world isn’t
a nuisance but rather a source of new experiences, new back-
grounds, and probably more than a few new friends, if you’ll
allow yourself to ﬁnd them. From a mercenary point of view, it’s
also a source of new business contacts who will help you ﬁnd
and land your next great job.
Simple Ways to Improve Your Network
Here are simple, concrete ways to help improve your social net-
work. Some are direct, some indirect, but all help you get into
the way of thinking about social contacts that will be standard
in the coming years. Note that in some cases, the activities over-
lap with those already discussed in Section 12.1, Jump-Start
Your Self-improvement, on page 228.
• Have
lunch
with
someone
outside
your
department.
Surely there are people in your company whom you are
acquainted with, but not that well. Aim for once a week.
• Go to a user group meeting in your area of expertise. The
group may be technical or purely social. Either way, meet
as many people as you can. Find out about others, and let

IMPROVE YOUR NETWORK
234
them know about you. Then look at user groups in areas
you don’t know but would like to know.
• Join a new mailing list in your area of expertise. Answer
technical questions. Follow up with those you’ve helped to
see whether your advice did the trick. You’re far more likely
to make a connection with that person.
• Go to a meeting or join a mailing list about something non-
technical that interests you. Maybe you raise tropical ﬁsh,
so join a tropical ﬁsh group. People you know outside of a
business capacity can still turn into technical contacts.
• Hang out in an IRC channel related to your area of exper-
tise. Answer questions. Try a channel on a topic you’d like
to know more about.
• Send mail to someone whose work you admired or wrote a
blog post you learned from.
• Send an instant message to someone whose work you
admired, if they publish their address. More and more peo-
ple are using Jabber, AIM, Yahoo! Messenger, and the like,
and this can be an easy way to introduce yourself to some-
one without the fear of meeting face-to-face.
• Thank the manager at a restaurant for a great meal or
great service from the wait staff. It’s the opposite of what
they’ve come to expect. It’s also great practice for learning
to say “I like X, and I thank you for it.”
• Learn to shake hands with conﬁdence. In the United
States, shaking hands is a universal gesture of business
greeting, whether the parties are male, female, or both. The
tactile feedback of hand against hand also helps drop your
mental defenses and makes you more open to talking to
the other person. See the sidebar on page 157 for more.
Clearly, some of these will have you meet more new people than
others. Some, like having lunch with different people, are habits
you get into, where others, like going to user groups, take more
practice. All will help build your social circle and make you more
comfortable with meeting people.

IMPROVE YOUR NETWORK
235
Make It Easier to Meet Other People
For some of you, this level of social interaction may be intim-
idating. Our industry attracts those who enjoy working with
machines and may less enjoy the human aspects. That’s not at
all an indictment but an observation. That said, it’s still impor-
tant to have a network that involves real live people to help you
in your career.
Before you go down this road, take a look at how you see oth-
ers. Are you a comparer, silently measuring your value against
the value of others? If so, know that it is toxic to your happi-
ness and your career. There is no surer way to scuttle existing
relationships and inhibit the growth of new ones.
The Internet has done away with the face-to-face caste systems
that used to keep people stratiﬁed. People who you might see as
“above,” you are just the same as you and everyone else. They’re
not imbued with special powers, and they probably don’t have
the attitude that you are not worthy of social interaction with
them. If they do, it’s a character ﬂaw in who they are, not what
they’ve achieved.
Industry rock stars are
just regular people.
This means that the people you admire,
or even idolize, are not in some imag-
ined ivory tower to be watched from
afar. Indeed, they are potentially some
of the greatest contacts you can have. Whether in person or in
email and whether at work, at a meeting, or a conference, you
have no reason not to meet the people who you admire.
The easiest way to get to meet someone you see as “above” you
is to tell him or her “Hi, I’m Bob Smith. I like what you did,
and I thank you for it.” It could be in email, or it could be in
person, but it always starts simple. The ﬁrst time I met Dave
Thomas, one of the publishers of this very book, I recognized
him in an elevator at a conference and told him I loved the book
he cowrote, The Pragmatic Programmer [HT00], and that I was
glad the book existed for me to refer newer programmers to.
This approach works for a number of reasons. First, it gives you
something to say and some common ground. You’re both famil-
iar with what the person has done, so you can both intelligently
discuss it if the person chooses to. Second, it puts the person

IMPROVE YOUR NETWORK
236
Can Facebook Get Me a Job?
In recent years, sites like Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter
have made social networking a game. It’s fun to search
for people you know and add them to your list of friends
or contacts. In a way, it’s social networking, but not like
I’m talking about here.
The sort of network I’m talking about is of colleagues, of
people who can and will help you in your career, and
for whom you’d return the favor. Keeping track of these
folks on LinkedIn may help keep them in front of mind,
but what good is having 200 contacts on a site if they’re
not there in a pinch?
I’m not at all bashing any of these sites. I have plenty
of contacts on all three and will likely have plenty more
on the dozens of others that pop up after this book is
printed. Just don’t confuse someone you only vaguely
know because they friended you on Facebook with
someone who’s looking out for you.
you’re talking with in a positive frame of mind. Everyone likes
having their work admired and appreciated.
Try it next time you go to a user group meeting where some-
one gives a talk. If you liked the talk, just say that. “Hi, I’m
Bob Smith. Thanks for the talk. I liked what you were saying
about backup strategies.” Even if it wasn’t all that fascinating,
you probably learned something, right? You can say “Hi, I’m
Bob Smith. Some of those software packages I’d never heard
of before. Thanks for speaking tonight.”
Do not criticize the person you’re meeting, because that’s how
you’ll be remembered. If you go up and say “Yeah, hi, I just
wanted to tell you that you spelled accessory wrong on slide
12,” you’ll be remembered as the person who complained about
the slides.
Of course, all these same ideas apply when you’re emailing or
IMing someone. “I like what you did, and I appreciate it.” As
with face-to-face discussions, it’s respectful and it leaves the
door open for more conversation, if the person wants it.

IMPROVE YOUR BRAND
237
Keeping Track of Your Contacts
As you build your social network, keep track of who they are,
and their vital information. Keep a database of your contacts,
with scraps of information to help you remember who people are
and how you know them. Not only is that person your contact,
you are also his or hers. Tracking these tidbits of information
will help you down the road when you get an email from some-
one you only somewhat remember. “Aha!” you’ll exclaim, “she
was that artist from Indiana I met at a web conference a few
years ago.”
Tracking contacts doesn’t have to be fancy, and you don’t need
some big fancy-shmancy contact database designed for a sales
person. You can use Outlook on Windows, or you can use
Address Book on the Mac. There are any number of options
available to you out on the Net, of course. You can track every-
thing in a text ﬁle if it works for you.
The information doesn’t have to be detailed. Track email
addresses and phone numbers if you have them, of course, but
that’s just what it takes to get in touch with someone. I like to
track business speciﬁcs, like where the person works and what
his or her title is. Web page and blog URLs ﬁt along these lines.
It’s also good to note personal things if they come up, like a
spouse’s name or names and ages of children. Then, in notes
ﬁelds, I add speciﬁcs of the reason for knowing this person. It
might be a project name or a conference where you met, but it
should be enough to help you remember if that person comes
out of the dark past and you’ve forgotten the connection.
This tracking of information must become a habit, or it won’t
get done. You can’t slack off for years and then decide you’d
better hurry up and write everything down because your job
is in jeopardy. The only way to build your network, and the
database of information about the people in it, is to cultivate it
continually over time, as a habit.
12.3
Improve Your Brand
Your brand is crucial in your job search and in your day-to-
day life at work. Before you sneer at the word brand as being
“marketing,” consider the power of the concept of the brand.

IMPROVE YOUR BRAND
238
Brands are all around us in the real world. What do you think of
when you hear the name Microsoft? Walmart? America Online?
Apple? Some you love, some you hate. Many people are their
own brands: Oprah, Tom Cruise, Matt Groening, Elvis, Bono,
and David Letterman, for example. Again, some you love, some
you hate.
It’s not just celebrities who have strong brands. In our own
industry, we have Bill Gates, Richard Stallman, Steve Jobs,
Steve McConnell, Bill Joy, Larry Wall, and Steve Ballmer. Each
of these probably conjures up an image and reaction for you.
You have a brand,
whether you want it or
not.
The fact is, everyone has a brand,
whether he wants it or not. Whether it’s
a good or bad brand, and what you do
with it, is up to you.
A colleague of mine, active in the Perl
community, once told of interviewing for a Perl job. The hiring
manager explained right off “My guys all know your work. We
don’t need to discuss your technical background.” What a repu-
tation to have, to have your technical bona ﬁdes not questioned
at a job interview! That’s the power of a strong brand.
Brand is just shorthand for your reputation, how you’re known,
and what people think of you. I speciﬁcally use the word brand
because it is a business term, and you’re doing work to help
business. Let the business angle help shape your thinking.
At work, your brand works for you and against you. It affects
how you’re seen by everyone around you, even if they haven’t
met you. It affects the projects you get assigned to and how
much money you get when it’s time for raises.
How are you seen at work? Which of these words applies to how
others see you?
• Helpful? Or obstructive?
• Diligent? Or lazy?
• Approachable? Or standofﬁsh?
• Careful? Or sloppy?
• Humble? Or arrogant?
• Attentive? Or careless?
• Eager? Or apathetic?

IMPROVE YOUR BRAND
239
Perception is reality.
Are you sure? Be honest with yourself,
because it doesn’t matter what your
perception is as much as the percep-
tions of others. You may think you’re the nicest guy in the place,
but if you’re the only one who sees it that way, then it doesn’t
much matter.
A brand is also based on the work you do. If the projects you’re
working on are cutting edge, that reﬂects on you. If you never
do more than rote reporting applications, chances are people
around the company won’t remember you. Your brand is also
what people see each day in the results you produce. Are you
someone who consistently turns out good work, who makes
things run smoothly, and who brings projects in on time? Or
are you the guy who blows Monday mornings and Friday after-
noons reading Slashdot? Are you sure?
For more on personal branding, please pick up a copy of Tom
Peters’ excellent The Brand You 50 [Pet99].
Build an Online Presence
If you’re serious about your personal brand, you need an online
presence that supports your personal brand now and in the
future. Maintaining your online presence is important to giving
a proper impression to your future employers.
I’m not talking about a big fancy website. At the very least, you
should have a blog or some place where you can be found by
name and where you show off your technical skill. A blog is
likely the ﬁrst hit that a potential employer will ﬁnd when doing
a web search for you. You want that to represent at least some
of your professional skills.
If you already have a blog, or a personal website, but it’s not
technical, start a technical one. Keep it separate from the per-
sonal blog. A future employer won’t be inspired to call you for
an interview by your trip to the Grand Canyon. What I’m talking
about is a tech-related blog that just deals with what value you
have to an employer. For those who don’t, start a blog today.

IMPROVE YOUR BRAND
240
Your blog need not be complicated, and it can be almost trivial
to create. You can create one through Blogger4 or WordPress5
for free in a matter of minutes.
Treat your blog like a technical diary. Use it to reﬂect on the
work you’ve done over time, as you do it. Populate it with infor-
mation that will give employers a sense of your technical skills,
as well as a running journal of day-to-day activities.
For example, one day you might write this:
You, in your blog:
Spent half a day playing with
LogFoo today. It’s a new open source website log anal-
ysis tool I saw mentioned on Slashdot, and the sample
reports were impressive. We’ve been using WebBonker
for over two years now, and I ﬁgure it wouldn’t hurt to
look around.
Unfortunately, it wasn’t a good experience. Installation
was a chore. There wasn’t a prebuilt RPM package for
it, so I had to install a half dozen dependent libraries
on a scratch server, and then spent a good hour mon-
keying with conﬁguration parameters just to get it to
install.
Finally, when I got it going, it was slooooow. It took
more than an hour to analyze the last year of logs from
the website. And then, when it ﬁnally generated the
reports, they were these bland reports, nothing like the
demo. Turns out the demo reports require the Stylizer
add-on and some style pack. What a pain.
Your blog can be more
powerful than any
résumé.
That’s not so tough to write. It may
take you ten or twenty minutes, but
the investment will last for years. It’s
like putting away money in a special
account with each paycheck. Blog just
twice a month, and in a year you’ve got twenty-four entries that
give potential employers insight into your skills and background
better than any résumé can.
4.
http://www.blogger.com/
5.
http://wordpress.com/

ALWAYS LOOK FOR YOUR NEXT JOB
241
Blog about anything you’ve done that you might tell a techie
buddy about at lunch or over beers after work. Make sure that
you’re not just reporting like it’s a news story but that you tell
something about you at the same time.
Here are some ideas to get you thinking. Note how each one
sounds like it might be a story you’d tell at an interview.
• A particularly pernicious bug you found in some code and
how you ﬁxed it
• The story of a terrible catastrophe, how you ﬁxed it, and
how you helped prevent it from happening again
• An article about software development methodology and
your opinions about what it said
• Your ﬁve favorite books about Linux
• The three Photoshop ﬁlters you use most, and why
• Your experience trying out a new editor, or programming
language, or some other tool
• What
you’d
like
to
change
in
your
current
edi-
tor/language/tool
Don’t worry if people aren’t going to read it. This is for your ben-
eﬁt, mostly. It’s your career journal—your running log of what
you’ve done and why you rock.
However, there’s tangible value besides to you. Chances are that
you’ll get some contacts. Someone searching the Web for the
same cryptic error message you were stumped by will ﬁnd your
blog entry, where she’ll learn what you did to solve the problem.
That person may also contact you to thank you and become a
member of your technical network. You never know what will
happen.
Remember, chance favors the prepared mind, as well as the
blogger who publishes good content.
12.4
Always Look for Your Next Job
You know you’ll need another job some day. You know you’ll
need to be prepared when that day comes. There’s no better
way to keep this mind-set than to always have your eyes open
for your next great job.

ALWAYS LOOK FOR YOUR NEXT JOB
242
Do some low-key searching of job sites every so often. Sign up
for a local job listing mailing list. Subscribe to the RSS feed for
a bulletin board that specializes in your area of expertise. This
will keep a steady stream of job information passing in front of
you. Maybe 95 percent of it is uninteresting, but that other 5
percent could be gold.
None of this is to say that you should pursue the jobs that you
spy. Don’t pursue an alternative job just because something
comes by that you’re qualiﬁed for. However, do take the time to
consider what you see. Think about the trade-offs you’d make,
and assess your current situation.
There Could Be Something Better
Even the best jobs might be eclipsed by another opportunity,
but you won’t know unless you’re looking for them. Consider
the possibilities:
• Opportunity to lead a new team on a groundbreaking
project.
• Working in an industry that’s always fascinated you
• Working for a company whose products you love (I once
pursued a sysadmin position working for Touch & Go
Records, while a friend ﬂirted with a job with his beloved
Chicago Cubs.)
• A chance to work someplace you’ve wanted to move to,
whether another part of the country, or another country
altogether.
• A job working with someone whom you’ve always admired
• Signiﬁcantly higher pay for a similar position
If you close off the idea that there could be a situation even
better for you than your current job, even if you’re perfectly
happy, you could be missing a great opportunity.
Looking Helps You Prepare
Whether the next job you pursue is because an excellent oppor-
tunity falls in your lap or because you’re unceremoniously out
on the street, being prepared will make it easier when the time
comes. It may save precious time when you need to strike.

ALWAYS LOOK FOR YOUR NEXT JOB
243
Could you apply for a
job tomorrow if you
needed to?
How ready are you to apply for a new
job? Whether because of a loss of a
current job or ﬁnding an excellent new
opportunity that needs to be acted on
quickly, consider how many of these
apply to you right now:
• Your résumé is up-to-date.
• Your skills are competitive with the rest of the job market.
• You have at least ﬁve people you could turn to help you
ﬁnd your next job.
• You have at least three references who can speak to your
work ability.
Looking for your next job helps keep these at front of mind so
that when the time comes, you’re ready.
Looking Keeps You Smart
Looking for your next job helps you get a feel for the industry in
your region. If all you think about from day-to-day is your job,
your little niche of the computer business, you’ll miss everything
else going on around you. Keeping the blinders off is the only
way to see what’s available.
Try this: this Sunday, grab a newspaper for your nearest
big city, and spread out to read the classiﬁeds. Read every
computer-related ad. Mark the jobs that seem interesting. Note
the ones that you could tolerate if you had to in a pinch. Mar-
vel at how you’re completely unqualiﬁed for many of them. Look
for terms you don’t understand and for positions you haven’t
heard of. What are SPSS, .NET, SharePoint, Peoplesoft, or Dru-
pal? What’s a SAN, and why do you need a SAN administrator
to take care of it? Answering these questions will be educational
in general and may uncover some new ideas or directions in
speciﬁc.
When you’re done, think about what you knew and what you
didn’t know. Any trends that surprised you? Looking for your
next job will help you stay connected to what’s going on.

ALWAYS LOOK FOR YOUR NEXT JOB
244
Looking Helps You Assess Your Current Situation
Perhaps most important, looking at other employment possibil-
ities helps you verify to yourself that the job you’re currently in
is indeed the best choice for you right now or that you should
move on. It can help you feel better about your current job and
appreciate what you’ve got to see what the alternatives are.
The next time you feel yourself grumbling that you’re over-
worked and underpaid, take a look at the alternatives. See what
other companies are paying for comparable work. Maybe you’re
overpaid for the market, and you should be thankful for what
you’ve got. Maybe the low pay isn’t because of the company,
but because your position and skillset aren’t worth as much.
Whatever the situation, looking for your next job is the primary
research to do.
When you’ve assessed your situation, you can’t help but think
about the competition for the next job or for the job you have
now. You get a feel for what skills are in demand, which may
well turn out to be skills you need. These help inform your
direction for self-improvement, as discussed at the beginning of
the chapter.
There’s Nothing Wrong with Looking
There’s nothing at all disloyal about looking for your next job.
First, your primary loyalty has to be to yourself, not to your
organization. If your employer is not fulﬁlling the needs that you
have (thinking back to Chapter 2, What Do You Want in a Job?,
on page 36), then it’s time to move on. Even if you ignore your
own needs, staying in a job where you’re not doing your best
means you’re not giving your best to the company. Eventually,
you’ll be out anyway.
Company loyalty does
not exist.
Second, I guarantee you that your com-
pany has no loyalty to you. Your par-
ents or grandparents may wax rhap-
sodic about how in times past, loyalty
meant something, and your years of service meant that you
could have a job for life. Those days are now gone.
For that matter, a company cannot be loyal, because a com-
pany is a shifting amalgam of people in a given point in time.

IT’S NEVER THE END
245
Even something as somewhat deﬁnable as “company culture”
changes over time. People can be loyal, but organizations can-
not. The best someone could promise you is “You’ll have a job
here as long as I’m around,” but what happens when that per-
son leaves or is ﬁred?
I don’t mean to sound cold or mercenary, but I don’t want any-
one to have the delusion that “loyalty” means anything in the
relationship between employee and employer. Employees and
employers come together to do the best work possible, and they
go their separate ways when the situation requires it.
None of us wants to be in the situation where we have to get
a new job. Being prepared for that scenario will make things
much easier when it comes.
12.5
It’s Never the End
We’re at the end of this chapter and the end of this book, but it’s
not the end of your reading. Beyond the idea of staying hirable
is the larger subject of career management. I suggest you
follow up this book with Chad Fowler’s excellent The Passionate
Programmer [Fow09]. Reading the ﬁrst edition of that book was
one of my inspirations for writing this one.
I hope that you’ll see your career as a geek-for-hire as one that
always has one more cool program to create, one more feat of
network wizardry, or one more excellent hack to pull off. As
technical professionals, we are blessed to have the skills to be
well paid for jobs that we love. Not just like, but love. Please
don’t settle for anything less.

Appendix A
Meaningless Clichés to Avoid
Corporate jargon isn’t the only source of meaningless blather.
The following clichés would make an excellent start for Buzz-
word Bingo, Résumé Edition.1
• Professional.
• Hard worker; efﬁcient; strong work ethic.
• Quick learner; love to learn.
• Strong communication skills.
• Highly motivated; self-starter; makes things happen.
• Dedicated; determined; reliable.
• Good with people; a real people person.
• Eager; aggressive; a real go-getter.
• Team player.
• Customer-focused.
• Problem solver.
• I do whatever it takes to get the job done.
Everyone is “professional” and “dedicated” and a “team player,”
so these descriptions fail to distinguish you from the crowd.
To turn these clunkers into words that matter, see Chapter 3,
Résumé Content: Getting the Words Down, on page 51.
1.
Never seen Buzzword Bingo? See mine at http://theworkinggeek.com/bingo/.

Appendix B
Résumé, Cover Letter,
and Email Killers
The written word is how most of us communicate in our indus-
try. Being able to write is a minimum for entry, not a skill.
Read Chapter 3, Résumé Content: Getting the Words Down,
on page 51; Chapter 4, Building Your Résumé Documents, on
page 80; and Section 6.2, Create a Cover Letter, on page 127.
• Spelling errors
• Sloppy production
• Too much document, too little content
• Errors about people, such as misspelling someone’s name
or confusing his or her gender
• Having
a
silly
email
address
like
packers_fan_497
@gmail.com or live_for_beer@hotmail.com
• Not following directions, such as sending a PDF instead of
a Word document
• Speaking ill of anyone, especially current or past employers
• Fluff words and meaningless clichés (see Appendix A, on
the previous page, for more info)
• Personal information, especially anything discriminatory
(see Chapter 10, Too Much Information, on page 196)
• Too much talk of your needs, not the employer’s

Appendix C
Interview Killers
Any of these during an interview will weigh heavily against
you, if not end the interview abruptly. For more on the right
and wrong of interviewing, see Chapter 8, The Interview, on
page 152.
• Showing up late
• Being unprepared
• Chewing gum or smoking, or smelling like smoke
• Using a limp handshake
• Have bad breath or body odor
• Coming underdressed or sloppily dressed
• Speaking ill of anyone, especially current or past employers
• Complaining, or discussing your problems
• Bringing up money, beneﬁts, sick days, and so on
• Appearing disinterested or aloof
• Not asking questions of your own
• Appearing overenthusiastic or desperate
• Lying
• Leaving your phone on
• Having to cut the interview short

Appendix D
Web Resources
Land the Tech Job You Love home page. . .
. . . http://pragprog.com/titles/algh/
The source for updates and information about this book, plus an online
discussion forum to share with other readers.
The Working Geek ........................ http://theworkinggeek.com
The author’s blog about working life for the technical professional,
including the job hunt and beyond.
Ask The Headhunter ................... http://asktheheadhunter.com
Nick Corcodilos’ companion website to his inspiring book Ask the Head-
hunter [Cor97].

Appendix E
Bibliography
[BJ82]
Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. The One
Minute Manager.
Berkeley Publishing Group, New
York, 1982.
[Con05]
Damian Conway. Perl Best Practices. O’Reilly Media,
Inc., Sebastopol, CA, 2005.
[Cor97]
Nick Corcodilos.
Ask the Headhunter: Reinventing
the Interview to Win the Job. Plume, New York, 1997.
[DR08]
Margaret Riley Dikel and Frances E. Roehm. Guide
To Internet Job Searching 2008–2009. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2008.
[Fow09]
Chad Fowler. The Passionate Programmer: Creating
a Remarkable Career in Software Development. The
Pragmatic Programmers, LLC, Raleigh, NC, and Dal-
las, TX, 2009.
[HT00]
Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. The Pragmatic Pro-
grammer: From Journeyman to Master. Addison-Wes-
ley, Reading, MA, 2000.
[Lim06]
Thomas A. Limoncelli. Time Management For System
Administrators. O’Reilly Media, Inc., Sebastopol, CA,
2006.

APPENDIX E. BIBLIOGRAPHY
251
[McC04]
Steve McConnell. Code Complete: A Practical Hand-
book of Software Construction. Microsoft Press, Red-
mond, WA, 2004.
[Pet99]
Tom Peters. The Brand You 50: Fifty Ways to Trans-
form Yourself from an “Employee” into a Brand That
Shouts Distinction, Commitment, and Passion! Alfred
A. Knopf, Inc, New York, 1999.
[RD05]
Johanna Rothman and Esther Derby. Behind Closed
Doors: Secrets of Great Management. The Pragmatic
Programmers, LLC, Raleigh, NC, and Dallas, TX,
2005.
[Rot04]
Johanna Rothman. Hiring the Best Knowledge Work-
ers, Techies, and Nerds: The Secrets and Science of
Hiring Technical People.
Dorset House, New York,
2004.
[SE99]
Stephen Spainhour and Robert Eckstein. Webmaster
In a Nutshell. O’Reilly & Associates, Inc, Sebastopol,
CA, 1999.

Index
A
Accepting job offers, 218
Achievements, 72–73
Acronyms, 83
Action words, 65
Address Book, 237
Age discrimination, 199
Aggregators, job board, 106
Application process, 124–134
cover letters, 127–130
online forms, 92
pitfalls, 134
résumés, customizing, 125–126
salary history, 131–134
selecting jobs for, 124
what to send, 130
see also Résumés
Appreciations, 11
Ask the Headhunter: Reinventing
the Interview to Win the Job
(Corcodilos), 13, 118, 170,
249
Attitude, see Negativity; Positive
attitude; Presentation
Autonomy, 47, 188
Awards, 70–71
B
“B.S.” answers, in interviews, 177
Basics, see Job search
fundamentals
Behind Closed Doors: Secrets of
Great Management (Rothman
& Derby), 11
Beneﬁts, 43, 154, 215
Binders, 142
Blanchard, Ken, 28
Blogger, 240
Blogs, 229, 239, 241
Bold face, 86, 126
Brand improvement, 237–241
The Brand You 50: Fifty Ways to
Transform Yourself from an
’Employee’ into a Brand That
Shouts Distinction,
Commitment, and Passion!
(Peters), 239
Bulleted lists, 64, 90, 92
Buzzword Bingo, 246n
Buzzwords, on résumé, 73–75
C
Callouts, about, 18
Capitalization, 83
CareerBuilder, 102, 103, 105, 108
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), 91
Certiﬁcations, 69–70
Chamber of Commerce, 100–101
“Cheat sheet” story, 142
Clichés to avoid, 246
Clubs and organizations, 201
Co-workers, 46
Code Complete (McConnell), 155
Commercial job boards, see Job
boards
Communication
attitude and, 33–35
co-workers and, 46
with employees, for research,
115–116
exit interviews, 221–222
handshakes, 157
honesty in, 21–26
interviews and, 137, 156–158
job research and, 111–112
job search and, 94–99
minimum requirements in, 247
presentation, 29–31

COMMUTE
253
FILE FORMATS
references, 213
resignations, 220
through stories, 31–33, 162,
184
thank-you notes, 205–206
written, 229
see also Legal considerations;
Networking
Commute, 44, 148
Company size, 46
Compensation, 42–43, 154, 164,
215
Conﬁdentiality, 132
Contact block, 55
Contacts, see Networking
Conway, Damian, 13, 155
Corcodilos, Nick A., 13, 118, 170,
222, 249
Coughlin, Ed, 14, 15
Counteroffers, 216, 219, 220
Cover letters, 127–130
pitfalls, 127, 129, 130
purpose of, 127
sample, 128
writing basics, 247
Cow eye sucker, 129
Craigslist, 105
Crispin, Gerry, 103
CSS, see Cascading Style Sheets
Curveball questions, 193–194
D
Dean, Howard, 201
“Debbie Downer”, 34
Debrieﬁng, interviews, 172
Declining, job offer, 216–217
Derby, Esther, 11
Detective work, see Researching
jobs
Dice, 105
Dikel, Margaret, 106
Discrimination, see Legal
considerations
Dishonesty, consequences of, 26
Dress code, 48, 214
E
Eckstein, Robert, 96
Education, 68–69
“Elevator pitch”, 56
Email address, 57
Emailing résumé, 92
Employee manual, 214
Employees, research and, 115–116
Employers
career advancement, 227
loyalty and, 244
operations, 114
research on, 117, 181, 184
resigning from, 219–222
website of, 99, 110–111
Employment gaps, 67
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 200n, 203
Ethnic background, 197
Exercises
blogs, 241
interviews, 194
job search, 243
self-improvement, 229–231
social network improvement,
233–234
“Exit Interview, Stage Right”
(Corcodilos), 222
Exit interviews, avoiding, 221–222
Experience, 78
summary of, 58–59
work, 61–68
Expertise, 60–61, 169
Extra-curricular activities, 41
F
Facebook, 116, 236
Failure points, 149
about, 18
application process, 134
cover letters, 127, 129, 130
interviews, 137, 146, 164, 166,
174, 177, 196
job research, 120
job searching, 96
networking, 236
references, 210
résumés, 55, 70, 82, 87
web résumés, 89
Family
in interviews, 199
as references, 210
Fees and payments, 119
File formats
HTML, 88–92
HTML, Word-generated, 89

FILE NAMING
254
INTERVIEWS
pitfalls, 247
text, 92–93
what to send, 81, 130
Word, 84–85
Word vs. PDF, 81
File naming, 130
Finances, see Compensation;
Money
Finding a job, see Job search
process
First impressions, 157, 158
see also Interviews;
Presentation
“Five-years” question, 189
Follow-up letter, 134
Font choice, on résumés, 83
Footers, in Word, 85
Fowler, Chad, 245
Free Software Foundation, 47
Fulﬁllment, 41, 45, 63
Fundamentals/Foundation, see
Job search fundamentals
Future plans, see Staying hirable
G
Gaps, employment, 67
Gmail, 57
Google Code, 63
Google Groups, 113, 229
Google, Gmail, 57
Graphics, 84
Guide to Internet Job Searching
(Dikel & Roehm), 106
Guidelines, for résumés, 82–84
Gumble, Seth, 25
H
<h1> tag, 90
Handshakes, 157, 234
Header/footer, in Word, 85
Headhunters, 117–119
Health, 200
Health beneﬁts, 215
Help, asking for, 96–99, 115, 194,
224
Henmueller, Kristen, 220
Herzberg, Frederick, 39
Hidden job market, 95
Hierarchy of psychological needs
(Maslow), 38–39
Hirability, see Staying hirable
Hiring managers, see Management
Hiring process
advertising positions, 95
interviews and, 152
résumé screening, 51–52, 57, 88
understanding, 27
Hiring the Best Knowledge
Workers, Techies, and Nerds:
The Secrets & Science Of
Hiring Technical People
(Rothman), 28
Hobbies, 72, 77, 201
Honesty
in internal motivators, 42–49
with others, 24–26, 166, 177,
183, 199
with self, 21–24, 239
self-knowledge and, 39–41
Howard, Adrian, 189
HTML résumé, 88–92
constructing, 89–91
hyperlinks, 91, 92
quality control, 91–92
HTML Tidy, 91
HTML validation tools, 91
Hunt, Andy, 235
Hyperlinks, in HTML résumés, 91,
92
I
Illegal topics, see Legal
considerations
Improving your brand, 237–241
Improving yourself, 228–232
Independence, 47
Ink story, 29
Internal motivators, 44
Interview-related threads, 176
Interviews, 136–175
asking for the job, 171
attitude toward, 152
“B.S.” answers, 177
closing, 170–172
conduct toward others, 156–158
curveball questions in, 193–194
debrieﬁng, 172
demonstrating expertise in,
168–170
exercises for, 194
exit, 221–222
further, 208–209

INTRODUCTIONS
255
LOYALTY
goal of, 153–154
handshakes, 157
honesty, 21–26, 166
illegal topics, 196–200
inappropriate questions,
202–203
listening in, 154–155, 160, 166
note taking, 155
overview (walk through) of,
158–161
pitfalls, 137, 144, 146, 149,
164, 166, 174, 177, 196, 248
portfolios, 138–143, 167
positive attitude and, 33–35
preparation for, 29, 109
presentation, 29–31
questions to ask, 143–148
questions, preparing for, 138
red ﬂags, 178
references, 209–213
salary history and, 133, 200
scheduling, 137, 150
selling yourself, 137, 161–168
stories and, 31–33, 184
telephone, 172–174
thank-you notes, 205–206
timeliness and, 148–149
tough questions in, 179–192
waiting after, 206–208
what to bring, 149–150, 158
see also Legal considerations
Introductions, interview, 159
J
Job advertising, 95
Job boards, 102–106
problems with, 104
websites for, 105
Job interview–related threads, 176
Job listing aggregators, 106
Job offers, 213–218
accepting, in writing, 218
counteroffers, 216
declining, 216–217
negotiations, 215
proper response to, 213
questions to ask, 214–215
see also Rejection; Staying
hirable
Job search fundamentals, 21–35
honesty, 21–26
management, thinking like,
26–28
motivational theory, 38–39
portfolios and stories, 31–33
positive attitude, 33–35
presentation, 29–31
problem-solving skills, 28–29
self-knowledge, 39–41
see also Application process
Job search process, 94–123
continuing, 241–245
headhunters, 118–119
networking and, 94–99
paying for, 119
record keeping, 120–122
research and, 108–117
sources, 99–108
Chamber of Commerce,
100–101
employers, 99
job boards, 102–106
newspapers, 106–107
when not to, 107
Johnson, Spencer, 28
Jokes, 174
Justiﬁcation, 83
K
Keywords, 89, 125
Krawczyk, Pete, 117
L
Laziness, as virtue, 52
Leads, see Job search process
Legal considerations
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 200n, 203
exit interviews, 222
interviews and, 146, 196–204
illegal topics, 196–200
portfolio work and, 141
references and, 209
résumés and, 76
Lester, Andy, 29
Letter of resignation, 219
Limoncelli, Thomas, 45, 201
LinkedIn, 116, 117, 236
Linux jobs, 105
Listening skills, 154–155, 160, 166
Location, 44
Loyalty, 244

LYNX
256
PINK PAPER
Lynx, 92, 93
M
Management
interview red ﬂags, 178
problem solvers, need for,
28–29, 168–170, 186–188
relationship with, 47
résumé screening, 51–52, 57, 88
salary history and, 133
selling yourself to, 29–31, 66,
161, 181, 184
thinking like, 26–28, 109, 176
Maslow, Abraham, 38–39, 46
McConnell, Steve, 155
Mehler, Mark, 103
Memberships, 70–71, 201
Microsoft Certiﬁed Systems
Engineer (MCSE), 69
Microsoft Word
HTML, creating from, 89
vs. PDF, 82, 130, 247
résumé, 81
résumé version, 84–85
Money, 42–43, 154, 164, 215
Monster, 104, 105
Morrison, Phil, 168
Mosquito truck driver, 67
Motivation worksheet
described, 41–42
factors, 42–49
testing, 50
Motivation-Hygiene Theory
(Herzberg), 39
Motivational factors, 42–49
Motivational theory, 38–39
MySpace, 116
N
Name, on résumé, 56
Named styles, 85
Negativity, 34, 178, 191
Negotiations, job offer, 215
Networking, 232–237
building, 233
improving, 233–234
job research and, 111–112
job search and, 94–99
keeping track of, 237
methods of, 235–236
pitfalls, 236
social websites, 116–117
value of, 232
see also Communication
Newspapers, 106–107
Note taking, 155, 159
O
O’Reilly’s Open Source Conference,
16
Objective, on résumé, 60, 76–77
Odom, Bill, 15
Offers, see Job offers
The One Minute Manager
(Blanchard & Johnson), 28
Online presence, 239
Online résumés, 88–92
constructing, 89–91
hyperlinks, 91, 92
quality control, 91–92
Open source, 63, 141
OpenOfﬁce, 82
Operations, researching, 114
Opportunity, see Brand
improvement; Job search
process; Self-improvement;
Staying hirable
“Oracle migration” story, 25
Organizations, 201
“Out of ink” story, 29
Outlook, 237
Overtime, 146
P
Panic, 167
The Passionate Programmer:
Creating a Remarkable Career
in Software Development
(Fowler), 245
Payment and fees, 119
PDF format, 81, 82, 130, 247
People, see Communication;
Management; Networking:
Teamwork
Perl Best Practices (Conway), 13,
155
Perl Mongers, 15
Peters, Tom, 239
Phone screens, 173
Photographs, 76, 84
Physical factors, 200
Pink paper, 87

PITCH
257
RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION
Pitch, 56
Politics, 201
Portfolios, 31–33
components of, 140–141
constructing, 141–142
interviews and, 138–143
necessity of, 143
new work for, 142
open source projects and, 63
presenting, 167
Positive attitude, 33–35, 178, 191,
220, 224
The Pragmatic Programmer: From
Journeyman to Master (Hunt
& Thomas), 235
“Pregnancy interview” story, 202
Preparation
example of, 96
hiring process, understanding,
27
importance of, 151
interviews and, 109, 136–151
portfolios, 138–143
questions, 138, 143–148,
179–192
scheduling, 137, 150
selling yourself, 137
timeliness and, 148–149
tough questions, 179–192
what to bring, 149–150
motivation worksheet, 41–42
motivational factors, 42–49
for résumé writing, 52–54
staying hirable, 226–245
brand improvement, 237–241
job searching, 241–245
networking, 232–237
reasons for, 226–227
self-improvement, 228–232
see also Interviews; Job search
fundamentals; Legal
considerations; Portfolios;
Researching jobs; Résumés
Presentation, 29–31
email address, 57
handshakes, 157
interviews, 149, 178
name, 56
portfolios, 142
resignations, 220
résumés, 80–81, 84
thank-you notes, 205–206
see also Positive attitude;
Preparation
Pride, 44
Principles, see Job search
fundamentals
Printer ink story, 29
Privacy, 132
Problem-solving skills, 28–29,
168–170, 186–188
Profanity, 158
Professional summary, 56–58,
85–87
Q
Quality control, online résumés,
91–92
Questions
asking, 163
challenging ones, 138, 179–192
curveballs, 193–194
ﬁnal, 170
inappropriate, 202–203
job offers, 214–215
preparing, 143–148
technical, 164
tough, in interviews, 179–192
“Quick reference card” story, 142
Quitting, a job, 219–222
R
Race, 197
“Read the Freaking Manual”, 163
Receptionists, 158
Recognition, 44
Record keeping, 120–122
Red ﬂags, in interviews, 178
Reddit, 176
References, 78, 209–213
asking for, 213
formatting the list, 211–212
who to use, 210–211
Regulations, see Legal
considerations
Rejection, 222–225
see also Job offers
Relationships, see
Communication; Networking
Relatives, as references, 210
Religious afﬁliation, 198

REPUTATION
258
SOURCEFORGE
Reputation, see Brand
improvement
Researching jobs, 108–117
company research, 110–111,
181, 184
contacts, 111–112
employee information, 115–116
operations, 114
social websites, 116–117
web searches, 112–114
Resignation letter, 219
Resigning, 219–222
“Résumé Police”, 53, 75
Robert, Kirrily, 66
Roehm, Frances, 106
Rolsky, Dave, 201
Rothman, Johanna, 11, 28, 202
“RTFM game”, 163
Résumés, 51–79
building, 47, 80–81
clichés to avoid, 246
customizing, 125–126
email address, 57
employment gaps, 67
ﬁle naming, 130
guidelines for, 82–84
honesty on, 25
improving, 33
interviews and, 149
name on, 56
objective, 60
paper for, 87
pitfalls, 51, 87
preparation for, 52–54
presentation, 31
printing, 87–88
purpose of, 51–52
quantiﬁable achievements, 65
references, 209–213
sections of, 55–76
achievements, other, 72–73
certiﬁcations, 69–70
contact block, 55
education, 68–69
expertise, 60–61
honors, awards, activities,
70–71
ordering, 75
other, 75
professional summary,
56–58, 85–87
skills and buzzwords, 73–75
summary of experience,
58–59
work experience, 61–68
time needed to write, 54
as tracking tools, 231–232
versions of, 81–82
HTML, 88–92
text-only, 92–93
Word document, 84–88
what to omit, 76–78
writing basics, 247
S
Salary, see Compensation; Money
Salary history, 131–134, 192, 200
Sample work, see Portfolios
Schedule, work, 48–49
“Scrooge McDuck”, 216
Searching process, see Job search
process
Second interviews, 208–209
Self-improvement, 228–232, 244
Self-knowledge, 39–41
career advancement, 227
honesty, with self, 21–24
job ﬁt and, 146
motivation worksheet, 41–42
motivational factors, 42–49
researching jobs and, 108
weaknesses, 179
Selling yourself, 163
importance of, 29–31
interviews, 137, 161–168, 179,
180
résumés, 51, 87
thank-you notes, 205–206
Sexual orientation, 201
Shaking hands, 157, 234
“Should,” uncovering meaning of,
39–40
Signes, Ricardo, 41
SimplyHired, 106
Skills, on résumé, 73–75
Slashdot, 176
Social interactions, 46
see also Communication;
Teamwork
Social websites, 116–117, 236
SourceForge, 63

SOURCES OF HIRE (SOH) STUDY
259
YAHOO! GROUPS
Sources of Hire (SOH) study,
CareerXRoads (Crispin &
Mehler), 103
Spaces, 85
Spainhour, Stephen, 96
Spelling, 83, 85, 86, 247
Stallman, Richard, 81
Staying hirable, 226–245
brand improvement, 237–241
job searching, 241–245
networking, 232–237
reasons for, 226–227
self-improvement, 228–232
Summary of experience, 58–59
Swearing, 158
T
Tab stops, 85
Talman, Ilya, 139
Teaching, as learning tool, 229
Teammates, 181
Teamwork, 33, 46, 147, 176, 188
Technology, 47
Telephone interviews, 172–174
Text résumés, 92–93
Thank-you notes, 205–206
Thieda, Kate, 142
Thomas, Dave, 235
Tidy, 91
Time Management for System
Administrators (Limoncelli),
201n
<title> tag, 90
Too much information (TMI), 196
see also Legal considerations
Tough interview questions,
179–192
Tracking
contacts, 237
job search, 120–122
Truth, see Honesty
“Trying hard” story, 25
“Turning over rocks” story, 117
Twitter, 236
Two Factor Theory, see
Motivation-Hygiene Theory
Typical workday, 145
V
Validation tools, 91
“Visual C++” interview, 189
W
W3C CSS validator, 91
W3C HTML validator, 91
Waiting, after interviews, 206–208
Wall, Larry, 52
“We Can Put an End to Word
Documents” (Stallman), 81n
Web résumés, 88–92
constructing, 89–91
hyperlinks, 91, 92
quality control, 91–92
Webmaster in a Nutshell
(Spainhour & Eckstein), 96
Websites
Ask the Headhunter, 249
blog creation, 240
companies, 99, 110–111
discussion groups, 229
Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 200n
“Exit Interview, Stage Right”
article, 222n
interview-related threads, 176
job boards, 103n, 105, 106
for Land the Tech Job You Love,
19, 249
on motivational theory, 38, 39n
open source project repositories,
63n
Perl Mongers, 15n
social networking, 116–117
validation tools, HTML, 91n
Working Geek, The, 249
Whining at work, 34, 178, 191
“Whiteboard solution” story, 168
Word
HTML, creating from, 89
vs. PDF, 82, 130, 247
résumé version, 81, 84–85
Word version, of résumé, 86–88
WordPress, 240
Work experience, 61–68, 78
Work hours, 48–49, 146
Work samples, see Portfolios
Workday, typical, 145
Working Geek, The, 249
Workplace size, 46
World of Warcraft, on résumé, 71
Writing skills, 229, 247
Y
Yahoo! Groups, 229

The Pragmatic Bookshelf
Available
in
paperback
and
DRM-free
PDF,
our
titles
are
here
to
help
you
stay
on
top
of
your game. The following are in print as of May 2009; be sure to check
our website at pragprog.com for newer titles.
Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
Advanced Rails Recipes: 84 New Ways to Build
Stunning Rails Apps
2008
9780978739225
464
Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams Great
2006
9780977616640
200
Agile Web Development with Rails, Third Edition
2009
9781934356166
784
Augmented Reality: A Practical Guide
2008
9781934356036
328
Behind Closed Doors: Secrets of Great
Management
2005
9780976694021
192
Best of Ruby Quiz
2006
9780976694076
304
Core Animation for Mac OS X and the iPhone:
Creating Compelling Dynamic User Interfaces
2008
9781934356104
200
Data Crunching: Solve Everyday Problems
using Java, Python, and More
2005
9780974514079
208
Deploying Rails Applications: A Step-by-Step
Guide
2008
9780978739201
280
Design Accessible Web Sites: 36 Keys to
Creating Content for All Audiences and
Platforms
2007
9781934356029
336
Desktop GIS: Mapping the Planet with Open
Source Tools
2008
9781934356067
368
Developing Facebook Platform Applications with
Rails
2008
9781934356128
200
Enterprise Integration with Ruby
2006
9780976694069
360
Enterprise Recipes with Ruby and Rails
2008
9781934356234
416
Everyday Scripting with Ruby: for Teams,
Testers, and You
2007
9780977616619
320
FXRuby: Create Lean and Mean GUIs with Ruby
2008
9781934356074
240
From Java To Ruby: Things Every Manager
Should Know
2006
9780976694090
160
GIS for Web Developers: Adding Where to Your
Web Applications
2007
9780974514093
275
Google Maps API, V2: Adding Where to Your
Applications
2006
PDF-Only
83
Groovy Recipes: Greasing the Wheels of Java
2008
9780978739294
264
Hello, Android: Introducing Google’s Mobile
Development Platform
2008
9781934356173
200
Interface Oriented Design
2006
9780976694052
240
Continued on next page

Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
Learn to Program, 2nd Edition
2009
9781934356364
230
Manage It! Your Guide to Modern Pragmatic
Project Management
2007
9780978739249
360
Mastering Dojo: JavaScript and Ajax Tools for
Great Web Experiences
2008
9781934356111
568
No Fluff Just Stuff 2006 Anthology
2006
9780977616664
240
No Fluff Just Stuff 2007 Anthology
2007
9780978739287
320
Practical Programming: An Introduction to
Computer Science Using Python
2009
9781934356272
350
Practices of an Agile Developer
2006
9780974514086
208
Pragmatic Project Automation: How to Build,
Deploy, and Monitor Java Applications
2004
9780974514031
176
Pragmatic Thinking and Learning: Refactor Your
Wetware
2008
9781934356050
288
Pragmatic Unit Testing in C# with NUnit
2007
9780977616671
176
Pragmatic Unit Testing in Java with JUnit
2003
9780974514017
160
Pragmatic Version Control Using Git
2008
9781934356159
200
Pragmatic Version Control using CVS
2003
9780974514000
176
Pragmatic Version Control using Subversion
2006
9780977616657
248
Programming Erlang: Software for a Concurrent
World
2007
9781934356005
536
Programming Groovy: Dynamic Productivity for
the Java Developer
2008
9781934356098
320
Programming Ruby: The Pragmatic
Programmers’ Guide, Second Edition
2004
9780974514055
864
Programming Ruby 1.9: The Pragmatic
Programmers’ Guide
2009
9781934356081
960
Prototype and script.aculo.us: You Never Knew
JavaScript Could Do This!
2007
9781934356012
448
Rails Recipes
2006
9780977616602
350
Rails for .NET Developers
2008
9781934356203
300
Rails for Java Developers
2007
9780977616695
336
Rails for PHP Developers
2008
9781934356043
432
Rapid GUI Development with QtRuby
2005
PDF-Only
83
Release It! Design and Deploy Production-Ready
Software
2007
9780978739218
368
Scripted GUI Testing with Ruby
2008
9781934356180
192
Ship it! A Practical Guide to Successful Software
Projects
2005
9780974514048
224
Stripes ...and Java Web Development Is Fun
Again
2008
9781934356210
375
TextMate: Power Editing for the Mac
2007
9780978739232
208
The Deﬁnitive ANTLR Reference: Building
Domain-Speciﬁc Languages
2007
9780978739256
384
Continued on next page

Title
Year
ISBN
Pages
The Passionate Programmer: Creating a
Remarkable Career in Software Development
2009
9781934356340
200
ThoughtWorks Anthology
2008
9781934356142
240
Ubuntu Kung Fu: Tips, Tricks, Hints, and Hacks
2008
9781934356227
400

Expand Your Horizons
The Passionate Programmer
This book is about creating a remarkable career in
software development. Remarkable careers don’t
come by chance. They require thought, intention,
action, and a willingness to change course when
you’ve made mistakes. Most of us have been
stumbling around letting our careers take us where
they may. It’s time to take control.
This revised and updated second edition lays out a
strategy for planning and creating a radically
successful life in software development (the ﬁrst
edition was released as My Job Went to India: 52
Ways To Save Your Job).
The Passionate Programmer: Creating a
Remarkable Career in Software Development
Chad Fowler
(200 pages) ISBN: 978-1934356-34-0. $23.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/cfcar2
Pragmatic Thinking and Learning
Software development happens in your head. Not in
an editor, IDE, or design tool. In this book by
Pragmatic Programmer Andy Hunt, you’ll learn how
our brains are wired, and how to take advantage of
your brain’s architecture. You’ll master new tricks
and tips to learn more, faster, and retain more of
what you learn.
• Use the Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition to
become more expert
• Leverage the architecture of
the brain to strengthen different thinking modes
• Avoid common “known bugs” in your mind
• Learn more deliberately and more effectively
• Manage knowledge more efﬁciently
Pragmatic Thinking and Learning:
Refactor your Wetware
Andy Hunt
(288 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343560-5-0. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/ahptl

Mac and iPhone Development
iPhone SDK Development
Jump into application development for today’s
most remarkable mobile communications platform,
the Pragmatic way. This Pragmatic guide takes you
through the tools and APIs, the same ones Apple
uses for its applications, that you can use to create
your own software for the iPhone and iPod touch.
Packed with useful examples, this book will give
you both the big-picture concepts and the everyday
“gotcha” details that developers need to make the
most of the beauty and power of the iPhone OS
platform.
iPhone SDK Development
Bill Dudney, Chris Adamson, Marcel Molina
(430 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343562-5-8. $38.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/amiphd
Core Animation for OS X/iPhone
Have you seen Apple’s Front Row application and
Cover Flow effects? Then you’ve seen Core
Animation at work. It’s about making applications
that give strong visual feedback through movement
and morphing, rather than repainting panels. This
comprehensive guide will get you up to speed
quickly and take you into the depths of this new
technology.
Core Animation for Mac OS X and the iPhone:
Creating Compelling Dynamic User Interfaces
Bill Dudney
(220 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343561-0-4. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/bdcora

Pragmatic Management
Behind Closed Doors
You can learn to be a better manager—even a great
manager—with this guide. You’ll ﬁnd powerful tips
covering:
• Delegating effectively
• Using feedback and
goal-setting
• Developing inﬂuence
• Handling
one-on-one meetings
• Coaching and mentoring
• Deciding what work to do-and what not to do
• . . . and more!
Behind Closed Doors: Secrets of Great
Management
Johanna Rothman and Esther Derby
(192 pages) ISBN: 0-9766940-2-6. $24.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/rdbcd
Manage It!
Manage It! is an award-winning, risk-based guide
to making good decisions about how to plan and
guide your projects. Author Johanna Rothman
shows you how to beg, borrow, and steal from the
best methodologies to ﬁt your particular project.
You’ll ﬁnd what works best for you.
• Learn all about different project lifecycles
• See
how to organize a project
• Compare sample
project dashboards
• See how to staff a project
• Know when you’re done—and what that means.
Manage It! Your Guide to Modern, Pragmatic
Project Management
Johanna Rothman
(360 pages) ISBN: 0-9787392-4-8. $34.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/jrpm

The Home of Ruby and Rails
Programming Ruby 1.9 (The Pickaxe for 1.9)
The Pickaxe book, named for the tool on the cover,
is the deﬁnitive reference to this highly-regarded
language.
• Up-to-date and expanded for Ruby version 1.9
• Complete documentation of all the built-in
classes, modules, and methods
• Complete
descriptions of all standard libraries
• Learn more
about Ruby’s web tools, unit testing, and
programming philosophy
Programming Ruby 1.9: The Pragmatic
Programmers’ Guide
Dave Thomas with Chad Fowler and Andy Hunt
(992 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343560-8-1. $49.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/ruby3
Agile Web Development with Rails
Rails is a full-stack, open-source web framework,
with integrated support for unit, functional, and
integration testing. It enforces good design
principles, consistency of code across your team
(and across your organization), and proper release
management. This is the newly updated Third
Edition, which goes beyond the award winning
previous editions with new material covering the
latest advances in Rails 2.0.
Agile Web Development with Rails: Third Edition
Sam Ruby, Dave Thomas, and David Heinemeier
Hansson, et al.
(784 pages) ISBN: 978-1-9343561-6-6. $43.95
http://pragprog.com/titles/rails3

The Pragmatic Bookshelf
The Pragmatic Bookshelf features books written by developers for developers.
The titles continue the well-known Pragmatic Programmer style and continue to
garner awards and rave reviews. As development gets more and more difﬁcult,
the Pragmatic Programmers will be there with more titles and products to help
you stay on top of your game.
Visit Us Online
Land the Tech Job You Love’s Home Page
http://pragprog.com/titles/algh
Source code from this book, errata, and other resources. Come give us feedback,
too!
Register for Updates
http://pragprog.com/updates
Be notiﬁed when updates and new books become available.
Join the Community
http://pragprog.com/community
Read our weblogs, join our online discussions, participate in our mailing list,
interact with our wiki, and beneﬁt from the experience of other Pragmatic Pro-
grammers.
New and Noteworthy
http://pragprog.com/news
Check out the latest pragmatic developments, new titles and other offerings.
Buy the Book
If you liked this eBook, perhaps you’d like to have a paper copy of the book. It’s
available for purchase at our store: pragprog.com/titles/algh.
Contact Us
Online Orders:
www.pragprog.com/catalog
Customer Service:
support@pragprog.com
Non-English Versions:
translations@pragprog.com
Pragmatic Teaching:
academic@pragprog.com
Author Proposals:
proposals@pragprog.com
Contact us:
1-800-699-PROG (+1 919 847 3884)

