

LASERS AND ELECTRO-OPTICS RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LASER BEAMS: THEORY, PROPERTIES  
AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

LASERS AND ELECTRO-OPTICS RESEARCH 
AND TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional E-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website under the E-books tab. 
 

LASERS AND ELECTRO-OPTICS RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LASER BEAMS: THEORY, PROPERTIES  
AND APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAXIM THYS  
AND  
EUGENE DESMET 
EDITORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2011 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
Telephone 631-231-7269; Fax 631-231-8175 
Web Site: http://www.novapublishers.com 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Laser beams : theory, properties, and applications / editors, Maxim Thys and Eugene Desmet. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-60876-266-8 (hardcover) 
1.  Lasers--Industrial applications. 2.  Laser beams.  I. Thys, Maxim. II. Desmet, Eugene. 
TA1675.L335  2009 
621.36'6--dc22 
2009038668 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc.  New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on  
Materials with Tightly Focused Energy Deposition 
1 
D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
Chapter 2 
Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes:  
Durations of Elementary Processes, Thresholds 
of Channels Opening and Their Saturations 
95 
Mark E. Perel'man 
Chapter 3 
Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning  
of Solid Surfaces by Four-Beam Standing  
Wave Excimer Laser Lithography 
159 
Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov, 
A. Yu. Klimov, B. S. Gribkov, D. O. Filatov,  
Yu. Yu. Gushchina, C. Tan, C.S. Peng, M. Pessa,  
Z. Wang, S. M. Olaizola and S. Tisserand 
Chapter 4 
ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by  Laser Ablation 
205 
D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato,  
M. Lomascolo, R. Rella and M. Martino 
Chapter 5 
Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
245 
A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini,  
E. A. Squeo and V. Tagliaferri 
Chapter 6 
Lasers and Lamps with Excitation  
by Background-Electron Multiplication Wave 
283 
A. M. Boichenko 
Chapter 7 
Phase Transitions as Possible Sources  
of High Power Radiation 
313 
Mark E. Perel'man 
 
 

Contents 
vi 
Chapter 8 
Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting  
Multi-Layer Coatings on the Inner Surfaces of Hollow Objects 
331 
Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan,   
Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov   
and Denis Vladimirovich Chulkov 
Chapter 9 
Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
351 
Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber and Liu Kewei 
Chapter 10 
Laser Cladding: An Overview 
367 
L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
Chapter 11 
Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
383 
Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan,  
Carsten Reinhardt and Boris N. Chichkov 
Chapter 12 
Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
399 
I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, and A.V.Tolkachev 
Chapter 13 
Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by  
High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
415 
J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos,  
L. J. Juan and J. M. L. Poyato 
Chapter 14 
Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous  
CO2 Laser (Physical Process Description,  
Energetic and Thermal Modeling) 
501 
Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari,  
AnnieTarrats-Saugnac and Jean Paul Longuemard 
Index 
 
517 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
This book considers some general laser-induced processes that are involved in laser-
matter interactions. A brief review is presented about a very interesting application of laser 
beams in the fields of materials science: the growth of zinc oxide (ZnO) nanostructured films 
by Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). In addition, safe and precise cavity detection, especially 
of dangerous or inaccessible voids, is essential to safe production in a working mine. The 
advantages and disadvantages of laser detection systems are analyzed, and a combination of 
laser scanning techniques and conventional survey methodology is proposed. Other chapters 
in this book present an overview on laser cladding, a discussion of the applications of 
structured laser beams in laser refractography technology, a review of some fundamentals of 
laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and an analysis of laser forming of steel parts 
by means of diode lasers. 
Chapter 1 - It has been several decades since the first laser was assembled by T. Maiman 
and his research on generation of coherent radiation by the photoexcited ruby was published 
in 1960 [1]. Several other works, however, prior to his study were also aimed on creation of 
Light Amplifier by Stimulated Emission of Radiation (LASER). Thus, one can find the 
description of laser on ammonia capable of amplifying the microwaves, and therefore called 
MASER, with induced radiation in works by N.G. Basov and A.M. Prohorov in 1958 [2,3] 
and in works by C.H. Townes and A.L. Schawlow [4]. And even earlier, the possibility of the 
existence of induced atomic radiation itself was yet foreseen in 1916 by A. Einstein in his 
work on the theory of interaction of the electromagnetic radiation with matter [5]. The 
discovery of laser irradiation in 1960 therefore was a logical conclusion of many years 
theoretical and experimental research and became one of the most meaningful breakthrough 
in science and technology in XX century. 
Chapter 2 - Kinetics of interaction of powerful light (laser) flux with substance is 
examined within the frame of microscopic theory of multiphoton processes. It is usually 
supposed that with growth of radiation intensity its quantum characteristics "become 
averaged" and consequently their consideration within the scope of quasi-classical theory 
become allowable and sufficient, that leads to nonlinear theories with corresponding 
approximations and complications. However, the existence of thresholds of opening of new 
reaction channels, their saturation and so on requires quantum examination in the scope of 
linear theory, of quantum electrodynamics, which is less sophisticated in some aspects. 
The quantum kinetics of photon flux interaction with substance demands definition of 
durations of elementary scattering acts and durations of formation of physical states as a 

Maxim Thys and Eugene Desmet 
viii 
result of such interaction, thus it requires the appeal to quantum electrodynamics and 
scattering theory. Therefore the general positions of the theory of durations (theory of 
temporal functions) are briefly considered and the general theory of multiphoton processes on 
this base is constructed. Then processes of higher harmonics generation and transformations 
of spectra, multiphoton ionization, multiphoton acceleration of charged particles, pressure of 
light on absorbing and transparent objects (they are needed for planning of thermonuclear 
reactions), some features of light reflection are considered. All this visually shows the 
significance and, simultaneously, the simplicity of used microscopic quantum approach, its 
perspectives. 
The base of offered approach consists in the temporal consideration of interactions and 
applications of temporal functions, which are rarely yet used. Therefore in the Appendix is 
shown that these functions allow simple approach and proving of many kinetic relations and 
characteristics in several branches of physics including general determination of condensed 
states and some features of phase transitions. This part has, presumably, a methodological 
character, but opens a new vision or alternative approach to several known kinetics 
phenomena. 
Chapter 3 - The article is devoted to a promising technology for fabrication of two-
dimensional nanoperiodic structures on solid surfaces by four-beam standing wave pulsed 
laser modification. In this method, a large number of spots (up to 107) less than 100 nm in 
size heated up to several thousand degrees are formed on the modified surface as a result of 
the interference of the four laser beams incident on the object coherently. Besides a direct 
laser ablation, various nonlinear mechanisms of surface modification may take place in the 
standing wave maxima. This way, a nearly perfect two-dimensional pattern can be formed on 
the modified surface; the pitches of the pattern in both directions can be adjusted easily within 
the range from a few microns to tens of nanometers by simply varying the beams' incidence 
angles. This method being developed extensively at present is very promising for application 
in microelectronics, data storage, integrated optics (including fabrication of the Bragg 
mirrors, antireflection coating, two-dimensional photonic crystals, etc.) and is considered to 
be a promising alternative to X-ray lithography in a wide range of applications, The most 
important advantage of the method is that the nanoperiodic pattern can be formed in a single 
step (actually, at single laser pulse) by direct laser ablation of the material. However, the 
method could be applied as well to patterning a resist deposited onto the processed substrate 
to serve as a lithographic mask. In this article, the authors present some experimental results 
on patterning various materials, such as metal films on semiconductor and glass substrates, 
polyimide, and even such a hard material as diamond by direct laser ablation using a XeCl 
excimer laser. Patterning a resist film, the phase masks on fused silica and the antireflection 
structures on Si and silica glass have been fabricated. Also, using the effect of stimulation of 
self-assembling of the semiconductor nanostructures by standing wave laser irradiation 
discovered by the authors, the authors have fabricated the ordered arrays of nanoislands on 
the surface of single crystal Si and GaAs and of GaAs/InxGa1–xAs/GaAs(001) heterostructures 
with the diameter ranging from 5 to 60 nm. 
Chapter 4 - This chapter aims to present a brief review about a very interesting 
application of laser beams in the field of materials science: the growth of zinc oxide (ZnO) 
nanostructured films by Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD), and in particular by means of 
excimer laser ablation. After an introduction giving an overview on properties and 
applications of ZnO and its nanostructures and on some growth techniques used to obtain 

Preface 
ix
these materials, this survey will present several results, obtained by different research groups 
in the world, about nanostructured ZnO grown by excimer laser ablation. Then this study will 
be focused on the results obtained by the author’s research group in this field so far. By 
properly changing some deposition parameters (substrate temperature, oxygen pressure and 
ablation laser wavelength) the authors obtained nanostructured films with hexagonal 
pyramids, columns, hexagonal hierarchical structures and pencils, as well as smooth or rough 
films. In particular the different ablation laser wavelengths (248 nm of KrF and 193 nm of 
ArF) are shown to have a deep influence on both morphology and crystal quality of the grown 
samples. 
Scanning 
electron 
microscopy 
(SEM), 
x-ray 
diffraction 
(XRD) 
and 
photoluminescence (PL) measurements were used to inspect the film properties. Finally, 
some results about the author’s optical gas sensing tests conducted on the grown samples are 
presented. 
Chapter 5 - Laser forming of steel parts by means of diode lasers is discussed from 
different points of view. The physical mechanisms at the basis of the laser forming processes 
are depicted, and a description of the state of the art is reported. Many laboratory experiences 
are presented in the case of diode laser forming of stainless steel sheet metals and tubes. Also 
slotted tubes were processed to form flares and tongues. Numerical modeling was carried out 
by means of analytical and finite element models and experimental data were in good 
agreement with numerical ones. The analytical approach lead to the evaluation of the laser 
forming efficiency, instead finite element models were used to predict the final shape of the 
steel parts as a function of the process parameters. In fact, finite element models allow the 
researchers to thoroughly study the part behavior during forming in the case of sheets, tubes 
or slotted tubes. In the end, an attempt was made to describe how material analysis helps in 
the laser forming investigation; residual stresses are mainly discussed as they strongly affect 
the formed part performances.  
Chapter 6 - It was shown earlier that the ionisation propagation in a gas at about the 
atmospheric pressure may proceed due to the multiplication of the existing electrons with a 
low background density rather than the transfer of electrons or photons. It is considered the 
feasibility of using the plasma produced in the afterglow of this background-electron 
multiplication wave for pumping plasma lasers (in particular, Penning neon laser and Xe*
2 
excimer lasers) as well as excilamps.  
The Penning neon laser was studied in a Ne-H2 mixture excited by a transverse discharge. 
Theoretical modeling allowed the conclusion that the laser active medium was excited due to 
the BEMW passed through the discharge gap. Numerous attempts to pump Xe*
2 lasers by a 
gas discharge instead of a beam have not been successful. Simulations show that it is possible 
to achieve the laser effect at λ = 172 nm as well as to substantially improve the peak specific 
power of the spontaneous radiation of xenon lamps.  
Chapter 7 - Removal of the latent heat at vapor condensation and/or crystallization (with 
temperature T << Tc) occurs, as is shown by theoretical calculations and the resulted 
experimental data, on characteristic frequencies and their higher harmonics'. Intensity of this 
radiation can be very high and can explain, in particular, the bright flashes at the phenomenon 
of sonoluminescence. Under the general laws of the quantum theory these processes can be 
stimulated by resonant frequencies, therefore it is possible to carry out the laser on such 
“condensation” radiation. Potential capacity and, in principle, simplicity of such devices 
should attract to them attention of researchers. 

Maxim Thys and Eugene Desmet 
x 
Spectral features of atmospheric clouds correspond to characteristic frequencies of water 
vapor condensation and of CO2, CH4 condensation, etc. Radiative stimulation of their phase 
transitions can lead to control of atmospheric processes and of heat fluxes from the Earth, to 
regularization of its thermal regime. 
Chapter 8 - Presented here are the analysis results of the ability of Pulsed Laser 
Deposition methods for putting a multi-layer multi-component coating with single-layer 
thickness in the nano-scale range as well as micro- and nano-composite coatings on the inner 
surfaces of hollow objects. Also reviewed are mass-transporting processes, occurring during 
the application of double-component coatings by Pulsed Laser Deposition methods on the 
inner surface of long tubes of small diameter (L/d>50 L≈900mm, d≈13mm). With XPS and 
RBS methods, the structure and composition of double-component multi-layer coatings with 
single-layer thickness ≈30 nm, obtained on special installation equipped with YAG:Nd+ 
Laser LTI-207, is investigated. A device to provide target changing during the deposition 
process without vacuum braking is developed. The authors determined conditions of 
obtaining multi-layer coatings with single-layer thickness in nano-scale range and methods of 
preliminary inner surfaces cleaning of said objects by means of hollow cathode glowing 
discharge with partial plasma filling of cathode cavity. The authors considered different 
schemes of cleaning inner surfaces of tube-like objects. Possible applications of the presented 
method for treating of said objects in individual or serial production, instrument decisions 
providing realization of the presented process and its perspective are discussed. 
Chapter 9 - Safe and precise cavity detection, especially of dangerous or inaccessible 
voids, is essential to safe production in a working mine. Conventional underground cavity 
detection methods are briefly reviewed and their limitations discussed. Accurate 3D laser 
measurement systems are introduced. One of these laser systems was used to detect 
inaccessible underground cavities from the surface through boreholes at Luanchuan 
molybdenum open pit in China. The results from the scanner demonstrated very well the 
detailed level of information that can be collected in a cavity using this method, with the 
cavities’ layout under various benches being fully mapped. The processed data can be 
imported into existing models in SURPAC and CAD and the roof and floor elevations from 
the model of the cavity was used to output sections which would be required at a later design 
stage. A minimum number of exploration boreholes can be coordinated based on the scanned 
data which therefore not only fully details the extent of the cavity, but also saves on the costs 
of exploration drilling. Finally, the advantages and disadvantages of laser detection systems 
are analysed, and a combination of laser scanning techniques and conventional survey 
methodology is proposed to detect these unknown underground cavities. 
Chapter 10 - This chapter presents a basic overview on laser cladding. Among laser 
technologies, laser cladding has received great attention in recent years, mainly due to the 
reduced costs of laser sources, the increasing potential for material processing, the 
development of new coating materials, the emergence of rapid prototyping and other 
manufacturing applications.  
In this chapter the process and different systems for laser cladding have been described, 
some case studies have been discussed, some predictive models have been proposed, and new 
perspectives have been discussed. Some aspects and advantages of laser cladding process 
have been highlighted.  

Preface 
xi
Chapter 11 - Growing interest in the field of surface plasmon polaritons comes from a 
rapid advance of nanostructuring technologies. The application of two-photon polymerization 
by pulse laser technique for the fabrication of dielectric and metallic SPP-structures, which 
can be used for localization, guiding, and manipulation of plasmonic waves on a 
subwavelength scale, are studied. This fast technology is based on nonlinear absorption of 
near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses. Excitation, propagation, and interaction of SPP waves 
with nanostructures are controlled and studied by leakage radiation imaging. It is 
demonstrated that created nanostructures are very efficient for the excitation and focusing of 
plasmonic waves on the metal film. Examples of passive and active plasmonic components 
are presented and discussed. 
Chapter 12 - In this chapter, the applications of structured laser beams in laser 
refractography technology are considered. The basic principles of laser refractography, a new 
method for diagnostics of optically inhomogeneous media and flows are described. This 
technology is based on the refraction of the structured laser beams in transparent 
inhomogeneity, digital registration and computer processing of the refraction pattern. The 
experimental setup allowed quantitative visualization of the transparent media by using 2D- 
or 3D-refractograms. The 3D-refractograms are used for visualization of the boundary layer 
near the hot or cold ball in water that are present. The problem of laser sheet (plane structured 
laser beam) also cylindrical beam propagation in media with radial variation of the 
temperature and refractive index is solved and the trajectories of geometrical rays are 
calculated. The comparison of the parameters for experimental and corresponding calculated 
refractograms allows recognizing the temperature fields in the boundary layer, i.e., gives 
quantitative information. The method is modified for studying edge effects and micro layers 
in liquids and gases. Due to nearly inertialess measurements, laser refractography can be used 
for diagnostics of fast and transient processes. 
Chapter 13 - This chapter reviews some fundamentals of laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy (LIBS) and describes some experimental studies developed in the author’s 
laboratory on gases such as nitrogen, oxygen and air. LIBS of these gases at different 
pressures, in the spectral range ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR), was excited by 
using a high-power transverse excitation atmospheric (TEA) CO2 laser (λ=9.621 and 10.591 
μm; τFWHM=64 ns; and different laser power densities). The spectra of the generated 
plasmas are dominated by emission of strong atomic, ionic species and molecular bands. 
Excitation temperatures were estimated by means of atomic and ionic lines. Electron number 
densities were deduced from the Stark broadening of several ionic lines. The characteristics of 
the spectral emission intensities from different species have been investigated as functions of 
the gas pressure and laser irradiance. Optical breakdown threshold intensities in different 
gases have been measured experimentally. The physical processes leading to laser-induced 
breakdown of the gases have been analyzed. Plasma characteristics in LIBS of air were 
examined in detail on the emission lines of N+, O+ and C by means of time-resolved optical-
emission spectroscopy (OES) technique. The results show a faster decay of continuum and 
ionic spectral species than of neutral atomic and molecular ones. The velocity and kinetic 
energy distributions for different species were obtained from time-of-flight (TOF) OES 
measurements. Excitation temperature and electron density in the laser-induced plasma were 
estimated from the analysis of spectral data at various times from the laser pulse incidence. 
Temporal evolution of electron density has been used for the estimation of the three-body 
recombination rate constant. 

Maxim Thys and Eugene Desmet 
xii
Chapter 14 - Manufacturers who use laser cutting are interested in the optimization of 
productivity and the subsequent quality of components made by the laser cutting process. 
Both aspects are governed by the selection of appropriate laser process parameters. These 
parameters include laser power, assist gas and cutting speed. The last parameter must be able 
to provide a good quality of machined components. The inert gas is used to minimize the 
number of laser process parameters. So, only the absorbed energy by steel Ea contributes in 
the machining processes. Ea depends on power laser, interaction time and absorbed 
coefficient. 
Good quality of components made by the laser cutting process is deduced from groove 
specific characteristic parameters like the width (LS), the groove depth (Pr) and the width of 
the Thermal Affected Zone (ZTAZ).  
The condition that must be used to write the energy balance is to fix the adequate 
assumption. The energy balance will give the theoretical values of the characteristic 
machining parameters and will permit the evaluation of lost energy if the energy quantity able 
to create the TAZ is calculated from the resolution of the heat propagation equation. 
 
 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 1-93  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
COMPUTER MODELING OF NANOSTRUCTURING ON 
MATERIALS WITH TIGHTLY FOCUSED  
ENERGY DEPOSITION 
 
 
D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
Technical University of Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION TO THE THEORY OF NANOSTRUCTURING 
WITH LASER BEAMS 
 
(a) Laser in Nanostructuring 
 
It has been several decades since the first laser was assembled by T. Maiman and his 
research on generation of coherent radiation by the photoexcited ruby was published in 1960 
[1]. Several other works, however, prior to his study were also aimed on creation of Light 
Amplifier by Stimulated Emission of Radiation (LASER). Thus, one can find the description 
of laser on ammonia capable of amplifying the microwaves, and therefore called MASER, 
with induced radiation in works by N.G. Basov and A.M. Prohorov in 1958 [2,3] and in 
works by C.H. Townes and A.L. Schawlow [4]. And even earlier, the possibility of the 
existence of induced atomic radiation itself was yet foreseen in 1916 by A. Einstein in his 
work on the theory of interaction of the electromagnetic radiation with matter [5]. The 
discovery of laser irradiation in 1960 therefore was a logical conclusion of many years 
theoretical and experimental research and became one of the most meaningful breakthrough 
in science and technology in XX century. 
Since then, the laser technologies have grown to incredible opportunities and 
applications. Lasers have occupied a significant field in physics and penetrated nearly all 
scientific areas. Because of their unique properties, laser beams can efficiently serve in 
medicine as a surgical instrument to perform the tiniest operations [6] and with the same 
success in industry as a powerful cutter capable of ripping iron sheets of several centimetres 
thick [7]. Whereas lasers themselves can be effectively used as both diagnostic and research 
tools their development is still in progress. The requirements to the laser beams as well as the 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
2 
accuracy in controlling the chosen parameters are varying in a wide range of pulse durations 
and energies depending on their applications. To nowadays in physics and biophysics the 
pulse duration has shrunk to attoseconds and energies around 1kJ become possible to be 
reached in a single pulse. At such high power, of 1012 Watt and more, realized upon the 
absorption of the laser pulse, the matter can undergo a transition to solid dense plasma state 
that results at least in change of the surface morphology and usually in partial removal of the 
material (ablation). Especially, the ability of laser beams to serve for a high density energy 
deposition into a limited area (sub micron scale) and on a very short time scale (less then 10 
ps) has been widely exploited in nanostructuring experiments – the process of generation of 
nanosize features on material surfaces [8]. 
There is a strong demand for new technologies which can produce 2 and 3-dimensional 
nanostructures on a wide range of materials [9,10,11,12]. The most common technology of 
this type is optical lithography. Since the development of this technology, there has been a 
gradual reduction in the size of the features produced using optical lithographic techniques 
[13]. This has been achieved mainly by using shorter wavelength of light and it has been 
predicted that the technology would still be applicable even for feature sizes below 100 nm 
[14]. The disadvantages are that optical lithography can only be applied to a small range of 
materials which must have flat surfaces, hence there is a  need for the development of new, 
more broadly applicable nanostructuring technologies based on laser beam technique. 
Wereas lasers are well established tools for materials processing. However, the 
conventional lasers are limited when the highest precision is required due to undesirable 
effects such as thermal energy dissipation and the formation of heat and shock affected zones. 
With the introduction of ultrafast lasers (pico-, femto-, and atto-second), it was shown that 
higher precision features could be produced, thus opening up new applications and 
possibilities which could not be realized with ordinary laser systems [15,16,17,18]. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1. SEM images of an array of micro-shells and nano-jets fabricated in the experiments: (a) by B. 
Chichkov [9] and (b) by Y. Nakata [11] on thin gold film with femtosecond laser pulses. (c) Formation 
of nanohillocks on SrTiO3 in swift heavy Xe+ ions bombardment experiments [19]. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
3
Recently, ultrafast laser materials processing has become more attractive due to the rapid 
development of femtosecond laser systems. At the extreme conditions of matter, however, 
realized with femtosecond pulsed laser beam focused on a material surface, the physics 
behind the interaction of laser irradiation with matter is no longer of the classical view as well 
as the processes of nanostructures formation and the properties of obtained features. In 
general, high power, short-pulsed, laser-matter interactions are complex, involving 
mechanical, thermal, and phase perturbations. A number of the non-equilibrium processes 
induced by a short-pulsed laser beam are impossible to study experimentally and difficult to 
model at all levels: ab-initio, atomistic, and continuum. In this chapter we address this 
challenge using new computational techniques that combine advantages of different 
theoretical approaches. Particularly, we will focus our research on the application of laser 
beams for the purpose of restructuring materials. We will consider in details which processes 
are responsible for a change of the surface morphology as result of the laser beam interaction 
with solid and which physical mechanisms act towards the nanostructuring. 
The structure of this chapter can be therefore outlined in the following way. In the 
beginning we will consider in general laser-induced processes that are involved into laser-matter 
interaction and thus can be responsible for the change of the surface morphology, Section 1 b) 
and c). Then, some background on the modelling of laser-matter interaction will be given, 
including several computational approaches with discussion of their advantages and 
disadvantages in the scope of description of the nanostructuring processes, Section 2 a)-e). In 
Section 3 of this chapter, we will present several combined atomistic-continuum theoretical 
models to study laser-induced changes of the surface morphology. We will demonstrate the 
applicability of the combined models to study these on different materials as a result of tightly 
focused energy deposition that can be obtained by any means, either by laser irradiation, Figure 
1 a-b), Section 3 b) and c), or by swift heavy ion bombardment of the solid, Figure 1c, Section 3 
f). The latter will be considered in a close connection with laser beam nanostructuring 
experiments since the resulting nanostructures are governed by similar physical mechanisms 
and can be therefore described within the frames of our combined computational approaches. 
 
 
(b) Processes, Involved into Laser Matter Interaction 
 
Since it is the electronic system in matter that absorbs the laser pulse energy we shall start 
our study with a very basic presentation of the electron theory in a solid. In fact, the 
appropriate description of the dynamics of the excited electronic system occures to be the 
most crucial in determinition the further evolution of matter upon the laser beam absorption. 
In this section we describe the process of excitation and relaxation of the conduction band 
electrons in metals. Later, similar processes in semiconductors and dielectrics will be 
addressed by analogy in description of nanostructuring of the related materials, Section 3 e) 
and f). 
The classical theory of metallic conductivity was first presented by Drude [20] in 1900. 
According to his theory, the outer shell electrons (conduction electrons) of atoms that form a 
metallic solid are able to move freely through the volume of the specimen forming an 
“electron gas”, governed by Fermi-Dirac statistics. These ourter shell electrons are 
responsible for the conduction of electricity in metals, and are termed “conduction band 
electrons”, to distinguish from the electrons of the filled shells of the ions, termed “valence 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
4 
band electrons”. The interaction of conduction band electrons with the ion cores of the 
original atoms is neglected in the free electron approximation, and all calculations are 
performed under assumption that the conduction electrons are entirely free in space bounded 
by the surfaces of the specimen. The lattice enters as a periodic background for free moving 
electrons, responsible therefore for the detailed band structure. There is no direct energy 
exchange between free conduction band electrons and the atoms constituting the lattice. 
However, there is an interaction of electrons with quantized modes of vibrations occurring in 
a lattice that are called phonons [21]. Phonons are wave-like quasiparticles that are governed 
by Bose-Einstein statistics and their interaction with electrons can be described in terms of the 
electron-phonon collisions [21] This interaction becomes especially important in the case of 
electron-phonon nonequilibrium [22]. Thus, from the point of computational physics we can 
treat the system of electrons and phonons as two weakly bounded subsystems in the solid. 
For long pulse laser irradiation (ns and longer) the excitation rate is comparatively low 
and both electron-electron and electron-phonon equilibration takes place during the laser 
pulse. Therefore, both Fermi-Dirac distribution of the electrons and thermal equilibrium 
between the electrons and the lattice can be safely assumed at any time during and after the 
laser pulse. For subpicosecond laser pulses, however, one can distinguish three time intervals 
of material response to a laser irradiation, as schematically shown in Figure 2 [22] where the 
electron density distribution function is shown at different excitation stages. Immediately 
upon the laser pulse absorption, there are two processes take place in the electronic system. 
One process is the ballistic energy transport by highly excited non-equilibrium electrons, and 
the other one is the establishment of the Fermi-Dirac distribution due to electron-electron 
collisions (electron thermalization). The characteristic length of the ballistic energy transport 
can vary for different types of materials. For example it is on the order of 100 nm for noble 
metals (weak electron-phonon coupling like it is in Au and Cu) and on the order of the optical 
penetration depth, typically 10-20 nm, for transition metals (strong electron-phonon coupling 
like it is in Ni and Al). The establishment of the Fermi-Dirac distribution is a general process 
that occurs by means of collisions of the excited electrons with those around the Fermi level 
and usually takes few hundred of femtoseconds [23,24,25,26]. The first conditional time 
interval is over when Fermi-Dirac distribution is established at any depth in the irradiated 
target and hot electron bath is localized either within the ballistic range or within the optical 
penetration depth. 
 
 
 τe_e
τe_ph
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 2. Three stages of the relaxation of optically excited electrons in a metal target irradiated by a 
femtosecond laser pulse: (a) optical excitation, (b) establishment of the Fermi-Dirac distribution 
(thermalization process) by means of electron-electron collision process; (c) electron cooling due to the 
electron heat conduction and the electron-phonon equilibration resulting in lattice heating. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
5
At the same time, the electron-phonon thermalization proceed via electron-phonon 
collisions but this process takes place on a longer, picosecond time scale which in general 
depends on the strength of electron-phonon coupling [27,28]. The latter determines the 
amount of energy transferred between electrons and phonons per unit time per volume, called 
the electron-phonon coupling parameter, and can vary by more than an order of magnitude for 
different materials. The second time interval, therefore, is mainly characterized by the 
difference in temperatures between the hot electrons with the Fermi-Dirac distribution and 
cold phonons. Due to the large temperature gradient, hot electrons tend to transfer energy 
deeper into the target by means of the electronic thermal diffusion mechanism. Although at a 
much slower speed as compared with the ballistic energy transport the electron heat 
conduction process can nevertheless dissipate a significant amount of energy in a high 
temperature regime [29,30], when temperature of electrons reaches 104 K and more. 
Meanwhile, the electron-phonon equilibration process results in the lattice temperature grow. 
The diffusion length and the temperature profile of hot electrons before the establishment of 
the electron-phonon equilibrium is defined therefore by the interplay of the strength of the 
electron-phonon coupling and the electron heat conduction. Depending on the level of 
excitation, these two processes have a complex temperature dependence [31,32] and their 
appropriate theoretical description becomes especially important for the temperature 
evolution dynamics in the proximity of the material surface [33]. 
The third time interval can be conventionally defined starting from the time when thermal 
equilibrium is established between the electrons and phonons. Because of the large difference in 
heat capacities of electrons and phonons, the rise of lattice temperature is one-two orders of 
magnitude lower then the electron temperature drop and due to temperature dependence of the 
electron heat conductiotivity, the established common electron-lattice temperature gradient will 
result in correspondingly slower heat propagation into the deeper parts of the target. 
If a sufficiently high temperature is reached in the solid, it can undergo a phase transition. 
As energetically favorable, the free surfaces usually serve as nucleation sites for melting with 
a subsequent propagation of the liquid front into the bulk of the material [34]. Furthermore, 
homogeneous nucleation of the liquid phase may contribute to the phase transition and 
regions of liquid phase can appear and grow ahead of the propagating solid/liquid interface 
[35]. 
Finally, at even higher excitation, the processes of spallation (chunky material removal) 
and ablation (gaseous material removal) can take place [36]. In recent study with Molecular 
Dynamics [37] a close connection between melting, spallation, and ablation processes were 
considered as a function of fluence. In the case of nanostructuring, however, which is the 
focus of our work, due to relatively low fluence the contribution of the ablation mechanism 
will be suppressed whereas the melting process will be dominant. For the same reason of low 
fluence, the radiation and electron emission losses, usually attributing the ablation 
mechanisms, will be neglected as comprising less than 0.5% of the laser deposited energy. In 
the next section, we will consider those processes that we must include into the theoretical 
description of nanostructuring on materials with tightly focused laser beams. 
 
 
 
 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
6 
(c) Laser-Induced Processes, Contributing to Nanostructuring 
 
The mechanism of nanostructuring in general is a complex interplay of fast concurrent 
laser-induced processes spawning on a wide time interval, 10 fs – 10 ns, and on a large spatial 
scale, 10 nm – 10 μm. Since the fluencies used in the nanostructuring processes are rather 
low, just above the melting threshold [9, 10, 11, 12], the processes of ablation or evaporation 
will be suppressed. It follows from here that the only possible way of changing the materials 
surface morphology is the establishment of hydrodynamic motion of the melt or the elasto-
plastic deformations of the solid in the proximity of the laser sport. According to [38] upon 
melting the material’s elastic shear modulus vanishes. Therefore, at the moment of phase 
transformation the crystal structure is lost and material can easily undergo a restructuring and 
surface modification processes. Upon the phase transition of a particular volume, a part of the 
solid’s thermal energy goes to the latent heat of melting that in turn decreases temperature of 
the surrounding region. Since the velocity of melting front propagation is a strong function of 
overheating [39,40], such local temperature decrease along the solid-liquid interface may lead 
to variation of the velocity of the melting front propagation and development of the melting 
front instabilities due to thermal energy redistribution across the solid-liquid interface [41]. 
Such instabilities eventually can lead to the formation of nanofeatures on a material surface 
that can be studied experimentally [42,43]. The kinetics of liquid phase nucleation and 
growth, however, as well as the shape of the nuclei are still the subjects of current debates. At 
high levels of superheating realized in short pulse laser melting, when the size of a critical 
nucleus becomes comparable to several interatomic distances [44], the applicability of 
macroscopic kinetic approaches based on classical nucleation theory [45] is questionable and 
should be verified by a detailed microscopic analysis of the involved processes. 
With any laser material processing technology the minimum achievable structure size is 
determined by the diffraction limit [46] of the optical system and it is generally of the order of 
the laser wavelength. Apparently, the characteristic length of the established temperature 
gradient in the solid upon the laser heating will roughly outline the material volume which 
can potentially undergo to restructuring, if the absorbed fluence was high enough. In this 
sense, for the purpose of nanostructuring the temperature gradients developed on the 
nanoscale are of the great preference. This presumes the laser spot size to be at least not grater 
then temperature gradient range. The focusing of laser beams into the spot of nanosize, 
however, is not a straightforward task. The diffraction limit defines the lowest possible size, 
x, of the laser beam spot focused on a material surface,
D
F
x
λ
22
.1
≥
[46], where F is the 
focal length and D is the aperture of the optical system. Thus, if working in visible diapason 
with the wave length λ = 400 nm the smallest laser spot that can be obtained in the material 
surface with a high quality optics of F/D = 1.5 still on the level of 1-3 μm that can barely 
provide the establishment of temperature gradient on a submicron scale. 
In order to overcome the diffraction limit, several advanced techniques were recently 
introduced into the nanostructuring process. One of the interesting properties of ultrafast laser 
materials processing is that there is a very well defined melting threshold [9, 11, 22, 47]. This 
allows for sub-diffraction limited structuring by setting the peak applied laser fluence to be 
just above the threshold fluence value, like it was accomplished with the use of Gaussian laser 
pulse tip in the experiments by Chichkov in [9, 10, 60], Figure 1 a). In this case only the 
central portion of the laser beam can cause any surface modification. In theory, it should be 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
7
possible to produce ever-decreasing structure/feature sizes using this technique but in practice 
a limit exists due to imperfections in the laser beam profile. Alternatively, the interference of 
four laser beams was used in nanostructuring experiments by Nakata [11, 12], Figure 1 b). 
Moreover, the recent development of near-field optics [48, 49, 50, 51] broadens the 
opportunities of tight focusing of the laser energy deposition in nanomodifications of 
materials. 
But probably even more important factor in laser nanostructuring experiments is the time 
frame within which the laser energy deposition occurs. The effect of laser pulse duration on 
the character of laser damage (melting, ablation, and spallation) has been considered in 
several experimental [16, 18, 22, 52, 53] and theoretical [33, 54, 55, 56, 57] works for the last 
decade. It was justified that ns laser pulses result in a relatively slow heating under electron-
phonon equilibrium conditions and eventually in a significant damage of surrounding material 
due to the excess of thermal energy (melting). This process therefore was attributed to photo-
thermal damage and opposed to the photo-mechanical effect where ps or fs laser pulses were 
used to generate a strong non equilibrium between electrons and phonons. It has been 
reported that with pico- and femtosecond laser pulses the heating rate can be extremely high, 
up to 1015 K/s, before the systems of electrons and phonons come to the equilibrium. Fast, 
within tens of ps, heating results in development of significant stresses inside of the material. 
The 
relaxation 
of 
these 
laser-induced 
stresses 
leads 
to 
a 
local 
mechanical 
damage/modification of material with very sharp edges [15, 16, 18, 58]. Apparently, the 
regime of photo-mechanical influence should be therefore a working mode for the purpose of 
nanostructuring [9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18]. From here, the accurate description of laser energy 
deposition is one of the first and important issues that we must deal with when modeling the 
material nanostructuring processes. 
As highly mobile particles the electrons readily accept the laser energy by means of direct 
absorption in metals or by additional channels of excitation via one- or multiphoton 
absorption and impact ionisation in semiconductors and insulators [20, 21]. For short pulses 
(10 ps and shorter) the resulting temperature difference therefore, developed upon the 
electron-phonon non equilibrium, can grow as high as two orders of magnitude by the end of 
the pulse. The further dynamics of the electron and phonon temperatures is defined by energy 
dissipation via two essential channels: the electron heat conduction and electron-phonon 
collision mechanisms. Both are strong and complex functions of temperatures [29, 30, 31, 32, 
59, 60], and depending on the pulse intensity and duration can significantly alter the resulting 
lattice temperature profile established by the time of the electron-phonon equilibrium and thus 
efficiently influence the nanostructuring process [22, 29, 33, 52]. 
If the excitation of conduction band electrons due to laser irradiation is too strong, the 
establishment of Fermi distribution can take up to hundreds of femtoseconds [59] and until 
the electronic system is thermalized, the applicability of Fermi statistics is no longer valid. 
Additionally, depending on materials the distribution function of free electrons can be 
influenced by those exited out of valence band (d-band electrons) that enhances 
nonequilibrium [31, 32]. In order to treat nonthermalized electrons and their interaction with 
phonons in particular, Boltzmann statistics is proposed, where distribution functions of the 
systems of electrons and phonons are considered as a function of time [61]. 
Since the structure size we want to model is on the same scale as the size of the laser spot 
on the material surface, all these processes: the laser light absorption, the process of 
thermalization of the electrons, the electron-phonon equilibration, and the electron heat 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
8 
conduction must be described in 3D space. The relative methods of their description will be 
considered later in the Section 2 a), d), and e). 
When the lattice temperature gradient is established upon the electron-phonon 
equilibrium, a part of material can undergo to restructuring due to melting or plastic 
deformations. It was emphasized in Ref. [62] that the essential mechanism of the mechanical 
damage to the metal film under low-fluence laser irradiation is the relaxation of the stresses, 
generated with a short laser pulse. The building up of the compressive stresses inside the 
material in turn is a result of thermal expansion of the lattice in response to laser heating. 
Such process is a common phenomenon for all classes of the materials: metals, 
semiconductors, and insulators [63]. If the heating is fast enough, and the thermal expansion 
of the material is slow, the formation of laser-induced stresses is followed by a propagation of 
a pressure wave that can cause a mechanical damage of solid or the establishment of a 
hydrodynamical flow in a melt. In other words, the heating time, τh, must be shorter than 
relaxation time (the characteristic time of stress propagation), τs, that in turn is defined via 
speed of sound in the solid Cs and geometrical size of the heated region Lc, τh < τs= Lc/Cs. 
Such heating is said to be under conditions of stress confinement [64] that triggers the 
mechanism of relaxation of the laser-induced pressure as a sequence of the 
compressive/extensive pressure recoils and directly effects the material restructuring. 
Finally, the melting and plastic deformations are two separate mechanisms that contribute 
to the nanostructuring differently and on different spatial scales. If the establishment of a 
hydrodynamical flow in the molten part of the material is limited to the central part of the 
formed nanofeature, the most effected by the laser beam [9, 10], the plastic deformation can 
extend to microns and can form a plateau on which the nanostructure is forming [9, 60]. In 
nanostructuring experiments, both processes occur under conditions of superheating above 
the melting point and strong temperature and pressure gradients, and thus proceed at 
nonequilibrium. The size of liquid nuclear can be as small as several interatomic distances 
[38, 41, 44] and the melting process itself can be as fast as several hundreds of femtosecond 
[35]. Therefore, the applicability of Gibbs and classical nucleation theory [45, 65, 66] for 
description of such melting process is not supported in nanostructuring as well as the elasto-
plastic deformations must be described via a realistic stress tensor that includes complex 
temperature dependences [67]. In the next section, we will present the appropriate physical 
models that can describe the processes contributing to the nanostructuring. We will outline 
their advantages and limitation and present the essential impact points on laser-matter 
interaction obtained with those models. 
 
 
2. MODELING OF MATERIAL PROCESSING WITH A TIGHTLY 
FOCUSED ENERGY DEPOSITION 
 
(a) Two-Temperature Model 
 
As discussed in the previous section, upon laser light absorption by the conduction band 
electrons, the deposited energy quickly, within femtoseconds, is equilibrated among the 
electrons and, more slowly, is transferred to the atomic vibrations. The latter process is 
controlled by the strength of the electron-phonon coupling and can take from a fraction of a 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
9
picosecond to several tens of picoseconds. Finally, a thermal equilibrium is established 
between the electrons and phonons, and the heat flow from the surface region into the bulk of 
the irradiated target can be described as the common thermal diffusion [68]. Based on an 
energy balance, in 1974, S.I. Anisimov suggested that at the continuum level, the time 
evolution of the lattice and electron temperatures, Tl and Te, can be described within a so-
called Two Temperature model [69,70] (TTM) by two coupled nonlinear differential 
equations, 
 
 
( )
(
)
[
]
(
)(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
[
]
(
)(
)
⎪⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎨
⎧
−
+
∇
∇
=
∂
∂
+
−
−
∇
∇
=
∂
∂
l
e
ph
e
l
ph
l
l
l
l
l
l
e
ph
e
e
ph
e
e
e
e
e
T
T
T
T
G
T
T
T
K
t
T
T
C
t
z
S
T
T
T
T
G
T
T
T
K
t
T
T
C
,
,
,
,
,
 
(1) 
 
where C and K are the heat capacities and thermal conductivities of the electrons and lattice 
as denoted by subscripts e and l, and G is the electron-phonon coupling parameter. The source 
term S(z,t) is used to describe the local laser energy deposition per unit area and a unit of 
time. In the second equation the term responsible for the phonon heat conduction is typically 
negligible as compared to the electron heat conduction in metals and is often omitted. 
The system of differential equations (1) can be solved by a finite difference method and 
the spatial and time evolution of the electron and lattice temperatures can be obtained. As an 
illustration of the model predictions in 1D case of heat conduction, the temperature profiles 
for a 50 nm Ni film irradiated by a 200 fs laser pulse are shown in Figure 3 for the front and 
rear surfaces of the film. We can see that equilibration between the hot electrons and the 
lattice takes up to 20 ps for the Ni film, and the heating rate as well as the energy distribution 
in the film are strongly affected by the equilibration kinetics. A simple description of melting 
is also included in the model by tracking the fraction of the melted material in any finite 
difference discretization cell where the equilibrium melting temperature is reached and taking 
away the latent heat of melting until the complete melting is occurred. The melting process is 
reflected in regions of the constant-temperature plateau in the lattice temperature profiles. The 
model predicts that melting of the front surface region starts at 5 ps after the laser pulse and 
takes 4 ps, whereas melting of the back surface region starts at 8 ps after the laser pulse and 
takes ~12 ps. As it will be shown in the next section, these predictions on the melting kinetics 
are very different from the predictions of a more realistic model in which overheating and the 
effect of pressure on the melting process are included. 
Despite its relative simplicity, TTM model can be successfully used in studying the 
complex mechanism of interplay between channels of the laser-deposited energy dissipation 
in laser-matter interaction experiments [22]. Particularly, we will demonstrate below that this 
model predicts the possibility of experimental determination of the strength of the electron-
phonon interaction via a direct access to the electron-phonon relaxation time. For this purpose 
we will consider the interplay between the electron-phonon coupling and the electron heat 
conduction mechanisms at different conditions, realized during short pulse laser interaction 
with free standing metal films [33]. 
Among of four metals chosen to test the process of energy dissipation two of them, Au 
and Cu, exhibit pure properties of noble type of metals and the rest, Ni and Al, belong to the 
group of transitional metals. Noble metals have a relatively weak strength of the electron-

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
10
phonon coupling, which results in quite high values of the electronic temperatures upon laser 
light absorption. Transitional metals, on the other hand, exhibit much stronger electron-
phonon coupling and much lower electronic temperatures are reached during the laser-matter 
interaction process. 
 
 
Figure 3. Time dependence of electron and lattice temperatures predicted by TTM for a 50 nm Ni film 
irradiated with a 200 fs laser pulse at an absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. 
Although, it was discussed that it is the strength of the electron-phonon coupling that 
plays a determinant role in the character of the laser induced processes [52], its quantitative 
definition is still a big challenge and only several predictions based on theoretical models 
were made till nowadays [71,72]. Obviously, that the strength of the electron-phonon 
coupling is unequivocally related to the electron-phonon relaxation time. The complex and 
transient character of the electronic and lattice temperature behaviour, however, during the 
short laser pulses make the experimental determination of this time difficult. Additionally, the 
fast electron heat conduction mechanism is a strong function of the electronic temperature Te 
and can drastically alter the energy dissipation during the electron-phonon equilibration 
process. In several theoretical attempts to study the electron heat conduction mechanism [59, 
72, 73], it was emphasized that depending on the level of electron excitation (temperature), 
the conductivity can be approximated either as a constant (Tph ~ Te), or a linear function of Te 
(Tph<Te<<TF), or a function attributed with the electron-electron collision process 
(Tph<<Te<TF), or a function that behave like plasma conductivity ~Te
5/2 (Tph<<T~TF). 
In this section the heat conduction mechanism is considered in 1-D here that corresponds 
to the case of wide laser spot (~ 10 μm) on a metals surface as compare to the laser light 
absorption depth (~ 10 nm). Heat capacities Cph and Ce were taken as functions of phonon Tph 
and electron Te temperatures correspondingly. The dependence of Cph on Tph was based on 
experimental measurements [74]. The dependence of the electron heat capacity Ce and the 
strength of the electron-phonon interaction G on Te was accounted for with different 
theoretical predictions and qualitatively did not affect the results of our calculations: either we 
used G = const [22, 52] and Ce = γTe [75] or more complex dependence was considered when 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
11
both G = f(Te) and Ce = f(Te) [31, 32]. The electron heat conductivity ke exhibits a strong 
dependence with temperatures of electrons and phonons and was described with two 
approximations, depending on the material and, as a result, the temperature of electrons 
developed upon the absorption of the laser pulse. Namely, if the excitation of electrons leads 
to the temperature comparable with Fermi temperature TF, like it is the case of Au and Cu (Te 
~ 104 K ), the dependence of ke as suggested in [59] is given by Eq. 2: 
 
 
(
) (
)
(
) (
)
ph
e
e
e
e
e
e
b
C
k
ϑ
ϑ
ϑ
ϑ
ϑ
ϑ
+
+
+
+
=
2
2
1
2
4
5
2
092
.0
44
.0
16
.0
 
(2) 
 
Where θe = Te/TF and θph = Tph/TF and C, b are material constants, listed in [59,76]. If, 
however, the excitation is relatively low and the maximum electronic temperature remains 
negligible as compare to Fermi Temperature TF, like it was in the case of Ni and Al (Te ~ 103 
K ), an ordinary linear dependence of ke with electron temperature Te can be used [73], Eq,3: 
 
 
ph
e
T
T
k
k
0
=
 
(3) 
 
where k0 is a material constant. The heat conductivities for materials used in the present 
calculations are shown in Figure 4 a) and b). 
In order to exclude any assumption about the melting process, the fluences used in all 
calculations were chosen to be below the threshold for material modification (melting), and 
were hold constant for a particular set of calculations where only pulse duration was varying. 
The source term S(z,t) for convenience was defined via the absorbed fluence F that accounts 
for reflectivity R: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
p
p
pulse
p
L
L
L
z
t
t
t
L
F
t
z
S
−
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
=
exp
1
1
exp
exp
,
2
2
0
σ
π
σ
 
(4) 
 
where σ = 4Ln2, F = F0(1-R) indicates hhe absorbed fluence out of the incident one F0, and R 
is the reflectivity, Lp the laser penetration depth, L is the film thickness, tpulse is the pulse 
duration, and t0 = 2.5 tpulse is the time of pulse initiation. The first exponent describes 
Gaussian temporal profile; the second exponent reflects Lambert-Beers law of the laser 
energy deposition inside a solid; and the last multiplicator accounts for a finite thickness of 
film, for systems with sizes comparable to the effective energy deposition depth. 
 
 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
12
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 4. The electron heat conductivities for: a) Ni (TF = 136,000 K) and Al (TF = 135,000 K); b) Au 
(TF = 64,000 K) and Cu (TF = 81,000 K). 
Some of the material parameters used in the description of the electron system, Eq. (1) for 
the case of simple behavior of Ce and G with the electron temperature [22, 52]. For Ni, Ce = γTe 
with γ = 1065 Jm-3K-2, Ke = K0Te/Tl with K0 = 91 Wm-1K-1, G = 3.6×1017 Wm-3K-1, λball ~ 0 nm 
are used in the simulations; for Au, Ce = γTe with γ = 71 Jm-3K-2, G = 2.1×1016 Wm-3K-1, λball = 
105 nm are used. In order to describe the dependence of the electron thermal conductivity Ke on 
the electron and lattice temperatures in Au we use Eq. (2) with C = 353 Wm-1K-1, b = 0.16, and 
TF = 64200 K. The choice of approximations and parameters used for the electron thermal 
conductivity for Ni and Au was made based on characteristic electron temperatures attainable in 
calculations at used fluencies. When a more realistic dependence of Ce and G with electron 
temperature had to be considered, we used tabulated data obtained by Z. Lin in his first-
principles electronic structure calculations of the electron density of states [31, 32]. 
The system of TTM equations was solved with the initial and boundary conditions as 
they are for free standing films. The film thickness L was chosen so that by the end of 
modeling the rise of electron temperature on the back surface would not exceed 1% of its 
initial value. Thus, the calculations were carried out on what is usually understood by thick or 
bulk metal targets (with L values 300 nm, 400 nm, 500 nm, and 2000 nm for Ni, Al, Cu, and 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
13
Au materials respectively). The time step was chosen based on Neumann stability criterion Δt 
≤ 0.5(ΔX2)Ce(Te)/Ke(Te,Tph) and ranged in 0.01 - 1 fs. 
For each metal we perform a set of calculations at fixed absorbed fluence for a range of 
pulse durations from 100 fs to 100 ps. Thus, for all of the mentioned materials, there would be 
pulses much shorter and much longer than the characteristic electron-phonon relaxation times τe-
ph. Here we will understand the electron-phonon relaxation time as the time needed for both Te 
and Tph to equalize (crossover) on the metal surface, see Figure 5b). Being determined in such 
the way it can be therefore directly detected in experiments when measuring the surface 
temperature. Thus, we carry out the calculations until the moment when temperatures of 
electrons and lattice are equal at the surface. The results of simulations of laser pulses 
interacting with Ni target at the absorbed fluence F = 35 mJ/cm2 are represented in Figure 5a), 
where the dynamics of transient electron and lattice temperatures on the surface is shown for 
different pulse durations. The maximum lattice temperature reached at the surface in our 
simulations as a function of pulse duration can be seen in Figure 5b). 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. (a) Dynamics of transient electron (dotted) and lattice temperatures (solid) on the surface of 
Ni for different pulse durations at fixed fluence F = 35 mJ/cm2. (b) The maximum surface temperature 
of lattice (solid) of Ni as a function of pulse duration and the electron-phonon temperature dynamics on 
the surface (dotted) upon instantaneous energy deposition at the same fluence. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
14
The results show that there is a clear peak in the maximum temperature on the target’s 
surface at some pulse duration, tpulse = 12.5 ps, which is very close to electron-phonon 
relaxation time for Ni material that can be measured from the simulation where the effect of 
the pulse shape and duration is excluded. For this purpose we distribute the initial electron 
temperature within the optical absorption depth (13.5 nm for Ni at λ = 400 nm) so that the 
total energy integrated in depth would correspond to the value of the same absorbed fluence 
and follow the electron-phonon temperature dynamics on the metal surface until equilibration. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. (a) For a set of different pulse durations, the energy dissipated through the electron heat 
conduction Edis cond (upper dotted line) and through the electron-phonon interaction Edis coupl (lower 
dotted line). Thin dotted lines connecting them with the zero point indicate their development in the real 
time from the left to the right for different pulse durations of 1, 5, 10 and 30 ps. For the same value of 
pulses, the evolution of conductivity function is shown by solid lines. (b) The maximum surface 
temperature of Al with constant G (solid) and with G = f(Te) (dashed) at the absorbed fluence of 9.5 
mJ/cm2. 
Apparently, the coincidence of the electron-phonon relaxation time with the pulse 
duration time, at which the maximum lattice temperature on the target’s surface is developed, 
is not accidental. In earlier works by Duff and Zhigilei [77], the fastest cooling rate in laser 
melting simulations was also observed at the pulse duration on the order of the electron-
phonon relaxation time. In order to understand the nature of such coincidence, for different 
pulse durations, but at the constant fluence, we conduct the calculations while monitoring the 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
15
energy fluxes at the surface due to the conduction of hot electrons Edis cond and due to the 
electron-phonon energy exchange Edis coupl, Figure 6a. The evolutions of these quantities in 
time are shown by thin dotted lines from the left to the right for different pulse durations 
corresponding to 1, 5, 10, and 30 ps. For the same pulse durations we also plot the transient 
values of heat conductivity by the solid lines. As we can see, for pulses shorter than τe-ph 
defined in Figure 2b, there is a significant part of the energy dissipated from the surface due 
to high value of the electron heat conductivity (at Te ~ 4,000 K). Fast energy transfer into the 
bulk of the material prevents its transfer into the phonon vibrations and the rise of lattice 
temperature therefore is suppressed. At longer pulses, closer to τe-ph, the energy dissipation 
from hot electrons to phonons is more pronounced as the electron heat conduction is limited 
by lower temperature of electrons. In fact, at tpulse = τe-ph, the rate of energy transfer due to 
electron heat conduction is balanced by the rate of the electron-phonon energy dissipation 
process. At pulses much longer than τe-ph, however, the electron heat conduction remains 
roughly on the same level whereas the temperature difference between electrons and phonons 
developed during the laser pulse is gradually decreasing with the grow of tpulse, and therefore 
the energy dissipation from the electrons to the phonons is decreasing as well. 
The existence of peak in the maximum temperature reached on the surface can be also 
observed in similar experiment with Al, another type of material, which exhibit very strong 
characteristics of transitional metals. Conducting the set of calculations, as we did for Ni, we 
can plot the temperature of the surface upon the electron-phonon equilibrium for different 
pulse durations at the absorbed fluence of 9.5 mJ/cm2, Figure 6b. Qualitatively, we can find a 
lot of similarities between Al and Ni, but Al has much shorter pulse duration, tpulse = 2.5 ps, at 
which the peak in lattice temperature was observed. This corresponds to the experimental 
observation of much faster electron-phonon equilibration in this material [78]. The existence 
of the maximum still remains if we account for the electronic temperature dependence of the 
strength of electron-phonon coupling G(Te ) as it was discussed in [32], Figure 6b, although 
its position slightly changes to tpulse = 4.5 ps. The latter suggests an avareaged over time value 
for the electron-phonon relaxation time, τe-ph, when it is a function of Te. 
Note, that Figures 5b and 6b were constructed based on monitoring the surface lattice 
temperature for a range of pulse durations, like it is shown in Figure 5a. From there we can 
conclude that even though the maximum temperature on the surface is still defined by the 
pulse duration equal to the electron-phonon relaxation time, the rate of the lattice temperature 
grow is nevertheless higher for the pulses shorter than τe-ph. This implies that if there is 
enough space for the temperature gradient development [22, 79, 80], the shorter pulses will 
induce higher stresses upon the laser heating towards the conditions of inertial stress 
confinement [64] and after. As it was already mentioned above, physically the condition of 
inertial stress confinement means that the temperature grow exceeds the rate of thermal 
expansion of the solid in response to that hearting. The relaxation of overheated solid, 
apparently, is attributed with a propagation of a strong pressure wave that in turn may cause 
the mechanical damage. Therefore, the shorter pulse, the stronger laser-induced stresses, and 
the more photo-mechanical damage is pronounced. The latter complement the condition on 
inertial stress confinement, when τheating < L/Cs (where L is geometrical size of the system and 
Cs is the speed of sound), given in Ref. [64]. Contrary, the pulses longer than τe-ph result in 
establishing of temperature gradients on a longer scale and in a longer time. Any damage 
therefore can be rather addressed with photo-thermal effects, like melting or boiling 
processes. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
16
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. (a) The maximum surface temperature of lattice of Au at F = 85 mJ/cm2 for a range of pulse 
durations. (b) Similar to Figure 6a, but for pulse durations of of 1, 10, 30, and 50 ps. Edis cond is lower 
dotted line and Edis coupl is upper dotted line. 
Now we perform the same type of calculations for noble metals Cu and Au. In Figure 7a 
we plot the maximum temperature reached at the surface of Au for different pulse durations at 
constant absorbed fluence of 85 mJ/cm2 and constant coupling parameter G. As we can see, 
the essential difference with similar calculations on transitional metals Ni and Al, Figure 5b, 
is that now we do not observe a peak in maximum lattice temperature on the surface when 
varying the pulse duration. This fact, nevertheless, can be understood with the help of Figure 
7b where in real time we plot the energies dissipated from the surface due to the electron heat 
conduction Edis cond and the electron-phonon interactions Edis coupl along with the value of the 
electron heat conductivity. As we can see, the dynamics of the electron heat conductivity of 
Au is very different from that of Ni. Namely, the electron temperatures ~10,000 K, realized 
upon the laser light absorption for pulses on the order of 1 ps, drive the electron heat 
conductivity into the high temperature regime (Te ~ TF), resulting in a smaller value of heat 
conductivity, see Figure 4 b). Thus, the energy dissipation from the surface due to heat 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
17
conduction mechanism is suppressed and the heat is confined in the proximity of the surface, 
resulting in a higher maximum lattice temperature. 
This situation drastically changes, however, if we decrease the absorbed fluence down to 
1 mJ/cm2, pushing the electronic heat conductivity function to the low temperature regime 
(the electronic temperatures Te reaches the value ~ 1,000 K) so that only linear dependence of 
ke with Te is realized, Figure 4 b). Now, we can clearly see that there is a peak in the 
maximum lattice temperature developed on the surface at tpulse = 14 ps, Figure 8 a), that can 
be related to the electron-phonon relaxation time at this fluence. Qualitatively this behavior 
can be compared with the presented calculations for transitional metals, also exhibiting the 
low-temperature behavior of the heat conductivity, as on Figure 4 a). The interplay of the 
energy dissipation via the electron phonon interaction, Edis coupl, and via electron heat 
conduction, Edis cond, resulting in a peak behavior of the maximum lattice temperature on the 
surface for a low fluence regime can be seen in Figure 8 b). Thus, we come to the important 
conclusion that in the developing of the surface lattice temperature the electron heat 
conduction mechanism plays as an important role as the process of electron-phonon energy 
exchange. Similar type of calculations performed for Cu, another metal of noble type, 
confirmed the dependence of maximum surface temperature with the pulse duration in 
different fluence regimes. Namely, the absence of maximum surface temperature peak at F = 
28 mJ/cm2 and its presence at tpulse = 10 ps in the low fluence regime F = 1 mJ/cm2. 
Therefore, there is a fluence regime where we can detect the electron-phonon relaxation 
time experimentally by means of measuring the lattice temperature reached at the surface for 
a range of pulse durations at fixed fluence. But even at high excitations the profile of lattice 
temperature in a wide fluence range can give us important information about τe-ph and its 
temperature dependence. The necessary picosecond resolution in surface temperature 
measurements could be achieved in pump probe experiments where optical properties are 
monitored not only via a signal’s amplitude but detecting it’s phase as well [81,82]. In these 
experiments, the abrupt change in fast dynamics of the optical properties would indicate the 
establishment of equilibrium between the electrons and phonons. Therefore, having the 
reference points measured at the equilibrium conditions for the same material, the end of fast 
changing in optical properties could be referred to the value of lattice temperature. 
Despite the fact that noble metals exhibit essentially different properties in maximum 
temperature development when varying the pulse duration, the conclusion drawn concerning 
the photo-mechanical damage versus photo-thermal one for transition metals still holds valid 
for noble materials as well. Particularly, if there is enough space for the temperature gradient 
development upon the laser heating, pulses shorter than τe-ph will induce faster heating and 
therefore photo-mechanical effects will be more pronounced, whereas pulses longer than τe-ph 
will result in photo-thermal damage more pronounced. This particular conclusion is very 
important for the nanostructuring and will be utilized later in this chapter when modeling 
short pulse laser interaction with thin metal films [62]. 
While TTM has become a common tool for computational analysis of short pulse laser 
interaction with metals [22,83,84,85,86,87,88], it is nevertheless based on a number of 
assumptions and choice of approximations for the temperature dependence of the electron 
thermal conductivity [59, 73] and coupling parameter [32, 71]. Also, in all calculations we 
assume that the electron thermalization (establishment of the Fermi-Dirac distribution, Figure 
2, takes place instantaneously upon the laser pulse irradiation. This assumption is justified by 
theoretical calculations presented in [61] were a system of Boltzmann equations was solved 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
18
for both electron and phonon gases. It was found that for picosecond and sub-picosecond 
pulses the difference between the solutions of the Boltzmann equations and TTM calculations 
can be neglected. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8. (a) Same as in Figure 5 (b), but at F = 1 mJ/cm2. The dotted lines are for the electron and 
lattice temperature dynamics followed by instantaneous energy deposition within the optical penetration 
depth, including the ballistic energy transfer range. (b) Similar to Figure 6a. 
Finally, in addition to the diffusive electron energy transport assumed in TTM, the 
ballistic motion of the excited electrons can significantly alter the initial energy deposition 
depth for s/p-band metals [89], where the electron-electron collision rate is relatively small. 
Before the excited electrons equilibrate due to collisions with other electrons near the Fermi 
level and form a Fermi-Dirac distribution with a certain electron temperature, they can 
propagate from the optical absorption depth deeper into the bulk of the irradiated sample with 
velocities close to the Fermi velocity, ~106 m/s. This ballistic motion of the excited electrons 
leads to the fast, within ~100 fs, redistribution of the deposited energy within the ballistic 
range that is defined by the mean free path of the electrons. It has been suggested [22] that the 
effect of ballistic electrons can be incorporated into TTM by substituting the optical 
penetration depth Lp in the source term, Eq. (4), with an effective laser energy deposition 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
19
depth defined by both optical absorption and ballistic energy transport, Lp + Lb, where Lb is 
the ballistic range. 
As we can see, some of the limitation of TTM model can be overcome by adding “more 
physics” within the framework provided by TTM. In particular, recent developments include 
incorporation, through the parameters of TTM, of the description of the surface and grain 
boundary scattering [90], as well as the energy transfer by ballistic electrons [22, 30, 91], 
combining TTM with the hot electron blast model [28] and thermoelasticity equations to 
investigate the conditions for nonthermal damage to thin metal films [83]. 
Other limitations, on the other hand, are harder to overcome within a continuum model. 
In particular, the description of phase transformations occurring under highly nonequilibrium 
conditions induced in the target material by short-pulse laser irradiation is difficult and 
typically involves several simplifications. Part of the problem is that the physics of ultrafast 
phase transformations and damage occurring under highly nonequilibrium conditions is not 
well understood yet and therefore cannot be reliably described by a set of kinetic equations. 
As already mentioned above, even the basic questions on the kinetics and microscopic 
mechanisms of melting under conditions of strong overheating continue to remain the 
subjects of active scientific debates. At the extremely high levels of superheating realized in 
ultrashort-pulse laser melting, when the melting front propagation approaches speeds on the 
order of speed of sound and the size of a critical nucleus becomes comparable to several 
interatomic distances, the applicability of macroscopic kinetic approaches based on classical 
nucleation theory [35, 45, 92] is rather doubtful. In the next section we describe a 
computational method that is suitable for description of fast nonequilibrium processes 
mentioned above. 
 
 
(b) Molecular Dynamics Approach 
 
A computational method that is suitable for simulation of fast nonequilibrium processes 
and therefore can provide insights into the mechanisms of laser-metal interactions at the 
atomic scale is the Molecular Dynamics (MD) method. In its classical representation, the MD 
method can be described as eth following system of Newton equation of motion: 
 
 
(
)
2
2
3
,
2
1
,...,
,
dt
r
d
m
r
r
r
r
U
F
i
i
N
i
i
r
r
r
r
r
r
=
−∇
=
     j = 1,2,3, … ,N 
(5) 
 
where mi is the mass of atom i, Ui its total potential energy that can be in general a function of 
position of the other atoms, and Fi is the resulting force acting on the atom and i runs from 1 
to N, the total number of atoms in the system. 
The advantage of the MD method is that only details of the interatomic interaction need 
to be specified, and no assumptions are made about the character of the processes under 
study. In particular, MD has been demonstrated to be an efficient tool for a microscopic 
analysis of the melting mechanisms under conditions of overheating in both the bulk of a 
crystal [99, 100] and in systems with free surfaces [101, 102]. Simulations of boiling, 
spinodal decomposition and fragmentation of a metastable liquid [103, 104, 105], generation 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
20
and propagation of laser-induced pressure waves [106,107], and laser ablation [108, 109, 110] 
have been also reported. 
Therefore, all the thermal and elastic properties of the lattice, such as the lattice heat 
capacity, elastic moduli, the coefficient of thermal expansion, melting temperature, change of 
volume, and entropy of melting, as well as the dependence of these characteristics on 
temperature and pressure are defined by the interatomic interaction, described in most of 
applications in this chapter by the Embedded Atom Method (EAM) [111, 112] in the form 
and parameterization of the potential suggested by Johnson [112]. The total energy of the 
atomic system described vie EAM potential can be given as follow: 
 
 
(
)
( )
∑∑
∑
≠
+
Φ
=
i
i
j
ij
ij
i
i
i
r
U
r
ϕ
ρ
   and   
( )
∑
≠
=
i
j
ij
i
i
r
f r
ρ
 
(6) 
 
where Фi is an embedding functional that approximates the energy required to embed a 
positively-charged core ion i into a linear superposition of spherically averaged atomic 
electron densities given by ρi and φij is an ordinary pair potential [113]. 
One of the most frequently arising questions while dealing with MD is the question about 
how well the chosen potential describes the material properties. Definitely, one would prefer 
to have a potential that could accurately reproduce all the properties of the investigated 
material, but it is difficult to chose an empirical function describing the interatomic 
interaction so that it would provide a perfect fit to a wide range of properties of the material. 
Typically, however, the main purpose of an MD simulation is not to describe all the 
properties of a chosen material as well as it possible, but to reveal some general physical 
behavior that is not very sensitive to small variations of the parameters of the material system. 
In order to perform a quantitative analysis of the simulation results and to relate them to 
experimental observations, we should start from finding the physical properties of the model 
material, as predicted by the interatomic potential. As an example of MD application, we 
reproduce some of the calculations here that help us to analyze the properties of EAM Ni 
model materials relevant to the melting process, since it is always preceding to a material 
restructuring. 
A series of liquid-crystal coexistence MD simulations has been performed at different 
pressures to determine the equilibrium melting temperature [114]. In these simulations a 
system of coexisting liquid and solid phases is allowed to evolve toward the equilibrium state 
while the energy of the system is conserved. If the temperature of the system is initially above 
the equilibrium melting temperature, part of the solid phase melts, consuming latent heat of 
melting and reducing the temperature. If the initial temperature is lower than the equilibrium 
melting temperature, crystallization of a part of the system leads to the temperature evolution 
toward the equilibrium melting temperature from below. 
Simulation results, shown in Figure 9a, predict a nearly linear dependence of the melting 
temperature on pressure. This prediction is in a good agreement with calculations based on 
the Clapeyron equation: 
 
 
m
m
m
m
m
H
V
T
S
V
dP
dT
Δ
Δ
=
Δ
Δ
=
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
 
(7) 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
21
where the volume change and entropy of melting, ΔVm and ΔSm, are determined from the 
temperature dependences of the volume and internal energy calculated for zero pressure, as 
shown in Figures 11a and 12a respectively. For example, for the model EAM Ni material, the 
values of volume change and entropy of melting at zero pressure are found to be ΔVm = 0.46 
cm3/mole and ΔSm = ΔHm/Tm = 10.06 J/K-mole, comparable to the experimental values for Ni, 
ΔVexp
m = 0.32 cm3/mole and ΔSexp
m = 9.94 J/K-mole [115]. In simulations we find that both 
ΔVm and ΔSm are decreasing with increasing pressure, leading to a weak non-monotonous 
pressure dependence of the slope of the coexistence line with an average value of (dT/dP)m 
≈45K/GPa. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 9. (a) Equilibrium melting temperature of the EAM Ni model material determined in a series of 
liquid-crystal coexistence simulations The melting temperature Tm = 1439 K is found at zero pressure. 
(b) Several snapshots from the liquid-crystal simulations are shown at different pressures. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
22
The dependences of the heat capacity CP and the volume coefficient of thermal expansion 
α on temperature are calculated for the model materials in a series of constant pressure – 
constant temperature simulations. The results of these simulations for EAM Ni are shown in 
Figures 10b and 11b, where the temperature dependences of the volume and internal energy 
of the system are shown for different pressures. The volume plots, Figure 10, allow us to 
calculate the volume coefficient of thermal expansion, α = (1/V)(dV/dT)p for different 
temperatures and pressures. 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Temperature, K
11
11.5
12
12.5
13
13.5
Volume per atom, A
3
Ni, P = 0 GPa
ΔVm
crystal
liquid
(a)
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Temperature, K
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
12.5
13
Volume per atom, A
3
-4 GPa
crystal
(b)
0 GPa
12 GPa
8 GPa
4 GPa
 
Figure 10. a) The temperature dependence of the volume of the EAM Ni material at zero pressure for 
both solid and liquid phases. b) Same for several different pressures for the solid phase. The 
dependences are used to calculate the volume coefficient of thermal expansion at different temperatures 
and pressures, αv = (1/V)(dV/dT)p, and the volume change of melting, ΔVm, as indicated in a). The 
vertical dashed line in a) shows the equilibrium melting temperature of the EAM Ni at zero pressure. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
23
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Temperature, K
-4.4
-4.3
-4.2
-4.1
-4
-3.9
-3.8
-3.7
Internal energy per atom, eV
Ni, P = 0 GPa
crystal
liquid
(a)
ΔUm
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Temperature, K
-4.4
-4.3
-4.2
-4.1
-4
-3.9
-3.8
-3.7
Internal energy per atom, eV
-4 GPa
crystal
(b)
0 GPa
12 GPa
8 GPa
4 GPa
 
Figure 11. a) The temperature dependence of the internal energy of the EAM Ni material at zero 
pressure for both solid and liquid phases. b) Same for several different pressures for the solid phase. 
The dependences are used to calculate the heat capacity at different temperatures and pressures, Cp = 
(dH/dT)p, as well as the latent heat of melting, ΔHm = ΔUm + PΔVm, and the entropy change of melting, 
ΔSm = ΔHm/Tm. The vertical dashed line in a) shows the equilibrium melting temperature of the EAM Ni 
at zero pressure. 
The internal energy plots, Figure 11, provide us with the pressure and temperature 
dependence of the heat capacity, Cp = (dH/dT)p. The information on the temperature and 
pressure dependences of the thermodynamic parameters of the material allows us to perform 
thermodynamic analysis of processes induced in the surface region of the target by short pulse 
laser irradiation. In particular, the relaxation of the laser-induced stresses can induce fast 
adiabatic/isentropic 
expansion/compression 
of 
the 
material 
with 
associated 
pressure/temperature variations described by the following equation: 
 
 
p
v
s
C
VT
P
T
α
=
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
∂
 
(8) 
 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
24
where αv(T,P) is the volume expansion coefficient of the material. The knowledge of CP(T,P), 
αv(T,P), and V(T,P) allows us to integrate this equation and to obtain the temperature-pressure 
evolution of the system. This analysis is used for interpretation of simulation results on short 
pulse laser melting considered in Ref. [36, 37, 62, 64, 79, 116, 119] as well as in the next 
section where simulations of nanostructuring with short laser pulses on metallic surfaces are 
performed. In Table 1, we combine all the properties that we found from constant temperature 
– constant pressure and solid-crystal coexistence simulations for EAM Ni and EAM Au 
materials. As we can see, some of them show a disagreement with their experimental values, 
but this fact should not disturb the physical picture of melting and nanostructuring processes 
that we study. 
Thus, having now all the properties of the modelled material for a quantitative analysis of 
the simulation results, we want to to demonstrate the applicability of MD method when 
studying fast nonequilibrium phase transformation processes we perform calculations aimed 
on isolating two essential mechanism of melting: homogeneous and heterogeneous 
mechanisms. The objective is to investigate the applicability of the homogeneous nucleation 
theory [36, 65] for the description of both homogeneous and heterogeneous melting at the 
strong overheating that can be achieved with short laser pulses. The timescale of the melting 
process tM [36], the density of the liquid phase nuclei and the evolution of the shapes of the 
liquid regions will be investigated. Microscopic mechanisms of melting will be considered 
based on the results of several large scale MD simulations performed for EAM Ni material at 
a high degree of superheating (T ≈ 1.2Tm). 
 
Table 1. Some of the material parameters determined for the EAM Ni and Au materials. 
Values of the equilibrium melting temperature, Tm, volume change, ΔVm, enthalpy, ΔHm, 
and entropy, ΔSm, of melting are given for zero pressure. The dependence of the 
equilibrium melting temperature on pressure, (dT/dP)m, is determined from the liquid-
crystal coexistence simulations performed at different pressures and confirmed by the 
calculations based on the Clapeyron equation, (dT/dP)m=ΔVm/ΔSm. Variations of the 
coefficient of linear expansion, α, and heat capacity at zero pressure, Cp, are given for a 
temperature range from 293 K to 1000 K for Ni and from 293 K to 950 K for Au. 
Experimental values are from references [74, 115, 117]. 
 
Properties 
Tm, K 
ΔVm, cm3 mol-1
ΔSm, J K-1 mol-1
ΔHm, kJ mol-1 
EAM Ni 
1439 
0.46 
10.0 
14.47 
Experiment Ni 
1726 
0.452 
9.94 
17.472 
EAM Au 
963 
0.28 
8.69 
8.37 
Experiment Au 
1336 
0.55 
9.56 
12.78 
 
Properties 
(dT/dP)m, K GPa-1
Cp, J K-1 mol-1 
α, 106 K-1 
EAM Ni 
45.73 
25.04-36.13 
14.4-22.6 
Experiment Ni 
45.47 
25.85-46.50 
12.8-17.5 
EAM Au 
32.19 
25.26-32.71 
10.3-21.4 
Experiment Au 
57.53 
25.38-31.20 
14.2-19.1 
 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
25
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Snapshots taken from a MD simulation of homogeneous nucleation and growth of liquid 
regions in a Ni crystal at T = 1725 K. The homogeneous nuclei coalesce and develop into a large 
aspherical volume. 
 
Figure 13. Melting time as a function of overheating T/Tm as predicted by the homogeneous nucleation 
theory and calculated as suggested in Ref. [35] for Ni material with experimental parameters (solid line) 
and parameters given by EAM potential used in this work. The black square point indicates the melting 
time obtained in MD simulations of homogeneous melting, described here. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
26
Here we present the analysis of homogeneous melting of a Ni crystal with the size of the 
computational box 22 x 22 x 100 nm is illustrated in Figure 12. Periodic boundary conditions 
imposed in all directions, and constant hydrostatic pressure maintained by means of the 
“Berendsen barostat” algorithm [118]. The sample was slowly heated under constant pressure 
conditions up to the temperature T = 1725 K, where a spontaneous nucleation of several 
liquid regions was observed. To analyze the shape of the liquid regions quantitatively the 
following procedure was developed. 
The whole system was first divided into small cells with dimensions of 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 
nm. The local order parameter [114] was then averaged for all particles in the cell and the cell 
is assigned to be a part of a liquid region if the average value of the local order parameter was 
less then 0.04 (see Appendix at the end of this section) [116]. Connectivity among the cells is 
then checked and clusters of liquid cells, defined as groups of more than 2 liquid cells 
connected with each other by sharing a face, are identified. Two clusters identified using the 
method described above are shown in Figure 12. We can see that two liquid nuclei appear 
within the volume of the MD computational cell are not spherical as it is assumed in the 
classical homogeneous nucleation theory [65], but rather coarse and elongated. They grow, 
coalesce, taking an irregular elongated shape, and fill in the entire volume, thus completing 
the solid-liquid phase transformation [35]. 
From two simulations discussed above we can estimate an approximate melting time tM 
of the full volume to be on the order of 50 - 60 ps at an overheating of ~1.20 Tm. In Figure 13, 
following procedure presented in Ref [35], we replot the data one melting time tM as a 
function of superheating T/Tm for Ni materials with experimental and EAM parameters 
including the marked value of the melting time tM estimated from the MD simulations. As we 
can see the melting time by nucleation theory and the one obtained from our MD simulation 
differ by at least 4 orders of the magnitude. Such a big difference can not be easily attributed 
to an error in the choice of the material parameters used in Ref. [35] and listed in Table 1. 
Although not all of the parameters listed in Table 1 can be reliably determined experimentally 
and the value of melting time tM given Ref. [35] is sensitive to the choice of the materials 
parameters, the difference in 4 orders of magnitude can be hardly eliminated by a simple 
variation of the parameters within physically reasonable limits. Therefore, the applicability of 
nucleation theory [35, 65] in description of the homogeneous melting at high degrees of 
overheating attainable in short laser pulse nanostructuring experiments is questionable. 
The heterogeneous melting mechanism, on the other hand, is also difficult to describe at 
continuum level. The solid-liquid transition may result in a significant (~150 K) local 
temperature drop since part of the thermal energy goes to the latent heat of melting. It is clear 
that melting proceeds slower in cooler regions and goes faster in hotter areas. Therefore, 
while the homogeneous melting front is propagating, due to thermal energy redistribution the 
instabilities may emerge across the solid-liquid interface. The kinetics of these instabilities 
may be especially important in the case of strong superheating when heterogeneous melting is 
about to be supplemented by the homogeneous nucleation of liquid regions ahead of the 
propagating solid-liquid interface. To elucidate the kinetics of possible instabilities below we 
perform several large-scale simulations aimed specifically at investigation of the mechanism 
of heterogeneous melting front propagation [119]. 
To ensure that periodic boundaries do not affect the kinetics of propagation of the solid-
liquid interface and possible appearance of instabilities, we performed simulations for 
computational cells with three different sizes in the lateral directions:14.8 × 14.8 nm, 22 × 22 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
27
nm, and 44 × 44 nm. Most of the results were obtained on samples containing 3,945,600 
atoms and having dimensions of 22 × 22 × 100 nm. This size of the computational cell was 
found to give results similar to the ones obtained with larger systems. Simulations were 
performed for a model EAM Ni material and for a set of different temperatures, 1600 K, 1650 
K, 1700 K, 1715 K, and 1725 K. 
 
 
Figure 14. Snapshot of solid-liquid interface taken from a simulation of heterogeneous melting of the 
sample with size of 44 × 44 × 55 nm (7 948 800 atoms). The characteristic size of the surface 
fluctuations is much smaller than the size of the computational box in the lateral directions, in which 
periodic boundary conditions are imposed. 
Temperature, K
Surface area deviations from a plane
1600
1650
1700
1750
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
 
Figure 15. The time averaged deviations of the surface area of the solid-liquid interface from the 
surface area of a perfect plane shown as a function of temperature. A linear fit is used to extrapolate this 
dependence down to the equilibrium melting point Tm = 1439 K. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
28
The results of simulations reveal instabilities across the solid-liquid interface that appears 
as fluctuations of the melting front surface as it can be seen in Figure 14. In this figure we do 
no show the crystalline part of the system so that the shape of the interface would be clearly 
visible. In these simulations we assume that a cell is melted if the number of particles that 
belong to the liquid phase has reached at least half of the total number of particles in this cell. 
One of the easiest ways to characterize the roughness of the surface is to calculate the 
deviation of its area from the one of a perfect plane. The calculated quantity, As-l interface/Aplane 
is plotted in Figure 15 as a function of temperature. 
From data presented in Figure 15 we can deduce that the solid-liquid interface becomes 
rougher as the melting proceeds more actively, however, we can also see that this dependence 
is rather weak. Even if we continue to decrease the temperature down to the equilibrium 
melting point, the linear extrapolation will give us the remaining value of of ~1.025. This 
value is close to 1.032 measured in a large-scale liquid -crystal coexistence simulation (T = 
Tm = 1439 K, P = 0 GPa) and we consider this value to be inherent solid-liquid interface 
fluctuations. 
A more informative quantitative description of the spatial size of the solid-liquid interface 
fluctuations during the heterogeneous melting process can be performed with the help of the 
correlation function F(Δr). To calculate the correlation function, we construct the following 
overlap integral in polar coordinates: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
∫
Ω
Δ
+
Ω
=
Δ
r
d
r
r
h
r
h
r
F
r
r
r
r
r
)
(
1
 
(9) 
 
where h(r) is a position of the solid-liquid interface and Ω is the area of the computational 
box in the lateral directions. By calculating this integral and taking its average over all data 
points on the surface of the solid-liquid interface we are able to find the correlations, if any, in 
the spatial distribution of the interface fluctuations. Moreover, since we do not normalize this 
function to unity, by taking the square root of the main maximum altitude, we thus may 
estimate the characteristic height of those fluctuations, Figure 16. 
For all simulations the correlation function, Figure 16, reveals a similar, very stable 
behavior that does not deviates significantly even at different temperatures. Averaging the 
correlation functions over time for each simulation, we may deduce several conclusions. First, 
the width of the main maximum taken at the half maximum of the correlation function gives 
us the characteristic radius of the bumps on the solid-liquid interface, the diameter of which 
we can estimate to be about 3 nm. Second, the characteristic height of the instabilities is 
merely the square root of the maximum intensity of the correlation function is on the order of 
0.2 nm. Third, there is no spatial correlation between the fluctuations. In other words the 
occurrence of fluctuations across the solid-liquid interface is completely random. 
The analysis performed above leads us to the conclusion that instabilities emerging across 
the solid-liquid interface during a heterogeneous melting process even at a high degree of 
overheating are still on the order of 0.2 nm in the direction normal to the interface, which is 
also comparable to the resolution of our method of data analysis (the choice of the size of a 
cell of the spatial discretization). If there are strong and complex instabilities in the 
heterogeneous melting front propagation, they must be on the scale much larger than the 
computational cell used in this work, 44 nm in the lateral directions. Otherwise, the 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
29
instabilities we observed in our simulations are on the atomic scale ~1 nm. The roughness of 
the melting front slightly increases with overheating, but this increase is comparable to the 
inherent solid-liquid interface fluctuations at the equilibrium melting temperature. A more 
detailed study of the heterogeneous melting process with Molecular Dynamics approach is 
presented elsewhere [119]. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
Distance, nm
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
Intensity, a.u.
 
Figure 16. Height-height correlation function averaged over 50 positions of the solid-liquid interface in 
a simulation of the melting front propagation performed for a Ni sample of 44 × 44 nm dimensions in 
the lateral directions at a temperature of 1715 K. The function provides information on the 
characteristic size of the fluctuations, characteristic amplitude of the bumps, and their spatial 
correlations. 
Therefore, as one can see, the accurate and reliable introduction of these tiny details into 
the nucleation theory at continuum level does not seem to be possible in the set of kinetic 
equations. This justifies the choice of MD method as a powerful numerical tool in studying 
non equilibrium phase transformation laser-induced processes that potentially can be involved 
into the nanostructuring. The classical MD method, however, is not directly applicable for 
simulation of laser interactions with metals. Since the electronic contribution to the thermal 
conductivity of a metal is dominant, the conventional MD method, where only the lattice 
contribution is present, significantly underestimates the total thermal conductivity. This leads 
to unphysical confinement of the deposited laser energy in the surface region of the irradiated 
target and does not allow for direct comparison between the calculated and experimental data. 
Moreover, the laser energy absorption by the conduction band electrons and the transient state 
of electron-lattice nonequilibrium, briefly discussed above, in Section 2a), cannot be 
reproduced since the electrons are not explicitly represented in the classical MD model. 
Additionally, the long range (several microns) elasto-plastic deformation of the solid induced 
by a short pulse laser nanostructuring processes can not be encompassed by MD calculations 
because of their high computational cost, but can efficiently contribute to the nanostructuring 
process [9, 11, 60, 62]. The appropriate method that includes the description of laser-induced 
nonequilibrium between the electrons and phonons, fast electron heat conduction, and the 
laser light absorption by conduction band electrons, as it is in TTM model, but on the other 
hand accounts for long range laser-induced deformations of the solid based on the 
Macroscopic Continuum Model (MCM) will be presented in the next section. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
30
APPENDIX: LOCAL ORDER PARAMETER FOR IDENTIFICATION OF 
SOLID AND LIQUID PHASES 
 
The identification of liquid and crystal regions in the atomic configurations produced in 
the simulations of ultrafast laser melting is often challenging due to the complex nature of the 
melting process and the absence of well-defined plane liquid-crystal interfaces (e.g. Figure 
17). In this work a distinction between the original fcc structure and the liquid phase is made 
with the local order parameter defined as [114]: 
 
 
(
)
2
1
6
1
exp
1
6
1
∑∑
=
=
⋅
=
Ψ
Z
j
k
ij
k
i
r
q
i
Z
r
r
 
(59) 
 
where the first summation by k is over a set on six vectors {
}
k
qr
 chosen so that 
(
) 1
exp
=
ij
kr
qi
r
r
 for any vector 
ijrr  connecting atom i with an atom j in the first or second 
neighbors shell in a perfect fcc lattice, and the second summation by j is over all the atoms 
found within a cutoff distance rcut chosen so that the first two neighbor shells in a perfect fcc 
lattice are included. The choice of the six vectors{ }
k
qr
 is not unique, and the following set of 
vectors was found to provide an optimal sensitivity of the method: 
 
 
[
]
100
a
4
q
fcc
1
π
=
r
[
]
010
a
4
q
fcc
2
π
=
r
[
]
001
a
4
q
fcc
3
π
=
r
[
]
110
a
4
q
fcc
4
π
=
r
[
]
011
a
4
q
fcc
5
π
=
r
 
[
]
101
a
4
q
fcc
6
π
=
r
 
 
where afcc is the fcc lattice parameter. 
For the method to work in general, three orthogonal vectors are enough. The additional 
vectors, however, increase the range of basic element{
}
k
qr
 orientation in crystal structure. 
For example, including vectors looking at the second neighbor shell q4, q5, and q6 into the 
given set extend the sensitivity of the method against density fluctuations due to shock 
disturbance [62, 64]. In order words, the resulting value of the local order parameter will be 
now calculated on the relative orientation of the atomic bonds within the first and second 
neighbor shells with respect to that of a perfect fcc crystal with orientation [001]. A further 
increase of the basis range, however, would decrease the method sensitivity with respect to 
fast homogeneous melting. If this process is attributed with a strong laser-induced pressure 
relaxation across the system, the nuclei size smaller then diameter of third neighbor shell 
would be noised out. 
Finally, in order to reduce the effect of the thermal atomic vibrations on the result of the 
structural analysis, the atomic positions used in the calculation of 
i
Ψ are averaged over 0.25 
ps. Moreover, the local order parameter was by itself averaged over Z neighbors within first 
and second neighbor shell, as suggested in [114]: 
 
 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
Ψ
+
Ψ
+
=
Ψ
∑
=
Z
j
j
i
i
Z
1
1
1
 
(60) 
 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
31
As shown in Figure 17, the local order parameter defined above provides a quantitative 
measure of the “degree of crystallinity” of the local atomic configurations that agrees well 
with a visual analysis. The test atomic configurations were taken from the experiment of 200 
fs laser melting of 50 nm free standing Ni film, considered later in this chapter in Section 3 a), 
Figure 30 and 31. The local order parameter changes from 0.00 to 1.00 with a value of 
04
.
0
=
Ψi
 chosen in this work to distinguish between the liquid and crystal structures. 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Distribution of the local order parameter for two configurations encountered in the 
simulations of laser melting in Section 3 a), Figure 31 and 32. Cutoff value of 0.04 is chosen for the 
local order parameter to distinguish between the crystalline and disordered atomic configurations. 
 
 
(c) Continuum Calculations with Microscopic Models 
 
As it was mentioned above, limited by the quality of optical systems, it is difficult to 
focus a laser beam down to 1 micron in nanostructuring processes. But even a micron-size 
laser sport would result in the establishment of temperature gradient on the scale of several 
microns that in turn leads to relaxation of laser-induced stresses even on a bigger scale. The 
effect of laser-induced pressure waves was considered in Ref. [62, 116] and found to have a 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
32
significant influence on the kinetics of short pulse laser melting and therefore, on the 
nanostructuring process in general. Moreover, the propagation of the laser-induce pressure 
waves can also influence the resulting nanofeature [9,11,60] on the scale of microns, which is 
not possible to describe within the scale of Molecular Dynamics method because of its high 
computational cost. 
As a first step, in order to overcome this limitation and to advance the continuum 
description of the laser-induced pressure waves we introduce the macroscopic-continuum 
model (MCM) [67, 120] in which the TTM model [70] is incorporated as well. Thus, on one 
hand, this model accounts for a long range relaxation of the laser-induced stresses, and on the 
other hand accounts for the electron properties of the solid in description of the heat 
conduction, electron-phonon nonequilibrium, and the laser-light absorption. In essence, the 
MCM model is based on three laws of the conservation: the conservation of mass, the 
conservation of momentum, and the conservation of energy. The governing equations for the 
MCM model will be as follows [67, 120]: 
 
 
(
)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
Τ
−
Τ
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
⊗
∇
−
=
Τ
−
+
⋅
∇
−
=
+
⋅
∇
−
×
Π
⋅
∇
=
Π
×
∇
=
=
⋅
∇
+
)
)
r
r
)
)
r
r
r
r
r
)
r
)
r
r
r
r
r
s
coupl
laser
e
e
coupl
ph
ph
J
dt
d
Q
Q
dt
dw
Q
dt
dw
dt
d
dt
d
τ
μ
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
1
)
(
3
1
E
2
0
v
q
q
v
v
v
 
(10) 
 
where ρ and v are the density and velocity, w and q are the specific internal energy and heat 
flux, E is the strain rate tensor, μs is the shear modulus and the subscripts ph and e are used 
for the lattice and electrons respectively. The energy exchange between lattice and electrons 
due to electron-phonon scattering is described with Qcoupl and the energy absorbed by the 
conduction band electrons is accounted for in Qlaser. The stress tensor Π)
 used in Eq. (10) is a 
function of lattice temperature Tph and given by: 
 
 
Τ
+
=
Π
)
)
)
I)
,
(
ph
T
-p ρ
 
(11) 
 
where p is the pressure, Ι)
 is the unit tensor and Τ)
 is the deviation part of the stress tensor 
Π)
, containing the elasto-plastic stresses. The first term in the right part in the last Eq. in (10) 
describes the production of stresses due to elastic deformation according to Hooke’s law. The 
second term in the right part of this equation describes the fast relaxation of the stresses due 
to plastic deformation according to von Mises yield condition. The function J(Τ)
) is defined 
as: 
 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
33
 
⎩
⎨
⎧
>
Τ
≤
Τ
=
Τ
1
)
(
,
1
)
(
,1
)
(
)
)
)
r
r
r
J
, 
2
2
3
2
2
2
1
)
3
/
2
(
)
(
Y
T
T
T
r
+
+
=
Τ)
 
(12) 
 
where Ti are the principal components of the tensor Τ)
 and Y is the yield stress. Also, for the 
complete description, Fourier’s law, the models of electron energy, and heat conduction, and 
the equations of state should be added to the system given by Eq. (10). The latter is especially 
important for an accurate description of the phase transition processes, induced by laser 
heating. 
The solutions of equations (10) are found numerically when the time of stress relaxation 
to the yield limit tends to zero (
)
0
→
r
τ
. Although this simulation will be performed on the 
continuum level and thus samples sizes as big as several microns can be used, the calculations 
implementing the MCM may be as complex as the MD ones. In this approach, however, if a 
Gaussian pulse is used for the nanostructuring, the central symmetry of the system can be 
exploited. Therefore, the MCM model can be implemented in 2D in the Hydrodynamic 
Domain (HD), which significantly reduces the computational cost of the calculations. 
Therefore, HD calculations will be performed in semiplane schematically shown in Figure 18 
on which the description of boundary conditions are indicated as well, similar to [121]. The 
interaction between the film and the substrate is described with Lennard-Jones potential U(r) 
as it was suggested in [17]. 
In a recent work by Meshcheryakov and Bulgakova [122] the elasto-plastic flow model, 
similar to the one described above, was applied to describe the nanostructuring mechanism 
responsible for the formation of nanofeatures in the experiments on Au [9, 11]. The 60 nm 
gold film was situated on quartz-glass substrate the interaction with which was discarded. The 
pulse duration of 30 fs was used at the fluencies on the order of 0.1 mJ/cm2 in order to 
simulate the film bending in response to the laser heating. Below, we cite the schematic 
picture published in [122], Figure 19, in which one can observe the process of formation of a 
microbump. 
 
 
Figure 18. The HD domain in which continuum calculations in 2D will be performed is schematically 
shown along with the boundary settings according to Ref. [121]. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
34
 
Figure 19. Schematic representation of the nanostructuring process on a thin Au film situated on a 
quartz-glass substrate published in Ref. [122]. (a) Laser light absorption by conduction band electrons. 
(b) Bending of the film due to laser heating. (c) Plastic forces seas the motion of solid, but not the 
molten material in the centre. d) Surface tension forces and cooling mechanisms finalize the formation 
of jet atop the microbump. 
In spite of the obvious advantages of the MCM in computational approach to describe 
short pulse laser nanostructuring on the scale comparable with the experiment, there are 
certain difficulties in its successful applications. Calculations based on Macroscopic 
Continuum Models still require many assumptions to be made. The resulting model can not 
reliably describe the complex laser-induced nanostructuring processes that involve a series of 
phase transformation, especially under highly non equilibrium conditions. The description of 
melting on continuum level is a difficult task since the solid can be overheated far beyond of 
its equilibrium melting point and the melting mechanism itself can be strongly affected by the 
relaxation of the laser-induced pressure [62]. Accepting that the model described in [122] is 
valid for the description of microbumps formation on thin metal films, when metal-silica 
adhesion energy is negligible, its applicability for the bulk of material, when microshell 
formation inside of the material must take place, remains questionable. As a result, limited in 
the description of melting process and working with sub melting temperatures, the continuum 
model in [122] did not show explicitly the formation of a nanojet feature and the mechanism 
responsible for the formation of a nanojet is therefore schematically proposed in Figure 19. 
A similar problem can be expected when applying the MCM model in description of the 
nanostructuring process. As it was shown in [36, 37, 116], for pico- and femto- second laser 
pulses, melting always precedes the spallation of films and bulk metal targetsm but the 
description of melting process, occurring under strong degrees of overheating and laser-
induced pressure and temperature gradients, is hampered at continuum level. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
35
(d) DFT Method for the Energy Deposition Dynamics 
 
As it was mentioned above, the irradiation of solid matter with tightly focused laser 
beams can result in creation of the structures on nanoscale [9, 10, 11, 12]. The appropriate 
description of the laser-energy absorption in this case can become crucial for the further 
description of the system’s dynamic. If the use of a laser source in short pulse laser 
interaction experiments can be reliably described by Eq. 4, Section 2 a), the experiments on 
nanostructuring with utilization of the near filed optics can produce a highly nonequilibrium 
state of the electronic system when the applicability of the continuum description of the laser 
source given by Eq. 4 as well as the assumption about instant thermalization of the excited 
electrons and establishment of the Fermi-Dirac distribution become questionable [42, 48, 49, 
50, 51]. For this purpose we suggest to use the Density Functional Theory approach [123] for 
an accurate description of the energy deposition in to the electronic system. In order to 
demonstrate the applicability of this method, in this section we present the problem on fast 
and dense energy deposition into the electronic system with swift heavy ions, probably the 
most extreme and difficult to describe example of the electronic system excitation. 
 
 
Figure 20. The energy per track length transferred to the electronic system due to the slowing down of 
the ion. A highly localized character of the energy deposition can be observed [139]. 
Similarly to the short pulse laser nanostructuring with near filed optics, the irradiation of 
solid with heavy ions of 100 MeV energy is known to create structural modifications ranging 
from defects and amorphization in the bulk up to the creation of hillocks on the surface[19, 
124, 125, 126, 127]. In this energy range, the projectile is slowed down almost exclusively by 
electronic interactions and the underlying physics of any surface damage/modification, due to 
intensive electronic excitation, can be therefore described in terms of the generation of a 
cylindrical zone of electronic excitation along the penetrating ion track. These excitations 
originate from the transfer of kinetic energy of the projectile to the electronic system of the 
target which is usually referred to as electronic stopping. The occurrence of surface damage 
in spite of the fact that this kinetic excitation is limited to a small radial area (8  10 Ǻ) around 
the path of the primary particle indicates that the transport of excitation energy away from the 
track core must play an essential role in that process. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
36
The standard model for ~100 MeV irradiation of a solid surface is the inelastic Thermal 
Spike Model (TSM) [128, 129]. This model treats the electronic energy loss experienced by 
the moving projectile as a source of excitation energy of the electronic system assuming an 
instantaneous thermalization and is used to describe the energy transport heat diffusion in a 
cylindrical symmetry based on TTM model in Ref. [130, 131, 132]. Although this model has 
been quite successful in explaining a track radii in various materials created by irradiation 
perpendicular with respect to the surface [131], such approach requires many approximations 
as well as the fitting of the strength of the electron-phonon coupling. One of the effects during 
the high electronic excitation induced by the ion beam is the fact that the energy is deposited 
on a very small special scale. Therefore by changing the alignment of the incoming ion beam 
with respect to the target surface results in a drastic change of the energy deposition profile. 
This has been demonstrated by recent experiments [19, 133, 134] where the irradiation of 
perovskite crystals (ABO3) under glancing incidence has been shown to generate chain-like, 
periodic nanodots at the surface, Figure 1 c) in Section 1 a). In order to understand the nature 
of such kind of modifications the energy transfer of the ion to the target electrons must be 
correctly modeled. In particular belowe, we will consider the electronic system excitation in 
the nanostructuring experiments on SrTiO3 surface with swift heavy ions [19]. 
For ions with a few 100 MeV kinetic energy the stopping occurs via direct inelastic 
projectile-electron collisions and is often treated in terms of the Lindhard model [135], which 
gives the electronic stopping cross section as Se = βυp with a material parameter β depending 
on the specific target-projectile combination and υp denoting the projectile velocity. For a 
target containing different elements i with individual β(i) the effective electronic stopping 
cross section Se,eff must be used. The electronic energy loss per track length, dE/dz (stopping 
power), of the projectile along its path through the solid then reads: 
 
 
(
)
)
(
)
(
t
r
t
r
N
dz
dE
p
eff
p
e
e
•
=
r
r
β
 
(13) 
 
where Ne(rp(t)) denotes the electron density of the target at the position of the projectile. From 
here, it is evident that the electronic density of the target must be known function. Therefore, 
for its precise calculations DFT calculations were utilized. The electron density Ne(r) is 
calculated for one unit cell of the perovskite using the Abinit package [136] with Perdew-
Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) pseudopotentials from the Fritz-Haber-Institut [137]. Employing a 
cutoff energy of 2600 eV with a sampling of 512 k-points on a cubic grid, the calculations 
have been carried out within the Generalized Gradient approximation (GGA) using the PBE 
functional [138]. The lattice constant of SrTiO3 has been determined as 3.905 Ǻ by local 
energy minimization. The spatial resolution of this electronic density is around 0.1 Ǻ, and 
was consider therefore to be accurate enought. The calculated density is inserted in Eq.13, 
which yields the electronic stopping experienced by the moving projectile, and thus the 
excitation of the electronic system. To calculate the transport of electronic energy away from 
the track on a large scale (typically track radii are 5 - 20 nm) the output of this DFT 
calculation is used as a input for a standard 3D TTM model explained in the Section 1 a). The 
energy transferred to the electrons per unit of track length in nanostructuring experiment on 
SrTiO3 with swift heavy Ions of 100 MeV calculated with the help of DFT method is shown 
in Figure 20. A very local character of the transferred energy is supporting the use of DFT 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
37
method in front of ordinary TSM continuum model for description of the electronic system 
excitation. More details on this modeling can be found in Ref. [139]. 
Since the DFT calculations are only performed for the first 10 fs after the excitation, the 
phononic system remains unchanged and is treated initially at equilibrium at room 
temperature. The initial electronic temperature for the TTM is taken from the DFT 
calculations by fitting the electronic excitation energy to local Fermi distributions. This 
approach, using high resolved DFT electronic density data, provides information regarding 
the geometric relations of the target material with the incoming ion beam, which are not 
included in models using a simple homogenous free electron gas. The excitation of the 
electron system is directly included and can be used for further studies, not only for track 
radii calculations as it was explained here, but also in any other experiments where highly 
localized energy deposition must be described, for example in short pulse laser 
nanostructuring experiment with near filed optics [42, 48, 49, 50, 51]. 
However, it is necessary to remark here that the calculated energy of electronic system by 
the time of 10 fs is by no means in equilibrium. While a strict DFT calculation of the exited 
electrons will eventually lead to an equilibrium electron distribution and possibility to use 
Fermi-Dirac statistics for temperature definition, this kind of calculations take a lot of CPU-
time and are still limited to a small spatial area. A more appropriate model based on 
Boltzmann statistics and aimed on a treatment of the non equilibrated electron systems is 
presented in the next section. 
 
 
(e) Nonequilibrium Electron Dynamics Modelled with Boltzmann Equations 
 
As mentioned in the previous sections, upon strong excitation free electrons in a solid can 
turn to a highly nonequilibrium state. Applying the two-temperature model, the 
nonequilibrium between electrons and phonons is accounted for. However, for timescales in 
the femtosecond regime even the concept of temperature is questionable. Indeed, only a few 
electrons in the solid will absorb one or several photons. As long as the energy is not 
redistributed among all free electrons, a Fermi distribution and thus a temperature cannot be 
determined. This redistribution of energy is caused by electron-electron collisions and called 
thermalization. Transient changes of distribution functions can be most effectively described 
in terms of the Boltzmann equation. Several works apply such kinetic approaches to study the 
effect of a nonequilibrium (i.e. a non-Fermi) distribution in laser-excited solids [24, 26]. In 
the Boltzmann equation, the changes of distribution function are due to spatial flux on one 
hand and caused by collisions on the other hand. For the case of ultrafast interaction of laser 
with metals, mainly three collision processes are relevant. First, is a collision term describing 
the absorption of a photon by an electron. To fulfill energy and momentum conservation at 
the same time, a third collision partner is required, given by the lattice. Second, as stated 
above, collisions in between the free electron gas, i.e. electron-electron collisions play a 
crucial role to describe the thermalization and thus the transition from the necessity of a 
kinetic approach to the applicability of the two-temperature model. Third, the energy transfer 
from the excited electron gas to the lattice, described as electron-phonon collisions starts in 
the femtosecond regime (the electron-phonon collision time) and has to be accounted for. In 
the case of kinetic description of laser interaction with semiconductors and/or dielectrics, also 
the increase of the free electron density by ionization processes as (multi-)photon ionization 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
38
across the band gap or electron-electron collision with band transition (impact ionization) 
have to be included as separate collision terms. For the numerical calculation of the time-
dependent Boltzmann equation, spatial transport is neglected. If one assumes also spatial 
isotropy, the equation depends only on time and energy. The collision term for the electron 
occupation number f is composed of collision terms for each considered process. The system 
of Boltzman’s equation for the calculation of the distribution functions of electron gas and 
phonon gas reads: 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−
−
−
el
phon
absorb
phon
el
el
el
t
q
g
t
q
g
t
k
f
t
k
f
t
k
f
t
k
f
r
r
r
r
r
r
 
(14) 
 
Here, f(k) and g(q) are distribution functions of electrons and phonons depending on the 
modulus of wave vector k and q, respectively. 
The complete Boltzmann collision terms can be found elsewhere [24, 61, 140]. For the 
electron–electron interaction, the matrix element is given by a screened Coulomb integral. 
The screening length can be calculated as follows directly from any distribution function 
[141], thus also as in our case from a strongly nonequilibrium distribution function: 
 
 
( )
∫
∞
=
0
0
2
2
2
2
k
d
k
f
m
e
k
e
sc
r
r
h ε
π
 
(15) 
 
The electron-phonon interaction can be described by a standard collision term as given by 
Allen [142]. The matrix element for electron-phonon interaction in metals is given in Ref. 
[143]. Photon absorption of free electrons requires a third collision partner to provide energy 
and momentum conservation. To describe photon absorption by free electrons we apply an 
expression deduced by Epshtein in 1970 [144]. It combines the collision terms for electron–
phonon interaction and absorption of laser energy by electrons, resulting in a single electron–
phonon–photon collision term, which includes the matrix element of electron–phonon 
collisions, Me−ph(q). The possibility of multiphoton absorption and emission is taken into 
account, its probability being expressed in Bessel’s functions Jℓ, where subsricpt indicates ℓ 
the number of photons absorbed or emitted. The argument of Bessel’s function includes the 
electric field amplitude EL and the frequency ωL of the laser. 
 
 
( )
( )
(
) ( )
∑
∑
∑
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
+
±
−
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
×
×
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⋅
=
∂
∂
+
+
=
−
=
gain
loss
L
q
k
q
k
q
k
q
k
q
l
L
L
l
ph
e
phon
phon
el
k
l
f
g
f
F
m
q
E
e
J
q
M
t
f
ω
ε
ε
ε
δ
ε
ε
ε
ω
π
ε
h
r
r
r
h
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
,
,
2
2
2
2
 
(16) 
 
The functional F and other details can be found in the article of Epshtein [144]. Note the 
product EL · q in the argument of Bessel’s function: The electron absorbs energy if the wave 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
39
vector q of mediating phonon has a component in the direction of electric field EL. Since we 
do not consider the polarization of the laser at the moment, EL is averaged over all directions. 
For the case of no irradiation, Eq. (14) turns to a collision term for pure electron–phonon 
interaction. 
In metals, also inverse Bremsstrahlung, where an electron changes its momentum when 
colliding with an ion core, has to be considered [61]. This absorption can be described by 
essentially the same collision integral, Eq. 16, where the Matrix element of Coulomb 
interaction of electron with rigid ion cores is applied. Note, that in our approach collisions of 
electrons with fixed ions are assumed to change solely the momentum of free electrons. The 
energy exchange of free electrons and lattice is described through electron-phonon collisions. 
Assuming parabolic energy dispersion of electrons and Debye’s dispersion relation for 
phonons, and taking advantage of the assumed isotropy, the dimensions of the collision 
integrals can be reduced analytically. After that, a numerical treatment of the equation system 
is possible: Discretizing the energy axes, we transform Eq. 15 into a system of ~250 coupled, 
nonlinear integro-differential equations which we solve with Runge-Kutta integration of fifth 
order with automatic step-size control [139]. With this procedure, we are able to follow the 
time evolution of the distribution functions f(ε(k), t) and g(ε(q), t) and observe their changes 
due to excitation of the electron gas by the laser beam, thermalization of the electron gas by 
electron-electron collisions and energy exchange between electron gas and phonon gas due to 
electron-phonon collisions. 
The model has successfully been applied for the description of electron dynamics in 
aluminum, where three free electrons resemble in a good appriximation a parabolic dispersion 
relation. For the calculation of the time evolution of distribution functions in a given metal a 
few parameters have to be provided. These are the free electron density n, the wave number at 
Fermi energy, kF,0, the number of free electrons per atom, and Debye’s wave number which 
are taken from standard tables [21, 146]. The effective electron mass and the speed of sound 
are found from comparison of resulting heat capacities with experimental values. This leads 
to an effective electron mass of me = 1.45me,free , as also derived in Ref. [147]. The phonon 
heat capacity turned out to be best reproduced applying the sound speed of longitudinal 
phonons. Thus, only parameters describing the unperturbed solid enter the calculation. 
To calculate the excitation of the electron gas by laser irradiation we assume a laser pulse 
of rectangular intensity profile with duration τL = 100 fs and vacuum wavelength λ = 630 nm 
corresponding to a photon energy of ħωL = 1.97 eV = 0.245 εFermi. Figure 21 shows the 
transient behavior of the occupation number of free electrons for an electric laser field of 
amplitude EL = 1.4×108 V/m, corresponding to an intensity of IL = 7×109 W/cm2 and an 
absorbed fluence of Fabs = 0.7 mJ/cm2. This is a weak intensity far below damage threshold 
(Fthresh,abs = 17 mJ/cm2). A function Φ, shown in Figure 21,  is defined as: 
 
 
( )
( )
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
=
Φ
1
1
ln
ε
ε
f
 
(17) 
 
This function increases with increasing f and is especially suitable to visualize the 
perturbation of the electron gas: In thermal equilibrium, when electrons obey a Fermi-Dirac-
distribution, Φ(ε) equals (εFermi − ε)/(kBTe). In this case, Φ(ε) is a linear function with a slope 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
40
proportional to the inverse electron temperature 1/Te. Thus, a deviation of the electron gas 
from thermal equilibrium is directly reflected in a deviation of Φ(ε) from a straight line. 
In Figure 21 a) the strong perturbation of the electron distribution immediately after the 
begin of irradiation can be seen (solid line). In comparison to the straight line representing the 
Fermi distribution at 300 K, the absorption of photons lead to a step-like distribution function: 
Electrons below Fermi energy absorb photons, leading to an increase of the occupation 
number of electrons with energies up to ħωL above Fermi energy. Further absorption of 
photons by excited electrons lead to an increase of the occupation number for energies up to 
2ħωL above Fermi energy. The occupation number of electrons below Fermi energy decreases 
at the same rate, reproducing the Fermi edge in steps of ħωL. A similar step-like electron 
distribution function for electrons above Fermi energy was found in Ref. [26]. Experimentally 
the first plateau of excited electrons was observed in gold in Refs. [148, 149], and 
theoretically reproduced in Ref. [150]. Our log-like plot of the function Φ(ε) defined by Eq. 
17 has the advantage that not only excited electrons above Fermi energy but also “holes” 
below Fermi energy can be observed. 
Figure 1 b) shows the completion of electron thermalization around the Fermi edge after 
irradiation. A straight line in Φ(ε) and thus a Fermi distribution is established quickly after 
irradiation ended. Now the effect of electron-phonon interaction is also visible: Cooling of the 
hot electron gas leads to an increasing modulus of the slope of Φ(ε), corresponding to lower 
electron temperatures. 
The electron cooling, i.e. the energy exchange between electrons and phonons can be 
studied more in detail as follows: By integrating over the distribution function we find the 
internal energy of the subsystems at each time step. The energy δu(e,p) is defined as the 
difference of internal energy u(e,p) and the internal energy of electrons and phonons, 
respectively. Thus, for the electrons the internal energy is given as: 
 
(
)
( )
(
)
∫
∞
−
=
−
=
0
2
2
2
300
,
2
300
,
2
2
2
dk
k
m
k
f
k
f
f
u
u
u
e
K
Fermi
K
Fermi
e
e
e
h
r
π
δ
 
(18) 
 
The increment of internal energy of phonons, δup, is calculated analogously. The sum of 
both increments of internal energy gives the total absorbed energy, δu. The constancy of δu 
after irradiation provides a good check of numerical stability. 
Figure 22 shows the transient behavior of energy increase for the electron gas, the 
phonon gas and the total absorbed energy, respectively, for the case of excitation with a laser 
pulse of 100 fs duration and an intensity of IL = 7*109 W/cm2. The absorbed energy δu 
increases linearly during irradiation with constant intensity. In [151] we studied the 
absorption characteristics for different intensities. We found linear absorption corresponding 
to an exponential absorption profile. Also the strength of absorption compares very well with 
literature. 
The energy increase of the electron gas δue follows the total absorbed energy, with a 
slight decrease due to energy transfer to the phonon gas during the pulse. After irradiation, 
energy transfer from the electron gas to the phonon gas continues until both systems have the 
same temperature. Because of the large difference in heat capacity, this corresponds to a 
much lower internal energy of the electron gas than that of the phonon gas. As also shown in 
Figure 22 the rate of energy transfer from the disturbed electron gas to the phonon gas is 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
41
essentially the same as the energy transfer rate from a hot electron gas with Fermi-Dirac 
distribution of the same initial energy. The absorbed energy of δue of the laser excited 
electron gas corresponds to a Fermi distribution at Te = 3400 K. We extract an electron-
phonon coupling constant G as used in the TTM model [70] and obtain a value of G = 
3.1*1017 J/Ksm3 for aluminum. 
 
 
Figure 21. Distribution function of free electrons in aluminum: (a) during and (b) after irradiation. The 
quantity Φ, defined by Eq. 17, is shown as a function of electron energy. A laser pulse with constant 
intensity of IL = 7×109 W/cm2 of 100 fs duration and a photon energy of ħωL = 1.97 eV = 0.245 εFermi 
was assumed.  
 
 
Figure 22. Transient energy increase of electron gas, δue, and of phonon gas, δup, respectively, and total 
absorbed energy δu. Additionally the cooling of a Fermi distributed electron gas is shown. The same 
laser parameters as in Figure 21 were applied.  

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
42
 
Figure 23. Weak excitations: (a) Transient internal energy of laser-excited electron gas and of the 
corresponding hot Fermi distributed electron gas. (b) Distribution function of laser-excited electron gas, 
the corresponding hot Fermi distributed electron gas and Fermi distributed electron gas at room 
temperature. 
 
Figure 24. Cooling time of laser-excited electron gas after irradiation of a 100 fs laser pulse with 
constant intensity (dashed line) and characteristic relaxation time of a Fermi distributed electron gas 
(solid line) both interacting with a phonon gas at initially 300 K. 
For weak excitations, however, we find that the two temperature model does not hold. In 
Figure 23 we assumed a laser intensity of IL = 5.8*108 W/cm2 leading to an energy increase of 
δue = 5.5*107 J/m3, corresponding to a Fermi distribution at Te = 960 K. Figure 23 a) shows 
that the initial cooling rate of the laser-heated electron gas is substantially lower than the 
cooling rate of the corresponding Fermi-distributed electron gas. This is due to the non-
equilibrium of the laser-heated electron gas: At t = 0 the electron distribution functions 
interact with a phonon gas of about 300 K. Thus, at this moment the electron–phonon 
interaction acts on the electron gas in a way that it tends to establish Fermi distribution with 
300 K. To this end, electrons above Fermi energy have to be transferred to states below Fermi 
energy. However, due to the small phonon energy, the phonons are able to act on the 
electrons only in a small region around Fermi’s edge. The maximum phonon energy in the 
case of aluminum is about 0.08 εFermi. Figure 23 b) shows three distribution functions of the 
electron gas: the laser-excited electron gas at the end of irradiation, the Fermi distributed 
electron gas of the same energy, and a Fermi distribution of 300 K. As before, the function 
Φ(ε), defined by Eq. 17, is shown. In the region of one maximum phonon energy (0.08 εFermi) 
around Fermi energy the laser-excited electron gas shows nearly no deviation from the Fermi 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
43
distribution at 300 K. Thus, the phonon action on the non-equilibrium electron gas is rather 
inefficient. In contrast, the corresponding Fermi distribution of a hot electron gas shows a 
large deviation from the Fermi distribution of 300 K. Therefore here the cooling by the cold 
lattice is much more efficient. This leads directly to the different cooling rates, i.e. different 
slopes of energy decay at t = 0 in Figure 23 a). Such delay of energy transfer to the lattice for 
a laser perturbed electron gas as compared to the TTM model was observed experimentally at 
low temperatures and for very low intensities [152, 153]. 
Figure 24 shows the “relaxation time” τrel of the energy between a high-energetic electron 
gas and the cold lattice. For the laser excited electron gas we prefer the name “initial cooling 
time” τcool,0, first to pronounce that we refer to the energy decrease directly after the pulse and 
second, to avoid the impression of a general feature of the heated electron gas. In contrast, 
τcool,0 depends strongly on pulse characteristics. Figure 24 shows the delay of energy transfer 
between laser excited electron gas and lattice in comparison to the energy transfer between 
Fermi distributed electron gas and lattice occurs only at weak excitations. For stronger 
excitations, as also shown in Figure 22, there is no difference between both kinds of 
excitation and the relaxation time τrel becomes characteristic for the amount of internal 
energy. It is important to note that all intensities studied here are below melting threshold. 
Concerning laser induced nanostructuring, we thus conclude, that the energy exchange 
between electron gas and phonon gas can be described by the well-known TTM model [70]. 
However, there are several limitations of the applied calculation, leading directly to the 
future scope of interest in this field. First of all we did not consider spatial behavior. This is a 
numerically challenging problem, however worth to study since experiments indicate an 
effect of ballistic motion of hot electrons which are present for non-thermal energy 
distribution [83]. The comparison of the kinetic approach with the two–temperature model 
with respect to heat conduction will reveal the influence on nonequilibrium electron 
distribution on energy dissipation, essential for nanostructuring with ultrashort pulses. 
Second, different materials, in particular noble metals with a d-band of electrons in the 
range of one or two photon energies below Fermi–energy, have to be modelled. Calculations 
of electron–phonon coupling parameter [31, 32] assuming a Fermi function for the occupation 
number reveal for high temperatures, that these d–electrons strongly increase the coupling 
strength. In case of nonequilibrium electron distribution an influence of d–electrons is 
expected by far lower temperatures, since d–electrons can be excited into free places below 
Fermi edge, thus increasing the number of free electrons in the conduction band and 
increasing the energy exchange between electrons and phonons. The modeling of these 
extensions of the kinetic approach is currently in progress. 
 
 
3. COMBINED MODELS FOR SHORT PULSE LASER 
NANOSTRUCTURING ON MATERIALS 
 
(a) Previously Tested Models and the Strategy of the Models Construction 
for the Purpose of Nanostructuring 
 
Research efforts towards the development of direct-write laser technologies have yielded 
a significant progress in fabrication of surface nano- and micro-structures with spatial 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
44
resolution exceeding the optical diffraction limit. The spatial resolution achievable in laser 
surface processing is defined by the ability to concentrate the laser energy deposition in a 
smallest possible domain. Several approaches have been demonstrated to be instrumental in 
achieving highly localized laser energy deposition, including the use of tightly focused laser 
beams with the peak laser fluence close to the threshold for material modification [9, 10, 11, 
12, 15] or utilization of the optical near field effects, e.g. a local field enhancement in the 
vicinity of a probe tip [48, 49, 50, 51] or a deposited nano/micro-particle [148,149] or by 
means of ion bombardment [19, 124, 125, 126, 127]. While the ability to generate arrays of 
nanoscale surface features opens up a range of opportunities for practical applications, the 
processes responsible for the surface nanostructuring are not yet fully understood. 
As of the present time, there have been numerous computational methods developed to 
study laser-induced processes, like laser melting [30, 39, 45, 79, 101, 116, 119], spallation 
[53, 63, 64, 80], and ablation [28, 35, 37, 54, 56, 57, 59, 116, 156]. None of them, however, 
meet the challenge of accurately describing a nanojet formation in experiments by Chichkov 
or Nakata, Figure 1 a) and b), [9, 10, 11, 12, 18, 60], which is the objective of this work. In 
the work by Meshcheryakov and Bulgakova [122], considered in Section 2 c), the formation 
of the microbump was ascribed to the development of thermoelastic stresses in the film, 
resulting in its bending. Although original, the work represents a rather simplified approach to 
a complex phenomenon. The description of the stress tensor, the central point of the model, 
was approximated with linear equations and the thermoelasticity itself was only included on 
the boundaries of the computational domain. Finally, the melting process that was 
speculatively suggested as a mechanism responsible for the formation of the nanojet in [9, 10, 
11, 12], was not explicitly included in the model at all [122]. 
Another possible explanation of the nanojet grow in experiments was given by the group 
of Chichkov [9, 10, 18, 60]. The formation of these structures was suggested to be due to the 
Marangoni effect [157, 158], which is the establishment of a thermocapillary flow, induced 
by the temperature gradient on the material surface followed by the Gaussian beam intensity 
profile of the laser beam. The temperature gradient on the surface creates a tension gradient 
that drives material from the hot centre to the cold periphery or vice verse depending on the 
material [159]. The formation of the nanojet structures, however, if in the molten phase, must 
take place on a picosecond time scale in femtosecond laser pulse experiments [35, 160, 161]. 
Even though observed in nanosecond experiments [162, 163], the establishment of such 
strong convective flows in the experiments by Chichkov on a nanoscale is considered rather 
doubtful. The Figure 25, shows the velocity vector filed of the ejected matter at t = 50 ps in 
nanostructuring simulations, considered later in Section 3 c). The molten part of the material 
is depicted in particle velocity vectors whereas the atomic configuration of the solid is colored 
according to the local order parameter, see Appendix in Section 2 b). At this time the 
hydrodynamic motion of the molten part is established. However we do not observe 
Marangoni effect in this experiment. This can be seen in Figure 25, where particle velocity 
vectors are merely directed up, oppositely to the direction of the absorbed laser pulse, and not 
organizing in anyhow noticeable curls discarding this effect therefore as a possible 
mechanism of the surface restructuring due to tightly focused short-pulsed laser beams. 
Finally, the origin of driving force responsible for the acceleration of molten material 
followed by the formation of nanofeature in the experiment by Nakata was explained due to 
pressure of evaporating material between the film and substrate [11, 12]. However, since 
working with fluencies around threshold for material modification (melting), the evaporation 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
45
process is essentially surprised. This is also confirmed in theoretical calculations on short 
pulse laser melting [37, 116, 119], where no volatile particles are observed even in 
simulations on spallation of metal targets [36, 64]. Thus, the development of somehow 
meaningful pressure necessary for material restructuring due to evaporation mechanism in the 
experiments [11, 12] does not look realistic. 
 
 
Figure 25. The velocity vector filed of nanostructured sample, showed for a cross section in a randomly 
chosen radial direction outward the centre. The configuration was taken from the nanostructuring 
experiment, considered in Section 3 c) at t = 50 ps when the process of ejection matter is completely 
established. 
Therefore, the theoretical models considered above do not account for the essential 
effects taking place during short pulse laser-metal interactions. As it was considered in 
Section 1 c), these effects include non equilibrium laser-induced phase transformations, 
occurring under conditions of strong superheating and fast deformation rates, strong electron-
phonon nonequilibrium induced by a short laser pulse, fast electron heat conduction, and the 
laser energy absorption by the conduction band electrons. To account for these processes in 
this study, the strategy of computational investigation of the formation of surface 
nanostructures is outlined below. 
Computer modeling of the material response to short pulse laser irradiation indeed has a 
potential for providing information on the physical processes responsible for the formation of 
sub-micron frozen surface structures in laser nanotexturing. Depending on the required 
precision and the available computational power, the same processes in the area of laser-
matter interactions can be described on the potentially different levels: from the 
experimentally visible scale, 1 - 10-6 m, with Macroscopic Continuum Models; to atomistic 
description,10-6 – 10-9, with Molecular Dynamics Method; down to nuclear size, 10-9 – 10-15 
with First Principles, ab-Initio calculations [164, 165]. 
Clearly, computational models based on first principles would provide a precise result on 
the system’s evolution upon the absorption of the laser irradiation. The solution of such 
system, however, is very costly from the point of computational power. Even the world most 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
46
powerful computer at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory can reasonable work with 
a system consisting of only ~103 atoms since the number of operations grow as fast as N3 with 
number of atoms N and even faster [166]. 
Calculations based on continuum models, on the other hand, capable of working on 
experimental scale, requires implementation of many assumptions originating form unclear 
knowledge of fast nonequilibrium processes involved into short pulse laser nanostructuring 
experiments. In particular, it is difficult to describe the phase transformations and liquid 
disruption occurring under conditions of strong superheating and high deformation rates 
within the conventional hydrodynamic computational models. 
Molecular Dynamic (MD) calculations appear to balance the precision of the system 
analyzed on the atomic level and yet a possibility to compute on a micron scale. One of the 
advantages of the MD approach is that all the material properties are given a priory, via 
interatomic potential, which in most of the applications presented in this chapter was 
described via Embedded Atom Method (EAM) with parameterization suggested by Johnson 
[167]. While being relatively computationally expensive, MD therefore does not require any 
assumptions to be made about the processes and mechanisms of interest and is well suited for 
investigation of fast dynamic material response to short pulse laser irradiation. 
However, as we could see from Section 2 b), the MD model, when applied alone, do not 
account for several important processes that can be induced by a short pulse laser interaction 
with metals and that can play a determinant role in short pulse laser nanostructuring. 
Particularly, neglecting the free-electron contribution to the transport properties in study by 
Clancy [168] was reflected in the values of the thermal conductivities of the considered 
metals being roughly two orders of magnitude lower when compared to their experimental 
values. The heat conduction due to the free electrons is the main heat transport mechanism in 
metals and this drawback resulted in the overestimation of the established temperature 
gradient (sureface heat confinement) during the simulations that in turn certainly affected the 
melting mechanism in general [168]. 
To account for the free electron system the Two Temperature Model (TTM) can be 
applied, see Section 2 a). While the description of free electron system in this model has been 
successfully applied to investigate the kinetics of the electron and lattice temperature 
evolution in several theoretical studies and experimental works [29, 83, 84, 85], being 
realized at continuum level, its application in phase transformation description is hampered. 
In particular, the physics of ultrafast phase transformations and damage occurring under 
highly nonequilibrium conditions is not well understood and, therefore, cannot be reliably 
described by a set of kinetic equations. 
In this chapter, therefore, the computational investigation of the formation of the surface 
nanostructures [9, 10, 11, 12] shall be performed with the hybrid atomistic-continuum 
models, that possess the advantages of different computational approaches and can act in a 
wide spawn of time and spatial scales. The strategy of multiscale computational approaches 
was already successfully tested when studying such complex phenomenon as a crack 
propagation in crystals [169], plasticity modeling in materials [170], and laser-induced shock 
waves in a solid [171]. Although requiring a careful implementation and sometimes a 
complex computational technique, especially at the borders of different numerical schemes, 
the combined models nevertheless are capable of describing some times nearly incomparable 
processes. In the next Section 3 a) we present the basic atomistic-continuum method aimed on 
description of short-pulse laser-metal interaction process. The kinetics of fast non equilibrium 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
47
phase transformation processes will be treated at the atomic level with MD, whereas the 
description of laser light absorption by free carriers, their transport dynamics, and strong 
laser-induced electron-phonon non equilibrium are accounted for in the continuum part of the 
model based on TTM approach. The essential laser-induced processes that can potentially act 
in the nanostructuring mechanism therefore (see Section 1 c) are described within the scale of 
a single computational approach TTM-MD. This method will become a basic model, which 
will be then enhanced and modified for the purpose of laser nanostructuring on metals and 
expanded for further applications to other materials: semiconductors and insulators, see 
Section 3 e) and f). 
 
 
(b) Combined Model for Short Pulse Laser Melting of Metals 
 
Our goal in this section is designing the new computational approach that could 
overcome the limitations and combine the advantages of traditional TTM and MD methods in 
description of short pulse laser interaction processes on metals and demonstrating the 
efficiency of hybrid computational approaches when studying complex and multiscale 
phenomenon. We developed a computational model (TTM-MD) that combines the classical 
MD method for simulation of non-equilibrium processes of lattice superheating and fast phase 
transformations with a continuum description of the laser excitation and subsequent 
relaxation of the conduction band electrons, based on TTM [116]. 
In the combined TTM-MD method, schematically illustrated in Figure 26, MD 
completely substitutes the TTM equation for the lattice temperature, Eq. 1, in the surface 
region of the irradiated target, where the most active processes are expected to occur. The 
diffusion equation for the electron temperature Te is solved by a finite difference method 
simultaneously with MD integration of the equations of motion of atoms and the electron 
temperature enters the coupling term [101], which is responsible for the energy exchange 
between the electrons and the lattice: 
 
 
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎨
⎧
+
=
+
−
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
∂
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
T
i
i
i
i
l
e
e
e
e
e
e
v
m
F
dt
r
d
m
t
z
S
T
T
G
z
T
K
z
t
T
T
C
r
r
r
ξ
2
2
,
 
(19) 
 
where 
 
 
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
=
−
=
i
T
i
i
n
k
l
k
e
N
v
m
T
T
GV
n
2
1
1
r
ξ
 
(20) 
 
In Eq. 19, mi and ri are the mass and position of an atom i, and Fi is the force acting on 
atom i due to the interatomic interaction. An additional term, added to the ordinary MD 
equations of motion, accounts for the electron-phonon coupling. A modified, as compared to 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
48
earlier works [101], formulation of the coupling term is used in the model and is described 
below.  
In this section for the beginning we assume the laser spot size, as it is in the typical short-
pulsed laser-matter interaction experiment, to be much larger as compared to the depth 
affected by the laser heating. Thus a one-dimensional version of the diffusion equation for 
electron temperature, Eq. 1, is used here, in Eq. 19. 
In the combined TTM-MD model the cells in the finite difference discretization are 
related to the corresponding volumes of the MD system and the local lattice temperature is 
defined from the average kinetic energy of thermal motion of atoms, KT: 
 
 
(
) (
)
∑
=
=
i
cell
2
T
i
i
T
l
3kN
v
m
3k
2K
T
r
 
(21) 
 
where the summation is performed over all the Ncell atoms in a given cell. In this definition, it 
is important to distinguish between the thermal velocities of the atoms, vi
T , and the velocities 
of the collective motion of atoms in a cell. For any atom, the thermal velocity is defined as vi
T 
= vi - vc, where vi is the actual velocity of an atom i, and vc is the velocity of the center of 
mass of a cell to which atom i belongs. 
 
z
Non-reflecting, heat-
conducting boundary 
condition
Laser pulse
 
Figure 26. Schematic representation of the combined atomistic-continuum model. The evolution of 
electron temperature is described by a non-linear differential Eq. 19, whereas the atomic motions are 
described by the MD method with additional forces that account for the energy exchange due to the 
electron-phonon coupling. Spatial discretization in the continuum model (typically ~1 nm) and size of 
the atomistic region are not drawn to scale. Non-reflecting boundary conditions are described in Refs. 
[76, 109]. 
The energy exchange between the electrons and the lattice is described in the model by 
two coupling terms, -G(Te - Tl) in the diffusion equation for Eq. 19, and ξmivi
T in the equation 
of motion of the atoms, Eq. 19. The latter term serves the same purpose as does the coupling 
term G(Te - Tl) in the equation for the lattice temperature in Eq. 1. In order to define the 
coefficient ξ in the coupling term given by Eq. 20 for each cell in the MD system, we have to 
relate the coefficient to the rate of the energy exchange and to make sure that this rate 
matches the one described by the coupling term G(Te - Tl) of the continuum equations. Since 
the coupling term affects the thermal velocities of the atoms, let us consider the rate of the 
thermal kinetic energy change in a given cell of the MD system: 
 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
49
 
(
)
∑
∑
∑
∑
−
=
=
=
i
c
T
i
i
i
i
T
i
i
i
i
T
i
T
i
i
2
T
i
i
T
dt
v
d
v
m
dt
v
d
v
m
dt
v
d
v
m
2
v
m
dt
d
K
dt
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 
(22) 
 
Since the thermal velocities of atoms in a cell have random directions, the second term in 
the above equation can be neglected for sufficiently large cells. Therefore, using the equation 
of motion Eq.19 and defining the rate of the energy deposition/extraction in a cell of a volume 
VN according to the electron-phonon coupling term, we have: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
l
e
N
i
2
T
i
i
i
i
T
i
i
T
i
i
i
T
i
i
i
T
i
i
T
T
T
GV
v
m
ξ
F
v
v
ξm
F
v
dt
v
d
v
m
K
dt
d
−
=
+
=
+
=
=
∑
∑
∑
∑
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 
(23) 
 
expressing the coefficient ξ from this equation we have 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
∑
−
−
=
i
2
T
i
i
i
i
T
i
i
2
T
i
i
l
e
N
v
m
F
v
v
m
T
T
GV
ξ
r
r
r
r
 
(24) 
 
The second term in this equation is not related to the energy exchange with the electron 
sub-system of the model and is the result of the constraint on the thermal kinetic energy 
introduced by Eq. 23. This constraint prevents any temperature fluctuations and limits the 
thermal kinetic energy variations to the controlled energy deposition due to the electron-
phonon coupling. Actually, the second term in Eq. 24 corresponds to a well-known Gaussian 
thermostat method for constant temperature simulations [172]. In our model we do not want 
to prevent the natural temperature fluctuations in the system as well as temperature changes 
due to the phase transformations (e.g. melting leads to the transfer of a part of the kinetic 
energy to the latent heat of melting). Therefore we omit the second term in Eq. 24 and leave 
only the term that is responsible for the controlled energy deposition due to the electron-
phonon coupling: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
T
l
e
N
i
2
T
i
i
l
e
N
2K
T
T
GV
v
m
T
T
GV
ξ
−
=
−
= ∑
r
 
(25) 
 
where the lattice temperature is defined by Eq. 21 and the coupling coefficient ξ is 
recalculated at each MD integration time-step for each cell defined by the finite difference 
discretization. 
The time-step of the finite difference integration of Eq. 19 is typically n times (1 - 100) 
smaller then the one used in the MD part of the model, ΔtMD = n×ΔtFD, and the electron 
temperature can change during one MD time-step. Therefore, the actual implementation of 
the algorithm involves averaging over a number of finite difference integration time-steps that 
fits to one MD time-step. The coefficient ξ is chosen so that the energy added to (or removed 
from) each cell of the MD system at each integration step, ΔtMD , would match the energy 
transferred between the electrons and the lattice during n steps of the finite difference 
integration: 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
50
 
(
)
∑
=
−
−
=
n
1
k
l
k
e
N
FD
ph
e
T
T
GV
Δt
ΔE
 
(26) 
 
which leads to the following final expression for ξ used in this work, 
 
 
(
)
(
)
T
n
1
k
l
k
e
N
T
n
1
k
l
k
e
N
FD
MD
2K
T
T
GV
n
1
2K
T
T
GV
Δt
Δt
1
ξ
∑
∑
=
=
−
=
−
=
 
(27) 
 
Finally, we would like to emphasize the importance of making the distinction between 
the thermal and collective motion of atoms that has not been taken into account in earlier 
works [76, 101]. Scaling the total velocities of atoms can introduce significant artifacts into 
the simulation results and cause unphysical overheating [173] of fast moving material parts 
and clusters followed by ablation or spallation phenomenon. As shown below, the relaxation 
of the laser-induced pressure in the irradiated films leads to large acoustic vibrations and, at 
high fluences, disintegration of the films. The energy of the collective motion of atoms 
associated with these processes can be comparable to the energy of the thermal motion of 
atoms, as it will be seen later in Figure 28. Therefore, scaling the total velocities would 
artificially pump the energy into the energy of the acoustic vibrations, facilitate disintegration 
of the films, and accelerate any cluster that would form before the equilibrium between the 
local electron and lattice temperatures is reached. It is also essential to make the distinction 
between the thermal velocities and the velocities of collective motion of atoms in the 
definition of temperature, Eq. 21, and pressure, defined in MD simulations through the virial 
equation. 
Now, after the coupling term has been defined, we will further discuss the TTM-MD 
algorithm illustrated in Figure 26. In the combined model, the cells in the finite difference 
discretization are related to the corresponding volumes in the MD system. The lattice 
temperature and coefficient ξ are defined for each cell of a volume VN, and the summation ∑i 
in the Eq. 19 is performed over all the atoms in a given cell. The expansion, density variations 
along the z axes, and, at higher fluences, disintegration of the irradiated target predicted in the 
MD part of the model are accounted for in the continuum part of the model. New cells are 
activated when the number of atoms in the corresponding MD regions exceeds a certain 
critical number, taken in this work to be 10% of the average number of atoms in a cell in the 
initial system. Cells are deactivated when the number of atoms in the corresponding MD 
region falls below the critical number. The atoms in the deactivated cells are included in the 
nearest active cell if they are located within a distance equal to half the size of a cell from the 
active cell. 
The step of the spatial discretization in the finite difference integration of Eq. 19 can be 
estimated based on the von Neumann stability criterion, ΔtFD ≤ 0.5(ΔxFD)2Ce(Te)/Ke(Te,Tl) for 
the values of the heat capacity and thermal conductivity giving the smallest time-step. The 
maximum time-step that can be used in the finite difference integration is typically smaller 
than the values of the time-step used in the integration of the MD equations of motion, Eq. 
19. Therefore, the time-steps in the two parts of the combined model are chosen so that one 
MD time-step would correspond to an integer number of finite difference time-steps, ΔtMD = 
n×ΔtFD. In each finite difference discretization cell, the energy transferred between the 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
51
electrons and the lattice due to the electron-phonon coupling is accumulated for n steps of 
integration, 
(
)
∑
=
−
−
Δ
=
n
1
k
l
k
e
N
FD
ph
e
T
T
GV
t
ΔE
. The accumulated energy is then transferred to 
(or extracted from) the energy of the atomic motion in the corresponding part of the MD 
system by means of the coupling term added to the MD equations of motion, Eq. 19, as it was 
explained before. Note that although a smaller time-step is used in the finite difference 
integration, the computational efficiency of the combined TTM-MD model is defined almost 
entirely by the MD part. A Gaussian temporal profile is used in the simulations to describe 
the laser energy deposition, as it was described in the Section 2 a). 
In the case of a bulk sample irradiated by a laser pulse, the MD method is used only in 
the very surface region of the target, where active processes of laser melting and ablation are 
taking place, whereas the diffusion equation for electron temperature is solved in a much 
wider region affected by the thermal conduction from the absorbing surface layer, Figure 26. 
In order to avoid reflection of the pressure waves propagating from the irradiated surface, 
dynamic boundary conditions that mimic the interaction of the atoms in the boundary region 
with the outer “infinite elastic medium” [116] are applied at the bottom of the MD region. 
The energy carried away by the wave is monitored, allowing for control over the energy 
conservation in the combined model. Free boundary conditions are used at the surface 
exposed to laser irradiation. In the simulations performed for free-standing thin metal films 
free boundary conditions are applied at both surfaces of the film. Periodic boundary 
conditions are imposed in the directions parallel to the free surface(s). These conditions 
simulate the situation in which the laser spot diameter is much larger as compared to the 
depth of the laser energy deposition so that the effects of the edges of the laser beam can be 
neglected. 
The hybrid approach, briefly described above, combines the advantages of the two-
temperature model and the MD method. The two-temperature model provides an adequate 
description of the laser energy absorption by the conduction band electrons, energy exchange 
between the electrons and phonons, and fast electron heat conduction in metals, whereas the 
MD method is appropriate for simulation of non-equilibrium processes of lattice superheating 
and melting. 
Before proceeding to the simulations of short-pulsed laser nanostructuring on metals we 
want to justify its applicability in experiments on laser melting of Ni and Au films and bulk 
targets, discussed below. But first, we briefly discuss a simulation that can serve as a test of 
the model that we developed, and which was already considered at continuum level in Section 
2 a), Figure 3. In this discussion we will focus on the energy conservation in the joint 
electron-lattice system. The total energy conservation can be used as a main test of the correct 
implementation of the algorithm discussed in this section. 
The initial MD system used in the simulation discussed here is an FCC crystal composed 
of 56800 atoms with dimensions 3.53 × 3.53 × 50.14 nm and periodic boundary conditions 
imposed in the directions parallel to two (100) free surfaces. Before applying laser irradiation, 
the system is equilibrated at 300 K. The evolution of the electron and lattice temperatures is 
shown in Figure 27. While the temperature profiles are similar to that in Figure 3, where the 
results of a TTM simulation are shown for the same irradiation conditions, the MD 
description gives a much more realistic representation of the lattice response to the laser 
heating, including thermal expansion, overheating, melting, and disintegration, as discussed 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
52
in the following sections. The size of the relative temperature fluctuations in Figure 27 is 
determined by the number of atoms in cells within the MD system, for which temperature is 
calculated, 
(
)
cell
2
N
1
~
T
ΔT
 [168]. The size of the fluctuations can be reduced by 
increasing the lateral size of the MD system or the step of spatial discretization used in the 
finite difference integration of Eq. 19, Figure 26. The step of spatial discretization used in this 
work is ΔXFD = 1 nm, and the average number of atoms in a cell is 1159 in the initial 
equilibrated system, before laser irradiation. 
The time-step in the finite difference integration of Eq. 19, ΔtFD = 1.25 fs for Ni and ΔtFD 
= 0.025 fs for Au, and the time-step in the integration of the MD equations of motion, Eq. 19, 
ΔtMD = 2.5 fs, are chosen so that the von Neumann stability criterion and the synchronization 
requirement ΔtMD = n×ΔtFD are satisfied, and the total energy in the combined model is 
conserved with the maximum energy drift of less than 0.3% during any of the simulations 
discussed in this section. 
 
 
Figure 27. Time dependence of electron and lattice temperatures predicted by the combined TTM-MD 
method for a 50 nm Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs, laser pulse at an absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. 
Dashed lines show the melting temperature by EAM Ni. 
The energy balance in a combined TTM-MD simulation is illustrated in Figure 28 for the 
simulation, for which the surface temperatures are shown in Figure 27 [175]. The total energy 
of the entire system is shown along with contributions from the thermal energy of the 
electrons, Ee, the energy (kinetic and potential) associated with the thermal motion of the 
atoms, Eth
a, the energy (kinetic and potential) of the collective atomic motion due to the 
elastic vibrations of the film induced by the fast laser energy deposition, Ec
a, and the energy 
that goes to the latent heat of melting, Em. Both Eth
a and Ec
a include contributions from the 
kinetic and potential energies of the MD system and the approximate separation of the MD 
energy into the energies of the thermal and collective motion is based on the virial theorem 
[176]. The energy spent on melting is determined by multiplying the fraction of the liquid 
phase in the system at any given time by the latent heat of melting of the model material. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
53
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Time, ps
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Energy, eV
Ea
th
Ee
Ea
c
Em
E
tot = Ee + Ea
th + Ea
c + Em
 
Figure 28. Energy redistribution in a 50 nm Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs, laser pulse at an absorbed 
fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. The thermal energies of the electrons, Ee, and the atoms, Eth
a, the energy of the 
collective atomic motion due to the elastic vibrations of the film, Ec
a, the energy that went to the latent 
heat of melting, Em, and the total energy of the system, Etot = Ee + Eth
a + Ec
a + Em are shown. Energies 
are normalized to the total energy absorbed by the film, Etot = Fabs×S, where S is the surface area of the 
MD system and Fabs is the absorbed laser fluence. 
 
 
Figure 29. Contour plots of (a) lattice temperature and (b) pressure for simulation of laser melting of a 
50 nm Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs laser pulse at an absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. Solid and 
dashed lines show the beginning and the end of the melting process. Rectangles A and B in (a) show the 
areas of the film and times for which snapshots are shown in Figures 31 and 32 respectively. The laser 
pulse is directed along the Y axes, from the bottom of the contour plots. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
54
The fraction of the liquid phase is determined based on the local order parameter, defined 
in Appendix of Section 2, whereas the latent heat of melting is calculated from the internal 
energy plots, Figure 11, as discussed in Section 2 b). Figure 28 shows that the total energy is 
conserved following the laser energy deposition occurring during the first ps. Initially all the 
laser energy is deposited into the energy of electrons and then, within ~ 20 ps, is transferred 
to the thermal energy of the atomic motion. The fast temperature increase leads to the buildup 
of the compressive pressure in the middle of the irradiated film (see below in this section) and 
induces acoustic vibrations of the film. The vibrations are gradually dissipating into heat, 
which is reflected in a gradual transfer of energy from Ec
a to Eth
a. This energy transfer does 
not lead to the increase of the thermal energy, Eth
a, since it is offset by the transfer of energy 
from Eth
a to Em. The time dependence of the energy of melting, Em, reflects the two-step 
character of the melting process. A fast melting of ~80% of the film that takes place from ~10 
ps to ~25 ps, and is followed by a much slower melting of the remaining part of the film. A 
detailed analysis of the melting mechanisms is flowed up. 
We will now apply TTM-MD model to describe short-pulses laser melting of metal 
targets, the central point of the mechanism of nanostructuring with laser beams. The 
following simulations in this section are performed for 50 nm Ni free-standing films 
irradiated with laser pulses of 200 fs. The effect of ballistic energy transport is negligible in 
Ni and the source term, Eq. 4, with the optical penetration depth of 13.5 nm is used in the 
simulations of laser irradiation of Ni films. The range of laser fluences used in the simulations 
is chosen so that the lowest fluence would be close to the threshold for the surface melting of 
the irradiated film, whereas the highest fluence would be close to threshold of the film 
spallation/disintegration. Thus, the range of absorbed fluences, Fabs = (1-Rref)F, used in this 
work, is for Ni from 18.1 mJ/cm2 (surface melting on a 30 nm film) to 193.5 mJ/cm2 (the 
onset of spallation on a bulk target). The initial MD system used in the simulations of laser 
irradiation of Ni films is an FCC crystal composed of 56800 atoms with dimensions 3.53 × 
3.53 × 50.14 nm and periodic boundary conditions imposed in the directions parallel to two 
(100) free surfaces. Before applying laser irradiation, all systems are equilibrated at 300 K. 
The following discussion of the redistribution of the absorbed laser energy and the 
mechanism of laser melting is given below for a simulation performed for a 50 nm free-
standing Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs laser pulse at an absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. This 
fluence is chosen so that we have a complete melting of the film by the end of the simulation. 
The laser energy absorption by the conduction band electrons, fast electron heat conduction 
and gradual energy transfer to the lattice vibrations due to the electron-phonon coupling are 
reflected in Figure 27, where the evolution of the electronic and lattice temperatures at the 
front and rear surfaces of the film is shown. The laser energy absorption results in a sharp 
increase in the electronic temperature near the irradiated front surface. The fast temperature-
dependent electron heat conduction leads to the redistribution of the deposited energy within 
the film as reflected by the rise of the electronic temperature near the rear surface of the film. 
The process of the energy redistribution within the electronic system is occurring 
simultaneously with a more gradual energy transfer to the lattice vibrations due to the 
electron-phonon coupling. As can be seen from Figure 27 and Figure 28, most of the energy 
is transferred to the lattice within ~5 ps, whereas complete equilibration between the hot 
electrons and the lattice takes up to 20 ps. As briefly discussed above, the energy transferred 
to the lattice splits into three parts in Figures 28; the energy of the thermal motion of the 
atoms, the energy of melting, and the energy of the collective atomic motion associated with 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
55
elastic vibrations of the film. The latter part is associated with the relaxation of the laser-
induced pressure and is decreasing with increasing laser pulse duration [116] or decreasing 
strength of the electron-phonon coupling [116]. 
The temporal and spatial evolution of the lattice temperature and pressure in the 
irradiated film is shown in the form of contour plots in Figure 29. The complexity of the 
temperature plot, Figure 29a, reflects the interplay of several processes that are responsible 
for the lattice temperature evolution. 
First, the energy transfer from hot electrons to the lattice leads to the initial temperature 
increase. A relatively small thermal diffusivity and strong electron-phonon coupling in Ni (as 
compared to other metals) leads to a rapid transfer of the absorbed energy to the lattice and 
the development of a temperature gradient within the 50 nm film during the first 10 ps of the 
simulation, Figure 29a. 
Second, the onset of melting leads to a local decrease of the lattice temperature due to the 
transfer of a part of the thermal energy to the latent heat of melting, Figure 28. A transient 
decrease of temperature due to the melting can be seen in Figure 29a, where the beginning 
and the end of the melting process are shown by the dashed and solid lines respectively. The 
dashed line goes through the regions in the film where 10% of atoms have a “liquid-like” 
environment (as defined by the local order parameter, described in Appendix of Section 2 b), 
whereas the solid line connects the regions where 90% of atoms belong to the liquid phase. 
Third, the elastic vibrations of the irradiated film caused by the relaxation of the laser-
induced pressure have a significant effect on the temperature evolution in the film. Strong 
electron-phonon coupling in nickel leads to the steep rise of the lattice temperature during the 
first ~5 ps after the laser pulse, Figure 27, Figure 28 and Figure 29a. The time of the lattice 
heating is shorter than the time needed for the film to expand in response to the corresponding 
thermoelastic stresses and, in the central part of the film, the heating takes place under 
conditions of the inertial stress confinement [109, 177]. The heating under the condition of 
inertial stress confinement results in the buildup of high, up to 6 GPa, compressive pressure, 
Figure 29b. Relaxation of the compressive pressure leads to the expansion of the free-
standing film with tensile stresses concentrating in the central part of the film. The following 
gradually dissipating oscillations of the film can be described as propagation of two 
unloading pressure waves trapped within the film and changing their signs from compressive 
to tensile and vice versa at each reflection at the free surfaces. The dissipation of the 
oscillations is reflected in the gradual energy transfer from the energy of the collective atomic 
motion, Ec
a, to the energy of the thermal motion of the atoms, Eth
a, as can be seen from Figure 
28. The energy of the film oscillations decreases from ~15% of the total energy deposited by 
the laser pulse at 15 ps down to less than 10% by the time of 150 ps. A direct correlation 
between the pressure and temperature variations in the film is apparent from comparison of 
Figures 29a and 29b. Compression leads to the temperature increase whereas expansion 
corresponds to cooling. Neglecting viscosity and dissipation of the energy of the elastic waves 
and considering the compression and expansion of the solid and liquid parts of the film as 
isentropic processes, the temperature variation with pressure can be estimated from classical 
thermodynamics, Eq. 8. 
The knowledge of CP(T,P), α(T,P), and V(T,P) allows us to integrate the equation for 
isentropic expansion and the results of the integration are shown in Figure 30, where the 
isentropes are shown for the crystal phase by dashed lines for several initial values of entropy. 
For a pressure variation from -5 to 5 GPa, observed in Figure 29b, the range of the 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
56
temperature variation of ~200 K is predicted for the isentropic process of 
expansion/compression for both crystal, Figure 30, and liquid (not shown) phases, in 
agreement with the temperature variation observed in Figure 29a. 
 
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
P ressure (G P a)
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
Temperature (K)
 
Figure 30. Conditions of equilibrium and nonequilibrium melting observed in simulations performed 
for the EAM Ni material. Black diamonds correspond to the conditions obtained in liquid – crystal 
coexistence simulations, Figure 9. Solid line shows the melting curve calculated from the Clapeyron 
equation. Blue dashed lines are isentropes plotted for the crystal phase for four different values of 
entropy. Black triangles connected by the black dashed line correspond to the maximum overheating of 
crystal observed in simulations performed with 3D periodic boundary conditions, Figure 9. Color 
circles correspond to the conditions leading to the onset of homogeneous melting in the simulation of 
laser irradiation of a 50 nm Ni film at the absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. The conditions for the onset 
of homogeneous melting are realized along the dashed lines in Figure 29 up to the depth of 35 nm. The 
circles are connected by lines and colored from red to blue in the order of the increasing depth under the 
surface. 
The analysis performed above indicates that the complex temperature evolution in the 
irradiated film is defined by the interplay of the fast energy transfer from the excited electrons 
to the lattice vibrations, transfer of a part of the lattice thermal energy to the latent heat of 
melting, and the temperature variations related to the relaxation of the laser-induced pressure. 
The temperature and pressure evolution, in turn, define the kinetics and the mechanisms of 
laser melting, as discussed below. 
Turning to the analysis of the mechanisms of laser melting, we can see from the dashed 
and solid lines separating the liquid and solid-state regions in the contour plots shown in 
Figure 29 that the melting process occurs in two steps. An ultrafast melting of ~80% of the 
film occurring within ~15 ps is followed by a much slower melting of the remaining 
crystalline region near the back surface of the film that takes more than 100 ps. 
The irradiated side of the film starts to melt ~10 ps after the laser pulse, when the 
temperature reaches ~ 1650 K, significantly above the equilibrium melting temperature of 
1439 K, determined for the EAM Ni from a liquid-crystal coexistence simulation at zero 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
57
pressure. During the following 15 ps a big part of the film melts and only a small layer near 
the back surface remains in a crystalline form. Although, at first sight, the melting seems to 
proceed by propagation of the melting front from the irradiated surface, a closer look at a 
series of snapshots of the atomic-level structure of the region undergoing ultrafast melting, 
Figure 31, reveals a more complex characteristic picture of homogeneous melting. Small 
liquid regions appear and grow ahead of the “melting front” leading to a very high apparent 
“melting front” propagation velocity of ~4000 m/s. 
 
 
Figure 31. Snapshots from simulation of a 50 nm Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs laser pulse at an 
absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. Snapshots are taken at times and locations marked by rectangle A in 
Figure 29a. Atoms are colored according to the local order parameter - red atoms have local crystalline 
surroundings, blue atoms belong to the liquid phase. In these and other snapshots the atomic positions 
are averaged over 100 MD integration timesteps (0.25 ps) in order to reduce the effect of thermal 
oscillations of atoms. 
From the temperature contour plot, Figure 29a, we see that although the homogeneous 
melting starts near the irradiated surface at a temperature of ~1650 K, it proceeds at 
significantly lower temperatures that, in the central part of the film, become as low as ~ 1300 
K. This observation can be explained based on the pressure dependence of the equilibrium 
melting temperature. Simulation results, shown by diamonds in Figure 30, predict a nearly 
linear dependence of the melting temperature on pressure. This prediction is in a good 
agreement with calculations based on Clapeyron equation, (dT/dP)m = ΔVm/ΔSm, where the 
volume change and entropy of melting, ΔVm and ΔSm, are determined from the temperature 
dependences of the volume and the internal energy calculated for zero pressure, as shown in 
Figure 10a and Figure 11a respectively. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
58
 
Figure 32. Snapshots from simulation of a 50 nm Ni film irradiated with a 200 fs laser pulse at an 
absorbed fluence of 43 mJ/cm2. Snapshots are taken at times and locations marked by rectangle B in 
Figure 29a. Atoms are colored according to the local order parameter - red atoms have local crystalline 
surroundings, blue atoms belong to the liquid phase. 
A region near the back surface of the irradiated film is not affected by the ultrafast 
homogeneous melting discussed above, and a much slower conventional heterogeneous 
melting takes place. A thin crystalline layer with two well-defined crystal-liquid interfaces is 
observed in a snapshot taken at 30 ps after the laser pulse in Figure 32. The subsequent 
snapshots show that two melting fronts are propagating from the back surface of the film and 
from the homogenously melted part of the film, leading to a gradual decrease of the size of 
the crystalline region and complete vanishing of the crystalline layer by the time of ~ 115 ps 
after the laser pulse. The heterogeneous melting is also affected by the pressure variations. 
The decrease in the thickness of the crystalline region typically coincides with the expansion 
of the region. This is related to the steeper slope of the coexistence line as compared to 
isentropes, (dT/dP)m > (dT/dP)s, Figure 30. Therefore, an adiabatic expansion of a region of 
the liquid-crystal coexistence facilitates melting and induces the advancement of the melting 
front. 
From the analysis preformed in this subsection we can conclude that the interplay of 
homogeneous and heterogeneous melting mechanisms is responsible for the laser melting of 
thin metal films. Ultrafast homogeneous melting takes place almost simultaneously in a wide 
area of the overheated crystal and proceeds by nucleation and growth of liquid regions inside 
the crystal. It is followed by a slower heterogeneous melting that proceeds by the propagation 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
59
of the liquid-crystal interfaces (melting fronts) from the back surface of the film and from the 
homogeneously melted part of the film. 
We shall now discuss the effect of laser-induced stresses relaxation on the melting process 
using the simulation performed for a 50 nm Ni film and discussed in the previous section as an 
example. The temperature and pressure conditions leading to the onset of the ultrafast 
homogeneous laser melting are shown in Figure 33 by colored circles. This figure is analogous 
to Figure 30, with some additional information related to the effect of laser-induced stresses on 
the melting process shown. The conditions for the onset of homogeneous melting are calculated 
along the dashed line in Figure 29 a) for the depth under the irradiated surface up to 35 nm. At 
all pressures, the homogeneous melting starts under conditions of overheating above the liquid-
crystal coexistence line. The circles are connected in the order increasing depth. The 
overheating required for the initiation of the homogeneous melting in this simulation is found to 
range from 1.05 Tm to 1.18 Tm. These values of overheating are significantly lower then the 
highest temperature at which no homogeneous melting is observed in constant-pressure 
simulations performed with three-dimensional periodic boundary conditions. A series of such 
simulations has been performed for different values of hydrostatic pressure and the observed 
temperatures required to melt the system, 1.21 – 1.25 Tm, are shown by red squares connected 
by the black dashed line in Figure 33. The temperatures at which melting takes place in a 
system with no external boundaries and internal defects correspond to the limit of thermal 
stability of the crystal lattice [66], and can be considered as the maximum possible overheating 
achievable in a system. The maximum overheating of ~1.25 Tm is observed at pressures from 0 
to 10 GPa, whereas a gradual decrease of the overheating down to 1.21 GPa at -5 GPa is 
observed for negative pressures. The reasons for the discrepancy between the maximum 
overheating and the one required for the initiation of homogeneous melting under laser 
irradiation conditions can be explained by the dynamics of the relaxation of the laser-induced 
pressure, as shown below. 
The strong pressure gradients transiently realized in the irradiated films, Figure 29 b), and 
associated complex stress conditions can destabilize the lattice and promote melting at lower 
overheatings. Moreover, for a typical laser spot diameter of 10 – 100 μm the fast relaxation of the 
laser-induced pressure can only proceed in the direction normal to the surface. This uniaxial 
expansion and associated anisotropic lattice distortions can additionally reduce the lattice stability 
against the initiation of melting. Indeed, the melting process in the simulation proceeds 
simultaneously with the uniaxial expansion of the film, Figure 29b, leading to the decrease of the 
overheating needed for the initiation of the homogeneous melting. This scenario is supported by 
the data shown in Figure 30 and Figure 33, where the points corresponding to the onset of the 
homogeneous melting are approaching the coexistence line as depth (and time) increases. 
In order to test this hypothesis, we performed a series of constant-pressure simulations 
under conditions of uniaxial expansion, when the sizes of the computational cell in the lateral 
directions were fixed at values that correspond to zero pressure at a temperature of 300 K and 
relaxation is only allowed in one direction. These simulations predict the conditions for the 
onset of homogeneous melting (green diamonds in Figure 33) that fit well with the conditions 
realized in the simulation (color circles in Figure 33). Note, that under conditions of uniaxial 
expansion the value of pressure, defined as negative one third of the first invariant of the 
stress tensor, P = -(σxx + σyy + σzz)/3, contains different contributions from different diagonal 
components of the stress tensor. For example, for melting conditions at zero pressure the 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
60
lattice parameter in lateral (X and Y) directions is fixed at a0 = 0.353 nm, lattice parameter in 
z direction is a1 = 0.394 nm, and stresses are σxx = σyy = -0.66 GPa, and σzz = 1.32 GPa. 
 
Pressure, GPa
Temperature, K
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
maximum overheating 
(hydrostatic pressure) 
maximum overheating 
(uniaxial expansion) 
liquid - crystal coexistence
liquid
crystal
a0
a2
a1
a1
a2 > a0
 
Figure 33. Pressure/temperature conditions for equilibrium and nonequilibrium melting observed in 
simulations performed for EAM Ni material. Blue triangles correspond to the conditions of equilibrium 
melting obtained in liquid-crystal coexistence simulations. Red squares connected by the black dashed 
line correspond to the maximum overheating of a crystal observed in simulations performed with 3D 
periodic boundary conditions and constant hydrostatic pressure. Green diamonds show the conditions 
for homogeneous melting in simulations of uniaxial expansion. Colored circles show the conditions 
leading to the onset of homogeneous melting in the simulation of laser melting illustrated in Figures 29 
a) and b). The circles are connected by lines and colored from red to blue in the order of increasing 
depth under the surface. 
Therefore, we can conclude that the dynamics of the relaxation of the laser-induced 
pressure has a profound effect on the melting processes. The homogeneous nucleation of 
liquid regions inside the crystalline material is assisted by anisotropic lattice distortions 
induced by the short pulse laser irradiation. The anisotropic uniaxial expansion reduces the 
overheating required for the onset of homogeneous melting down to less than 1.05 Tm. Thus, 
our simulations suggest that homogeneous melting can be induced at significantly lower 
values of overheating and larger range of irradiation parameters as compared to the 
predictions based on the classical nucleation theory [35]. The reduced lattice stability under 
conditions of short pulse laser irradiation has important implications for the interpretation of 
experimental data on the kinetics of laser melting. 
The complete study of short-pulsed laser melting, including the simulations presented in 
this section can be found in Refs. [62, 116], where the effect of pulse duration and the 
strength of the electron-phonon coupling were also considered. The TTM-MD was 
successfully utilized when finding the threshold for the surface modification of metal films of 
different thickness [79]. The onset of the interracial stress confinement in short pulse laser 
melting, spallation, and disintegration of metal films was largely investigated in Refs [36, 37, 
63, 64] with TTM-MD and the results are vastly applicable in surface nanostructuring 
experiments with laser beams. Finally, the model was found to be applicable in investigation 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
61
of shock melting of grain boundaries in metal targets [178, 179]. In fact, the applicability of 
the combined atomistic-continuum model can be justified in any experiments where the 
interplay of transient electron-phonon dynamics is perturbed with nonequilibrium phase 
transformation processes. The existence of Fermi Distribution in the electronic system, 
however, is assumed for TTM-MD during whole simulation process. In the next section we 
will present the atomistic-continuum model suitable to study nanostructuring processes 
generated in the experiments by Chichkov and Nakata [9, 10, 11, 12]. 
 
 
(c) Combined Model for Nanostructuring on Metals 
 
Although MD calculations are a way ahead of ab-initio ones from the point of view of the 
sample size that can be modeled, even the largest MD job performed on Los Alamos National 
Laboratory Super Facility [180] in fact is only on the micron scale, which is on the verge of 
the experimental measurements. As we can see, for their close comparison, it is an extremely 
difficult task to perform MD calculations on the scale attainable by an experiment. In our 
case, in order to observe the formation of surface nanostructures, the sample has to be big 
enough to accommodate the concurrent laser-induced processes like homogeneous melting, 
propagation of the solid-liquid interface, relaxation of the laser-induced pressure, and other 
possible processes resulting in a hydrodynamic motion of matter and leading to the formation 
of nanostructures. It can be estimated that if we want to fit the experimental scale of the 
microbumps/nanojets on Au [9, 10, 11, 12] into MD calculations, it would require an 
enormous number of atoms in the computational cell. For example, a circular slab of gold 
film with thickness of 50 nm and diameter of 1 μm consists of approximately 2.3 x109 atoms, 
which is of immense computational cost to process with MD in a reasonable time. However, 
if we chose Ni to suit our challenges, we can study the process of surface laser nanotexturing 
in general, but on a smaller scale that fits the MD approach. Strong electron-phonon coupling 
of Ni (one order of magnitude stronger than that of Au) and negligible contribution of the 
ballistic energy transport (the range of ballistic electrons in Au is ~100 nm [22]) result in a 
fast lattice heating and a high degree of laser energy localization near the laser spot. To 
quantitatively characterize the extent of spatial energy redistribution during the time of the 
electron-phonon equilibration, one can consider the effective penetration depth of hot 
electrons, Lc, introduced in Ref. [181]. This quantity is a material property and was shown to 
be the key parameter defining the surface melting thresholds for films of different thickness 
and for the melting/recrystallization mechanism observed in a bulk of material. Although 
derived in 1D, both the physical meaning and quantitative value of the quantity Lc holds for a 
multidimensional diffusion process as well and can be used to justify the choice of Ni as an 
investigated material in the problem of microbumps/nanojets formation. Indeed, following the 
procedure described in [22, 79, 181], the values of Lc can be estimated to be ~50 nm for Ni 
and ~700 nm for Au. Therefore, in contrast with a recent continuum-level study presented in 
[122] where a sample of Au of ~1μm in diameter was used, to observe nanotexturing 
processes similar to [9, 10, 11, 12] but on Ni surface, a sample of ~250 nm in diameter is 
enough. A 20 nm thick circular slab of EAM Ni material, 250 nm in diameter provides an 
adequate description of the laser-induced phase transformations and plastic deformation 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
62
following a localized laser energy deposition and still contains 85,158,528 atoms, a number 
that can be treated in a large-scale parallel MD simulation [182]. 
Since the sample size is reduced by one order of magnitude, to observe the 
nanostructuring process similar to [9, 10, 11, 12], the diameter of the laser beam in the MD 
simulation is also reduced by the same order. The simulation is performed with 200 fs laser 
pulse having Gaussian spatial and temporal profiles and a laser beam diameter b (full width at 
half maximum) equal to 10 nm. Thus, the source term in the continuum part of MD-TTM 
model can be written in cylindrical coordinates, x = (r,z), as the following: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)z
t
r
I
t
x
I
α
α
−
=
exp
1
,
,
0
r
 and 
(28) 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛−
−
=
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
exp
exp
1
,
pulse
pulse
t
t
t
b
r
t
b
F
R
t
r
I
ω
π
π
ω
 
(29) 
 
where R is reflectivity that was not considered in this modeling. Instead we worked with the 
absorbed fluence that was taken to be 3.1 J/cm2 and that can be easily transferred to the 
incident one with known function of reflectivity, and ω = 4Ln2. 
Thus, the computational model can be considered to be a scaled down version of the 
experimental setup used in nanostructuring of Au films. While the difference in the length-
scale and material properties of EAM Ni does not allow us to establish direct quantitative 
connections between the computational results and experimental data, the scaled down model 
can be expected to capture the basic mechanisms responsible for formation of the surface 
nanostructures. Althought the immediate goal of this work is to provide insights into the 
mechanisms responsible for nanobump formation in experiments reported in Refs. [9, 10, 11, 
12], the results of the simulation may also have implications for other laser processing 
techniques, particularly for surface nanostructuring based on optical near-field effects [15, 18, 
50, 51]. 
Despite the fact that the atomistic-continuum model TTM-MD developed in the previous 
Section 3 a) [116] was successfully applied to study various ultrafast nonequilibrium 
phenomena induced during laser-matter interaction, including laser-induced melting [79, 116, 
119], spallation [63, 64], and even ablation of metal targets [36, 37, 64], it is in need of 
further development to study the nanojets formation mechanism. Namely, in the case of short 
pulse laser nanostructuring the size of laser spot becomes comparable with the characteristic 
size of the studied features. The solution of the diffusion equation for the electrons, therefore, 
is no longer valid in 1-D and, since there will be a significant temperature gradient established 
in the vicinity of the modeled structures, the description of the electron heat conduction 
process in 3D is required. 
Furthermore, it is important to exclude the artificial effect of multiple reflections of the 
laser-induced pressure recoil from the system’s boundaries that can certainly affect the 
formation of the nanostructures. In [109, 116], where as a result of the laser heating the 
establishment of temperature gradient took place in 1D, the propagation of a plane wave 
through the dynamic boundary was successfully applied. When studying the nanojets, 
however, the conduction due to hot electrons in 3-D results in the establishment of a 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
63
temperature gradient in 2D for thin and in 3D for thick films. The terms “thin” and “thick” are 
applicable when comparing film thickness, d, with the distance Lc, the effective penetration 
depth of hot electrons by the time of electron-phonon equilibrium [22, 79, 181]. In thin films 
(d < Lc), the laser-induced pressure recoil is expected to take place in radial directions, and 
the nonreflective boundary, therefore, can be represented in the form of a ring. Alternatively, 
in the case of thick films (d > Lc), the dynamical boundary must take a spherical shape. Such 
boundary conditions require thorough development and is considered for development in the 
MD-TTM application for the surface laser nanostructuring for the first time. Therefore, with 
all the modifications described above, the preliminary atomistic-continuum MD-TTM model 
has been used for the case of thin film (d < Lc) to study the formation of the nanojets 
structures in the experiments [9, 10, 11, 12]. 
A schematic representation of the computational cell used in the simulation is shown in 
Figure 34 [182]. The simulations are performed for a 20 nm Ni film deposited on a 
transparent substrate. The initial MD part of the model is a circular slab of 250 nm in 
diameter, where atoms are arranged in the FCC crystal structure with (001) surface oriented 
parallel to the substrate. The thermal and elastic properties of the Ni film are defined by the 
interatomic interaction potential, described in this work by the embedded-atom method 
(EAM) [112]. Some of the parameters of the model EAM Ni material are reported in [64, 
116] and also above in the Section 2 b). The parameters used in the TTM equation for the 
electron temperature are given in [116] and in the Section 2 a). The top surface of the film, 
exposed to the laser irradiation, is free to move, whereas the interaction of the bottom side of 
the film with the substrate is described by Lennard-Jones potential. The parameters of the 
Lennard-Jones potential are chosen to represent an adhesion of a Ni film to the substrate and 
set to be 10 times weaker than the effective strength of Ni-Ni interaction that roughtly 
corresponds to the estimations from experimental results on adhesia. The substrate is kept 
rigid during the simulation and the energy exchange between the metal film and the substrate 
is not allowed. This assumption of the model is justified by the short characteristic time of the 
processes responsible for the nanobump formation and relatively slow heat exchange between 
a metal film and a glass substrate. 
While the size of the MD part of the combined model is limited to 250 nm in diameter, 
the TTM equations for the electron and lattice temperatures are solved in a much wider region 
affected by the thermal conduction, up to more than 300 nm from the center in the radial 
direction, Figure 34. A special non-reflective boundary (NRB) condition is applied 
circumferentially around the MD computational cell. This boundaries imitates the propagation 
of the laser-induced radial/circular pressure wave from the MD region to the continuum part 
of the model and eliminates the artificial effect of the multiple reflections of the waves. 
Note that the TTM-MD simulation involving 85,158,528 atoms interacting by a realistic 
many-body EAM potential presents a significant computational challenge that can only be 
addressed with access to advanced computational facilities. The simulation reported in this 
work is performed with an MPI parallel TTM-MD code optimized for the IBM eServer 
cluster 1350 recently build at the National Facility at Irish Centre for High End Computing. 
Using an optimized linked list neighbor search and improved memory consumption, the code 
has reached a competitive time of ~8 µs spent by a single processor per atom per time step. 
The simulation was run across 128 processors and required ~1,000 hours of calculations 
[182]. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
64
transparent substrate 
NRB 
NRB
TTM-MD domain 
TTM domain 
TTM domain
Gaussian laser pulse
600 nm
 
Figure 34. Schematic representation of the computational setup used in MD-TTM [182]. 
The visual picture of the laser-induced processes is shown in Figure 35. In order to 
provide a clear view of the film separation from the substrate and nanobump formation, only 
a thin 5 nm slice cut through the center of the MD part of the model is shown in the snapshots 
taken from the simulation. The atoms in the snapshots are colored according to the local order 
parameter (see appendix in Section 2 b) [114], with blue color indicating the destruction of 
the original FCC crystalline order due to the fast melting. The melting starts within 2-3 ps 
after the laser pulse and the radius of the melted region reaches its maximum size of ~32 nm 
by the time of ~20 ps. The melting process proceeds simultaneously with the separation of the 
central part of the film from the substrate and generation of a pronounced hollow nanobump 
due to the rapid bloating of the melted region away from the substrate. Some limited plastic 
deformation, proceeding mainly by emission of dislocation from the melting front, is 
observed in a relatively narrow layer adjacent to the melted region. 
The insights into the physical mechanisms responsible for the nanobump formation can 
be obtained by considering the evolution of the electron and lattice temperatures, pressure, 
and velocity in the direction normal to the substrate. The values of the parameters plotted in 
Figure 36 are averaged over a central part of the film with a radius of 2 nm. Due to the small 
heat capacity of the electrons, the laser excitation results in a large spike of the electron 
temperature that reaches ~16,000 K by the end of the pulse. The sharp drop of the electron 
temperature during the first 10 ps of the simulation, Figure 36 a), is mainly due the fast 
energy transfer from hot electrons to the lattice. By the time of 12 ps, the electron temperature 
in the central part of the system drops below the lattice temperature and further decrease of 
the electron temperature is defined by the two-dimensional electron heat conduction in the 
radial direction. The fast energy transfer from the electrons to the lattice is also reflected in 
the initial increase of the lattice temperature, that exceeds the melting temperature of the 
EAM Ni material, Tm = 1439 K [116], at 1 ps after the beginning of the laser pulse and 
reaches the maximum level of 2.26Tm by the time of 15 ps. At later times the heating turns 
into cooling, with the electron heat conduction and energy transfer from the lattice to the 
electrons being the dominant cooling mechanisms. 
The fast localized heating of the film takes place under conditions of the partial inertial 
stress confinement [62, 63, 64, 109], when the heating time is shorter than the time needed for 
the film to expand in response to the thermoelastic stresses. The confinement of the 
thermoelastic stresses, combined with an additional pressure coming from the suppressed 
volume expansion associated with the melting process [116], results in the buildup of high, up 
to 8 GPa, compressive stresses during the first several picoseconds of the simulation, Figure 
36 b) and d). The relaxation of the compressive stresses proceeds by expansion in both radial 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
65
direction and normal to the substrate. In the presence of the rigid substrate, the normal 
expansion of the film results in the upward acceleration of the film up to a velocity exceeding 
300 m/s, Figure 36 c). The expansion of the film may be described in terms of an unloading 
wave propagating from the free surface toward the substrate. The reflection of the unloading 
(tensile) wave from the rigid substrate results in the concentration of the tensile stresses at the 
film-substrate interface and leads to the separation of the film from the substrate. 
 
 
 
Figure 35. Snapshots from a TTM-MD simulation of a 20 nm Ni film on a transparent substrate 
irradiated with a 200 fs laser focused on a 10 nm spot in the middle of the computational cell. The 
average fluence absorbed within the beam diameter is 3.1 J/cm2. Atoms are colored according to the 
local order parameter [114] - red atoms have local crystalline surroundings, blue atoms belong to the 
liquid and, in the last snapshot, to small crystallites disoriented with respect to the original crystalline 
structure of the film [183]. 
An apparent correlation between the time of the film acceleration and the first peak of the 
compressive pressure, Figure 36 d), provides clear evidence that the relaxation of the laser-
induced compressive stresses generated under conditions of the inertial stress confinement is 
responsible for the initial acceleration of the central part of the film. Following the initial 
acceleration, the vertical velocity slowly decreases during the remaining part of the 
simulation, Figure 36 c). The decrease of the velocity is related to the resistance of the colder 
parts of the film to the separation from the substrate. The upward displacement of the central 
part of the film leads to the elastic deformation of the surrounding areas which relaxes by 
pooling the film back toward the substrate, Figure 35. In the melted part of the film, however, 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
66
the initial momentum induces a hydrodynamic flow of the molten material leading to the 
formation of a distinct nanobump. 
 
Time, ps
Lattice and electron temperatures, K
0
50
100
150
200
250
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Electron temperature
Lattice temperature
(a)
Time, ps
Velocity, m/s
0
50
100
150
200
250
-100
0
100
200
300
(c)
Time, ps
Pressure, GPa
Velocity, m/s
0
5
10
15
20
25
-2
0
2
4
6
8
-100
0
100
200
300
(d)
Pressure
Velocity
Time, ps
Pressure, GPa
0
50
100
150
200
250
-2
0
2
4
6
8
(b)
 
Figure 36. (a) The time dependences of the electron and lattice temperatures, (b) pressure, and 
(c) velocity in the direction normal to the substrate, averaged over a part of the film within 2 nm from 
the center of the laser spot. (d) The initial changes of pressure and velocity during the first 25 ps of the 
simulation are shown with higher resolution. 
Strong electron temperature gradients established in the radial direction following the 
initial localized laser energy deposition result in a fast cooling of the electrons and the lattice 
at later times. At ~50 ps the lattice temperature at the periphery of the melted region drops 
below the equilibrium melting temperature, starting a slow process of epitaxial crystallization. 
At the same time, the fast two-dimensional electron heat conduction continues to cool the 
melted region, with the lattice temperature in the center of the laser spot dropping down to Tm 
by 90 ps and down to 0.6Tm by the end of the simulation at 250 ps. At such strong 
undercooling, the slow epitaxial recrystallization gives way to a massive homogeneous 
nucleation of multiple crystallites within the undercooled liquid region, resulting in a rapid 
solidification of the nanobump. A detailed description of the presented model and the 
nanostructuring mechanism can be found in Ref. [182] whereas the analysis of the 
solidification process producing a nanocrystalline nanobumb is presented elsewhere [183]. 
In this large-scale parallel molecular dynamics simulation of the nanobump formation 
with a short-pulsed laser beam we can now surely relate the results of the simulation to the 
alternative mechanisms of nanobump formation proposed in literature. We note that, contrary 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
67
to the suggestions on the dominant contribution from the pressure of evaporating material [11, 
12] or plastic deformation [122], we observed neither of them in the presented TTM-MD 
simulation. The area of the nanobump undergoes a transient melting, and the hydrodynamic 
motion of the melted part of the film prior to the resolidification, rather than plastic 
deformation, is defining the shape of the nanobump. The upward acceleration of the melted 
film is provided by the relaxation of the initial compressive stresses generated by the fast 
laser heating, with Marangoni effect not involved into the process of restructuring [9, 10]. 
The results of the simulation do not exclude, however, the possibility that under different 
irradiation conditions or for different material system the above mentioned effects may 
contribute to the generation the surface structures in short pulse laser nanostructuring. 
Finally, the results of a large scale TTM-MD simulation performed for a thin metal film 
irradiated by a tightly focused femtosecond laser pulse reveal the physical processes involved 
in the formation of a nanobump with dimensions comparable to the laser spot. The relaxation 
of the compressive stresses generated under conditions of the inertial stress confinement is 
identified as the main driving force responsible for the acceleration of a transiently melted 
region of the film which results in the bloating of a hollow nanostructure. Two-dimensional 
electron heat conduction provides the conditions for the fast cooling of the melted region and 
rapid solidification of a surface feature generated in the process of hydrodynamic motion of 
the liquid metal. While in the simulation discussed in this work the growth of the nanobump 
stops at ~200 ps, one can expect that, at higher excitation levels, the hydrodynamic motion 
induced by the relaxation of the laser-induced compressive stresses may result in a stronger 
acceleration and a more active hydrodynamic flow leading to the emergence of jet-like 
structures that have been observed on top of hollow microbumps in experiments performed at 
sufficiently high laser fluencies. 
 
 
Figure 37. Structures obtained by irradiation of a 60 nm gold film with single femtosecond laser pulses 
having square-shaped intensity distribution. The laser fluencies on the sample surface are (a) 0.19 
J/cm2, (b) 0.195 J/cm2, and (c) 0.2 J/cm2 [60]. 
The results of the simulation performed above, nevertheless, still do not allow for a direct 
theory-experiment comparison. The necessity of switching material from Au as it is in the 
experiments [9, 10, 11, 12] to EAM Ni, the structuring of which was retarded in the 
experiments by Koch [9, 10], was justified from the point of computational power accessible 
for the moment of study. The further experiments of Kuznecov [60], however, reveal a 
complicated dependence of the formed nanojet aspect-ration as a function of fluence, Figure 
37, that again bring the question on the mechanism of nanostructuring on thin Au film on the 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
68
experimental scale back to the agenda of our current theoretical research. In particular, the 
necessity of working with Au material, as it is in the experiment by Koch and Kuznecov, and 
on the same scale, therefore completely reproducing the experimental conditions, now looks 
obvious for a deeper understanding of the processes underlying the nanostructuring of gold 
films [9, 10, 16, 18, 60]. In the next section we will present two computational approaches of 
the extension of the combined atomistic-continuum model to the possibility of modeling on 
the experimental scale (microns) for a direct theory-experiment comparison. 
 
 
(d) Extension of the Combined Atomistic-continuum Model for 
Nanostructuring on Metals to the Experimental Scale 
 
The complexity of the nonreflective boundaries with circumferential or spherical shape, 
described in the previous section, limits their application and still implies some assumptions 
concerning the symmetries of the laser-induced pressure recoil. A more advanced model, 
therefore, capable of including the processes related to free electrons, nonequilibrium phase 
transformations, and long range laser-induced elasto-plastic deformations within the frames 
of one computational approach, is needed. In order to overcome this limitation and to advance 
the continuum description of the laser-induced pressure waves, it is possible to merge the 
atomistic-continuum TTM-MD [116] model with the hybrid macroscopic-continuum model 
(MCM) [67, 120] in which the TTM model [70] and elasto-plastic flow model [122] are 
incorporated as well. Similar to TTM-MD, at the atomic level at the very central part of the 
computational cell this model accounts for the kinetics of fast laser-induced nonequilibrium 
processes such as phase transformation, spallation, and ablation with Molecular Dynamics by 
means of TTM-MD model along with the effects related to the free electrons. However, in 
addition to the TTM-MD model, in which no plasticity effects can be considered beyond MD 
boundary, by adding the description of elasticity within the frames of MCM model, where no 
phase transformations shall take place, the long range elasto-plastic deformations will be 
treated with continuum hydrodynamic approach. With the combined atomistic-continuum 
TTM-MD and macroscopic-continuum model MCM model therefore, we can align our 
calculations to what is experimentally accesable, and compare our results directly with the 
experiments [9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18, 60]. The computational set up for the combined TTM-MD-
MCM model is schematically shown in Figure 38. 
The basic theses and governing equations of MCM model were described in Section 2 c). 
In order to combine the atomistic-continuum TTM-MD and macroscopic-continuum MCM 
implementing the elasto-plastic flow model, we set a common area for MD and HD domain. 
Hence, these two domains overlap for the purpose of exchange with the input/output 
information, organizing therefore a feed back to ensure the accuracy of the calculations. In the 
coupled TTM-MD and MCM models the time step will be synchronized for the HD and MD 
calculations. Each step, MD will average necessary data over all angles (due to the central 
symmetry) within the common MD/HD area and pass this information to the HD domain as 
in input, where it is treated in 2D. After the HD step, the related output data will be 
interpolated for the all atoms in the MD/HD area and passed to the MD domain for processing 
on the next time step. Due to this synchronization we have a permanent connection between 
HD and MD domains within the boundaries separating the atomistic and continuum 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
69
description of the same analyzed system. The complete description of the TTM-MD-MCM 
model will be given elsewhere [184]. 
In spite of the obvious advantages of such the combined computational approach to 
describe short pulse laser nanostructuring on the scale comparable with the experiment [9, 10, 
11, 12, 16, 18, 60], there is a certain difficulties in its successful applications. The originality 
of the essential problem arises from the nature of discrete and continuum approaches 
themselves. Namely, it was indicated in [116] that the limited number of atoms (50-100) in a 
unit cell of TTM-TTM model results in fluctuations of such macroscopic parameters as 
temperature, pressure, and density. Those fluctuations do not affect the continuum part of the 
MD-TTM model since they get averaged in time during the MD integration. However, the 
jumps in definition of temperature, pressure, and especially density are very harmful for 
MCM part implementing the elasto-plastic flow model. Particularly, McCormack scheme 
used for the integration of the system, given by Eg. 10 in Section 2 c), becomes unstable. In 
order to get a higher stability and keep the processing safe we propose to interpolate the 
macroscopic parameters determined along the MD/HD zone by means of the least squares 
method. Thus, yet before we pass them from MD to HD domain, we smoothen the 
fluctuations of the temperature, pressure, and density after their averaging over all angles. 
Furthermore, we can get an even higher stability, if averaging those parameters over time as 
well. We may record the change of macroscopic variable within the MD/HD zone for the last 
several steps and get theire weighted average every MD step. Therefore, we believe that the 
problems on the connection of MD and HD domains can be eventually overcome and the 
description of laser-induced pressure relaxation can be extended, as compare to the MD-TTM 
model, over the experimental scale. In the same time, since MD calculations proceed only in 
the central part of the system and HD calculations take place 2D, the computational cost of 
such processing remains very reasonable at significantly fewer number of atoms as compared 
to TTM-MD model describing the nanostructuring on metals, Section 3 a). The latter gives us 
broad opportunities to vary the laser input parameters and playing with different initial 
conditions have our calculations compared directly with the experimental data [9, 10, 11, 12, 
16, 18, 60]. 
 
 
Figure 38. Comparative position of the areas of the computational cell treated with MD and HD 
approaches. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
70
 
Figure 39. Position of the MD domain in the frames of TTM-MD-MCM model at the final time t = 100 
ps. The nanobump is formed and the solidification process is nearly finished. The atoms are colored 
according to their local order parameter, Section 2 b), [114] that shows atoms with disordered ambient 
in blue color. Coloring other than that indicates the solid with the initial [001] crystal orientation. The 
HD domain is not shown. 
In order to validate the applicability of TTM-MD-MCM model to study the processes of 
nanostructuring on the example of nanojets, we perform a trial modeling of 20 nm Ni film 
situated on a silica substrate irradiated with 200 fs laser pulse at the absorbed fluence 2.5 
J/cm2. With this fluence, assuming a realistic metal-silica adehasion, we allow for a complete 
separation of the MD domain off the substrate. This separation, if happens in the case of 
TTM-MD model, Section 3 a), makes our further calculations no longer valid. In TTM-MD-
MCM model however, the metal-substrate interaction of MD domain would still have the 
place via HD domain and the formation of a microbump and a nanojet can be therefore 
described, Figure 39. The diameters of MD domain and the laser sport was taken to be 75 nm 
and 10 nm respectively. The former results in the number of atoms in MD part to be just 
5,997,600 that significantly simplifies calculations of MD part and the model in overall as 
compare to TTM-MD approach described in the previose section.. 
In this modeling, the separation of central part of the film, describe within MD domain, 
took place at 8 ps as a crack. Further monitoring of the MD domain revealed a gradual 
increase of this crack until it reached its maximum diameter of 110nm by the time t = 15 ps, 
Figure 40. The initial position of the MD domain is indicated by the black solid line at the 
level of -20 nm. The final lattice temperature distribution is shown by color and validates an 
accurate connection of TTM-MD and MCM models. In spite of the mosaic-like field of 
temperature in MD domain [116], it can be seen that in average the lattice temperature is a 
continuous function at the MD/HD border. 
 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
71
 
Figure 40. The overall view on the MD and HD domains at the final time t = 100 ps. The color 
represents the lattice temperature. Two vertical solid lines indicate the borders where HD and MD 
domains are connected. The solid horizontal line represents the surface of substrate where the film was 
initially situated. 
Similar, to the case with TTM-MD, in this run the electronic temperature eventually goes 
significantly below the lattice one, Section 3 a), and acts as an extensive cooler for the molten 
material in the area of nanojet formation. The difference between electron and lattice 
temperatures, ΔT = 350 K, was reached by t = 50 ps. Therefore, in this run we reproduced the 
effects we have already seen with TTM-MD model, but in same time, the employed model is 
able to work with higher fluencies due to correct description of both the plastic deformation 
and the electron heat conduction in HD domain on the scale archivable in the experiments. 
The problem of connecting the MD and HD domains due to nature of atomic-continuous 
connection, limits the absorbed fluencies at the moment to the values not exceeding 3,1 J/cm2. 
A higher excitation results in strong fluctuations in definition of macroscopic parameters at 
the border of MD part and as a result unstable solution in HD domain. Moreover, higher 
fluencies would require a bigger MD domain for a possible wider propagation of the melting 
front. The problem of unstable numerical solution in the connecting area of TTM-MD-MCM 
is in the process of elaboration now, and application of a more advanced and stable 
algorithms against of strong fluctuations, like TVD and Godunov-based methods, can 
probably increase the efficiency of TTM-MD-MCM method. 
Nevertheless, the possibility of a direct comparison between the experimental data on 
nanostructuring process [9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18, 60] and the theoretical models implementing 
the atomistic-continuum numerical approach still remains within the frames of TTM-MD 
approach only. Particularly, in the experiment by Kuznecov [60], a nanobarrier structures on 
60 nm Au film were obtained with a single femtosecond laser pulse with an intensity 
distribution strongly elongated perpendicular to the beam axes. The application of 
symmetrical boundaries (mirror type) along the obtained structure and periodic boundaries in 
one of the lateral direction makes the modeling on the experimental scale possible with MD-
TTM approach, Figure 41. 
In order to model a segment of 60 x 2500 x 60 nm, shown in Figure 41 a), the 
computational cell must have dimensions of 147 x 6125 x 147 lattice parameters (4.05 Ǻ) in 
X, Y, and Z direction respectively, accounting for about 530,000,000 atoms totally, Figure 41 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
72
b). The Au sample will have polycrystalline structure [185], for a realistic simulation of short 
pulse laser nanostructuring of thin Au film [60]. The film is situated on a silica substrate with 
which the atoms are interacting via Leonard-Johns potential, as it was done in [182]. The 
nonreflective (NRB) boundaries [109, 110] are applied on the right side of the model to 
ensure for absorption of the laser-induced pressure wave as it was done in simulation of bulk 
in Ref. [36, 37, 63, 64]. Since the parameter Lc [22, 79, 181] for Au material is on the order of 
700 nm, the electron heat conduction therefore, must be described in continuum on a much 
grate scale, up to 15 microns. A special new type of mirror boundaries is necessary for 
simulating the presence of the material on the left at the atomic scale. To our best knowledge 
such type of the boundaries has not been yet implemented in Molecular Dynamics and will be 
elaborated and introduced in this model for the first time. Since, in the experiment, the laser 
pulse has intensity distribution strongly elongated perpendicular to the beam axes, the 
application of periodic type of boundaries in the same direction looks natural. In order to 
observe the formation of liquid nuclei without any possible effect form the limited size of the 
periodic boundaries, however, we must set their length at least equal to the film thickness 
[119]. 
 
 
MD Domain
Silica Substrate
Half Gaussian Laser Pulse
SB
NRB 
nanobarrier 
2.5 microns 
60 nm 
MD: 530,000,000 atoms 
Au 
Au 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 41. (a) Nanobarrier obtained at Laser Zentrum Hanover in experiments, (b) schematic 
representation of the model allowed for a direct comparison the results. 
Finally, in order to get a possibility for a direct simulation-experiment comparison, we 
need to have the experimental properties of the material reproduced via EAM potential as 
close as it possible. Although the EAM potential for Ni and Au, developed by Johnson and 
utilized in [116] described some of the material thermodynamics properties close to their 
experimental values, it also showed a quite discrepancy for the melting temperature and the 
enthalpy of melting, which can be harmful in the task we pursue in our modeling on a direct 
simulation-experiment comparison. Recently, however, a new EAM potential by Zhakhovskii 
[186] was developed and discovered a good fit for several materials like Ni, Al, Au, and Pl to 
theire experimental properties and will be therefore employed in our simulation.  
Thus, in this computational approach, the complete process of femtosecond laser 
nanostructuring of Au film on a substrate can be modeled on the experimental scale in a 
super-large scale simulation based on Molecular Dynamics. The code implementing the 
atomistic-continuum model for nanostructuring [182] is adapted for multiprocessing and is 
planned for submission at Juelich Supercomputing Centre (Germany) across 4,000 processors 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
73
and more in order to process the system of 0.5*109 Au atoms [187] for at least 1 ns for 
observation of the complete process of resolidification of the nanojet, as it is in the 
experiments [60]. Thus, this modelng become one of the biggest MD-based modeling up to 
now. It is important to notice here, that models presented above in these sections are yet in the 
process of elaboration and applications. Some of the details therefore may slightly change in 
their final versions. Especially it concerns the application of mirror type of the boundaries in 
modeling on direct simulation-experiment comparison of the obtained nanostructures, since a 
straightforward imaging of the atoms in the set plane mirror may introduce unphysical 
phenomenon resulted form correlated atomic motion. This can be avoided by setting the 
image particle velocities at the mirror type of boundaries randomly oriented, thus forcing 
them for uncorrelated motion, however at the same kinetic energy as thire real hosts. In the 
next section, we will introduce you the method of extension of the atomistic-continuum type 
of models for a simulation of nanostructuring processes on semiconductors and insulators. 
 
 
(e) Extension of the Combined Atomistic-Continuum Model for 
Nanostructuring on Semiconductors 
 
This section we begin with the extension of the atomistic-continuum model [116] for 
simulation of nanostructuring processes on semiconductors [188]. Similarly to that with 
metals, the essential idea of the atomistic-continuum model application for other materials 
holds the same. Namely, within the frames of a single computational approach we describe 
the processes of different special scales and time intervals. 
 
Figure 42. Schematic illustration of the electron-hole carrier excitation due 1 or 2 photon absorption in 
Si with a laser pulse of a sufficient energy. The further dynamics of the electron-hole condensate can be 
described as the ambipolar diffusion process. 
For simulation of short pulse laser interaction with semiconductors, therefore, we must 
account for nonequilibrium phase transformation, generated with a short laser pulse, and the 
process of energy dissipation by free-carrier transport, similarly to that in metals on the other 
hand. As it was developed in [69, 70], the free carriers (electrons), when thermalized upon 
laser energy absorption, form a distribution governed by Fermi-Dirac statistics. Thus we 
could prescribe a temperature definition according to the possessed energy, and based on the 
energy balance the TTM model was proposed [189, 190, 191] for description of a temperature 
dynamics of the electrons and the phonons in metals. In essence, the TTM model states that 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
74
the local energy change in the electronic subsystem is due to three essential processes: the 
energy transport by electron heat conduction, the energy exchange with the phononic 
subsystem, and the energy gained due to the laser light absorption. 
In the experiment with Si, on the other hand, one has to consider the energy gap Eg = 1.05 
eV. But under laser irradiation of sufficiently high energy one can promote quite a few 
electrons into the conduction band by means of 1 or 2 photon absorption, Figure 42. The latter 
results in the establishment of electron-hole condensate that is governed by Fermi-Dirac 
statistics. Thus, the dynamics of the electron-hole carrier transport can be described as an 
ambipolar diffusion process [190] and a model, similar to TTM, based on the energy balance 
can be proposed. Similarly, to TTM [70], the change of total energy of the electron-hole 
condensate will be accounting from: 1) the energy gained from the laser irradiation due to one 
or multiphoton absorption processes and direct laser light abortion by free carriers, 2) 
equilibration of free carrier’s density and temperature gradient, and 3) the energy exchange 
between electron-hole carriers and phonons. The processes of impact ionization and Auger 
recombination processes must be added to the calculation of electron-hole carrier density. The 
complete Self Consistent Model (SCM) model can be found in Ref. [190, 191] and it has the 
following governing system of equations in 1D: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
−
+
∇
⋅
∇
=
∂
∂
−
−
⋅
∇
−
+
Θ
+
=
∂
∂
⋅
∇
−
+
−
+
=
∂
∂
−
−
−
−
l
e
ph
e
g
e
h
e
l
l
l
l
e
ph
e
g
e
h
e
g
e
g
e
e
g
e
T
T
E
T
n
C
T
k
t
T
C
T
T
E
T
n
C
E
T
n
W
t
z
I
t
z
I
n
t
E
T
n
U
E
T
n
J
n
n
h
t
z
I
h
t
z
I
t
n
τ
τ
β
α
θ
γ
ν
β
ν
α
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
)
,
,
(
2
,
,
2
3
2
r
r
r
 
(30) 
 
where subscripts e and l stay for the electron-hole and phonon systems respectively. n is the 
free carrier (electron-hole pairs) density, Ue the total free carrier energy density, T is 
temperature, and Eg is the energy gap. The ratio of the electron-hole heat capacity Ce-ph and 
electron-hole relaxation time τe-ph defines the rate of energy transfer form hot electron-hole 
carriers to the energy of phonon vibrations, or in other words lattice temperature, and I(r,t) is 
the laser intensity. 
The first equation describes density of the electron-hole carriers via one or two photon 
absorption given by first and second terms respectively with material parameters α and β. The 
third term describes the Auger recombination with parameter γ, forth term gives the impact 
ionization with parameter θ, and finally the last term described the loss mechanism due to carrier 
current. Note, that applicability of the term describing impact ionization nedd to be confirmed 
depending on intensity and pulsed duration [186]. The second equation stays for the balance of 
total energy of the electron-hole pairs. Similarly to the first equation, it accounts for the processes 
of one and two photon absorption, the energy flux W and the energy exchange with lattice. Third 
equation describes the energy balance of lattice in the same form as it is in TTM [70], Eq. 1, 
Section 2 a). Follow the formulation of ultrafast transport dynamics presented in [188, 189], the 
carriers current is given by: 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
75
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎪⎪
⎬
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎨
⎧
∇
⎭⎬⎫
⎩⎨⎧
−
+
+
+
∇
+
+
∇
−
=
−
−
−
−
−
e
h
e
h
e
e
g
h
e
e
b
T
H
H
H
H
T
n
E
H
H
T
k
n
n
D
J
r
r
r
r
2
3
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
0
1
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
η
η
η
η
η
η
 
(31) 
 
where the ambipolar diffusion coefficient D is given by: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
h
e
h
h
e
e
h
e
h
e
e
b
H
H
H
H
H
H
q
T
k
D
η
η
η
μ
η
μ
η
η
μ
μ
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
0
2
1
0
0
2
1
0
0
2
1
0
2
1
0
0
−
−
+
+
=
 
(32) 
 
the reduced Fermi Levels μc can be found from the local carrier density, obtained by 
integrating over the microscopic quasi-equilibrium distribution functions [192] 
: 
 
(
)
c
c
b
c
c
F
T
k
m
n
η
π
2
1
2
3
2
*
2
2
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
=
h
 
(33) 
 
where 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)dx
x
x
F
c
c
∫
∞
−
+
+
Γ
=
0
exp
1
1
1
η
ξ
η
ξ
ξ
  and  
(
)
(
)
(
)
c
c
c
H
F
F
η
η
η
ξ
ζ
ζ
ξ
=
 
(34) 
 
The energy current is defined by carrier’s density gradient leading to the ambilpolar 
diffusion and temperature gradient causing the heat transport. Given by the sum of the carrier 
energy current in electrons and holes it is resulting therefore in: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
{
}
(
)
e
h
e
h
e
e
b
g
T
k
k
J
H
H
T
k
E
W
∇
+
−
+
+
=
r
r
r
η
η
1
0
1
0
2
 
(35) 
 
where ke and kh are the conductivities of the electrons and holes respectively. 
Since the total energy density Ue in the electron-hole pairs is the product of the carrier 
number density number n and the sum of the band gap Eg energy per unit volume and the 
kinetic energy is given by: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
⎭⎬⎫
⎩⎨⎧
+
+
=
h
e
e
b
g
e
H
H
T
k
E
n
U
η
η
2
3
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
3
 
(36) 
 
Substituting Eq. 36 into the second equation of Eq. 30 and bearing in mind that the heat 
capacity of the electron-hole pairs 
const
n
e
e
h
e
T
U
C
=
−
∂
∂
=
 we can write an explicit energy 
balance equation with respect to temperature of the electron-hole free carriers, Te: 
 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
76
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
⎭⎬⎫
⎩⎨⎧
+
+
∂
∂
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
∂
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
∂
∂
−
−
−
⋅
∇
−
+
Θ
+
=
∂
∂
−
−
h
e
e
b
g
l
l
g
g
l
e
e
g
e
h
e
g
e
e
g
e
h
e
H
H
T
k
E
t
n
t
T
T
E
t
n
n
E
n
T
T
E
T
n
C
E
T
n
W
t
z
I
t
z
I
n
t
T
E
T
n
C
η
η
τ
β
α
2
3
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
2
3
,
,
,
,
,
)
,
(
,
,
r
 
(37) 
 
with 
 
 
(
)
(
)
{
}
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
{
}
h
h
h
e
e
e
b
e
b
e
g
g
e
h
e
H
H
H
H
nk
H
H
nk
T
E
n
E
T
n
C
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
2
1
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
3
2
1
2
3
2
1
1
1
2
3
2
3
,
,
−
−
−
−
+
−
−
+
+
∂
∂
=
 
(38) 
 
Although the Eq. 37 gives an explicit relation with respect to Te, the energy density 
balance via formulation 37 is a nonconservative scheme, so that the control of the numerical 
scheme through the conservation of energy is not possible. In this sense, the energy density 
balance given by second equation in Eq. 30 is of a better preference. 
 
 
Figure 43. Electron-hole (red) and lattice (green) temperature along with density of free carriers (blue) 
dynamics is presented according to Self Consistent Model in [191]. The calculations are performed for 
20 μm free standing Si film at 500 fs 775 nm laser pulse at the absorbed fluence of 0.1 J/cm2. The laser 
intensity is shown in black and not in scale. 
Finally, for a volume-absorbing material, the laser attenuation in the direction of 
propagation z can be obtained by solving the following differential equation that describes 
losses due one- or two-photon absorption and free carrier absorption [191]: 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
77
 
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)t
z
I
t
z
I
n
z
t
z
I
,
,
,
2
β
α
−
Θ
+
−
=
∂
∂
 
(39) 
 
For the constant values of α, β, and Θ a closed-form solution of the Eq. 39 can be derived [191]: 
 
 
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
z
n
n
z
n
t
r
I
n
t
z
I
Θ
+
−
−
+
Θ
+
Θ
+
−
Θ
+
−
=
α
β
α
α
α
1
exp
1
exp
,
,
0
 
(40) 
 
where I0(r,t) is the incident intensity of the laser beam at the material surface, z = 0, given by 
Eq. 29 in Section 3 b). 
Following the numerical procedure described in Ref. [191], one can obtained the solution 
of Eq. 30 for a 500 fs 775nm laser pulse interacting with a 20mk free standing Si film. The 
expensive calculations of reduced chemical potential ηc in SCM model from transcendental 
Eq. 33 can be tabulated in order to increase the efficiency of the numerical scheme, which 
was realized in finite differences method here. Together with the electron-hole temperature 
dynamics at the surface, Figure 39 shows the lattice temperature dynamics and the transient 
carrier density of laser-generated free carriers. The laser intensity reflecting Gaussian 
temporal profile is not in the scale, but rather an eye guide. The material parameters for in 
present SCM calculations are taken form Ref. [190, 191]. 
The unusual double peak behavior in the electron-hole temperature dynamics, as it can be 
seen from Figure 43, clearly correlate with the laser pulse shape. When number of free 
carriers n is negligible, their heat capacity Ce-h is low and the temperature of the electron-hole 
pairs easily goes up. When the number of free carriers become sufficiently high, their 
temperature grow cease for a moment and energy dissipation vie heat conductivity 
mechanism comes to place, that is reflected in a transient temperature decrease. The further 
increase in the number of free carriers in the conduction band, however, results in a direct 
laser light absorption as a dominant absorption mechanism and the temperature of electron-
hole pairs is rising again following the laser pulse, similarly to the electron temperature 
dynamics in TTM model for metals, Section 2 a). The lattice temperature is gradually 
increasing until it equilibrates with temperature of free carriers roughly by the time of 20 ps, 
that is associated with free carriers phonon equilibration time, τe. 
The interesting behavior of the electron-hole temperature dynamics during short pulse 
laser interaction with Si opens up a wide range for research opportunities from the point of 
view of both the fundamental physics and the practical application for the purpose of 
nanostructuring. In order have this model applicable in nanostructuring experiment however, 
we must deal with basically same essential physical mechanisms that were found to be 
responsible for the structuring on metals. They are transient laser-induced nonequilibrium 
phase transformation under condition of strong superheating and fast deformation rates on 
one hand, and fast electron-hole heat conduction, laser light absorption, and laser-induced 
nonequilibrium between electron-holes and phonons. On the other hand, all these processes 
can be, similarly to TTM-MD, described within the scale of a single computational approach, 
where phase transformations are taken care of at the atomic level with MD approach, and 
processes due to free carriers are treated in continuum with SCM model. The atomistic-
continuum model for semiconductors therefore, by analogy with TTM-MD, can be composed 
by substituting the last equation for lattice in Eq. 30 by MD integration in which the energy 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
78
exchange between the electron-hole free carriers and phonons vibrations is accounted for by 
adding an additional friction term expressed via thermal velocities, as it was described in 
Section 3 b): 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
+
=
−
−
⋅
∇
−
+
Θ
+
=
∂
∂
⋅
∇
−
+
−
+
=
∂
∂
−
T
i
i
i
i
l
e
e
g
e
h
e
g
e
g
e
e
g
e
v
m
F
dt
r
d
m
T
T
E
T
n
C
E
T
n
W
t
z
I
t
z
I
n
t
E
T
n
U
E
T
n
J
n
n
h
t
z
I
h
t
z
I
t
n
r
r
r
r
r
ξ
τ
β
α
θ
γ
ν
β
ν
α
2
2
2
3
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
)
,
,
(
2
,
,
 
(41) 
 
where 
 
 
(
)
(
)
∑
∑
=
−
−
=
i
T
i
i
n
k
l
k
e
e
h
e
N
v
m
T
T
C
V
n
2
1
1
r
τ
ξ
 
(42) 
 
When merging these two models MD and SCM, however, one must carefully consider 
the effect the excited free carriers on the weakening of the atomic bonding, that for the case of 
silicon will be described by Stillinger-Webber potential [193]. In the work by Loraso [194], 
the attractive part of the Stillinger-Webber potential was simply discarded upon the electron-
hole pair excitation. Such a rude approximation was not supported in ab-initio calculations by 
Louie [195] where role of the electorn-hole interaction was investigated followed by optical 
excitation. In the atomistic-continuum model for the nanostructuring on Si therefore, one 
must fit the Stillinger-Webber potential in MD calculations for Si in accordance with ab-initio 
calculations in which the effect of photoexcited electron-hole pairs is thoroughly considered. 
In the next section, we describe how to extent the applicability of the combined atomistic-
continuum computational technique to study the nanostructuring processes on insulators. 
 
 
(f) Extension of the Combined Atomistic-Continuum Model for 
Nanostructuring of Insulators 
 
The strategy of the hybrid atomistic-continuum modeling of the complex laser-induced 
transient processes resulted in extention of the applicability of the TTM-MD model to the 
nanostructuring on metals on the experimental scale and on semiconductors, Section 3 b)-e). 
Moreover, recent experiment with near-field optics involved into nanostructuring process [48, 
49, 50, 51 ] allows us for a direct comparison of the calculation with the experimental data 
already with models described in Section 3 c) and d), that reinforce the position of the 
atomistic-continuum modeling as an advanced computational tool in investigation of short 
pulse laser materials interactions for the pulpous of studying the ultrafast phenomenon in 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
79
nanostructuring experiments [9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18, 60]. But even beyond the laser 
applications, the TTM-MD-based model can be applicable to a broader range of phenomena. 
In fact, this model will be applicable everywhere where fast and localized energy deposition 
occurs, from ion beam surface nanomodifications and cluster deposition to the analysis of 
damage to a spacecraft shielding material from hypervelocity impacts by energetic particles. 
In Section 2 e) we considered DFT method in description of fast and localized energy 
deposition with swift heavy ions in nanostructuring experiments on the surface of SrTiO3 
material [19,]. In his model, however, Osmani used the TTM model for the description of fast 
electron heat conduction and electron-phonon nonequilibrium. While accepting such the 
model as a first approximation of quite complex phenomena, the applicability of the TTM 
model is limited here by the absence of local thermal equilibrium everywhere in the proximity 
of restructured surface within any volume comprising 50-100 atoms for a meaningful 
determination of lattice temperature. The same problem is related to the electronic system as 
well. Strong excitation with heavy swift ions can promote the electrons into the conduction 
band, where yet before the establishment of Fermi-Dirac distribution, a significant energy 
transport due to heat conduction or ballistic energy transport can occur [22, 59]. Apparently, 
within the scope of our review, the description of nonthermalized electrons should be given 
with Boltzmann system, Section 2 d). Finally, for a reliable treatment of fast transient 
processes of melting and formation of the nanohillocks, the Boltzmann approach for 
nonthermalized elecrons must be utilized in a coupling with atomic description based on MD 
approach, similarly to that was done when linking TTM and MD models in nanostructuring 
on metals and semiconductors. The problem of Boltzmann system numerical applicability, 
however, is that it is written in K space, Eq. 14, whereas both DFT and MD methods are 
working in real space. Therefore, in order to bring all these three methods in one 
computational approach, we suggest solving the Boltzmann system in each numerical cell 
where treatment of the nonequilibrium electronic system is considered to be necessary, 
obtaining therefore the local solution of Boltzmann system for the real space. 
The MD computational approach, on the other hand, can be used for description of fast 
nonequilibrium processes of phase transformation at the atomic level. The crystal structure of 
SrTiO3 is related to the group of Perovskite type, which is fcc with Sr in corners and Ti in the 
center of the cubic cell, Figure 44. 
The simulation of this crystal structure with molecular dynamic approach was described 
in Ref. [196], where ionic crystal model was proposed for the treatment of interatomic 
interaction: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
[
]
{
}
∗
∗
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
+
−
+
+
+
=
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
j
i
j
i
ij
j
i
j
i
ij
j
i
ij
r
r
r
r
D
r
c
c
b
b
r
a
a
b
b
f
r
e
Z
Z
U
β
β
πε
exp
2
2
exp
exp
4
1
6
0
2
 
(43) 
 
The first term represents the Coulomb interaction, where Zi and Zj are the effective 
charges of ions I and j, respectively and rij is the interatomic distance between the ions. The 
second term represents the short range repulsion potential. The parameters ai and aj reflect the 
radii and bi and bj reflect the hardness of the ions i and j and f0 = 0.043364 eV*A. Their term 
represents the dipole induced dispersion potential based on the van der Waals interaction. The 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
80
last term is the Morse potential for description of covalent bonding for Ti-O bonds only, 
where Dij, bij, and rij
* are the specific parameters for the Ti-O bond. The parameters of the 
interatomic potential given by Eq. 43 are listed in the Table 2 for SrTiO3 material. 
 
 
Figure 44. Schematic representation of the Ionic Crystal cell [139]. The direction of projectile is 
indicated by an arrow. 
Table 2. Parameters for SrTiO3 material described via Ionic Crystal Model, Eq. X23. 
For Ti-O bonds, the parameters are: Dij = 1.1193 eV/at; βij = 2.0 Ǻ-1; r* = 1.6 Ǻ. 
 
Parameter 
Z 
a, Ǻ 
b, Ǻ 
C, eV1/2Ǻ3at-1/2 
O 
-1.4 
1.850 
0.18 
8.5569 
Ti 
2.2 
1.385 
0.10 
0.0 
Sr 
2.0 
1.846 
0.13 
5.9083 
 
Similarly to that in Section 3 b) when constructing the atomistic-continuum TTM-MD 
model, the energy conservation law is utilized for controlling the accuracy of the calculations 
that is specifically important for ionic crystal type of potentials since it involves the 
summation of long range interactions ~1/r, originating from Coulomb interaction, given by 
first term of Eq. 43. An advanced Ewald summation method is suggested in Ref. [197] to take 
care of long range electrostatic forces. Although, the classical Ewald method results in a poor 
scaling with number of particles N in the system, leading to number of calculation ~N2, there 
are schemes that allow for speeding up the Ewald Summation with Fast Fourie 
Transformation and increasing the efficiency of the calculations up to ~NLog(N) and even 
better [192,193,194,195]. Several theoretical groups, however, consider a straight forward 
Ewald method summation as is inefficient when crystal structure is vanishes due to melting 
process. Thus, a more advanced and computationaly favorable method Particle-Particle-
Particle-Mesh (P3M) [198, 199, 200, 201] method looks reasonable for studing 
nanostructuring processes on insulators.  
Thus, by merging all three model in a single computational approach, we are able to 
simulate fast and localized ion energy deposition in the electronic system of SrTiO3 with DFT 
method, fast ballistic transport with nonthermalized electrons under conditions of the 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
81
electron-phonon nonequilibrium with the system of Boltzmann equations in a real space, and 
transient nonequilibrium induced phase transformation processes at the atomic level with 
Molecular Dynamics. We believe that this atomistic-continuum computational model will 
allow for a simulation of the nanostructuring processes induced by not only in ion 
bombardment experiments [19], but also in atto- and femto-second pulse laser experiments, in 
essence as soon as fast and localized energy deposition take place. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In conclusion we want to indicate that the presented strategy of combination of the 
potentially different models for description of fast surfaces nanostructuring processes 
different in respect to temporal and special scale has found a significant support of its 
applicability. The combined atomistic-continuum models allowed for simultaneous 
description of the laser light absorption, laser-induced electron-phonon nonequilibrium, and 
fast free carrier heat conduction processes in continuum on one hand with the Two 
Temperature Model, and transient nonequilibrium phase transformations at the atomic scale 
with Molecular Dynamic approach on the other hand. Moreover, nonequilibrium processes 
induced by very intensive and localized energy deposition on the scale of angstroms can be 
accounted for by means of adding Density Functional Theory description or Boltzmann 
kinetic approach and long range laser induced elasto-plastic deformations occurring in micron 
spawn can be described by Macroscopic Continuum Models. With the multiscale methodic 
outlined in this chapter therefore, we have a very powerful computational tool for studying 
nanostructuring processes on material surfaces induced with a short pulse laser beams or 
other means of fast and dense energy deposition. 
The results of TTM-MD model application for investigation of short pulse laser 
nanostructuring processes on metals suggest that the essential mechanism of the nanojet and 
nanobump formation is the interplay of two laser-induced processes. Fast energy deposition 
followed by the recoil of compressive/tensile pressure waves in both radial and vertical 
directions results in the establishment of the hydrodynamic motion of the molten material that 
is an essential driving force responsible for the acceleration of the melt and formation of the 
nanojet. The nanojet solidification, on the other hand, is essentially due to fast electron heat 
conduction in multidimensional space. The electron temperature goes significantly below (up 
to ~500 K) the temperature of melted lattice in the vicinity of the forming nanofeature, which 
results in a very strong cooling of the melt and very fast (within tens of picoseconds) 
solidification of the nanojet due to homogeneous phase nucleation mechanism. The resulting 
nanostructure therefore exhibit a nanocrystalline character. Finally, the establishment of a 
strong temperature gradient in the vicinity of the laser spot lead to the long range elasto-
plastic deformation of the film on the micron scale and formation of a microbump on which 
the nanostructures appear. 
The effect of electron heat conduction on the nanojet solidification process can be 
significantly increased if developed in 3D. In the modeling presented in Section 3 c), the film 
thickness of 20 nm is rather small comparatively with the distance Lc, which is 50 nm for Ni. 
Therefore, no temperature gradient is developed in the vertical, Z, direction upon the electron-
phonon equlibration and heat conduction proceeds in radial, 2D, direction only. If we take a 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
82
thicker film, however, 50 nm and more, the electron heat conduction will proceed in both 
radial and vertical direction resulting in much stronger, 3D, cooling of the electrons. In this 
case, the temperature difference reached between the electrons and lattice can be much 
greater and extremely fast cooling and resolidification can potentially induce the appearance 
of metastable structures. 
Note, that although the presented results on nanostructuring experiments on metals in 
Section 3 were yet limited in size by computational power, recent development of 
subwavelength structuring and nearfield optics allow for a direct simulation-experiment 
comparison already at this stage. The inclusion of the Macroscopic Continuum Model into 
consideration will significantly increase the scale of the model applicability up to microns 
with decrees of the computational cost at the same time. Nevertheless, the computational cell 
set-up presented in the Section 3 d) will allow for a direct simulation-experiment comparison 
of the modeled features in a super large scale modeling on advanced computational facilities 
(Juelich Supercomputer Centre, Aachen, Germany) already at this stage within the frames of 
the atomistic-continuum TTM-MD model. 
Moreover, beyond the laser applications on metals, the TTM-MD-based models can be 
applicable to a broad range of phenomena and materials. The discussions on the atomistic-
continuum computational approach when modeling nanostructures on metals by analogies 
where carried out in the application on semiconductors, that additionally reinforces the 
position of the atomistic-continuum modeling strategy. In fact, this model will be applicable 
everywhere where fast energy deposition takes place, from ion beam surface 
nanomodifications and cluster deposition to the analysis of damage to a spacecraft shielding 
material from hypervelocity impacts by energetic particles, that was considered on the 
example of the TTM-MD-based model application to study nanostructuring processes on the 
surface of TiSrO3 with swift heavy ions. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Maiman, T. H. (1960) “Stimulated Optical Radiation in Ruby”, Nature, 187, 493. 
[2] 
Basov, N. G. & Prohorov, A. M. (1955) “Possible Methods of Obtaining Active 
Molecule doe a Molecular Oscillator”, Sov. Phys. JETP, 1, 184. 
[3] 
Basov, N. G. & Prohorov, A. M. (1955) Theory of the Molecular Generator and the 
Molecular Power Amplifier”, Sov. Phys. JETP, 3, 426. 
[4] 
Townes, C. H. & Schawlow, A. L. (1958) “Infrared and Optical Masers” Phys. Rev., 
112, 1940. 
[5] 
Einstein, A. (1917). “Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung”, Physika Zeitschrift, 18, 121. 
[6] 
Berlien, H. P. & Mueller, G. J. (2003) Applied Laser Medicine, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York. 
[7] 
Powel, J. (1998) “CO2 Laser Cutting”, Springer London Ltd, 2nd Revised edition. 
[8] 
Wolf, E. L. (2006) Nanophysics and Nanotechnology: Introduction to Modern 
Concepts in Nanoscience, Weinheim : Wiley-VCH , 2nd updated and enl. Ed. 
[9] 
Korte, F., Koch, J. & Chichkov, B. N. (2004) “Formation of Microbumps and Nanojets 
on Gold Targets by Femtoseccond Laser Pulse”, Appl. Phys. A, 79, 879. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
83
[10] Koch, J., Korte, F., Bauer, T., Fallnich, C., Ostendorf, A. & Chichkov, B. N. (2005) 
“Nanotexturing of Gold Films by Femtosecvond Laser-Induced Melt Dynamics”, Appl. 
Phys. A, 81, 325. 
[11] Nakata, Y., Okada, T. & Maeda, M. (2002) “Fabrication of Dot Matrix, Comb, and 
Nanowire Structures Using Laser Ablation by Interfered Femtosecond Laser Beams,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 81, 4239. 
[12] Nakata, Y., Miyanaga, N. & Okada, T. (2007) “Nano-Structured Surfaces on Ni–Ti 
Generated by Multiple Shots of Interfering Femtosecond Laser”, Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 
6555. 
[13] Björk, G., Sánchez-Soto, L. L. & Söderholm, J. (2001) “Entangled-State Lithography: 
Tailoring Any Pattern with a Single State”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 86, 4516. 
[14] Björk, G., Sánchez-Soto, L. L. & Söderholm, J. (2001) “Subwavelength Lithography 
Over Extended Areas”, Phys. Rev. A, 64, 013811. 
[15] Pronko, P. P., Dutta, S. K., Squier, J., Rudd, J. V., Du, D. & Mourou, G. (1995) 
“Machining of Sub-Micron Holes Using a Femtosecond Laser at 800 nm”, Optics 
Comm., 114, 106. 
[16] Nolte, S., Momma, C., Jacobs, H., Tünnermann, A., Chichkov, B. N., Wellegehausen, 
B. & Welling, H. (1997) “ Ablation of Metals by Ultrashort Laser Pulses”, J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. B, 14, 2716. 
[17] Stuart, B. C., Feit, M. D., Herman, S., Rubenchik, A. M., Shore, B. W. & Perry, M. D. 
(1996) “Optical Ablation by High-Power Short-Pulse Lasers”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 13, 
459. 
[18] Korte, F., Serbin, J., Koch, J., Egbert, A., Fallnich, C., Ostendorf, A. & Chichkov, B. N. 
(2003) “Towards Nanostructuring with Femtosecond Laser Pulses”, Appl. Phys. A, 77, 
229. 
[19] Akcöltekin, E., Akcöltekin, S., Osmani, O., Duvenbeck, A., Lebius, H. & Schleberger, 
M. (2008) “Swift Heavy Ion Irradiation of SrTiO3 Under Grazing Incidence”, New J. 
Phys., 10, 053007. 
[20] Drude, P. (1900) “Electron Theory of Metals”, Ann. Physik., 1, 566. 
[21] Kittel, C. (1996) “Introduction to Solid State Physics”, 7th ed., John Wiley and Sons, 
New York. 
[22] Hohlfeld, J., Wellershoff, S. S., Gudde, J., Conrad, U., Jahnke, V. & Matthias, E. 
(2000) “Electron and Lattice Dynamics Following Optical Excitation of Metals”, Chem. 
Phys., 251, 237.  
[23] Fann, W. S., Storz, R., Tom, H. W. K. & Bokor, J. (1992) “Electron Thermalization in 
Gold”, Phys. Rev. B, 46, 13592. 
[24] Sun, C. K., Valle´e, F., Acioli, L. H., Ippen, E. P. & Fujimoto, J. G. (1994) 
“Femtosecond-Tunable Measurement of Electron Thermalization in Gold”, Phys. Rev. 
B, 50, 15337. 
[25] Bejan, D. & Raseev, G. (1997) “Nonequilibrium Electron Distribution in Metals”, Phys. 
Rev. B, 55, 4250. 
[26] Lugovskoy, A. V. & Bray, I. (1999) “Ultrafast Electron Dynamics in Metals Under 
Laser Irradiation”, Phys. Rev. B, 60, 3279. 
[27] Bonn, M., Denzler, D. N., Funk, S., Wolf, M., Wellershoff, S. S. & Hohlfeld, J. (2000) 
“Ultrafast Electron Dynamics at Metal Surfaces: Competition Between Electron-
Phonon Coupling and Hot-Electron Transport”, Phys. Rev. B, 61, 1101. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
84
[28] Falkovsky, L. A. & Mishchenko, E. G. (1999) “Electron-Lattice Kinetics of Metals 
Heated by Ultrashort Pulses”, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 115, 149. 
[29] Schmidt, V., Husinsky, W. & Betz, G. (2002) “Ultra Short Laser Ablation of Metals: 
Pump-Probe Experiments, the Role of Ballistic Electrons and the Two Temperature 
Model”, App. Sur. Sci., 145, 197-198. 
[30] Chen, J. K. & Beraun, J. E. (2001) “Numerical Study of Ultrashort Laser Pulse 
Interactions with Metal Films”, Numerical Heat Transfer, Part A, 40, 1. 
[31] Lin, Z. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2007) “Temperature Dependences of the Electron-Phonon 
Coupling, Electron Heat Capacity and Thermal Conductivity in Ni under Femtosecond 
Laser Irradiation”, Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 6295. 
[32] Lin, Z., Zhigilei, L. V. & Celli, V. (2008) “Electron-Phonon Coupling and Electron 
Heat Capacity of Metals under Conditions of Strong Electron-Phonon Nonequilibrium”, 
Phys. Rev. B, 77, 075133. 
[33] Ivanov, D. S. & Rethfeld, B. C. (2008) “The Effect of Pulse Duration on the Character 
of Laser Heating: Photo-Mechanical vs. Photo-Thermal Damage of Metal Targets”, on-
line Appl. Surf. Sci., 255,9724. 
[34] Ma, D. & Li, Y. (2000) “Heterogeneous Nucleation Catastrophe on Dislocations in 
Superheated Crystal”, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 12, 9123. 
[35] Rethfeld, B., Sokolowski-Tinten, K., von der Linde, D. & Anisimov, S. I. (2002) 
“Ultrafast Thermal Melting of Laser-Excited Solids by Homogeneous Nucleation”, 
Phys. Rev. B, 65, 092103. 
[36] Zhigilei, L. V., Lin, Z. & Ivanov, D. S. (2006) “Molecular Dynamics Study of Short 
Pulse Laser Melting, Recrystallization, Spallation, and Ablation of Metal Targets”, 
Proceedings of the 2006 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and 
Exposition (IMECE2006), ASME paper IMECE16305. 
[37] Zhigilei, L. V., Lin, Z. & Ivanov, D. S. (2009) “Atomistic Modeling of Short Pulse 
Laser Ablation of Metals: Connections Between Melting, Spallation, and Phase 
Explosion”, J. Chem. Phys. C, 113,11892. 
[38] Born, M. (1939) “Thermodynamics of Crystals and Melting”, J. Chem. Phys., 7, 591. 
[39] Bucksbaum, P. H. & Bokor, J. (1984) “Rapid Melting and Regrowth Velocities in 
Silicon Heated by Ultraviolet Picosecond Laser Pulses”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 53, 182. 
[40] Kapat, J. S., Wei, Z. & Kumar, A. (1998) “Role of Kinetics in Laser Processing”, Appl. 
Sur. Sci., 212, 127-129. 
[41] Lin, Z. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2006) “Time-Resolved Diffraction Profiles and Atomic 
Dynamics in Short Pulse Laser Induced Structural Transformations: Molecular 
Dynamics Study”, Phys. Rev. B, 73, 184113. 
[42] Bennett, T. D., Grigoropoulos, C. P. & Krajnovich, D. J. (1995) “Near-Threshold Laser 
Sputtering of Gold”, J. Appl. Phys., 77, 849. 
[43] Vorobyev, A. Y. & Guo, C. (2007) “Femtosecond Laser Structuring of Titanium 
Implants”, Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 7272. 
[44] Lindemann, F. A. (1910) “The Calculation of Molecular Vibration Frequencies”, 
Z. Phys., 11, 609. 
[45] Lu, K. & Li, Y. (1998) “Homogeneous Nucleation Catastrophe as a Kinetic Stability 
Limit for Superheated Crystal”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 80, 4474. 
[46] Born, M. & Wolf, E. (1965) “Principles of Optics”, Pergamon Press, New York. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
85
[47] Mannion, P., Magee, J., Coyne, E., O’Connor, G. & Glynn, T. J. (2004) “The Effect of 
Damage Accumulation Behavior on Ablation Thresholds and Damage Morphology in 
Ultrafast Laser Micro-Machining of Common Metals in Air”, Appl. Surf. Sci., 233, 275. 
[48] Yin, X., Fang, N., Zhang, X., Martini, I. B. & Schwartz, B. J. (2002) “Near-Field Two-
Photon Nanolithography Using an Apertureless Optical Probe”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 81, 
3663. 
[49] Jersch, J., Demming, F., Hildenhagen, J. & Dickmann, K. (1997) “Nano-Material 
Processing with Laser Radiation in the Near Field of a Scanning Probe Tip”, Opt. Laser 
Technol., 29, 433. 
[50] Chimmalgi, A., Choi, T. Y., Grigoropoulos, C. P. & Komvopoulos, K. (2003) 
“Femtosecond Laser Aperturless Near-Field Nanomachining of Metals Assisted by 
Scanning Probe Microscopy”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 1146. 
[51] Huang, S. M., Hong, M. H., Lu, Y. F., Lukyanchuk, B. S., Song, W. D. & Chong, T. C. 
(2002) “Pulsed-Laser Assisted Nanopatterning of Metallic Layers Combined with 
Atomic Force Microscopy”, J. Appl. Phys., 91, 3268. 
[52] Wellershoff, S. S., Hohlfeld, J., Gudde, J. & Matthias, E. (1999) “The Role of Electron-
Phonon Coupling in Femtosecond Laser Damage of Metals”, Appl. Phys. A, 69, S99. 
[53] Yingling, Y. G., Conforti, P. F. & Garrison, B. J. (2004) “Theoretical Investigation of 
Laser Pulse Width Dependence in a Thermal Confinement Regime”, Appl. Phys. A, 79, 
757. 
[54] Gamaly, E. G., Rode, A. V., Tikhonchuk, V. T. & Luther-Davies, B. (2002) 
“Electrostatic Mechanism of Ablation by Femtosecond Lasers”, Appl. Sur. Sci., 699, 
197-198. 
[55] Bulgakova, N. M., Stoian, R., Rosenfeld, A., Campbell, E. E. B. & Hertel, I. V. (2004) 
“Model Description of Surface Charging during Ultra-Fast Pulsed Laser Ablation of 
Materials”, Appl. Phys. A, 79, 1153. 
[56] Lukyanchuk, B. S., Anisimov, S. I. & Lu, Y. F. (2001) “Dynamics of Subpicosecond 
Laser Ablation, Exammined by Moments Technique”, Proc. SPIE, 4423, 141. 
[57] Nediakov, N. N., Imamova, S. E., Atanasov, P. A., Heusel, G., Breitling, D., Rut, A., 
Hugel, H., Dausinger, F. & Bereger, P. (2004) “Laser Ablation of Iron by Ultrashort 
Laser Pulses”, Thin Sol Films, 496, 453-454. 
[58] Hirayama, Y. & Obara, M. (2005) “Heat-Affected Zone and Ablation Rate of Copper 
Ablated with Femtosecond Laser” J. Appl. Phys., 97, 064903. 
[59] Anisimov, S. I. & Rethfeld, B. (1997) “On the Theory of Ultrashort Laser Pulse 
Interaction with a Metal”, Proc. SPIE, 3093, 192. 
[60] Kuznetsov, A. I., Koch, J. & Chichkov, B. N. (2009) “Nanostructuring of Thin Gold 
Films by Femtosecond Lasers”, Appl. Phys. A, 94, 221. 
[61] Rethfeld, B., Kaiser, A., Vicanek, M. & Simon, G. (2002) “Ultrafast Dynamics of 
Nonequilibrium Electrons in Metals Under Femtosecond Laser Irradiation”, Phys. Rev. 
B, 65, 214303. 
[62] Ivanov, D. S. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2003) “Effect of Pressure Relaxation on the 
Mechanisms of Short-Pulse Laser Melting”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 91, 105701. 
[63] Leveugle, E., Ivanov, D. S. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2004) “Photochemical Spallation of 
Molecular and Metal Targets: Molecular Dynamic Study”, Appl. Phys. A, 79, 1643. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
86
[64] Zhigilei, L. V., Ivanov, D. S., Leveugle, E., Sadigh, B. & Bringa, E. M. (2004) 
“Computer Modeling of Laser Melting and Spallation of Metal Targets”, High Power 
Laser Ablation V, Proc. SPIE, 5448, 505. 
[65] Gibbs, J. W. (1931) “Collected Works”, Vol. 1, 55-372, Longmans, New York. 
[66] Jin, Z. H., Gumbsch, P., Lu, K. & Ma, E. (2001) “Melting Mechanism at the Limit of 
Superheating”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 055703-1. 
[67] Wilkins, M. L. (1964) “Methods in Computational Physics”, vol. 3, Academic press, 
New York, 211-261. 
[68] Pilipovich, V. A., Malevich, V. L.,  Ivlev, G. D. & Zhidkov, V. V. (1985) “Dynamics of 
Nanosecond Laser Annealing of Silicon”, J. Eng. Phys. Thermophys., 48, 228. 
[69] Kaganov, M. I., Lifshitz, I. M. & Taranov, L. V. (1956) “Relaxation Between Electrons 
and the Crystalline Lattice”, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 31, 232 [Sov. Phys. JETP, 4, 173 
(1957)]. 
[70] Anisimov, S. I., Kapeliovich, B. L. & Perel’man, T. L. (1974) “Electron Emission from 
Metal Surfaces Exposed to Ultrashort Laser Pulses”, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 66, 776 [Sov. 
Phys. JETP, 39, 375 (1974)]. 
[71] Allen, P. B. (1987) “Theory of Thermal Relaxation of Electrons in Metals”, Phys. Rev. 
Lett., 59, 1460. 
[72] Wang, X. Y., Riffe, D. M., Lee, Y. S. & Downer, M. C. (1994) “Time-Resolved 
Electron-Temperature Measurement in a Highly Excited Gold Target Using 
Femtosecond Thermionic Emission” Phys. Rev. B, 50, 8016. 
[73] Groeneveld, R. H. M., Sprik, R. & Lagendijk, A. (1995) “Femtosecond Spectroscopy of 
Electron-Electron and Electron-Phonon Energy Relaxation in Ag and Au”, Phys. Rev. 
B, 51, 11433. 
[74] Touloukian, Y. S. (1970) Thermophysical Properties of Matter 4: Specific heat: 
metallic elements and alloys (New York: IFI/Plenum). 
[75] Gray, D. E. (Ed.). American Institute of Physics Handbook, 3rd ed. (McGraw-Hill, 
New-York 1972). 
[76] Schäfer, C., Urbassek, H. M. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2002) “Metal Ablation by Picosecond 
Laser Pulses: A Hybrid Simulation”, Phys. Rev. B, 66, 115404. 
[77] Duff, W. H. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2007) “Computational Study of Cooling Rates and 
Recrystallization Kinetics in Short Pulse Laser Quenching of Metal Targets”, J. of 
Phys. : Conference Series, 59, 413. 
[78] Girardeau-Montaut, J. P., Afif, M., Girardeau-Montaut, C., Moustaizis, S. D. & 
Papadogiannis, N. (1996) “Aluminium Electron-Phonon Relaxation-Time Measurement 
from Subpicosecond Nonlinear Single-Photon Photoelectric Emission at 248 nm”, Appl. 
Phys. A, 62, 3. 
[79] Ivanov, D. S. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2004) “Combined Atomistic-Continuum Model for 
Simulation of Laser Interaction with Metals: Application to Calculation of Melting 
Thresholds in Ni Targets of Varying Thickness”, Appl. Phys. A, 79, 977. 
[80] Corkum, P. B., Brunel, F., Sherman, N. K. & Srinivasan-Rao, T. (1988) “Thermal 
Response of Metals to Ultrashort Laser Excitation”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 61, 2886. 
[81] Agranat, M. B., Anisimov, S. I., Ashitkova, S. I., Zhakhovskiia, V. V., Inogamov, N. 
A., Nishihara, K., Petrov, Yu. V., Fortov, V. E. & Khokhlov, V. A. (2007) “Dynamics 
of Plume and Crater Formation After Action of Femtosecond Laser Pulse”, Appl. Sur. 
Sci., 253, 6276. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
87
[82] Horn, A., Mingareev, I., Gottmann, J., Werth, A. & Brenk, U. (2008) “Dynamical 
Detection of Optical Phase Changes During Micro-Welding of Glass with Ultra-Short 
Laser Radiation”, Meas. Sci. Technol., 19, 015302. 
[83] Hohlfeld, J., Müller, J. G., Wellershoff, S. S. & Matthias, E. (1997) “Time-Resolved 
Thermoreflectivity of Thin Gold Films and its Dependence on Film Thickness”, Appl. 
Phys. A, 64, 387. 
[84] Hostetler, J. L., Smith, A. N. & Norris, P. M. (1998) "Simultaneous Measurement of 
Thermophysical and Mechanical Properties of Thin Films”, Int. J. Thermophys., 19, 
569. 
[85] Eesley, G. L. (1986) “Generation of Nonequilibrium Electron and Lattice Temperatures 
in Copper by Picosecond Laser Pulses”, Phys. Rev. B, 33, 2144. 
[86] Hostetler, J. L., Smith, A. N., Czajikowsky, D. M. & Norris, P. M. (1999) 
"Measurements of the Electron-Photon Coupling Factor Dependence on Film Thickness 
and Grain Size in Au, Cr, and Al.", Applied Optics, 38, 3614. 
[87] Hodak, J. H., Henglein, A. & Hartland, G. V. (2000) “Electron-Phonon Coupling 
Dynamics in Very Small (between 2 and 8 nm diameter) Au Nanoparticles”, J. Chem. 
Phys., 112, 5942. 
[88] Antaki, P. J. (2002) “Importance of Nonequilibrium Thermal Conductivity During 
Short-Pulse Laser-Induced Desorption From Metals”, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 45, 
4063. 
[89] Thomas, D. A., Lin, Z., Zhigilei, L. V., Gurevich, E. L., Kittel, S. & Hergenröder, R. 
(2009) “Atomistic Modeling of Femtosecond Laser-Induced Melting and Atomic 
Mixing in Au Film - Cu Substrate System”, Appl. Surf. Sci. in press. 
[90] Qiu, T. Q. & Tien, C. L. (1993) “Size Effects on Nonequilibrium Laser Heating of 
Metal Films”, J. Heat Transfer, 115, 842. 
[91] Chen, J. K., Beraun, J. E., Grimes, L. E. & Tzou, D. Y. (2002) “Modeling of 
Femtosecond Laser-Induced Nonequilibrium Deformation in Metal Films”, Int. J. 
Solids Struct., 39, 3199. 
[92] Turnbull, D. (1956) “Phase Changes”, Solid State Phys., 3, 225. 
[93] Kudryashov, S. I., and Emel'yanov, V. I. “Electron Gas Compression and Coulomb 
Explosion in the Surface Layer of a Conductor Heated by Femtosecond Laser Pulse”, 
JETP Lett. 73, 666 (2001). 
[94] Miotello, A. and Kelly, R. “Limit of Overheating and the Threshold Behavior in Laser 
Ablation”, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 69, S67 (1999). 
[95] Kelly, R. and Miotello, A. “Does Normal Boiling Exist Due to Laser-Pulse or Ion 
Bombardment?”, J. Appl. Phys. 87, 3177 (2000). 
[96] Bulgakova, N. M. and Bulgakov, A. V. “Pulsed Laser Ablation of Solids: Transition 
From Normal Vaporization to Phase Explosion”, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 
73, 199 (2001). 
[97] Vidal, F., Johnston, T.W., Laville, S., Barthe´lemy, O., Chaker, M., Le Drogoff, B., 
Margot, J., and Sabsabi, M. “Critical-Point Phase Separation in Laser Ablation of 
Conductors”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2573 (2001). 
[98] Sokolowski-Tinten, K., Bialkowski, J., Cavalleri, A., von der Linde, D., Oparin, A., 
Meyer-ter-Vehn, J., and Anisimov, S.I. “Transient States of Matter during Short Pulse 
Laser Ablation”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 224 (1998). 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
88
[99] Kluge, M. D., Ray, J. R. & Rahman, A. (1987) “Pulsed Laser Melting of Silicon: A 
Molecular Dynamics Study”, J. Chem. Phys., 87, 2336. 
[100] Jin, Z. H. & Lu, K. (1998) “Melting of Surface-Free Bulk Single Crystals”, Philos. 
Mag. Lett., 78, 29. 
[101] Häkkinen, H. & Landman, U. (1993) “Superheating, Melting, and Annealing of Copper 
Surfaces”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 71, 1023. 
[102] Abraham, F. F. & Broughton, J. Q. (1986) “Pulsed Melting of Silicon (111) and (100) 
Surfaces Simulated by Molecular Dynamics”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 56, 734. 
[103] Abraham, F. F., Schreiber, D. E., Mruzik, M. R. & Pound, G. M. (1976) “Phase 
Separation in Fluid Systems by Spinodal Decomposition: A Molecular-Dynamics 
Simulation”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 36, 261. 
[104] Blink, J. A. & Hoover, W. G. (1985) “Fragmentation of Suddenly Heated Liquids”, 
Phys. Rev. A, 32, 1027. 
[105] Ashurst, Wm. T. & Holian, B. L. (1999) “Droplet Formation by Rapid Expansion of a 
Liquid”, Phys. Rev. E, 59, 6742. 
[106] Zhigilei, L. V. & Garrison, B. J. (1999) “Pressure Waves in Microscopic Simulations of 
Laser Ablation”, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 538, 491. 
[107] Etcheverry, J. I. & Mesaros, M. (1999) “Molecular Dynamics Simulation of the 
Production of Acoustic Waves by Pulsed Laser Irradiation”, Phys. Rev. B, 60, 9430. 
[108] Herrmann, R. F. W., Gerlach, J. & Campbell, E. E. B. (1998) “Ultrashort Pulse Laser 
Ablation of Silicon: an MD Simulation Study”, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process, 66, 
35. 
[109] Zhigilei, L. V. & Garrison, B. J. (2000) “Microscopic Mechanisms of Laser Ablation of 
Organic Solids in the Thermal and Stress Confinement Irradiation Regimes”, J. Appl. 
Phys., 88, 1281. 
[110] Zhigilei, L. V. (2003) “Dynamics of the Plume Formation and Parameters of the 
Ejected Clusters in Short-Pulse Laser Ablation”, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process, 76, 
339. 
[111] Foiles, S. M., Baskes, M. I. & Daw, M. S. (1986) “Embedded -Atom-Method Functions 
for fcc Metals Cu, Ag, Au, Ni, Pd, Pt, and Their Alloys”, Phys. Rev. B, 33, 7983. 
[112] Zhou, X. W., Wadley, H. N. G., Johnson, R. A., Larson, D. J., Tabat, N., Cerezo, A., 
Petford-Long, A. K., Smith, G. D. W., Clifton, P. H., Martens, R. L. & Kelly, T. F. 
(2001) “Atomic Scale Structure of Sputtered Metal Multilayers”, Acta Mater, 49, 4005. 
[113] Lennard-Jones, J. E. & Devonshire, A. F. (1924) “On the Determination of Molecular 
Fields. II. From the Equation of State of a Gas”, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 106, 463. 
[114] Morris, J. R. & Song, X. (2002) “The Melting Lines of Model Systems Calculated from 
Coexistence Simulations", J. Chem. Phys., 116, 9352. 
[115] Smithell’s Metal Reference Book, 6th edition, E. A. Brandes, ed. London: Butterwoths, 
1983. 
[116] Ivanov, D. S. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2003) “Combined Atomistic-Continuum Modeling of 
Short-Pulse Laser Melting and Disintegration of Metal Films”, Phys. Rev. B, 68, 
064114. 
[117] Touloukian, Y. S. (1975) Thermophysical Properties of Matter 12: Thermal expansion: 
metallic elements and alloys (New York: IFI/Plenum). 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
89
[118] Berendsen, H. J. C., Postma, J. P. M., van Gunsteren, W. F., DiNola, A. & Haak, J. R. 
(1984) “Molecular Dynamics with Coupling to an External Bath”, J. Chem. Phys., 81, 
3684. 
[119] Ivanov, D. S. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2007) “Kinetic Limit of Heterogeneous Melting in 
Metals”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 98, 195701. 
[120] Wang, X. & Xu, X. (2001) “Thermoelastic Waves Induced by Pulsed Laser Heating”, 
Appl. Phys. A, 73, 107. 
[121] Preuss, S., Demchuk, A. & Stuke, M. (1995) “Sub-Picosecond Laser Ablation of 
Metals”, Appl. Phys. A, 61, 33. 
[122] Meshcheryakov, Y. P. & Bulgakova, N. M. (2005) “Thermoelastic Modeling of 
Microbump and Nanojet Formation on Nanosize Gold Films under Femtosecond Laser 
Irradiation”, Appl. Phys. A, 82, 363. 
[123] Burke, K., Werschnik, J. & Gross, E. K. U. (2005) “Time-Dependent Density 
Functional Theory: Past, Present, and Future”, J. Chem. Phys., 123, 062206. 
[124] Awazu, K., Wang, X., Fujimaki, M., Komatsubara, T., Ikeda, T. & Ohki, Y. (2006) 
“Structure of Latent Tracks in Rutile Single Crystal of Titanium Dioxide Induced by 
Swift Heavy Ions, J. Appl. Phys., 100, 044308. 
[125] Khalfaoui, N., Goerlich, M., Mueller, C., Schleberger, M. & Lebius, H. (2006) “Latent 
Tracks in CaF2 Studied with Atomic Force Microscopy in Air and in Vacuum”, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods B, 245, 2469. 
[126] El-Said, A. S., Cranney, M., Ishikawa, N., Iwase, A., Neumann, R., Schwartz, K., 
Toulemonde, M. & Trautmann, C. (2004) “Study of Heavy-Ion Induced Modications in 
BaF2 and LaF3 Single Crystals”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 218, 4927. 
[127] Mueller, A., Neumann, R., Schwartz, K. & Trautmann, C. (1998) “Scanning Force 
Microscopy of Heavy-Ion Tracks in Lithium Uoride”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 146, 
3938. 
[128] Lucchese, R. R. (1987) “Thermal spike model for heavy ion induced desorption from 
surfaces”, J. Chem. Phys., 86, 443. 
[129] Tucker, O. J., Ivanov, D. S., Johnson, R. E., Zhigilei, L. V. & Bringa, E. M. (2005) 
“Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Sputtering from a Cylindrical Track: EAM vs. Pair 
Potentials”, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B, 228, 163-169. 
[130] Seitz, F. & Koehler, J. (1956) “Displacement of Atoms During Irradiation Solid”, State 
Phys., 2, 305. 
[131] Toulemonde, M., Dufour, C. & Paumier, E. (1992) “Transient Thermal Process After a 
High-Energy Heavy-Ion Irradiation of Amorphous Metals and Semiconductors”, Phys. 
Rev. B, 46, 14362. 
[132] Meftah, A., Constantini, J. M., Khalfaoui, N., Boudjadar, S., Stoqert, J. P., Studer, F.  & 
Toulemonde, M. (2005) “Experimental Determination of Track Cross-Section in 
Gd3Ga5O12 and Comparison to the Inelastic Thermal-Spike Model Applied to Several 
Materials”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 237, 563. 
[133] Akcltekin, E., Peters, Th., Meyer, R., Duvenbeck, A., Klusmann, M., Monnet, I., 
Lebius, H. & Schleberger, M. (2007) “Creation of Multiple Nanodots by Single Ions”, 
Nat. Nanotechnol., 2, 2904. 
[134] Carvalho, A. M. J. F., Marinoni, M., Touboul, A. D., Guasch, C., Lebius, H., Ramonda, 
M., Bonnet, J. & Saign, F. (2007) “Discontinuous Ion Tracks on Silicon Oxide on 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
90
Silicon Surfaces After Grazing Angle Heavy Ion Irradiation”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 90, 
073116. 
[135] Lindhard, J. & Schar, M. (1961) “Energy Dissipation by Ions in the keV Region”, Phys. 
Rev., 124, 128. 
[136] Gonze, X., Beuken, J. M., Caracas, R., Detraux, F., Fuchs, M., Rignanese, G. M., 
Sindic, L., Verstraete, M., Zerah, G., Jollet, F., Torrent, M., Roy, A., Mikami, M., 
Ghosez, Ph., Raty, J. Y. & Allan, D. C. (2002) “First-Principles Computation of 
Material Properties: the ABINIT Software Project”, Comput. Mater. Sci., 25, 47892. 
[137] Fuchs, M. & Schefer, M. (1999) Comput. Phys. Commun., 119, 6798. 
[138] Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. (1996) “Generalized Gradient Approximation 
Made Simple”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 77, 3865. 
[139] Osmani, O., Duvenbeck, A., Akcoeltekin, E., Meyer, R., Lebius, H. & Schleberger, M. 
(2008) “Calculation of Electronic Stopping Power Along Glancing Swift Heavy Ion 
Tracks in Perovskites Using Ab-Initio Electron Density Data”, J. Phys.: Condens. 
Matter, 20, 315001. 
[140] Snoke, D. W., Ruehle, W. W., Lu, Y. C. & Bauser, E. (1992) “Evolution of a 
Nonthermal Electron energy Distribution in GaAs,” Phys. Rev. B, 45, 10979. 
[141] Binder, R., Koehler, H. S., Bonitz, M. & Kwong, N. (1997) “Green’s Function 
Description of Momentum-Orientation Relaxation of Photoexcited Electron Plasmas in 
Semiconductors,” Phys. Rev. B, 55, 5110. 
[142] Allen, P. B. (1987) “Theory of Thermal Relaxation of Electrons in Metals,” Phys. Rev. 
Lett., 59, 1460. 
[143] Ashcroft, N. & Mermin, N. (1976) Solid State Physics, Saunders College Publishing. 
[144] Epshtein, E. M. (1970) “Scattering of Electrons by Phonons in a Strong Radiation 
Field”, Sov. Phys. Solid State, 11, 2213. 
[145] Press, W. H. & Teukolsky, S. A. (1992) Numerical Recipes in C, Cambridge University 
Press, New York. 
[146] Grigorev, I. S. & Mejlikhov, E. Z. (1991) “Fizicheskie Velichini.” Moskau 
Energoatomizdat. 
[147] Ashcroft, N. W. & Wilkins, J. W. (1965) “Low Temperature Electronic Specific Heat 
of Simple Metals,” Physics Letters, 14, 285. 
[148] Fann, W. S., Storz, R., Tom, H. W. K. & Bokor, J. (1992) “Electron Thermalization in 
Gold,” Phys. Rev. B, 46, 13592. 
[149] Fann, W. S., Storz, R., Tom, H. W. K. & Bokor, J. (1992) “Direct Measurement of 
Nonequilibrium Electron-Energy Distribution in Subpicosecond Laser-Heated Gold 
Films,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 68, 2834. 
[150] Bejan, D. & Raseev, G. (1997) “Nonequilibrium Electron Distribution in Metals”, Phys. 
Rev. B, 55, 4250. 
[151] Rethfeld, B., Kaiser, A., Vicanek, M. & Simon, G. (1999) “Femtosecond Laser-Induced 
Heating of Electron Gas in Aluminium”, Appl. Phys. A, 69 [Suppl.], S109. 
[152] Groeneveld, R. H. M., Sprik, R. & Lagendijk, A. (1992) “Effect of a Nonthermal 
Electron Distribution on the Electron-Phonon Energy Relaxation Process in Noble 
Metals”, Phys. Rev. B, 45, 5079. 
[153] Groeneveld, R. H. M., Sprik, R. & Lagendijk, A. (1995) “Femtosecond Spectroscopy of 
Electron-Electron and Electron-Phonon Energy Relaxation in Ag and Au”, Phys. Rev. 
B, 51, 11433. 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
91
[154] Huang, S. M., Hong, M. H., Lukiyanchuk, B. & Chong, T. C. (2003) “Nanostructures 
Fabricated on Metal Surfaces Assisted by Laser with Optical Near-Field Effects”, Appl. 
Phys. A, 77, 293. 
[155] Lu, Y. & Chen, S. C. (2003) “Nanopatterning of a Silicon Surface by Near-Field 
Enhanced Laser Irradiation”, Nanotechnology, 14, 505. 
[156] Povarnitsyn, M. E., Itina, T. E., Khishchenko, K. V. & Levashov, P. R. (2007) “Multi-
Material Two-Temperature Model for Simulation of Ultra-Short Laser Ablation”, Appl. 
Sur. Sci., 253, 6343. 
[157] Bennett, T. D., Krajnovich, D. J. & Grigoropoulos, C. P. (1997) “Marangoni 
Mechanism in Pulsed Laser Texturing of Magnetic Disk Substrates”, J Heat Transfer, 
119, 589. 
[158] Lu, Y., Theppakuttai, S. & Chen, S. C. (2003) “Marangoni Effect in Nanosphere-
Enhanced Laser Nanopatterning of Silicon”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 4143. 
[159] Kingery, W. D. (1959) “Surface Tension of Some Liquid Oxides and Their 
Temperature Coefficients”, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 42, 6. 
[160] Sokolowski-Tinten, K., Blome, C., Blums, J., Cavalleri, A., Dietrich, C., Tarasevich, 
A., Uschmann, I., Förster, E., Kammler, M., Horn-von-Hoegen, M. & von der Linde, D. 
(2003) “Femtosecond X-ray Measurement of Coherent Lattice Vibrations near the 
Lindemann Stability Limit”, Nature, 422, 287. 
[161] Siwick, B. J., Dwyer, J. R., Jordan, R. E. & Miller, R. J. D. (2003) “An Atomic-Level 
View of Melting Using Femtosecond Electron Diffraction”, Science, 302, 1382. 
[162] Schwarz-Selinger, T., Cahill, D. G., Chen, S. C., Moon, S. J. & Grigoropoulos, C. P. 
(1999) “Micron-Scale Modifications of Si Surface Morphology by Pulsed-Laser 
Texturing, Phys. Rev. B, 64, 155323. 
[163] Willis, D. A. & Xu, X. (2000) “Transport Phenomena and Droplet Formation During 
Pulsed Laser Interaction With thin Films, J. Heat Transfer, 122, 763. 
[164] Valavala, P. K. & Odegard, G. M. (2005) “Modeling Techniques for Determination of 
Mechanical Properties of Polymers Nanocomposites”, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 9, 34. 
[165] Xu, X. & Liao, K. (2004) “Molecular and Continuum Mechanics Modeling of 
Graphene Deformation”, Mater. Phys. Mech., 4, 148. 
[166] Bohm, E., Bhatele, A., Kalé, L. V., Tuckerman, M. E., Kumar, S., Gunnels, J. A. & 
Martyna, G. J. (2008) “Fine-Grained Parallelization of the Car-Parrinello Ab Initio 
Molecular Dynamics Method on the IBM Blue Gene/L Supercomputer”, IBM J. Res. 
and Dev., 52, 159. 
[167] Zhou, X. W., Wadley, H. N. G., Johnson, R. A., Larson, D. J., Tabat, N., Cerezo, A., 
Petford-Long, A. K., Smith, G. D. W., Clifton, P. H., Martens, R. L. & Kelly, T. F. 
(2001) Atomic scale structure of sputtered metal multilayers, Acta Mater, 49, 4005. 
[168] Richardson, C. F. & Clancy, P. (1992) “Contribution of Thermal Conductivity to the 
Crystal-Regrowth Velocity of Embedded-Atom-Method-Modeled Metals and Metal 
Alloys”, Phys. Rev. B, 45, 12260. 
[169] Rafii-Tabar, H., Hua, L. & Cross, M. (1998) “A multi-scale numerical modelling of 
crack propagation in a 2D metallic plate”, J. of Comp.-Aided Mat. Design, 4, 165. 
[170] Kuchnickia, S. N., Radovitzky, R. A. & Cuitiño, A. M. (2008) “An Explicit 
Formulation for Multiscale Modeling of bcc Metals”, Int. J. Plasticity, 24, 2173. 
[171] Tang, Z. & Xu, J. (2006) “A Combined DEM/FEM Multiscale Method and Structure 
Failure Simulation under Laser Irradiation”, AIP Conf. Proc., 845, 363. 

D.S. Ivanov, O. Osmani and B. Rethfeld 
92
[172] Evans, D. J. (1983) “Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics via Gauss’s Principle of 
Least Constraint”, Phys. Rev. A, 28, 1016. 
[173] Amorusso, S., Bruzzese, R., Wang, X., Nediakov, N. N. & Atanasov, P. A. (2007) 
“Femtosecond Laser Ablation of nickel in Vacuum”, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 40, 331. 
[174] Landau, L. D. & Lifshitz, E. M. (1999) “Statistical Physics: Part I”, 3d ed., Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann. 
[175] Zhigilei, L. V. & Ivanov, D. S. (2005) “Channels of Energy Redistribution in Short-
Pulse Laser Interactions with Metal Targets”, Appl. Surf. Sci., 248, 433-439. 
[176] Landau, L. D. & Lifshitz, E. M. (1976) “Mechanics”, 3d ed., Oxford; New York: 
Pergamon Press. 
[177] Paltauf, G. & Dyer, P. E. (2003) “Photomechanical Processes and Effects in Ablation”, 
Chem. Rev., 103, 487. 
[178] Ivanov, D. S., Zhigilei, L. V., Bringa, E. M., De Koning, M., Remington, B. A., 
Caturla, M. J. & Pollaine, S. M. (2004) “Molecular Dynamic Simulations of Shocks 
Including Electronic Heat Conduction and Electron-Phonon Coupling”, Shock 
Compression of Condensed Matter 2003, AIP Conf. Proc., 706, 225. 
[179] Remington, B. A., Bazan, G., Belak, J., Bringa, E., Caturla, M., Colvin, J. D., Edwards, 
M. J., Glendinning, S. G., Ivanov, D. S., Kad, B., Kalantar, D. H., Kumar, M., Lasinski, 
B. F., Lorenz, K. T., McNaney, J. M., Meyerhofer, D. D., Meyers, M. A., Pollane, S. 
M., Rowley, D., Schneider, M., Stolken, J. S., Wark, J. S., Weber, S. V., Wolfer, W. G., 
Yaakobi, B. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2004) “Materials Science Under Extreme Conditions of 
Pressure and Strain Rate”, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 35, 2587. 
[180] Kadau, K., Germann, T. C. & Lomdahl, P. S. (2004) “Lasrge-Scale Molecular-
Dynamics simulation of 19 Billion Particles”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 15, 193. 
[181] Corkum, P. B., Brunel, F., Sherman, N. K. & Srinivasan-Rao, T. (1988) “Thermal 
Response of Metals to Ultrashort-Pulse Laser Excitation”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 61, 2886. 
[182] Ivanov, D. S., Rethfeld, B. C., O’Connor, G. M., Glynn, T. J., Volkov, A. N. & 
Zhigilei, L. V. (2008) “The Mechanism of Nanobump Formation in Femtosecond Pulse 
Laser Nanostructuring of Thin Metal Films”, Appl. Phys. A., 92, 791. 
[183] Ivanov, D. S., Rethfeld, B., O’Connor, G. M., Glynn, T. J., Lin, Z. & Zhigile, L. V. 
(2009) “Microstructure of a Nanobump Generated by Focused Laser Irradiation of a 
Metal Film”, in print J. Appl. Phys. 
[184] Ivanov, D. S., Rethfeld, B., Volkov, A. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2010) “The Mechanism of 
Microbump/Nanojet Formation due to Short Pulse Laser Surface Nanostructuring”, in 
preparation for Phys. Rev. B. 
[185] Lin, Z., Bringa, E. M., Leveugle, E. & Zhigilei, L. V. (2009) “Molecular Dynaimc 
Simulation of Laser Melting of Nanocrystalline Au”, in preparation. 
[186] Zhakhovskii, V. V., Inogamov, N. A., Petrov, Yu. V., Ashitkov, S. I. & Nishihara, K. 
(2009) “Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Femtosecond Ablation and Spallation with 
Different Interatomic Potentials”, in print Appl. Sur. Sci. 
[187] Ivanov, D. S., Rethfeld, B. C. & Kuznecov, A. (2009) “Direct Comparison of a Super 
Large Scale Modeling of Nanostructuring on Au Films with the Experiment”, in 
preparation. 
[188] Gottmann, J. & Wagner, R. (2006) “Sub-Wavelength Ripple Formation on Dielectric 
and Metallic Materials Induced by Tightly Focused Femto-Second Laser Radiation”, 
Proc. of SPIE, 6106, 61061R . 

Computer Modeling of Nanostructuring on Materials… 
93
[189] Drabble, J. R. & Goldsmid, H. J. (1961) “Thermal Consuction in Semiconductiors”, 
Pergammon Press, Oxford. 
[190] Young, J. F. & Driel, H. M. (1982) “Ambipolar Diffusion of High-Density electrons 
and holes in Ge, Si, and GaAs: Many-body Effect”, Phys. Rev. B, 26, 2147. 
[191] Chen, J. K., Tzou, D. Y. & Beraun, J. E. (2005) “Numerical Investigation of Ultrashort 
Laser Damage in Semiconductors”, Int. J. of Heat and Mass Transfer, 48, 501. 
[192] Rethfeld, B. (2006) “Free-Electron Generation in Laser-Irradiated Dielectrics”, Phys. 
Rev. B, 73, 035101. 
[193] Stillinger, F. & Weber, T. A. (1985) “Computer Simulation of Local Order in 
Condensed Phases of Silicon”, Phys. Rev. B, 31, 5262. 
[194] Lorazo, P., Lewis, L. J. & Meunier, M. (2006) “Thermodynamic Pathways to Melting, 
Ablation, and Solidification in Absorbing Solids under Pulsed Laser Irradiation”, Phys. 
Rev. B, 73, 134108. 
[195] Louie, S.G. (2001) "Ab Initio Study of Optical Excitations: Role of Electron-hole 
Interaction", in Conference Proceedings (no. 577), Density Functional Theory and Its 
Appl. to Materials, eds. V.E. Van Doren, K. Van Alsenoy, and P. Geerlings (American 
Institute of Physics, Melville, N.Y.,  151. 
[196] Kawamura, K. (1990) Proc. of the 13th Taniguchi Symp. Kashikojima, Japan 6-9, 88. 
[197] Katsumata, T., Inaguma, Y., Itoh, M. & Kawamura, K. (1998) “Molecular Dynamic 
Simulation in SrTiO3”, Sol. State Ionics, 108, 175. 
[198] Toukmaji, A. Y. & Poard, J. A. Jr. (1996) “Ewald Summation Techniques in 
Perspective: a Survey”, Comp. Phys. Comm., 95, 73. 
[199] Duan, Z. H. & Krasny, R. (2003) “A Treecode Algorithm for Computing Ewald 
Summation of Dipolar Systems”, Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing, 172. 
[200] Deserno, M. & Holm, C. (1998) “How to Mesh Up Ewald Sums (I): A Theoretical and 
Numerical Comparisons of Various Particle Mesh routines”, J. Chem. Phys., 109, 7678. 
[201] Deserno, M. & Holm, C. (1998) “How to Mesh Up Ewald Sums (II): An Accurate Error 
Estimate for the P3M Algorithm”, J. Chem. Phys., 109, 7694. 
 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 95-157  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
QUANTUM KINETICS OF MULTIPHOTON PROCESSES: 
DURATIONS OF ELEMENTARY PROCESSES, 
THRESHOLDS OF CHANNELS OPENING  
AND THEIR SATURATIONS  
 
 
Mark E. Perel'man*  
Racah Institute of Physics, Hebrew University, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Kinetics of interaction of powerful light (laser) flux with substance is examined 
within the frame of microscopic theory of multiphoton processes. It is usually supposed 
that with growth of radiation intensity its quantum characteristics "become averaged" and 
consequently their consideration within the scope of quasi-classical theory become 
allowable and sufficient, that leads to nonlinear theories with corresponding 
approximations and complications. However, the existence of thresholds of opening of 
new reaction channels, their saturation and so on requires quantum examination in the 
scope of linear theory, of quantum electrodynamics, which is less sophisticated in some 
aspects. 
The quantum kinetics of photon flux interaction with substance demands definition 
of durations of elementary scattering acts and durations of formation of physical states as 
a result of such interaction, thus it requires the appeal to quantum electrodynamics and 
scattering theory. Therefore the general positions of the theory of durations (theory of 
temporal functions) are briefly considered and the general theory of multiphoton 
processes on this base is constructed. Then processes of higher harmonics generation and 
transformations of spectra, multiphoton ionization, multiphoton acceleration of charged 
particles, pressure of light on absorbing and transparent objects (they are needed for 
planning of thermonuclear reactions), some features of light reflection are considered. All 
this visually shows the significance and, simultaneously, the simplicity of used 
microscopic quantum approach, its perspectives. 
The base of offered approach consists in the temporal consideration of interactions 
and applications of temporal functions, which are rarely yet used. Therefore in the 
                                                           
* .Corresponding author. E-mails: m.e.perelman@gmail.com; mark_perelman@mail.ru. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
96 
Appendix is shown that these functions allow simple approach and proving of many 
kinetic relations and characteristics in several branches of physics including general 
determination of condensed states and some features of phase transitions. This part has, 
presumably, a methodological character, but opens a new vision or alternative approach 
to several known kinetics phenomena. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Basic calculations in the laser theory and, more generally, in quantum optics and in the 
theory of multiphoton processes are usually executed in the quasiclassical frames. Such 
approaches are very effective, but in this course can be missed valuable details (let‘s 
remember the famous maxim of Albert Einstein: ―Things should be as simple as possible, but 
not simpler‖). The used assumptions of sufficiency of quasiclassical description can represent 
an excessive simplification, and therefore a support of many positions or even the 
reconsideration of them by methods of quantum electrodynamics is very desirable or even 
necessary. 
Quantum electrodynamics (QED) examines, as a rule, processes with two particles in an 
initial state. From here, apparently, had been appeared a conviction that processes with big 
numbers of initial particles are the following terms of a general decomposition of S-matrix 
over parameter of interaction α = 1/137. Therewith, a direct calculation, for example, of the 
higher harmonics generation with matrix element containing 
 is seemed senseless. 
Probably therefore multiphoton processes (MPPs) are examined as the extremely nonlinear 
effects that are demanding the description by averaged functions such as nonlinear 
susceptibilities (e.g., the general reviews with the detailed bibliography [1,2]). 
So for the description, for example, of process                 the matrix 
element of (   )-order is the basic one; but it is not the N-term of S-matrix perturbative 
decomposition (perturbative decompositions lead to appearance of additional internal lines in 
the Feynman graphs only). With taking into account the fluxes density of incident particles, 
i.e. at the correct transition to limits of the quantization volumes, the smallness of constants of 
interaction will be compensable by other factors [3]. Among these factors the most physically 
interesting was the automatic appearance of the delays time of scattering process at 
summation of an infinite S-matrix series that determine the radius of convergence and 
therefore the thresholds of new channels of MPPs reactions. 
All this shows an opportunity of the consideration of MPPs in the frameworks of QED 
with the strict observance of all its instructions. The analysis of received results can be carried 
out most simply and physically evidently, in our opinion, with taking into account the 
conception of duration of interaction, which should be included into general field theory. 
Temporal characteristics of process of scattering should contain, as minimum in 
principle, two types of magnitudes: duration of a delay of colliding particles during their 
interaction (their temporal virtual joining) and duration of formation (dressing) of products of 
reaction. Formation of dressed (physical) state can require also an account of durations of 
establishment of other parameters: the momentum at ionization, etc. Their research has an 
uneasy history: in the beginning of development of quantum theory McColl had shown that 
the calculation of duration of tunnel transition leads to negative values [4]. Therefore during 
long time was factually postulated that any estimations of temporal characteristics, besides 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
97
the uncertainty principles, are practically not necessary or even impossible. Moreover, in the 
MPPs theory is usually implied that all N photons at process of higher harmonics generation 
are absorbed within one-stage interaction, instantaneously, that completely contradicts the 
paradigm of QED.  
This problem must be investigated on the base of field theory. And the offered approach 
must be reinforced via revealing of real presence of temporal parameters in others, even 
common theories (these problems are considered in the Appendix). 
The first appearing of this problem must be connected with the famous article of Frank 
[5], where in the theory of Ĉerenkov radiation is introduced the notion of path length (or 
duration), necessary for a gradual formation of real photon by "a superluminal in media" 
electron. Without such concept the discrete character of this emission was incomprehensible, 
and Frank had been forced to estimate the interference picture of continuously emitted 
(virtual) waves that can lead to the real emission of single photons in resonance conditions. 
However this theory had been remaining without further researches and developments 
onto many years. The first, as far as I know, quantum investigation in this direction has been 
executed and published by Moshinsky [6]. He had calculated, through the non-stationary 
Schrödinger equation, the time duration needed for establishment of the definite state of 
electron after its transition onto upper level with some damped oscillations ("temporary 
diffraction"), i.e. the duration of resulted state formation. 
 The first (semi-qualitative) consideration of time delay in processes of tunneling had 
been performed, as far as I know, by Bohm [7]. Then Ter-Mikaelyan and Landau and 
Pomeranchuk [8] had considered the duration of photon formation in the theory of 
bremsstrahlung: it is the time duration needed for formation of virtual coat around particle, its 
dressing. 
The more constructive and physically more transparent approach to magnitude of time 
delay under an elastic scattering was introduced by Wigner [9] through the partial phase 
shifts,              and generalized by Smith [10] via  -matrix as 
 
 
         
 
                
(1.1) 
 
Next Goldberger and Watson had deduced on the base of (1.1) a "coarse-grain" 
Schrödinger equation which shown the generality of this definition [11]. But at their approach 
the magnitude (1.1) had been however introduced artificially, by the serial decomposition of 
Fourier transformed response function      of linear relation, 
 
                                                                              (1.2) 
 
or its logarithm near the selected frequency without discussion of its imaginary part, higher 
terms and dependence on spatial variables. 
Another approach, which seems at first glance to be distinguished from the Wigner-Smith 
one, was suggested by Baz' [12] for consideration of nonrelativistic tunneling processes: to a 
scattering particle is attributed magnetic moment and its rotation within the scattering process 
is analyzed (the method of "Larmor clocks"). 

Mark E. Perel'man  
98 
Another problem is connected with the definite duration of state formation ("dressing") 
expressed as 
 
                                                                                        (1.3) 
 
As far as I know, the similar expression for τ2 was introduced, for the first time, by Pollak 
and Miller [13] and was interpreted as the duration of tunneling process. (Note that the 
duration of particle formatting can be calculated by dynamical considerations, it presents the 
special direction in the high energy physics, cf. the review [14].) 
After these initial investigations a number of various definitions of duration of scattering 
processes and interaction were offered, different determinations of duration of interactions are 
introduced, e.g. the reviews collected in [15]. 
Our purpose in the series of papers, generally reviewed in [16], was to reveal that 
functions describing duration of scattering processes and formation of new states are present 
in already existing theories: if these concepts reflect essential features of a reality they should 
be found in the theories, which adequately describe several experiments. (Just with this aim 
the simplest well-known expressions are considered in the Appendix.) 
On the other hand, however, it is necessary to show that the direct use of temporal 
functions at analyses, at least, of some processes has practical and not only a gnostic sense. 
On their basis the theory of optical dispersion had been established [17], the features of 
frustrated total internal reflections [18] and singularities of so named left-handed materials 
[19] are explained. The notion of temporal functions allows consideration of phase transitions 
by analogy with radiative quantum transition, including MPPs, and their thresholds; it leads to 
the theory of critical indices [20] and predicts characteristic radiation of latent energy, 
existence of which is experimentally proven ([21] and references therein). 
Among other possibilities the opportunity of the "nonlocality in the small", i.e. 
instantaneous tunneling jumps of excitations within the scope of near field, has been shown 
[22]. As it is proven, the superluminal transfer of excitations (jumps) through a linear passive 
substance can be affected by nothing but by the instantaneous tunneling of virtual particles. 
The tunneling distance       is expressed via the deficiency in the energy relative to the 
nearest stable (resonance) state       as the relation of uncertainty type:         the 
nonlocality of the electromagnetic field must be described by the 4-potential   , whereas the 
fields E and B remain unconnected to the near field.  
Nevertheless the existence of two independent expressions (1.1) and (1.3) even logically 
seems unsatisfactory: delay at scattering and duration of formation should be in some way or 
other interrelating. Formally they can be combined as                      
            , which appears as an equivalent of the equation  
 
                                                                                            (1.4) 
 
as though it is the analog or reciprocal form of the Schrödinger equation for S-matrix, 
rewritten via the Legendre transformation of     type and with a "temporal" operator 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
99
        instead the Hamiltonia [18]. Just this equation is the basic one in the microscopic 
theory of MPPs. 
 The general overview of the theory of temporal functions is given in the Section 2. These 
general expressions will be needed at the QED approach to the general theory of MPPs in the 
Section 3. 
The Section 4 is devoted to the detailed calculations of stimulated radiation in two-level 
systems [3]. These calculations allow to revealing the most general sense of MPP in the scope 
of QED, including an appearance of singularities of reaction rates and thresholds of new 
processes as functions of flux power. In the Sections 5 and 6 the main MPPs on single atoms 
and free electrons, the higher harmonics generation (HHG) and multiphoton ionization (MPI), 
are considered. In the Section 7 are briefly considered possibilities of laser acceleration of 
single charged particles, but since such phenomena are really realizable in plasma, here are 
described elementary acts only. The Section 8 is devoted to problems of radiation pressure at 
absorption and on transparent surfaces; this last problem has a long and casuistic history and 
now is more demanded in connection with perspectives of laser inducing compression for 
realization of thermonuclear reactions. In the Section 9 some problems connected with light 
reflection are described. 
    As our approach is based on the temporal notions and they are not yet common known 
and/or are rarely used, in the Appendix is shown that several different physical laws and 
expressions can be considered and simply prove with the use of temporal notions. It can give 
new possibilities of their interpretations and understanding. 
   It must be noted that the basic content of Sections 4 - 6 corresponds to [17] with some 
corrections and additions. The results and some perspectives are summed in the Conclusions. 
 
 
2. PHOTON GREEN FUNCTIONS AND DURATIONS 
 
Temporal functions are introducing in general form via the response functions or matrix 
elements of scattering processes as transfer functions in the frequency‘s representation, 
                    , other variables are omitted: 
)
(
S
ln
)
id
/
d
(
i
)
(
2
1









.                                             (2.1) 
In this expression   







d
/
d
)
(
Re
1
 and 
)
(
ln
)
/
(
)
(
Im
)
(
2






S
d
d


                 (2.2) 
that describe, correspondingly, the delay duration at the scattering process via the variation of 
response phase and the duration of outgoing particle formation (its "dressing" or "redress") 
via the amplitude alteration. 
As the simplest illustrative examples of temporal functions, the propagators in the nearest 
order in the (ω, k) representation could be considered. So the causal photon‘s propagator of 
the lowest order in the Feynman gauge,                        
 
   leads to the 
temporal functions: 

Mark E. Perel'man  
100 
                                         
                                         .                      (2.3) 
The time delay τ1 is non-zero for real photons only (         ) and for the static 
Coulomb field (     ). The duration of dressing τ 2 is finite for virtual photons 
with          , it‘s negative sign at          corresponds to tunneling processes (the case 
of anomalous dispersion as example).  
 The interpretation of temporal functions can be achieved also by the presentation of 
temporal functions (2.3) in  -space via the Green functions of Klein-Gordon equation: 

)
(
)
(
)
(
1
x
D
x
D
i
x
adv
ret
t




;  

)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
x
D
x
D
i
x
t






              (2.4) 
These relations present the delay duration at scattering process as the jointed decay of 
retarded and generation of advanced waves or vice versa in the light cone limits. But the 
duration of formation (dressing) shows that the physical particle formation requires waves 
with different signs of energy, i.e. vacuum fluctuations including out-of-cone ones are take 
part in them, therefore superluminal effects in these processes cannot be excluded. (These 
examinations are shown, in particular, that superluminal phenomena should be present and, in 
principle, may be observed at all scattering processes, not only in the QED.)   
 Temporal functions allow certain specification of properties of the basic singular 
functions of field theory. Let us determine their corresponding temporal functions in the 
      representation          below): 
                                                                                  (2.5) 
                                                                                         (2.6)   
                                                                                                  (2.7) 
The representations (2.5) demonstrate that propagators of ―dressed‖ photons can be 
considered classically: they describe passage of photons without any reformations. 
 The representations (2.6) show that commutations of field intensities described by the 
Pauli-Jordan function are connected with their formation or reformations without delay. The 
Coulomb field is infinitely in the undressed state and therefore the term   
   leading to the 
Coulomb pole in (2.6) must be subtracted. The subtraction can be performed with the 
decomposition of cotangent:





1
2
2
2
)
/(
1
2
/
1
)
cot(
n
x
x
x
x

. It leads to the 
renormalized expression for (2.6):  





1
2
2
2
2
)
(
2
)
/(
1
2
)
,
(
n
r
r
r
renorm






,                                  (2.8) 
which shows that the first pole of (2.6) is at the point     . Therefore it can be taken that 
the formation path for photon is of the order 
2
/
/
~




l
.                                                             (2.9) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
101 
 As this process is instantaneous, it corresponds to the jump of photon at the act of 
formation on the distance /2 (cf. [23], where this estimation is proven by the covariant 
dispersion relations). Really it means impossibility of gradual photons formation that 
completely corresponds to quantum paradigm. 
As must be underlined, (2.9) and (2.3) strictly correspond to duration of Ĉerenkov photon 
formation that justifies results of classical approach to this phenomenon. 
For analysis of near field the usual decomposition can be written out (e.g. [23], compare 
[24,25], certain problems of near field are considered in [26]):  
)
,
(
)
(
1
)
cot(
)
(
)
,
(
2
r
D
P
r
r
P
r
i
e
e
r
D
ij
ij
j
i
ij
ij


















         (2.10) 
with directing           and the tensor                . Three terms of (2.10) are related, 
correspondingly, to far, intermediate and near fields. The Sommerfeld condition of radiation, 
                       
at r, selects within these terms the far field only. 
Near field part corresponds to the function entered by Schwinger in [27]: 
)
sin(
)
2
/
1(
)
,
(
3
2
r
r
r
DN






.                                                  (2.11) 
Corresponding duration, 










)
cot(
2
,
|
r
r
i
r
DN





,                                                (2.12) 
shows that formation of near field requires duration 4-times bigger the uncertainty value in 
addition to (2.12). Therefore this value can be measurable. 
Note that intermediate and near fields have space-like parts, corresponding instantaneous 
jumps (2.9), the singular function (2.11) describes connection of atoms in near field and 
transferring of excitations that can be instantaneous [23]. 
It can be noted that the spontaneous breaking of symmetry that leads to phase transitions 
of the first kind into more ordered states, at least, is executed by emission of photons [21], .e. 
it corresponds to the Higgs mode. 
Electromagnetic interactions in media can be examined via the dielectric susceptibility:  


2
2
0
2
1
2
1
)
2
/
(
/)
,
(
)
,
;
(








i
i
r
r
f
r
r




                                        (2.13) 
(we consider for brevity the two-level system only), which can be considered as the response 
function and for which temporal functions can be expressed just as above, but in the (ω-r) 
representation. Thus the logarithmic derivative of (2.13) leads to 

Mark E. Perel'man  
102 
        
4
/
)
(
2
/
)
(
2
2
0
1









;       
4
/
)
(
)
(
2
2
0
0
2











.               (2.14) 
These forms will be used below. 
Although several different possibilities for establishment of temporal functions had been 
considered in [18], it seems that the most short and the closest one to canonical theory follow 
the Ward identity. 
Let‘s consider the simplest Ward-Takahashi identity: 
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
(
1
1
q
G
p
G
k
q
p
k






,                                               (2.15) 
where  is the vertex part and G(p) is the causal propagator. At q p its right part can be 
transformed as 







k
iG
G
k
i
k
iG
G
k
k
1
1
1
ln











,                           (2.16) 
i.e. can be rewritten via the covariant temporal function, corresponding to 4D generalization 
of (2.1) and (1.4) as  


S
i
ln
/






    and       
S
k
i
S


ˆ
/



,                             (2.17) 
where 
)
,
( 




 is the 4D temporal-spatial function. 
The corresponding operator 

ˆ  is canonically conjugated with the operator of energy-
momentum. So, evidently, 
1
]
ˆ
,ˆ
[

H
i 
                                                                       (2.18)  
and the executing of this obligatory condition underlines the uniqueness of considered 
operator: it has not place with another artificially introduced duration operators [16]. Note 
that both operators in (2.18) describe interactions with another objects and with vacuum 
fluctuations, hence they must act onto S-matrix. 
 Thus, with these substitutions the Ward-Takahashi identity can be rewritten as 
)
,'
,
(
)
(
)
(
k
p
p
k
p
iG
p
k






                                          (2.19) 
that at 
0


k
 leads to the main definition: 
)
,
(
)
(
)
(
p
q
p
p
iG
p






                                                (2.20) 
(it can be deduced directly from the Ward identity, but the used way visually shows that the 
strong equality k = 0 is not necessary). 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
103 
Physical sense of duration operator can be précised by the QED representation 
)
,
(
)
,
(
q
p
q
p








 with the Ward identity


p
p
p
p





/)
(
)
,
(
, where (p) 
is the mass operator: 
 







p
p
p
iG





/)
(
)
(
.                                                      (2.20‘) 
     Thus, the durations of scattering process are connected with reorganization of scatterer and 
with formation of emitted particle. On the other hand (2.20) is close to the expression of 
current                 , i.e. each measurement corresponds to the addition of zero 
energy vertex to corresponding line of the Feynman graph, that justifies the ―Larmor clocks‖ 
method [13]. 
The structure of (2.20) shows possibilities of its generalization by the standard 
substitutions 
ieA
p
p


 with further decomposition over degrees of charge, etc.  
Let us consider the principal significance of locality features corresponding to (2.20). The 
component     describes temporal properties of interaction, other components are related 
with its spatial lengths, but they can be expressed via the temporal functions and group 
velocity:  
v
E
p
E
p
G
E
i
p
G
p
i




)
(
)
(
ln
)
(
ln












.                                 (2.21) 
Analogically, for particle of spin ½ from (2.20) follows: 






)
(
)
,
(
)
(
E
p
q
p
p
iG





.                                                   (2.22) 
     These expressions allow to writing the covariant representation: 


2
2
2
2
/
1
)
(
c
v
E



,                                                  (2.23) 
i.e.  is the 4-vector of proper duration (cf. [28]). 
 
 
3. OVERVIEW OF GENERAL THEORY 
 
Let's consider interaction of   photons with electron, free or bound: 
 
γ(ω , k ) + ... + γ(ωn, kn) + e(E,p) → e(E′,p′) + γ(ω ′,k ′) + ... + γ(ωm′,km′).              (3.1) 
 
In 
the 
lowest 
order 
this 
process 
is 
described 
by 
the 
standard 
matrix 
element:                           
              
                                                                                

Mark E. Perel'man  
104 
For processes on a bound (atomic) electron its propagator in the Furry representation can 
be taken in the Low form [29] as 
 
         
 
      
 
            
 ω
 
  
     ω         
     ω                                 (3.3) 
 
external electromagnetic field can be quantized in the volume   in the plane wave 
representation: 
       
      
  ω    
 
             ω      ,                                          (3.4) 
where R is the radius-vector of the center of atom. 
     After integration over all time variables 
 
                
 δ  ω            ,                                 (3.5) 
 
where 
 
                
    
       
                      
  ω   
 
 
            
′   λ 
  ω            
 ω          
  λ
     
   
,     
                     
(3.6) 
at photons absorption and emission ωq ≷ 0, the standard designations of partial matrix 
elements are used, the factorials corresponding to permutations of identical particles are 
grouped in the     . 
The reaction rate is determined as 
 
                  
   
      
   
 ,                                              (3.7) 
 
dNi is the number of incident photons of type i in the energy interval (ωi, dωi), the matrix 
element is averaged over polarization of initial photons and summed over polarizations of 
outlet photons interacting with single electron: 
 
        
     
                   γν   .                                          (3.8) 
 
At calculation of processes with two-particle initial states, it is possible to omit V in (3.7) 
by the known procedures, however in general case the situation is more complicated. The 
transition V →   is performed for outlet and incident photons, respectively, as 
 
 
  
   
                    
   
        ω      .                                                    (3.9) 
For unidirectional monochromatic laser flux of photons density ρ the last distribution is 
simplified, 
      ω    ρ δ      ,                                                                 (3.10) 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
105 
but can be generalized for the case of some fluxes with different frequencies and directions, in 
thermal field it would be expressed via the Planck distribution and so on. 
If the interference between levels in (3.6) can be neglected, all integrations over angles in 
(3.8), except transitions into the continuous spectrum, can be executed: 
 
       γμ     λ             ω λ.                                          (3.11) 
 
The integration over frequencies can be executed by (3.10) and/or by the Lorentz profiles 
in the square of expression (3.6). 
For the reactions in the continuous flux, where number of interacting photons is not fixed, 
the complete reaction rate can be determined, after all integrations, as 
 
      
    
 
     
    
 
 
ρ ,                                                         (3.12) 
 
i.e. as the virial decomposition over the photons density        in vacuum. 
At calculation of (3.12) the question of convergence of these series appears. The radius of 
convergence determines saturation of corresponding process and an opportunity of opening of 
new channels of reactions. Notice that the presence of thresholds on number of particles is the 
feature of the MPPs theory; in nuclear physics, for example, thresholds are determined by the 
energy of single incident particle. 
Some basic features of MPPs can be revealed at consideration of such example. 
Let's consider the most usual MPP of type 
 
γ ω       γ ω        .                                                        (3.13) 
 
As the main graph of the process is one-connected, its matrix element 
 
   
      
  
 
   
     μ          μ           ,                             (3.14) 
 
where  in(p ) is the wave function of initial state of scatterer, bound or free, M is the matrix 
element of decay of excited intermediate state into the final state: A∗ → B + C. 
     In the low frequencies limit ( ω/mc  << 1,  λ/r >>1) it can be taken in the accordance with 
(1.4) that 
 
 μ            μ                 ξμ   ,                                      (3.15) 
 
i.e. the temporal function can be naturally introduced. In our limit            . Hence each 
absorbed photon introduces into reaction rate the factor: 
 
    
 ω  μ μ            νξν  ω  
  
 ω  ′τ,                                                (3.16) 
 

Mark E. Perel'man  
106 
where M′ corresponds to the matrix element of elastic e-γ scattering and in the considered 
limit for it the classical Thompson amplitude r = e²/mc² can be taken. For nonpolarized 
photons, in accordance with the optical theorem of QED, 4 r /2ω = cσtot. 
It shows that the reaction rate represents the series over 
 
     ω   σ   τ  ω ,                                                      (3.17) 
 
and therefore clears up the physical sense of (3.12): the magnitude of j  =1/σtotτ  represents 
the saturation value of photon flux. 
 Thus suggested theory can be characterized as the  -matrix decomposition over the 
parameter (    ) and can be comparing with other ones. 
 In the early period of MPPs investigations the processes of MPI were modeled in the 
quasiclassic theory by consideration of electron liberation from the potential well of depth   
in the field E         . These calculations are leading to the famous Keldysh adiabatic 
parameter [30]: 
ξ 
    ω          .                                            (3.18) 
In the scope of QED this parameter can be rewritten as   

2  j0
(N) / j   j tot 0(N), 
where 0(N)  12N corresponds to the uncertainty principle. Such representation shows that 
these theories propose the simultaneous absorption of N photons, without any spans between 
elementary acts. Such conjecture can be justified in the definite cases, but can not be the 
universal one.  
At the further investigations (e.g. [31], and references therein) this parameter was slightly 
generalized by including the complete absorbed energy        : 
 
ξ 
    ω                                                                                                                       
where Up is the ponderomotive potential. 
The introduction of a free electron's intensity parameter [32] as 
 
                  σ                                                             (3.20) 
 
supposes that the duration of process is determined by the Compton time τC = /mc². This 
conjecture seems very artificial one and must be proven for concrete processes.     
It must be concluded that none of these parameters take into account the momentum 
acquisition at MPI. Therefore, they can be suitable, in principle, for the HHG examination, 
but not to distinguishing between HHG and MPI at all. These parameters, as may be added, 
do not contain the characteristics of scatterers and it complicates the consideration of such 
phenomenon as atomic stabilization. (Some other parameters are considered in [33].) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
107 
The non obvious proposition of simultaneousness permits to use the usual one-time             
Schrödinger equation with the Hamiltonian of interaction        instead of        . The 
transition from one form to another can be carried by the unitary transformation  
                                  , 
if   does not depend on the spatial variables, but it is known that these forms are not 
equivalent, for example, in the calculations of photonuclear reactions [34], which are formally 
similar to MPPs, and it can be connected just with duration of these reactions: as this 
transformation is non local, it can not be so produced for time and spatial extended process. 
Hence if MPPs are determined by the sequential photons absorption, they must be calculated 
via   .   
Let's define for further examinations the conditions at which the atom can be considered 
as an isolated object relative to MPP. The volume, in which occurs single non-resonant e-γ 
interaction, can be determined as 
 
     σ  τ        ω                                                                 (3.21) 
 
Process can be examined as happening on the isolated atom, if the density ρa [atoms/cm³] 
of considered substance (or, more precisely, the density of upper electrons) is those, that 
 
ρ                                                                                       (3.22) 
 
This condition can be rewritten in a more simply and physically evident form through the 
plasma frequency as 
ω  ω   
                                                                    (3.23) 
Thus, the execution of MPPs should go faster than excitation of plasma waves and 
transferring of energy into collective oscillations. 
 
    
4.  STIMULATED RADIATION 
 
    The notion of stimulated (induced) radiation appears at consideration of resonant 
processes: 
 
        
∗                   
                                           (4.1) 
 
at ω  = E   E . 
Its probability is defined in the resonance field of intensity            by the 
Einstein coefficients [35] as 
 
W = A + Bj(ω ).                                                                         (4.2) 

Mark E. Perel'man  
108 
 
The linear dependence on photons intensity can be generalized onto more complicated 
processes (cf. [36]). So, the consideration of processes in an intensive monochromatic field 
requires an account of possibilities of additional absorption-reemission of photons: 
 
         
∗                                                         
 (4.3) 
 
Its probability must be examined in a more general form comparable with (2.13): 
 
       
 
             ,                                  (4.4)                      
 
i.e. in the form of "virial" series with Bn as functions of parameters of scatterers considered 
for simplicity as two-level systems. 
    Such representation, if it would be summed, can lead to the radius of convergence for 
processes of stimulated radiation, to their saturation and to thresholds of another processes. 
Let's consider its deduction in some details. 
    The amplitude of transition (4.3) can be written in the form of clusters decomposition 
as 
 
                ∗      
        
       
 
 
                ∗             , 
(4.5) 
 
where Qn  corresponds to the density of states, initial and final, i.e. is determined via densities 
of incident photons. By taken into account its further squaring 
 
     
        
   
 
 
 
   
        
   
 
 ,                                                     (4.6) 
where ρi(k) is the density of photons of type i, in the monochromatic coherent flux ρi(k) = 
ρδ(kk ). 
At             all diagrams of (4.5) with nonresonant factors instead of resonant 
ones and all S-matrix terms with   
  in the Hamiltonian can be omitted. With these 
approximations the reaction rate with     gives 
 
     
   
     
 
                                                                       (4.7) 
 
For     with only resonant terms taken into account the partial reaction rate 
 
                                                                         
 (4.7′) 
 
and the complete reaction rate is summed at j < j  via the higher hypergeometric function: 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
109 
   
      
 
 
                            
    
              
              (4.8) 
here the designation 
 
   
  
                        
 
                                               (4.9) 
 
is introduced. (To simplify the writing, here and below we omit factors arising from 
averaging over the initial polarizations and summing over the final polarizations.) 
The expression of j  via the cross-section of elastic scattering σel and the duration of time 
delay at this process τ  (cf. (1.2)) evidently visualizes the physical sense of the non-removable 
pole of reaction rate: this flux density corresponds to the saturation of induced radiation and, 
as can be demonstrated, the possibility of opening of new channel, the higher harmonics 
generation. 
The most interesting physical result consists here in the natural appearance of temporal 
characteristic of scattering process, which is usually introduced in the theory ad hoc, by hands 
only. 
      Thus the parameter of multiphoton reaction rates decomposition must be of the order 
(j/j ), i.e. must contain temporal characteristics of interactions (further decomposition of each 
partial matrix element goes, naturally, over degrees of      ). These results are deduced in 
[3, 37] by another method also, there is considered also stimulated radiation at irradiation in 
restricted time and so on. 
Threshold of the beginning of induced radiation at the strictly resonant irradiation of 
excited gas is enough low. So, at ω  = 1015 and   = 108 it is received that 
 
                  
                    
 
Therefore these phenomena could be in part investigated up to the invention of lasers. 
Our consideration, certainly, is much idealized: it is assumed that values of j are 
independent of time, i.e. their fluctuations are small on time intervals τ  1/ω , when the 
electron can be considered as virtual. If the distance between inlet photons is more cτ , the 
matrix element is splitted onto product of independent multipliers. 
The formal requirement to uniformity and intensity of radiation flux can be expressed as 
the condition: 
 
 
      
  
 
          
                                            (4.10) 
 
Now we shall consider the parameters of levels, their widths and shifts in the field. In the 
asymptotically weak field these magnitudes are described, in accordance with Low, as 
 
            
  
     
  
  
              
        
                   
 
 
           (4.11) 

Mark E. Perel'man  
110 
 
External field can be taken into account by the substitution:            , at which 
the nominator of (4.11) receives additive terms that in the dipole approximation are of the 
type of              and its square. Therefore the widths of levels and their shifts 
become to 
 
       
        
 
   
    
 
 
 
       
         
                                               (4.12) 
 
Note that in the high frequencies field (4.12) correspond to so-called theorem of squares: 
 
           
 
 
   
                                          (4.13) 
 
that naturally leads to Δ   j1/2. 
In the two-level system           in an intensive field usually, and therefore the 
half-width of level can be replaced by the Raby frequency         . In a more general 
case it can be taken that              and near to the resonance (       ) such 
substitution is possible: 
 
   
   
           
 
         
 .                                                      (4.14) 
     It shows that atomic electrons in the intensive field must be in continuous beatings with 
frequency 1/τ  between levels, i.e. in the sequential absorption-reemission processes. This 
result completely coincides with the quantum mechanical calculation [38]. But our 
consideration shows that such beatings take place at       only, higher fields must be 
examined additionally. 
Let us consider now the dependence of level parameters on flux intensity via the 
substitution of (4.9) into (4.8) that can be rewritten at       in the Lorentz form: 
 
                                                           
 (4.15) 
with nonresonant factor A =  σres  (Δω  +   /4)/(Δω + δω)  and with shifts of effective levels 
and width: 
 
                
           
       
        
  
  
  
              
                             (4.16) 
 
These expressions demonstrate that reemission processes lead to the renormalization of 
parameters of electron levels. At the strict resonance                       

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
111 
and                     , which show, in comparison with (4.12), that the functional 
forms are changing directly at the resonance. 
Now we will consider processes of higher field intensity, at j > j . 
As it can be showing, each (nonresonant) act of absorption-reemission adds to (4.8) the 
multiplier 
 
       
    
  
 
                 
 
  
  
     .                              /        (4.17) 
 
So, if between two resonant transitions appears   nonresonant transitions of the same 
frequency, the radius of convergence will be increased on the factor of (4.17) in the degree   . 
Therefore it seems that the convergence of this new reaction rate is possible if the expression 
(4.17) is not bigger than one, i.e. the radius of convergence with taken into account 
nonresonant scatterings would be 
 
                                                                 
 (4.18) 
 
This magnitude is so big (in the optical range           that if only these processes 
played a role, stimulated radiation would be possible at all practically achievable intensities. 
But on the other hand an intensity of irradiation should be lower than the threshold of 
harmonics generation. At the absence of any additional levels of system, harmonics can arise 
in the non-resonant way if the distance between consistently suitable quanta is lesser     , i.e. 
if 
 
                                                                    (4.19) 
 
where                 . As the magnitude of (4.19) is usually much lesser (4.18), it 
represent natural upper threshold of stimulated radiation connected with opening of a new 
channel, of HHG. 
Notice, that the analogical calculation of stimulated absorption, i.e. of (4.3) with    
   , shows that corresponding partial rates 
            
             
   
                                                       (4.20) 
 
i.e. it confirms the validity of the Einstein solution (4.2) of thermodynamic Diophantine 
equation. 
 
 
5. PROCESSES OF HIGHER HARMONICS GENERATION 
 
Generation of higher harmonics, especially at single electrons, can be considered by an 
analogy with a multiphoton Compton scattering and therefore some problems of its 

Mark E. Perel'man  
112 
kinematics can be directly transferring from the one-photon processes description. But the 
dependence on densities of photon fluxes represents some new problems.  
Consideration of HHG processes is usually carried out variously for different energies. 
For harmonics with energy smaller the ionization threshold is usually suggested that the 
electron, which has virtually absorbed some photons, is transferring downwards in the same 
atom with emission of the total saved up energy as one photon. However the HHG of 
significant big energies is usually considered through three steps: (1) tunnel or barrier-
suppression ionization, (2) acceleration by the laser field and return to the ion, and (3) 
recombination with the ion. The excess energy of the recombination process is emitted as 
short wavelength radiation (e.g. [39,40]). The HHGs at the accelerator energy had been also 
investigated [41]. 
 As we shall show, such complications are not necessary: HHG at all energies can be 
considered as a process when virtually excited electron does not leave the atom, and simply, 
as well as in the case of weak excitation, comes back onto the place. The developed approach 
does not conduct to spectral expansion of the higher harmonics, inevitable at three-stage 
processes. 
 However for harmonics of very high numbers and for an explanation of so-called plateau 
in the harmonics spectrum it is more convenient to use the statistical approach in the frame of 
QED. Therewith, it appears that there is original rather short-term effect of an equipartition of 
energy on "degrees of freedom" of electronic gas, which are represented as the number of 
virtually seized photons. 
 For comparatively low intensity of laser flux (J   1013 W/cm2), at which atomic levels 
have significant role, the calculations can be proceeding in accordance to general rules 
described above. So for the elementary act of frequency doubling (really such process is 
possible under special conditions in media only): 
 
 γ ω     γ  ω                                           
 (5.1) 
 
we can formally write: 
 
     
     
         
    
 ω 
  
 ω   ω          
 
 ω    ω                  
       ,          (5.2) 
 
where Q  include all multipole factors and the critical flux density 
 
  
         σ ω τ ω  σ ω τ  ω                                                
 (5.3) 
 
is the geometrical average over one-photon densities. 
Reaction rates for generation of higher harmonics on isolated scatterer can be written 
analogously: 
 
              
            σ  ω  τ ω   ω    
                          (5.4) 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
113 
This approach can be essentially simplified. As a matter of fact from QED is required 
only the concept of time of delay and the formations of final states applied to statistical 
consideration of processes. Simultaneously such consideration reveals some features of 
MPPs. 
Let's consider a set of free electrons irradiated by a monochromatic photon flux         
of high intensity. Process of elastic scattering occurs as absorption of a photon and its 
emission through time of delay τ1. But if the density of photons flux is such that during this 
time the scattering of second photon on the same electron takes place, this electron will retain 
onto a time duration     double energy, which will be let out, with greater probability, as one 
photon of the double frequency. Thus, the electron can retain energy             
        , sufficient for HHG, and corresponding momentum, the oddness of   guarantees the 
parity conservation. This process goes by one stage, can be described by the single Feynman 
graph and there is not necessity for splitting it onto subprocesses of various nature. 
According to the uncertainty principle if the electron absorbs   photons of energy    , it 
can keep their energy during the time   
′       . The theory of temporal functions 
overviewed in the Section 2 gives twice bigger value till the end of particle formation (its 
"dressing"):    
′′      . Hence we can estimate the duration of holding time for 
accumulated energy as 
 
       ω                
                                               (5.5) 
 
Over this time NK photons are transferring through the maximally possible cross-section 
S  = α λ  of e-γ interaction (α is the fine structure constant): 
 
    ξ      
                                                       (5.6) 
 
where ξ characterizes a competition in photons capture with other sufficiently closely located 
scatterers (it will be considered below and can be omitted at consideration of rarefied gas). 
The probability of each virtual absorption (capture) is proportional at considered 
frequencies and at absence of resonances to the total cross-section of the single photon 
scattering σtot = 4 cr /ω and can be represented as 
 
  σ            λ  λ  
                                              (5.7) 
 
   is the Compton wave length, in considered processes     . 
The probability of virtual absorption of K photons, from among NK quanta passing 
through the maximal possible interaction cross-section, is expressed by the binomial 
distribution (e.g. [42]; for its approximations we use, actually, the conservation laws only): 
 
                        
                                           (5.8) 
 
     This distribution corresponds to a fast decreasing of intensity of lower frequencies 
harmonics, but for big NK>>1 and with pNK<<1 this decreasing is sharply slowing down. So 

Mark E. Perel'man  
114 
the distribution (5.8) can be approximated at these conditions by the Poisson distribution with 
the mean value of virtually absorbed photons forming the K harmonic: 
 
        σ          ω 
     
  ω  .                                           (5.9) 
 
It means that the mean energy of this harmonic 
 
     ω      
     
 ω    
σ   
 ω                                                    (5.10) 
 
i.e. this mean that the energy does not depend on the harmonics number in the considered part 
of the HHG spectrum and forms the observed plateau. (To this value can be added, of course, 
I/ ω, where I is the ionization potential.) 
Hence each harmonic in this region of spectrum can be considered as the "degree of 
freedom" of photonic gas with the equipartition law of their description when the interaction 
between scatterers is negligible. Moreover (5.10) does not contain   and therefore appears as 
the classical magnitude in the concordance with the classical, generally speaking, notion of 
degrees of freedom. 
This expression can be rewritten as EK = (4/ )U, where U is the ponderomotive potential. 
Note, that in so called "simple man's theory" [43] this energy is introduced for description of 
the experimental data as 3.17U. It means that the coefficient   is precisely in the limits of 
(5.5),          and that, consequently, our result qualitatively, at the least, conforms to the 
experimental data and therefore further numerical comparisons are not required. 
The higher frequencies tail of (5.8) at big K and nK, but with K/nK → 1, can be 
approximated by the Gaussian: 
 
                                    .                                 (5.11) 
It evidently corresponds to the observed decreases of energy of harmonics with the rising 
of K→NK after the plateau. 
Let's consider now the low-frequencies tail of harmonics spectra. With the lowering of 
kept energy the duration of their keeping will increase, and therefore possibilities of their 
partial transferring to another scatterers will also increase; it will lead to a distortion of the 
harmonics' profile, to formation of quasi-continuous spectrum. 
This transferring is effective for such accumulated energy only, for which cTK is bigger  
  
    , the mean distance between scatterers. Therefore we can expect that the clear 
harmonics comb begin only with K bigger 
 
         ω ρ 
                                                    (5.12) 
 
Hence we had finished, in principle, the description of the main parts of HHG spectra for 
rarified scatterers set. For consideration of HHG processes in more dense media a coefficient 
ξ in (5.6) must be estimated. 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
115 
The simplest case is a rarified medium of the scatterers' density ρe, when the free path 
length of photon ℓ=1/ρeσtot  is bigger the target depth L, then the coefficient ξ = L/ℓ. 
For more dense targets, but with L ≤ ℓ and when the photon wavelength     
    , the 
sufficiently thin target gas layer can be subdivided onto "interaction pipes" of cross sections 
       
    , so it can be assumed that each photon can interact in an each "pipe" with a 
single scatterer only. If we shall accept, for simplicity, that ρe = Zρ, ρ is the atomic density, Z 
is a number of electrons taking part in the process (note that at sufficient energies all atomic 
electrons, not only valent ones, can be involved in the reaction), then into the expression (5.6) 
would be inserted 
 
ξ    ρ      αλ ,                                                                (5.13) 
 
and the probability of single photon virtual capture will be now, instead of (5.7), determined 
as p =σtot/S . 
According to (5.6) the maximal photons quantity, that are passing through the 
"interaction pipe" and can be virtually captured by the scatterer, will be equal to 
 
                  ω       
                                      (5.14) 
 
i.e. the highest harmonic of plateau in the HHG process will be of the order 
 
                 ω       ρ                                         (5.15) 
 
Hence the numbers of higher harmonics are proportional to the strength of laser field, 
instead of its power. Such dependence seems physically natural for the common classical 
representations that the energy of electron is determined by its acceleration in the laser field. 
The dependence       for the highest achievable harmonic (5.15) can be comparable 
with some experimental data. In the article [44] the highest numbers of harmonics formed by 
the various gas targets are concerned as Ar : Kr : Xe = 1 : 0.85 : 0.71, the expression (5.15) 
results in ratio 1 : 0.79 : 0.69. In the article [45] the ratio of the highest harmonics numbers on 
targets He : Ne=0.58, our formula gives for them 0.52. According to [46] such relation was 
measured for gases Ne : Ar ≥ 0.75 (uncertainty is connected to alterations of gas density in 
this research), the relation (5.15) gives 0.75. 
With dependence on frequency the situation is more complicated: the estimation (5.15) 
results in dependence 1/ω, but for the highest harmonics and in sufficiently dense medium 
only. The similar estimation for rarefied gases (5.9) leads to 1/ω , which is closer to the 
"simple man's theory", where                   , with        . The dependence 
of Nmax on wavelength with equal other conditions was measured in [47] at J = 4 1014 W/cm² 
for wavelengths 0.8 and 1.51 mcm: the cutoff of harmonics set occurs, correspondingly, on 
energies of 64 eV and close to 160 eV that corresponds to       and is close enough to square-
law dependence in (5.10), but not to (5.15). This observation can be interpreted as the obvious 
minimization of the role of interaction with neighbor scatterers at higher frequencies with 
their shorter durations for such interactions, but evidently requires further investigation. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
116 
For numerical estimations, however, the more precise dynamical models are needed. 
Nevertheless, for a characteristic set of used parameters: J = 1014 W/cm²,  ω = 1 eV, Z = 18, 
ρ = 1018 cm 3, and at assumption that all processes are channeled only in the HHG we receive 
that Nmax  ≥ 200. This estimation does not seriously contradict observed values, especially 
since even the account of polarization of a laser beam and its angular divergence can reduce 
this value. (Notice that for the mean number of accumulated photons the expression (5.9) 
gives more adequate answers.) 
It must be underlined that all above is conditioned by a shortness of laser pulse. If its 
duration would be longer, it can stimulate the partial exchange of surplus energy between 
electrons and accelerate the leveling of harmonics comb. It is not excluded that just such 
reasons can explain the phenomena, observed in some experiments [1], when the intensity of 
harmonics at the light impulse in 7 fs is approximately on the 0.5 orders above than at the 
impulse in 30 fs. Note that inasmuch as at the initial stage of dissipation its speed corresponds 
to the plasma frequency of electronic components               , the condition of 
smallness of thermalization can be estimated through smallness of laser pulse duration in 
comparison with 1/νp. 
The described picture can be evidently generalized on the case of two or more laser 
beams of different frequencies: the spectrum of harmonics will be more complex, inasmuch 
as, in the accordance with the composition law of binomial distributions, the new and more 
complicate set of "the degrees of freedom" can appear, but it does not change the general 
approach and observed picture. 
The processes of summation of high harmonics quanta (including quanta of different 
frequencies) with each other are also possible. Probably, the mechanism of some harmonics 
amplification in the research [48], where the HHG was spent out in the long capillary with 
gas, is just those that increased the probability of virtual absorption and subsequent addition 
of previously formed quanta of higher frequencies. 
At processes of HHG in the unidirectional flux all consideration is facilitated by the 
concordance of energy and momenta of harmonics quanta. In other cases, at the ATI and even 
in the crossed laser beams, the accumulation of additional momentum via interaction with 
parent ions or with neighbors is needed; it can accelerate the thermalization effects and 
widening of single harmonics (the extreme case of crossed light beams are processes in the 
opposite directed laser beams, [49]). The kinematics of such processes is evident and can be 
omitted. 
We did not consider above the dependence of sequential photons capture on their 
polarization. As the virtual absorption of the first photon polarizes electron, it becomes 
necessary to take into account that the probability of following photon absorption would be 
proportional to probabilities of polarized photons scattering on polarized electrons. This 
circumstance, it is possible to think, changes the intensity of HHG at division of focuses of 
laser fluxes with different linear polarizations and at circular polarization in comparison with 
linear. But it also does not alter basically the described picture. 
The revealed features can be considered as the extending of the Rayleigh-Jeans theory of 
the equilibrium low-frequency thermal radiation to the rapid energies reallocation at power 
laser flux interaction with electrons set. At the considered phenomenon the role of black body 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
117 
fulfill scatterers with opportunities of only discrete and equidistant, on the frequencies   , 
virtual energy accumulations. Note that the rescattering phenomena as the cause of plateau 
formation (e.g. [50] and references therein) and our approach lead to different temporal 
dependences, but we did not see yet sufficient experimental data for the choice between them. 
It can be interesting to note that in the articles of Jeans [51], where for the first time the 
fluctuations of "ether" in the resonator and their harmonics had been considered, only the 
equality of possible energies, without their equating to     , was accepted. 
Some other peculiarities of the MPPs consist in the dependence of maximal number of 
these virtual degrees of freedom on the density of photon gas, on the target parameters and on 
the specific short-term condition of "thermodynamic balance". It is remarkable that in an 
accord with the classical definition of degrees of freedom their energies are classical 
magnitudes. 
 
 
6.  MULTIPHOTON IONIZATION: PROBLEM OF MOMENTUM 
 
Consideration of processes of multiphoton ionization (MPIs) can be beginning with 
comparisons of reaction rates of one-photon processes and HHG on single scatterers with 
equal final energies and the same energy of an intermediate state: 
1) one-photon processes with rates           and           , 
 
                  ,                                                       (6 .1) 
                        ,                                                (6.2) 
2) multiphoton processes with rates      and     , 
 
                    ,                                                 (6.3) 
                         ,                                          (6.4) 
 
where                ,    is the potential of ionization. 
 
Their rates must be connected by the ratio: 
 
                  ,                                                       (6.5) 
 
it follows unitarity of  -matrix since all four processes have almost identical (last for (6.3-4) 
graphs) intermediate states of an electron virtually absorbing energy    with duration of this 
stage      . The ratio can be comparable with the Fermi-Watson theorem for  -mesons 
photoproduction [52]. 
In the spite of our general approach we shall begin with the most power processes and 
then will turn to lower intensities, for which calculations and comparison with experimental 
data are simpler. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
118 
The rates of one-photon processes are well known and if the HHG process also would be 
well examined, the rate of MPI could be described via them. If this ratio is not executed, it 
would mean that MPI goes, completely or in part, as a multi-stage process, i.e. via the initial 
formation of sufficient high harmonics and subsequent ionization by one or even some 
different photons of high harmonics. 
For the MPP with such (last) intermediate state as the combination of (6.3) and (6.2), the 
reaction rate can be estimated: 
 
    
                                        
                   (6.5′) 
 
where THHG  is the duration of (6.3) that via the uncertainty principle can be approximated as 
1/2 . Hence, with taking into account (6.5) and         , where       , the classical 
Thomson cross-section, 
 
    
     
 
                                              
 (6.5‖) 
 
and it can be generalized on more number of intermediate states. 
Let's consider now the direct calculation of     . It can be approximately represented as 
 
                   ,                                                (6.6) 
 
where         is the kinetic energy of photoelectron,         is its momentum, 
       is the probability of momentum accumulation via interaction with atomic reminder 
and so on. 
The problem of momentum accumulation by freed electron had been the item of 
discussing from the very beginning of quantum electrodynamics ([53]), and even earlier, in 
the theory of one-photon photoeffect (e.g., [54], the modern statement [55]) and in the theory 
of molecules photo-dissociation. As can be represented, the most direct decision of this 
problem can be achieved by the Landau method advanced in the theory of predissociation 
[37]; therefore the state of an electron that receives enough energy, but the corresponding 
momentum has not accumulated up yet, can be named the pre-ionization state. 
Let's try to estimate        in (6.6) by the Landau method. 
Let    and    describe states of an electron in discrete and continuous spectra, 
 
                                                              (6.7) 
 
If       and       are self-functions, and     and      are self-values of the 
Hamiltonian H , it is possible to search for wave function as the superposition   
             . Multiplying the equation (6.7) at the left serially on the functions 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
119 
conjugated to        and     , we receive system of two homogeneous equations and the 
condition of their compatibility results in the expression: 
 
                                            ,            (6.8) 
 
where      is the matrix element of interaction operator  , and all magnitudes are functions 
of r. 
    The start of photoelectron is possible from the point, in which     . Near to this 
point the difference           as function of          can be approximated as 
 
                 , 
 
where            is the force of interaction between an electron and atomic reminder. 
As this process can be considered as nonrelativistic, it becomes possible to accept     . 
Then the equality      shows that the transition occurs during (pure imaginary) moment 
of time 
 
  
                           ,                                     (6.9) 
 
its completely imaginary form corresponds to the duration of final state formation    
described in the Section 2 [18]. 
If       in (6.9) also, it is possible to assume that        is about the momentum, 
which has been accumulated up by an electron at a starting from atom; then     , in the full 
conformity with the Second law of dynamics, shows the duration of time necessary for 
accumulation of the momentum corresponding to the kinetic energy of electron: 
 
            ,                                                             (6.10) 
 
where  Δ              at ionization within the state with the main quantum 
number  . Thus it can be assumed that                            , i.e. the 
duration of time, necessary for momentum accumulation, sharply increases with transition to 
highest levels that result in a relative stabilization of the Rydberg levels concerning 
opportunity of MPI. 
Accepting to Δ         it is received that 
 
                                                       (6.10′) 
 
where    is expressed in the eV's. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
120 
 This magnitude is the major parameter since it is obvious that for realization of 
considered reaction the durations of momentum and energy accumulations should be 
coordinated. 
Now it is possible to search for the solution of the Schrödinger temporal equation, needed 
for their coordination: 
 
                                                                  (6.11) 
 
in the form 
 
                                                                (6.11′) 
 
with the initial conditions                , such that         is the probability of 
electronic transition in a point      into the state   , and                   is the 
probability of electron that further stays in the atom. 
According to the quasiclassical Landau method for the solution of such equations, it is 
necessary to proceed in the factor 
 
           
 
   
      
 
  
  
                                  (6.12) 
 
at big     into the complex plane with detour the point       from above. Thus      
passes in      that conducts to the expression: 
 
                   
        
     
  
               
      (6.13) 
 
where      is accepted . 
It is natural to assume, in accordance to the uncertainty principle, that duration of holding 
of virtually absorbed energy of N photons by an electron, i.e. duration of formation of a free 
electron state with kinetic energy         , is about        . Hence, the 
parameter exhibitors in the expression (6.13) are determined by the ratio of durations 
necessary for accumulation of mutually corresponding momentum and energy of the taking 
off electron. According to (6.10') this key parameter of the theory can be appreciated as 
 
                             
                                   (6.14) 
 
The full probability of pre-ionization can be determined according to the Landau-Zener 
definition of probability of predissociation as 
 
                                                          (6.15) 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
121 
The expression (6.15) has the flat maximum equals ½ at 
 
     
            
        /                                    (6.16) 
 
weakly varies at                 in an interval about            and decreases 
on the order at       and    . From last condition it follows that the efficiency of the 
direct MPI should fall down essentially at 
 
                                                                 (6.17) 
 
Thus, MPIs at big energies should, basically, pass through stages of accumulation of 
energy, virtually corresponding to HHGs, and the subsequent one-quantum photoeffect. 
Therefore the spectra of MPIs have the plateau analogically to HHGs processes. Notice that 
the stabilization of the Rydberg levels at MPI and necessity of transition to heavier atoms for 
increasing the output of photoelectrons also follows (6.17). 
Thus, this factor shows definite reduction of probability of ionization with growth of 
energy in comparison with probability of HHG. However, speed of this falling off is 
proportional    , i.e. obviously is slower than at three stages MPI processes: so it can be 
concluded that the basic role in MP I in the field of low frequencies executes direct liberation 
of electron that accumulated energy of absorbed photons in atom. 
Let‘s turn to direct calculations of MPPs rates at comparatively lower power. In 
accordance with (6.6) 
 
                                                               (6.18) 
And therefore the rate of MPP ionization can be written as   
    
          
   
      
  
  
    
     
    
   
 
,                              (6.19) 
 
in which under N near to the ionization potential I must be included the 
Wigner threshold factor           . 
 
Table 1. Logarithm of the generalized cross-sections (6.19) in comparison with the 
experimental data from [56], pp 101, 109, 110; (K = [I/ + 1], I is the energy of 
ionization,  is the energy of the laser quanta, both in eV’s.) 
 
Atom  I            K 
   lgcalc  
  lg experim 
Na   5.14  2.34     3      
                 1.17     5    
K   4.43    2.34     2 
                 1.17     4 
81.1 
143.7  
48.9 
111.7 
80.40.1 
140.11.7;  
47.50.8;  49.10.8 
105.61.2; 109.20.8 

Mark E. Perel'man  
122 
Cs   3.89   1.17     4 
Ca   6.113  2.34    3 
                   1.17   6 
Ba   5.21    2.34    3 
                   1.17   5 
Sr   5.69      1.17   5 
Kr   14.0     4.2     4 
Xe   12.13   6.37   2 
                    4.2     3 
                    2.11   6 
                    1.17  11 
                    0.62  19 
111.6 
81,2 
175.9 
76.7 
143.7 
144.0 
115.5 
50.3 
82.7 
178.3 
  
589.5 
108.40.2; 109.50.2 
78.40.5 
172.31.5 
78.60.4 
140.01.0 
142.71.5 
115.10.6 
49.4;52.0 
82.70.1 
170.20.6;  169 
3362.0 
585 
 
For the direct comparison of (6.19) with the experimental data the averaging of reaction 
rate is needed: 1) over numbers (N  K), since if in the experiment are fixed the numbers of 
ions, the numbers of photons absorbed above K is unknown; 2) over principal quantum 
numbers, since all atomic electrons are virtually free for a short time interval and inner 
electrons easier grow needed momentum for liberation; 3) over spatial and time distribution 
of photon flux density, etc. 
     As the main critical is the dependence on number of absorbed photons N, the experimental 
verification of the relation seems interesting: 
    
       
           
       
                                             (6.20) 
             
     This relation was measured near the threshold at the atoms of Cs (N = K = 4) under 
J=510
14 W/cm2 and was founded to be 0.03 [57], which is close to an estimation of (6.20) of 
order 0.025.  
     For the direct comparison of (6.19) with the experimental data the averaging of reaction 
rate is needed: 1) over numbers (N  K), since if in the experiment are fixed the numbers of 
ions, the numbers of photons absorbed above K is unknown; 2) over principal quantum 
numbers, since all atomic electrons are virtually free for a short time interval and inner 
electrons easier grow needed momentum for liberation; 3) over spatial and time distribution 
of photon flux density, etc. 
     But if, without all these procedures, it will be proposed for the rough comparison n that the 
subprocess of many photons absorption is the most characteristic one, then we would 
compare the expression (6.19), in fact the Poisson distribution, with the experimental data of 
MPP ionization. And this comparison (the Table 1) gives surprising fine results for such 
approximated estimations, which corroborate our approach and, in particular, the QED spirit 
for choice of elementary acts parameters: the total cross-section and the time of formation. 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
123 
     The choice of the formation duration can be supported by the analysis of above threshold 
ionization in a two-color laser field, where usually E(t) = E1() cos t  E2n cosnt  . 
Since under N-photon processes the duration time is of order 2 N , it is evident that 
photons from both fluxes will be absorbed independently and just such picture is observed in 
the experiments [58,59] at    , when the electrons can absorb photons from one flux 
only. Such picture is evidently seen on the Figures of [56] (in these experiments J1  J2 and n = 
2): the peaks R13(  R72 under such phase difference and it leads to J/J0(  1.14, 
which is of the order of used values. At     R7(2  R13 and at   , inversely, 
R7(2  R13(. It can be interpreted by the parity requirements. The absolutely rates of such 
processes can be calculated with account of product wN wN, where N and N  are 
functions of t and . 
    It must be noticed that although from the classical point of view the interference between 
these two fields leads to frequencies, such peaks were not fixed. More once it says that 
classical approach to MPPs is impossible. 
     All these results are related to high intensity fields. In weaker fields such interesting events 
was registered. So, in the early experiments were usually defined so named index of 
multiphotonics   K =  ln RN /  ln J, which at first sight can not be bigger than N. But there 
were fixed bigger values (e.g. [60]). And really as can be shown at j < j1           
              ) and shows the possibilities of additional photons reemissions. On the other 
side, if there is a level, which can be in resonance with some number of absorbed photons, 
then in the relative weak field K can be less than N, since the process of ionization will go 
from the excited state of atom with lesser ionization potential.  
 
 
TABLE 2. Logarithm of the generalized cross-sections of multiphoton detachment from 
negative ions of halogens and limits of experimental data from [55],  p. 61. 
 
Ion           I             K      lg (theor)                      lg (exp)                                    
F 
           3,45   2,44   2     - 48,3                            - 49,7 
                         1,22   3    - 80,1                            - (81,6 - 82,4), 
Cl 
         3,61   2,44   2     - 48,1                            - (49,7 - 50) , 
                         1,22   4    - 112,1                          - (112,1 - 112,5), 
 I 
         3,08    2,44   2     - 48,4                            - (48,4 - 48,7), 
                         1,22   3    - 79,8                            - (81,3 - 81,7) , 
      Br 
       3,37   1,22   3    - 79,3                           - (81,6 - 82) , 
 
1.0 MPPs photo detachment of electron from the negative ion  
2.0  
3.0 (                                                    (6.21)                     
4.0  

Mark E. Perel'man  
124 
5.0 
is distinguished from considered above by the interaction in final state. Therefore it 
can be estimated on the same base: the comparison of calculated and experimental data is 
given in the Table 2. 
    Let us consider in some details the unique investigation of (6.21) on the negative ion H
, 
carried on the ion accelerator under continuous shifted photons energy from 0.043 eV till 0,39 
eV, e.g. for       under the affinity energy E0 = 0.75 eV [61].  
     For the peculiarities of kinematics the probability of photodetashment is equal to zero at 
the threshold, come up to a slope maximum at Ns = K, . Hence the saturation of process 
arrives at  j = 1/tot Ns   and it leads to the expression  
                                                                (6.22)                
where W =c r0 J/2 is the relativistic invariant photon energy.  
    In the experiment [59] W =0.105 eV and therefore  = 3.5. The relative peaks probability 
can be estimated as     
 pN(Ns) = RN / RN  (1/N!) Ns
N exp(-Ns).                                         (6.23) 
 
     Hence the relative probability pN/pN+1  0.11, which does not contradict to the experiment.   
 
 
7.  ACCELERATION OF FREE ELECTRONS 
 
    Real processes of electrons acceleration can take place within plasma targets and include 
many different subprocesses (e.g. [62,63]). Their consideration leaves far beyond our tasks, 
therefore we shall be limited to the elementary cases that demonstrate some features of 
multiphotonics (cf. [64]).  
If on a free electron will fly photons flux        , the electron can keep virtually 
absorbed single photon during the time       .  After this time the Compton scattering is 
executed with division of energy and momentum between electron and secondary photon (e.g. 
[65]).  
 With rising of the flux intensity some additional photons can be virtually absorbed till 
executing of the process: it is the multiphoton Compton scattering, 
 
                
            
  ,                                  (7.1) 
 
with corresponding distribution of final momenta. Thresholds of (7.1) are identical with 
considered above. 
    For increase in energy of electrons it is necessary to find a way of transfer the 
momentum to it. It can be the static Coulomb field E in a direction of electrons movement. In 
such field electron receives momentum         and    energy         
       
 
   . Hence the duration of photons energy accumulation decreases: 
 
  
                 
 
                                                          (7.2) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
125 
 
and with substitution      
        it represents the possibilities for estimation of 
parameters of acceleration process in a very idealized case of separated free electrons in the 
Coulomb field. 
   At higher intensities the relativistic Doppler shift of frequencies of inletting photons 
must be taken into account, therefore the electron, that holding   photons, perceives the 
frequency of subsequent (   )‘s photon as 
 
           –                                                                  (7.3) 
where                     and        
 
  the density of photons flux in 
the electron self frame is shifted as  
 
            –           
                                                     (7.4) 
 
 For        nm and          eV the main parameter          and 
consequently for        relativistic corrections can be omitted. 
 The complete energy holding by electron after virtual absorption of   photons in its own 
frame is equal to  
 
     
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 .                           (7.5) 
 
With replacement of summation by integration for N   1 and with         we 
come to the expression: 
 



,
2
/
.)
1
1
(
sin
2
1
1
)
,
(
);
,
(
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
0
1
0
a
a
a
N
a
N
a
N
a
xa
xa
a
dx
N
























.       (7.6) 
 
The virtual holding of this energy requires such density of photons flux: 
 
        
 
   
 
                                                          (7.7) 
 
where     is the total cross-section (the mass of electron is invariant in its own frame).                
     The suspension of virtual photons energy accumulation onto single electron becomes 
possible when the flux density will be less or of the order of (7.7), its possibility of energy 
keeping. The equaling of these expressions allows an estimation of limiting density of photon 
flux     in the L-system. Thus the power needed for   photons accumulation  
 

Mark E. Perel'man  
126 
  
         
   
                                                     (7.8) 
with 
)
,
(
)
1(
1
)
(
2
2
2
2
)
(
a
a
f
N








.                                        (7.9) 
At     
2
/
2
/
)
(
2
2
2
)
(
N
a
f
N



 
 
and with        eV the needed power can be estimated for the N-photon processes on 
a free electron as 
 
  
                   [W/cm2].                                               (7.10) 
 
It must be underlined that for multiphoton processes on bound electrons the numerical 
factor in (7.10) can be essentially less, since the duration of virtual energy holding N can be 
sufficiently bigger. 
    At the taking into account the Doppler shift it should be concluded that the maximal 
acceleration might be achieved if the laser flux will be directed oppositely to the electrical 
field and electrons flux (     above). It appears as paradox at the first glance, but should 
be remembered that the electron receives its momentum from the field and only its energy 
from the laser flux, which therefore does not determine the moving direction of electron. Thus 
the considered case can be considered as the rising of electron energy during its acceleration 
in a linear accelerator, etc. 
 
 
8. LIGHT PRESSURE ON MEDIA CONDITIONED BY FEATURES OF 
PHOTONS KINETICS 
 
One of the perspective applications of high power lasers consists in targets compression 
for initiation of thermonuclear reactions. Therefore problems of light pressure must be 
considered more scrupulously.  
Examinations of light pressure on transparent media have a centenary history, basically 
as discussions of so called Abraham-Minkowski controversy (e.g. [66]). Two different 
determinations of classical energy-momentum tensor of electromagnetic field, by Minkowski 
and by Abraham, lead to different linear momenta of photons in isotropic transparent media: 
                      ,  where       and        are the phase and 
group indices of refraction,       and         are the phase and group velocities. 
In accordance with the approach of Minkowski the full momentum is connected to the 
"photon in medium"; but at the Abraham picture the definite part of this momentum during 
time of passage is related to the medium. This difference leads to the opposite directions of 
movement of transparent body at the time of pulse propagation.  

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
127 
This controversy can be presented in the evidently paradoxical form. Let's consider the 
passage of light flux through a transparent medium with the phase velocity u ≤ c: in 
accordance with the Maxwell equations, the light momentum in a medium can be bigger than 
in vacuum and in accordance with the momenta conservation this body should move against a 
direction of light (Minkowski). But on the other hand such presentation also seems correct: if 
light is passing through the medium for greater time than in vacuum, the conservation of 
movement of the center of masses or inertia requires that the body should move in a direction 
of light flux (Abraham).  
Hence this paradox means the necessity of some correction or even a re-examination of 
light propagation theory.  
The experimental data are so inconsistent that the general comparison with them is 
impossible. So, in the recent experiments of Ketterle group [67] was shown that at reflection 
by a mirror and at absorption by an atom, a photon in a dispersive medium behaves as though 
had a momentum of nk according to Minkowski. But in the subsequent experiment [68] 
photons that go out from waveguides lead to the recoil in accordance with the Abraham 
proposition. These inconsistencies together with discrepancy of former experiments, cited in 
[67, 68] show that the direct experimental verification of situation is very complicated and 
intricate; therefore the proper theoretical analysis, with possible revision of established 
notions and/or outside the scope of macroscopic electrodynamics, seems desirable or even 
necessary.  
    It can be suggested that, possibly, the initial implicit representation of transparent 
media as the un-structured substance, the classical ―black box‖, is inadequate, i.e. by another 
words, the description of process via the mean velocities corresponding to the classical 
Maxwell equations is non-sufficient: the kinetics of light passage through medium must be 
considered in more details. Really, a photon in media may be a part of time, at least, in virtual 
state, to which classical description is not applicable; hence quantum peculiarities of light 
interaction with constituents of medium must be taken into account.  
    From the microscopic point of view [17] single photon is flying from one scatterer to 
another with the speed c on distances of the free path ℓ = 1/ρζ (ρ is the density of scatterers, 
free and valent electrons, ζ is the cross-section of elastic unbiased scattering). After that it 
will be detaining on scatterer on the delay time τ1, determined by (2.7) or by a similar 
expression for more realistic model. If η2 > 0, to the free path length must be added the 
distance cη2, after passing of which photon becomes real, at τ2 < 0 it instantaneously jumps 
over the distance c|η2|. Thus this photon undergoes                 acts of elastic 
unbiased scattering with delays τ1 by each of them, and therefore the complete duration of its 
transmission at η2>0 on the distance     becomes  
 
1
/

N
c
L
T


                                                            (8.1)  
 
(for the case of      the substitution     –         is needed, but we do not consider 
this case further). 

Mark E. Perel'man  
128 
Such representation leads to the group refraction index for the region of normal 
dispersion: 
 
)
/(
1
/
2
1


c
c
L
cT
ng





.     .                                                 (8.2) 
 
If       this expression can be approximately rewritten, sufficiently far from 
resonances, as  
 
)
(
)
(
1
1




c
ng


.                                                             (8.2') 
 
   These magnitudes allow the estimation of group velocities of photons in transparent 
media and of corresponding indices of refraction. (Note that, as it was experimentally shown, 
photon really passes in media with the group velocity [69].) 
    The phase index of refraction can be determined through the group index as 
 
 





d
n
n
n
g
g



0
)
(
1
)
0
(
)
(
,                                              (8.3) 
 
i.e. by its averaging over the frequencies interval     ) at assumption ng(0) = 0 or with a 
subsequent subtraction. 
At the periods of time Nτ1, when the photon is virtually captured, its momentum is 
transmitted into the medium. But if from the Abraham point of view the part of momentum is 
transmitted into media onto full duration of photon passage, in the offered approach it takes 
place at saltatory virtual regime. If only these times are taken into account, then such part of 
linear momentum of photon will be related to body:  
 
g
g
g
n
n
n
T
N
/
1
1
/)1
(
/
1





.                                                (8.4) 
 
Hence during the time of photon's pass inside the body, it will possess the momentum 
 
 
)
(
)
/
1
1(
k
k
k
n
p
g








                                               (8.5) 
 
directed to the flux under ng > 1 and oppositely under ng < 1. It will lead to the displacement 
of body onto the distance 
 
M
k
N
M
pT
S
/
/
1





,                                                  (8.6) 
 
where M is the mass of displaced body, and as 
1
/)1
(
~

c
n
L
N
g 
, the relative 
displacement of this body at the single photon passage can be expressed as 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
129 
2
/
)1
(
~
/
Mc
n
L
S
g





.                                                      (8.7) 
 
Into this expression must be included, generally speaking, displacements caused by the 
surface effects considered below. 
 This picture, as must be underlined, simultaneously corresponds to both laws of 
conservations, the linear momenta and the uniform motion of center of inertia. At the same 
time it allows the consistent determination of indices of refraction describing the average 
duration of radiation passage through media. 
Notice that the additional momentum in (8.5) is curiously connected with the Abraham 
and Minkowski momenta: 
 
2
/
1
/
)
(
A
M
g
p
p
n
k
k






.                                              (8.8) 
 
At the real absorption by an isolated scatterer (the Bose condensate in [67] must be 
considered as a single scatterer) the photons‘ virtual coat, the evanescent waves (see below), 
must be absorbed together with the energy-momentum (8.5). Therefore at this act, in 
accordance with conservation laws, ω2 = c2k2, hence formally ng =1/n and therefore  
 
k
n
k
abs




)
(
,                                                         (8.9) 
 
i.e. the momentum of body, in accordance with (8.5), will be equal to             , 
just as it is describable by the conception of "photons in medium". So the complete 
momentum of system after absorption is equal to k, just as it is needed. Notice that such 
division corresponds to the Minkowski picture, but just as the Abraham picture described 
above, it is not universally true: both pictures are correct along the definite and different 
moments and for parts of the total path of photon. 
Thus, at the real absorption of single photon by an isolated scatterer of mass M 
 
U
M
k
n



2
/
)
(
2


,                                             (8.10) 
 
where ΔU is the energy of inner reconfiguration of scatterer. The term of absorbed kinetic 
energy can be expressed via the energy of recoil   and with the explicit accentuation of 
refraction index factor   = n2 ‘ it leads to the representation: 
 
U
n




'
2

,                                                  (8.10‘) 
 
that conforms to the results of the experiments [67]. Nevertheless, contrary to the conclusions 
of this article, it does not mean yet that the photon's self-momentum in media is constantly 
equal to nk: such significance appears at the absorption only, by an integration of parameters 
of photon self-momentum and of corresponded evanescent waves.  

Mark E. Perel'man  
130 
    The appearance of evanescent waves propagating mutually with a bare photon can be 
demonstrated in the frame of QED. The concept of "photons in medium" requires the 
replacement of the momentum on the pseudo-momentum:          . This replacement 
corresponds to the transformation of causal propagator: 
 
)
(
~
)
)
(
,
(
)
(
~
)
,
(
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
k
n
c
k
n
D
k
c
k
D
c
c















.    (8.11) 
 
Inside the medium, far from borders, it is possible to accept n = ck/ω. Then by use the 
properties of δ-function at ω ≠ 0 the propagator in transparent isotropic media can be 
decomposed as  
 

)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
2
1
ki
D
k
D
k
n
D
c
c
c








.                                       (8.12) 
 
The first term corresponds to the photon's free flight between scatterers with the vacuum 
speed c. The second term of (8.12) describes, accordingly, the field of evanescent waves, 
caused by photons flight through media; these waves can be attributed to the near field 
photon's dressing in media: 
  
                          
 
      Notice that this term describes the Coulomb field also, in as much as 
)
(
)
(
~
)
(
2
2
2
k
c
k
c






 at    . 
 Evanescent waves are characterized by imaginary momenta. As a contrast to the 
evanescent waves at the FTIR [19] here all components are imaginary. From the formal point 
of view the Green function              corresponds to the 4-D Laplace equation for 
space instantons of zero mass (cf. [70]), it demonstrates that corresponding excitations are 
transmitting instantaneously. 
The difference between two terms of (8.12) is more visual in the mixed       
representation: 
 
)
/
exp(
)
4
/
1(
)
,
(
c
r
i
r
r
Dc





;   
)
/
exp(
)
4
/
1(
)
,
(
)
(
c
r
ir
r
D near






 (8.13) 
 
that obviously shows the space-like character of near field and its fast attenuation, on account 
of which near field does not contribute in the far field of sources [71]. Notice that these 
phenomena on such distances do not overflow the uncertainties limits; therefore the 
observance of conservations laws is not here required.  
*   *   * 
Let's turn now to consideration of reflection and refraction and begin with the Fresnel 
formulae, for the clearness and better comprehension of physical content we do not go 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
131 
beyond the normal incident onto flat surface (conditions of their applicability are discussed, 
for example, in [72]). 
The transient functions of refraction and reflection processes depend on the phase index 
of refraction only. Therefore the duration of transmitted or refracted waves‘ formation can be 
expressed in the form: 
 




d
dn
n
S
n
S







)
(
ln
)
(
ln
(.)
(.)
(.)
,                                     (8.14) 
 
where by definition inside isotropic media   
 



n
n
u
v
c
d
dn
g 









1
1
,                                            (8.15) 
 
v and u are the group and phase velocities correspondingly. Hence the sign and the value of 
η(.) depend on discrepancy between them, (8.15) is positive for regions of normal dispersion. 
   At crossing of boundary between media this function can be formally represented as 
 



)
(
)
(
1
)
,
(
)
,
(
lim
2
1
2
1
~
2
1
0
n
n
n
n
x
n
x
n
d
d
d
dn
g
g


















, (8.16) 
 
really, of course, this transition must be more smoothing (e.g [20]). If the medium is bordered 
with vacuum, one of  ‘s  is equal to 1 and we come back to (8.15), sign of which depends on 
direction of ray.  
Let's begin with the consideration of reflection. The relative amplitude of reflection 
)1
/(
)1
(
)
(



n
n
S R
 leads to the duration of reflecting wave formation: 
 
)
(
1
2
)
(
2
)
/
(
)1
(
2
R
R
d
dn
n






.                                              (8.16‘) 
 
As photons are twice transmitted through the transient zone, 


d
dn
d
dn
R
/
2
)
/
(
1
)
(

 
and is positive. The negativity of (8.16‘) means that the emission of reflected photons is 
instantaneous and just therefore they remain coherent with the initial flux (phase is changed 
on   and so on). 
 The force acting on reflecting medium, 
 
g
R
R
n
n
n
c
F





1
2
2
2
2
)
(
2
)
(





,                                                (8.17) 
 
leads to appearance of perturbation or recoil wave directing into the medium and inducing its 
temporary polarization. Such processes would induce the cooling of transient layer (the 

Mark E. Perel'man  
132 
possibility of cooling by wave reflection, as far as I know, never was observed, its searching 
could be used for direct measuring of duration of formation). 
 Notice that in the addition to this recoil photon, an acoustic wave into a medium can 
appear (a polarization wave, cf. [73]), the direct usage of energy-time uncertainty relation and 
conservation laws can present difficulties and therefore at an initial analysis may be avoided. 
However, elastic reflection leads to appearing of momentum of reflecting media, i.e. to 
appearing of its kinetic energy, therefore the source of this energy must be examined.  
Let's proceed to the phenomena on refraction surfaces. 
For wave incoming from vacuum
)1
/(
2
)
,
(


n
S
in
T
, hence 
 
)
,
(
1
)
,
(
)
/
(
)1
(
in
T
in
T
d
dn
n






,                                              (8.18) 
 
which 
is 
negative 
for 
the 
case 
of 
normal 
dispersion. 
For 
out-going 
wave 
)1
/(
2
)
,
(


n
n
S
out
T
the duration of disguising of photons that exiting medium becomes 
 
)
,
(
1
1
)
,
(
)
/
(
)1
(
out
T
out
T
d
dn
n
n






,                                      (8.19) 
but as       changes sign at transition from (8.18) to (8.19), the signs of durations 
coincide. 
 The nonzero duration of wave formations must lead to appearance of inversely oriented 
optical transient zones on both surfaces of body (cf. [19]): 
 
)
,
,
(
)
,
(
out
in
T
out
in
c
x



.                                                 (8.20) 
 
Another connected phenomenon is the occurrence of forces of light pressure on surfaces, 
differing for in- and out-surfaces with taking into account the altering of momenta:  
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
,
/
)
1(
in
out
in
in
F
F
c
n
F







.                                   (8.21) 
 
Thus in both cases the pressure is directed into the media, squeezing it. It just 
corresponds to results of the experiment [68]. 
*   *   *   
Thus the researches of dispersion phenomena necessitate more profound consideration of 
light interaction with substance even the transparent one: they show inapplicability of 
concepts of macroscopic electrodynamics to theory of dispersion [17]. The appeal to more 
deep concepts of quantum electrodynamics with usages of temporal functions allows the 
description of kinetics of photons propagation and determination of light pressure with 
simultaneous feasibility of all conservation laws.  
The continue discussions of Abraham-Minkowski controversy on the base of classical 
energy-momenta tensors have not direct physical sense: neither the Abraham momentum nor 
the Minkowski momentum is conservable. Both expressions are wrongful as general ones and 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
133 
new researches must be basing on microscopic considerations or correspond to them (the 
problem of correct form of macroscopic energy-momenta tensor remains open). 
The most interesting and new in these considerations seems such result: processes of 
photons dressing or their redress on borders of media lead to formation of oppositely oriented 
effective transient zones on boundaries. They represent double electric layers, dipoles or other 
moments of which absorb falling waves and emit new ones, reflected or refracted. Some other 
processes of reflection can be considered on an analogical base. So, it can be noted that the 
mirror reflection by metal surfaces requires a more scrupulous consideration of photon 
interaction with the group of scatterers:  this process takes place in the depth of skin-layer 
         
   and Re δ = Im δ [74]. The time delays at scattering and the duration of outlet 
photon formation are equal; therefore such process does not destroy the coherence of 
reflected light flux. 
The inside directed surface pressure by the incident light may be useful for precise 
designing of the laser-induced inertial-confined fusion. It must be taken into account at 
consideration of certain astrophysical problems also. 
 It must be underlined that the used approach is of probabilistic type and more 
scrupulously it would be described as the Poisson process. Therefore the outgoing pulse must 
be represented as the Poisson comb, i.e. by its envelope with some inevitable smearing of 
initial pulse. The probability of N scattering acts on the distance L, if N is sufficiently big, are 
describable, in general, by the Gauss distribution of magnitude     . Hence there is a finite 
probability of appearance of "precursors", i.e. photon passing through media without 
scattering, with only one scattering and so on. It can lead to observation of signal passing with 
the vacuum speed c through sufficiently thin medium. Probably, just such observation is 
described in [75], at which one bit of information was transferred with the speed     
through the thin layer of resonant slow-light medium. However, it does not mean the 
possibility of introduction of the signal or information velocity vi ~ c: the conditions of this 
experiment, the low optical thickness of intermediate layer, is too restricted for such wide 
generalization; the increasing of this thickness inevitably would lead to such attenuation of 
signal that will do it non-measurable. Such description of precursors seems more adequate in 
quantum theory than the classical ones, which present the existence of precursors via 
unavoidable presence of high frequencies in the abrupt front of pulses [76] (last experiments 
[77]). 
All above was considered at the condition of comparatively big free path length,   
       What can be expected at sizeable decreasing of  ? In the Anderson theory of 
localization [78] a possibility of such interference and self-interference picture was predicted, 
when photons will be, at least, delaying in substance. For the effect of localization is known 
the empirical Joffe - Regel criterion:     . Just this phenomenon was observed in [79] 
(therein are given references on preceding investigations). In the scope of offered approach 
the phenomenon of Anderson's localization can be considered on a slightly another base. So, 
if ℓ<< c|τ2| the photon will undergo repeating interaction acts without completion of its 
physical formation between them that must delay its exit out of medium. The criterion of 
delay is determined [23] as         , which can be rewritten with       and 

Mark E. Perel'man  
134 
        as       . Notice that this condition is nearer to the experimental results [19] 
than the Joffe - Regel criterion. 
 
 
9. THRESHOLDS OF LIGHT REFLECTION 
 
Let‘s consider some features of occurrence of specular reflection at metal surface. We 
assume that each act of reflection is the collective effect of the group of M scatterers. The 
depth of skin-layer in substance with dielectric susceptibility             is equal 
                by the definition, at complex description         and therefore 
the delay at scattering coincides with the duration of formation of reflected signal. The 
duration of reflection process (absorption of ingoing photon and formation of outgoing) can 
be determined as 
 
      
  
                 
 
,                                   (9.1) 
 
where         is the light velocity in reflecting layer of metal. Here must be underlined 
that in (9.1) contains the relation        , i.e. resonance denominators are cancelled and 
      is sufficiently flat function (absence of sharp maxis of reflection is natural for metals). 
 The size of scatterers group M can be determined via comparison of thresholds of MPP 
at reflection estimated by different methods. 
 Let‘s consider an area S of skin-layer of depth    on which the flux j falls. As the 
duration of interaction of each photon is equal      , in this volume simultaneously can be 
      quanta and          . On the other hand maximal number of independently 
reflected photons must be equal to number of reflecting groups in the volume S   i.e. 
          
 
  The equating of both relations leads to an estimation: 
 
       
 
                                                            (9.2) 
 
In the Drude model all outer electrons in metal can be considered as free ones. Therefore 
the amplitude of scattering on the group close to saturation is M-fold bigger than the 
amplitude of scattering on single electron r0, i.e. the cross-section on such group    
      Thus the threshold density of reflecting photon flux 
 
        
 
                                                          (9.3) 
 
 Equating of these expressions leads to an estimation: 
 
  
 
      
 
    
     
     ,                                            (9.4) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
135 
 
where N is the number of dispersive electrons and approximately 
 
       
 
 
        
 
        
 
 
 
as for coherent interactions       in analogy with          
Let‘s consider the flux j, part of which is entering into rays tube, i.e. into the cylinder of 
diameter   If on this area is a heterogeneity, the silver grain, for example, with M dispersive 
electrons, it quasi-resonantly interacts with this part of flux and the threshold of nonlinear 
processes goes down: 
 
  
      
  
    
      
     
      
 
                                      (9.5) 
Hence the presence of grains of definite sizes on reflecting surface can lower threshold of 
nonlinear processes in           -fold. It is the gigantic effect of harmonics generation (e.g. 
[80]). 
Considered mechanism can explain also the known Wood effect: transition from diffuse 
reflection to mirror one with growing of density of mercury gas [81] (further investigations 
are reviewed e.g. in [82]). 
For this purpose the density of atoms-scatterers              needed for beginning 
of mirror reflectance must be estimated. As mercury in considered case can be represented as 
an ideal gas, this density is determined via pressure as       
 
 and therefore 
 
      
 
  
  
    
     
      ,                                 /                         (9.6) 
 
This expression is in a qualitative conformity with the Fermi calculations [83]. 
It can be noted that the generation of higher harmonics must be sharply increased at 
approach to thresholds of selective reflection. As far as I know, such effect was not 
experimentally examined. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Let us enumerate examined problems and the main results. 
1.  Microscopic consideration of lasers and, more generally, of interactions of intensive 
radiation flux with matter requires the examination of QED processes with N incident 
photons (   ) in the initial state. With this aim the clarification of transition to the 
infinite volume of field quantization is executed. The refined procedure leads to 
appearance of dependence of reaction rate on densities of photons fluxes      
[quant/cm²s]. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
136 
2.  Calculations of MPPs naturally lead to appearing of the time durations of elementary 
processes which, as all primary physical magnitudes, must be initially contained in 
the QED and their ad hoc introduction is not needed. 
3.  Calculation of MPP rates in laser fields leads to the "virial" series over       . 
Characteristic photon flux density is presented as              , where 
 
and () are the cross-section and time duration of elementary act of elastic e-γ 
scattering. 
4.  Reaction rates are characterized by the irremovable pole at j = j0. This pole 
corresponds to saturating of considered process and/or to opening of new channel of 
interactions and can be naturally interpreted via magnitudes of durations and cross-
sections of scattering. 
5.  The HHGs can be interpreted via virtual absorption of many quanta during the time 
of keeping of their total energy by bound or free electron in accordance with the 
uncertainty principles. The emission of all this energy by one photon is the most 
probable. The HHG on bound electron can completely be executed in the scope of 
the same atom. 
6.  The reaction rates of HHGs are expressed via the binomial distribution that leads 
under big N to the plateau in HHG spectra far from both their tails. 
7.  The MPI process is complicated by the accumulation of momentum of liberated 
electron corresponding to energy of virtually absorbed quanta. The computation of 
this process is executed by the Landau theory of predissociation that leads to 
revealing of time duration of momentum accumulation. The reaction rate depends on 
conformity of both durations. 
8.  Acceleration of charged particles by laser field is also describable by two mutual 
subprocesses: the accumulation of energy by virtual absorption of photons of laser 
flux and an acquisition of corresponding momentum via interaction with ions of 
plasma and/or by external electric field. Last case is considered in some details.  
9.  The QED consideration of radiation pressure on transparent objects can resolve the 
very old Abraham-Minkowsky paradox and gives correct expressions for several 
cases. This problem can be valuable at consideration of laser induced thermonuclear 
reactions. 
10.  As the offered approach is based onto the theory of temporal functions, the 
demonstration of their significance seems desirable. With these aims in the Appendix 
their application to general structure of condensed states and to several kinetic 
processes, mostly well known, are examined. This consideration demonstrates the 
possibilities that can lead to new understanding of some old problems. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Problems considered in this article had been studied during long times and had been 
discussed, at different directions, with many colleagues. The most valuable comments were 
expressed by N. B. Delone, G. Mainfray, V. A. Kovarsky, S. G. Matinyan, E. Pollak. I. 
Royzen, M. Ya. Amusia and, constantly, by G. M. Rubinstein. I am deeply indebted to them. 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
137 
 
APPENDIX: QUANTUM KINETICS OF CONDENSED STATES: ROLE OF 
DURATIONS OF ELEMENTARY PROCESSES 
 
A-1. Overview 
 
    The most interactions between atoms/molecules in condensed substances can be 
considered as exchanging of virtual photons within the near field of constituents charges. 
Therefore durations of interaction and "dressing" of particles, considered above, are the main 
determinative that lead to definition of effective volume of such interaction   expressed 
through the total cross-section of (low frequencies) scattering          of virtual photons 
and duration of this interaction       , i.e.               . Hence radii of 
electronic correlations         ; they determine a set of critical indices under phase 
transitions, lead to somewhat précised form of the Landau-Ginzburg theory of phase 
transitions and so on. 
   Offered approach, just as in the case of multiphoton processes, allows estimation of 
saturations of interactions and determining thresholds of new channels opening for certain 
processes. Therefore several expressions can be deduced for transition points of dielectric and 
magnetic 
susceptibilities 
of 
different 
media, 
electrical 
conductivity 
including 
superconductivity and Anderson transitions, heat conductivity, certain limit significances of 
physical parameters and so on. The offered theory allows also the consideration of Bose-
Einstein condensate of rarified gases via virtual photons exchange between atoms. 
    It should be noted that although all interactions between components of such states are 
electromagnetic ones, however the direct use of QED concepts, just as for the theory of 
MPPs, is usually presented a priori impossible or inconvenient and with excessive 
complication. Here we try to demonstrate possibilities and perspectives of the QED approach 
to certain more or less known problems. The general aim of QED should consist in describing 
of all phenomena, except nuclear and gravitational ones, by the photons exchange and 
influence of static fields. At application to definition of condensed states this program can be 
expressed in such form: 
    The stationary state can be called the condensed formation, if each part of an 
unrestricted, in principle, isotropic set of its constituents has lesser mass than in free or 
isolated states, i.e. at sufficiently far distance between them.  
     Such definition means the consideration of mass defect as the negative binding 
energy. The lesser value of mass can be interpreted, on the quantum language, dynamically: 
these particles are in the processes of "development" into separate physical particles, are at 
the formation status. Therefore they are inter-connected by virtual field quanta of near field 
that are also in the status of formation. Differently, the virtual "coat" of individual particles is 
not completed or such "dressing" is integrated for a set of constituents and therefore the 
virtual dressing of each particle is not required, as though particles lost self-individuality or 
identification. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
138 
For demonstration of the offered program we shall use basic determinations and features 
of near field and temporal functions describing processes of formation (dressing) of particles 
and states given in the Section 2. The most needed for us is the simplest case of two-level 
systems: 
 
                                                                   (A.1.1)  
 
After averaging over the Boltzmann distribution it leads to the usable expression: 
 
       
     
                
                                                         (A.1.2)  
 
with               .  
In a majority of cases below will be enough the simplest forms: 
           ,                                                               (A.1.3) 
 
the magnitude (A.1.3) will be only used for examination of problems of dressing, index and 
average sign will be omitted. 
 The general consideration of these notions is given in the Subsection A.2 [16]. In the 
Subsection A.3 they are expressed in more precise forms for different types of interactions, 
[20], which allow determination of radii of correlations for these interaction types at 
comparing of their relative values. 
 In the Subsections A.4 and A.5 certain well known expressions of different branches of 
solid state physics (cf. [84]) are expressed via temporal functions and corresponding radii of 
correlations and thresholds. Such way of their derivation demonstrates possibilities of method 
and can lead to some new interpretations of known phenomena. 
 The phenomenon of Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) in rarefied atomic gases [85] is 
separately examined in the Section 6. The QED approach to this phenomenon can be 
connected to our general assumption of impossibility of existence of links without an 
exchange of excitations, of virtual photons [18]. 
 All these results and certain further perspectives are summed in the concluding section of 
the Appendix. 
 
        
A-2. General consideration 
 
    Let us examine the peculiarity of (virtual) photons exchange (we follow [20]). The 
mean free flight path of photons is determined by the total cross-section of e-γ interactions 
and the density of scatterers (outer electrons) as          . The total cross-section is 
determined by the optical theorem of scattering theory as 
 
             
                                                           (A.2.1)  
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
139 
A(0) is the amplitude of elastic scattering on the zero angle. For low frequencies, interesting 
for our consideration in the most cases, can be taken that            with       
   , the classical radius of electron. 
Interchanging photons will be in a formation stage if 
 
                                                                         (A.2.2) 
  
and this condition is the basic one for the offered theory, exactly corresponds (2.14), etc. 
(Some other deductions of this main physical notion will be given below.) 
 The definition (A.2.2) leads to the basic inequality corresponding to the proposed 
definition of condensed state: 
 
                                                                       (A.2.3) 
  
where       
 (EM) interactions on 
the frequency ω" or, more shortly, "the volume of interaction". 
From the definition (A.2.3) the effective radius of EM correlations (the length of EM 
interactions) on frequency   follows: 
 
                                                                         (A.2.4)  
 
and conditions for saturation of interactions on this frequency as 
 
                                      
 
                             (A.2.5) 
  
as several types of interactions are possible. (We do not take here into account the space-time 
dependencies and anisotropy of states, polarization effects, etc.) 
The induction of external influence in medium can be defined as 
 
        
 
 
  
  
                                                   (A.2.6) 
 
      is the generalized susceptibility of medium. Therefore the conditions of phase 
transitions can be determined as singularities of       and/or as situations when          
at definite frequency. 
As     and, more generally,   are functions of the frequency  , the natural question 
arises: which frequency must be inserted into (A.2.1)? It can not be, of course, frequencies, 
connected with the heat radiation that corresponds to kinetic energy of particles. As this 
frequency is the representative of the (negative) potential energy, it must be connected with 
latent heat, energy of atomization and so on. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
140 
By a very surprising manner the volume of interaction for single electron    can be 
defined as the volume within which the mass of electron (the complete mass of free physical 
particle) is assembled in the averaged result of pure Coulomb interaction: 
 
    
 
      
  
            
  
                                      (A.2.7)  
 
where             is the Coulomb potential (choice of the averaging procedure is not 
very critical, the density of averaging        must be chosen so that               
    only). This relation undoubtedly shows that the volume included in it corresponds to such 
physical interpretation: 
 
                                                                     (A.2.8)  
+ 
where                     is substituted  and       is the duration of physical 
particle formation at this frequencies range (A.1.3) (the uncertainty principles interpretation 
of this factor is not excluded). 
The expression (A.2.8) can be also calculated for electrons in EM fields via the factor 
expressing the absorbed energy   of density of electromagnetic flux                  
penetrating into the volume: 
 
                                                                    (A.2.9) 
 
Let's assume that the electron is absorbing this energy as one quantum:     . For its 
keeping an accumulation of momentum         from surrounding particles or fields 
at the course of the time duration         is needed. Substitution of these magnitudes in 
(A.2.9) with taking into account the Second Law,     
 
     leads just to the expression 
(A.2.8). (It must be emphasized that        is the relativistic invariant.) 
The expression (A.2.8) leads to the radius of bonds (or correlations) as 
 
                                                         (A.2.10)  
 
For usual distances        cm between atoms/molecules in condensed state the 
relation (A.2.10) leads to     mcm, of a right order of magnitude for interatomic bonds. 
In processes of photons exchanging between particles with magnetic moment   and 
under exchanging between spherical rotators with dipole moment   and moment of inertia 
  the corresponding amplitudes are: 
 
   
    
                  
     
  
 
            .                        (A.2.11)  

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
141 
 
For the first estimations can be taken that                     and      , 
then 
 
                                                         (A.2.11′)  
 
and therefore the effective volume for these interactions remains equal to (A.2.8). It can be 
even assumed that these more weak interactions would lead to phase transitions of the second 
kind, etc. 
A slightly another interpretation of the interaction volume can be represented via the 
energy of black body radiation        filling up the volume of interaction: 
 
    
  
 
 
            
  
   
 
  
 
   
 
                         (A.2.12)  
 
The expression (A.2.12) can be rewritten via the ratio of durations: 
 
    
 
  
  
          
 
                                                  (A.2.13)  
 
where              and        . It can be considered, in particular, as 
proportionality of the magnitudes of action:                  
Note that the order and the sense of   can be noted also by such simple estimation. For 
hydrogen and hydrogen-like atoms the binding energy        , where           
is the Bohr radius, and the transition frequency       . These values lead to a limiting 
estimation:        
 , i.e. the mean interaction volume is of the order of the Bohr volume. 
It may be noticed that the strange, at first glance, dependence:         and therefore 
the proportionality        could be foreseen by the well-known dependence of the Fermi 
energy:                 . 
 
        
A-3. Radii of thermal and field correlations  
 
The mole latent energy of phase transitions is determined as           , where    
is the entropy of   phase. If at approach to the critical temperature    this difference 
smoothly aspires to zero, the latent energy per atom/molecule can be presented as 
 
                             
                ,        (A.3.1)  
where              . 

Mark E. Perel'man  
142 
Let's suppose that this energy plays the role of n quanta (of equal frequencies, for 
simplicity) that execute connections in (A.2.8) as       . This assumption leads to 
such expression of the volume of interaction: 
 
                                                                       (A.3.2)  
 
        , and to the radius of virtual photon's correlations: 
 
                                                                 (A.3.3)  
 
. For the phase transitions of second kinds the thermal energy of a single atom may be 
determined close to the critical temperature as 
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
            
i.e. it leads to the similar form of expressions for the radius of correlations. 
Similar quantities may be determined for some other types of interactions. So for the 
electrical and magnetic dipole interactions, correspondingly       and      . It 
naturally leads to the radii of correlations: 
 
                                                                        (A.3.4)  
 
If there is such medium, where the main role plays the exchange of electrons (polymer 
molecules?), the corresponding matrix element and correlation radius will be of the form: 
 
                                    .                       (A.3.5)  
 
Thus, in all these cases the critical index of correlations is of the universal type: 
 
                                                                          (A.3.6)  
 
-  the conclusion, which supports, in the scope of offered theory, the known hypothesis of 
transitions similarity. This result predetermines the estimations of other critical indices [20]. 
The definition of volume of interaction allows estimating of some other physical 
quantities. So, for example, the maximal temperature, when the existence of chemical bonds 
is still possible, can be estimated. 
Let's define for this aim the e-e interaction volume averaged over the Maxwell 
distribution that implies the substitution              and therefore the volume of 
interaction, written with taking into account (A.3.5), can be expressed as 
 
                                                               (A.3.7) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
143 
 
It shows that the electron exchange interactions at distances        cm are possible 
when          K only. (Note that on this base can be determined the maximal 
temperature for  -mesoatoms interactions also, etc.) Such estimations should be more 
probable than the usual ones of type         , where Λ is the mole energy of 
atomization. 
The condition     , natural for the offered approach, can be rewritten as 
                                                                      (A.3.8)  
 
which for medium density N=1021÷1024 particles/cm3 leads to the bond energy of order 
0.04÷2.6 eV or to the maximal latent heat                   kJ/mole. 
These estimations seem rough ones, but not contradictory. 
The limit case of narrow cooperation should be noted when     , but       remains 
non-zero. In such case             and therefore 
 
  
                                                              (A.3.9)  
 
i.e. the index is twice lesser than nearby of usual critical points. It means that the 
corresponding index can vary, in general, between 2/3 and 1/3. 
It is necessary to underline that determination of the radius of correlations allows the 
expanding of density of thermodynamic potentials over the order parameter as 
 
                                                 (A.3.10)  
 
where as distinguished from the famous Landau theory the expansion goes not over the 
artificial parameter            , but over physically founded magnitude    
   
    . 
From the definition (A.2.9) follows that              and therefore 
 
                                                                             (A.3.11) 
  
This approach leads to certain refinements of the Ginsburg-Landau theory; they are in 
more details described in our article [20] and therefore are here omitted. 
 
        
A-4. Some applications: electromagnetic properties  
 
    In the accordance with (A.2.11), (A.2.8), (A.2.12) and (A.3.5) such expressions for 
volumes of different interaction types can be represented: 
 

Mark E. Perel'man  
144 
               
              
                        
                                                    (A.4.1) 
 
  These magnitudes lead to the dimension-less parameters 
                                                                  (A.4.2) 
  
where    is the density of corresponding particles or complexes. It means that such quantities 
as susceptibilities and some other characteristics of media must be expressed via (A.4.2), and 
the equality      should signify the singularity of considered quantity. 
We shall illustrate these propositions by some more or less evident examples. 
 
 
A-4-1. Dielectric susceptibility 
 
Dielectric susceptibility of rarefied plasma on high frequencies can be represented as 
 
                       
                                   (A.4.3)  
 
This conformance leads to a macroscopic definition of the volume of interaction: 
 
                                                                       (A.4.4)  
 
In the more general case, when the multiple interaction acts are possible, the induction (in 
isotropic linear media) must be written as 
 
          
 
 
                    
     
                            (A.4.3′)  
 
These expressions can be easily generalized on more complex cases. So, for crystals in 
the Drude - Kronig theory of free charge carriers the effective electron mass  ∗ and the 
damping caused by frequent electron-lattice collisions ϖ must be taken into account. 
Therefore 
  
 
                               
 ∗ 
 
           
from which the known expression for      
 of oscillators N can be 
taken into account. 
Molecule with the constant dipole moment d can be considered as the spherical rotator. If 
its moment of inertia is I, the amplitude of forward scattering          . In the static 
case         and therefore 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
145 
              
 
                                                      (A.4.5) 
 
For the dielectric analysis can be used the following form of partial contribution of 
molecules of either type into the dielectric susceptibility: 
 
     
  
 
 
 
                                                        (A.4.6)  
 
 Addition of n links leads to change of the moment of inertia      and to the variation 
of resonance frequency       , which allows an estimation of the degree of 
polymerization. 
The formulae (A.4.3) - (A.4.6) are related to sufficiently rarefacted media, to systems of 
non-interacted dipoles. The account of their interactions leads to the usual Lorentz factor. 
 
 
A-4-2. Debye radius of screening 
 
Debye's radius of screening determines the space distance of saturation of e-e interaction 
(A.2.3) that leads to the expressions for cases of one type and for mixture of scatterers, 
respectively: 
 
    
                          
         
                             (A.4.7)  
 
Notice that this condition determines the skin-layers depth in metals. At the absence of 
external fields this equality permits longitudinal waves propagation, i.e. the presence of near 
field. 
For a quantitative comparison with the usual theory is needed to take into account that the 
path length in molecular dynamics is determined as 
 
                          
 
This expression leads to the Debye radius, differs on the factor of order     
 
 from the 
usual one. 
 
 
A-4-3. Magnetic susceptibility 
 
If atoms of medium do not have magnetic moments,    , photons scattering induces 
electric dipole moments   and features of medium are determining via   . If      the 
volume of interaction and consequently magnetic susceptibility   do not depend on 
frequency, it is so named Van Vleck's paramagnetism. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
146 
Under rising of   (or temperature) or under excitation of higher levels with rising of   
the enhancement of      
 be observed: 
 
                                                                        (A.4.8)  
 
If     and      , it can be concluded that 
 
                                                           (A.4.9) 
  
    This expression can be generalized as 
 
      
 
          
 
 
 
   
                                          (A.4.9′)  
 
which shows the possibility of saturation and at       leads to the Curie-Weiss law: 
 
                                                                  (A.4.10)  
 
For diamagnetics, correspondingly, can be concluded that 
 
                                                   (A.4.8‖)  
 
 
A-4-4. Polaron 
 
The function    and the corresponding radius of correlation arrive at maximum on the 
frequency       , i.e. at the "particle" radius 
 
 ∗      ∗                                                                 (A.4.11) 
  
Just such excitation is named polaron. 
The value of ω  corresponds to the characteristic temperature of rotation        
      and to the self energy of rigid rotator                                       
 
 
A-4-5. Electrical conductivity and Anderson transitions 
 
Electro-conductivity can be determined via the dielectric susceptibility as 
 
      
 
             
 
                                             (A.4.12)  

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
147 
 
For the direct current it leads at         to the known relation: 
 
                           ∗                                       (A.4.13) 
  
where          is of the order of time of the electron free path     at the Fermi energy. 
(Notice that the account of e-e scattering leads to the substitution            instead of 
   and to dependence of the corresponding part of conductivity on temperature as     
   .) 
 For adjusting (A.4.13) to the elementary theory of conductivity the substitution     
    can be taken, where   is the free path length and   is the velocity on Fermi surface. 
Under a more successive consideration the quantity N or N/ω must be replaced by 
corresponding distributions, by the integrals of overlapping and so on. 
It is physically evident that for metallic conductivity the overlap of particles 
electromagnetic volumes is needed:     . And really for metals            
          at the room temperature, which correspond to (A.4.13) at    1. 
Since V and N depend on thermodynamic parameters, external fields and chemical 
composition, it leads to possibilities for control of processes of electrons delocalization, i.e. 
the processes of dielectric-metal transitions:                       
The most known of them are transitions of enough quantity of electrons into the 
conduction band (photoconduction, thermal and electrical breakdown, etc.). 
As V and N are functions of frequency, it is possible that the condition      will be 
executed in the definite frequencies interval only. So, if in the expression for    would be 
taken into account that the energy of electrons is constrained by the edge of mobility   , the 
replacement          leads to the radius of correlations: 
 
                              .                                (A.4.14)  
 
Such dependence is revealed in the known theory of Freed [86]. The coincidence of the 
degree in (A.4.14) with the critical index β allows to naming the process of energy transition 
over     as the Anderson phase transition. 
The control of conductivity is evidently possible by modification of relative contents of 
components of medium, when, for example,              , where N  and N  are 
density of metal and dielectric atoms correspondingly. At such cases        and the 
control of conductivity is feasible via the variation of medium composition. 
 
 
A-4-7. Superconductivity 
 

Mark E. Perel'man  
148 
The conditions for superconductivity existence (at    ) must be written as (A.2.3): 
 
                                                                       (A.4.15) 
  
where             
∗  , and for the Cooper pairs   
∗   ∗    ∗  , (here  ∗   , 
 ∗   ,          
For ions of mass    this volume is equal to 
 
                                 
and therefore at     from the condition         follows 
 
  
         ,                                                                 (A.4.16) 
 
which corresponds to the known Fröhlich isotopic effect. 
 Magnetic field in the domain (A.4.15) can be represented as 
 
                               
 
which satisfies the well-known Londons' equation: 
 
                               
                                    (A.4.17) 
  
       is the field penetration depth. 
In the Ginzburg-Landau theory the equation for macroscopic Ψ-function is of the form: 
 
      ∗                                               (A.4.18)  
 
and in accordance with (A.3.10) can be taken that 
 
           ∗      
         
                            (A.4.19) 
From (A.4.18) follows that   
∗                  . Therefore the penetration 
depth 
 
            
∗                                 
 
which is noticeably different from the usual expression, but the Ginzburg-Landau parameter 
             does not depend on      and the corresponding quantities are not 
modified. 
As in the BCS theory the energy gap at    0 is equal to          , it becomes 
possible to determine the numerical value of the radius of correlation as 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
149 
 
           
     
           
  
 
          
                   
        
(A.4.20) 
  
It leads to     that can be bigger the distance between atoms even till the room 
temperatures! But we can not claim that it should lead to an explanation of the high 
temperature superconductivity. 
 
 
A-5. Some applications: thermodynamic properties  
 
A-5-1. Fermi sphere 
Under     the concentration of electrons is determined as                     
and from the condition of saturation,            , follows 
 
                                                                        (A.5.1)  
 
The condition of saturation             for e-e interactions leads to the length 
 
                   ,                                                   (A.5.2)  
 
from which follows the maximal energy         
          . 
Note that (A.5.2) defines the limit distance, at which electrons are connected by the Pauli 
principle. It means that in any media atoms cannot be compressed on distances lesser than 
(A.5.2), i.e. it determines the maximal density of atomic media. 
 
A-5-2. Sound velocity and Debye temperature 
Let's consider such situation when, at very low temperatures, ions/atoms of medium 
obtain energy via collisions with electrons only. If an electron transfers at collision the energy 
          to ion, the momentum of ion, with          , will be equal to 
 
                                                                (A.5.3)  
 
  is the molecular mass. 
    Since   can be determined by the condition      , where          is the 
number of ions/atoms in the volume   , 
 
                                                               (A.5.4) 
  

Mark E. Perel'man  
150 
Therefore the analog of the Debye temperature can be defined as 
 
                                                                  (A.5.5)  
 
where s is the mean sound velocity. The last two relations lead to the definition: 
 
                                                                  (A.5.6)  
 
i.e. to a qualitative conformity with the Debye temperature for simple media. 
 
A-5-3. Heat conductivity 
Let's attempt to consider the quantities V and N for phonons flux. The dispersion law for 
phonons can be written as     . Since it can be taken that        , where    , 
we have that 
 
                                                                (A.5.7) 
  
As in the case of electrical conductivity, the coefficient of thermal conductivity can be 
determined from the relation for thermal flux: 
 
                                                                        (A.5.8) 
  
where L is of interatomic order. 
      It seems, that the classic Wiedemann-Franz relation 
 
                     
 
is fulfilled for obtained estimations. In every case they allow to estimate amplitude of 
phonons scattering on distinguished scatterers. 
 
A-5-4. Energy and heat capacity of electron gas 
Let's designate 
 
                                                          (A.5.10)  
 
Electron states number      in the volume V and their density      on the energy 
interval are naturally written as 
 
                                                     (A.5.11)  
 
      Complete energy of electron gas in the volume V under    
 
   is equal to 
 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
151 
    
  
 
 
 
                                                  (A.5.12)  
 
and hence immediately follows heat capacity of degenerate electron gas: 
 
                                                                       (A.5.13)  
 
Let us calculate now the internal energy of electron gas and compare it with the energy of 
heat radiation. If it will be assumed that the electrons kinetic energy is completely caused by 
photons of the internal field, the complete energy of this field must be calculated as the 
analogue with (A.5.12), with substitution           and the averaging over the Bose-
Einstein distribution: 
 
    
   
    
  
 
 
  
                                                  (A.5.14)  
 
Thus, this energy surpasses the Planck radiation energy at, approximately, 137-fold: 
 
                  .                                                       (A.5.15)  
 
This relation, with precision till (4/ ), is natural from the QED point of view: irradiation 
leads to the additional vertex at any Feynman graph. 
 
A-4-5. Fermi gas 
Under     the density of Fermi gas is determined via the top momentum as    
  
       . If it would be taken that the main frequency, which determines the volume   , 
depends on the limit energy of Fermi gas      
    ∗, then the saturation condition 
       with        leads to the expression        
 
   
 
   
  
    
 ∗
  
 
                                                  (A.5.16) 
  
    It leads to such EM volume of one fermion: 
             
          
   ,                                 (A.5.17) 
 
where                 ∗     and at      the mass renormalization in such 
system is turn out: 
 
 ∗                                                                 (A.5.18) 
 

Mark E. Perel'man  
152 
It must be noticed that the analogical form of Vγ with slightly different coefficient C  can 
be formed by inclusion in Vγ the Coulomb energy          with                
instead of irradiation energy. 
 
A-5-6. Maximal binding energy and maximal self-frequency 
The mole energy of atomization Λ may correspond to such EM volume, for which the 
correlation radius is of the order of the Bohr radius:           
  and        . It 
leads to such estimations: 
                                                                    (A.5.19) 
 
It can be reminded that under the normal conditions (absence of external pressure) the 
maximal atomization energy has Wolfram  , it is of the order 857 kJ/mole. The duplicating 
of Λ can be achieved by more scrupulous consideration of interatomic distances. With taking 
into account this possibility it can be stated that the maximal self-frequency in condensed 
media must correspond to photons energy of order of 8÷9 eV. 
 
A-5-7. Green functions and quasiparticles 
The dispersion law for quasiparticles is usually determined via poles of thermodynamic 
Green functions in momentum space, i.e. by the equation 
 
                                                                   (A.5.20)  
 
More visual will be such proposition: the elementary excitation can be freely transferring 
via media if its (macroscopic) delay time is equal to zero: 
 
τ     
 
  ω        μ         ′    ′        ,                      (A.5.21) 
  
where G1 and G2 are the real and imaginary parts of G and   
  are corresponding derivatives. 
    The equality (A.5.22) leads to three possibilities of quasiparticles formation: 
 
                                                           (A.5.22) 
  
and the third possibility, as far as I know, was not considered yet. It seems that this condition 
can be connected with peculiarities of skin layers, etc. 
 
 
A-6. Bose-Einstein Condensation of Gases: Interconnection of Constituents 
 
Let's consider the BEC formation as the process of virtual photons exchange that links 
spacely distributed systems of oscillators [87]. The conditions of virtuality leads to the main 
restriction on density of identical particles in considered medium      , which should be 
close to the condition of Bose condensate formation defined by Einstein [88] as 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
153 
 
                                                                          (A.6.1) 
 
where                 is the length of de Broglie thermal wave. 
The combination of these conditions leads to our main condition: BEC of rarified atomic 
gases can be formed by coordination of thermal excitation (thermal wave length) and the 
energy of the lowest, but sufficiently effective level of atom (the       transitions). 
Let's consider this assumption in more detail. Each atom has, on the average, the kinetic 
energy               , where   is the coefficient of proportionality; probably, in 
view of condensation,                  , its magnitude introduces certain 
uncertainty not very important for further examination. Therefore at entering into the 
condensate each atom must get rid of corresponding momentum, 
 
                                                               (A.6.2) 
 
by atomic collisions that are very rare at the considered situation, or by a transfer of this 
momentum via a virtual photon emission to any other constituent. 
The energy of photon with momentum (A.6.2) may correspond therefore to the 
wavelength of the strongest level of recipient atom λ : 
 
                                                                  (A.6.3) 
 
Additionally we must suggest that the transfer of this excitation will be the most effective 
on a distance of photon wavelength, i.e. if all interacting atoms of BEC are in the near field of 
exchanging photons: 
 
        .                                                               (A.6.4) 
 
The comparison of the estimations (A.6.3) and (A.6.4) for the most suitable, as seems, 
lines with experimental data [84] shows a qualitative accordance of the data for Na, Cr and 
Rb or, more carefully, an absence of essential contradictions. 
  *   *   * 
The considerations described in the Appendix lead to such conclusions. 
All dynamical interactions between atoms/molecules in condensed substances can be 
considered as the exchanging by virtual photons in the frame of QED. Such approach allows 
the determining of effective radii of correlations for different types of interaction and 
effective volumes of such interactions. These magnitudes are directly determined via 
durations of interaction: the duration of delay at elastic scattering and the duration of final 
state formation. It evidently demonstrates the significance of temporal conceptions for 
fundamental science. 
The derived radii of correlations determine critical indices of phase transitions. It 
univocally demonstrates their physical sense and proves the offered conception. The deduced 

Mark E. Perel'man  
154 
radii of interactions correspond to volumes of interactions and allow a specification of 
thresholds of different processes. The offered approach leads, in particular, to certain 
specification of the Ginzburg-Landau theory of phase transitions. 
For obvious demonstration of possibilities of this conception, the simplified deduction of 
some known results in different branches of physics is represented. These results represent 
also certain new possibilities of phenomena interpretations. The most obvious example of the 
offered approach represents the Bose-Einstein condensation of gases; therefore it is described 
in the special Section. 
It can be noted that constituents dressing can be considered as a direction to their 
decoherence. Therefore the theories of decoherence (e.g. [89]) can be formally close to the 
offered approach. 
The negative values of durations are not considered here. They correspond to processes 
of tunneling, are partly examined in [18] and require special consideration. Note, that the 
offered scheme can be evidently generalized on non-electromagnetic interactions also. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Brabec, T. & Krauz, F. (2000). Rev. Mod. Phys., 72, 545.  
[2] 
Dell'Anno, F., De Siena, S. & Illuminati, F. (2007). arXiv: quant-ph/0701050v1. 
[3] 
Perel'man, M. E. (1970). Sov. Phys. JETP, 31, 1155.  
[4] 
McColl, L. A. (1932). Phys. Rev., 40, 261. A more recent calculations, for example: E. 
O. Kane in "Tunneling phenomena in solids" (E. Burstein, S. Lundqvist, Ed's). Plenum 
Press, NY, 1969. 
[5] 
Frank, I. M. (1942). Izvestia Akademii Nauk SSSR, ser. fizich., 6, 10.  
[6] 
Moshinsky, M. (1951). Phys. Rev., 81, 347, 84, 525 (1951). See, also, a recent 
interpretation of this phenomenon: V. Man'ko, M. Moshinsky & A. Sharma. Phys. Rev., 
A 59, 1809 (1999) 
[7] 
Bohm D. Quantum theory. Prentice-Hall, NY: 1952, Ch.11.  
[8] 
Ter-Mikaelyan M. L. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 25, 289 (1953). Landau L. D. & 
Pomeranchuk I. Ya. DAN SSSR, 92, 535, 735 (1953) 
[9] 
Wigner E. P. Phys.Rev., 98, 145 (1955), Wigner cited in this connection the       
unpublished theses of L.Eisenbud. 
[10] Smith F. T. Phys. Rev., 118, 349; 119, 2098 (1960). 
[11] M. L. Goldberger & K. M. Watson. Collision Theory. Wiley, NY, 1964. 
[12] A. I. Baz'. Sov.J.Nucl.Phys., 4, 229 (1967)  
[13] E. Pollak, W. H. Miller. Phys. Rev. Lett., 53, 115 (1984); E. Pollak. J. Chem. Phys.         
83, 1111 (1986). 
[14] V. N. Baier, V. M. Katkov. Phys. Rep., 409, 261 (2005). 
[15] J. G. Muga et al., Ed's, 2002. Time in Quantum Mechanics. NY: Springer. 
[16] M. E. Perel'man. Int J Theor Phys  47, 468 (2008). 
[17] M.E. Perel‘man, G.M. Rubinstein, Sov. Phys. Dokl. 203  798 (1972);   M.E. Perel‘man, 
G.M. Rubinstein, in: W.T. Arkin (Ed.), New Research on Lasers and   Electro Optics, 
Nova Science, New York, 2006, pp. 229–267. 
[18] M. E. Perel‘man. Phys. Lett. A 373, 648 (2009) 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
155 
[19] M. E. Perel‘man. Phys. Lett. A 370, 528 (2007) 
[20] M. E. Perel'man. Phil. Mag., 87, 3129 (2007). 
[21] M. E. Perel‘man, V.A. Tatartchenko. Phys. Lett. A 372, 2480 (2008); M. E. Perel‘man, 
V.A. Tatartchenko. arXiv: 0711.3570. M. E. Perel‘man, G. M. Rubinstein, V.A. 
Tatartchenko. Phys. Lett. A 372, 4100         (2008) 
[22] M. E. Perel'man. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 14, 733 (2005); quant-phys/0510123. 
[23] L. D. Landau , E. M. Lifshitz. The Classical Theory of Fields. 4 Ed. Pergamon,          
Oxford, 1975  
[24] O. Keller. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 16, 835 (1999)   
[25] H. E. Arnoldus.  J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 18, 547 (2001) 
[26] M. E. Perel‘man. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 16, 350 (2007); quant-ph/0611098   
[27] J. Schwinger. Phys. Rev., 74, 1439 (1948)  
[28] J. Schwinger. Phys. Rev., 82, 664 (1951) 
[29] F. Low. Phys. Rev., 88, 28 (1952). 
[30] L. V. Keldysh. Sov.Phys.JETP, 20, 1307 (1965). 
[31] P. Salieres, et al. Adv. Atomic, Mol. Opt. Phys., 41, 89 (1999). 
[32] H. R. Reiss. Prog. Quant. Electr., 18, 17 (1992). 
[33] M.E. Perel'man, V. G. Arutyunian. Sov. Phys. JETP, 35, 260 (1972). 
[34] J. Levinger. Photonuclear reactions, 1960; I.Schicher. In: Quantum Electrodynamics         
and Quantum Optics. NY, Boulder, 1984, p.405. Comp.: W.R.Lamb, R.R.Schlicher,         
M.O.Scully. Phys.Rev.A, 36, 2763 (1987).  
[35] A. Einstein. Phys. Zs., 18, 121 (1917). 
[36] A. Einstein, P. Ehrenfest. Zs. Phys., 19, 301 (1923). 
[37] M. E. Perel'man. arXiv: quant-ph/0903.1823. 
[38] L. D. Landau, E.M.Lifshitz. Quantum Mechanics (Non-Relativistic Theory). 3rd ed.         
Pergamon Press. Oxford,1991. 
[39] P. Agostini, L. F DiMauro. Rep. Prog. Phys., 67, 813 (2004). 
[40] A. Scrinzi, et al. J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 39, R1 (2006). 
[41] Ch. Bula. E144 Collaboration. SLAC-PUB-7219, Jul 1995. 23pp. 
[42] W. Feller. An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications. NY:          
Chapman, 1961. 
[43] K. C. Kulander, K. J. Schafer, J. L. Krause. In: Super-intense Laser-Atom Physics.         
NATO ASI Series B, 316, 95 (1993).   
[44] J. Peatross, D. D. Meyerhofer. Phys. Rev. A, 51, R-906 (1995). 
[45] Z. Chang et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 2967 (1997). 
[46] P. B. Corcum. Phys. Rev. Lett, 71, 1994 (1993). 
[47] B. Shan, Z. Chang. Phys. Rev. A, 65, R-011804 (2002). 
[48] R. Bartels et al. Nature, 406, 164 (2000). 
[49] S. L. Voronov et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 133902 (2001). 
[50] A. Gazibegović-Busuladžić, D. B. Milošević, W. Becker. Phys. Rev. A, 70, 053403        
(2004). 
[51] J. H.Jeans. Phil. Mag., 10, 91 (1905); 17, 229 (1909). 
[52] E. Fermi. Suppl. N. Cimento, 2, 17 (1955). 
[53] N. Bohr, L. Rosenfeld. Kgl. Danske Videnk. Selskab., Math.-Fys. Medd., 12, No 8          
(1933). 
[54] A. Zommerfeld. Atombau und Spektrallinien. B.2. Braunschweig, 1960. 

Mark E. Perel'man  
156 
[55] M. Ya. Amusia. Atomic Photoeffect. Plenum, NY. 1990. 
[56] Delone, N. B. & Krainov, V. P. (1993). Multiphoton processes in atoms, Berlin:         
Springer.  
[57] G.Petite et al. Phys.Rev.A, 29, 2677 (1984). 
[58] H.G.Muller, P.H.Bucksbaum, D.W.Schumacher, A.Zavriyev. J.Phys.B, 23, 2761             
(1990). 
[59] Watanabe et al. Phys.Rev.Lett. 73, 2692 (1994). 
[60] G.Mainfray. J.Phys.(France) 43, S.2-367 (1982).  
[61] C.Y.Tang et al. In: Multiphoton processes (G.Mainfray, P.Agostini, Eds.) Paris:                 
CEA, 1991, p.69. 
[62] D. Umstadter. Phys. Plasm., 8, 1774  (2001); J. Phys. D: 36 , R151 (2003), 
[63] S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov et al. arXiv: 0812.14.21v.3 
[64] M. Pardy. hep-ph/0207274   
[65] T. Plettner et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 134801 (2005) 
[66] S. R. de Groot, L. G. Suttorp. Foundations of Electrodynamics (North-Holland,          
Amsterdam, 1972), Ch. V.7; I. Brevik. Phys. Rep., 52, 133 (1979); V. L. Ginzburg. 
Applications of Electrodynamics in Theoretical Physics and        Astrophysics (Gordon 
& Breach, NY, 1989) 
[67] G. K. Campbell, A. E. Leanhardt, J. Mun, M. Boyd, E. W. Streed, W. Ketterle, D. E.          
Pritchard. Phys. Rev. Lett., 94, 170403 (2005). 
[68] Weilong She, Jianhui Yu, Raohui Feng. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 243601 (2008).     
[69] A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, R. Y. Chiao. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68,  2421 (1992). 
[70] R. Rajaraman. Solitons and Instantons (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982). 
[71] M. E. Perel‘man. Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 16, 350 (2007).  
[72] A. Zangwill. Physics at Surfaces.  Cambridge Univ. Press, NY, 1988.. 
[73] V. V. Zheleznyakov et al. Sov. Phys. Usp. 32, 835 (1989) (UFN, 159, 194 (1989)). 
[74] L. D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz. Electrodynamics of continuous media (Pergamon,         
London, 1984). 
[75] M. D. Stenner, D. J. Gauthier, M. A. Neifeld. Phys.Rev.Lett., 94, 053902 (2005). 
[76] L. Brillouin. Wave Propagation and Group Velocity. Academic Press, NY, 1960.  
[77] S. -H. Choi, U. Österberg. Phys.Rev.Lett., 92, 193903 (2004). 
[78] P. W. Anderson. Phys. Rev., 109, 1492 (1958). 
[79] M. Störzer et al. Phys. Rev Lett., 96, 063904 (2006); cond-mat/0511284. 
[80] C. K. Chen et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 46, 145 (1981) 
[81] R. W. Wood. Phil. Mag., 23, 689 (1912); Physical Optics (Macmillan, NY, 1934). 
[82] V. A. Kizel‘. Otrazhenie sveta (Light Reflection). Moscow, 1973 and references         
therein. 
[83] E. Fermi. Rend. Lincei, 33, 90 (1924). 
[84] L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz. Statistical Physics. 1. L. Pergamon, 1980;         
Electrodynamics.of Continious Media. L.: Pergamon, 1981. 
[85] E. A. Cornell, C. E. Wieman. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 875 (2002); E. A. Cornell, J. R. 
Ensher, C. E. Wieman. Proc. Intern. School of Physics "Enrico           Fermi ", Course 
CXL (Eds M. Inguscio, S. Stringari, C. E. Wieman) (Italian Phys.          Soc., 1999) 
pp.15 -- 66; In: arXiv/9903109. 
[86] K. F. Freed. Phys. Rev., 135, 4802 (1972). 
[87] M. E. Perel'man. In: arXiv/ 0804.1908 (2008). 

Quantum Kinetics of Multiphoton Processes: Durations of Elementary… 
157 
[88] A. Einstein. Sitzungsber. K. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Phys. Math. Kl., 1924, 261; 1925, . 
[89] Ph. Blanchard, et al. (Eds.). Decoherence: theoretical, experimental, and conceptual 
problems (Lecture notes in physics; 538). Berlin et al.: Springer, 2000. 
 
 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 159-204  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
TWO-DIMENSIONAL PERIODIC NANOSCALE 
PATTERNING OF SOLID SURFACES BY FOUR-BEAM 
STANDING WAVE EXCIMER LASER LITHOGRAPHY 
 
 
1Yu. K. Verevkin, 1E. Ya. Daume, 1V. N. Petryakov, 2A. Yu. Klimov, 
2B. S. Gribkov, 3D. O. Filatov, 3Yu. Yu. Gushchina, 4C. Tan, 
4C.S. Peng, 4M. Pessa, 5Z. Wang, 6S. M. Olaizola and 7S. Tisserand 
1Institute for Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Science, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
2Institute for Physics of Microstructures, Russian Academy of Science, 
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
3Research and Educational Center for Physics of Solid State Nanostructures, 
N. I. Lobachevskii University of Nizhny Novgorod, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
4Optoelectronics Research Centre, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland 
5Manufacturing Engineering Centre, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK 
6CEIT and Tecnun, University of Navarra, San Sebastian, Spain 
7SILIOS Technologies, Peynier, France 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The article is devoted to a promising technology for fabrication of two-dimensional 
nanoperiodic structures on solid surfaces by four-beam standing wave pulsed laser 
modification. In this method, a large number of spots (up to 107) less than 100 nm in size 
heated up to several thousand degrees are formed on the modified surface as a result of 
the interference of the four laser beams incident on the object coherently. Besides a direct 
laser ablation, various nonlinear mechanisms of surface modification may take place in 
the standing wave maxima. This way, a nearly perfect two-dimensional pattern can be 
formed on the modified surface; the pitches of the pattern in both directions can be 
adjusted easily within the range from a few microns to tens of nanometers by simply 
varying the beams' incidence angles. This method being developed extensively at present 
is very promising for application in microelectronics, data storage, integrated optics 
(including fabrication of the Bragg mirrors, antireflection coating, two-dimensional 
photonic crystals, etc.) and is considered to be a promising alternative to X-ray 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
160 
lithography in a wide range of applications, The most important advantage of the method 
is that the nanoperiodic pattern can be formed in a single step (actually, at single laser 
pulse) by direct laser ablation of the material. However, the method could be applied as 
well to patterning a resist deposited onto the processed substrate to serve as a lithographic 
mask. In this article, we present some experimental results on patterning various 
materials, such as metal films on semiconductor and glass substrates, polyimide, and 
even such a hard material as diamond by direct laser ablation using a XeCl excimer laser. 
Patterning a resist film, the phase masks on fused silica and the antireflection structures 
on Si and silica glass have been fabricated. Also, using the effect of stimulation of self-
assembling of the semiconductor nanostructures by standing wave laser irradiation 
discovered by the authors, we have fabricated the ordered arrays of nanoislands on the 
surface of single crystal Si and GaAs and of GaAs/InxGa1–xAs/GaAs(001) 
heterostructures with the diameter ranging from 5 to 60 nm. 
 
PACS: 42.55.Gp, 42.62.-b, 42.79.Dj, 68.65.Hb, 81.16.Nd, 81.16.Dn, 85.40.Hp 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The periodic submicron structures have found a wide range of applications in science and 
technology [1] Among the applications of these arrays, one could mention Bragg mirrors, 
photonic crystals, data storage, etc. For formation of the periodic arrays of the nanometer-sized 
elements, E-Beam lithography and X-Ray Lithography are used the most often. One of the 
promising methods for forming the submicron periodic arrays on the solid surfaces is Standing 
Wave or Interference Lithography [2]. In this method, the periodic pattern on the surface to be 
processed is provided by the interference of two (or more) coherent laser beams. In the case of 
two beams, the interference pattern is suitable for forming various gratings, first of all, for the 
integrated and fiber optics [3,4], including the Bragg mirrors, beam couplers, etc. As follows 
from a simple geometrical consideration (Fig. 1), the period of the standing wave in the 
symmetric scheme d = λ/[2sin(i)] where λ is the wavelength of the radiation used and i is the 
angle of incidence. So far, one can vary the period of the grating formed within a rather wide 
range simply adjusting i. The minimum dmin = λ/2 is reached at i → π/2. Using an immersion 
medium reduces dmin n times where n is the refractive index of the immersion medium. 
 
 
λ/2
d
i
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of two-beam interference in the symmetric scheme. 
In the four-beam Standing Wave Lithography, the material to be patterned is subjected to 
the two pairs coherent laser beams incident on the surface under relatively large angles. So 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
161
far, the energy of the laser beams is localized in a huge number of spots of ~ λ/4 in size. 
When the excimer ultraviolet (UV) lasers are used, the light can be localized in the spots of 
less than 40 nm in size. Using the 4th (or even the 5th) harmonic of a solid state laser radiation 
represents an alternative approach. 
It should be noted that E-Beam Lithography and X-Ray Lithography exceed the standing 
wave lithography in the spatial resolution. The forthcoming generation of the semiconductor 
devices will be based on sub-50-nm critical dimensions [5]. These critical dimensions are 
planned to be achieved using nonlinear effects in Extreme UV lithography. The above listed 
techniques have higher spatial resolution limit than UV Standing Wave Lithography. On the 
other hand, the main advantage of the last method compared to E-Beam Lithography is higher 
productivity because the latter is based on the scanning principle. 
In this article we present some experimental results on patterning various materials, by 
Four Beam Standing Wave Lithography using a powerful UV XeCl excimer pulsed laser with 
the emission wavelength λ = 308 nm. The apparatus used in these experiments is described in 
Sec. II. Also, some features of the interference of four laser beams and the mechanisms of the 
surface modification under pulsed interfering UV excimer laser radiation are discussed 
briefly. Finally, in Sec. II the heat dissipation in a thin film on a heat conducting substrate 
subjected to a spatially periodic standing wave of pulsed laser radiation [6] is considered in 
detail. It was shown that this process governs all the processes of the film modification (first 
of all, direct ablation of the film material) and is important for interpreting the experimental 
results presented below. 
There are two main techniques of Standing Wave Laser Lithography. In the first 
technique, the surface to be patterned is covered by a photoresist and exposed to the 
interfering laser radiation. Then the exposed resist undergoes development followed by 
further processing as in routine UV lithography [7,8,9]. The possibility of easy incorporation 
into a standard UV photolithographic process is a considerable advantage of Standing Wave 
Lithography. An alternative technique is direct (single pulse) modification of the patterned 
surface by laser irradiation [10,11,12,13]. In the studies presented in this article, both 
techniques have been applied. The first technique employs CW and pulsed lasers, whereas the 
second one needs high-power pulsed lasers. The high sensitivity of the photoresists makes it 
possible to use relatively low pulse energy densities and therefore to spread the processed 
area up to more than 10 cm in diameter [2, 9, 12]. This approach is promising for forming the 
large area regular arrays of the nanostructures (e.g., for flat panel displays [14]). However, 
this multistage process is rather complicated and expensive. 
In the present article, we applied this technique to pattern the surface of fused silica [15]. 
Also, we used two-beam Standing Wave Laser Lithography to form the one-dimensional 
phase masks on fused silica and on Si and the antireflection gratings on Si [16]. These objects 
are promising for applications in planar integrated optics [17,18]. The reason for using the 
photoresist is that the above applications require high enough aspect ratio of the surface relief 
that could hardly be obtained by direct ablation. The results of these studies are presented in 
Sec. III. 
The second approach enables one to form sub-100-nm periodic arrays of the surface 
nanostructures in a single step (actually, at a single pulse) in a variety of environments, 
including vacuum and ambient air. In Sec. IV we present the results of direct four-wave 
pulsed laser modification of the Fe—C films on Si substrates [6], of the polyimide films on 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
162 
the fused silica substrates, and of even such a hard material as diamond [15]. The submicron 
periodic regular arrays of the nanodimensional features of the surface morphology were 
obtained. Such structures are interesting in both fundamental and applied aspects. Fe—C 
films are promising for magnetic data storage applications. Also, investigation of the effect of 
the pulse energy density and duration on the resulting film morphology turned to be useful to 
verify the theory of heat dissipation in the thin films on various substrates presented in Sec. II. 
The polyimide films are promising as the high-contrast photoresists useful for application in 
various purposes. It was demonstrated that the mechanisms of the effect of the standing wave 
laser radiation on the polyimide film surface are different for various beam energy densities. 
Diamond has been considered to be a promising wide-gap semiconductor material for several 
decades. One of its features is extreme radiation hardness that makes it especially promising 
for application in nuclear engineering, in high energy physics, in the space applications, etc. 
At present the epitaxial films of the artificially synthesized diamond of nanometer scale 
thickness are considered to be a promising material for future nanoelectronics, first of all, due 
to high thermal conductivity of diamond. On the other hand, hardness of diamond caused 
considerable problems in processing these films. The results presented in this article 
demonstrate the possibility of direct patterning of diamond by Standing Wave Laser Ablation. 
Besides, this technique can be applied to secret marking of the diamonds used in jewelry. 
Investigations and applications of the self-assembling of nanostructures is now one of the 
dominant trends in the development of nanotechnology [19]. Starting from self-assembling of 
InAs/GaAs(001) quantum dots (QDs) [20] and GeSi/Si(001) nanoislands [21] driven by the 
elastic strain in the process of the heteroepitaxy of the highly mismatched materials [22] in 
the early 1990s, to date it has grown into a broad field of science and technology promising a 
wide range of applications in nanoelectronics [23], nanophotonics [24], etc. In recent years, 
extensive investigations have been devoted to finding the conditions for self-assembling of 
the spatially-ordered arrays of the self-assembled nanoislands in various material systems 
[25,26,27]. As a result of these studies, some self-assembling mechanism stimulating 
improvement of the size uniformity of the islands and their arrangement in regular arrays on 
the growth surface have been discovered [28,29]. Nevertheless, the problem of forming the 
uniform regular arrays of self-assembled semiconductor nanoisland still remains a vital one. 
Among various approaches to the solution of this problem, one could mention substrate 
prepatterning [30] using lithography [31,32], masking [33], growth on the vicinal surfaces 
[34], using the artificial substrates such as GexSi1–x/Si(001) buffers for growing spatially 
ordered GeSi nanoislands [35], etc. Pedraza et al. have studied the self-assembling of the 
nanoislands on Si under high-power UV pulsed laser radiation in the regime of surface wave 
excitation [36]. The self assembling effect was observed after > 200 laser pulses with the 
pulse energy density ~ 1 J⋅cm–2. 
Recently a novel approach to forming near perfectly ordered periodic arrays of self-
assembled semiconductor nanoislands has been proposed by the authors of the present article 
[37]. This is the self assembling of the semiconductor nanoislands under four-beam standing 
wave pulsed laser radiation. In Sec. V the experimental results on the formation of the two-
dimensional regular periodic arrays of the semiconductor nanoislands on the single crystal 
Si(001) and GaAs(001) through self-assembling stimulated by the standing wave pulsed XeCl 
excimer laser radiation are presented. The surface stresses due to the local thermal expansion 
of the single crystal surface in the standing wave maxima were considered to be the driving 
force for ordered nanoisland array formation. Also the results of the four beam standing wave 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
163
pulsed laser modification of a GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs(001) strained heterostructure grown by 
Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) are presented in Sec. V. The complex two-dimensional 
periodic nanoscale patterns were formed. Within each cell of the standing wave induces 
pattern, a number of self-assembled nanoislands having a bimodal size distribution were 
observed. The islands of smaller size (≈ 5 nm in diameter) were concentrated in the center of 
each cell whereas the larger islands (≈ 15 nm in diameter) were located at the boundaries of 
the cells. The results were explained by the interaction of the intrinsic elastic strain in the 
CaAs/InGaAs/GaAs heterostructure with the standing wave induced thermal field. 
 
 
II. STANDING WAVE PULSED LASER MODIFICATION OF THE SOLID 
SURFACES: APPARATUS AND BASICS 
 
A. Apparatus 
 
The techniques for laser modification of the solid surfaces can be classified according to 
the number of the laser beams employed. The methods using a single focused laser beam are 
the most developed ones [38]. The nonlinear mechanisms of modification of the solids under 
the focused laser beams provide the possibility to reduce the modified area downto the sizes 
comparable to the wavelength of the laser radiation used [39]. Using laser beam scanning 
and/or the motorized stages one can produce any complex structure including the Bragg 
mirrors for the infrared (IR) and visible wavelength bands. The main drawback of this 
approach is poor productivity that is an attribute of all technologies based on the scanning 
principle. 
Another approach to forming the one-dimensional Bragg mirrors, gratings, etc. is using 
the interference of two coherent laser beams [40,41,42]. This way, a perfectly periodic pattern 
over the area of several centimeters in diameter can be formed. Also, the Bragg mirrors with 
the spatially modulated period can be formed using the interference of the two laser beams 
with the different non-planar wave fronts [43]. The optical filters with complex transmission 
spectra can be created using the interference of two beams having several narrow lines in 
their emission spectra [44]. The same results can be obtained using the interference of three 
(or more) coherent monochromatic laser beans aligned in a single plane of incidence. 
The interference of three and more coherent laser beams incident onto the surface to be 
modified in difference planes opens a way to create large two dimensional arrays of the 
submicron elements [45,46,47]. Also, the interference of the surface electromagnetic waves 
can be used in these purposes [48,49]. The latter mechanism can be used to create novel 
measuring and imaging systems on the basis of the method of the aperture synthesis. For 
instance, using many-beam interference one can create the holographic beam splitters for the 
master oscillators in the complex powerful laser systems. 
In the experiments described in the present article a three-cascade UV XeCl pulsed 
excimer laser designed and built at the Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of 
Sciences (Nizhny Novgorod, Russia) have been employed. The laser parameters were the 
following: the emission wavelength λ ≈ 308 nm, the coherence length > 30 cm, the laser 
radiation bandwidth ≈ 0.02 cm–1, the pulse duration ranging from 2 to 45 ns, the pulse energy 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
164 
up to 100 mJ, the beam divergence was close to the diffraction limit. The schematic drawing 
of the experimental setup is presented in Fig. 2. 
The laser system consisted of a master oscillator, of two cascades of the optical 
amplifiers, and of the optical elements for forming the laser beam(s) geometry and properties 
for matching between the amplification cascades. The master oscillator (MO) (1) consists of 
an amplifying module (2) with pumping by a transverse charge and automatic ionization of 
the active volume (33 × 2.8 × 0.7 cm3). The cavity consisted of two planar mirrors with the 
reflection coefficients of 98% (3) and 50% (4). 
In contrast to the conventional design, which utilizes the diffraction gratings in the master 
oscillator as the spectrum purifiers [50,51] two Fabry — Perot interferometers (FPs) (5, 6) 
with the sharpness ≈ 10 were employed were used for the laser spectrum rectification. This 
approach allowed improving the stability of the output radiation mode structure considerably. 
The FPs were placed inside the thermostats with the temperature stability ≈ 0.1 С° at the 
ambient temperature variations of ≈ 3 С°. The design of two FPs and thermostats 
implemented in the laser setup ensures the stability of the spectral characteristics of the laser 
radiation for about one week. After this time, the FPs required readjustment. A diaphragm of 
1.5 mm in diameter (7) was used to select a single transverse mode in the cavity. An optical 
dielectric polarizer (8) was installed inside the cavity to select the radiation polarization. The 
total cavity length was ≈ 1.5 m. 
 
 
Figure 2. The schematic diagram of the laser system for four-beam standing wave XeCl pulsed excimer 
laser modification of the solid surfaces. 1 — the master oscillator (MO); 2 — the amplifying module; 3 
and 4 — the back and the front mirrors of the cavity, respectively; 5, 6  — the Fabry-Perot etalons 
(FPs); 7 — the mode selection diaphragm; 8 — the polarizer; 9 — the beam expander; 10 — the first 
stage optical amplifier; 11 — the phase conjugation (PC) scheme; 12 — the beam decoupler; 13 — the 
second stage optical amplifier; 14 — the modified object; 15 — synchronization; 16 — the vacuum 
system; 17 — the scheme for measuring the spatial distribution of the laser radiation; and 18 — the 
mirrors. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
165
A beam expander (a co-focal telescope, 9) with the spatial filter for increasing the beam 
diameter and decreasing the level of amplified spontaneous radiation appeared in the MO was 
placed between the MO and the mirror (18). 
The first stage amplifier (10) had the active volume of 33 × 2.8 × 1.4 cm3. The radiation 
passed around the amplifier twice. The second pass was provided by a phase-conjugation 
(PC) scheme (11) where the radiation was extracted due to rotation of the beam polarization 
plane by 90° (12). Compressed SF6 under the pressure of ≈ 175 psi had been employed for 
PC. 
The four-way second stage optical amplifier (13) had an active volume of 65 × 3.5 × 1.6 
cm3. The radiation was extracted by a stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) mirror. After the 
second stage amplifier, the radiation was directed into the optical scheme and split into the 
required number of beams. The beams were then joined together onto the surface to be 
modified (positioned vertically, 14). The optical scheme consisted of four dielectric mirrors in 
the case of the two beam interference and of 11 mirrors in the case of the four beam one. The 
dielectric mirrors with the reflectivity R ≈ 0.5 were employed as the beam splitters and in 
order to direct the two resulting coherent beams onto the surface to be patterned the high 
reflectivity (R ≈ 0.99) dielectric mirrors were used. 
A high-voltage switch with a set of the cable delay lines (15) was used to synchronize the 
MO and the amplifiers. A vacuum system with one vacuum pump (16) was used to 
manufacturing and circulating the working-gas mixtures in the amplifiers. 
The setup included also a high-resolution grating spectrograph, a calorimeter for 
measuring the pulse energy, several multi-channel oscilloscopes with the high-speed 
photodetectors for recording the radiation kinetics, and a scheme for measuring the spatial 
distribution of the laser radiation (17). Also the setup included a number of the dielectric 
mirrors (18). 
The laser was initiated by feeding a high-voltage start-up pulse to the active-volume 
discharger of the master oscillator. The delay of the start-up of the first and the second stage 
amplifiers with respect to the MO depended on the rise time of the radiation in the MO and on 
the light propagation time from the MO to the corresponding amplifier. Usually, this delay 
was several tens of nanoseconds. The stability of the delay of the control pulses was ≈ 2 ns. 
The application of the thermally stabilized optics, of the spectral and spatial filtering, and of 
the SBS mirror made it possible to maintain a high quality of the laser beams during 
amplification. The SBS mirror was also used to shorten the laser pulses and to filter out the 
amplified spontaneous radiation. In most experiments the pulse duration was ≈ 7 ns unless 
other values were specified. All the experiments described below were performed in the 
ambient air at room temperature. Typically, the modified area on the sample surface was of 
several square millimeters. 
Generally, the interference of four beams is described by more than 20 parameters [2]. 
When one creates a nonmodulated uniform periodic two-dimensional structures, it is 
sufficient to consider three simplified interference schemes characterized by a much smaller 
number of parameters: 
 
(i) In the first scheme, two pairs of the beams lie in two different planes of incidence. 
These planes are perpendicular to each other, and the bisectors of the angles between 
the beams in each of the incidence planes are perpendicular to the sample surface. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
166 
(ii) The second scheme differs from the first one in that the bisector between the beams 
in one of the pairs is not perpendicular to the sample. 
(iii) In the third scheme, the planes of incidence are not perpendicular to each other. 
 
The mathematical procedure in describing the interference patterns in these cases is 
obvious and can be found, for instance, in [2]. Without going into the details of trigonometric 
calculations here, we shall mention several specific features of the interference of the four 
laser beams in the cases listed above. In the first scheme of interference, all the maxima have 
equal amplitudes and are separated by equal intervals. In the second and the third schemes, 
the amplitudes of intensity maxima in the plane of the sample and the separations between 
these maxima vary periodically. 
In all the above schemes, the interference pattern is highly sensitive to the polarizations 
of the interfering beams. Let us consider the following two cases: [46] i) the polarization 
planes of both pairs of the beams are perpendicular to the respective incidence planes (below 
referred to as TE—TE interference); and ii) the direction of polarization in one pair of beams 
is perpendicular to the plane of incidence of these beams, while in the other pair of the beams 
it is parallel to the plane of incidence of these beams (TE—TM interference). 
In [19] the pulsed laser modification of the surface of a Fe—C film with a thickness of 
several tens of nanometers deposited onto Si substrate in the TE—TM four-beam interference 
polarization scheme was studied experimentally. Fig. 3 shows the profiles of the modified 
Fe—C film surface measured by Maxim GP 200 profilometer with ≈ 0.5 μm in-plane 
resolution and ≈ 0.2 nm vertical one. Fig. 3 (a) and (b) correspond to the case when the 
bisector of one of the beam pairs is not perpendicular to the sample surface. In this case, the 
depth of surface modification varies across the sample. These variations became less 
expressed with decreasing angle between the bisector and the normal to the sample surface 
[Fig. 3 (c)]. From these experiments, one can conclude than in order to achieve the acceptable 
scatter of the intensity in the interference pattern maxima within 10%, the deviation of the 
angular beam alignment should be less than 1°. 
Most papers cited above were devoted to Standing Wave Laser Lithography where the 
interfering laser radiation was used to pattern a photoresist followed by development and 
further processing as in standard UV lithography. In this article we present mostly the results 
of forming the submicron periodic structures (including almost perfectly arranged periodic 
arrays of the holes in the metal films and of the semiconductor nanoislands) by direct 
Standing Wave Laser Modification using a powerful pulsed UV laser. Let us consider briefly 
the mechanisms of the solid surface modification in this process. 
The interest to the effect of the laser radiation on the surface of various materials 
originates from the development of the laser technologies in the 1960-s. Many fundamental 
and applied problems have been considered since that time [39, 52]. 
A powerful standing wave laser pulse results, first of all, in rapid (up to 1011 °C⋅s–1) 
heating up of the patterned surface in the local nanometer sized areas. This heating may result 
in the material evaporation [53], in the recrystallization of the films of various chemical 
composition [54,55,56], in the acceleration of the chemical reactions (in particular, in the 
laser-induced oxidation), in enhancement of the surface diffusion, etc. For example, this 
method was applied to the local nanodimensional modification of paramagnetic films with 
their conversion into the ferromagnetic state that is promising for magnetic data storage [57]. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
167
However, the effect of the laser radiation on a solid surface may not be limited to a pure 
thermal heating only. As well, it may result in a photochemical effect. 
In order to understand these processes, it is important to know the temperature 
distribution in the structures subjected to the standing wave pulsed laser radiation. Knowing 
this distribution is also useful in studying the thresholds for the laser destruction of the metal 
coatings [58] and for excitation of the surface waves. 
In the next subsection a detailed two-dimensional calculations of the heat release in a 
metal film on a heat-conducting substrate [59] are presented. Then this theory will be applied 
to analysis of the experimental results presented in the following sections. It will be 
demonstrated that thermal physical properties both of the film and of the substrate play an 
important role when a standing wave laser radiation is employed to produce a submicron 
structures on the surface.  
 
 
Figure 3. The effect of the deviation of the bisector of the angle between the two laser beams lying in 
the same plane of incidence from the normal to the sample surface on the relief of a Fe—C film 
patterned by direct sihlge-pulse two-beam laser ablation: the bisector was not perpendicular to the 
sample surface (the deviation ≈ 2°) (a, b) and the bisector was almost perpendicular to the sample 
surface (the deviation ≈ 30`) (c). 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
168 
B. The Spatial Distribution of the Temperature in a Film on a Substrate 
Heated by a Surface Standing Wave of Laser Radiation 
 
This subsection is devoted to an analysis of the heat transfer in a film of finite thickness 
on a semi-infinite substrate. Here we assume that the film surface is heated from the surface 
by a spatially periodic (in the film surface plane) heat source (namely, the standing wave of 
the laser radiation). This approximation is valid when the absorption length of the laser 
radiation employed β(λ)–1 << L where β is the optical absorption coefficient of the modified 
material at the wavelength of λ and L is the film thickness. For λ = 308 nm this conditions is 
satisfied well for most metals (at reasonable L) and semiconductors. Here we limited our 
analysis to considering the thermal effects only neglecting other effects of laser radiation on 
the film material listed in the previous subsection. 
The schematic drawing of the configuration of the film on the substrate is shown in Fig. 
4. The film has its boundaries at x = 0 and at x = L, and the substrate is located in the region x 
< 0. The thermal parameters of the film and of the substrate are indicated by the subscripts 
"1" and "2", respectively. Let us assume that the thermal flux qin incident onto the film 
surface at x = L is spatially modulated along the у axis as 
 
 
( )
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
≥
≥
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
0
2
cos
B
A
d
y
B
A
y
qin
π
 
(1) 
 
where d is the period of the standing wave. 
A two-dimensional heat conduction equation describing the spatial distribution of the 
temperature as a function of the time t T(x, y, t) can be written as 
 
 
Figure 4. A schematic drawing of a film of the thickness L on a semi-infinite substrate. Region (1) is the 
film and region (2) is the substrate. The direction of the heat flux incident onto the film surface at x = L is 
indicated by the arrows. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
169
 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
∂
+
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
2
2
,1
2
2
2
,1
2
2
,1
2
,1
y
T
x
T
t
T
α
, 
(2) 
 
where 
[
]
1
2
,1
2
,1
2
,1
2
,1
−
=
c
k
ρ
α
 are the temperature conductivities, k1,2 are the heat conductivities, 
2.1
ρ
 are the densities, and c1,2 are the specific heat capacities for the film material and for the 
substrate one, respectively. 
The initial condition for the problem considered is that the temperature in both the film 
and the substrate are constant at t = 0: 
 
 
0
2
,1
)
0,
,
(
T
y
x
T
=
. 
(3) 
 
The boundary conditions are written as follows. For x = L, the heat flux entering the film is 
 
 
in
q
x
T
k
=
∂
∂1
1
. 
(4) 
 
For x = 0, the continuity condition for the heat flux 
 
 
x
T
k
x
T
k
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
2
2
1
1
 
(5) 
 
and the condition of equal temperatures 
 
 
)
,
,0
(
)
,
,0
(
2
1
t
y
T
t
y
T
=
 
(6) 
 
should be satisfied. For x 
−∞
→
, the temperature of the substrate should tend to T0: 
 
 
0
2
)
,
,
(
T
t
y
x
T
x
→
−∞
→
. 
(7) 
 
Under these conditions, the solution of Eq.  
(2 ) is 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
d
y
t
x
T
t
x
T
t
y
x
T
a
c
π
2
cos
,
,
,
,
2
,1
2
,1
2
,1
 
(8) 
 
Applying the Laplace transformation with respect to the time t to Eq.  
(2) and to the 
boundary conditions (4) — (7), one can obtain the equations for the images Tc
1,2(x, p) and 
Ta
1,2(x, p). 
The solutions of Eq.  (2) have different forms in the regions 1 and 2. Here we consider the 
solution for the temperature distribution in the film (0 < x < L) only: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
d
y
t
x
T
t
x
T
t
y
x
T
a
c
π
2
cos
,
,
,
,
1
1
1
. 
(9) 
 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
170 
The constant component T1
c is given by the following expression: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
[
]
(
)
[
]
(
)
(
)
[
]
(
)
⎪⎭
⎪⎬
⎫
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
+
+
+
−
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
−
+
−
+
−
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
−
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
⎭
⎬
⎫
⎩
⎨
⎧
+
−
+
⎭
⎬
⎫
⎩
⎨
⎧
−
+
+
=
∑
∞
=
t
x
L
n
x
L
n
t
x
L
n
x
L
n
t
x
L
n
t
x
L
n
t
k
A
T
t
x
T
n
n
c
1
1
0
1
2
1
2
1
1
0
1
2
1
2
erfc
1
2
2
1
2
erfc
1
2
4
1
2
exp
4
1
2
exp
2
,
α
γ
α
α
γ
α
π
α
γ
 
(10) 
 
where 
 
 
σ
σ
γ
+
−
= 1
1
, 
(11) 
and 
 
 
1
1
1
2
2
2
c
k
c
k
ρ
ρ
σ =
. 
(12) 
 
The amplitude of the oscillating component of the temperature distribution along the y 
axis T1
a is given by 
 
 
(
)
(
)
Q
I
D
k
B
t
x
T a
−
−
=
1
1
,
 
(13) 
 
where 
 
 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
⋅
=
d
L
d
L
d
x
d
x
d
D
π
δ
π
π
δ
π
π
2
cosh
2
sinh
2
sinh
2
cosh
2
 
(14) 
 
and δ = k2/k1. The form of the functions I and Q depends on the relationship between the 
thermal conductivities 
1
α  and 
2
α . This effect is related to the fact that the number of poles 
and branching points of the function 
(
)
p
x
T a
,
1
 depends on the above relationship. When 
2
1
α
α >
 
 
 
( )
( )
(
)
u
u
u
u
u
d
L
u
u
L
x
u
u
u
d
L
L
t
L
I
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
1
cos
sin
2
1
cos
2
exp
2
β
δ
π
β
π
α
π
δ
+
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
×
×
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
⎪⎭
⎪⎬
⎫
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
∫
∞
 
(15) 
 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
171
 
(
)
u
u
u
u
u
d
L
u
u
L
x
u
u
u
d
L
L
t
L
Q
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
1
cosh
)
(
~
sinh
2
1
cosh
)
(
~
2
exp
2
β
δ
π
β
π
α
π
δ
ε
+
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
×
×
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
⎪⎭
⎪⎬
⎫
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
∫
 
(16) 
 
where 
 
 
1
2
1
2
α
α
π
ε
−
= d
L
 , 
(17) 
 
 
( )
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
u
d
L
u
α
α
π
α
α
β
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
 , 
(18) 
 
and 
 
 
( )
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
~
u
d
L
u
α
α
π
α
α
β
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
. 
(19) 
 
When 
2
1
α
α <
, the following expressions can be obtained: 
 
 
( )
( )
(
)
u
u
u
u
u
d
L
u
u
L
x
u
u
u
d
L
L
t
L
I
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
cos
sin
2
1
cos
2
exp
2
β
δ
π
β
π
α
π
δ
ω
+
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
∂
×
×
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛−
⎪⎭
⎪⎬
⎫
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
∫
∞
 
(20) 
where 
 
 
1
2
2
1 −
=
α
α
π
ω
d
L
, 
(21) 
 
and 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
[
]
∑
+
−
=
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
x
r
l
x
r
r
C
t
Q
sin
δ
cos
exp
ρ
 , 
(22) 
 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
172 
 
2
1
2
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
d
r
i
i
π
α
ρ
, 
(23) 
 
 
2
2
2
α
ρ
π
i
i
d
l
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
, 
(24) 
 
and ρi are the roots of the equation 
 
 
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
g
2
α
ρ
π
δ
π
α
ρ
π
α
ρ
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
d
d
L
t
d
. 
(25) 
 
All roots 
iρ  of Eq. (25) should be determined, and the summation in Eq. (22) should be 
performed over the whole range of i. The roots 
iρ  fall into the range from 
2
1
)
/
2
(
d
π
α
ρ =
 to 
2
2
)
/
2
(
d
π
α
ρ =
. The total number of roots of Eq. (25) is [z] + 1, where [z] is the integer part 
of 
5.0
1
2
)1
/
(
/
2
−
α
α
d
L
. 
The solution T2(x, y, t) for the substrate that is not written here also satisfies Eq. (2). The 
boundary conditions (3) — (7) are also satisfied by the solutions found. We failed to verify 
the fulfillment of the initial condition T1,2(x, y, 0) = T0 analytically, but the computer 
calculation demonstrated that this condition was satisfied as well. If one considers the 
condition (3) to be satisfied, the improper integrals in (15) and (17) for t = 0 can be expressed 
in terms of function (14) and, correspondingly, in terms of (16) and (18). 
It should be noted that the integrals I and Q entering expression (13) for the amplitudes 
)
,
(
1
t
x
T a
 tend to zero at 
∞
→
t
. This means that 
1
1
/
)
,
(
k
BD
x
T a
=
∞
 is a steady-state value of 
the amplitude of the temperature distribution component oscillating with varying y. 
Fig. 5(a) and (b) show 
d
D
D
/
2π
=
 as a function of L/d for various values of depths x 
normalized to the film thickness L for a metal film on the silica glass substrate and on the Si 
one, respectively. These ones represent the behavior of the steady-state value of the 
temperature distribution component varying along у direction for the metal films on various 
substrates. A dramatic effect of thermal properties of the substrate on the spatial distribution 
of the film temperature is seen clearly. In the case of the silicon substrate k1 < k2 and D 
decreases with decreasing L/d starting with a certain value of L/d. In this case, 
2
1k
k
D →
. For 
the silica glass substrate, k1 > k2 and D increases with decreasing L/d. 
One can see from Eqs. (15) — (20) that the settling time for the steady-state value of 
)
,
(
1
t
x
T a
 is determined by the two parameters: by tL = L2/α1 and by td = d2/(2π)2α1. The effect 
of the latter parameter td is related to the presence of an exponential factor that does not enter 
the integrand. The effect of tL entering the integrand, which is a function of four thermal 
physical parameters and of the quantity 2πL/d, is more complicated. As follows from 
computer simulation, the settling time for the steady-state value of 
)
)(
,
(
1
st
a
t
t
x
T
 for the metal 
film on the silica glass substrate decreased from 5td downto 2td as L/d increased from 0.025 to 
0.25. For the silicon substrate, a different behavior of tst was obtained. Namely, tst increased 
from 0.3td up to ≈ td as L/d increased within the limits indicated above. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
173
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. The effect of the metal film thickness L and of the period of the spatial modulation of the heat 
flux d on the steady-state amplitude of the temperature distribution in the y direction for various depths x. 
Substrate material: (a) — silica glass; (b) — silicon. x/L: 1 — 0, 2 — 1/4, 3 — 1/2, 4 — 3/4, and 5 — 1. 
For certain applications, the parameter 
(
)
(
)
[
]
0
1
1
,
,
T
t
x
T
t
x
T
M
c
a
−
=
 characterizing the depth 
of spatial modulation of the temperature is important. For the boundary conditions (3) — (7), 
∞
→
)
,
(
1
t
x
T c
 for 
∞
→
t
, and, consequently, M → 0 for 
∞
→
t
. This means that in order to 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
174 
obtainin a desired value of M the duration of heating should be limited. The effect of the 
substrate parameters on M(L, t) for various values of L and d is shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. 
Note that the relative effect of the substrate is more pronounced as d decreases (Fig. 6). 
For d = 200, 400, and 800 nm the parameter td is 0.085, 0.34, and 1.35 ns, respectively. 
As follows from Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, the modulation depth is 15-20% for the heating time t < 
10td. 
The main conclusions from the analysis and computer simulation presented in this 
subsection are as follows: 
 
(i) The parameter L/d should be smaller than 0.1 for heating to be sufficiently uniform 
over the film thickness. 
(ii) The heating time t should be less than 10td in order to provide the modulation depth 
of the film temperature (in the у direction) greater than 15%. 
(iii) When the structures with the period d < 500 nm are produced, the modulation depth 
M for the silicon substrates is 2 to 4 times greater than for the silica glass ones. The 
effect is attributed to higher heat conductivity of silicon than the one of silica glass. 
 
Finally, it should be noted that the problem considered here can be extended to the case 
when the input flux qin is an arbitrary function of y. This can be done by representing it in 
terms of a Fourier integral and carrying out inverse transformation of Fourier images obtained 
from the solutions of the heat conduction equations (13) — (25). The time dependence of the 
input heat flux qin can also be included with the use of Duhamel's integral. 
 
 
Figure 6. The depth of spatial modulation of the temperature M with the period d for an iron film of 
thickness L = 20 nm on silica glass (1 and 5), iron (2 and 6), and silicon (3 and 4) substrates as a function 
of the heating time t. The modulation period d =200 nm (1, 2, and 3) and d = 800 nm (4, 5, and 6). 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
175
 
Figure 7. The depth of spatial modulation of the temperature M with the period d = 400 nm for an iron 
film of thickness L on a glass substrate with L = 40 nm (1) and 10 nm (2) and a silicon substrate with L = 
10 nm (3), 40 nm (4), and 200 nm (5) as a function of the heating time t. 
 
III. FORMING THE ONE- AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL PERIODIC RELIEF 
ON THE FUSED SILICA AND SI SURFACES BY STANDING WAVE 
PULSED LASER LITHOGRAPHY 
 
A. One-dimensional Periodic Nanorelief on the Fused Silica and Si: the Phase 
Masks and the Antireflection Coatings 
 
In this subsection the results on forming of the phase masks on the fused silica and of the 
antireflection coatings on fused silica and on Si using the two-beam standing wave UV pulsed 
laser radiation to expose the photoresist on the fused silica and Si substrates followed by a 
standard lithographic process including the development of the exposed resist and by dry 
etching. One of the most promising applications of this technology is fiber and integrated 
optics, namely forming the phase masks and Bragg mirrors with controlled 
reflection/transmission spectra. Such gratings made from Si are promising for various 
applications in the IR wavelength band, for instance, in the solar sells as the antireflection 
coatings [60] and in the integrated optics, especially, in Si based photonics, which is a new 
field of science and technology developed rapidly in recent years [61]. There the regular 
surface relief can be applied as the Bragg mirrors in the Si based planar and ridge waveguides 
(in the photodetrctors, multiplexors, etc.), in distributed feedback (DFB) for the Si-based 
lasers, in the one-dimensional photonic crystals, etc. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
176 
For forming the phase masks E-Beam Lithography is used the most widely. The studies 
presented in this subsection were devoted to development of simple and cost-effective method 
of Standing Wave Lithography using a powerful XeCl excimer pulsed laser for forming the 
one-dimension gratings. One of the advantages of the Standing Wave Pulsed Laser 
Lithography is much less effect of the vibration environment on the nanoscale pattern quality. 
Besides, using a powerful lasers allows increasing the pulse energy up to several tens of 
joules that in turn would allow exposing relatively large areas (up to 1000 cm2) at a single 
pulse. On the other hand, the breakdown threshold for fused silica exposed to the UV 
standing wave laser radiation with λ = 308 nm is ≈ 15 J⋅cm–2. Such a high value does not 
allow the formation of a regular periodic relief over an area greater than ~ 1 cm2 by direct 
Standing Wave Laser Ablation. 
Let us first estimate the parameters of the surface nanorelief required for the efficient 
phase masks and antireflection coatings. For the phase masks, the condition of minimum 
transmission in the zero order of diffraction (MTZOD) is an obligatory one. The quality of the 
phase mask can be considered to be satisfactory when MTZOD is less than 10%. From the 
elementary physics considerations, MTZOD is obtained when the corrugation depth 
)1
(
2
/
−
≈
n
h
λ
 where λ  is the wavelength of the incident light used for the pattern transfer 
and n is the refractive index of the phase mask material. This condition provides MTZOD at 
normal incidence of the light onto a phase mask with a rectangular relief. However, this 
estimate is rather rough; and modern technological developments require more accurate 
theory as well as the experimental verification of the latter. 
For the antireflection coatings the following two conditions are to be satisfied. First, the 
period of the surface relief d should be less than λa/n where λa is the wavelength of the light, 
which the antireflection coating is designed for. Second, the corrugation height h should equal 
approximately to λa/4. The first condition is required in order to suppress the diffraction of 
the higher orders inside the coated material while the second one provides the MTZOD at the 
normal incidence. 
The forming of the relief on the surfaces of the silica glass substrates was performed 
using a double layered resist mask consisting of a Cu film of ≈ 50 nm in thickness deposited 
onto a photo resist film ≈ 400 nm thick. We have used the two-beam XeCl laser interference 
scheme with the energy densities ≈ 30 mJ/cm2. The exposed resist was developed in an 
alkaline water solution and Cu film was etched using Ar+ ion beam. The silica glass was 
etched using Reactive Ion Beam Etching in a flux of CF4 — O2 gas mixture. The etching rates 
were ≈ 30 nm/min for fused silica and for the photo resist and ≈ 3 nm/min for Cu. This way, 
the relief on the surface of the fused silica substrate up to ≈ 500 nm in depth was formed. 
In Fig. 8 (a) and (b) AFM image and line profile, respectively of a phase mask formed on 
a fused silica substrate by the process described above are presented. The period of the 
grating d was ≈ 460 nm and the averaged grove depth h was ≈ 280 nm. It should be noted that 
the width of the groves and the one of the ridges are not equal to each other. These parameters 
depend on the conditions during developing of the photoresist and etching of the metal mask 
and of silica glass. In order to optimize the phase mask relief further experiments are 
necessary. 
 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
177
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8. An AFM image (a) and a line profile (b) of a phase mask on the surface of a silica glass 
substrate formed by Standing Wave Excimer XeCl Pulsed Laser Lithography with reactive ion etching. 
The optical transmission measurements in the zero order of diffraction have been carried 
out using Specord M40 Carl Zeiss Jena spectrophotometer. Also, a special measurement has 
been carried our using XeCl laser as a probing light source. In the latter case, the beam 
diameter was expanded to ≈ 5 mm. In order to increase the measurement accuracy, a double 
beam technique with a reference beam was applied. The results of the optical transmission 
measurements are presented in Fig. 9. Curve 1 represents the optical transmission spectrum of 
a flat fused silica substrate served as a reference sample. Curve 2 represents the transmission 
spectrum of the sample shown in Fig. 8. The minimum TCZOD took place at λ ≈ 250 nm and 
the antireflection properties were observed at λa > 
630 nm. So far, the structure obtained 
can serve both as a phase mask at λ ≈ 250 nm and as an antireflection coating at λ > 
630 
nm at the same time. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
178 
 
Figure 9. The optical transmission spectra of the reference sample (the initial fused silica substrate) (1) 
and of the phase mask formed by Standing Wave Excimer XeCl Pulsed Laser Lithography with reactive 
ion etching, the morphology of which is presented in Fig. 13 (2). ⊗ — the result of the measurement 
with XeCl laser as a probing light source. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 10. The calculated grayscale diagrams of the optical transmission of the goffered fuled silica 
substrate for the sinusoidal model surface profile (a) and for the truncated sinusoidal one (b).The fields 
close to the maximum and the minimum transmissions are highlighted by the inverted colors. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
179
 
Figure 11. The calculated optical transmission of a goffered fused silica surface versus d/λ ratio for the 
relief heights providing the minimum transmission (corresponding to the gray lines in Figure 11). 
The transmittance of a goffered fused silica surface has been calculated by the numerical 
solving of the integral equation for diffraction of a plane wave on a goffered surface [62]. The 
calculations were carried our for the two corrugation profiles: i) for the sinusoidal one [Fig. 
10 (a)] and ii) for a truncated sinusoide [Fig. 10 (b)]. The latter was selected as a model 
profile to approximate the measured one presented in Fig. 8 (b). The refractive index of fused 
silica n was assumed to be 1.46 over the whole wavelength band which the calculations were 
carried out for. The optical absorption in fused silica was neglected. The refractive index of 
the ambient medium was assumed to be equal to unity. 
The calculated dependencies of the power transmittances T (averaged over the TE and 
TM polarization modes of the incident light) on the dimensionless parameters of the phase 
mask h/d and d/λ are presented in Fig. 10 as the grayscale maps for the respective corrugation 
profiles presented nearby. The fields of the near-maximum transmittance and of the near-
minimum one are denoted by the inverted grayscale palette tones for clarity. In both cases of 
the sinusoidal surface profile and of the profile close to the one obtained in the experiment the 
calculated T is close to unity within a rather wide range of the model parameters λ > d, h > λ, 
and h > d/2. The general pattern of the T(h/d, d/λ) chart depends on the exact shape of the 
surface profile weakly. For the ideal sinusoidal profile T reaches its minimum (T → 0) when 
d/λ ≈ 2.25 and πh/d ≈ 2.21. For the actual corrugation profile minimum T is greater than 0,13 
and its position in the h/d — d/λ axes is shifted to lower d/λ as compared to the case of the 
ideal sinusoidal profile. 
In Fig. 11 the calculated profiles of T(d/λ) along the lines shown in Fig. 10 (for the 
values of h providing the minimum transmission) are presented. For the structure studied in 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
180 
the experiment d ≈ 460 nm and h ≈ 320 nm (i. e. πh/d ≈ 2.21). Curve 1 (the bold line) 
presents T vs d/λ for the sinusoidal profile and curve 2 (the dashed bold line) — for the 
truncated sinusoidal one. These two curves represent the optical transmission spectra 
averaged over the TE and the TM modes to simulate the non-polarized natural light 
transmission. The respective solid curves represent the results of calculations for the TE and 
the TM modes, respectively calculated for the sinusoidal profile. The difference between 
these two curves is the most pronounced near λ1 ≈ d, which is the cut-off wavelength for the 
first diffraction maximum in vacuum. There is a narrow dip in the T(d/λ) curve at λ1 for the 
TE mode while a smoothed step takes place for the TM one. It should be noted that the dip is 
seen in the averaged T(d/λ) curve at λ1 as well although the dip is less pronounced. 
A rapid decreasing of T with decreasing λ takes place at transition from the longer 
wavelengths where T → 1 to the shorter ones. Another critical point important for the 
experimental data analysis is λ2 = nd, which corresponds to the cut-off for the first harmonic 
in the substrate material. The calculations predict a step or even a peak in the T(d/λ) curves 
near λ2 for both surface profile shapes considered above and for both incident lightwave 
polarizations. 
Having measured λ2, one can determine n if the period of the grating is known. For the 
sample studied in the present work, λ*
2 = dn ≈ 650 nm, d ≈ 460 nm, and n ≈ 1.46. This value 
was used in the calculations. 
In Fig. 9 besides the measured optical transmission spectra of the goffered fused silica 
subsrrate the calculated ones are presented (curves 3 and 4). The latter were calculated by 
numerical solving of the integral equation for diffraction of light on a fused silica plate of 
finite thickness with a goffered front side taking into account the parasitic reflection of the 
transmitted light from the flat back side. The model optical transmission spectra were 
calculated for the truncated sinusoidal surface profile approximating the one of the 
experimental sample. The behavior of the measured curve indicates the domination of the 
TM-polarized radiation in the probing light since the dip near λ = d featuring the TE-
polarized light is not expressed. Fitting of the measured transmission spectrum by the 
calculated one revealed the TE/TM ratio in the probing light to be ≈ 1 : 4. 
Curve 3 was calculated for h = 280 nm and curve 4 — for h = 390 nm. Curve 3 is 
consistent with the experimental transmission spectrum (curve 2) within the longer 
wavelength band however at shorter wavelengths the calculated transmission was greater than 
the measured one. On the contrary, curve 4 concedes with the measured curve 2 better as 
shorter wavelengths and worse at longer ones. This disagreement could be attributed to not 
accurate enough approximation of the actual surface profile by the model one (the truncated 
sinusoid). Also, the scatter of the groove depth and width was not taken into account in the 
calculations. 
In Fig. 12 (a) and (b) an AFM image and a surface profile of a grating formed on the 
surface of a single crystal Si wafer are presented. The patterned area was ≈ 6 mm in diameter. 
The period of the grating d was ≈ 460 nm and the groove depth h was 350 – 370 nm. Using 
the formulae given above, one can estimate the cut-off wavelength for the antireflection band 
to be λ1 ≈ 1.5 μm. 
 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
181
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 12. An AFM image (а) and a surface profile (b) of a one-dimensional grating on a Si single 
crystal substrate formed by Two-Beam Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Lithography using XeCl excimer 
laser to pattern the photoresist film on Si and subsequent Ar+ ion etching. 
In Fig. 13 the IR transmission spectra of the Si wafers measured using LOMO SP-20 
spectrophotometer and the calculated ones are presented. Curve 1 presents the measured 
transmission spectrum of a flat Si wafer. Curves 2 and 3 are the measured transmission 
spectra of the patterned Si wafers with h ≈ 350 nm and h ≈ 400 nm, respectively. A 
significant increase in the light transmission at λ > 1,5 μm has been observed in curves 2 and 
3 that is in a good agreement with the rough estimate given above. More detailed analysis of 
the measured transmission spectra revealed the cut-off wavelength of the first harmonic in the 
substrate λ2 = nd ≈ 1.53 μm. From d ≈ 466 nm [see Fig. 12 (b)] one can estimate n ≈ 3.28. 
The model transmission spectra (curves 4 and 5 in Fig. 13) were calculated just for this 
particular value of n and for the relief profile close to the one presented in Fig. 12 (b). The 
latter was approximated by a truncated sinusoide with the length of the plateaus on the tops 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
182 
equal to d/5 (as shown in the inset in Fig. 14) for the two values of h = 350 and h = 400 nm. 
The calculated IR transmission spectra were weighted averaged of the ones for the TE and the 
TM modes (5 TE : 1 TM) as in the probing light used in the IR transmission measurements. 
In Fig. 14 the model IR transmission spectra for the TE and the TM modes calculated for the 
two values of h = 350 nm and h = 400 nm are presented. The calculations were performed for 
λ > 1.15 μm where the measured transmission spectrum of the flat Si wafer was almost 
constant (see Fig. 13, curve 1). The optical absorption in Si was not taken into account since 
Si is almost transparent in the wavelength band of interest. The calculations demonstrated the 
IR transmission spectra to be different for the TM and TE modes essentially. On the other 
hand, a little difference was found between the transmission spectra calculated for h = 350 nm 
and for h = 400 nm. 
 
 
Figure 13. The measured optical transmission spectra of the flat Si wafer (1) and the ones for the 
goffered Si wafers (2 — 4); the calculated optical transmission spectra for the sinusoidal model surface 
profiles with h = 350 nm (5) and with h = 400 nm (6). 
Concluding, a promising technology for forming the one-dimensional submicron periodic 
relief on fused silica substrates and on the Si ones using Standing Wave Pulsed Laser 
Lithography have been developed. Comparing the experimental results on the optical 
properties of the test samples with the results of computer simulations demonstrates 
applicability of the structures made by the above technology as the phase masks for the fiber 
and integrated optics and as the antireflection coatings. 
 
 
B. Formation of the Two-dimensional Periodic Arrays of the Nanometer 
Sized Pits with High Aspect Ratio in Fused Silica 
 
In this subsection, we present the experimental results of forming the two-dimensional 
submicron periodic relief on the fused silica substrates by Four-Beam Standing Wave Pulsed 
Laser Lithography using the four beam standing wave XeCl laser radiation to expose an UV 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
183
photoresist film on the fused silica surface followed by development and wet or Ar+ ion 
etching. The periodic arrays of the nanometer sized pits in the fused silica surface were 
obtained.  
 
 
Figure 14. The calculated optical transmission spectra of a goffered Si surface for the model surface 
profile shown in the inset for different polarization modes. h, nm: 1 — 350; 2 — 400. 
The nanometer scale periodic patterning of the fused silica surface is an important 
applied problem. The relevant technology could be applied to formation of various integrated 
optical and electronic devices. Its potential applications include, first of all, the phase masks 
for forming the Bragg mirrors for the planar optical waveguides [63,64,65], the planar 
photonic crystals, the punches for the nanoimprint technology [66,67,68] the broadband 
antireflection coatings [69,70] etc. [71,72]. From the technological viewpoint, the direct 
patterning of fused silica surface by Four Beam Standing Wave Laser Ablation would be 
extremely promising. However, the relatively large value of the breakdown threshold for 
fused silica at λ ≈ 308 nm (≈ 15 J⋅cm–2, as had already been mentioned above) would make us 
to reduce the patterned area downto ~ 1 mm2 (at the maximum pulse energy of the laser 
available ≈ 300 mJ) and therefore to loose in the main advantage of the direct modification 
namely, in the productivity. So far, in order to make a periodic pattern on the fused silica 
surface of a considerable area (~ 1 cm2), we selected using a photoresist. We used FP-4-04-V 
positive UV photoresist spread over the fused silica substrates by spinning. The photoresist 
film thickness was 800 – 1000 nm. 
After the standing wave laser irradiation with the pulse energy density of ≈ 20 mJ⋅cm–2 
the swellings on the photoresist surface of ≈ 50 nm in height have been observed by AFM 
[Fig. 15 (a)]. The wet development in the KOH solution resulted in appearance of the holes in 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
184 
the photoresist [Fig. 12 (b)] ≈ 1000 nm in depth. In addition, some number of shallow pits 
attributed to the action of the laser beams reflected from the back surface of the substrate and 
interfering with the incident ones has been observed. 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 15. The AFM images of a UV photoresist film on a fused silica substrate exposed to a standing 
wave pulsed XeCl laser radiation with the energy density ≈ 20 mJ⋅cm–2 (a) and after the development 
(b); the fused silica substrate after etching in hydrofluoric acid (c) and after Ar+ ion etching (d). 
After the wet development, the forming of the relief in the fused silica was performed by 
the following two methods: i) by wet etching in the hydrofluoric acid (HF) and ii) by Ar+ ion 
etching at the dose of (4.4–5.0) × 104 cm–2 and the ion energy of 2.5 – 3.0 keV for 12 hours in 
URM 3.279.029 ion milling machine. Fig. 15 (c) presents an AFM image of the fused silica 
substrate surface etched through the holes in the developed photoresist film in HF. In this 
case, the maximum depth of the etched pits was ≈ 100 nm. In Fig. 12 (d) the surface of the 
fused silica substrate after Ar+ ion etching is presented. Unlike etching in HF, in the case of 
ion etching the pit depth is greater than 200 nm. It was found that when radiation with the 
wavelength λ = 308 nm was diffracted by the ion-etched relief, ≈ 50% of the incident light 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
185
energy was concentrated in the zero order of diffraction. Along with the estimates given in the 
previous subsection, these results indicate that Four Beam Standing Wave Pulsed Laser 
Lithography is a promising technology for production of the efficient two-dimensional phase 
masks on the fused silica substrate. 
Concluding, a periodic relief on the fused silica surface was obtained with an UV photoresist 
exposed to four beam standing wave XeCl pulsed laser radiation and wet and Ar+ ion etching. It 
should be noted that this technology could be applied not only to formation of the periodic 
gratings for integrated optics applications, but also to formation of the regular arrays of various 
semiconductors nanostructures, including the QDs [73,74]. For example, the regular arrays of the 
GeSi nanoislands on the Si substrates were formed from an epitaxial Si/GeSi/Si(001) quantum 
well (QW) heterostructure by Standing Wave Laser Lithography and dry etching [75]. 
 
 
IV. THE TWO-DIMENSIONAL PERIODIC PATTERNING OF THE SOLID 
SURFACES BY DIRECT FOUR-BEAM STANDING WAVE EXCIMER 
LASER MODIFICATION 
 
In this section, the results of the investigations of direct four-beam standing wave pulsed 
excimer laser patterning of the metal films on Si substrates, of the synthetic polycrystalline 
diamond films on the single crystal diamond substrates, and of the polyimide films on the 
fused silica substrates are presented. 
 
 
A. The Fe—C Films on Si Substrates 
 
In this subsection, we present the results of the periodic patterning of the Fe—C films 
with the thickness of several tens of nanometers on the Si substrates by direct Four-Beam 
Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. These studies continue the series of investigations 
devoted to the development of the technology for the fabrication of the regular arrays of the 
ferromagnetic nanoparticles with the submicron period by modifications of the thin metal 
films by direct four beam standing wave XeCl excimer pulsed laser modification [76,77]. In 
this subsection, forming of the two-dimensional periodic arrays of the holes in the Fe—C 
films with different shape and periods in different directions are reported. The effect of the 
geometry of the optical scheme of the laser setup on the nanostructure morphology has been 
studied. It was demonstrated that the two-dimensional periodic arrays with the variable 
geometrical parameters of the elements can be formed by varying the orientation of the 
bissector of the angle between the laser beams with respect to the modified sample surface. 
The possibility of varying the incident angles and, so far, the period(s) of the arrays and/or the 
aspect ratio of the formed nanoparticles is an important advantage of the four-beam technique 
useful for some applications. An example of such applications is the periodic arrays of 
elongated ferromagnetic nanoparticles for dense magnetic data storage elements [6]. The 
features of the nanostructure morphology were shown to be highly sensitive to the duration 
and energy of the laser pulses. The conditions for the forming of near perfectly periodic two-
dimensional arrays of the submicron structures in the thin Fe—C films are determined. 
 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
186 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 16. The AFM images (a, b) and the surface profile (c) of a Fe—C film on a Si substrate 
patterned by Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. 
The main processes responsible for the modification of the metal film surface are usually 
determined by the heat release process. As it was demonstrated in Sec II, the submicron 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
187
spatial modulation of the temperature with a considerable modulation depth can be achieved 
when the duration of the heating pulses does not exceed several nanoseconds. This 
requirement dictates the choice of the operation mode of the excimer laser used for the metal 
film patterning. 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 17. The effect of the laser pulse energy density on the morphology of the pits in the Fe—C film 
on the Si substrate patterned by Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. The laser pulse energy density, J 
cm–2: (a, b) — 0.3; (c, d) — 0.5. 
In Fig. 16 an AFM image of the surface of a Fe—C film on a Si substrate modified by a 
single laser pulse is presentd. Fig. 16 (c) presents a surface profile across a pit along the line 
shown in Fig. 16 (b). The width and the depth of the pits were ≈ 0.8 μm and ≈ 25 nm, 
respectively. The ellipticity of the pits was ≈ 0:3 that is close to the ratio of the interference 
pattern periods in the respective directions. The ratio of the size of the modified area to the 
period of the array for typical experimental conditions was ≈ 0:25.  
An important feature of the pit morphology is a swell around each pit. The AFM 
measurements revealed that approximately ¼ of the material removed in the process of the 
pits' formation was transferred to the swells. The rest material was ablated.  
The morphology of the swells has been found to depend on the laser beam parameters 
strongly. In Fig. 17 the AFM images and the surface profiles of the pits formed at different 
laser pulse energy densities are presented. The samples shown in Fig. 17 (a) and (c) were 
formed at the laser pulse energy densities in the maxima of the interference pattern of ≈ 0.3 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
188 
J⋅cm–2 and ≈ 0.5 J⋅cm–2, respectively. Both the depth and the width of the pits increased with 
increasing pulse energy density. In the samples shown in Fig. 17 about 20% of the material 
removed from the film was transferred into the swells around the pits. 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 18. An AFM image (a) and the surface profiles (b — d) along the lines labeled with the 
respective letters in the AFM image (a) of a Fe—C film on Si substrate patterned by Standing Wave 
Pulsed Laser Ablation under conditions of sufficient heat dissipation during the laser pulse. 
The laser pulse duration in the experiments on the modification of the samples shown in 
Fig. 17 was selected to be short enough (≈ 3 ns) to ensure a weak heat dissipation during the 
laser pulse. In Fig. 18 an AFM image and the surface profiles of a Fe—C film modified at the 
laser pulse duration of ≈ 7 ns and the pulse energy density of ≈ 0.44 J⋅cm–2 are presented. 
Comparing the image in Fig. 18 to the ones presented in Fig. 17 one can see that the width 
and the height of the swells around the pits are much greater in the former case so that the 
swells around any two adjacent pits even tend to overlap [see Fig. 18 (b)]. The ellipticity of 
the pits in Fig. 18 was ≈ 0.5 although the ratio of the periods in the interference pattern of the 
laser radiation was ≈ 0,25.  
The results presented in Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 allowed us to estimate the heat diffusion 
length to be ≈ 0.25 μm that is consistent with the results of the calculations presented in Sec. 
II. The maximum temperature of the film in the interference maxima can be estimated to be 
close to the boiling point of iron. The parameter of the two-phase destruction [52] χ = 
(h/D)(vl/vv) < 0.7 where h is the film thickness, D is the diameter of the heated area, v1 is the 
velocity of melt flowing out of the irradiated area, and vv is the evaporation rate. The 
calculated ratio of the mass of the removed liquid metal to the mass of the removed vapor is 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
189
less than 0.3. The latter estimate agrees well with the measured ratio of the volume of the 
swells around the pits to the volume of the entire pit [Fig. 16 (c)]. Knowing the mean velocity 
of the melt rolling [52] (v1 ≈ 250 m s–1) and the pit radius (r ≈ 0.5 μm) one can estimate the 
time of rolling of the liquid metal to be ≈ 2 ns that is close to the duration of the laser pulse. 
Note that the role of the heat diffusion under the conditions of the experiments described here 
becomes much less important when both periods of the interference pattern exceed ≈ 2 μm 
(see Fig. 16). 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 19. The AFM images of the Fe—C films on Si patterned by Standing Wave Pulsed Laser 
Ablation. The ratio of the periods of the interference pattern in different directions Qi: a — 0.25;  
b — 0.5. 
Thus, based on the study reported, we have determined the conditions necessary for the 
formation of the nearly perfect two-dimensional periodic submicron arrays of the pits in the 
Fe—C films on the Si substrates by Four Beam Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. The 
primary mechanism of the pits' formation was associated with the two-phase destruction of 
the metal film material. In Fig. 19 the AFM images of the Fe—C films on the Si substrates 
patterned by Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation with different values of the ratio of the 
periods of the interference pattern in different directions Qi are presented. It ts worth to note a 
remarkable uniformity of the patterned film surface over the whole AFM images. 
 
 
B. The Polyimide Films on the Fused Silica Substrates 
 
The objects to be modified were 1-μm-thick polyimide films deposited onto the fused 
silica substrates. The experiments on the standing wave pulsed laser modification of the 
polyimide films have shown that there exist two different modes of the modification subject 
to the pulse energy density. At the pulse energy densities less than 100 mJ cm–2, the swelling 
of the film surface has been observed, the most probably originating from the destruction of 
polyimide. In Fig. 20 (a) an AFM image of the polyimide film on the fused silica substrate 
modified at the pulse energy density of ≈ 100 mJ cm–2 is presented. The height of the 
swellings depended on the pulse energy density and ranged from 300 to 1000 nm. At the 
energy densities greater than 100 mJ⋅cm–2, the regular arrays of the holes in the polyimide 
film have been observed. In Fig. 20 (b) an AFM image of the polyimide film modified in the 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
190 
the regime specified above is presented. Such objects can be used as the resist masks in the 
submicron lithography. Unlike the conventional Standing Wave Lithography where such 
masks are formed in the two-step process (the first step is the exposing of the resist and the 
second one is the development), direct Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation allows a single-
step mask formation that is highly appreciable from the viewpoint of the cost reduction. 
 
 
C. Polycrystalline Diamond 
 
Diamond has been being considered to be a promising wide-gap semiconductor material 
for decades. In particular, the ultrathin epitaxial films of the synthetic diamond are considered 
now to be a promising material for some advanced microelectronic applications. Diamond is 
featured by outstanding thermal and radiation hardness as well as by high thermal 
conductivity. The latter property is extremely valuable for the very large scale integrated 
circuits (VLSICs) where the problem of the heat sink is now a critical one. 
Here it was demonstrated that a regular periodic relief can be formed on the surface of the 
synthetic diamonds by direct Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. The importance of this 
result follows from the fact that radiation and chemical hardness of diamond causes 
considerable problems in its processing by the standard microelectronic techniques (such as 
dry etching, etc.). 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 20. The AFM images of the polyimide films on the fused silica substrates modified by the four 
beam standing wave pulsed laser radiation at the pulse energy densuty of (a) 60 mJ cm–2 and (b) 120 mJ 
cm–2. 
In Fig. 20 the AFM images of the surface of the synthetic polycrystalline diamond 
exposed to the standing wave pulsed laser radiation with the energy density of ~ 10 J⋅cm–2, 
which corresponds to the radiation induced damage threshold for the single crystal diamond 
are presented. At such an energy density, different places of the policrysralline diamond 
surface exhibited different types of damage. There were the areas where the damage pattern 
correlated with the standing wave one well [Fig. 21 (a)]. These were the surfaces of single 
crystal grains in the polycrystalline diamond film. In some places, a severe damage 
independent on the incident radiation spatial structure has been observed [Fig. 21 (b)]. These 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
191
places were associated with the inclusions of graphite between the diamond grains highly 
absorbing the laser radiation while the single crystal diamond is transparent to the 308-nm 
radiation. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 21. The AFM images of the modified surface of synthetic polycrystalline diamond: (a) the 
modified surface of a single crystalline grain; (b) severe damaged surface of a graphite inclusion 
between the crystalline grains, and (c) at the boundary between two adjacent single crystal grains. The 
pulse energy density was ≈ 10 mJ/cm2. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
192 
In Fig. 21 (c) a fragment of the modified polycrystalline diamond surface between the 
single crystal grains where the absorbing graphite layer and, so far, the severe damage were 
absent is presented. 
In conclusion, it was demonstrated that using the direct Four Beam Standing Wave 
Pulsed UV Laser Ablation, one can form a two-dimensional periodic relief with a submicron 
period on the diamond surface. In particular, this technology could be applied for secret 
marking of the diamonds used in jewelry. 
 
 
V. SELF ASSEMBLING OF THE PERIODIC ARRAYS OF THE 
NANOMETER SIZED SEMICONDUCTOR ISLANDS STIMULATED BY 
STANDING WAVE UV LASER RADIATION 
 
In this section, we present the results on the formation of the two-dimensional regular 
periodic arrays of the semiconductor surface nanoislands formed by self-assembling 
stimulated by four coherent interfering pulsed laser beams incident onto the silicon and 
gallium arsenide single crystal wafers. The lateral size of the islands ranged from 60 to 100 
nm and the height from 6 to 12 nm that was 5 – 10 times smaller than the period(s) of the 
standing wave. The island formation was attributed to the effect of the elastic strain at the 
crystal surface induced by the non-uniform heating of the substrate by the standing wave laser 
radiation. The effect of the laser beam parameters including the polarization of the interfering 
laser beams on the resulting nanoisland array morphology has been investigated. It has been 
already mentioned above (see Sec. II) that the distribution of radiation in the standing wave 
field depends on the polarization of interfering laser beams significantly. The analytical 
expressions and the computer calculations of the spatial distribution of the standing wave 
intensities for various polarization configurations can be found in [45]. In our experiments, 
both the TE—TE configuration and the TE—TM one had been explored. The conditions for 
obtaining the uniform nearly perfectly periodic arrays of Si and GaAs nanoislands on the 
Si(001) and GaAs(001) substrates, respectively, had been determined. 
 
 
A. Silicon 
 
The results presented in this subsection were obtained using single laser pulses with the 
duration of 10 ns and the energy density of (1.0 – 1.5) J⋅cm–2. In Fig. 22 a typical AFM image 
of Si(001) surface patterned by four-beam standing wave UV pulsed laser radiation in the 
TE—TE polarization configuration is presented. The standing wave pattern in this case 
corresponds to the two series of stripes perpendicular to each other. The AFM image in Fig. 
22 (a) as well as the two surface profiles along the lines 1 and 2 in the main image [Fig. 22 (b) 
and (c), respectively] demonstrate the nanoislands with the diameter of 40 – 60 nm to form in 
the maxima of the standing wave intensity. The islands were separated by the almost flat 
regions of the substrate with the dimensions of ≈ 30 × 150 nm2. An essential feature of the 
self-assembling in this particular regime is the appearance of the pits of various shapes and 
dimensions near the islands. The pits have lateral dimensions more than 30 nm and the depth 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
193
of  4 – 6 nm. As can be seen in Fig. 22, the pits are located at different sides of the 
neighboring islands.  
 
 
x/nm
300
0
300 
y/nm 
 0
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 22. An AFM image (a) and the surface profiles (b, c) of Si(001) surface patterned by the four-
beam standing wave UV pulsed laser radiation in the TE–TE polarization configuration. 
This pattern of modification of the crystal surface differs significantly from the results of 
the standing wave laser modification of the amorphous materials (see Sec. IV.A) where the 
symmetric swells were formed around the pits [6]. A substantially different character of self-
assembling was observed in the case of using the beams with the TE—TM polarization 
configuration. In this case, the sites of maximum intensity are well localized and surrounded 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
194 
by the lines of zero intensity. As a result of such an intensity distribution, the self assembled 
Si nanoislands are better defined in this case.  
 
 
x/μm
1,5 
 0
1,5 
y/μm 
 0
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 23. An AFM image (a) and a surface profile (b) of Si(001) surface patterned by the four-beam 
standing wave UV pulsed laser radiation in the TE—TM polarization configuration. 
In Fig. 23 a typical AFM image and a surface profile of Si(001) surface patterned in the 
TE—TM polarization configuration is presented. The AFM image revealed a nearly perfect 
two-dimensional periodic array of islands with the diameter below 100 nm and the height of ≈ 
12 nm. It should be noted that all islands in the array are located at the same side of the 
adjacent pits that indicates that the conditions of diffusion for silicon atoms were the same 
over the whole AFM image. 
 
 
B. Gallium Arsenide 
 
In Fig. 24 an AFM image of GaAs(001) single crystal surface patterned by four-beam 
standing wave UV pulsed laser radiation in the TE—TM polarization configuration is 
presented. The islands observed on the GaAs surface had the lateral dimensions of ≈ 60 nm 
and the height of ≈ 7 nm. The surface profile showed that the positions of the islands with 
respect to the interference pattern knots scattered within ≈ 30 nm. 
 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
195
The results presented above demonstrate that the minimum lateral size of the islands is 5 
– 10 times smaller than the period of the standing wave of the laser radiation. In the case of 
laser modification of the amorphous or polycrystalline films [15, 78], the typical size of the 
region of modification usually amounts to 50% of the standing wave period. This significant 
difference between the results of the laser modification of the single crystal and of the 
amorphous surfaces leads to a conclusion that the resulting surface morphology in the laser 
modification of single crystals is affected by the inhomogeneous laser-induced strain field 
arising from the local heating of the crystal surface by the standing wave radiation. This 
heating results, first, in the thermal expansion of the near-surface layers inducing the elastic 
stress, and second, in the stimulation of the diffusion of the atoms of the modified material in 
the elastic strain field developed in the surface layer of the crystalline substrate. The 
simultaneous action of the two factors listed above makes possible the formation of the 
nanoislands with the sizes significantly smaller than the standing wave period. Note that the 
island formation can not be explained by the effect of the thermal threshold for the laser 
modification only since the nanoisland size remained almost the same when the energy 
density of the laser radiation increased two times. So far, such a modification is possible in 
the presence of the surface stress only. 
 
 
x/μm
1,5 
 0
1,5 
y/μm 
 0 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 24. An AFM image (a) and a surface profile (b) of GaAs(001) surface patterned by four-beam 
standing wave UV pulsed laser radiation in the TE—TM polarization configuration. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
196 
C. InGaAs/GaAs Eptiaxial Heterostructures 
 
In this subsection, the results of the four beam standing wave pulsed laser modification of 
the strained GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs quantum well (QW) heterostructures are presented. These 
studies were the further development of the ones described in the previous subsections and 
were aimed at confirming the suggestion of the laser-induced local thermal expansion of the 
surface as the key driving force for the nanoisland formation. In these purposes, the 
GaAs/InGaAs/ GaAs hererostructures where the elastic stress was present ab initio were 
grown on GaAs(001) substrates by Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE). 
 
 
x/μm
1,0 
 0
1,0 
y/μm 
 0 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 25. An AFM image (a) and a surface profile (b) of the GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs heterstructure 
surface modified by four beam standing wave XeCl pulsed laser radiation. 
The 
experiments 
on 
modification 
of 
the 
GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs(001) 
epitaxial 
heterostructures were carried out on the four samples. The n-GaAs(001) epi-ready substrates 
were used for the epitaxial growth by all-solid-source MBE. After the thermal removing of 
the native oxide from the GaAs substrate surface in the As flow, the 100 nm GaAs buffer 
layers were grown at 580°C followed by deposition of the 3 nm thick In0.35Ga0.65As QWs at 
520°C. Finally, the GaAs cap layers of 5, 10, 20, and 40 nm in thickness were grown at the 
same temperature as the In0.35Ga0.65As layer. The conditions of the four beam laser 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
197
modification were the same as in the experiments on modification of the single crystal Si and 
GaAs wafers (see Sec. V A and B for details) but the laser pulse duration was varied within 
the range from 10 to 15 ns. 
Within the accuracy of the AFM measurements, the general pattern of the modified 
surface morphology did not depend on the GaAs cap layer thickness. Below the results of the 
laser modification of the heterostructure with the 20 nm thick cap are presented. 
When the TE—TM polarization configuration was selected, the intensity distribution in 
the plane of the sample surface can be treated in the first-order approximation as the 
sinusoidal one along both directions [45]. In Fig. 25 (a) and (b) an AFM image and a surface 
profile of the GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs heterstructure surface modified by four beam standing 
wave pulsed laser radiation with the pulse energy density of ≈ 1.5 J⋅cm–2 are presented. Note 
that in this experiment the bissector between the incidence angles of one pair of the beams 
was tuned off the normal to the sample surface. This resulted in the modulation of the 
intensity in the standing wave pattern maxima in the diagonal direction from the upper left 
corner of the AFM image to the lower right one; the modulation period was doubled relative 
to the basic period of the standing wave pattern. That is why the corresponding modulation of 
the surface modification pattern can be observed in the AFM image in Fig. 25 (a). 
 
 
Figure 26. A typical AFM images of a modified area on the surface of GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs 
heterstructure. 
In Fig. 26 a typical AFM image of a modified area on the GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs 
heterostructure surface is presented. Let us consider the following two features of the 
morphology of the modified heterostructure surface. First, the outer boundary of the modified 
areas (corresponding to the interference maxima) had a nearly rectangular shape, while the 
calculated intensity distribution near the standing wave maxima had a circular symmetry. The 
second important feature is that a considerable number of islands appeared inside the 
modified areas, whereas no islands had been observed between these ones. It should be 
mentioned here that the general pattern of the modification on the surface of the strained 
heterostructure differs drastically from the one of the single crystal GaAs and Si as well as 
from the one of the amorphous films. In the case of the crystalline semiconductors, the single 
islands appeared near each interference maximum and a pit in the substrate was formed 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
198 
straight in the maxima (see Sec. V A and B). This was considered as the evidence of the 
crystalline material transfer. In the case of the amorphous metal films, the pits on the film 
surface surrounded by the swells (like in the case of an explosion) were formed (see Sec. IV 
A). 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 27. The histogram of the lateral size distribution for the peripheral (large) islands (a) and of the 
internal (small) ones (b) on the surface of GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs QW heterostructure modified by four-
beam standing wave pulsed XeCl laser radiation in the TE—TM polarization configuration. 
The statistical analysis of the island sizes in the AFM images shown in Fig. 26 revealed a 
bimodal island size distribution. The sizes of the islands located in the periphery of the 
modified area (7 to 20 nm in diameter) differed significantly from the sizes of the islands 
located inside this area (3 to 8 nm, respectively). The size distributions of the peripheral 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
199
(large) islands and of the internal (small) ones are presented in Fig. 27 (a) and (b), 
respectively. The surface densities of the peripheral islands and of the internal ones are close 
to 1 × 1010 cm–2 and to 5 × 1010 cm–2, respectively. 
From the experimental data presented here, one can make the following conclusions 
regarding the island formation process. First of all, under the conditions of these experiments, 
the ablation (i.e., removing the material from the processed surface) was absent. So far, the 
resulting surface morphology could be attributed to the material transfer on the surface only. 
The lateral sizes of the islands were 20 to 60 times smaller than the standing wave period(s). 
These sizes of the islands cannot be determined by a pure thermal effect since similar islands 
were obtained when the laser pulse energy density was increased two times. 
As in the case of the laser modification of the single crystal GaAs and Si, understanding 
the modification process of the strained heterostructures requires consideration of the surface 
stresses as the driving forces of the nanoislands' self assembling. The process of island 
formation during the four-beam standing wave laser modification can be understood in terms 
of the Stranski-Krastanow growth. It is well known that the surface of a single crystal is in a 
stressed state. These surface stresses are related to the difference in the coordination of the 
atoms located in the bulk and on the surface of the crystal. The higher the quality of the single 
crystal surface, the greater the magnitude of surface stresses. Actually, the stresses relax at the 
defects of the single crystal surface that arise during growth and processing of a single crystal 
substrate. Any defects of any type known in crystallography can act as the stress relaxation 
centers. In this case, the spatial scale of the stress variations across the single crystal substrate 
surface depends on the quality of the substrarte. In the case of the substrate of high enough 
quality, the stress relaxation scale can be commensurable with the substrate dimensions. This 
is exactly what has been observed for the Si and GaAs single crystal substrates. 
Unlike the homogeneous single crystals, the primary origin of the surface stresses in the 
heteroepitaxial films is the lattice mismatch between the film and the substrate. For InAs, the 
lattice constant a1 ≈ 0.60584 nm and for GaAs a2 ≈ 0.56534 (at 293K). The spatial scale of 
the stress variations is determined by the beats between the two lattice constants a1 and a2. In 
this approximation, one can easily obtain an expression for the minimum period of the spatial 
strain fluctuations to be 2a1a2/( a1 – a2). This estimate yields a value of ≈ 17 nm. In the 
samples used in the experiments described here, the averaged lattice constant of the 
In0.35Ga0.65As alloy was ≈ 0.57952 nm (at 293K) that yields the period of the spatial variation 
of the elastic strain to be ≈ 51 nm. This value agrees fairly well with the averaged distance 
between the islands (presented in Fig. 26) measured experimentally by AFM. Such a 
coincidence can be treated as an additional argument that surface stresses play a key role in 
the standing wave laser assisted self assembling observed in the experiments described here. 
In this scope, the scatter in the distances between the adjacent islands can be attributed to the 
local variations in the InGaAs alloy composition. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The results of the studies presented in this article demonstrate the capabilities and 
versatility of Four Beam Standing Wave XeCl Pulsed Excimer Laser Lithography in the 
periodic patterning of various materials. These results supported by the theoretical 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
200 
calculations have demonstrated that using the four-beam interference of the high-power 
coherent pulsed UV laser radiation one can form the nearly perfect periodic arrays of the 
nearly identical surface nanoobjects in an extremely wide range of the material systems. The 
lateral dimensions of these nanoobjects as well as the array periods in both directions can be 
controlled precisely by adjustment of the optical scheme of the interference (namely, of the 
angles of incidence of the laser beams onto the illuminated area) and of the beam parameters 
(such as the beam polarizations, the pulse energy, and the pulse duration). For the XeCl laser 
with the emission wavelength λ = 308 nm the minimum array period is ≈ 150 nm and as low 
relative uncertainty in the array period as ~ 10–4 is achievable. 
Although E-beam Lithography, X-Ray Lithography, and even Extreme UV Opitcal 
Lithography (again, the two latter techniques use the photomasks recorded by E-Beam 
Lithography) provide potentially much lower limits of the critical dimensions, the typical 
element size range of the UV Standing Wave Laser Lithography of 100 to 1000 nm covers a 
wide range of applications, first of all, in the integrated optics of the visible and of the near IR 
wavelength bands. Next, E-Beam Lithography is featured by infinite flexibility (i.e., any 
desired picture can be drawn by the electron beam scanning). This feature is inherited by X-
Ray and UV Lithographies along with the photomasks. In this scope, the capabilities of the 
Standing Wave Lithography are limited to the rather simple periodic patterns. However, in 
this particular case, Standing Wave Lithography takes an important advantage of the array 
period reproducibility. The last (but not least) Standing Wave lithography is much more cost 
effective compared to the other techniques listed above, especially when the direct surface 
modification is feasible. The studies presented in this article demonstrate that even such hard 
material as diamond can be patterned using direct Standing Wave Pulsed Laser Ablation. This 
method can be applied not only in the semiconductor diamond technology but also for secret 
marking of the diamonds used in jewelry for security and customs purposes, etc. 
The process of modification of the solid surfaces in the direct Standing Wave Pulsed 
Laser Modification is governed by the thermal processes near the surface. The theoretical 
investigations of the heat transfer in the thin films on the heat conducting substrates heated by 
a spatially periodic pulsed heat source helped us to find the conditions for the forming of the 
arrays of the surface nanostructures with necessary morphological parameters in various film 
and substrate material systems. 
Application of the four-beam standing wave laser radiation to stimulate the self 
assembling of the semiconductor nanoislands opens new prospects in control of the self-
assembling process and therefore in increasing the size uniformity of the nanoislands and the 
degree of their ordering in the substrate plane. The results of our experiments demonstrated 
the possibility of controlled self-assembling of the two-dimensional arrays of the nanoislands 
on the surface of single crystal Si(001) and GaAs(001) stimulated by pulsed standing wave 
UV laser radiation. Self assembling mechanism of the nanoisland formation provides the 
small nanoisland sizes down to ≈ 40 nm that is ~ 10 times smaller than the standing wave 
period while the typical size of the nano relief features produced by direct Standing Wave 
Laser Ablation is ≈ 1/4 of the array period. So far, utilization of self-assembling reduces the 
lower limit for the size of the nanoislands formed by Standing Wave Laser Modification 
drastically. On the other hand, the standing wave pattern dictates the spatial arrangement of 
the nanoislands on the substrate and provides the uniform islands to arrange in nearly perfect 
two-dimensional superlattice. One can control both periods of this superlattice by adjusting 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
201
the angles of incidence of the laser beams onto the patterned substrate. Also, the resulting 
nanoisland array morphology has been demonstrated to depend on the polarization of the 
interfering laser beams that opens additional opportunities for controlling the self-assembling 
process. The experiments on the four-beam standing wave pulsed laser stimulation of the self-
assembling 
on 
the 
surface 
of 
GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs(001) 
strained 
quantum 
well 
heterostructures demonstrated that the interaction of the intrinsic strain field with the standing 
wave induced thermal one results in a rather complex pattern of the surface nanostructures. 
It should be stressed here that the four-beam laser setup could be combined quite easily 
with any growth chamber for MBE as well as for Vapor Phase Epitaxy just passing the laser 
beams through the appropriate viewports. Thus, standing wave assisted self assembling can 
be performed in situ, and the resulting nanoisland arrays could be built in any multilayered 
structure including the device ones. Taking into account all the above, we can conclude that 
the four beam standing wave laser assisted self-assembling is a very promising technique for 
various applications in nanotechnology. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The studies presented in this article have been supported in part by European Community 
FP-6 IST-4 No.027976 “Development of Lithography Technology for Nanoscale Structuring 
of Materials Using Laser Beam Interference (DELILA)”, by Russian Academy of Science 
(Division of Physics Sciences) under Nonlinear Optics of Unique Laser Systems Program, by 
Russian Foundation for Basic Research (L-EN 96-15-96594, 98-02-16306, and 02-02-17139), 
and by Joint Russian – American Program “Basic Research and Higher Education”(BRHE) 
funded in parity by US Civilian Research and Development Foundation (CRDF) and by 
Ministry of Education, Russian Federation (REC-NN-001). 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Zaidi, S. H., Brueck, S. R. J., Hill, T. & Shagam, R. N. (1998). Proc. SPIE, 3331, 371-
382. 
[2] 
Brueck, S. R. (2005). J. Proc. IEEE, 93, 1704-1721. 
[3] 
Zhang, L., Sugden, K., Williams, J. A. R., Bennion, I.., Reid, D. C. J. & Ragdale, C. M. 
(1995). Opt. Lett. A, 20, 1927-1929.  
[4] 
Askins, C. C., Tsai, Т. Е., Williams, G. M., Putnam, M. A., Bashkansky, M. & Friebele, 
E. (1992). J. Opt. Lett., 17, 833-835.  
[5] 
Luryi, S., Xu, J. & Zaslavsky, A. (2007). Future Trends in Microelectronics: Up the 
Nano Creek. Wiley-IEEE Press: Hoboken, NJ, 14. 
[6] 
Bredikhin, V. I., Verevkin, Yu. K., Daume, E. Ya., Kuznetsov, S. P., Mal'shakova, 
O. A., Petryakov, V. N., Vostokov, N. V. & Polushkin, N. I. (2000). Quantum 
Electron., 30, 333-339. 
[7] 
Savas, T. A., Farhoud, M., Smith, H. I. & Ross, C. A. (1999). J. Appl. Phys., 85, 6160-
6165. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
202 
[8] 
Fernandez, A., Bedrossian, P. J., Baker, S. L., Vernon, S. P. & Kania, D. R. (1996). 
IEEE Trans. Magn., 32, 4472-4475. 
[9] 
Smith, H. I. (2001). Phys, E, 11, 104-109. 
[10] Zheng, M., Yu, M., Liu, Y., Liou, S. H., Sellmyer, D. J., Petryakov, V. N., Verevkin, 
Yu. K., Polushkin, N. I. & Salashchenko, N. N. (2001). Appl. Phys. Lett., 79, 2606-
2608. 
[11] Phillips, H. M., Callaham, D. L. & Sauerbrey, R. (1992). Appl. Phys. A, 54, 158-163. 
[12] Ezaki, M., Kumagai, H. & Toyoda, K. (1993). Jpn. J. Appl.Phys., 32, 1308-1315. 
[13] Pelissier, S., Biauc, D., Andrews, M. P., Najafi, S. I., Tishchenko, A. V. & Parriaux, O. 
(1999). Appl. Opt., 38, 6744-6746. 
[14] Fernandez, A., Nguyen, H. T., Britten, J. A., Boyd, R. D., Perry, M. D., Kania, D. R. & 
Hawryluk, A. M. (1997). J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 15, 729-734. 
[15] Verevkin, Yu. K., Bronnikova, N. G., Korolikhin, V. V., Gushchina, Yu. Yu., 
Petryakov, V. N., Filatov, D. O., Bityurin, N. M., Kruglov, A. V. & Levichev. V. V. 
(2003). Tech. Phys., 48, 757-761. 
[16] Verevkin, Yu. K., Klimov, A. Yu., Gribkov, B. A., Petryakov, V. N., Koposova, E. V. 
& Olaizola, S. M. (2008). Quantum Electron., 38 (in press). 
[17] Brundrett, D. L., Gaylord, T. K. & Glytsis, E. N. (1998). Appl. Opt., 37, 2534-2538. 
[18] Xu, Y., Sun, H., Ye, J., Matssuo, S. & Misawa, H. (2001). J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 18, 1084-
1090. 
[19] Nano-optoelectronics: Concepts, Physics, and Devices. Grundmann, M., Ed., Springer: 
Berlin - Heidelberg, 2004. 
[20] Ledentsov, N. N., Ustinov, V. M., Shchukin, V. A., Kop’ev, P. S., Alferov, Zh. I. & 
Bimberg, D. (1998). Semicond., 32, 343-361. 
[21] Pchelyakov, O. P., Bolkhovityanov, Yu. B., Dvurechenskii, A. V., Sokolov, L. V., 
Nikiforov, A. I., Yakimov, A. I. & Voigtländer, B. (2000). Semicond., 34, 1229-1247. 
[22] Teichert, C. (2002). Phys. Rep., 365, 335-369. 
[23] Cerofolini, G. F., Arena, G., Camalleri, M., Galati, C., Reina, S., Renna, L., Mascolo, 
D. & Nosik, V. (2002). Microel. Eng., 81, 405-429. 
[24] Semiconductor Nanostructures for Optoelectronic Applications. Steiner, T. D., Ed., 
Artech House Semiconductor Materials and Devices Library, Artech House: Norwood, 
MA, 2004. 
[25] Ustinov, V. M. (2004). Semicond., 38, 923-927. 
[26] Kryzhanovskaya, N. V., Gladyshev, A. G., Blokhin, S. A., Musikhin, Yu. G., Zhukov, 
A. E., Maksimov, M. V., Zakharov, N. D., Tsatsul’nikov, A. F., Ledentsov, N. N., 
Werner, P., Guffart, F. & Bimberg, D. (2004). Semicond., 38, 833-835. 
[27] Sgartato, A., Szkutnik, P. D., Balzarotti, A.; Motta, N. & Rosei, F. (2004). Appl.Phys. 
Lett., 83, 4002-4004. 
[28] Shchukin, V. A., Borovkov, A. I., Ledentsov, N. N. & Kop’ev, P. S. (1995). Phys. Rev. 
B, 51, 17767-17770. 
[29] Capellini, G., De Seta, M., Spinella, C. & Evangelisti, F. (2003). Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 
1772-1774. 
[30] Patella, F., Szkutnik, A. & Sgarlata, E. (2004). J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 16, S1503-
1505. 
[31] Kitajima, T., Lu, B. & Leone, S. R. (2002). Appl. Phys. Lett., 80, 497-499. 

Two-Dimensional Periodic Nanoscale Patterning of Solid Surfaces… 
203
[32] Zhoug, Z., Halilovic, A., Fromherz, T., Schäffler, F. & Bauer, G. (2003). Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 82, 4779-4781. 
[33] Li, Q., Han, S. M., Bruek, S. R. J., Hersee, S., Jiang, Y. B. & Xu, H. (2003). Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 83, 5032-5034. 
[34] Liu, F. & Lagally, M. G. (1997). Surf. Sci., 386, 169-175. 
[35] Drozdov, Yu, N., Krasil’nik, Z. F., Lobanov, D. N., Novikov, A. V., Shaleev, M. V. & 
Yablonskiĭ, A. N. (2006). Semicomd., 40, 338-342. 
[36] Pedraza, A. J., Fowlkes, J. D. & Guan, Y. E. (2003). Appl. Phys. A, 77, 277-279. 
[37] Verevkin, Yu. K., Daume, E. Ya., Petryakov, V. N., Gushchina, Yu. Yu. & Tikhov, 
S. V. (2005). Tech. Phys. Lett., 31, 759-762. 
[38] Bauerle, D. (1996). Laser Processing and Chemistry. Springer: Berlin - Heidelberg. 
[39] Mullendorn, M., Birkelund, K., Grey, F. & Madsen, S. (1996). Appl. Phys. Lett., 69, 
3013-3015. 
[40] Meltz, G., Morey, W. W. & Glenn, W. H. (1989). Opt. Lett., 14, 823-825. 
[41] Askins, G. G., Tsai, T.-E., Williams, G. M., Putnam, M. A., Bashkausky, M. & 
Friebele, E. Y. (1992). Opt. Lett., 17, 833-835. 
[42] Dong, L., Archambault, Y. L., Reekie, L., Russell, P. S. Y. & Payne, D. N. (1993). 
Electron. Lett., 29, 1577-1579. 
[43] Zhang, L. S., Williams, Y. A. R., Denion, Y., Reid, D. C. Y. & Ragdale, C. M. (1995). 
Opt. Lett., 20, 1927-1929. 
[44] Othonos, A. & Lee, X. (1995). Rev. Sci. Instr., 66, 3112-3116. 
[45] Fernandez, A. & Phillion, D. W. (1998). Appl.Opt., 37, 473-478. 
[46] Baker, K. M. (1999). Appl. Opt., 38, 352-355. 
[47] Meier, M., Mekis, A., Dodabalapur, A., Timko, A., Slusher, R. E., Yoannopoulos, 
Y. D. & Nalamasu, O. (1999). Appl. Phys. Lett., 74, 7-9. 
[48] Ezaki, M., Kumagai, H., Toyoda, K. & Obara, M. (1993). Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 32, 1308-
1312. 
[49] Seminogov, V. N., Panchenko, V. Ya. & Khudobenko, A. N. (1997). JETP, 111, 174-
181. 
[50] Bychkov, Yu. I., Losev, V. F. & Panchenko, Yu. N. (1992). Sov. J. Quantum Electron., 
22, 638-642. 
[51] Perrone, M. R. & Yao, Y. B. (1994). IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 30, 1327-1330. 
[52] Veiko, S. M. & Metev, S. M. (1991). Laser Technologies in Microelectronics. Sofia: 
Bulgarian Academy of Science Publishing. 
[53] Phillips, H. M., Callahan, D. L., Sauerbrey, R., Szabo, G. & Bor, Z. (1992). Appl. Phys. 
A, 54, 158-161. 
[54] Chung, Y. & Shi-Woo, R. (2001). J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron., 12, 697-700. 
[55] Lee, M., Moou, S., Haatana, M. & Grigoropoulos, C. P. (2001). Appl. Phys. A, 73, 
317-321. 
[56] Efremov, M. D., Bolotov, V. V., Volodin, V. A., Kochubei, S. A. & Kretinin, A. V. 
(2002). Semicond., 36, 102-106. 
[57] Alekseev, A. M., Verevkin, Yu. K., Vostokov, N. V., Petryakov, V. N., Polushkin, 
N. I., Popkov, A. F. & Salashchenko, N. N. (2001). JETP Lett., 73, 192-195. 
[58] Boyd, R. D., Britten, Y. A., Decker, D. E., Shore, B. W., Stuart, B. C., Perry, M. D. & 
Li, L. (1995). Appl. Opt., 34, 1697-1700. 
[59] Verevkin, Yu. K. & Daume, E. Ya. (1998). Opt. Spectrosc., 85, 239-244. 

Yu. K. Verevkin, E. Ya. Daume, V. N. Petryakov et al. 
204 
[60] Wang, S., Zhou, C., Zhang, Y. & Ru, H. (2006). Appl. Opt., 45, 2567-2569. 
[61] Silicon Photonics. L. Pavesi, & D. J. Lockwood, (Eds.), Springer: Berlin - Heidelberg, 
2004. 
[62] Vlasov, S. N. & Koposova, E. V. (2003). Radio Phys. Quantum Electron., 46, 5-14. 
[63] Dragomir, N. M., Rollinson, C. & Wade, S. A. (2003). Opt. Lett., 28, 789-791. 
[64] Park, D. & Kim, M. (2004). Opt. Lett., 29, 1849-1851. 
[65] Haro-Poniatowski, E., Fort, E., Lacharme, J. P. & Ricolleau, C. (2005). Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 87, 3103-3105. 
[66] Guo, L. J. (2004). J. Phys. D Appl. Phys., 37, R123-159. 
[67] Pisignano, D., Maruccio, G. & Mele, E. (2005). Appl. Phys. Lett., 87, 3109-3111. 
[68] Heon, L., Hong, S. & Yang, K. (2006). Appl. Phys. Lett., 88, 3112-3114. 
[69] Kanamori, Y., Sasaki, M. & Hane, K. (1999). Opt. Lett., 24, 1422-1424. 
[70] Kintaka, K., Nishii, J., Mazutani, A., Kikuta, H. & Nakano, H. (2001). Opt. Lett., 26, 
1642-1644. 
[71] Rastei, M. V., Meckenstock, R., Bucher, J. P., Devaux, E. & Ebbessen, T. (2004). Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 85, 2050-2052. 
[72] Kim, D. (2005). Appl. Opt., 44, 3213-3217. 
[73] Zeng, L., Hong, Y., Liu, J., Feng, N., Duan, X., Kimerling, L. & Alamariu, B. (2006). 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 89, 1111-1113. 
[74] Guise, P., Yates, J., Levy, J., Ahner, J., Vaithynathan, V. & Schlom, D. (2005). Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 87, 1902-1904. 
[75] Zhong, Z., Katsaros, G., Stoffel, M., Costantini, G., Kern, K., Schidt, G., Jin-Phillipp, 
N. & Bauer, G. (2005). Appl. Phys. Lett., 87, 3102-3104. 
[76] Polushkin, N. I., Gusev, S. A., Drozdov, S. A., Verevkin, Yu. K. & Petryakov, V. N. 
(1997). J. Appl. Phys., 81, 1-3. 
[77] Verevkin, Yu. K., Petryakov, V. N. & Polushkin, N. I. (1998). Tech. Phys. Lett., 24, 
460-463. 
[78] Bredikhin, V. I., Burenina, V. N., Verevkin, Yu. K., Kirsanov, A. V., Petryakov, V. N., 
Vostokov, N. V., Dryakhlushin, V. F. & Klimov, A. Yu. (2004). Tech. Phys., 49, 1191-
1197. 
 
 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 205-244  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
ZNO NANOSTRUCTURES DEPOSITED BY  
LASER ABLATION 
 
 
D. Valerini1*, A. Cretí2, A. P. Caricato1, M. Lomascolo2, R. Rella2, 
and M. Martino1 
1Department of Physics, L3 group, University of Salento, 
Via Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy. 
2IMM-CNR, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, 
Department of Lecce, Via Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter aims to present a brief review about a very interesting application of 
laser beams in the field of materials science: the growth of zinc oxide (ZnO) 
nanostructured films by Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD), and in particular by means of 
excimer laser ablation. After an introduction giving an overview on properties and 
applications of ZnO and its nanostructures and on some growth techniques used to obtain 
these materials, this survey will present several results, obtained by different research 
groups in the world, about nanostructured ZnO grown by excimer laser ablation. Then 
this study will be focused on the results obtained by our research group in this field so 
far. By properly changing some deposition parameters (substrate temperature, oxygen 
pressure and ablation laser wavelength) we obtained nanostructured films with hexagonal 
pyramids, columns, hexagonal hierarchical structures and pencils, as well as smooth or 
rough films. In particular the different ablation laser wavelengths (248 nm of KrF and 
193 nm of ArF) are shown to have a deep influence on both morphology and crystal 
quality of the grown samples. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), x-ray diffraction 
(XRD) and photoluminescence (PL) measurements were used to inspect the film 
properties. Finally, some results about our optical gas sensing tests conducted on the 
grown samples are presented. 
 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding author : currently at Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable 
Economic Development (ENEA), Research Centre of Brindisi, S.S. 7 Appia - km 706, 72100 Brindisi, Italy. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
206 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A very interesting application of laser beams can be found in the field of materials 
science, where they can be valuably used as means to grow a wide range of materials with 
controllable physical properties, which can be consequently used for a huge number of 
technological applications. This chapter deals with the use of a laser-based growth technique 
(the Pulsed Laser Deposition technique) for the realization of nanostructured zinc oxide. In 
order to introduce the matter examined in this chapter, we first present a general overview 
about properties and applications of ZnO and its nanostructures and about some growth 
techniques used to obtain these materials. 
 
 
1.a. Properties and Applications of Zinc Oxide and Its Nanostructures 
 
Nanostructured zinc oxide (ZnO) has attracted great attention over the recent years 
because of its interesting properties making this kind of material particularly appealing for a 
wide range of applications in several technological fields, like e.g. optoelectronics and 
biochemical sensing. This is also evidenced by the huge number of scientific publications 
about this matter [1]. 
ZnO, even in its non-nanostructured form, is a very attractive material thanks to its 
features, like wide band gap, large exciton binding energy, chemical stability, 
biocompatibility, piezoelectricity, nonlinear optical effects, radiation hardness. Moreover, 
when passing from bulk material to nanostructures, the interest becomes strongly enhanced, 
since the properties deriving from the reduced dimensionality of nanostructures add to the 
intrinsic ZnO properties. Furthermore, the intense studies in this research field are promoted 
by the possibility to realize a very broad variety of ZnO nanostructures, such as dots, wires, 
rods, tetrapods, belts, combs, tubes, needles, hierarchical structures and so on. Some 
examples of ZnO nanostructures are displayed in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Some examples of ZnO nanostructures. (Reprinted with permission from [58], copyright 
2004, Elsevier). 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation
 
207
ZnO, as bulk material or film, is very appealing for electronic and opto-electronic 
devices, such as Ohmic contacts [2], Schottky contacts [3], LEDs [4], LASERs [5], 
transparent FETs [6], photodetectors [7] and solar cells [8]. Dealing with ZnO nanostructures, 
a lot of different possible electronic and opto-electronic applications have been explored. The 
possibility to realize Ohmic or Schottky metal nano-contacts onto ZnO nanostructures has 
been reported [9]. Electroluminescence for LED applications has been extensively studied 
with devices based both on ZnO nanorod arrays [10] and on single ZnO nanorod [11]. Thanks 
to the ZnO high refractive index (~ 2.0) and to the well-faceted ends of the nanowires acting 
as reflecting mirrors, ZnO nanowires can work as ideal optical resonance cavities; indeed 
lasing action at room temperature has been demonstrated on ZnO aligned nanorod arrays [12] 
and single nanorods [13], but also in random oriented nanorod arrays [14] and other 
nanostructures [15,16]. Even random lasing in ZnO nanoparticle films has been studied [17]. 
Field effect transistors (FETs) based on single ZnO nanorods [18], nanobelts [19], and hybrid 
ZnO tetrapods/polymer blends [20] have been realized. ZnO nanorods/nanowires have been 
studied for applications as ultraviolet photodetectors and optical switches [21,22]. UV 
photodiodes based on ZnO nanotetrapods with Schottky contacts have been reported [23]. For 
applications of ZnO nanostructures to solar cells, it is believed that aligned nanorods can 
highly improve the solar energy conversion efficiency through a faster electron transport than 
conventional solar cells; for this reason many studies are conducted towards this application 
[24,25]. By combinations of metal-semiconductor Schottky diodes or FETs, ZnO nanorods 
have been also used to realize logic circuits [26]. 
Due to its high refractive index ZnO is also useful for optical waveguides. Thus, for 
example, light can be guided inside a nanowire, acting like an optical nano-fiber. Even light 
coupling between nanostructures of different materials (like ZnO and SnO2) has been reported 
[27]. This is particular appealing for nanoscale photonics integration [27]. 
Since zinc oxide presents strong piezoelectric properties [28] it can be suitable for 
electro-mechanical transducers, sensors and actuators [29] and for surface acoustic wave 
(SAW) devices [30]. The piezoelectric properties of ZnO nanostructures have been widely 
explored [31]. A method to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy through 
piezoelectricity of ZnO nanowires has been showed [32], suggesting the possibility to convert 
biological mechanical energy, acoustic vibration energy, and bio-fluid hydraulic energy into 
electricity at nanoscale levels. Piezoelectricity can be also used for pressure or force sensors 
[33]. ZnO nanostructures are also interesting for use as nano-cantilevers [34], for example for 
atomic force microscopy (AFM), thanks to their piezoelectric properties and smaller 
dimensions than conventional cantilevers (e.g. made of Si3N4 or SiC). 
Bulk zinc oxide and films present large nonlinear optical coefficients, suggesting their 
potential application in quantum electronics and integrated optical devices. Second harmonic 
generation (SHG) in bulk ZnO [35] and films [36] and third harmonic generation (THG) [37] 
have been reported, hence showing the possibility to use this material, which is cheaper and 
easier to be integrated than other nonlinear optical single crystals like LiNbO3 and LiTaO3, in 
this technological field. Optical nonlinearity has been studied in ZnO nanostructures as well; 
for example SHG and THG have been reported for ZnO nanowires [38]. 
Ferromagnetism in doped ZnO has been theoretically studied [39] and experimentally 
evidenced at room temperature in doped ZnO films [40] as well as nanostructures [41], thus 
showing possible appliance in spintronics. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
208 
Another useful ZnO property is its radiation hardness [42,43], making it interesting for 
devices to be used in space applications. 
Zinc oxide is also reported to be a biosafe and biocompatible material [44], hence 
supporting the possible use of ZnO for biomedical applications [45,46]. However further 
studies are still required in this direction, since possible damages of ZnO nanoparticles on 
human cells have been observed [47]. 
The possibility to realize very ordered arrays of ZnO nanostructures is particularly useful 
for realization of photonic crystals. Theoretical and experimental results have shown the 
possibility to obtain photonic structures by means of ZnO inverted opals [48] and ZnO 
nanopillar arrays [49]. 
Another very interesting possible application of ZnO nanostructures is as field emitters to 
be used, for example, for flat panel displays, cold cathodes and other photoelectric devices. 
Oxide nanostructures may have high efficiency, reduction of cost and device sizes in 
comparison with conventional thermo-ionic emitters, and they are more stable in harsh 
environment and controllable in electrical properties compared, for example, to carbon 
nanotubes [50]. The great interest derives also from the fact that many nanostructures have a 
needle-like tip, so that the electron field emission is highly enhanced due to the local field 
enhancement on their tips. Several reports exist about field emission from different ZnO 
nanostructure arrays, such as nanowires [50], nanopencils [51], nanoneedles [52] and other 
nanostructures [53,54,55]. 
Other possible applications of ZnO nanostructures are related to their wettability 
properties, since hydrophilic or hydrophobic materials are interesting for microfluid devices, 
chemical sensors or biosensors and for industrial uses like cleaning, drying etc. Conversion 
from hydrophobic to hydrophilic surface of ZnO nanorod arrays by UV illumination [56] or 
by oxygen plasma treatment or annealing [57] have been reported. 
Certainly one of the most attractive applications of zinc oxide is for chemical or 
biological sensors. More details about this aspect will be given in par. 3.d. 
 
 
1.b. Growth Techniques for Zinc Oxide Nanostructures 
 
Several growth techniques have been reported in literature for the growth of ZnO 
nanostructures. Here we list some examples. 
A technique extensively used for the growth of ZnO nanostructures is thermal 
evaporation. In this vapor-phase method the species evaporated from the source material, e.g. 
zinc or zinc oxide, in a furnace are transported onto the substrate, maintained at the chosen 
temperature, through a flux of an inert gas or of a mixture containing a gas which must 
interact with the evaporated species (for example oxygen if only zinc is evaporated). By 
properly tuning the growth parameters, the condensation of the gaseous species on the 
substrate leads to the growth of different nanostructures [58]. Often, in order to get 
nanostructures, the growth must be aided by a catalyst. For example sometimes the catalyst is 
dispersed together with ZnO in the source material (e.g. graphite mixed with ZnO powder 
[59] and, during the condensation process, it catalyzes the nanostructure growth. In other 
cases a thin layer of a catalyst (e.g. Au, Cu, Ni, Sn, Pt, etc.) is previously deposited on the 
substrate. Typically the growth process in this technique is reported to be related to a vapor-
liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism [59], that is: on the substrate the catalyst forms liquid droplets 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation
 
209
which promote the adsorption of the gaseous molecules; when supersaturation is reached, the 
nucleation and subsequent growth of nanometric structures start. Usually, when no catalyst is 
used during the growth, a vapor-solid (VS) sublimation mechanism is proposed [58]. In order 
to aid the nanostructure formation or to modify their properties (like density on the substrate, 
dimensions, etc.), sometimes a ZnO film (buffer layer) is deposited on the substrate before the 
nanostructure deposition [60]. Thermal evaporation is a very simple technique, but it usually 
requires high temperatures (even ~ 900°C or more) in order to evaporate the source material 
or to form the liquid catalyst droplets on the substrate. The nanostructures shown in Figure 1 
were obtained by this growth technique. 
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) [61] and Metalorganic CVD (MOCVD) [62,63] are 
also widely used for the growth of ZnO nanostructures. In these techniques the volatile 
precursors containing the elements of the material to be deposited are transported onto the 
heated substrate where they react allowing the growth of the material. As for thermal 
evaporation, even in this case catalysts are sometimes used, and VLS or VS (for catalyst-free 
CVD) mechanisms are proposed as possible growth processes. Also plasma-enhanced CVD 
(PECVD), in which a plasma is used in order to enhance the chemical reaction rates of the 
precursors, has been employed to obtain ZnO nanostructures [64]. Figure 2 shows some ZnO 
nanostructures grown by these techniques. 
Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) has been used to realize ZnO nanostructures. Even in the 
MBE growth a catalyst can be used to aid the nanostructure formation. For example the cation 
flux coming from a zinc source is oxidized in a plasma of ozone/oxygen mixture and the 
material deposits on a catalyst-coated (e.g. Ag) heated substrate [65]. 
ZnO micro/nanostructure deposition can be obtained by sputtering of a ZnO target. As 
examples, RF magnetron sputtering has been used to grow ZnO nanorods on Cu-coated 
silicon substrates [66] or hexagonal micropyramids on alumina substrates [67]. 
Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD), in which a high-power pulsed laser beam is focused onto 
a target material (for example metallic zinc or sintered/ceramic zinc oxide) placed in a 
vacuum chamber, causing the ablation (ejection) of the material which interacts with the 
background atmosphere (for example oxygen) and deposits on a substrate, is a very powerful 
technique for the growth of ZnO nanostructures. Nanostructured ZnO has been obtained by 
PLD by using different lasers (excimer, Nd:YAG and femtosecond lasers) in conventional or 
unconventional systems, with or without the use of catalysts, in different background 
atmospheres, etc. The growth of ZnO nanostructures by this technique will be discussed in 
more details in the next paragraphs. 
 
 (a) 
(c) 
1 μm
(b)
 
Figure 2. SEM images of some ZnO nanostructures grown by (a) CVD, (b) MOCVD, (c) PECVD. 
(Reprinted with permission from: (a) [61], copyright 2002, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.; 
(b) [62], copyright 2007, Institute Of Physics (IOP); (c) [64], copyright 2004, American Institute of 
Physics (AIP)). 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
210 
Also direct oxidation of zinc powders has been showed to allow the realization of ZnO 
nanostructures. For example ZnO tetrapods have been obtained by heating zinc powders in a 
furnace at 850-900°C in oxygen atmosphere [68]. 
ZnO nanostructures have been synthesized by hydrothermal methods [69], which consist in 
the growth from hot (~ 90°-300°C) aqueous solutions at high vapor pressures (~ 1 atm or more). 
The aqueous solution contains the precursors for the growth of the material of interest, which 
dissolve in the high-temperature solution and condense in the cooler part of the chamber. 
Apart from hydrothermal synthesis, other solution-based methods have been used to 
synthesize ZnO nanostructures, like electrochemical methods (or electrodeposition) [70], sol-gel 
methods [71,72], sonochemical synthesis and microwave-assisted synthesis [73], and other 
solution-based chemical routes [74]. 
Zinc oxide nanostructures have been also realized by using template-directed methods, in 
which a periodic structured template (for example an anodic alumina membrane or a polymeric 
membrane) is exploited to lead the growth of the material. The pores of the template can be 
filled by using other techniques. For example nanodots have deposited by PLD using an anodic 
alumina membrane [75] and nanorods have been obtained by evaporation on a gold membrane 
[76]. 
Finally, it must be added that different methods, other than the previous ones, have also 
been used to deposit ZnO nanostructures and that techniques made by combinations of different 
methods can be used. For example ZnO nanorods have been grown by chemical vapor 
deposition combined with pulsed laser deposition [77]. Another example of a mixed technique 
is a combination between laser ablation and chemical synthesis (see par. 2.b). 
Some examples of ZnO nanostructures grown by different techniques are displayed in Figure 3. 
 
 
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f)
 
Figure 3. (a)-(e) SEM and (f) TEM images of ZnO nanostructures grown by (a) MBE, (b) sputtering, 
(c) oxidation of Zn powders, (d) hydrothermal method, (e) template-directed thermal evaporation, (f) 
sol-gel method. (Reprinted with permission from: (a) [65], copyright 2002, American Institute of 
Physics (AIP); (b) [66], copyright 2006, Elsevier; (c) [68], copyright 2002, Elsevier; (d) [69], copyright 
2006, Elsevier; (e) [76], copyright 2005, Institute Of Physics (IOP); (f) [71], copyright 2005, Elsevier). 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation
 
211
ZINC OXIDE NANOSTRUCTURES BY LASER ABLATION 
 
As already mentioned in the previous paragraph, the PLD technique represents a very 
functional method to grow ZnO nanostructures. Here we provide a brief general description 
of the PLD technique and then we present some results, obtained by different research groups 
in the world, about nanostructured ZnO grown by PLD (in particular by excimer laser 
ablation). 
 
 
2.a. The Pulsed Laser Deposition Technique 
 
The Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) technique is a very versatile technique for the 
deposition of thin films and it was applied to a wide range of materials and applications 
[78,79]. Some of the historical applications of the PLD technique are, just as examples, in the 
fields of superconductivity [80], diamond-like coatings [81], nitride thin films [82], and so on. 
In a standard pulsed laser deposition set-up (Figure 4) a high-power laser beam, for 
example an UV laser with nanosecond pulse duration like KrF or ArF excimer lasers, is 
directed onto a target placed inside a vacuum chamber. 
The main components of a standard PLD setup are: 
• 
an ablation laser; 
• 
a lens focusing the laser beam onto the target surface; 
• 
a variable attenuator, varying the laser energy on the target and thus controlling the 
laser fluence; 
• 
a stainless steel high vacuum chamber (~ 10-5 ÷ 10-4 Pa); 
• 
reaction gases inlets; 
• 
a rotating target holder; 
• 
a substrate holder, possibly equipped with a heater and a motion system. 
 
 
Figure 4. Schematization of a typical PLD experimental apparatus. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
212 
UV light is strongly absorbed by many metals and other materials in contrast to IR 
light [79], for this reason the UV lasers are very attractive for materials processing, and 
the film production by PLD is widely based on the use of ns laser pulses in the UV 
range. Typical wavelengths for laser ablation are obtained from excimer lasers at 248 
nm (KrF) and 193 nm (ArF), or also by Nd:YAG lasers (e.g. tripled Nd:YAG at 355 
nm) or femtosecond lasers. 
A comprehensive review on the fundamental aspects of laser-solid interaction is 
given in [83]. The laser-target interaction causes the ejection of material from the 
target. The material ejected from the target due to this “explosive removal” (ablation) 
expands perpendicularly to the target surface, creating a plasma plume, and it is 
collected onto a substrate placed in front of the target. The deposition of this ablated 
material on the substrate from a large number of laser pulses leads to the gradual 
formation of the film. 
Several parameters play a key role on the quality of pulsed laser deposited thin 
films, namely the laser fluence, the background gas and the substrate temperature. The 
presence of a gas, for example an inert gas as argon, during laser ablation changes the 
dynamic expansion of the plume as a consequence of the collisions between plume 
particles and background gas molecules. In this case the gas acts as a moderator 
reducing the high impact energy of the ablated species [84,85]. Moreover a suitable gas 
can be inserted in the process chamber in order to also induce chemical reactions 
between the plume species and the gas molecules during the transfer of the target 
material to the substrate. In the case of oxide materials, a background O2 pressure of 
few Pa is generally used during the deposition in order to maintain the oxygen content 
in the growing film. 
A unique feature of the PLD technique is the high kinetic energy of the ablated 
particles, which strongly depends of the laser fluence. Time-of-flight analyses 
evidenced kinetic energies of the ablated species exceeding 100 eV even at relatively 
low fluences (~ 2 J/cm2) [86]. The collisions within the plasma and with the 
background gas reduce the energy of the ablated species, therefore the substrate surface 
can be heated in order to increase the surface mobility of the adatoms. 
 
The PLD technique presents several advantages with respect to other thin film 
deposition methods: 
 
• 
The ablated species (ions and atoms in the plume) have very higher kinetic 
energy and internal excitation energy with respect to other techniques, like 
sputtering, consequently thin films with a good adhesion on the substrate and 
good crystalline quality can be deposited also at relatively low temperature. 
• 
Materials with complex stoichiometry can be deposited in a single step, since 
the laser-target interaction causes the simultaneous evaporation of all the target 
constituents (congruent ablation). However deficiency of the lighter and most 
volatile elements (like oxygen) in the plume can occur in the final film 
composition, so the use of a suitable background gas can overcome these 
deficiency. 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation
 
213
• 
Reactive PLD is possible using suitable background gases (e.g. nitride 
compounds in N2 or NH3 atmosphere), moreover since PLD is a non-
equilibrium process, the formation of new compounds and metastable phases is 
possible [87]. 
• 
Multilayer thin films can be easily deposited by means of multi-target systems. 
 
Two major drawbacks are related to the PLD process and should be considered. 
Droplets and particulate can be deposited along with the film. However a careful 
choice of the deposition parameters (laser wavelength and fluence, repetition rate, 
background pressure) can reduce or eliminate this problem. 
The thickness profile of the deposited films on large areas is inhomogeneous. In 
fact the angular distribution of the ablated material has a strong peak in the forward 
direction, with an angular dependence ~ cosn(θ), where θ is the angle respect to the 
target surface normal, and n ranges from 2 to 20 (in vacuum) even if higher values have 
been also reported [88]. It is possible to improve the film thickness uniformity by 
changing the relative position between target and substrate (e.g. by a suitable motion of 
the substrate), so that it is possible to achieve uniform thin films on a large deposited 
areas too. 
 
 
2.b. Nanostructured Zinc Oxide by PLD in the World 
 
The previous paragraph presented a description of the “classical” PLD technique. 
However, due to the versatility of this growth method, also some variants have been 
reported to deposit ZnO nanostructures. For example, the laser ablation of the target 
can be conducted in a liquid medium instead of a gaseous environment. ZnO 
nanoparticles have been obtained by laser ablation of a zinc oxide target in pure liquids, 
like deionized water or ethanol [89]. Also laser ablation of metallic zinc in aqueous 
solutions containing other surfactants has been reported for the growth of ZnO 
nanostructures, such as nanoparticles [90], nanoleaves [91], nanorods and other 
nanostructures [92]. This technique, in which the ablated species interact with the 
surfactants, for example preventing further growth of the ablated species thus allowing 
the formation of nanometric clusters, can be considered as a mixed method between 
laser ablation and chemical routes. Further variants have been reported in literature, 
like e.g. RF plasma assisted PLD [93], bias voltage assisted PLD [94], and others [95]. 
Dealing with the classical PLD technique, ZnO nanostructures have been deposited 
by using different lasers as ablation sources, such as KrF or ArF excimer lasers (see 
below for details), Nd:YAG [96,97] and femtosecond lasers [98,99]. 
Some examples of ZnO nanostructures obtained by laser ablation in liquid or by ablation 
with Nd:YAG or femtosecond lasers are reported in Figure 5. 
Focusing the attention on PLD with excimer lasers as ablation sources, different 
research groups in the world have reported the growth of ZnO nanostructures, in 
particular nanorods or nanowires, by the use of different process parameters (laser 
wavelength and fluence, kind of target and substrate, background atmosphere, substrate 
temperature, etc.), without or with the use of a catalyst for the nanostructure growth, 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
214 
and performing the depositions in conventional or unconventional PLD set-ups. Here 
we intend a “conventional” apparatus as a PLD system like that one described in par. 
2.a, while an “unconventional” apparatus is intended as a modified PLD set-up, like for 
example systems with a hot-walled vacuum chamber similar to a furnace (instead of a 
direct heating of the substrate) or systems with particular shapes or geometries (see 
later for more details). 
 
(a) 
(b)
(c)
(d) 
 
Figure 5. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of different nanostructures grown by laser ablation in 
liquid media. (c) and (d): SEM images of nanostructures deposited by Nd:YAG and 
femtosecond laser ablation respectively. (Reprinted with permission from: (a) [92], copyright 
2006, Elsevier; (b) [91], copyright 2007, Institute Of Physics (IOP); (c) [96], copyright 2006, 
Elsevier; (d) [98], copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics (AIP)). 
Table 1 summarizes the deposition parameters used by some research groups to 
grow ZnO nanorods/nanowires. The different groups are labeled with capital letters 
from A to M, and the subscripts indicate different references related to the same group. 
In the column named “Laser parameters”, the excimer laser wavelength (248 nm for 
KrF, 193 nm for ArF), the laser fluence (energy per unit area) on the target and the 
repetition rate of the laser pulses are reported. DT-S is the target-to-substrate distance. In 
the last column the proposed growth mechanism is also summarized, whether reported 
in the corresponding papers. The values reported in square brackets in the columns 
“Tsubstrate” and “Background atmosphere” represent the optimal values found in the 
corresponding reference for the nanorod growth. The gray-shaded rows indicate 
references where unconventional PLD systems have been used. 
Some comments about the results obtained by the different groups and about the 
different proposed growth mechanisms are reported below. 

 
 
Table 1. Deposition parameters used by different research groups (labeled with letters from A to M) for the growth of ZnO 
nanostructures by excimer PLD. See text for details. 
 
Refs. 
Laser parameters 
Target 
Substrate 
Catalyst 
Tsubstrate 
DT-S 
(mm) 
Background 
atmosphere 
Proposed growth 
mechanism 
 
 
 
A 
1 
KrF, 20 Hz, 3 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
or metallic Zn 
sapphire (0001) or 
(11 2 0), or silica 
/ 
400-800°C 
[600-700°C] 
20-70 
O2 or He 
13.3-2700 Pa 
[100-1300 Pa] 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
2 
KrF, 20 Hz, 3-4 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire (0001) or 
(11 2 0), silica, silicon 
Au particles 
on silicon 
Tfurnace=600-1200°C 
10-30 
Ar 30000-67000 Pa 
or N2 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
3 
KrF, 20 Hz, 3 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire 
/ 
Tsubstrate=700°C 
20 
O2 130-1300 Pa 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
KrF, 20 Hz, 4 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire 
/ 
Tfurnace=800°C 
/ 
Ar 20000-47000 Pa 
B 
ArF, 10 Hz, 
1-20 J/cm2 
ceramic ZnO 
silicon (100) with or 
without a ZnO buffer 
layer, or (0001) 
sapphire 
/ 
300-750°C 
[600°C] 
20-60 
O2 
1.33 Pa 
VLS catalyzed by Zn 
droplets 
on bare Si. 
VS on ZnO-coated Si. 
 
C 
1 
KrF 
ZnO 
silicon 
/ 
150-800°C [500°C] 
25 
O2 133-933 Pa 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
2 
ArF, 10 Hz, 
~2-3 J/cm2 
ZnO 
silicon (100), 
copper, or tungsten 
/ 
600°C 
40 
2.7×10-3 Pa 
Volmer-Weber on Si. 
Stranski-Krastanov on 
Cu and W. (VS) 
 
 
 
 

 
Table 1. (Continued) 
 
D 
ArF, 10 Hz 
ZnO 
sapphire (0001) 
/ 
500°C 
/ 
Ar 
10 Pa 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
(VS) Stranski-
Krastanov 
E 
KrF, 1-5 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
silicon 
without 
or with Au 
(5-30 Å) 
500-900°C 
[800-900°C without 
Au] 
[700-900°C with 
Au] 
/ 
O2 
26.6-1300 Pa 
VLS (atypical) 
F 
KrF, 3-10 Hz, 2 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire (0001), 
(11 2 0) or (1110) 
(off-axis) 
Au film 
(10 Å), or 
Au seed 
particles 
690-950°C 
5-35 
Ar or O2/Ar 
2500-50000 Pa 
Importance of Au only 
in the nucleation steps 
when using an Au 
film. VLS when using 
Au particles. 
G 
KrF 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire (0001) or 
silicon (001) 
/ 
400-780°C 
[600-700°C] 
20-42 
O2 33-2700 Pa 
[667-1330 Pa] 
Growth related to 
supersaturation 
H 
KrF, 5 Hz, 1-3 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
sapphire (0001) 
with a ZnO layer 
/ 
500-800°C 
20-50 
O2, Ar, or O2/Ar 
20-67 Pa [67 Pa] 
Not VLS 
I 
KrF, 3 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
silicon (100) 
with annealed ZnO 
powder (off-axis) 
/ 
650°C 
40 
Ar 
1.33 Pa 
VS on the seed  
particles 
J 
KrF, 10 Hz 
sintered ZnO 
silicon (100) (off-axis) 
Au (300 Å) 
600-800°C 
50 
O2 20 Pa 
/ 
 
 
 

 
Table 1. (Continued) 
 
K 
KrF, 10 Hz, 4 J/cm2 
metallic Zn 
sapphire (0001) 
/ 
600°C 
50 
O2 13-27 Pa 
VLS catalyzed by Zn 
droplets 
L 
KrF, 5 Hz, 2.5 J/cm2 
ceramic ZnO 
InP (001) with a 
ZnO seed layer 
/ 
400°C 
50 
O2 
30 Pa 
The droplets of the 
seed layer act as self- 
catalyst 
 
M 
KrF, 10 Hz, 4.3 J/cm2 
or 
ArF, 10 Hz, 1.6 J/cm2 
sintered ZnO 
silicon (100) 
/ 
500-700°C 
45 
O2 
1-100 Pa 
Growth started from 
Zn or zinc suboxide 
droplets at low 
pressure. 
Nanoparticle-assisted 
at high pressure. 
(see text for details) 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí,  A. P. Caricato et al. 
218 
A) Kyushu University (Fukuoka, Japan), Fudan University (Shanghai, China), 
University of Miyazaki (Miyazaki, Japan) 
 
A1) Refs. [100,101,102,103] 
Ablating a ZnO target, on sapphire substrate the authors observed the growth of c-axis 
oriented hexagonal rods with mean diameter of ~ 300 nm and lengths of ~ 6 μm on a thin 
ZnO layer at an oxygen background pressure of 665 Pa and substrate temperature of 700°C. 
At lower temperatures only ball-like structures, hexagonal structures or particles were 
obtained. Rayleigh scattering measurements showed that, at high background pressure, 
nanoparticles were formed in the gas-phase and transported onto the substrate. On the base of 
this observation it was assumed that these nanoparticles stacked on the substrate and, since 
their melting temperature is far lower than the bulk ZnO melting temperature, they fused 
forming the nanorods. As a consequence, the formation of nanorods was possible only at 
background pressures high enough (from ~ 100 Pa) to allow the formation of the 
nanoparticles in the gas-phase. At lower pressure (~ 13.3 Pa) micro-crystals on a smooth film 
were grown while at too high pressure (> 1300 Pa) the rods fused together and the surface 
became flattened. By using helium as background gas instead of oxygen, no rods were 
observed, while only smooth films, hexagonal micro-crystals or meshlike structures were 
obtained. When a metallic zinc target was ablated, the rods on sapphire were similar to those 
grown from a ZnO target, while on silica substrate the rods were bigger (diameter ~ 1 μm) 
and somewhat tilted from the substrate normal. 
 
A2) Refs. [104,105,106,107,108,109] 
Here the authors used a modified PLD system, consisting of a quartz furnace where a 
ZnO target was ablated. In this way the laser ablation occurred in a high-temperature gas 
background. Moreover the depositions were performed at very high background pressures and 
with different substrate positions. In argon atmosphere of 36000 Pa and at a furnace 
temperature of 1000°C, on sapphire (0001) substrate a web-like structure of nanowires with 
diameters of ~ 50 nm together with some large crystals (~ 200 nm), or bigger wires (~ 500 
nm) with smaller wires (< 100 nm) on their top were deposited for different substrate 
positions. On sapphire (112 0) substrate, cone-shaped crystals perpendicular to the substrate 
surface were obtained. On silicon substrate, nanowires grew only in the regions covered by 
Au nanoparticles acting as catalyst. On sapphire substrate annealed at 1000°C for 1 h, 
nanonails with root diameter of ~ 500 nm and stem diameter of ~ 150 nm were grown. On 
silica substrate annealed at 1000°C for 1 h, nanowires lying on the substrate were observed. 
The density of vertically aligned nanowires was found to increase with the increasing laser 
energy, and vertically aligned nanowires were grown in N2 atmosphere too. Also horizontally 
aligned nanowires, with lengths up to more than 8 μm, were obtained on annealed sapphire 
substrates, while on not-annealed sapphire substrates only nanodots appeared. 
 
A3) Ref. [110] 
In a conventional PLD apparatus, rods (with diameters of ~ 300-500 nm at oxygen 
pressure of 133 Pa, ~ 500-1000 nm at 667 Pa, and length of several μm) were grown on 
sapphire, while at higher pressure (1330 Pa) the rods fused together. In an unconventional 
apparatus, that is laser ablation in a quartz furnace, a web of nanowires with diameters of ~ 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
219
50-100 nm and several μm long were obtained in an Ar pressure range of 20000-47000 Pa, 
together with some large crystallites of ~ 500 nm. 
 
B) University of Bristol (Bristol, UK), refs. [111,112,113,114,115] 
At silicon substrate temperature of 600°C, the authors observed the growth of rods (base 
diameter ~ 60 nm, length ~ 200-800 nm) after a thin ZnO layer. At lower temperatures 
polycrystalline films or with a network-like morphology were grown, and at higher 
temperatures irregularly shaped larger particles were observed. On the tip of the rods, ZnO 
capping particles were present: on the base of this observation the growth was attributed to a 
VLS mechanism, catalyzed by Zn liquid droplets where adsorption of oxygen took place. On 
silicon substrate intentionally pre-coated with a thin ZnO film (deposited at 300°C for 1 
minute), the grown nanorods were denser, thinner (base diameter of ~ 20 nm) and longer (~ 
1-1.2 μm) than those obtained on uncoated silicon. Moreover in this case no capping particles 
were observed, thus suggesting that the growth occurred by a VS mechanism, with rods 
starting to grow from nanosized crystallites, acting as nucleation sites, on the ZnO layer. The 
nanorod diameters were found to increase from ~ 10 nm to ~ 50 nm with increasing the laser 
fluence from ~ 4 J/cm2 to ~ 11 J/cm2, whereas at further higher fluence (~ 20 J/cm2) large 
hexagonal nanostructures (~ 100 nm) were observed. At the same time, the density of 
nanorods and nanostructures decreased with increasing the fluence. These trends with laser 
fluence were ascribed to a higher bombardment effect of high energy species in the plume at 
higher fluences, thus allowing only the bigger rods to survive. On sapphire substrate, with a 
laser fluence of ~ 2.5 J/cm2 nanorods (diameter ~ 20 nm, length ~ 100-200 nm) grew after an 
ablation of 10 minutes, while for longer ablation times a porous ZnO network or a smooth 
film were grown. Some images are reported in Figure 6. 
 
 
(b) 
(a) 
 
Figure 6. SEM images of nanostructures grown by the group labeled with B. (Reprinted with 
permission from: (a) [111], copyright 2004, Elsevier; (b) [113], copyright 2007, Elsevier). 
 
C) University of Delhi (Delhi, India), University of Puerto Rico (San Juan, Puerto 
Rico), Harbin Institute of Technology (Harbin, China) 
 
C1) Refs. [116,117] 
In oxygen atmosphere of 665 Pa, rough and porous polycrystalline films were obtained at 
low substrate temperature (< 450°C), rods with a low size dispersion (~ 120-200 nm) at ~ 
500°C, rods with high size dispersion (~ 70-350 nm) at ~ 600°C, and a film having densely 
packed large size grains at ~ 800°C. As in references of group A, the growth mechanism was 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
220 
ascribed to the nucleation of the nanoparticles formed during the scattering events in the high 
background pressure. 
 
C2) Refs. [118] 
Different nanostructures were grown on the different substrates. On Si (100), needle-like 
nanostructures with lengths of ~ 1-5 μm were arranged in flower-like structures with a 
diameter of ~ 4-8 μm. The single needle presented a root and a tip of ~ 50-100 nm and 20-50 
nm respectively. Nanowires with diameter of ~ 50-70 nm and length of ~ 5-10 μm were 
grown on W substrates. Micro-flowers of ~ 1-3 μm with leaves with a base of ~ 150-200 nm 
were obtained on rough Cu substrates, while particles of ~ 300-500 nm were observed on 
smooth Cu substrates. The growth was supposed to be governed by a Volmer-Weber 
mechanism on Si, and by a Stranski-Krastanov mechanism on W and Cu due to their 
enhanced free surface energy in comparison to Si. The different morphologies observed on W 
and Cu were ascribed to the different thermal expansion coefficients of the two substrates, 
thus differently affecting the cracking of the initial layer from which the nanostructure growth 
took place. 
Some images are reported in Figure 7. 
 
(b)
(a) 
(d)
(c) 
 
Figure 7. SEM images of nanostructures grown by the group labeled with C. (Reprinted with 
permission from: (a) [117], copyright 2005, Elsevier; (b), (c) and (d) [118], copyright 2009, Institute Of 
Physics (IOP)). 
 
D) Osaka University (Osaka, Japan), Chiang Mai University (Muang Chiang Mai, 
Thailand), ref. [119] 
In argon atmosphere the authors obtained rods with diameter ~ 500-700 nm at high 
fluences and ~ 40-100 nm at low fluences, while only 3D hexagonal islands where observed 
in oxygen atmosphere. They explained this behavior observing that the mean free path of the 
particles in the plume was shorter in argon atmosphere than in oxygen, thus allowing more 
scattering events and the consequent formation of nanoparticles and zinc sub-oxide species in 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
221
the gas phase; these nanoparticles started the growth on the substrate and then acted as 
nucleation sites for the growth of the rods. Therefore the authors attributed the growth to a 
Stranski-Krastanov mechanism allowed by the formation of nanoparticles in argon 
atmosphere. Figure 8 displays the ZnO sample grown in Ar atmosphere. 
 
 
Figure 8. SEM image of a nanostructured ZnO sample reported by group labeled with D. (Reprinted 
with permission from [119], copyright 2005, Elsevier). 
 
E) Korea Institute of Science and Technology (Seoul, Republic of Korea), ref. [120] 
As in references labeled with A2, the unconventional PLD system here used was a furnace 
where the ablation of the target was performed. Here ZnO rods were deposited either without 
or with a 5-30 Å layer of Au catalyst. Without the catalyst, rods with diameters of ~ 200-600 
nm were deposited in the temperature range of 800-900°C with a fluence of ~ 3-5 J/cm2, 
while at lower temperatures a wrinkled patterns (600-800°C) or rough or grain-shaped films 
(500-600°C) were observed. With the catalyst, thinner nanorods (~ 30-100 nm) were grown 
with a fluence of ~ 2-5 J/cm2 in the temperature range of 700-900°C, and again wrinkled 
patterns or rough films were obtained at lower temperatures. When the Au catalyst was used 
the authors supposed a VLS growth mechanism but, since no Au presence was revealed on 
the rod tips, they retained that the catalyst had an important role only during the initial growth 
of the rods, thus remaining at their bottom. 
 
F) Universität Leipzig (Leipzig, Germany), Martin-Luther-Universität (Halle (Saale), 
Germany), refs. [121,122,123] 
The unconventional PLD system here used was a T-shaped quartz furnace in which the 
laser ablation was performed. The authors obtained the growth of rods or needles only in the 
regions of the substrate covered by a sputtered Au film acting as catalyst, while only a 
wetting layer was observed on the uncoated regions. No Au particles were detected on the top 
of the rods, while gold nanodrops were identified near the ZnO wetting layer, so the authors 
supposed that gold had an important role only in the nucleation steps of the rods. The Au 
catalyst was also pre-arranged in an ordered array of seeds by means of polystyrene 
nanosphere lithography. By using this catalyst, ZnO nanorods with diameters of ~ 60-150 nm 
and lengths of ~ 1 μm grew perpendicularly aligned to the substrate through a VLS 
mechanism. By depositing on sapphire (1010) substrates, the authors found that the grown 
rods were 30°-inclined to the right or to the left with respect to the substrate normal. By 
increasing the furnace temperature, the mean rod dimensions (both diameter and length) 
increased. By decreasing the total pressure in the tube below 10000 Pa, the rods began to 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
222 
coalesce, while, fixing the total pressure at 10000 Pa, an increase of the lateral rod dimensions 
was observed with increasing the oxygen partial pressure. Two samples are shown in Figure 
9. 
 
(a) 
(b)
 
Figure 9. SEM images of two samples deposited by group labeled with F. (Reprinted with permission 
from: (a) [121], copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics (AIP); (b) [123], copyright 2007, 
Institute Of Physics (IOP)) 
 
G) National University of Singapore (Singapore), Nanyang Technological University 
(Singapore), refs. [124,125] 
On sapphire substrate at 700°C, rods with a mean diameter of ~ 400 nm were obtained at 
oxygen background atmosphere of 1330 Pa, while increasing the oxygen pressure the rods 
started to contact each other forming a continuous film. Also at pressure lower than 667 Pa a 
continuous film was deposited. In the pressure range ~ 667-2700 Pa the rod diameter 
increases from ~ 300 nm to ~ 1000 nm. At oxygen pressure of 1330 Pa the authors observed 
the growth of rods at sapphire temperature of 600-700°C, hexagonal crystals at 550°C and 
continuous films at temperatures lower than 500°C or higher than 750°C. In the temperature 
range ~ 550-700°C the rod diameter increased almost linearly from ~ 100 nm to ~ 500 nm 
with the increasing temperature. On silicon substrate at 600°C in 1330 Pa of oxygen, rods 
with a mean diameter of ~ 400 nm were observed. Increasing the laser energy, the pulse 
repetition rate or the target-to-substrate distance, the rod dimensions increased. The growth 
mechanism, and thus the film morphology, was assumed to be strongly dependent on the 
supersaturation conditions, which strongly influences the coalescence processes of the 
nucleation sites. The ZnO grains were found to be separated in the early stages of the growth, 
then the rods with favorable orientation grew faster, dominating the growth process. The 
radial growth of these rods suppressed the growth of the others, and a compact nanorod array 
was finally formed. Two examples of rod arrays are shown in Figure 10. 
 
(a) 
(b)
 
Figure 10. SEM images of two samples deposited by group labeled with G. (Reprinted with permission 
from [125], copyright 2007, Elsevier). 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
223
H) National Dong Hwa University (Shoufeng, Taiwan), University of Florida (Gaine-
sville, Florida, USA), ref. [126] 
A ZnO layer (75-200 nm) was deposited on the substrate at 450°C in 4 Pa of oxygen 
before the rod growth. C-axis oriented nanowires, perpendicularly aligned to the substrate, 
were grown at 800°C in 67 Pa of oxygen, argon, or O2/Ar mixture. The nanorods had 
diameters in the range 50-90 nm and length of some μm. Fixing the substrate temperature at 
800°C, a smooth film was obtained at an oxygen pressure of 20 Pa, hexagonal microcrystals 
were observed at 40Pa, nanowires grew at 67 Pa, while only few nanowires were observed at 
133 Pa. Fixing the oxygen pressure at 67 Pa, the rods diameter was found to decrease from ~ 
500 nm at substrate temperature of 550°C, to ~ 150 nm at 750°C, to less than 100 nm at 
800°C. Since no particles were observed on the tips of the nanowires, the VLS mechanism 
was excluded. 
 
I) Keio University (Yokohama, Japan), ref. [127] 
The silicon substrate was firstly coated with ZnO powder and annealed at 1150°C for one 
hour, then the deposition was performed at 650°C. Without the annealing process, nanorod 
arrays were not grown, and only a ZnO thin film or particles were obtained. Also, no 
nanorods grew on the uncoated regions of the substrate. The rod diameters and lengths were 
found respectively to decrease from ~ 700 nm to ~ 50 nm and to increase from ~ 2 μm to ~ 10 
μm with increasing the distance of the substrate from the central position. The growth was 
ascribed to a VS mechanism in which, in the initial stages, the plume particles condensed on 
the seeds present on the coating layer, then the rods continued the growth along the c-axis. 
Some samples are shown in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11. SEM images of two samples grown by group labeled with I. (Reprinted with permission 
from [127], copyright 2008, Japan Society of Applied Physics). 
 
J) Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (Bangalore, India), ref. 
[128] 
A 30 nm Au catalyst layer was sputtered on the silicon substrate. C-axis oriented 
nanorods with diameters of ~ 30-50 nm and lengths of ~ 100-300 nm were grown at substrate 
temperature of 600°C, diameters of ~ 40-60 nm and lengths of ~ 200-400 nm at 700°C, and 
diameters of ~ 30-70 nm and lengths of ~ 200-400 nm at 800°C. Figure 12 shows some 
samples. 
(a) 
(b)

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
224 
 
Figure 12. SEM images of ZnO nanorod samples grown by group labeled with J. (Reprinted with 
permission from [128], copyright 2008, Institute Of Physics (IOP)). 
 
K) University of Canterbury (Christchurch, New Zealand), The MacDiarmid Institute 
of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology (New Zealand), ref. [129] 
Here nanostructured ZnO films were grown either by the standard PLD technique or by 
the eclipse PLD technique (EPLD), in which a shadow mask is placed between the target and 
the substrate to block the large particulate produced during the target ablation. By PLD, rods 
with a base of ~ 200 nm, a tip of ~ 50 nm and a length of ~ 900 nm grew with a good 
perpendicular alignment, but many particulates were observed in the sample. The film grown 
by EPLD was particulate-free and constituted by rods, with diameter of ~ 80-90 nm, which 
clumped up in micron-sized circular zones. Among the microclumps, hexagonal pyramids 
with a base diameter of ~ 150-200 nm, height of ~ 100-200 nm and tip of ~ 60-70 nm were 
observed. These tips were considered as capping particles due to a VLS mechanism starting 
from Zn droplets. Two samples are reported in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13. SEM images of two films grown by group labeled with K. (Reprinted with permission from 
[129], copyright 2008, Elsevier). 
 
L) University of Technology (Dalian, China), ref. [130] 
A ZnO buffer layer was grown on an InP substrate at 300°C, then the substrate 
temperature was increased to 400°C for the nanorod growth. The buffer layer was constituted 
of ZnO droplets, acting as self-catalysts and thus as seed-crystals for the growth of the 
nanorods, having a diameter of ~ 400 nm. A SEM image is shown in Figure 14. 
 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
225
 
Figure 14. SEM image of ZnO nanorods grown by group labeled with L. (Reprinted with permission 
from [130], copyright 2008, Elsevier). 
 
M) University of Salento (Lecce, Italy), refs. [131,132] 
Different kinds of nanostructures were obtained by our research group by changing the 
deposition parameters. The details of our results are reported in the next paragraphs. 
As seen in the discussion above, different mechanisms have been proposed to explain the 
growth of ZnO nanorods: formation of nanoparticles in the plume which form nucleation sites 
on the substrate for the nanorod growth (for example in a Stranski-Krastanov mode), other 
VS mechanisms (for example in a Volmer-Weber mode), VLS mechanism catalyzed by zinc 
droplets, or atypical VLS with the Au catalyst on the bottom of the rods instead of the top as 
in classical VLS. It should be noticed that formation of nanoclusters in the gas phase during 
ablation of a ZnO target has been also demonstrated by photoluminescence measurements 
[133]. 
Moreover, it is evident that several different sets of deposition parameters have been used 
to successfully grow ZnO nanostructures. This implies that, obviously, it is not possible to 
choose a unique set of parameters to get the PLD-growth of ZnO nanostructures and that the 
suitable set of deposition parameters must be found and optimized on one’s own experimental 
system. Anyway, by a comparison of the parameters used by the different research groups, it 
is possible to draw some observations: 
 
 
fluences from ~ 1 to 5 J/cm2 were used for KrF (λ = 248 nm) laser ablation, and from 
~ 1 to 20 J/cm2 for ArF (λ = 193 nm) laser ablation; 
 
usually a zinc oxide target was ablated for the depositions, although reports with the 
use of a metallic zinc target are present; 
 
the possibility to deposit ZnO nanostructures on different substrates (silicon, 
sapphire, silica, etc.) was showed; 
 
the optimal substrate temperature was around 600°C, and nanorod/nanowire growth 
was not observed for substrate temperatures lower than 500°C; 
 
the help of a pre-deposited catalyst on the substrate was not essential to allow the 
growth of nanostructures; 
 
nanorod growth was obtained in both low (~ 1 Pa) or high (~ 100 Pa or more) oxygen 
background pressure; also some reports with the use of Ar or N2 background 
atmosphere are present; 
 
the target-to-substrate distance was usually in the range ~ 20-60 mm, although also 
shorter or longer distances were reported. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
226 
OUR RESULTS 
 
The last row in Table 1 summarized the deposition parameters and the proposed growth 
mechanism in our research activity. More details on our results and discussion are reported 
here. 
 
 
3.a. Experimental PLD Set-Up and Deposition Parameters 
 
The experimental set-up here used for the growth of nanostructured ZnO films was a 
conventional PLD system, similar to that one described in par. 2.a and schematized in 
Figure 4. 
The excimer laser used for the target ablation was a Lambda-Physik LPX 305 I, with the 
possibility to change the working gas mixture (KrF or ArF) and thus the corresponding output 
wavelength: 248 nm (~ 5 eV) for KrF, 193 nm (~ 6.4 eV) for ArF. The laser pulse duration 
was ~ 25 ns. The laser beam was shaped through a mask with a 1cm×1cm aperture in order to 
select the most uniform region of the beam, which was focused onto the target by a f = 30 cm 
lens. The target was placed inside a stainless steel vacuum chamber and put on a target-holder 
rotated and translated to avoid continuous ablation on the same point. The chamber was 
evacuated by a pumping system, constituted of a scroll pump and a turbomolecular pump, and 
filled with oxygen gas with 99.999% purity to obtain the desired background atmosphere. The 
substrate was placed on a substrate holder/heater allowing to set the substrate temperature up 
to ~ 700°C. A K-type thermocouple was fixed on the front face of the substrate holder, nearly 
in direct contact with the substrate (distance ~ 1 mm) in order to measure the actual substrate 
temperature, and protected against the incoming ablated material. The thermalization of the 
heater surface and substrate was assured awaiting one hour after the desired temperature was 
reached, before starting the target ablation. The value of the laser fluence on the target was 
estimated by measuring, before evacuating the vacuum chamber, the laser energy arriving 
onto the target by a joulemeter and the area of the laser spot directly on the target surface by a 
caliper. 
 
 
Figure 15. A detail of the experimental set-up inside the vacuum chamber and of the ZnO plume during 
a PLD process. Some elements of the set-up are indicated in the picture. 
thermocoup
targ
substrate
substrate 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
227
The photo in Figure 15 displays a detail of the experimental set-up, showing the target 
and the substrate on the heater during a ZnO deposition. The plasma plume in the photo was 
produced by the ablation of the ZnO target by the KrF excimer laser beam in an oxygen 
background pressure of 1 Pa. 
In our study, ZnO nanostructured films were grown without the aid of any catalyst, by 
using two different excimer laser wavelengths (KrF mixture or ArF mixture) for the target 
ablation, by varying the substrate temperature and by performing the depositions at low and 
relatively high oxygen background pressure, while all the other deposition parameters were 
kept constant. In particular, the used deposition parameters are listed below. 
 
Fixed parameters: 
• 
Target = sintered ZnO (99.999% purity, bought from M.C.S.E.) 
• 
Repetition rate of laser pulses = 10 Hz 
• 
Laser spot dimensions on the target: ~ 4.2 mm2 with KrF, ~ 4.5 mm2 with ArF 
• 
Laser fluence on the target: ~ 4.3 J/cm2 with KrF, ~ 1.6 J/cm2 with ArF 
• 
Substrate = Si (100), area 1cm×1cm 
• 
Target-to-substrate distance = 45 mm 
• 
Number of pulses for each deposition = 25000 
• 
No catalyst used 
 
Varied parameters: 
• 
Laser wavelength = 248 nm (KrF) or 193 nm (ArF) 
• 
Substrate temperature = 500-700°C 
• 
Oxygen background pressure = 1, 5, 50, 100 Pa 
 
The low fluence value used for the ArF depositions was due to limitations in the 
experimental set-up: indeed the laser output energy obtained with the ArF mixture was lower 
than that one obtained with KrF, and the spot was chosen in order to get the minimum spot 
dimensions obtainable having a regular (rectangular) shape and without evident non-
homogeneous zones in the ablated region. In these conditions the minimum spot dimension 
was around 4.5 mm2, resulting in a fluence of about 1.6 J/cm2. 
Before the depositions, the silicon substrates were cleaned by ultrasonic baths for 10 
minutes in acetone and 10 minutes in isopropyl alcohol. 
The vacuum chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of ~ 4×10-5 Pa, which rose up to ~ 
4×10-4 Pa when the substrate was heated, due to desorption inside the vacuum chamber. 
Before starting each deposition, the substrate was shut by a steel mask and a preliminary 
ablation was performed spanning the target surface for two cycles. This preliminary ablation 
had two purposes. First, the target surface was cleaned of possible environmental 
contaminants. Second, since it has been reported [134] that the ZnO target surface becomes 
Zn-enriched after just a few laser shots due to backscattered zinc from the plume onto the 
target surface, a preliminary target ablation ensured that the composition of the ablated 
species and the deposition rate were almost constant throughout the deposition [135]. 
After the film deposition, the substrate cooled down to room temperature with a rate of 
about 14°C/min at the same oxygen pressure used during the deposition. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
228 
The following notation will be used hereafter to label the deposited samples: the first 
letter refers to the laser wavelength used for the target ablation (K for KrF, A for ArF), then 
the substrate temperature and the background oxygen pressure are reported in the label. For 
example, the sample labeled as “K600_1” indicates the sample grown by KrF laser ablation at 
substrate temperature of 600°C and oxygen pressure of 1 Pa. 
 
 
3.b. Morphology 
 
The morphology of the deposited samples was investigated by Scanning Electron 
Microscopy, by a JEM JEOL 6500F instrument equipped with a Schottky Field Emission 
Gun (SEM-FEG), used in the secondary electron detection mode and with an accelerating 
voltage of 5 kV. 
 
3.b.1. KrF-deposited samples (λ = 248 nm, E = 5 eV) 
Figure 16 reports the SEM images of three samples deposited at substrate temperatures of 
500°C, 600°C and 700°C in 1 Pa of oxygen background atmosphere. 
The sample deposited at 500°C (K500_1) appears as a smooth film with a “jigsaw”-like 
morphology. This morphology is similar to that one reported for metal films grown by 
physical vapor deposition techniques in a growth regime of transition from islands to 
percolation [136]. It has been reported that metal films deposited by this kind of techniques 
on substrates such as silicon, glass or graphite, in certain ranges of temperature have an initial 
growth consisting in droplets forming small islands which touch and coalesce to create larger 
islands. When the growth proceeds these islands can further coalesce forming elongated 
structures with gaps between the different structures (this process is called percolation). The 
coalescence stops when the islands reach a certain critical size, and the resulting film 
morphology depends on the competition between island coalescence due to surface diffusion 
and island growth due to deposition. This observation suggests that, in our case, zinc and zinc 
sub-oxide (ZnxOy with y<x) species, created in high amount in the plasma plume [137], form 
small droplets on the substrate since their melting temperature is very low (about 419°C [138] 
like the zinc melting point, or slightly higher for bigger and more stoichiometric clusters); 
these droplets coalesce in the very early stages of the growth and form the islands acting as 
nucleation sites for the subsequent ZnO film growth. As a consequence the final morphology 
resembles these islands formed in the early stage of the growth. Of course some differences 
can be observed in sample K500_1 with respect to the metal films mentioned above: the 
“pieces” forming the jigsaw morphology are smaller (sizes of the order of ~ 10-100 nm) than 
those observed in metal films (more than 1 μm) and no gaps among them are observed. These 
differences can be explained observing that, in our case, the adatoms depositing on the 
substrate are mainly constituted by oxide (or sub-oxide) species and not only by pure metal 
species; therefore the tendency to coalesce is slower than for pure metals and thus smaller and 
closer islands are formed. 
At substrate temperature of 600°C (sample K600_1) the same jigsaw morphology is still 
present (see inset of Figure 16(b)) but some structures, with dimensions ranging from few 
tens of nm to ~ 100 nm, emerge from the surface. The appearance of these nanometric 
structures is in accordance with a known behavior: the depositing species need higher 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
229
energies to allow the growth of nanostructured samples. In this case, this energy is provided 
to the adatoms by two ways. The first one is, of course, the higher temperature of the 
substrate itself, thus supplying more energy to the species arrived on the substrate. A second 
mechanism can be related to the observation that, for ablation of oxide materials in oxygen 
background atmosphere, the substrate heating also influences the plume propagation, as 
reported in ref. [139]: at higher temperatures the background gas resistance to plume 
propagation is reduced, leading to an increased velocity, and hence kinetic energy, of the 
species reaching the substrate during the film growth. 
 
(a)
K500_1 
(b) 
K600_1 
 
(c)
K700_1 
 
Figure 16. SEM images of KrF-deposited ZnO films in 1 Pa of oxygen at substrate temperature of (a) 
500°C, (b) 600°C and (c) 700°C. Image (b) and main panel of (c) are 45°-tilted views. Insets of (b) and 
(c) are at higher magnifications with respect to the corresponding main panels. 
When the substrate temperature is further increased to 700°C (sample K700_1), the same 
jigsaw morphology is still observed, but sparse pyramids with a nearly perfect hexagonal base 
of ~ 400 nm are present. By carefully observing these structures, it seems they are not grown 
on the sample surface, while they seem to emerge from the bottom of the sample. It is 
reasonable that hexagonal columns starts directly from the substrate surface or just after some 
few layers of material, and that the observed hexagonal pyramids are their tops, like a sort of 
pencils with a diameter of ~ 400 nm. These structures can be thought as deriving from the 
formation of bigger clusters, due to coalescence of the depositing species in the early stage of 
the growth, and, because of the high substrate temperature, these bigger clusters receive 
enough energy to be arranged in nearly perfect hexagonal crystals as the ZnO wurtzite 
structure. Due to their hexagonal base, it can be deduced that the observed structures are 
grown along the ZnO wurtzite c-axis, perpendicular to the substrate surface. 
The SEM images of ZnO samples deposited at fixed substrate temperature of 600°C and 
at oxygen pressures of 5, 50 and 100 Pa are shown in Figure 17. 
 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
230 
 (a) 
K600_5 
(b) 
K600_1 
 
(c)
K700_1 
 
Figure 17. SEM images of KrF-deposited ZnO films at substrate temperature of 600°C and oxygen 
background pressure of (a) 5 Pa, (b) 50 Pa and (c) 100 Pa. Image (a) is a 45°-tilted view. Insets of (b) 
and (c) are 40°-tilted view in proximity of intentionally-made scratches on the sample surface. 
The surface of the sample deposited at 5 Pa (K600_5, Figure 17(a)) is rougher than that 
one deposited at 1 Pa at the same substrate temperature (K600_1, Figure 16(b)), as expected 
due to the higher presence of particulates in a higher oxygen pressure. At further higher 
oxygen pressures (samples K600_50 and K600_100) the films show a columnar structure, 
evident in the insets of Figures 17 (b) and (c), and at 100 Pa the film is made by a rod array 
directly starting from the substrate surface. The rods of sample K600_100 have diameters in 
the range ~ 100-400 nm and their tops have a nearly hexagonal shape, suggesting that the 
columns are grown in the wurtzite structure with the c-axis perpendicular to the substrate 
surface. The morphology of sample K600_100 is very similar to that one reported in the 
literature for nanostructured ZnO films grown by PLD in high oxygen pressure (~ 100-700 
Pa) (see e.g. groups labeled with A1 and C1 in par. 2.b). This kind of growth was attributed to 
the high number of collisions of the ablated species in the high background pressure causing 
the formation, in the gas phase, of nanoparticles that stack on the substrate and fuse to form 
the rods. The height of the rods of sample K600_100 is about 3.5 μm near the center of the 
sample, while it decreases to about 2.7 μm in the border proximity. Moreover, at the center of 
the sample the columns are well oriented perpendicularly to the substrate surface, whereas, 
very close to the sample borders, they tend to slightly tilt toward the center. Further details 
and discussion about these features can be found in ref. [132]. 
 
3.b.2. ArF-deposited samples (λ = 193 nm, E = 6.42 eV) 
Figure 18 shows the SEM images of three samples deposited by ablating the target with 
the ArF laser beam at substrate temperatures of 500°C, 550°C and 600°C in 1 Pa of oxygen 
background atmosphere. For all the three samples, nanostructures constituted by hexagonal 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
231
terraces (“hexagonal hierarchical nanostructures”) are visible. These structures are 
particularly evident in the insets of Figs. 18 (b) and (c). 
 
 
A500_1 
(a) 
(b) 
A550_1 
 
(c) 
A600_1 
 
Figure 18. SEM images of ArF-deposited ZnO films in 1 Pa of oxygen at substrate temperature of (a) 
500°C, (b) 550°C and (c) 600°C. Insets of (a), (b) and (c) are 40°, 30° and 45° -tilted views, 
respectively. 
It can be noticed that the nanostructure diameter increases with increasing the growth 
temperature. In sample A600_1 these structures have a base diameter of ~ 200 nm and a tip of 
~ 30-40 nm. The perfect hexagonal shape of the terraces indicates that, like in other samples 
shown above, the structures grew in the wurtzite structure with the c-axis perpendicular to the 
substrate. Moreover it can be seen that these hierarchical structures sprout from a jigsaw-like 
film, similar to that one observed for the KrF-deposited samples, thus suggesting a similar 
growth mechanism for both the ablating wavelengths. Again it can be assumed that the 
species arriving onto the substrate coalesce forming the islands acting as nucleation sites for 
the subsequent film growth. However samples grown by the ArF ablating beam clearly 
exhibit a higher degree of nanostructuration, also at lower substrate temperatures, in 
comparison with the KrF-deposited ones, thus denoting a better tendency towards the growth 
of nanostructures when the 193 nm wavelength is used in comparison to the 248 nm 
wavelength. This occurrence can be ascribed to several reasons. Firstly, since the ArF photon 
energy is higher than the KrF one (6.42 eV versus 5 eV), during the depositions with ArF the 
target material is ablated by higher-energy photons and, in addition, the ablated species 
absorb higher-energy photons from the subsequent laser pulses. Secondly, the lower ArF laser 
fluence can be partially balanced by a higher absorption of the ArF laser beam per unit 
volume of the ZnO target, with respect to KrF. In a further addition, the higher energy of the 
ArF photons can also cause the production of more ionized species and more electronically 
excited species (Rydberg atoms or ions) in the plasma plume; this feature can lead to a higher 
Coulombic repulsion and thus probably to higher plume velocities (at least for the charged 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
232 
components). As a consequence of all these factors, it may be supposed that during the 
depositions with the ArF laser beam, despite the lower fluence and the lower substrate 
temperature, the species depositing onto the substrate have a higher kinetic energy with 
respect to KrF. Therefore, the formation of nanostructures and the possibility to get clusters 
having enough energy to arrange in hexagonal wurtzite crystals are favored when using the 
ArF ablating beam. Besides, it can be also underlined that the higher degree of plume 
ionization and a better dissociation of the oxygen molecules (as better explained in par. 3.c) 
lead to a greater reactivity between the ablated species and the background atmosphere, hence 
the depositing species can be also different when the ArF or KrF lasers are used to ablate the 
target. 
About the terrace growth observed for the hierarchical structures, a possible explanation 
can be found in the competition between two processes, suggested to explain the growth of 
hierarchical structures by vapor phase technique: ledge-flow mode and nucleation on the 
terrace [140]. When a terrace is formed, the other incoming species can diffuse from the 
terrace to its edge (ledge-flow mode) or can coalesce starting to form a new terrace 
(nucleation on the terrace). The competition between these two processes depends on the ratio 
of the diffusion time of an adatom from the terrace to the edge and the interval time between 
adatoms arriving at the terrace, thus determining the morphology of the film. This mechanism 
can also explain the increasing nanostructure size with the substrate temperature observed in 
Figure 18: indeed, increasing the substrate temperature the surface mobility of the depositing 
species increases, thus increasing the rate of the diffusion process of adatoms to the edge of 
the ledge and consequently increasing the nanostructure diameter. 
Another interesting feature is the slight inclination of the nanostructures near the sample 
border towards the center, similarly to what observed for sample K600_100. This tilt from the 
substrate normal is shown in Figure 19, whose inset also evidences how the structures 
partially lose the well-defined hierarchical structure observed at the center of the sample. 
When the substrate temperature is further increased to 650°C (sample A650_1), the 
nanostructure formation is inhibited and the film-like growth becomes more favorable, thus 
resulting in a smooth film with only few sparse pyramidal nanostructures coming out, as 
observable in Figure 20. The inset evidences that the residual structures still preserve a 
hierarchical construction, although less sharp and less well-defined than in the previous 
samples. 
 
 
 
Figure 19. SEM image of sample A600_1 near the sample border. Inset: higher magnification very near 
to the sample border. 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
233
 
A650_1 
 
Figure 20. 45°-tilted view SEM image of ArF-deposited sample at substrate temperature of 650°C and 
1Pa of oxygen background pressure. Inset: higher magnification. 
 
Figure 21 shows the SEM images of samples deposited at substrate temperature of 600°C 
at increased oxygen pressure of 50 and 100 Pa. 
 
 (a) 
A600_50 
A600_100
(b)
 
Figure 21. SEM images of ArF-deposited samples at substrate temperature of 600°C and oxygen 
background pressure of (a) 50 Pa and (b) 100 Pa. Inset of (a) is a 45°-tilted view, inset of (b) is a higher 
magnification on the top of a pencil. 
Similarly to the KrF-deposited samples at the same temperature and pressures, these 
samples show the same tendency to grow forming a pencil-array. The columns are somewhat 
non-uniform in shape and size, with column diameters in the range from ~ 80 to ~ 500 nm, 
and rather randomly tilted from the substrate normal. Clear evidence of a hexagonal shape 
can be observed from the images, thus indicating that the pencil axis is the c-axis of the 
wurtzite structure. Comparing the samples grown in 50 and 100 Pa, it can be noticed that 
sample A600_100 has a better uniformity in shape and size and a more evident tendency to 
grow in a nearly perfect hexagonal structure (see also inset in Figure 21(b)). This behavior is 
similar to what observed also in samples K600_50 and K600_100, and it is consistent with 
the growth mechanism assuming, at higher background pressures, the formation of a larger 
amount of nanoparticles in the gas-phase forming the nucleation sites for the growth of the 
columns. 
Even if the samples deposited at a substrate temperature of 600°C in 100 Pa of oxygen by 
the KrF and ArF wavelength show the same trend to grow in a pencil-like way, the 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
234 
differences between samples K600_100 and A600_100 are evident: in the former, the 
columns are almost perfectly aligned, oriented perpendicularly to the substrate surface and 
very close-packed, while in the latter the columns are misaligned, not perpendicular to 
substrate surface and more separated one each other. Moreover the hexagonal shape is much 
more evident in the ArF-deposited sample. All these differences are compatible with the 
suggestion made above, supposing more energetic depositing species when the 193 nm laser 
beam is used instead of the 248 nm for the target ablation. Indeed it can be assumed that, due 
to the higher energy of the species depositing on the substrate, there is a more favorable 
tendency to arrange in hexagonal wurtzite big crystals but, at the same time, there is also a 
higher tendency to grow with less ordered alignment and orientation during the ablation by 
the ArF laser beam with respect to the KrF one. 
By cross-sectional SEM inspections it is observed that, unlike the array of sample 
K600_100, in proximity of the border of sample A600_100 the rods do not show any 
tendency to grow inclined toward the center of the sample, while they are still somewhat 
randomly oriented as in the center of the sample. In addition, the difference in thickness is 
almost imperceptible in this case: a thickness of ~ 1.2-1.3 μm and ~ 1.15 μm is measured near 
the center and near the border respectively, corresponding to a difference of about 4-11% 
from the thickness measured at the center, while it was around 23% in sample K600_100. 
Again, this observation can be attributed to the possible higher energy of the ablated material, 
thus allowing that a higher amount of material can reach the more distant regions of the 
substrate. Anyway it must be taken into account that sample K600_100 is thicker than 
A600_100 (~ 3.5 μm versus ~ 1.25 μm, measured at the center of the two samples) so it 
cannot be excluded that the per-cent difference in thickness between the center and the border 
should become higher for a thicker ArF-deposited sample. 
 
3.b.3. Comparison between KrF and ArF -deposited samples 
Some comparisons about the samples deposited by KrF and ArF laser ablation were 
already made in the previous paragraph. The important observations are re-summarized here. 
By KrF laser ablation a weak sample nanostructuration was observed at low oxygen 
background pressure (1-5 Pa), while at high pressure (50-100 Pa) the samples grew in 
columnar structures and a rod array was obtained at 100 Pa. On the contrary, by ArF laser 
ablation the tendency toward the growth of nanostructures is stronger, also at low oxygen 
pressure and low substrate temperature. A possible explanation for this behavior was 
discussed in the previous paragraph and attributed to the ArF higher photon energy. 
At the same time, some common features were observed in samples deposited by the two 
ablating laser beams. For depositions at low oxygen pressure, a similar jigsaw-like film has 
been observed as background in samples grown by both laser wavelengths, suggesting a 
similar growth mechanism, but leading anyway to very different final morphologies. In the 
same way, at high oxygen pressure, for both laser wavelengths the films showed the 
formation of rod-arrays but, while with KrF the columns were well oriented perpendicularly 
to the substrate surface, with ArF the structures were tilted in a more disordered way. 
Moreover the hexagonal shape was more evident in the ArF-deposited films. As discussed in 
the previous paragraph, also for these behaviors a possible explanation was suggested in the 
higher photon energy of the ArF laser beam. 
 
 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
235
3.c. Summary of Other Characterizations 
 
X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) were performed to give information about the 
sample crystal quality and orientation. A Rigaku diffractometer with CuKα1 radiation (λ = 
1.5405 Å) was used over a 2θ range from 30° to 80°. Figure 22 shows the XRD spectra of 
samples K600_100 and A600_1. 
 
 
30
40
50
60
70
80
Si
ZnO (004)
ZnO (002)
K600_100
Intensity (a.u.)
2θ (degree)
A600_1
 
Figure 22. XRD spectra of samples K600_100 and A600_1. The spectra are normalized on the first 
peak and vertically translated for clarity. 
Apart from the peak at ~ 69.1° coming from the silicon substrate, only the (002) and 
(004) diffraction peaks of the zinc oxide wurtzite crystal structure are visible, indicating the 
good film crystal quality and that the samples are grown along the wurtzite c-axis 
perpendicular to the substrate surface, as also previously suggested by SEM inspections. 
About sample A600_1, since it is expected that the jigsaw-like film under the hexagonal 
structures (see Figure 18(c)) provides a significant contribution to the XRD spectrum, the 
absence of any other peak besides the (002) and (004) ones suggests that this underlying film 
is c-axis oriented as well. 
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were conducted at room temperature (RT) and 7 
K by exciting the samples with the 325 nm line delivered by a continuous wave He-Cd laser 
(Kimmon IK Series). The laser beam was focused onto the sample resulting in a spot 
dimension of ~ 130 μm and a power of ~ 6 mW. The PL was collected by a Jobin Yvon 
SPEX TRIAX320 monochromator, with a 1200 lines/mm grating and 100 μm slits. The 
nominal resolution of the instrument was 0.6 nm at 500 nm. All the recorded PL spectra were 
corrected with the spectral efficiency curve of the grating inside the monochromator. 
Figure 23 shows the low temperature (7 K) PL spectra of some samples deposited by KrF 
laser ablation. In order to make a comparison of the spectra, the intensities were normalized 
on the peak positioned at ~ 3.37 eV. 
The spectra evidence the donor-bound exciton emission at ~ 3.37 eV and two defect 
bands: a wide band centered at ~ 2.3-2.4 eV (usually called ‘‘green band’’) and a violet-blue 
band centered at ~ 3.1 eV. For sample K500_1, both defect bands are very intense, thus 
pointing out the low quality of this sample. For samples deposited at higher temperatures, the 
relative intensity of the violet-blue band with respect to the excitonic peak decreases with 
increasing the substrate temperature, while, apart for sample K500_1, the green band remains 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
236 
almost unaffected by the deposition temperature (see also [132]). On the contrary, the 
intensities of both bands decrease with increasing the oxygen pressure. The green band can be 
attributed to emission related to oxygen vacancies, while the violet-blue band can be ascribed 
to emission from zinc-related defects like zinc interstitials or vacancies [132]. 
 
 
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
0.1
1
Normalized PL intensity (a.u.)
 K600_1
 K600_100
Energy (eV)
Normalized PL intensity (a.u.)
 K500_1
 K600_1
 K700_1
(a)
(b)
3.1 5
3.20
3.25
3.30
3.3 5
3.40
3.45
PL intensity (a.u)
E nergy (eV )
 
Figure 23. PL spectra at sample temperature of 7 K of KrF-deposited films, (a) at fixed oxygen pressure 
of 1 Pa and substrate temperature of 500°C (black spectrum), 600°C (blue) and 700°C (green), and (b) 
at fixed substrate temperature of 600°C and oxygen pressure of 1 Pa (cyan) and 100 Pa (orange). Inset: 
magnification of the PL spectrum of sample K600_100 in the range 3.15-3.45 eV. 
The PL spectrum of the rod-array grown at 100 Pa (sample K600_100) is typical of high 
quality ZnO films [141]: narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM), low defect emission, 
and several transitions clearly detectable in the excitonic region as evident in the inset of 
Figure 23. 
Similar trends are also observed for the ArF-deposited samples. However, in this case, 
even the samples deposited at low substrate temperatures and low oxygen pressures show PL 
spectra with typical features of high-quality ZnO films (see e.g. the PL spectrum of sample 
A600_1 at 7 K reported in Figure 24). Several transitions are clearly detectable in the 
excitonic region (as observed for sample K600_100 too), and narrower excitonic peaks and 
lower defect emission are observed in comparison with the PL spectra of samples deposited 
by KrF laser ablation at the same substrate temperatures and oxygen pressures, thus indicating 
an improved crystal quality for the ArF-deposited samples [131]. This can be ascribed to the 
higher energy of the depositing species during the ArF laser ablation as suggested above, and 
to the fact that the higher ArF photon energy (6.1 eV) can promote (i) a higher production of 
ionized and electronically excited species and (ii) a better dissociation of the O2 molecules, 
having a dissociation energy of 5.1 eV, with respect to KrF photons (energy of 5 eV). These 
two effects lead to a better reactivity between the ablated species and the background oxygen 
molecules, thus allowing for the growth of higher quality films. 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
237
 
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
7K
PL intensity (a.u.)
RT
Energy (eV)
 
Figure 24. PL spectra at 7 K (black circles) and at room temperature (gray circles) of sample A600_1. 
The room temperature PL spectra (see e.g. the RT spectrum of sample A600_1 in Figure 
24 and the spectra in ref. [131]) show lower emission intensities with respect to the low-
temperature spectra due to the increasing effect of non-radiative relaxations, the excitonic 
emission is shifted to lower energy as expected due to band-gap shrinkage and it appears as a 
broader and unstructured band due to the broadening of the different peaks in this spectral 
region. 
 
 
3.d. Gas Sensing Tests 
 
As stated in the first paragraph of this chapter, one of the most appealing applications of 
ZnO nanostructures is related to gas and biological sensing. In general, semiconductor 
nanostructures, and particularly metal oxide semiconductors, are very interesting materials for 
chemical and biological gas sensing applications [44, 142]. In particular, zinc oxide and its 
nanostructures are extensively investigated as active material for gas sensors, as demonstrated 
by the great number of tested gases and vapors, like hydrogen, ammonia, carbon monoxide, 
ethanol, methanol, acetone, butane etc. (see e.g. [143,144,145,146]). Dealing with biological 
sensing, ZnO has been employed for species like e.g. glucose, cholesterol etc. [147,148]. 
When gas molecules or biological species interact with the surface of the active material 
of the sensor, they can induce a change in several physical properties of the material, such as 
the charge-carrier density, inducing variations in the electrical conductance and/or optical 
emission. As a consequence, different transduction mechanisms can be exploited in order to 
reveal the presence of the analyte in the environment. By using ZnO as active material, 
different transduction mechanisms have been studied, such as the measurements of the 
variations of the electrical resistance, the Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) technique, or the 
measurements of the variations in the photoluminescence (PL) emission [143-146]. In 
particular, when molecules of an oxidizing gas, like nitrogen dioxide (NO2), bind to the ZnO 
surface, which is an intrinsic n-type material due to native lattice defects like oxygen 
vacancies and zinc interstitials, they act as electron trappers, thus decreasing the number of 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
238 
charge-carriers which can radiatively recombine. As a consequence the NO2 adsorption 
process on the ZnO surface induces a quenching of the PL intensity. By a real-time 
monitoring of the integrated PL intensity in a fixed emission wavelength range, it is then 
possible to reveal the presence/absence of the gas through the decrease/increase of the PL 
signal. 
We tested the room temperature NO2 sensing properties, at concentrations as low as 3 
ppm, of some samples shown in the previous paragraphs by means of PL measurements. The 
tested sample was placed inside an aluminum sealed chamber where it was exposed to dry air 
or to a proper mixture of NO2 and dry air, and excited by the same He-Cd laser (325 nm) used 
for the PL measurements reported above. The laser beam was split in two paths: a part was 
sent to excite the sample with a focus spot of about 3 mm2, the second beam was sent to a 
silicon photodiode in order to take into account the fluctuations of the laser power during the 
sensing measurements. The PL emission was measured by a spectrometer (Avantes MC2000) 
with a 75 mm focal length, a 600 lines/mm grating, 200 μm slit, a 2048 pixels CCD linear 
array detector, and a spectral resolution of 4 nm. The integral under the PL spectrum in a 
fixed wavelength range was periodically acquired at fixed time intervals of 3 seconds. The 
desired gas concentration in the chamber was obtained by mixing different flows of dry air 
and NO2 through a bank of three mass flow controllers (Brooks Instrument 5850S). Each 
controller could operate in the flow range ~ 2.5-50 ml/min with an accuracy of ±0.2%. Two 
different total flows (50 ml/min and 100 ml/min) were used. The maximum used NO2 
concentration in dry air was 114 ppm, while the minimum obtainable concentration was about 
5 ppm with a total flow of 50 ml/min and 3 ppm with 100 ml/min. Before each measurement, 
the tested samples were exposed for 15 minutes in dry air flux in order to get sample 
stabilization. Then, for each selected NO2 concentration, an exposure of 5 minutes to the gas 
flux was followed by a recovery of 5 minutes in dry air flux. These periods were long enough 
to get detectable sensor response and recovery for the probed samples. Due to the high crystal 
quality of the films considered in this study, the PL signal in the ultraviolet range, resulting 
from band-edge emission, was very intense while the defect-related green band was very low, 
as observed in the previous paragraph. As a consequence, in our sensing measurements, the 
integrated area in the excitonic range, i.e. 360-420 nm was monitored. During the sample 
exposure to the NO2 gas, the only significant effect observed in the emission spectrum was a 
reduction of the PL intensity, while no shift of the emission peak or change in its lineshape 
were observed. 
Figure 25 shows the integral of the PL emission vs. time during the sensing 
measurements for five selected samples, whose SEM images are recalled beside the 
corresponding spectra. Six different NO2 concentrations, from 11 ppm to 114 ppm, were 
tested with a total flow of 50 ml/min. The spectra were normalized assuming a value of 1 for 
the integrated area at the beginning of the measure. All the graphs are reported with the same 
scale on the Y-axes in order to make a comparison of the different signals. As observable in 
the figure, when NO2 was introduced into the chamber, the PL integral sharply decreased and, 
after about 2 minutes, it reached a rather stable value. When dry air was flowed again, the 
integral partially recovered its initial value. The sensor response SC at a fixed gas 
concentration C can be defined as the percentage variation of the PL integrated area during 
the gas exposure with respect to the initial value in air. The values of S11, that is the sensor 
response at NO2 concentration of 11 ppm, are reported inside each graph. 
 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
239
 
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.95
1.00
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.90
0.95
1.00
 
 
 
PL normalized integrated area (a.u.)
 
 
 
 
( ppm)
114
91
69
46
23
 
Time (min)
 
11
 
 
S11=1.5%
S11=1.2%
S11=2.1%
S11=3.2%
S11=6%
K600_5
K600_100
A550_1
A600_1
A600_100
 
Figure 25. Room temperature NO2 PL sensing measurements for some deposited samples at gas 
concentrations from 11 to 114 ppm, with a gas flow of 50 ml/min. The time intervals of NO2 exposure 
are gray-shaded and the corresponding gas concentrations are reported on the top of the graph, while 
the white regions indicate the recovery in dry air. The values S11 of the response measured at the lowest 
NO2 concentration (11ppm) are reported inside each graph. An excerpt of the SEM image of each 
sample is reported beside the corresponding graph. 
The best responses are measured for samples A550_1, A600_1 and A600_100, which, 
thanks to their highly nanostructured morphology, have a higher total exposed surface than 
samples K600_5 and K600_100. Although sample K600_100 is constituted by a rod array, 
thus having a high surface-to-volume ratio and a high total surface, it presents the worse 
response to the gas, probably because the rods are tightly close one each other, thus allowing 
only a small fraction of the incoming molecules to bind to their surface. A low sensitivity is 
also revealed for sample K600_5, having a non-nanostructured surface although quite rough. 
On the contrary, the sensitivity increases in the last three samples shown in Figure 25, and the 
highest response (about 6% at 11 ppm) is obtained for the pencil-array (sample A600_100). 
This behavior can be ascribed to the well separated pencils which constitute the sample 
surface, resulting in a very high surface-to-volume ratio and a very wide total surface 
available for gas molecule adsorption. 
Two other important features can be observed in Figure 25: in all the signals, the 
quenching of the PL integrated area, or in other words the response, decreases as the gas 
concentration increases in the range 11-114 ppm; in addition, beside the sharp variations of 
the PL integrated area, the sample radiative emission continuously decreases during the 
experimental run-time (with a final reduction of about 3-7 %). These observations suggest 
that the process of NO2 adsorption is not fully reversed during the sample recovery in dry air. 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
240 
In other words probably not all the adsorbed molecules are released during the recoveries in 
dry air and consequently a complete retrieval of the initial PL integral was not allowed, thus 
causing a worsening of the sensor response. More details will be reported elsewhere [149]. 
Sample A600_100, which showed the highest sensor responses, was tested at lower gas 
concentrations (from 3 to 20 ppm) and with a higher gas flux (100 ml/min). Figure 26 shows 
the sensing measurements at NO2 concentrations in the range 5-20 ppm with a total flow of 
50 ml/min, and in the range 3-20 ppm with a total flow of 100 ml/min. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.99
1.00
1.01
 
   50 ml/ min
 100 ml/ min
( ppm)
20
15
10
3
5
PL normalized integral (a.u.)
Time (min)
 
Figure 26. Room temperature NO2 PL sensing measurements for sample A600_100 at gas 
concentrations from 3 to 20 ppm, with gas flows of 50 ml/min (black line) and 100 ml/min (red line). 
From these measurements, a low sensor response is obtained in comparison to that one 
obtained from the last spectrum of Figure 25: at 50 ml/min the response value is about 0.7% 
and 0.9% at 10 and 15 ppm NO2 concentrations respectively, far lower than the 6% value 
observed in the previous measurement at 11 ppm. This decrease is supposed to derive from 
the incomplete release of NO2 molecules adsorbed in the previous measurements. Anyway, in 
spite of these low responses, the variations of the PL integrated area when switching between 
NO2 and dry air result to be still sharp, thus allowing to clearly detect the NO2 presence also 
at the lowest tested concentration (3 ppm).  
Further inspections show that, as expected, the effects of the incomplete reversibility of 
NO2 adsorption are reduced at lower tested NO2 concentrations and higher gas flux [149]. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
A brief review has been presented about properties, applications and growth methods of 
nanostructured ZnO. The attention has been then focused on the growth of this material by the 
Pulsed Lased Deposition technique, and results obtained by different research groups have 
been reported. The results obtained by our research group have been described in a deeper 
extent. Smooth or rough films, as well as nanostructured films with hexagonal pyramids, 
columns, hexagonal hierarchical structures and pencils have been obtained by changing the 
ablation laser wavelength, the substrate temperature and the oxygen pressure. The 
morphology of the deposited samples has been investigated to get information about the 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
241
growth mechanisms, and some characterization analyses have been reported in summary to 
obtain information about the sample quality. Films deposited by ablation with the ArF laser 
beam showed a better tendency to grow in nanostructured forms and a higher quality than 
those grown by using the KrF laser beam. The differences observed between samples 
deposited by the two ablating wavelengths have been discussed and related to the ArF higher 
photon energy. Finally, some NO2 gas sensing tests exploiting the variations in the PL 
emission of the deposited samples have been reported, showing better responses for 
nanostructured samples with high surface-to-volume ratio and wide total surface available for 
gas molecule adsorption. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Many thanks are due to Prof. A. Luches, Dr. A. Taurino, Dr. F. Romano, Dr. T. Tunno, 
M. Corrado and F. Casino for helpful discussions and assistance. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
On June 3 2009, about 8700 results were found when searching for “ZnO AND nano*” 
in the field ‘Article Title, Abstract, Keywords’ on Scopus (www.scopus.com) or in the 
field ‘Topic’ on ISI Web of Knowledge (http://www.isiknowledge.com) 
[2] 
Akane, T; et al., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 18, 1406 (2000). 
[3] 
Sheng, H; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 80, 2132 (2002). 
[4] 
Xu, WZ; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 88, 173506 (2006). 
[5] 
Bagnall, DM; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 70, 2230 (1997). 
[6] 
Hoffman, RL; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 733 (2003). 
[7] 
Zheng, XG; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 2264 (2006). 
[8] 
Minami, T; et al., Thin Solid Films, 494, 47 (2006). 
[9] 
Park, WI; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 4358 (2003). 
[10] Park, SH, Nanotechnology 18, 55608 (2007). 
[11] Bao, J; et al., Nano Lett., 6, 1719 (2006). 
[12] Huang, MH; et al., Science 292, 1897 (2001). 
[13] Johnson, JC; et al., J. Phys. Chem., B 105, 11387 (2001). 
[14] Hsu, HC; et al., J. Appl. Phys. 97, 64315 (2005). 
[15] Yan, H; et al., Adv. Mater., 15, 1907 (2003). 
[16] Yu, D; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 91116 (20079. 
[17] Chelnokov, EV; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 89, 171119 (2006). 
[18] Cha, SN; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 89, 263102 (2006). 
[19] Arnold, MS; et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 107, 659 (2003). 
[20] Xu, ZX; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 223509 (2007). 
[21] Hsu, CL; et al., Chem. Phys, Lett. 416, 75 (2005). 
[22] Kind, H; et al., Adv. Mater., 14, 158 (2002). 
[23] Newton, MC; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 89, 72104 (2006). 
[24] Law, M; et al., Nat. Mater., 4, 455 (2005). 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
242 
[25] Baxter, JB; et al., Nanotechnology, 17, S304 (2006). 
[26] Park, WI; et al., Adv. Mater., 17, 1393 (2005). 
[27] Law, M; et al., Science, 305, 1269 (2004). 
[28] Dal Corso, A; et al., Phys. Rev. B, 50, 10715 (1994). 
[29] Minne, SC; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 67, 3918 (1995). 
[30] Krishnamoorthy, S; Iliadis, AA. Solid-State Electron., 50, 1113 (2006). 
[31] Wang, ZL; et al., Materialstoday, 10, 20 (2007). 
[32] Wang, ZL; Song, J.  Science, 312, 242 (2006). 
[33] Wang, X; et al., Nano Lett., 6, 2768 (2006). 
[34] Hughes, WL; Wang, ZL. Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 2886 (2003). 
[35] Wang, G; et al., Appl. Opt., 40, 5436 (2001). 
[36] Cao, H; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 73, 572 (1998). 
[37] Larciprete, MC; et al., Appl. Phys. B, 82, 431 (2006). 
[38] Johnson, JC; et al., Nano Lett., 2, 279 (2002). 
[39] Dietl, T. Semicond. Sci. Technol., 17, 377 (2002). 
[40] Ueda, K. et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 79, 988 (2001). 
[41] Chawla, S; et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 125204 (2009). 
[42] Look, DC; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 75 (1999). 
[43] Tuomisto, F; et al., Physica B, 401, 604 (2007). 
[44] Wang, ZL. Appl. Phys. A, 88, 7 (2007). 
[45] Hanley, C; et al., Nanotechnology, 19, 295103 (2008). 
[46] Wu, YL; et al., Nanotechnology, 19, 345605 (2008). 
[47] Sharma, V; et al., Toxicol. Lett., 185, 211 (2009). 
[48] García, PD; López, C. J. App. Phys., 99, 046103 (2006). 
[49] Cui, J; Gibson, U. Nanotechnology, 18, 155302 (2007). 
[50] Ham, H; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 404, 69 (2005). 
[51] Wang, RC; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 87, 013110 (2005). 
[52] Zhu, YW; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 83, 144 (2003). 
[53] Wei, A; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 88, 213102 (2006). 
[54] Hou, K; et al., Nanotechnology, 18, 335204 (2007). 
[55] Xu, F; et al., Nanotechnology, 17, 2855 (2006). 
[56] Feng, X; et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 62 (2004). 
[57] Meng, XQ; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 413, 450 (2005). 
[58] Wang, ZL; et al., Materialstoday, 7, 26 (2004). 
[59] Huang, MH; et al., Adv. Mater., 13, 113 (2001). 
[60] Cheng, HM; et al., Nanotechnology, 16, 2882 (2005). 
[61] Wu, JJ; Liu, SC. Adv. Mater., 14, 215 (2002). 
[62] Kim, DC; et al., Nanotechnology, 18, 015603 (2007). 
[63] Park, WI; et al., Adv. Mater., 14, 1841 (2002). 
[64] Liu, X; et al., J. Appl. Phys., 95, 3141 (2004). 
[65] Heo, YW; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 81, 3046 (2002). 
[66] Chen MT; Ting, JM. Thin Solid Films, 494, 250 (2006). 
[67] Kim, D; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 90, 101918 (2007). 
[68] Dai, Y; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 358, 83 (2002). 
[69] Liu, C; et al., Mater. Lett., 60, 1394 (2006). 
[70] Wong, MH; et al., Nanotechnology, 14, 968 (2003). 

ZnO Nanostructures Deposited by Laser Ablation 
243
[71] Lin, KF; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 409, 208 (2005). 
[72] Bae, CH; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 1758 (2006). 
[73] Hu, XL; et al., Mater. Chem. Phys., 88, 421 (2004). 
[74] Green, LE; et al., Inorg. Chem., 45, 7535 (2006). 
[75] Bae, CH; et al., Nanotechnology, 17, 381 (2006). 
[76] Fan, HJ; et al., Nanotechnology, 16, 913 (2005). 
[77] Hirate T; et al., Superlattices Microstruct., 42, 409 (2007). 
[78] Chrisey, DB; Hubler, GK. Pulsed Laser Deposition of Thin Films; Wiley, New York 
(1994). 
[79] Bäuerle, D. Laser Processing and Chemistry; 3rd edition, Springer, Berlin (2000). 
[80] Hor, PH; et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 58, 911 (1987). 
[81] Voevodin AA; Donley, MS. Surf. Coat. Tech., 82, 199 (1996). 
[82] Perrone, A. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 41, 2163 (2002). 
[83] Schou, J. Laser Beam-Solid Interactions: Fundamental Aspects in Materials Surface 
Processing by Directed Energy Techniques; edited by Y. Pauleau; Elsevier (2005). 
[84] Kools, JCS. J. Appl. Phys., 74, 6401 (1993). 
[85] Gonzalo, J; et al., J. Appl. Phys., 81, 951 (1997). 
[86] Hansen, TN; et al., Appl.Phys. Lett., 72, 1829 (1998). 
[87] Gonzalo J; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 76, 943 (2003). 
[88] K.L. Saenger in Pulsed Laser Deposition of Thin Films; Editors D.B. Chrisey and G.K. 
Hubler; Wiley, New York (1994). 
[89] Said, A; et al., J. Phys: Conf. Ser., 59, 259 (2007). 
[90] He, C; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 254, 2196 (2008). 
[91] Yang, L; et al., Nanotechnology 18, 215602 (2007). 
[92] Ishikawa, Y; et al., J. Colloid. Interf. Sci., 300, 612 (2006). 
[93] Epurescu, G; et al., Superlattices Microstruct., 42, 79 (2007). 
[94] Yamaguchi, H; et al., Physica B, 401-2, 391 (2007). 
[95] Suzuki, K ; et al., J. Nanopart. Res., 11, 1349 (2009). 
[96] O’Haire, R; et al., Superlattices Microstruct. 39, 153 (2006). 
[97] Premkumar, T; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 255, 6819 (2009). 
[98] Zhang, Y; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 87, 133115 (2005). 
[99] Liu, B; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 93, 813 (2008). 
[100] Kawakami, M; et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 42, L33 (2003). 
[101] Hartanto, AB; et al., Appl.Phys. A, 78, 299 (2004). 
[102] Okada, T; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 81, 907 (2005). 
[103] Okada, T ; et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 44, 688 (2005). 
[104] Okada, T; et al., Thin Solid Films, 506-507, 274 (2005). 
[105] Okada, T; Suehiro, J. Appl. Surf. Sci., 253, 7840 (2007). 
[106] Guo, RQ ; et al., Appl. Phys. A 89, 141 (2007). 
[107] Guo, RQ; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 254, 3100 (2008). 
[108] Guo, RQ; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 93, 843 (2008). 
[109] Guo, RQ ; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 255, 9671 (2009). 
[110] Sakai, K; et al., Physica E, 40, 2489 (2008). 
[111] Sun, Y; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 396, 21 (2004). 
[112] Sun, Y; et al., Superlattices Microstruct., 39, 33 (2006). 
[113] Sun, Y; et al., Chem. Phys. Lett., 447, 257 (2007). 

D. Valerini, A. Cretí, A. P. Caricato et al. 
244 
[114] Sun, Y; Ashfold, MNR. Nanotechnology, 18, 245701 (2007). 
[115] Doherty, RP; et al., Appl. Phys., A 89, 49 (2007). 
[116] Gupta, V; et al., Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 818, M8.26.1 (2004). 
[117] Gupta, V; et al., J.Cryst.Growth, 287, 39 (2005). 
[118] Yang, B; et al., J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 42, 045415 (2009). 
[119] Choopun, S; et al., J. Cryst. Growth, 274, 167 (2005). 
[120] Park, JH; et al., J. Cryst. Growth, 276, 171 (2005). 
[121] Lorenz, M; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 86, 143113 (2005). 
[122] Rahm, A; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 88, 31 (2007). 
[123] Zúñiga-Pérez, J ; et al., Nanotechnology, 18, 195303 (2007). 
[124] Liu, ZW; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 88, 53110 (2006). 
[125] Liu, ZW; Ong, CK. Mater. Lett., 61, 3329 (2007). 
[126] Tien, LC; et al., J. Mater. Sci., 43, 6925 (2008). 
[127] Nishimura, R; et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 47, 4799 (2008). 
[128] Rout, CS; Rao, CNR. Nanotechnology, 19, 285203 (2008). 
[129] Mendelsberg, RJ; et al., Superlattices Microstruct., 43, 594 (2008). 
[130] Yu, D; et al., Mater. Lett., 62, 4063 (2008). 
[131] Valerini, D; et al., Appl. Phys. A, 93, 729 (2008). 
[132] Valerini, D; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 255, 9680 (2009). 
[133] Ozerov, I; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 247, 1 (2005). 
[134] Claeyssens, F; et al., J. Appl. Phys., 92, 6886 (2002). 
[135] Ohtomo, A; Tsukazaki, A. Semicond. Sci. Technol., 20, S1 (2005). 
[136] Jeffers, G; et al., J. Appl. Phys., 75, 5016 (1994). 
[137] Aubriet, F ; et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 186, 282 (2002). 
[138] Yao, BD; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 81, 757 (2002). 
[139] Sambri, A; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 91, 151501 (2007). 
[140] Yang, YH; et al., Nanotechnology, 17, 5556 (2006). 
[141] Özgür, Ü; et al., J. Appl. Phys., 98, 041301 (2005). 
[142] Patolsky, F; Lieber, CM. Materialstoday, 8, 20 (2005). 
[143] Wang, JX; et al., Nanotechnology, 17, 4995 (2006). 
[144] Li, CC; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 91, 32101 (2007). 
[145] Sberveglieri, G ; et al., Sens. Actuators B, 121, 208 (2007). 
[146] de Julián Fernández, C. et al., Sens. Actuators B, 130, 531 (2008). 
[147] Wang, JX; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 233106 (2006). 
[148] Singh, SP; et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 63901 (2007). 
[149] Valerini, D; et al., accepted for publication on Sens. Actuators, B. 
 
 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 245-282  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
DIODE LASER FORMING OF STEEL PARTS 
 
 
A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo and V. Tagliaferri 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via del 
Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Laser forming of steel parts by means of diode lasers is discussed from different 
points of view. The physical mechanisms at the basis of the laser forming processes are 
depicted, and a description of the state of the art is reported. Many laboratory experiences 
are presented in the case of diode laser forming of stainless steel sheet metals and tubes. 
Also slotted tubes were processed to form flares and tongues. Numerical modeling was 
carried out by means of analytical and finite element models and experimental data were 
in good agreement with numerical ones. The analytical approach lead to the evaluation of 
the laser forming efficiency, instead finite element models were used to predict the final 
shape of the steel parts as a function of the process parameters. In fact, finite element 
models allow the researchers to thoroughly study the part behavior during forming in the 
case of sheets, tubes or slotted tubes. In the end, an attempt was made to describe how 
material analysis helps in the laser forming investigation; residual stresses are mainly 
discussed as they strongly affect the formed part performances.  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Laser forming is a no-contact technique for sheet metal and tube forming: the bending is 
obtained because of the difference between the very fast heating rate (during laser exposure) 
and the subsequent slow cooling rate after the laser removal. It gives the possibility to 
implement highly automated manufacturing processes and to reduce tooling costs for rapid 
prototyping and small-batch production. Thanks to the laser system flexibility, a lot of 
applications (such as soldering, brazing and hardening) can be performed by means of the 
same apparatus. In the last 15 years, laser forming has been investigated more and more; the 
interest of manufacturing industries in laser forming applications has increased thanks to the 
high degree of control over the energy transfer, the high accuracy and reliability, and the very 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
246 
high flexibility. Moreover, the no-contact nature of the process makes hard tooling not 
necessary and small batch production runs and rapid prototyping are very effective 
applications. 
 
 
THE LASER FORMING PROCESS 
 
The mechanism of laser forming is based on laser-induced thermal stresses; in particular, 
as Shi et al. reported [1], there are three main laser forming mechanisms associated with 
metal plates: temperature gradient mechanism (TGM), buckling mechanism (BM) and 
upsetting mechanism (UM).  
The TGM is present if the laser beam diameter is in the order of the sheet metal 
thickness. In the TGM, a fast scan of a plate on a line by the laser beam forms a steep thermal 
gradient across the thickness thus producing differential thermal expansion, which in turn 
generates a gradient of compressive stresses on the laser-processed area, along the thickness. 
These compressive stresses are caused by the restriction of the surrounding material which 
prevents the thermal expansion of the laser exposed material. When these stresses reach the 
temperature-dependent flow-stress, a gradient of plastic compressive deformation along the 
thickness occurs, which is greater on the top surface. After laser passing, the material starts to 
cool and contracts, but the plastic deformation cannot recover, therefore the plate bends 
around the laser scanned line towards to the laser beam. 
In the BM, the spot diameter is greater than the plate thickness and the heated zone takes 
up the entire thickness because of a slow scanning speed. The heated area expands, up to the 
limit allowed by the surrounding material. The plastic deformation is maximum at the top 
surface and, during cooling, the plate starts to bend either away from or towards to the laser 
beam.  
The UM uses process parameters similar to BM, but the heated area is much smaller than 
the plate thickness; the geometry of the plate would prevent buckling due to the increased 
moment of inertia. Also in this case, the material in the non-processed zone restricts the 
thermal expansion of the heated area, which exhibits a nearly constant strain along the 
thickness. The material of heated area shortens and increases its thickness during cooling; 
moreover, the material on top zone starts to contract earlier than the bottom one and the plate 
starts to bend toward the laser beam. A combination of TGM and UM was also proposed by 
Shi et al. as the coupling mechanism (CM) [1]. 
In the last years, the scientific interest on the laser forming process is enormously 
increased but a full industrial application is still far to come. This limitation is probably due to 
the complexity of process design and to the equipment cost.  
In 2000, Magee et al. already proposed a prototype laser forming system to demonstrate 
the process feasibility on large primitive shape [2]. Laeng et al., in their review, concluded 
that the laser-based metal forming process is a technique that has the potential to produce 
fully functional models directly from a CAD system and eliminate the need for an 
intermediate step [3].  
In 2001, Lawrence et al. discussed the bending of mild steel sheets by using a high power 
diode laser [4]. They only evaluated the effect of the process parameters on the bending 
angle, but it was evident that diode lasers gave high process efficiency. Even if this kind of 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
247
laser source has also other advantages, it is rarely mentioned in scientific papers. In the same 
year, Li and Yao deepened the laser forming of AISI 1010 steel sheets with constant line 
energy by using a CO2 laser [5]. They observed that under the condition of constant line 
energy, the bending angle increases with scanning velocity, but the degree of increase reduces 
with velocity increase.  
In 2002, Lee and Lin simulated the transient deformation of thin AISI 304 stainless steel 
sheet metals by a single pulse of a CO2 laser forming [6]; however the application of a single 
pulse simplifies the thermo-mechanical simulation. In the following year, 2003, Dearden and 
Edwardson, in their review on laser forming, described a number of new developments for 
both macro- and micro-scale applications [7]. 
In 2004, Geiger et al. discussed some developments in the laser forming of aluminum 
alloys [8]. Zhang and Michaleris proposed 3D Eulerian and Lagrangian finite element models 
to simulate the forming process [9]. Both models took into account only the transient thermal 
and the elasto-plastic analysis, whereas the effect of the laser heating on the material 
annealing was not considered. This is a general assumption of all the thermo-mechanical 
numerical models, in the previous and following studies as well. In the same year, Hsieh and 
Lin investigated experimentally and numerically the vibration phenomenon during pulsed 
laser forming of thin metal plates [10]; the metal plates were made of AISI 304 stainless steel 
and were heated by a CO2 laser.  
In 2005, McBride et al. introduced a simplified analytical model to characterize bending 
by the thermal gradient mechanism [11]. Experimental tests were performed on mild steel 
coupons by means of a CO2 laser. Moreover, Yanjin et al. deepened the influence of material 
properties on the laser forming process by means of numerical simulations [12]. Zhang et al. 
proposed a model to predict the fatigue behavior of sheet metals after laser forming [13], In 
fact, microstructure as well as the distribution of residual stresses changes during the process; 
they incorporated some results from microstructure integrated finite element modeling in the 
fatigue life model. Tests on low carbon steel were used to validate the model.  
A lot of numerical studies were carried out on laser forming in 2006. Edwardson et al. 
deepened the problem of the variation of the bending angle per pass during multiple passes 
along a single irradiation track [14]. Costa Santos et al. proposed a review on rapid 
manufacturing by laser forming [15]. A research on the related mechanisms was proposed by 
Shi et al. by means of a numerical and theoretical approach [1]. A numerical model was also 
proposed by Shi et al. who studied the straight-line laser forming under the TGM [16], and 
applied the similarity theory in the forming process [17]; by Shen et al. who introduced an 
analytical approach for estimating the deformation [18], a finite-element model for two-scan 
laser forming with different intervals along the same path [19], and a fuzzy logic model to 
predict the bending angle [20]. Another finite element model was also proposed by Liu et al. 
to simulate the laser forming of aluminum matrix composites [21]. A last mention has to be 
made of the study by Cheng et al. who discussed experimentally and numerically the laser 
forming of varying thickness plates [22], and proposed a strain-based strategy for process 
design [23].  
Also the last contributions are mainly numerical. In 2007, Shen et al. proposed a 3D non-
linear, indirectly coupled thermal model to investigate the edge effects of the laser bending 
[24], and the overlapping of two sequential scans [25]. More recently, Korsunsky et al. have 
proposed a beam-bending eigenstrain analysis of residual elastic strains in multi-scan laser-
formed steel samples [26]. The authors observed that a key challenge in the development of 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
248 
laser forming is the characterization of the relationship between process parameters and the 
resulting state of the material. In conclusion, Labeas has developed a 3D numerical model for 
the laser forming of aluminum components [27]. 
Not only laser forming of sheets is studied, several scientific studies deal with laser 
bending of tubes and the related physical mechanisms. In 2001, Li and Yao discussed in 
detail the mechanism at the basis of laser tube bending by stress analysis [28]. They studied 
the laser bending of low carbon steel tubes by a CO2 laser with a power of 1.5 kW, and 
discussed the dependence of the bending angle on scanning speed and laser power. 
Particularly they investigated the tube ovalization, and concluded that wall thickness 
reduction seems to be avoided and lesser ovalization results in comparison with mechanical 
bending. A thermo-mechanical finite element simulation to correlate stress arising in the tube 
and thermal gradients was performed in 2003 by Hao and Li [29], who also developed an 
analytical model for laser tube bending by a 400 W Nd-YAG laser source [30]. In 2005, 
Hsieh and Lin studied BM in laser tube forming, which occurs in the case of thin tubes [31]; 
experimental tests were carried out on stainless steel tubes by means of a CW CO2. 
Laser bending of tubes is normally achieved through the UM. In the most common laser 
scanning scheme, the tube rotates 180 degrees when its outer circumference is heated by a 
laser beam with a spot size greater than the tube thickness. The scanned region is heated 
homogeneously in the thickness direction, plastic compressive deformation arises and the 
wall thickens because the surrounding material prevents the thermal expansion. The 
consequent shortening of the scanned region in the axial direction of the tube during cooling 
causes the tube to bend towards the laser beam. Other scanning schemes (such as the axial 
scanning scheme) were evaluated by Zhang et al. in 2006 [32] and by Safdar et al. in 2007 
[33]. In the former case, a CO2 laser was used to bend low carbon steel tubes, and the effect 
of the scanning scheme on the ovalization was experimentally measured (in all cases lower 
than 1%). In the latter study, a fiber optic coupled high power diode laser was used to bend 
stainless steel tubes. The latter also discussed the main parameters to control the bending 
process and the correlation between thermal stresses, laser beam geometry and scanning 
direction.  
 
 
APPLICATION OF HIGH POWER DIODE LASERS (HPDLS) 
 
In 2000, Li discussed the application of HPDLs in material processing such as soldering, 
surface treatment, welding, marking, sheet metal bending [34]. As Bachman observed in 
2003, HPDLs have entered the industrial manufacturing area [35]. Because of their unique 
features (small size and low weight), high efficiency and reliability, diode lasers gained high 
interests as new sources for material processing. The investment costs of HPDL systems are 
not very lower than those of CO2 lasers but considerably less than Nd-YAG lasers. Running 
costs are much less than those of conventional lasers, because of their high efficiency (above 
30%). Many industrial applications are possible, from brazing to cladding and hardening. As 
a consequence of the rather poor beam quality, applications as cutting and high speed deep 
penetration welding are not yet available as a market for HPDL. Instead, hardening is a 
typical application, as reported by Pashby et al. who studied surface hardening of steel using a 
1.2 kW diode laser [36]. Recently Zhu et al. have suggested an interesting comparison 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
249
between CO2 and diode laser welding of AZ31 magnesium alloy [37]. Keyhole welding can 
be obtained using the CO2 laser, whereas only conduction welding is possible with the diode 
laser. Conduction mechanism is a limit for cutting and welding, but it is an advantage for 
other diode laser applications, such as forming. In particular, as suggested by Zhang et al. 
[32], diode lasers are suitable for tube bending due to the rectangular laser beam shape. In the 
study of Zhang et al., the case of low carbon steel tube forming is discussed.  
 
 
EXPERIMENTAL 
 
In the following, many experimental and numerical results related to the case of diode 
laser forming of sheet metals and tubes made of steel are discussed. The effect of the main 
process variables was evaluated and the related forming mechanisms were investigated [38-
43]. 
Laser forming tests were all carried out on AISI 304 stainless steel sheet metals and 
tubes. The laser system used was a 1.5 kW diode laser source (Rofin-Sinar, DL 015) with 940 
nm wavelength. The laser source had an almost rectangular spot due to the superposition of 
two different rays, each one coming from a 750 W emitter diode. A 63 mm long focus lens 
was used to maximize the depth of field. Nominally, in the focalization condition, the spot 
maximum axis was 3.8 mm in length and the minimum axis was 1.2 mm.  
Dealing with line bending (i.e. bending a sheet metal around a line), tests were performed 
by focusing the diode laser on AISI 304 stainless steel sheets with different area (100x35 
mm2 and 100x80 mm2) and thickness (1.20 mm and 1.50 mm, respectively). Before testing, 
samples were cleaned by means of acetone to remove any grease stain. No coating was 
applied on the sheets. Sheet metals were fixed on a CNC motion table along the smaller edge 
as reported in Figure 1. The samples were then laser scanned in the middle, backward and 
forward by moving them under the motionless laser source. Each scan was longer than the 
sample length: in this way the motion inversion occurred externally to the sample, avoiding 
over-heating on the edges. During the experimentation, several process parameters were 
changed, such as the scanning rate, the laser power and the spot orientation, which is 
expressed as the angle between the spot maximum axis and the laser path direction. The 
images of the bent samples, after each series of laser passes, were captured and the resulting 
bending angles were measured using an image processing software. During image acquisition 
the samples were left cooling in air, to avoid excessive pre-heating in successive scans. 
Considering the spot area and the small sample thickness, the TGM can be considered as 
the forming mechanism for the laser induced bending. In fact the TGM is present when the 
spot diameter is in the order of the sheet metal thickness. A steep temperature gradient occurs 
in the laser exposed area producing a non-uniform thermal expansion through the thickness. 
In this phase the sheet exhibits a counter bending. The constraining effect of the non heated 
surrounding material determines the presence of an elastic stress. At high temperatures the 
material yield stress decreases and therefore the pure elastic strains are converted into plastic 
ones. When the laser spot proceeds along its path and the initial irradiated portion of the sheet 
cools, the elastic strains are recovered but not the plastic ones. During cooling, the difference 
in thermal contraction between the upper and lower sheet layers, generates a bending angle 
towards the laser beam source.  

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
250 
In Figure 2 the total bending angle for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets is reported as a 
function of pass number in four different conditions.  
The bending angle increases with the number of scanning passes and the increase in laser 
power, whereas it decreases as the scanning rate increases. By increasing the pass number and 
laser power and decreasing the laser scanning rate, the energy amount provided to the sample 
increases, as well as the total bending angle. If two samples are bent in different conditions 
but with the same energy amount per unit length, similar bending curves could be obtained. 
For a given spot orientation, energy amount per unit length (i.e. the laser fluence) can be 
evaluated by means of the ratio P/v. In Figure 3 two bending curves, obtained at different 
powers and scanning rates but the same P/v value, seem to be superimposed. However this 
experimental evidence cannot be considered a general conclusion. In fact it was shown, 
experimentally and numerically, that under the condition of constant line energy, the bent 
angle increases with scanning velocity. Moreover the degree of increase reduces with velocity 
increase [5]. Evidently the investigated power and scan rate ranges are too small for the 
evaluation of the scan rate in condition of constant line energy. 
 
 
Figure 1. Experimental configuration for diode laser forming of stainless steel sheet metals. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
Bending angle [deg]
Number of laser passes
Laser power - Laser scanning rate
 250 W - 4.5 mm/s
 250 W - 7.5 mm/s
 350 W - 4.5 mm/s
 350 W - 7.5 mm/s
 
Figure 2. Total bending angle as a function of pass number for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets at 
different laser powers and scanning rates (90° spot orientation). 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
251
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
40
Bending angle [deg]
Number of laser passes
Laser power - Laser scanning rate - P/v
 350 W - 6.5 mm/s - 53.8 J/mm
 400 W - 7.5 mm/s - 53.3 J/mm
 
Figure 3. Total bending angle as a function of pass number for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets at 
equal fluence (90° spot orientation). 
A significant loss in bending efficiency is visible when melting appears on the laser 
exposed surface. Figure 4 shows the comparison between two different experimental curves, 
the first curve obtained at higher power and lower scanning rate than the second curve. Even 
if, in the first case, a greater energy amount per time unit is provided to the sample, the 
corresponding bending curve lies in the lower part of the graph. Surface melting partially 
nullifies thermal gradient effect because melting relaxes thermal stresses.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
Bending angle [deg]
Number of laser passes
Laser power - Laser scanning rate
 750 W - 4.5 mm/s
 450 W - 7.5 mm/s
 
Figure 4. Total bending angle as a function of pass number for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets, with 
(upper curve) and without (lower curve) surface melting (90° spot orientation). 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
252 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
Bending angle [deg]
Number of laser passes
Laser power - Laser scanning rate - Spot orientation
 250 W - 4.5 mm/s - 0°
 250 W - 4.5 mm/s - 90°
 400 W - 4.5 mm/s - 0°
 400 W - 4.5 mm/s - 90°
 
Figure 5. Total bending angle as a function of pass number for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets at 
different laser powers and spot orientations. 
Also spot orientation is an important parameter for an efficient bending process. In fact 
90° spot orientation allows a greater material area to be treated, reducing surface melting 
occurrence. Figure 5 shows that at a fixed laser power and scanning rate for stainless steel 
samples, 90° spot orientation gives higher bending angles than 0° spot orientation. When 
surface melting is generated, a similar bending curve is obtained in both cases (0° and 90° 
spot orientation), as Figure 6 shows. 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
Bending angle [deg]
Number of laser passes
Laser power - Laser scanning rate - Spot orientation
 700 W - 7.5 mm/s - 0°
 700 W - 7.5 mm/s - 90°
 
Figure 6. Total bending angle as a function of pass number for 1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets at 
different spot orientations in presence of surface melting. 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
253
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Numerical angle [deg]
Experimental angle [deg]
 Theoretical line
 Experimental data
R
2 = 0.986
 
Figure 7. Comparison between experimental data and numerical data extracted from the average single 
pass (1.5 mm thick stainless steel sheets). 
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
Single step bending angle [deg]
Laser power [W]
         Laser scanning rate
 4.5 mm/s
 6.5 mm/s
 7.5 mm/s
Surface melting 
 
Figure 8. Bending angle after a single laser pass as a function of laser power for 1.5 mm thick stainless 
steel sheets at different laser scanning rates (90° spot orientation). 
For all the experimental curves, with and without surface melting occurrence, a uniform 
increase in bending angle was observed, increasing the laser passes. After the first passes, the 
same increase in bending angle is obtained for all the subsequent single passes. This fact is 
shown in Figure 7 where the experimental angle is reported together with the numerical one. 
The numerical angle is simply the product between the number of laser passes n, and the 
average of the single pass bending angle increase γS. The experimental angle is almost equal 
to the numerical one for all the experimental points of the bending curves, as Figure 7 shows. 
This fact suggests to use the bending angle increase, after a single laser pass, as a significant 
experimental parameter for bending condition comparison. Figure 8 shows the single step 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
254 
bending increase as a function of laser power and scanning rate. In this case, surface melting 
occurrence is clearly visible by the curve trends. At a given scanning rate, a maximum is 
present for the optimal bending power. After the maximum, the curve drop is the highest at 
the lowest scanning rate. 
As Figure 9 shows, by reducing the sheet thickness, high bending angles may be obtained 
at lower laser powers after few scans. However, in this case, surface melting more easily 
occurs, limiting the process window.  
 
0
3
6
9
12
15
0
2
4
6
8
Number of laser passes
Bending angle [deg]
Scan rate = 4 mm/s
Laser power
100 W
150 W
 
Figure 9. Bending angle as a function of laser passes for 1.2 mm thick stainless steel sheets (90° spot 
orientation). 
Laser forming of tubes was performed by putting into rotation steel tubes made of AISI 
304, under the focused HPDL beam. The tubes were 20 mm in outer diameter, 60 mm in 
length and 1 mm in thickness. The experimental apparatus for laser forming is shown in 
Figure 10a together with the configuration for the tube temperature measurement under laser 
exposure (Figure 10b). The tubes were clamped to a stepper motor that provided the 
rotational speed, which ranged from 9 to 60 deg/s in 5 steps. A comparator was used to 
measure the vertical displacement of the free tube end so as to extract the bending angle.  
The maximum axis of the spot was aligned to the tube axis (i.e. the spot orientation was 
fixed to 90°). The tube clamping length was about 15 mm. Fifty consecutive scans were 
performed for each combination of laser power and tube rotational speed, whereas the angular 
displacement under heating was fixed to 180 deg. Every 2 scans the measure of the tube end 
displacement was acquired, and the tube was left to cool in air before further scans. Laser 
bending tests were also carried out by moving the laser source along the tube axis after 20 
consecutive circumferential scans. In this case the laser power was fixed to 150 W, the 
rotational speed to 36 deg/s, and 20 series of 20 laser scans were performed at a distance of 2 
and 3 mm one from the other. A sum of 400 scans were performed for each test, the tube was 
left to cool for 5 min between two consecutive series. 
Figure 11 shows the experimental results in terms of tube bending angle in dependence of 
the number of scans at different values of rotational speed and laser power. In this case a 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
255
single circumferential band was laser treated and no longitudinal motion was applied to the 
tube. The bending angle increases with decreasing the rotational speed and increasing of the 
laser power; however, too high powers or too low rotational speeds lead to the tube surface 
melting in the first scans. This occurrence limits the maximum value of the power to 175 W 
and the minimum value of the rotational speed to 9 deg/s, but also in this condition only few 
scans were performed at 18 deg/s and 175 W and no one at 9 deg/s and 175 W. At high laser 
powers and low rotational speeds, if the surface melting is avoided, high laser bending 
efficiencies are obtained, but high cycle times are necessary to cool the tube between 
successive scans or series of scans. The effect of multiple scans on the laser forming 
efficiency was also discussed by Edwardson et al. (2006) who observed the decrease in 
bending angle per pass after many irradiations for a given set of process parameters [14]. For 
this reason, large tube deformations were achieved at medium values of laser power (150 W) 
and rotational speeds (36 deg/s). It is clearly observable when surface melting occurs during 
laser forming, but this phenomenon is not the only one affecting the material integrity. Surely 
melting leads to catastrophic effects; nevertheless at lower temperatures phase 
transformations may occur, and the final material properties may be negatively influenced.  
 
 
Figure 10. Experimental set-up for tube laser bending (a) and temperature acquisition (b). 
 
Figure 11. Tube bending angle as a function of the number of scans at different values of rotational 
speed and laser power in the case of a single treated band. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
256 
 
Figure 12. Bending rate as a function of the rotational speed (a), and bent tube after 300 scans (b). 
At a fixed value of rotational speed and laser power, the bending angle is linearly 
dependent on the number of scans as discussed in [28]. Fig.12a shows the slope of the curves 
of Fig.11 as a function of the rotational speed for both laser powers. The linear fitting was 
performed by considering the intersection at the origin, and correlation factor of the linear 
fitting were always higher than 0.93 (up to 0.997). The lowest values were found for those 
curves of Fig.11 which start to decrease their slope at high number of scans due to the sudden 
increase of the tube average temperature. However this effect was sufficiently limited during 
the experimentation. 
Even if the bending angle is linearly dependent on the number of scans (Figure 11), it is 
not possible to normalize the bending rate by means of the input energy (which is related to 
the ratio between laser power and rotational speed). The contribution of these two process 
variables is always well distinct. Data of Figure 12a may be used to calculate the final 
bending angle for the different process conditions. In the case of 150 W, 36 deg/s and 400 
scans, a value of 19 deg is extracted. Experimental tests provided a value about 20 deg 
independently from the longitudinal distance that was applied between two successive series 
of scans. In Figure 12b, the case of the 3 mm distance is shown with the tube at the end of the 
laser processing. Therefore, a good agreement is present between the interpolated datum from 
Figure 12a and the experimental evidence of Figure 12b. This occurrence suggests that a 
numerical model can simulate the behavior of the tube under complex processing conditions 
if it is correctly calibrated by using laser tests on a single band. Up to 400 scans were 
performed on the steel tube of Figure 12b at 150 W of laser power and 36 deg/s of rotational 
speed, whereas 70 s of cooling were applied between two consecutive scans. Therefore, about 
10 hr were necessary to bend a steel tube (20 mm in outer diameter, 1 mm in thickness) up to 
20 deg without surface melting. Evidently, for an industrial application, this time has to be 
reduced and the tube has to be cooled by water and not left to cool in air. 
 
 
Figure 13. Slotted tubes (a) and aspect of the tubes after laser processing (b). 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
257
In a further development of laser forming, it is possible to combine line bending and tube 
bending to perform a slotted tube bending. In fact, if a U-shaped slot is cut in a tube, a tongue 
is obtained. The side of the tongue continuous with the tube can be laser processed by means 
of a HDPL, to carry out the tongue bending. The laser bending mechanisms are no more those 
typical of laser bending of tubes (UM), in fact the tongue can be considered as a plate 
attached to a tube by one side. This kind of tube geometry could be used to generate 
connections between mechanical parts by means of a no-contact technique. If a high specific 
power laser is used (such as CO2 laser), it could cut the slot when focused on the tube surface 
and bend the slot in defocused conditions. HDPLs do not permit to cut the slot, because their 
specific power is too low to generate the deep penetration mechanism during processing, 
therefore the slots were machined. Laser forming tests were performed putting into rotation 
slotted tubes, made of AISI 304, under a focused HPDL beam, at a speed of 0.628 rad/s. Also 
these tubes were 20 mm in outer diameter and 1 mm in thickness. In order to provide the 
rotational speed, the tubes were cut to a length of 50 mm and clamped to a stepping motor. 
The geometrical features of the tubes are depicted in Figure 13a. In particular, sample (a) had 
no slots, whereas sample (b) had a U-shaped slot and (c) had 4 symmetric slots along the tube 
end. The laser treated zone is shown in Figure 13a with a darker color for each sample.  
During tests, the laser beam was focused on the external tube surface and the laser power 
was fixed at 150 W. The tube clamping length was 15 mm. The details about the scanning 
schemes are reported in Table 1. Initially the laser was focused on the tube external surface 
and a first scan was performed along the tube circumference. At the end of the scan the laser 
spot was moved to the initial position to repeat the same scan. Up to a maximum of 20 scans 
were performed consecutively. At the end of this first set of scans, the tube was left to cool in 
air. Subsequently the laser spot was moved along the tube length to perform a set of scans on 
a parallel circumferential line. Finally, the total processed length of the tube ranged from 9.8 
to 15.8 mm, the number of scans per circumferential line from 10 to 20. The single laser scan 
interested the entire tube external circumference apart from the sample (b), for which an 
angular dimension of 56° was considered to bend only the tongue of Figure 13a. The distance 
between two consecutive set of scans was 2 mm. As the laser spot maximum axis was aligned 
to the tube length, a 1.8 mm superposition resulted between successive scans.  
In Figure 13b, the picture of the formed tubes is reported. A flare was obtained for the 
sample (a). In sample (b) the result was similar to the case of sheet metals and the tube wall 
deformed toward the laser source. However the unprocessed surface of the tongue remained 
unaltered with the shape of the initial cylindrical surface. Instead, in sample (c) the laser spot 
was moved from one end to the other one for a distance of almost 16 mm. A complex double 
curvature surface resulted in the four tongues. 
In a further experimentation, two tubes, different is size, were cut to a length of 50 mm 
and processed with rotational speed of 1.257 rad/s for the small tube and 0.628 rad/s for the 
big tube. The geometrical features of the slotted tubes are reported in Figure 14a. Initially the 
laser was focused on the tube external surface, aligned to one of the longitudinal sides of the 
U-shaped slot; a first scan was performed along the tube circumference, on the part delimited 
by the slot. At the end of the scan, the laser spot was moved to the initial position to repeat the 
same scan. Ten scans were performed consecutively; at the end of each scan, the tube was left 
to cool in air for 80 s. As the laser spot maximum axis was aligned to the tube axis, the axial 
processed length of the tubes was 3.8 mm. The appearance of the deformed tongues is 
reported in Figure 14b. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
258 
Table 1. Geometrical parameters for slotted tube forming tests. 
 
Sample 
Tube scanned 
length [mm] 
Number of 
scans per 
line 
Angular dimension 
of a single scan [°] 
Distance between 
consecutive set of scans 
[mm] 
A 
9.8 
20 
360 
2 
B 
3.8 
10 
56 
0 
C 
15.8 
20 
360 
2 
 
 
Figure 14. Slotted tubes with different size (a) and aspect of the tubes after laser processing (b). 
 
 
NUMERICAL MODELING 
 
Numerical simulation is fundamental for the laser forming design due to its complexity. 
In the scientific literature, very good agreements were obtained between experimental and 
numerical data in terms of bending angle or part deformation, by using both analytical and 
finite element models. The experimental results discussed in the previous section were used 
for making evidence of this predictability of analytical and discrete models.  
In the case of line bending, a simple model can be used in order to predict bending angle 
if the TGM occurs [44]. Bending angle is expressed as a function of material properties and 
working parameters: 
 
 
( )
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
5
1
rv
tk
P
S
αλ
β
π
γ
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
 
(1) 
 
where the laser power distribution is assumed to be constant over a circular spot with r radius. 
This equation (1) was analytically derived. It was also shown that the model is in reasonable 
agreement with experimental results (using CO2 and Nd-YAG lasers). This model was chosen 
only for its simple form that can be easily adapted to the definition of a process map.  

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
259
Equation (1) refers to a single laser pass, but it can be easily extended to the case of 
multiple passes, in the hypothesis that the same angle increase occurs at every single laser 
pass: 
 
 
S
T
nγ
γ
=
. 
(2) 
 
Combining equation (1) and (2): 
 
 
( )
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
5
1
rv
tk
P
n
T
αλ
β
π
γ
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
 
(3) 
 
Equation (3) can be arranged in a dimensionless form assuming: 
 
 
P
n
tk
N
T
Th
αβ
γ
=
1
 
(4) 
 
 
rv
NTh
λ
=
2
 
(5) 
and using equation (4) and (5) in equation (3): 
 
 
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
5
1
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
π
Th
Th
N
N
 
(6) 
 
Both the defined thermal numbers (NTh1 and NTh2) have a physical significance. The first 
thermal number NTh1 is the efficiency in laser bending. In fact the term γTt/n can be 
considered as the increment after a single laser pass in the sheet length, from the opposite side 
of the laser exposed surface compared with the length from the side of the laser exposed 
surface. This length increment is responsible for bending. The term αβP/k represents instead 
a characteristic length for thermal expansion, being the product (for a reference temperature 
interval ΔT) of an αΔT term (which is the linear thermal expansion) and a βP/kΔT term 
(which is the characteristic length for heat transfer during laser action). The concept at the 
basis of the first thermal number is that not all the thermal expansion can produce bending. If 
a large thermal expansion would be obtained homogeneously inside the sample thickness, no 
bending would occur. 
The second thermal number NTh2 is instead the ratio per unit time between the sample area, 
which is interested to the heat transfer (as the thermal diffusivity λ can be interpreted), and the 
sample area which is covered by the laser motion (approximately equal to the term rv). In this 
way NTh2 can be considered the efficiency of heat transfer during laser motion. If NTh2>>1 the 
heat transfer is faster than the laser motion, otherwise if NTh2<<1, the laser moves faster than 
thermal waves inside the material. Equation (6) shows that laser bending efficiency increases 
with heat transfer efficiency for every material, processing and geometry condition. However a 
direct correlation between the term NTh2 and the bending angle is not immediate.  

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
260 
Table 2. Material properties for process map definition. 
 
Material 
 
Property 
Value 
 
AISI 304 
α 
1.90E-5 
K-1 
λ 
4.88E-6 
m2/s 
k 
19.5 
W/m K 
 
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
NT1
NT
1/2
 Theoretical line
         Spot orientation
 90°
 0°
Surface melting
 
Figure 15. Laser bending process map for stainless steel sheets in all the experimental conditions. 
The discussed experimental data in the case of the 1.5 mm thick sheet metals (Figures 2-
8) were reported on a process map by using the definitions of equation (4) and (5), i.e. the 
bending efficiency and the heat transfer efficiency. Table 2 shows material property values 
used in equation (4) and (5). Additionally, in equation (4) the average of the bending angle 
increase after a single laser pass was used for the term γT/n, and β was fixed equal to 1. It is 
known that the for mild steel the absorption of HPDL radiation is about 45% [4], but, after the 
first passes, surface oxidation occurs and metal oxides have all very high absorption 
coefficient [45]. In equation (5) the minimum axis length was used for r in the case of 0° spot 
orientation, and the maximum axis length for the case of 90° spot orientation. Figure 15 
shows the obtained process map for all the experimental conditions. Every single bending 
curve is represented by a point. In the same figure, the theoretical curve of equation (6) is 
superimposed too. Figure 15 shows that equation (6) correctly predicts bending process when 
surface melting is not present. For stainless steel, experimental data in the case of surface 
melting are below the theoretical curve because in this case a decrease in bending efficiency 
NT1 is mainly present. 
Even if analytical models allows researchers to deepen the effect of the involved physical 
mechanisms in laser forming, finite element analysis is necessary to design complex forming 
processes. All the forming processes described in the experimental section were carefully 
modeled by means of finite element models. In the case of line bending, a 3D thermo-

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
261
mechanical finite element model was defined to compare numerical and experimental 
bending angles of the stainless steel sheet metals under different process conditions; the 
model was built in ANSYS 9 by means of the parametric design language (APDL) to reduce 
modeling and solution times and to easily change some parameters (such as the sheet 
thickness or the mesh size). The temperature-dependent material properties of AISI 304 were 
implemented into the model according to [46]. A bilinear isotropic hardening behavior was 
implemented to simulate the material properties. The model geometry was built according to 
the experimental set-up. Initially, a sheet with a thickness of 1.2 mm, a width of 35 mm and a 
length of 100 mm was modeled (Figure 16a). The model had a finer mesh in the middle, 
where the laser acted, and a coarse mesh in the remaining parts. The number of element 
divisions along the sheet thickness was constant and equal to 3. The laser heating was 
modeled by means of a thermal load in terms of heat flux over a 3.8x1.2 mm2 rectangular 
spot. The dimension of the elements of the finer mesh zone was inferred by the dimension of 
the spot, setting that the laser spot should cover a total of 2 element facets along the laser path 
direction. The laser scan was modeled by performing a spot translation along the sheet upper 
surface. A multi-step analysis was implemented: at each time step, the spot moves 
overlapping for a half the previous position. Therefore, the resulting time step depended on 
the mesh size and the scan speed, and was 0.075 s for a speed of 8 mm/s. Two values of the 
laser power were analyzed: 100 and 150 W. A single laser scan was simulated for the two 
conditions and a cooling time of 30 s (with a time step of 1 s) was added at the end of each 
step. Initially, a thermal analysis was carried out by using SOLID70 thermal elements. After 
obtaining the thermal solution, the thermal elements were converted into SOLID45 structural 
elements and the thermal solution was used to define the thermal loads of the non-linear 
structural analysis. Figure 16b shows a typical simulated deformation of a laser irradiated 
specimen.  
In order to calibrate the thermal numerical model, laser heating tests were performed by 
keeping the sheet in a standstill position; the laser acted on the central position of the sheet for 
5 s, with a power of 100 W. At the same time, the temperature of the sheet was acquired at a 
given distance from the laser spot, on the surface not exposed to laser heating. As a result, the 
absorption coefficient was set to 0.42 and the heat transfer coefficient was 10 W/m2 K. The 
room temperature was set to 24°C, according to the measured value during the test. 
In Figure 17a a comparison between the temperature curve acquired during the laser 
heating test and the temperature curve extracted from the thermal model is reported . 
Therefore, at the end of calibration procedure, a good match of the curves was found. From 
the thermo-mechanical analysis, the bending angles related to one laser scan and two laser 
power values (100 and 150 W) were extracted. The bending angle for multiple passes was 
obtained by multiplying the single-pass value for the number of scans. Figure 17b reports a 
comparison between experimental and numerical bending angles in the case of a scan rate of 
8 mm/s, and the agreement is very good. Higher values of the bending angle are related to a 
higher number of passes as well as to higher values of laser power. Numerical modeling can 
predict the effect of the process parameters on the sample deformation. However, the model is 
able to predict the mechanical effects rather than the thermal ones. In fact, material annealing 
was not considered in the model. 
 
 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
262 
 
Figure 16. FE modeling of sheet metal forming: a) the discrete model; b) displacement map at the laser 
power of 150 W and the scanning rate of 8 mm/s, after 1 scan.  
 
Figure 17. FE simulation of sheet metal forming: a) temperature calibration; b) comparison between 
experimental and numerical bending angle. 
In a further analysis, a single laser scan was simulated in the case of two different scan 
velocities: 4 mm/s (at 100 and 150 W) and 8 mm/s (at 100, 150 and 200 W). These process 
conditions refer to the experimental data already reported in Figure 9. The occurrence of the 
material melting was always avoided. A typical result from the numerical simulation is shown 
in Figure 18a in terms of temperature and displacement map at given time (3.5 s) and process 
conditions (scan velocity of 8 mm/s, laser power of 200 W). A comparison between 
experimental and numerical results is shown in Figure 18b for the sheet bending angle; 
experimental values were obtained by dividing by 2 the bending angle after 2 passes. The 
small discrepancy is probably due to the assumption of a constant absorption coefficient. 
However, the model is able to predict the effect of the change of the main process parameters.  
In Figure 19 the evolution of the temperature profile, the stresses and the bending angle is 
reported in dependence of the time for the same processing conditions of Figure 18a. The 
temperature profiles are acquired on the top surface of the sample at the start, the middle and 
the end point of the laser scan. The Von Mises stresses are extracted in the same positions but 
from the bottom surface. Instead the bending angle is extracted from the vertical displacement 
of the free end. 
The numerical results of Figure 19 may be also generalized to the other laser forming 
conditions. A peak in the temperature profile is measured when the laser spot passes on the 
related position. A higher peak is visible in the end point due to the sample pre-heating and 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
263
the edge effect. In correspondence of the peak temperature, a peak of the stress is also 
present. After the laser spot passing, the temperature decreases as well as the stress, but the 
latter starts to increase again during cooling. At the end, the stress reaches a plateau value 
depending on the position. Despite of the complex temperature and stress profiles, the 
bending angle evolution is quite simple. An initial deformation in the opposite direction is 
present during the first instants of laser exposure, subsequently the trend is rapidly inverted 
and the bending angle increases linearly during the laser heating. The linear trend disappears 
when the laser spot approaches the opposite edge. At this point the laser is turned off and the 
bending angle reaches a stable plateau. 
Residual stresses may be extracted by the numerical simulations (a typical stress map is 
shown in Figure 20a). The plateau value of Von Mises stress of Figure 19 can be considered a 
numerical prediction of the residual stress. In order to have a comparison between the 
different numerical solutions, the plateau value of the Von Mises stress was extracted along 
the laser scan from the side of the bottom surface. The stress distribution is quite complex and 
two maximums are visible near the edges due to the edge effect. This occurrence suggests that 
also the measurement of the residual stress is very sensitive to the test location. At 4 mm/s, by 
increasing the laser power, the residual stress in the central part of the sample increases 
(Figure 20b). At 8 mm/s the same effect of the laser power is visible (Figure 20c). 
 
 
Figure 18. Numerical model results: temperature and displacement maps (a) and comparison between 
experimental and numerical bending angle (b). 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
264 
 
Figure 19. Evolution of temperature, stress and bending angle during laser forming (scan velocity = 8 
mm/s, laser power = 200 W). 
In the case of tube forming, 3D thermo-mechanical finite element models were also 
defined. According to the experimental section, the tube was 20 mm in outer diameter, 60 mm 
in length and 1 mm in wall thickness, and was discretized with a mapped mesh, as Figure 21 
shows. In particular, the tube had a fine mesh where the laser acted and in the surrounding 
zones, whereas a coarse mesh was implemented in the remaining parts. The number of 
element divisions along the tube thickness was constant and equal to 3. The total number of 
elements was 5568, the nodes were 7888. 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
265
 
Figure 20. Prediction of residual stresses: (a) Von Mises stress map (scan velocity = 8 mm/s, laser 
power = 200 W, time = 89 s); residual stress profile on the bottom surface of the sample at the scan 
velocity of 4 mm/s (b) and 8 mm/s (c). 
Also in this case the laser heating was modeled by means of a thermal load in terms of 
heat flux over a 3.8x1.2 mm2 rectangular spot as Figure 21 shows. The size of the elements of 
the finer mesh zone was inferred by the dimension of the spot, setting that the laser spot 
should cover a total of 8 elements (2 along the minimum axis and 4 along the maximum axis). 
The tube rotation was modeled by performing a spot revolution along the external 
circumference of the tube.  
A multi-step analysis was implemented: at each time step, the spot moved so as to 
overlap for a half the previous position. Therefore the resulting time step depended on the 
mesh size and the rotational speed, ranging from 0.05 to 0.1 s. Four laser scans were 
simulated for each condition, and a cooling time of 70 s was added at the end of each heating 
step. The time step in the cooling phase was fixed to 0.5 s for all the simulations. In order to 
calibrate the thermal part of the numerical model, laser heating tests were performed by 
keeping the tube in a standstill position and by acquiring the tube temperature in the point 
opposite to the laser spot along the external circumference (Figure 10b). Different powers 
from 40 W to 200 W were set for the laser beam. The tests lasted about 4 min and were used 
for the calibration procedure of the thermal model. As a result, the absorption coefficient was 
set to 0.74 and the heat transfer coefficient was 21 W/m2 K. Figure 22 shows the good 
agreement between experimental and numerical data at the end of the calibration procedure.  
Numerical solutions were obtained for the power of 150 W and the rotational speeds of 
30, 36 and 60 deg/s. During experimentation, in such conditions the average tube temperature 
was sufficiently controlled during successive scans, thus reducing the cycle time. Due to the 
discussed numerical procedure, each solution run was divided into 800 steps with a small 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
266 
difference in the total time step of the heating phases. However, as the cooling phases were 
much higher in time, the total simulation time is similar for the three conditions (304 s at 30 
deg/s, 300 s at 36 deg/s and 292 s at 60 deg/s).  
Figure 23a shows the comparison between experimental and numerical results in terms of 
bending angle after the first 4 scans at the laser power of 150 W. A good agreement was 
found, showing the validity of the adopted calibration procedure. The effect of the rotational 
speed on the tube bending is reported in Figure 23b. Higher rotational speeds lead to lower 
bending angles. Under the laser exposure, the tube deforms downward, whereas in the 
subsequent cooling phase the tube deformation changes in direction and becomes stable. This 
mechanism is better shown in Figure 24 where the first two heating steps and the included 
cooling step are reported. At the beginning of the laser exposure, a sudden increase occurs 
due to the thermal expansion. The material starts to yield and in the subsequent cooling stage 
the thermal contraction leads to the tube bending. In the same figure, the displacement maps 
are shown at the beginning and the end of the first cooling step in the case of 150 W of laser 
power and 36 deg/s of rotational speed. By decreasing the rotational speed, the slope of the 
first linear trend increases as well as the final bending angle. However, the tube displacement 
under heating is an order of magnitude lower than the displacement at the end of the 
subsequent cooling stage.  
The tube deformation due to laser heating is complex as Figure 25 suggests. In this 
figure, the tube ovalization is reported as a function of time for the three rotational speeds. In 
tube forming, dimensional accuracy is the main requirement, therefore the problem of the 
tube ovalization is a key factor for the successful application of this technology. The measure 
of the tube ovalization is experimentally complex due to the uncertainty in the extraction of 
the tube cross section. Numerical modeling would help but a proper model calibration is 
necessary. The ovalization was evaluated by means of the normalized difference between the 
two orthogonal internal diameters according to the formula shown in the figure. At 30 and 36 
deg/s, the ovalization occurs by increasing the vertical diameter whereas the horizontal 
diameter increases at 60 deg/s. This mismatch is probably dependent on geometrical 
parameters such as the tube diameter and thickness. Generally, by increasing the laser scans, 
the tube flattens more and more, and higher ovalizations are observed at lower rotational 
speeds. An oscillation in the ovalization curve is present during each heating step due to the 
discussed deformation mechanism. Figure 26 shows the detail of the first heating step: the 
section of the tube in the case of the maximum and minimum ovalization is also reported at 
36 deg/s so as to highlight that the ovalization oscillation depends on the thermal dilatation 
provided by the laser spot. When this local effect ends, the ovalization curve starts to increase 
up to a plateau. Plateau values are reported in Figure 25 and a very high difference was found 
by changing the rotational speed. However, it is not correct to conclude that the higher 
rotational speed has to be preferred to reduce ovalization. In fact, Figure 27 reports the 
calculated ovalizations as a function of the bending angle. By studying the curve trends, it is 
appreciable that a given value of the bending angle would be obtained with higher 
ovalizations if a higher rotational speed is used. A maximum in the curve at 60 deg/s is 
observed and it is reasonable to assess that the thermal contribution of the first 4 heating steps 
is too low to generate a significant tube deformation.  
 
 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
267
 
Figure 21. Image of the tube mapped mesh. 
 
Figure 22. Comparison between numerical and experimental data at the end of the calibration procedure 
of the thermal model for tube bending. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
268 
 
Figure 23. Comparison between experimental and numerical results (a) and numerical prediction of 
bending angle variation over time (b). 
 
Figure 24. Numerical prediction of the bending angle in the first process stages and related 
displacement maps. 
In order to simulate the forming process of the slotted tubes, the discussed discrete model 
of the tube has to be changed. Figure 28 shows the case of one of the slotted tubes depicted in 
Figure 13. The tube geometry was divided into 3 parts for discretizing. The internal part, 
where the spot acted, was mapped meshed with a fine mesh. Also the two external parts were 
mapped meshed but with a coarse mesh. The number of element divisions along the tube 
thickness was left equal to 3 in each part of the tube. The tube rotation was modeled by 
performing a spot revolution along the portion of the external circumference delimitated by 
the slot boundaries (about 56°). At each time step, the spot moved so as to overlaps for a half 
the previous position. Fixing the rotational speed to 0.628 rad/s, the resulting time step 
depended only on the mesh size and was nearly 0.085 s. After each laser heating step, a 
cooling step of 80 s was simulated. Ten heating-cooling cycles were performed. At the end of 
the simulation, the radial displacement of a reference node (Figure 28) was evaluated.  

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
269
 
Figure 25. Numerical prediction of the tube ovalization. 
 
Figure 26. Numerical prediction of the tube ovalization at the beginning of the laser process. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
270 
 
Figure 27. Tube ovalization as a function of the bending angle (numerical results). 
 
Figure 28. FE model for laser forming of slotted tubes. 
Figures 29a and 29b show the results of the numerical simulation in terms of radial 
displacement of the reference node as a function of time for 1 and 10 scans respectively. As 
Figure 29a shows, at the beginning of the laser exposure, a sudden increase occurs due to the 
thermal expansion up to a maximum (point 1). In this case the laser path is too short and the 
constraining effect of the surrounding material determines this deformation. Subsequently, the 
radial displacement decreases down to a minimum (point 2). In fact after 1 s, the laser path is 
sufficiently longer than the spot size (Figure 30). The tongue deforms entering the tube wall 
and the minimum displacement is negative. As the thermal strains have the same gradient of 
the temperature, the maximum is on the side of the spot and the tongue bends in the opposite 
direction. But in this condition, due to the very high temperature, the material starts to yield in 
the laser processed zone. When the laser spot is sufficiently far from the early processed zone, 
the material starts to cool. However, due to the previous yielding, the tongue cannot return in 
the initial configuration but it starts to bend in the opposite direction. Figure 29b shows the 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
271
effect of the successive superimposed scans. At the beginning of each step, the same 
mechanism of Figure 29a is repeated. In particular the relative minimum is always clearly 
visible. After 800 s of laser processing, over 1.8 mm of total radial displacement is achieved 
(point 3). 
In Figure 31 three displacement maps are reported in correspondence of the above 
mentioned points. For a better understanding, maps 1 and 2 are shown with a scale factor of 
10, map 3 is in true scale. It is evident the complex forming mechanism that leads the tongue 
to invert twice the bending direction. The numerical simulation was validated by the 
experimental test on sample (b) of Figure 13. After laser processing, the formed surface of 
this sheet was analyzed by means of a 3D surface profiling system (Taylor Hobson Talysurf 
CLI) to acquire the profile of the bent tongue. It was measured a maximum radial 
displacement of about 2 mm, according to the result of Figure 31.  
Numerical modeling was also used to evaluate the effect of the tube diameter on the 
bending behavior of the tongue. In this case, the rotational speed was fixed at 1.257 rad/s 
(72°/s) for the tube with a diameter of 10 mm and at 0.628 rad/s (36°/s) for the tube with a 
diameter of 20 mm, according to the experimental section (Figure 14). Therefore, the rim 
speed of the laser spot was equal for both tubes. At the end of the simulation, the radial 
displacement of the reference node (Figure 32) was evaluated, as well as the radial 
displacement of the nodes in the middle of the tongue, on the external surface, so as to have 
the profile of the formed tube. In order to make a comparison between experimental and 
numerical data, the formed surfaces of the tubes of Figure 14b were analyzed by means of the 
3D surface profiling and the experimental profiles were filtered because the outline was of 
interest instead of the roughness profile.  
Figure 33a shows the results of the thermal analysis in terms of temperature map, after 
0.4 s and 0.98 s for the small and the big tube, respectively. This time corresponds 
approximately to 5/6 of the first laser scan completion. The larger tube reaches the maximum 
value of temperature, because in this case the pre-heating effect is more pronounced due to a 
longer laser path, with respect to the small tube. In both cases, the longitudinal cuts of the slot 
limit the heat transfer along the tube circumference and the tongue starts to behave like a 
plate.  
 
 
Figure 29. Radial displacement of the reference node during the first scan (a) and during 10 scans (b). 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
272 
 
Figure 30. Temperature map after 1 s (point 2). 
 
Figure 31. Radial displacement maps (section view) at three different time steps. 
Figure 33b shows the radial displacement of the reference node up to 10 scans. It is 
evident that a higher displacement is generated in the big tube and this difference is 
dependent on the tongue transverse dimension. The bending curves of Figure 33b are 
qualitatively similar but actually the tubes exhibit a different behavior during deformation. By 
increasing the laser scans, the radial displacement of the tongue uniformly increases in both 
cases. Figures 34a and 34b show the details of the first and the last scan. For the big tube, the 
mechanism is the same already discussed for Figure 29a. For the small tube, the first sudden 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
273
increment in the radial displacement is not present and the tongue immediately starts to enter 
the tube wall. It is interesting to observe that this different behavior was observed for all the 
10 cycles. In fact, Figure 34b refers to the last scan and the numerical curves are very similar 
to the curves of Figure 34a. Evidently, for the small tube, the size of the tongue is too small 
and the constraining effect of the surrounding material at the beginning of the laser path is 
less important.  
The radial displacement maps at the end of simulation are shown in Figure 35a in a true 
scale section view. The tongue deformation is very similar to the metal sheet case even if the 
tube surface is cylindrical and not flat. The analogy with the laser plate bending case is also 
confirmed by Figure 33b where a linear dependence of the bending angle on the number of 
laser scans is predictable.  
In Figure 35b a comparison between the profiles from experimentation and numerical 
simulation is given. The final agreement between experimental and numerical data is very good 
for both tubes. The unprocessed part of the tongue remains unaltered with the shape of the initial 
cylindrical surface and this occurrence resulted from both experimental and numerical analyses. 
 
 
Figure 32. FE models for laser forming of the slotted tubes with different size. 
 
Figure 33. Temperature maps at 5/6 of the first laser scan completion (a) and radial displacement of the 
reference nodes during 10 scans (b). 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
274 
 
Figure 34. Radial displacement of the reference nodes during the first scan (a) and the last scan (b). 
 
Figure 35. Radial displacement maps (section view) at the end of simulation in true scale, and 
comparison between the profiles from experimentation and numerical simulation. 
 
MATERIAL ANALYSIS 
 
Depending on the process parameters and the laser-material interaction, different effects 
may be observed on the material: from residual stresses to material annealing. Numerical 
modeling is mandatory to understand the relationship between process parameters and results 
in laser forming. However, even if good results are generally obtained in terms of prediction 
of bending angle, the quality of the results may be poor in terms of residual stresses. If 
multiple scans are carried out, the material annealing cannot be neglected. Numerical 
simulation may predict the final shape of the laser bent part, but it could be erroneous in the 
residual stress evaluation. Nevertheless, in order to design a forming process, residual stresses 
are fundamental and a strain-based approach could be dangerous. Therefore, material analysis 
is an important step in the study of the laser forming technology. 
Residual stresses can be measured by means of X-ray analysis in terms of first and 
second order stress, namely σI and σII. In fact, X-ray diffraction method is a very useful 
technique to detect the changes in lattice of the superficial layer subjected to different damage 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
275
processes. These changes could be of different nature, such as type of phase, crystalline 
lattice constants, dimension of mosaic blocks, level of the first and second order stresses, 
degree of texture, thickness of superficial layer, cohesion forces between atoms, level of 
dislocation density. In this study, the X-ray diffractograms were carried out by means of a 
DRON 3 diffractometer equipped with a graphite crystal monochromator. The test was 
performed on an un-processed metal sheet and 3 bent sheets, which were processed for 6 
passes at the scan velocity of 8 mm/s at different laser power (100, 150 and 200 W). The 
scans (λ = 1.541 Ǻ) were carried out in the angular domain 2θ where the typical diffraction of 
the γ-Fe phase of the stainless steel is visible. The X-ray measures on the treated samples 
were taken on the convex exterior surface, in the laser beam action zone 
The first and second order of residual stress may be directly extracted from the 
diffractograms. In particular, the first order stress σI is given by: 
 
 
(
) θ
θ
υ
σ
Δ
=
S
I
E cot
 
(7) 
 
where: 
 
 
In
S
θ
θ
θ
−
=
Δ
 
(8) 
 
with θS the diffraction angle of the peak measured on the stressed sample, and θIn the value of 
the initial un-processed sample: 
The second order stress σII was extracted by the physical width of the diffraction line 
(311), namely β311. The value of σII is given by: 
 
 
311
η
υ
σ
E
II =
 
(9) 
 
where: 
 
 
311
311
311
311
tan
4
θ
β
η
=
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛Δ
=
d
d
 
(10) 
 
and: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
2
311
2
311
311
St
S
β
β
β
−
=
 
(11) 
 
with θ311 the diffraction angle of the line (311), (β311)S the corresponding width for the 
stressed sample, and (β311)St the same value for a standard sample. 
In Figure 36 the results of the X-ray analyses are reported. The original diffractograms 
are shown together with the related bending angle of the samples. In the following Figure 37 
a typical microstructure of a bent sample is shown in the laser heated zone (after 6 passes at 
the scan velocity of 8 mm/s and the laser power of 200 W). The annealing twins are visible; 
with the laser power increasing, the density of annealing twins increases, as well as the depth 
of their penetration. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
276 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
Laser power [W]
Bending angle [deg]
Number of passes =6
Scan rate =  8 mm/s
)
Intensity
2 Theta
Intensity
2 Theta
Intensity
2 Theta
Intensity
2 Theta
Intensity
Intensity 
Intensity 
Intensity 
θ
2
θ
2
θ
2
θ
2
 
Figure 36. X-ray analyses of un-processed and processed samples. 
In Figure 38 the residual stresses experimentally measured (Figure 36) and extracted by 
equations (7) and (9) are reported. The first order stress, σI, measured on the convex exterior 
surface of the sample has a non-linear variation. By increasing the laser power from 100 to 
150 W, σI decreases, because of the thermal effect which is more pronounced than the 
mechanical effect. By increasing the laser power up to 200 W, σI increases, which means that 
the mechanical effect becomes dominant. The second order stress σII has a stabilization 
tendency, along with the laser power increasing, which means that the two effects, 
mechanical and thermal, are mutually compensated. The thermal effect of the laser heating on 
the material annealing is also shown by the microstructure analysis (Figure 37) as annealing 
twins are observed in the processed zones of the samples.  
In order to measure the effect of the laser bending process, instrumented macro-
indentation can be also used. A double indentation is performed on sheets by means of two 
co-axial small diameter flat indenters made of WC [47]. A very small indentation is left on 
the sheet, so as to consider this technique a non destructive one, particularly suitable for on-
line application. Double indentation tests were carried out on the 1.2 mm thick bent sheets, as 
shown in Figure 39a. Tests were performed by using a universal material testing machine 
(MTS Insight 5) opportunely equipped with two indenter holders (upper and lower). Two co-
axial flat indenters, 1 mm in diameter, made of WC, were set in the opposite holders. During 
the test, the applied load was acquired as a function of the penetration depth. 
 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
277
 
Figure 37. The microstructure of a laser bent sheet metal. 
 
Figure 38. First and second order residual stress (scan velocity = 8 mm/s, number of passes = 6). 
Indentations were performed at 0.10 mm/min up to a maximum penetration depth of 0.15 
mm, with a pre-load of 50 N. On each side of the bended sheet, 6 indentations were performed 
at fixed positions, following the grid depicted in Figure 39b. Lower distances form the bending 
line were not possible due to sample curvature. The value of the indentation load at a fixed 
penetration depth (0.04 mm) was extracted from each indentation test and used to make a 
comparison. Five double indentation tests were also performed on an un-processed specimen in 
the same test conditions. The effect of laser processing on material properties is clearly visible 
in Figure 39c: the indentation curves are very similar for the un-processed sample and a position 
far from the laser heated zone, whereas a high difference is present in a position near the 
bending line. Figure 40 shows the average indentation load at 0.04 mm as a function of the 
distance from the bending line. The indentation load is lower near the bending line, and rapidly 
approaches the value of the un-processed sample by increasing the distance from the laser 
processed zone. With an increase of the laser power or the number of passes, the indentation 
load decreases. Evidently the material annealing related to the laser heating is prevalent in 
comparison with the material hardening related to the sample plastic deformation.  

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
278 
 
Figure 39. Double indentation tests on laser bent sheets: a) experimental setup; b) indentation grid; c) 
example of indentation curves. 
 
Figure 40. Average indentation load of laser bent sheets. 
 
Figure 41. Indentation load maps of bent sheet metals. 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
279
 
Figure 42. Numerical residual stress (after 1 scan). 
The effect of the laser process parameters on the indentation load is more clearly visible 
in the maps of Figure 41. The load values, extracted from each samples, were arranged in a 
continuous map by using the Kringing correlation method. For a comparison, Figure 42 
shows the numerical prediction of residual stresses at 100 and 150 W after 1 scan. By 
considering that higher residual stresses are generally related to lower indentation loads, the 
maps of Figures 41 and 42 should be comparable. However it is evident that only a qualitative 
analogy may be discussed as the reduction of the indentation load for the processed samples 
depend mainly on the material annealing (which is not modeled). The effect of the residual 
stress is not absent but probably secondary. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Laser bending of steel parts is a very attractive process for prototyping or small 
production runs but the bending mechanism is quite complex. It is particularly critical to 
evaluate the combined effect of geometrical and process parameters, and numerical modeling 
is the only method to design a reliable process. Unfortunately, high processing times are 
necessary. In fact, high bending efficiencies are achieved if the material temperature is low 
but successive scans result in increasing the average part temperature. The temperature 
increase of the metal part during time may be detrimental also for the final process accuracy. 
For example, in tube bending the ovalization is strongly dependent on the rotational speed 
and lower rotational speeds should be preferred to reduce the tube flattening but a limit in the 
reduction of the rotational speed is given by the increase of the average tube temperature 
which may lead to surface melting or material modifications (e.g. softening).  
Experimental results showed that a diode laser can be efficiently used to form sheets and 
tubes. This way, the typical advantages of the laser forming process may be added to the 
advantages of using diode lasers. Under such conditions, a low power is sufficient to have a 
good forming efficiency in the case of thin parts. Sheet metals and tubes may be formed in 
complex shapes; tongues or flares can be made as well and successfully used for tube 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
280 
assembling or joining. A HPDL could be used also to weld steel parts after forming, even if 
only by a conduction process. In fact, the ability of diode lasers in performing new processes 
is very important for industrial applications.  
Numerical modeling helps in defining the correct forming strategy. Apart from line 
bending, it is not possible to predict the result of a forming operation without using any 
numerical modeling procedure. This is a strong limit as many enterprises prefer to use easier 
manufacturing processes, therefore laser forming is still confined in research laboratories. The 
development of simulation softwares for laser forming should overcome this problem but the 
state of the art of the knowledge is not yet sufficient to achieve this task.  
 
 
NOMENCLATURE 
 
P 
= Laser power [W] 
v 
= Laser scanning rate [mm/s] 
n 
= Number of laser passes 
t 
= Sheet thickness [mm] 
γS 
= Bending angle after a single laser pass [rad] 
γT 
= Total bending angle at the end of all the laser passes [rad] 
β 
= Absorption coefficient 
α 
= Linear thermal expansion coefficient [K-1] 
λ 
= Thermal diffusivity [m2/s] 
k 
= Thermal conductivity [W/m K] 
r 
= Spot radius [mm] 
NTh1 = First thermal number for laser forming 
NTh2 = Second thermal number for laser forming 
ΔT 
= Reference temperature interval 
E 
= Elastic modulus 
ν 
= Poisson’s ratio 
σI 
= 
First order of residual stress 
σII 
= 
Second order of residual stress 
θ 
= Diffraction angle of a X-ray peak 
βijk = Physical width of the diffraction line (ijk) 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Shi, Y; Yao, Z; Shen, H; Hu, J. Int J Mach Tools Manuf, 2006, vol 46, 1689-1697. 
[2] 
Magee, J; Sidhu, J; Cooke, RL. Opt Laser Eng, 2000, vol 34, 339-353. 
[3] 
Laeng, J; Stewart, JG; Liou, FW. Int J Prod Res, 2000, vol 38, 3973-3996. 
[4] 
Lawrence, J; Schimdt, MJJ; Li, L. Int J Mach Tool Manu, 2001, vol 41, 967-977. 
[5] 
Li, W; Yao, L. Int J Adv Manuf Tech, 2001, vol 17, 196-203. 
[6] 
Lee, KC; Lin, J. Opt Laser Technol, 2002, vol 34, 639-648. 
[7] 
Dearden, G; Edwardson, SP. J Opt A-Pure Appl Opt, 2003, vol 5, 8-15. 
[8] 
Geiger, M; Merklein, M; Pitz, M. J Mater Process Tech, 2004, vol 151, 3-11. 

Diode Laser Forming of Steel Parts 
281
[9] 
Zhang, L; Michaleris, P. Finite Elem Anal Des, 2004, vol 40, 383-405. 
[10] Hsieh, H.-S; Lin, J. Opt Laser Technol, 2004, vol 36, 431-439. 
[11] McBride, R; Bardin, F; Gross, M; Hand, DP; Jones, JDC; Moore, AJ. J Phys D Appl 
Phys, 2005, vol 38, 4027-4036. 
[12] Yanjin, G; Sheng, S; Guoqun, Z; Yiguo, L. J Mater Process Tech, 2005, vol 167, 124-
131. 
[13] Zhang, J; Pirzada, D; Chu, CC; Cheng, GJ. J Manuf Sci Eng, 2005, vol 127, 157-164. 
[14] Edwardson, SP; Abed, E; Bartkowiak, K; Dearden, G; Watkins, K.G. J Phys D Appl 
Phys, 2006, vol. 39, 382-389. 
[15] Costa Santos, E; Shiomi, M; Osakada, K; Laoui, T. Int J Mach Tool Manu, 2006, vol 
46, 1459-1468. 
[16] Shi, Y.J; Shen, H; Yao, ZQ; Hu, J. Acta Metall Sin, 2006, vol 19, 144-150. 
[17] Shi, Y; Shen, H; Yao, Z; Hu, J; Xia, L. Comp Mater Sci, 2006, vol 37, 323-327. 
[18] Shen, H; Shi, Y; Yao, Z; Hu, J. Comp Mater Sci, 2006, vol 37, 593-598. 
[19] Shen, H; Shi, Y; Yao, Z; Proc IME C J Mech Eng Sci, 2006, vol 220, 507-511. 
[20] Shen, H; Shi, YJ; Yao, ZQ; Hu, J. Mater Sci Technol, 2006, vol 22, 981-986. 
[21] Liu, FR; Chan, KC; Tang, CY. J Laser Appl, 2006, vol 18, 56-64. 
[22] Cheng, P; Fan, Y; Zhang, J; Yao, Y.L; Mika, D.P; Zhang, W; Graham, M; Marte, J; 
Jones, M. J Manuf Sci Eng, 2006, vol 128, 634-641. 
[23] Cheng, P; Fan, Y; Zhang, J; Yao, Y.L; Mika, D.P; Zhang, W; Graham, M; Marte, J; 
Jones, M. J Manuf Sci Eng, 2006, vol 128, 642-650. 
[24] Shen, H; Zhou, J; Shi, YJ; Yao, ZQ; Hu, J. Mater Sci Technol, 2007, vol 23, 483-486. 
[25] Shen, H; Zhou, J; Yao, ZQ. Proc IME C J Mech Eng Sci, 2007, vol 221, 993-997. 
[26] Korsunsky, AM; Vorster, WJJ; Zhang, SY; Topić, M; Venter, AM. Proc IME C J Mech 
Eng Sci, 2008, vol 222, 1635-1645. 
[27] Labeas, GN. J Mater Process Tech, 2008, vol 207, 248-257. 
[28] Li, W; Yao, YL. J Manuf Sci Eng, 2001, vol 123, 674-681. 
[29] Hao, N; Li, L. Appl Surf Sci, 2003, vols 208-209, 437-441. 
[30] Hao, N; Li, L. Appl Surf Sci, 2003, vols 208-209, 432-436. 
[31] Hsieh, HS; Lin, J. Opt Laser Technol, 2005, vol 37, 402-409. 
[32] Zhang, J; Cheng, P; Zhang, W; Graham, M; Jones, J; Jones, M; Yao, Y.L. J Manuf Sci 
Eng, 2006, vol 128, 20-33. 
[33] Safdar, S; Lin, L; Sheikh, MA; Liu, Z. Opt Laser Technol, 2007, vol 39, 1101-1110. 
[34] Li, L. Opt Laser Eng, 2000, vol 34, 231-253. 
[35] Bachmann, F. Appl Surf Sci, 2003, vols 208-209, 125-136. 
[36] Pashby, IR; Barnes, S; Bryden, BG. J Mater Process Tech, 2003, vol 139, 585-588. 
[37] Zhu, J; Li, L; Liu, Z. Appl Surf Sci, 2005, vol 247, 300-306. 
[38] Casamichele, L; Quadrini, F; Tagliaferri, V. J Manuf Sci Eng, 2007, vol 129, 868-873. 
[39] Guglielmotti, A; Quadrini, F; Squeo, EA; Tagliaferri, V. Proceedings of 
“Esaform2008”, Lyon, France, 23-25 April 2008. 
[40] Guglielmotti, A; Quadrini, F; Squeo, EA; Tagliaferri, V. Int J Mater Form, 2009, vol 2, 
107-111. 
[41] Gheorghies, C; Nicoara, D; Paunoiu, V; Quadrini, F; Santo, L; Squeo, E.A. Key Eng 
Mater, 2009, vols 410-411, 629-640. 
[42] Gorga, F; Quadrini, F; Squeo, EA; Tagliaferri, V. J Manuf Technol Res, 2009, vol 1, 
71-84. 

A. Guglielmotti, F. Quadrini, E. A. Squeo et al. 
282 
[43] Quadrini, F; Squeo, EA; Tagliaferri, V. Proceedings of Esaform 2009, Enschede, The 
Netherlands, 2009, 27-29 April. 
[44] Vollertsen, F. Proceedings of the LANE’1994, 94, vol 1, 345-359. 
[45] Duley, 1983, Laser processing and analysis of Materials, Plenum Press, New York. 
[46] Chen, J; Young, B. Eng Struct, 2006, vol 28, 229-239. 
[47] Quadrini, F; Santo, L; Squeo, EA. Key Eng Mater, 2007, vol 344, 127-133. 
 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 283-311  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
LASERS AND LAMPS WITH EXCITATION BY 
BACKGROUND-ELECTRON MULTIPLICATION WAVE 
 
It is devoted to S.I. Yakovlenko’s memory 
 
A. M. Boichenko  
Head of Kinetic Department A.M. Prokhorov General Physics Institute  
Vavilov street, 38, 119991, Moscow, Russia. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
It was shown earlier that the ionisation propagation in a gas at about the atmospheric 
pressure may proceed due to the multiplication of the existing electrons with a low 
background density rather than the transfer of electrons or photons. It is considered the 
feasibility of using the plasma produced in the afterglow of this background-electron 
multiplication wave for pumping plasma lasers (in particular, Penning neon laser and 
Xe*
2 excimer lasers) as well as excilamps.  
The Penning neon laser was studied in a Ne-H2 mixture excited by a transverse 
discharge. Theoretical modeling allowed the conclusion that the laser active medium was 
excited due to the BEMW passed through the discharge gap. Numerous attempts to pump 
Xe*
2 lasers by a gas discharge instead of a beam have not been successful. Simulations 
show that it is possible to achieve the laser effect at λ = 172 nm as well as to substantially 
improve the peak specific power of the spontaneous radiation of xenon lamps.  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Active media of plasma lasers represents recombination-nonequilibrum plasma produced 
by hard ionizer [1-9]. Widely known representative of such pumping is electron beam 
pumping. The possibility of new type of gaseous active media powerful pumping resulting to 
formation of recombination-nonequilibrum plasma is presented. First of all more interesting 
applications can be associated with laser pumping, especially Xe2
* laser pumping. Another 
one concerned with spontaneous emission of gases.  

A. M. Boichenko 
284 
It is known that beam-pumped lasers operating on photo-dissociation xenon transitions 
were the first-realised excimer lasers [10-13] (see also recent reviews [4, 14] and collection 
[6]). However, numerous attempts to pump Xe2
* lasers by a gas discharge instead of a beam 
have not been successful. Lasing by Kr2
* dimers in a discharge has been reported [15] and 
amplification by Ar2
* has been observed [16]. However, so far these results have not been 
reproduced by other scientific groups. The difficulty consists primarily in the high 
requirements imposed on the specific pump power. The matter is that the temperature 
increase to several tenths of an electron-volt leads to the quenching of lasing due to the 
increase of absorption in photoassociation reactions (for more details, see [4, 6, 8]). As for the 
ordinary discharge, for a high energy input it overheats the gas. There are grounds to believe 
that the pumping of rare-gas dimers can be achieved by using the recently realised (see [17-
20]) volume nanosecond discharges with a subnanosecond rise time.  
In Penning plasma lasers, an inverted population occurs in recombining plasma due to 
depopulation of the lower level by Penning reactions [1, 3, 6, 21]. Such lasers with neon 
mixtures are implemented for both beam pumping and pumping in discharge afterglow [6, 
21]. In [22-25] Penning neon lasers were excited in the transverse discharge. The possibility 
of pumping the Penning Ne-H2 laser by a multiplication wave was proposed in [26]. The 
conditions of Penning plasma laser with pumping by a transverse discharge in the cylinder-
knife electrode system [27, 28] are examined. 
In the present overview the concept of background-electron multiplication wave1 
(BEMW) is described. It is shown that BEMW pumping of a Penning plasma laser at the 
wavelength λ = 585.3 nm Ne-H2 mixture [27, 28] in the BEMW afterglow is realized. Then 
the feasibility of pumping Xe2
* laser by BEMW is discussed. Finally, the excilamp pumping 
by BEMW is analysed. 
 
 
2. BACKGROUND-ELECTRON MULTIPLICATION WAVE 
 
In [17, 19, 29-38] attention was drawn to the fact that the ionisation in a gas at about the 
atmospheric pressure can propagate due to multiplication of the existing electrons with a low 
background density instead of the transfer of electrons or photons. Simply stated, the 
difference in electron multiplication times at different points in space, which arises from the 
nonuniformity of the field intensity magnitude, may give rise to the motion of ionisation front 
not related directly to electron transfer. The preliminary background ionisation may be 
provided by a small number of runaway electrons as well as by the natural background of 
radioactivity and cosmic radiation. The background formation is comprehensively discussed 
in [30].  
Such a BEMW [19, 29-32, 36-40] arises at conducting irregularities, for instance, near a 
conducting surface with small radius of curvature, where an electric field is concentrated. Its 
front travels in the direction opposite to the gradient of the electric intensity modulus and its 
speed is proportional to the gas density. In this case, the direction of BEMW propagation is 
independent of the direction of the electric field. This allowed abandoning the photon 
hypothesis of streamer formation [41-43] and making an assumption that both anode- and 
                                                           
1 We use the term 'multiplication wave' to distinguish this process from the commonly considered ionisation wave 
caused by transfer processes (electron drift and electron heat transfer). 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
285
cathode-directed streamers are a multiplication wave [29, 30], the streamer arising from the 
instability of the multiplication wave front [31]. 
The BEMW is important to understand many problems of gas discharge physics. For 
example, the generation mechanism of high-power subnanosecond beams in atmospheric-
pressure gases under optimal conditions can be understood namely in the model of BEMW 
propagation in a dense gas [17, 44-49]. As indicated by experiments, when the rise time of the 
high-voltage pulse (of the order of one hundred kilovolts) is short enough (ranges into the 
subnanoseconds), the multiplication wave produces volume ionisation and the streamer has 
no time to develop. Fast prepulse electrons perform background ionization of gas and prepare 
BEMW propagation. The beam generation takes place when the multiplication wave 
approaches the anode and the nonlocal runaway-electron criterion is fulfilled [17, 19, 33-35]. 
The existence of volume preionization by fast (including runaway) electrons is confirmed by 
observation of X-rays from the gas-filled volume [50, 51]. A theoretical analysis was 
performed in [52]. 
It was also shown that the spatial distribution of the plasma glow between a plane 
electrode and a spherical (as well as pointed) one occupied a substantial volume for a 
subnanosecond rise time of the high-voltage pulse [53, 50]. In this case, the geometry of glow 
regions is nearly the same on changing the sign of the supplied voltage, i.e. is independent of 
electrode polarity, which may only be attributed to the existence of the multiplication wave, 
which is independent of the sense of the field.  
Capacitive current. The BEMW discharge has one more distinctive feature. Even before 
the voltage reaches a maximum, the discharge current is detected with a very short delay 
(fractions of a nanosecond) with respect to the time of high voltage applying to the gap [6, 17, 
27, 28, 34]. Usually, when a sharp-edge voltage pulse is applied, there is an overvoltage peak 
even if external preionization is used; only then a current arises and the voltage decreases. 
The point is that the gas-discharge gap capacitance changes when the multiplication 
wavefront moves, which causes a change in the electrode charge. Indeed, if plane capacitor 
plates being initially at a distance d are under a voltage U and approach each other with a 
velocity ufr, the current density on them is given by 
 
 
(
)
2
0
/
1
)
(
2
fr
fr
t
j
t
u
d
U
dt
d
j
τ
−
=
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
π
=
,  j0 = U/(2πdτfr),  τfr = d/ufr  
 (1) 
 
As an example, setting U = l00 kV, d = 1 cm, and τfr = 1 ns, we have j0 = 18 A/cm. This 
is in qualitative agreement with measurements. 
Note that the above conception of volume-discharge and high-current electron-beam 
production in a dense gas [17, 33, 34] was called into question in [54], where it was stated 
that the theory is incorrect from all aspects and all the experiments are doubtful. However, in 
[55, 56] it was shown that the key critical concepts of [54] are erroneous. 
Experimental aspects of BEMW realizations outlined in [19, 20, 47, 49]. Thus, the 
volume discharges on the basis of background-electron multiplication wave at about an 
atmospheric pressure have been realised. There is good reason to consider the prospect of 
using them for pumping lasers and high-pressure lamps. 
 

A. M. Boichenko 
286 
Recombining plasma 
Front velocity, ufr 
                Field screening layer, ~ rD 
Symmetry axis   
Background multiplication layer, ~1/αi 
Ingomogeneity on the 
cathode  
Electron cooling region 
 
Figure 1. Qualitative view of the discharge based on the background multiplication wave. 
 
3. MULTIPLICATION WAVE AND PLASMA LASERS 
 
There are many discharge types: glow, arc, corona, spark discharges, etc. A wealth of 
papers, reviews, and books are devoted to them [41, 57-60]. However, a pulsed discharge, 
which is underlain by the BEMW in a nonuniform field, until now has not been considered as 
a separate form of discharge. At the same time, it possesses several distinguishing features 
[20, 61].  
It turns out that the BEMW is also interesting in relation to the problems of active media 
excitation. BEMW-based discharges result in the formation of intensely recombining plasma. 
In recent studies [18-20, 26-28, 36, 37], some specific features of discharges with BEMW 
were considered. It was shown that plasma formed in afterglow of such discharges is 
overcooled in the degree of ionisation and promising to obtain lasing on transitions on which 
lasing in a dense gas was previously achieved with electron-beam pumping and in pulsed 
discharge afterglow [1-3, 5, 6, 8, 21] (i.e., in recombination-nonequilibrium plasma of plasma 
lasers). In particular, such plasma is promising also for pumping lasers and lamps with high 
specific power of radiation. 
In BEMW discharge, kinetic processes take place in the following way. Electrons are 
overheated at the front of multiplication wave. They accelerate in the electric field and ionise 
the gas. The plasma screens the field behind the multiplication wave front, with the effect that 
the field-induced heating of electrons is sharply decreased. Electrons begin to cool down due 
to collisions with gas atoms (Figure 1). Since the degree of ionisation is not high for a high 
gas density, the electrons are cooled down to a low temperature limited only by 
recombination heating. In many respects the situation is similar to that which takes place 
when a dense gas is pumped by a pulsed electron beam. These questions are considered in 
sufficient detail in the theory of plasma lasers [1- 3, 5, 6, 8, 21].  
The electron density Ne behind the multiplication wave can be estimated from the 
expression 
 
 
E = 2πerDNe,  
 
where E is the electric field intensity; rD = (Te/4πe2Ne)1/2 is the Debye radius; e is the 
electron charge; and Te is the electron temperature. For instance, for E ~ 105 V/cm and Te ~ 1 
eV we have Ne = E2/(πTe) ~ 2⋅1016 cm–3. Close values result from calculations of the 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
287
multiplication wave propagation between a wire and a cylinder in the atmosphere of xenon [6, 
17, 33, 34, 62], which were made on the basis of the diffusion-drift model for xenon 
elaborated in [63]. 
Note that producing a plasma of such density with the use of an electron-beam pump 
requires highly intense electron beams with a current density j ~ 100 kA/cm2. Lasing by Xe2
* 
excimers was obtained even for j ~ 100 A/cm2. 
Electrons are cooled due to inelastic and elastic collisions. The time taken to cool down 
to a temperature Te ~ 0.1 eV in a helium atmosphere is equal to ~ 3 ns and in the xenon 
atmosphere to ~ 80 ns (for more details, see below the results of calculations). When 
employing xenon as the active laser medium it is therefore expedient to add helium in order to 
speed up the cooling and intensify recombination. However, the main reason for the proposed 
dilution of xenon by helium is that a uniform discharge in xenon is more difficult to realise. 
The dimensions of the overcooled plasma region are controlled by the velocity of the 
multiplication wave. According to calculations by analytical formulas proposed in [29, 30], to 
simulations in the framework of the diffusion-drift model [6, 17, 33, 34, 62], and 
experimental data [6, 17], for a voltage of ~ 100 kV the multiplication wave traverses a 
distance d ~ 1 cm in less than 1 ns [38]. Therefore, one would expect a transverse dimension 
of the active medium of about 1 cm. 
From the aforesaid it follows that the afterglow plasma of background-electron 
multiplication wave holds promise for obtaining lasing by those transitions which were 
observed to lase in a dense gas pumped by an electron beam and in the afterglow of a pulsed 
discharge [6]: 
 
– 
by transitions of atomic xenon (this was realised in [64]); 
–  by transitions of atomic neon in Penning mixtures with hydrogen (this was realised in 
[27, 28]) and argon; 
– 
by transitions of metal ions (cadmium, zinc, strontium, calcium) mixed with dense 
rare gases; 
– 
by transitions of exciplex molecules (KrF, XeCl, etc.); 
 
by transitions of rare-gas dimers (Xe2 , Kr2 , Ar2). 
 
Note at the same time that gas-discharge lasers operating on the gas-plasma transition 
(i.e. in ionisation-non-equilibrium plasma, in particular, self-terminating lasers), in contrast to 
plasma lasers operating on the plasma-gas transition (i.e. in recombination-nonequilibrium 
plasma, see [1-3, 5, 6, 8, 21] for more details), are less promising for pumping by the 
discharge based on the multiplication wave. This is also indirectly confirmed by experimental 
results. In [64], the plasma laser on xenon transitions in BEMW discharge afterglow was 
initiated. However, an attempt to initiate the nitrogen laser using the discharge with 
multiplication was unsuccessful [64]. 
 
 
4. LAMPS WITH VOLUME BEMW DISCHARGE EXCITATION  
 
The BEMW is associated with the development of efficient excilamps based on exciplex 
molecule radiation [65-67]. As is known, large efficiencies (over 50%) are achieved in Xe2
* 

A. M. Boichenko 
288 
lamps based on barrier discharges on cathodes with small radius of curvature (e.g., shaped as 
wires) [68]; currently, such lamps are actively studied [65-72]. Simulation of such excilamps 
[63, 73, 74] allows the conclusion that volume ionization in them occurs exactly due to 
BEMW. Only after BEMW passing from a wire to the dielectric barrier, the discharge gap is 
shorted and quasi-steady charge accumulation on the barrier occurs [37, 63]. 
In these lamps, a rather long pump pulse duration (~ 1 μs) and not too high electrode 
voltage (~ 2-5 kV) are used; therefore, they operate at not too high pressures, p = 100-200 
Torr. To develop excilamps with high specific power and to achieve lasing, it is reasonable to 
use shorter and higher-voltage pulses at about atmospheric and higher pressures. 
 
 
5. PENNING PLASMA LASER AT THE WAVELENGTH λ = 585.3 NM IN A 
NE-H2 MIXTURE 
 
5.1. Laser Design and Measurement Techniques 
 
The experiments were performed [27, 28] using a laser excited by a transverse discharge 
with a simple system of preionization from spark gaps, whose design is close to that 
described in [75]. The setup allowed space discharge formation in various gas mixtures at 
elevated pressures. The laser scheme is shown in Figure 2. The pump generator included main 
and auxiliary circuits. The main circuit was formed by the capacitive storage C0, inductance 
L0, and spark gap SW0. The auxiliary circuit was intended for preliminary forward pumping of 
SOS diodes D and included the capacitor CDr, spark switch SWDr, and inductance LDr. Ten 
SOS-50-2 diodes were used in the laser, which were connected in parallel to peaking 
capacitors C1. The discharge gap was preionized by radiation of spark gaps placed on both 
sides from the anode, which were actuated during pulsed charging of peaking capacitors C1. 
The generator could operate in the mode with inductive energy storage or as an ordinary 
capacitive generator. In the latter case, the capacitor CDr was not used. The discharge current 
duration under various operating conditions of the generator was 150-250 ns.  
 
 
 
I0 
Id 
CDr
LDr
РDr 
L0 
C0 
C1 
L2 
P0 
U0 
Rпл 
L1 
I1 
D 
ID 
UDr
 
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup: SW0 and SWDr are spark gaps, C0 = 70 nF is the 
primary capacitive storage, C1 = 3.6 nF are peaking capacitors, CDr = 10 nF is the capacitor for forward 
pumping of SOS diodes D, L0 = 24.5 nH, L1 = 2 nH, L2 = 11 nH, LDr = 3.13 μH are circuit inductances, 
U0 and UDr are charging voltages, I0, I1, Id are circuit currents, and Rd is the discharge resistance.  

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
289
Cylindrical and knife stainless steel electrodes were used in the laser. The interelectrode gap 
thickness is d = 2.5 cm, the laser active volume is 2.5×0.3×72 = 50 cm3. Discharge and lasing 
characteristics were studied in pure neon and Ne-H2 mixtures at a mixture pressure up to 0.5 atm. 
A plane aluminum mirror was used as a rear mirror. Mirrors with a dielectric coating with 
the reflectance R = 75% or 95% at λ = 585 nm or a quartz plate were placed at the cavity 
output. 
The pulse shape and radiant energy were measured in the far-field region by an FEK-
22SP vacuum photodiode. The discharge emission spectrum was measured using a StellarNet 
EPP2000-C25 spectrometer with a spectral resolution of 0.75 nm and a response function 
halfwidth of 1.5 nm. To provide the photodiode and spectrograph operation in the linear 
mode, radiation at their input was attenuated using a sequence of metal grids with known 
attenuation factors. 
In the experiments, the current Id through the discharge gap, the discharge current I0 of 
the capacitive storage, the current ID through SOS diodes, and the laser electrode voltage Ud 
were measured. Electrical signals were measured by TDS-220 or TDS-224 digital 
oscilloscopes. 
 
 
5.2. Experimental Results and Discussion 
 
In the Ne-H2 mixture, a single line with a wavelength of 585 nm was detected in the 
lasing spectrum. In pure neon, lasing on the green line (λ = 540 nm) was observed. This line 
appeared after a voltage drop on the laser gap only at a low discharge voltage, U0 ≤ 23 kV, 
and was localized farther from the knife electrode in discharge regions where the current 
density decreases. As the discharge voltage increased, the discharge current increased and 
lasing on λ = 540 nm discontinued. 
The maximum energies and powers were achieved at neon and hydrogen pressures of ~ 
150 and 15-21 Torr, respectively. As the hydrogen pressure increased to ~ 40 Torr, the lasing 
threshold was not reached at neon admixtures from 10 to 350 Torr. The laser beam aperture 
was usually 25×3mm2. The radiation power distribution over the spot was nonuniform. The 
radiation power increased in the region with a maximum current density near the knife 
electrode. In the gap formed by two cylindrical electrodes (the discharge aperture is 
40×20mm2), lasing was not achieved. The main experiments were performed in a mixture of 
Ne:H2 = 165:21 Torr. 
The use of the inductive storage instead of the capacitive storage allowed to increase the 
pulse radiation energy. The maximum lasing energy reached 50 μJ. The radiation energy also 
increased with the energy fraction transferred to the discharge circuit inductance of capacitor 
С0, which was controlled by the charging voltage of capacitor СDr (see Figure 2). 
Figure 3 shows the oscillograms of voltage pulses on the laser gap, discharge current, and 
lasing pulses under optimal conditions of excitation from generators with capacitive (a) and 
inductive (b) energy storages. The first voltage peak on the laser gap corresponds to exposure 
actuation, the discharge is formed at the instant of the second voltage maximum. In both 
cases, the laser pulse appears at the discharge current pulse end and consists of an intense 
peak with a duration of ~ 100 ns and a low-intensity tail lasting for 300 ns after the end of 
pumping. The inductive generator substantially increases the breakdown voltage of the laser 

A. M. Boichenko 
290 
gap and the discharge current rise rate, but reduces the pump pulse duration, which is 
especially pronounced as charging voltages of capacitors С0 and СDr increase. These factors 
can improve discharge ignition conditions in the gap with a sharply nonuniform electric field, 
which results in an increase in the laser beam energy (power) when using the generator with 
inductive energy storage. 
The maximum radiation power of laser beam pulses was achieved using a quartz plate as 
output mirrors. At a maximum discharge voltage U0 = 36 kV, the radiation power reached 1.1 
kW. An increase in the output mirror reflectance to 75% decreases the peak radiation power 
by about half; however, the radiation pulse duration significantly increased. Due to this, the 
radiation pulse energy slightly increased. 
 
0,0
50,0
100,0
150,0
200,0
250,0
0
10
20
30
40
0,0
0,5
1,0
 
Plas
Id
U d
Plas, rel.un.
Id, kA, Ud, kV
t, ns
a
 
 
 
0,0
50,0
100,0
150,0
200,0
250,0
0
10
20
30
40
0,0
0,5
1,0
Id
Ud
Plas
Plas, rel.un.
Id, kA, Ud, kV
t, ns
b
 
 
Figure 3. Oscillograms of the voltage at the laser gap, the discharge current, and the temporal shape of 
the laser pulse for pumping from capacitive (a) and inductive (b) energy storages. The mixture is Ne:H2 
= 11:1 at a pressure of 180 Torr, U1 = 20 kV, U0 = 33 kV. A quartz plate is used as the output mirror. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
291
5.3. Kinetic Model 
 
In the calculation [27, 28], the kinetic model of the Penning neon plasma laser [76, 77] 
was used. The model of the neon laser for a He-Ne-Ar-H2-N2 mixture considers ~ 300 
plasma-chemical reactions. It includes the following excited atoms, molecules: He*, Ne**, 
Ar*, Ar**, Ne**, Ne*, He*, HeNe*, Ar*, and ions: He+, Ne+, Ar+, He+, Ne+, Ar+, He+, Ne+, Ar+, 
HeNe+. Four groups of neon states, (3s, 3s'), (3р, 3p'), (4s), (5s), and two separate states, 
3p'[1/2]0 and 3s'[1/2]1 [76, 77], were included to the neon atom kinetics. Simultaneously 
with the balance equations of the number of particles, the equations for gas T and electron Te 
temperatures are considered. When considering the balance of the number of particles and the 
heat balance, ionization events and events of excitation by beam electrons, triple and dis-
sociative recombination processes, two- and three-particle conversion reactions, Penning and 
charge exchange reactions, ionization and transitions between excited states during collisions 
with plasma electrons, spontaneous radiative transitions, and others was considered. In the 
calculation, the He and Ar component concentrations were set to zero, the effect of N2 im-
purity was also neglected. The possibility of lasing on the transition with wavelength λ = 
585.3 nm was examined. When determining the linewidth, the Doppler broadening and 
broadening by intrinsic and buffer gases were considered. Non-resonant absorption of 
operating radiation, caused by photoionization and photodissociation of mixture particles, was 
taken into account. The calculation was performed in approach of the effective photon 
lifetime in the cavity (zero-dimensional approach of radiation propagation in the cavity). In 
this approximation, it is assumed that the radiation intensity is uniform over the cavity 
volume, i.e., the photon concentration is uniform. 
To self-consistently solve unsteady equations for concentrations of various reagents, the 
balance equation for gas and electron temperatures, and the radiation intensity, the PLASER 
programm package was used [2, 3, 5, 7-9]. 
 
 
5.4. Stage Preceding Lasing 
 
5.4.1. Background electron formation 
An external voltage applied to the discharge gap results in background electron 
generation during passage of fast electrons. According to [44, 78], the energy of fast electrons 
formed in the discharge gap is approximately Ee = (2/3) eU, where U is the discharge gap 
voltage; the fraction of these electrons relative to their total number is approximately η = 15-
20%. Electrodes (73 cm long each) were a knife blade and a cylinder 4 cm in radius. Hence, 
the transverse discharge size near the cylindrical electrode is approximately 2 cm. The 
discharge current near the anode to the end of the background electron generation stage is I = 
15 kA (Figure 3(a)). Hence, the electron current density is 
 
 
≈
= S
I
j
 l00 A/cm2 
 (2) 
 
the electron current density of fast electrons is  

A. M. Boichenko 
292 
 
≈
η
= S
I
jb
20 A/cm2  
 
ionization frequency (see [2, 3, 5, 7-9] for more details),  
 
 
j
e
E)
(
2σ
=
ν
 
(3) 
 
where σ is the ionization cross section, j is the beam current density, and e is the electron charge. 
The ionization frequency corresponding to this current density jb at U ≈15 kV (Figure 3(b), Ee ≈ 
10 keV) is 104 sec–1. At such a frequency, an electron density of the order of 1013 cm–3 is formed 
for the time of fast electron passage through the discharge gap (less than 1 ns) (Figure 4). 
Let us estimate what current can be passed through plasma with electron density ne ≈ 1013 
cm–3. For the electric field strength U/d ≈ 40 V/(cm Torr), we obtain 
 
 
j = eudne = 86 А/cm2,  
 
where the drift velocity (ud = 5.38 107 cm/sec) was taken from [78, 79], which is in good 
agreement with (2). 
Thus, if U ≈ 15 kV is applied to the discharge gap, after its passage by fast electrons, an 
approximate background density of secondary electrons ne ≈ 1013 cm–3 is formed. 
 
n, cm-3 
νi, Hz  
νi, Hz  
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
1 .104
1 .1011
1 .1012
1 .1013
1 .1014
1012
3 1013
×
2000
4000
6000
8000
1 .104
0.1
1
10
100
1
.
t, ns 
а 
б 
1 
2 
 
Figure 4. Calculated dependencies of (a) the maximum density of electrons generated due to the 
ionization frequency and (b) the time of electron density leveling at (1) 1013 and (2) 3 1013 cm–3. The 
half-maximum duration of the ionization frequency action is 1 ns. The mixture pressure is 150 Torr, 
Ne:H2 = 5:l. 
 
 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
293
5.4.2. Discharge gap voltage after background electron formation 
After passage of fast electrons, the discharge gap resistivity can be estimated as  
 
en
e
m
2
ν
=
ρ
 
where 
c
a
ν
+
ν
=
ν
.  
Here the frequency electron-atom collisions is given by  
 
 
 
σ
=
σ
=
ν
m
T
v
e
a
3
[Ne]
[Ne]
 
 
where σ is the transport cross section of elastic electron scattering on the neon atom (it 
depends weakly on temperature in the low energy region and is approximately equal 1.5 10–16 
cm2 [80]), and the Coulomb collision frequency is given by 
 
 
3
4
9
)
ln(
3
4
e
e
c
mT
n
e
Λ
=
π
ν
 
 
where ln(Λ) is the Coulomb logarithm (≈ 10); m and Te are the electron mass and temperature, 
respectively. Under given conditions, [Ne] = 6.4 1018 cm–3 (the neon pressure is ~ 150 Torr), 
ne ≈ 1013 cm–3, Te ≈ 1 eV, and the electron-atom collision frequency exceeds the Coulomb 
collision frequency by more than two orders of magnitude. The plasma resistivity is 
approximately ρ ≈ 25 Ω cm and the discharge gap voltage decreases to 
 
 
≈
=
≈
j
d
dE
V
ρ
3-6 kV  
 
(at j = 100-200 A/cm–2, see Figure 3(a)) according to experimental data. 
 
5.4.3. Time of multiplication wave passage through the discharge gap 
The problem of the time of multiplication wave passage through the discharge gap (about 
2 cm long) in He, Xe, and nitrogen was considered in [40]. Propagation in neon was modeled 
in [81]. Results for Ne lies in the range between the data for He and Xe. For fields E = 7 
V/(cm Torr), the time of passage should be ~ 100 ns, which is in good agreement (see below) 
with experimental data (Figure 3(a)). 
 
5.4.4. Multiplication wave formation 
The electron density ne behind the multiplication wave can be estimated from the 
expression E = 2πerDne, where E is the field strength, rD = (Te/4πe2ne)1/2 is the Debye length, 
and Te is the electron temperature. 
For example, under given conditions (at E~2-2.5 kV/cm and Te ~ 0.2-1 eV), we have ne 
= E2/(πTe) ~ (6.4-1.3)⋅1013 cm–3. 

A. M. Boichenko 
294 
5.5. Lasing Modeling 
 
Lasing was modeled in two ways. In one case, the initial electron density was taken as ne = 
3⋅1013 cm–3. At such electron density, the external field is completely screened, and 
recombination-nonequilibrium plasma is generated behind the multiplication wave front (see 
Sec. 5.4.4). In another case, the above electron density is provided by setting the external 
ionization frequency. 
Note that recombination-nonequilibrium plasma formation due to medium excitation by a 
hard ionizer, e.g., the electron (or ion) beam, is well described by setting the ionization 
frequency (3). The energy deposition into a corresponding gas component is given by  
 
 
W = EpνN,  
(4) 
 
where Ep is the energy expended for electron-ion pair production (Ep = 36 eV for neon) and N 
is the density of ionized atoms. 
In this case, setting the ionization frequency only models a required electron density (ne = 
3⋅1013 cm–3). In order that modeling results could not affect afterglow of recombination-
nonequilibrium plasma, the exposure time was taken small (fractions of nanosecond).  
Thus, the initial electron density ne = 3 1013 cm-3 was modeled in two ways. In the first 
case, the initial electron density was set as a parameter, the ionization frequency was set to zero. 
In the second case, the initial electron density arose due to the fictitious ionization frequency 
action for fractions of a nanosecond. 
The time dependencies of the power, energy, and emission efficiency were obtained. The 
results obtained by two methods, i.e., pumping by an ultrashort beam and setting the initial 
electron density as a parameter, were compared. In both cases, similar delays of the lasing pulse 
of the order of 100 ns (Figure 5) were obtained. According to experimental data (Figure 3(a)), 
lasing begins with a delay of ~ 100 ns after medium breakdown. According to the theoretical 
treatment, lasing is performed as follows. Each region behind the multiplication wave front 
begins lasing with a delay of 100 ns. The multiplication wave also moves to the anode about 
100 ns. Thus, the lasing pulse beginning and end correspond to emitting regions near the 
cathode and anode, respectively. 
Lasing experiments were performed depending on the mixture pressure at an optimum 
(from the view point of output energy) ratio of components Ne:H2 = 5:1. Calculation at the 
same ratio showed that the radiation power and energy optima correspond to hydrogen 
pressures of ~ 40 and 25 Torr, respectively (Figure 6). The lasing power was also measured at a 
hydrogen pressure of 20 Torr as a function of the neon pressure in the mixture. The calculated 
optimum hydrogen pressure is in good agreement with the experimental value (Figure 7). 
According to experimental data, the active medium volume was 2.5×0.3×72 = 50 cm3. 
This volume corresponds to the calculated maximum emitted energy El ≈ 25 μJ (at a 
hydrogen pressure рH2 ≈ 25 Torr). It is in good agreement with experimental data (maximum 
emitted energy El ≈ 50 μJ at рH2 ≈ 20 Torr). 
 
 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
295
P, rel. un. 
10
-8
10
-7
10
-6
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
 
t, s 
1 
2 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of two calculation methods: (1) parametric setting of the initial electron density 
and (2) pumping by an ultrashort electron beam (the half-maximum width is ~ 0.1 ns). The pressure of 
mixture components is pNe = 100 Torr and pH2 = 20 Torr. The output mirror reflectance is R = 75%. 
The initial electron density is ne = 3 l013 cm–3. 
    
0 
20
40
60
80 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
.
P H2,  торр  
P,  Вт / см 3 ;  E,  10 -7Дж / см 3  
1  
2  
 
Figure 6. Dependencies of the specific radiation energy (1) and maximum power (2) on the hydrogen 
pressure. The component ratio is Ne:H2 = 5:l. The output mirror reflectance is R = 75%. The initial 
electron density is 3 1013 cm–3. 

A. M. Boichenko 
296 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
PNe, Torr 
Pizl/Pizl max 
 
Figure 7. Comparison with experimental data. The dependence of the lasing power on the neon 
pressure. The hydrogen partial pressure is constant, pH2 = 20 Torr. The dashed and solid curves 
correspond to the experiment and calculation, respectively.  
 
5.6. Some Comments 
 
Note that another interpretation of Figure 3(a) is formally possible. For example, 
medium breakdown and/or multiplication wave passage correspond to the first stage (a 
high voltage of ~ 15 kV on the gap), after which a mode similar to the glow discharge 
mode is reached (a gap voltage decreased to 3-6 kV). The lasing modeling data contradict 
such an interpretation. At an electric field strength of ~ 6-7 kV/cm (high voltage stage), 
the electron density behind the multiplication wave front should exceed 1014 cm–3. For 
initial condition corresponding to electron densities of 1014-1016 cm–3, the lasing pulse 
develops almost without delay (more precisely, there are two lasing pulses in calculation, 
the first of which develops almost without delay). Moreover, the passage of the 
multiplication wave itself at such high electric field strengths, according to [40, 81], 
should take a time of about 10 ns. Thus, the lasing pulse under these conditions cannot 
have a characteristic delay of the order of 100 ns as it is in the experiment. 
If we interpret the stage with lowered voltage as a stage equivalent to the glow 
discharge, discharge modeling (see the modeling method description in [7, 8]) with a 
field strength of about 0.2-2 kV/cm shows that total gas ionization occurs for times 
shorter than 20 ns. Certainly, total ionization will not actually occur; the field will be 
earlier superseded from such a discharge region. This also suggests that this stage cannot 
be considered as a stage similar to the glow discharge. 
We note that the discharge was also ignited between two cylindrical electrodes; in 
this case, the analogy with the glow-type discharge would apparently be more reasonable. 
However, lasing did not occur in this case. It arose only when the discharge was ignited 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
297
between knife and cylindrical electrodes. This circumstance also counts in favor of the 
multiplication wave existence since its initiation is facilitated by sharp bumps. 
The existence of capacitive current also argues in favor of the BEMW discharge. The 
point is that the discharge current, even before the voltage reaches a maximum, is 
detected with a very short delay (fractions of a nanosecond) with respect to the time of 
high voltage applying to the gap (Figure 3). In general, when applying a voltage pulse 
with a steep leading edge, an overvoltage peak arises even when using external 
preionization. Only then a current appears and voltage drops. The current development 
with a short delay can be explained by BEMW propagation. When the multiplication 
wave front moves, the gas-discharge gap capacitance changes, which causes a change in 
the electrode charge. Indeed, if planar capacitor plates are initially at distance d under 
voltage U and approach each other with velocity ufr, the current density on them is given 
by (1). 
As an example, setting U = 20 kV, d = 2 cm, and τfr = 10 ns, we have j0 ≈ 0.1 A/cm2. 
It is in qualitative agreement with measurements. Here we present only the estimate for 
electrodes approaching in vacuum. In a gas medium, this leads to a field strength 
increase, which in turn can cause an increase in the actual current. For example, it is 
noted in [22] that the current pulse began at the leading edge of the voltage pulse. 
 
 
6. XE2
* DIMER LASER 
 
6.1. Simulations of Xe2
* Afterglow 
 
As noted above, estimates suggest that a relatively high electron density should be 
produced after passage of a multiplication wave through the gas. In this case, simulations may 
be performed by either specifying the required initial electron density or modelling an 
external hard ionisation source which affords the requisite electron density in a short time (see 
Sec. 5.6.). The latter approach has been adopted in this study, i.e. the initial electron density is 
provided by an imaginary electron beam. 
We considered the afterglow of a xenon plasma with the initial electron density 
corresponding to the above estimates (see Sec. 3) for the discharge involving the background-
electron multiplication wave. Use was made of the kinetic model of a xenon-helium mixture 
described in [82]2. An investigation was made of the regime whereby the amplified 
spontaneous emission exerted a weak effect on the population density of the Xe2
* dimer 
levels. It was assumed that the initial electron density was produced by the pulse of an 
external electron beam. The beam action was characterised by the ionisation frequency (3). 
The frequencies for the beam excitation from the ground state were introduced in a similar 
way. In this case, the energy input to the corresponding gas component is given by the 
expression (4), where Ep = 22 eV for xenon and 46 eV for helium. For simplicity, the time 
dependence of the ionisation frequency was assumed to be bell-shaped. The beam pump 
duration was taken to be short enough in comparison with the characteristic afterglow 
                                                           
2 It is noteworthy that the Xe2
* radiation in the afterglow of a discharge was also considered in a recent paper by Lo 
et al. [83]. 

A. M. Boichenko 
298 
development times. The current density was selected in such a way as to provide a specified 
electron density. 
 
 
6.2. Kinetic Model 
 
The kinetic equations for particle number balance included 17 components: ions and the 
excited states of atomic and molecular xenon and helium [18, 20, 61]. In addition, the thermal 
balance equations were considered for the electron and gas temperatures.  
In the description of spontaneous emission we considered two states of the xenon dimer, 
i.e., Xe2(1) and Xe2(2) (resonance Xe2(1Σu
+) and metastable Xe2(3Σu
+) states) were taken into 
account, which make contributions to the emission band under discussion. In this case, to 
calculate the specific powers of spontaneous emission, were used the expressions 
 
 
Qi = Ai⋅[Xe2(i)],  Q = Q1 + Q2, 
 
where A1 = 1.82 108 s–1, A2 = 107 s–1 are the spontaneous decay rates; [Xe2(...)] are the 
population densities of the corresponding dimers. The efficiency η of conversion of the 
energy inputted into the medium to spontaneous radiation was defines as 
 
 
∫
∫
∞
∞
=
0
0
Wdt
Qdt
η
 
 
In present model, advantage was taken of the plasma chemical reaction rate coefficients 
which had earlier been employed in the simulation of XeCl [84, 85] and XeF laser [86] 
kinetics, the Kr-Xe binary mixture kinetics [87], as well as the kinetics of the third continua 
of xenon [88] (for more details, see [82]). The kinetic model of the Xe-He mixture took into 
account 132 reactions. The system of kinetic equations was formed and numerically solved 
with the use of PLASER code package [2, 3, 5, 7-9]. 
 
 
6.3. Results of Xe2
* Lasing Simulations 
 
The calculated characteristics of Xe- and He-Xe- plasma afterglow are represented in 
Figures 8-10. The simulations were carried out for different gas pressures p for the same 
energy input (~ 74 mJ cm–3), the base duration of a discharge pulse was ~ 0.1 ns. Under these 
conditions, the highest electron density was equal to ~ 2 1016 cm–3. 
One can see that gain in pure xenon arises only for p > 1 atm (Figure 8a). With increasing 
pressure, the peak value of the gain rises (Figure 9), but the characteristic lifetime of the gain 
and the time to attainment of the peak gain (~ 1-10 ns) shorten in this case. For p ≈ 2 atm, the 
gain is ~ 0.02 cm–1, which is sufficient for the onset of laser oscillation with an active 
medium of length ~ 15 cm. 
 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
299
 
 κ, cm-1 
t , s 
t , s 
 Q, W/см-3 
a) 
b) 
 p = 1.1 atm 
 2.6 atm 
 3.7 atm 
 5.2 atm 
 7.4 atm 
 p = 1.1 atm 
 2.6 atm 
 3.7 atm 
 5.2 atm 
 7.4 atm 
 
Figure 8. Time dependences of the gain κ (a) and the specific power of spontaneous emission Q (b) at 
the λ ≈ 172-nm Xe2
* photodissociation transition for different pressures of pure xenon. 
It has been known that lasing in pure xenon under beam pumping takes place for p > 13 
atm. The point is that a relatively long (50-100 ns) pump by a high-power electron beam is 
responsible for the heating of the active medium. This substantially strengthens absorption of 
laser radiation due to photoassociative transitions, which are the reverse of the laser 
transition. This issue was investigated in sufficient detail in [1-3, 5, 8]. It is possible to 
substantially lower the threshold pressure by taking advantage of a discharge with a 
subnanosecond rise time. 
It goes without saying that the production of a volume discharge in a dense gas is an 
intricate task because of the demanding requirements on the steepness of the rise time of the 
voltage pulse. However, in [64, 89] reported that they managed to achieve this for a helium 
pressure below 6 atm and a nitrogen pressure below 3 atm. It has also been possible to 
produce a specific energy input of ~ 1 J cm–3 in a time of 5 ns [17]. That is why the 
production of a volume nanosecond discharge for a xenon pressure of 2 atm and an energy 
input of ~ 0.1 J cm–3 also appears to be a realistic task. To avoid energy input into the 
discharge upon the shorting of the electrodes, advantage can be taken of a dielectric barrier at 
the anode, as is done in excilamps (see below). 

A. M. Boichenko 
300 
 p , atm 
 κmax, cm-1; η; τmax, ns 
 κmax 
τmax 
η 
 
Figure 9. Peak gain κmax, efficiency η of inputted-energy conversion to spontaneous radiation, and time 
tmax to attainment of the peak spontaneous emission power for the λ ≈ 172-nm Xe2
* transition as 
functions of pure xenon pressure. 
 
b) 
a) 
 Q, W/см-3 
 κ, cm-1 
t , s 
t , s 
 1 atm Xe, 1 atm He 
 1 atm Xe, 2 atm He 
 1 atm Xe, 3 atm He 
 1.5 atm Xe, 1.5 atm He 
 1 atm Xe, 1 atm He 
 1 atm Xe, 2 atm He 
 1 atm Xe, 3 atm He 
 1.5 atm Xe, 1.5 atm He 
 
Figure 10. Time dependences of the gain κ (a) and the specific power of spontaneous emission Q (b) at 
the λ ≈ 172-nm Xe2
* photodissociation transition for different pressures and compositions of xenon-
helium mixtures. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
301
To lower the working xenon pressure, it is expedient to employ helium as the buffer gas. 
Simulations show (Figure 10) that even the addition of 1 atm of helium to xenon at the same 
pressure gives rise to a positive gain. It is pertinent to note that the gains in pure xenon are 
higher than in xenon-helium mixtures for the same partial xenon pressures. However, in pure 
xenon it is more difficult to realise the volume discharge wave. 
 
 
7. MEDIUM-PRESSURE LAMPS 
 
7.1. Barrier Excilamps on Xenon Dimers 
 
7.1.1. Simulation based on the diffusion-drift approximation  
The highest emission efficiency of xenon dimers was achieved in single-barrier 
excilamps with small-curvature-radius cathodes. The discharge in them is ignited between a 
thin cathode (a wire at the quartz tube center) and an anode placed on the tube outer surface. 
For this reason, the discharge formation processes in xenon at a pressure of 100-200 Torr 
were theoretically and experimentally studied in [63, 72-74]. Let us enlarge on the problems 
associated with simulation of BEMW propagation. 
Plasma formation and electric field screening processes are described by the momentum 
transport and continuity equations for electrons and ions, as well as by the Poisson equation, 
 
 
je = Neue = ude(E,N) ⋅Ne – De(E,N) ⋅grad(Ne);   
 
 
ji  = Niui = udi(E,N) ⋅Ni – Di(E,N) ⋅grad(Ni) ;  
 
 
∂Ne/∂t + div(je) = νi(E,N) ⋅Ne – β⋅Ne⋅Ni; 
(5) 
 
 
∂Ni/∂t + div(ji) = νi(E,N) ⋅Ne – β⋅Ne⋅Ni; 
 
 
div(E) = 4πe(Ni – Ne).  
 
Here je and ji are electron and ion fluxes, ue and ui are the average electron and ion 
velocities, ude and udi are the average electron and ion drift velocities in the external electric 
field E, De and Di are the diffusivities, Ne and Ni are the electron and ion densities, N is the 
density of neutral xenon atoms, and νi is the frequency of xenon atom ionization by electrons, 
and β is the ion and electron recombination rate. 
In [63, 72-74], the cylindrical geometry was considered. The cathode is a cylindrical wire 
of radius r0 = 0.5 mm, being under potential U0 ~ –(0.5-5) kV. The cathode is adjacent to a 
xenon-filled discharge gap (r0 < r < rbar) behind which a dielectric barrier (rbar <  r  <  rmax) is 
placed, which separates the anode of radius rmax ~ 1-2 cm from the discharge gap. 
The dependencies of νi, ude, udi, De, and Di appearing on the right-hand sides of Eqs. (5) 
on the field strength E were specified using the formulas obtained from the approximations 
given in [72, 73]. 
 

A. M. Boichenko 
302 
7.1.2. Boundary conditions  
The boundary conditions for the set of equations (5) were specified at three points, i.e., 
on the wire, barrier, and anode (for the field), 
 
 
0
0
0
0
0
,
,0
U
j
j
r
N
r
r
r
r
i
r
r
e
r
r
i
−
=
ϕ
γ
−
=
=
∂
∂
=
=
=
=
, 
 
 
 
0
,0
max
bar
bar
=
ϕ
=
=
=
=
=
r
r
r
r
i
r
r
e
j
j
. 
 
 
where γ = 0.05 is the secondary electron emission coefficient. 
The initial conditions were taken in the form  
 
 
Ne(r,t)|t=0 = Ni(r,t)|t=0 = N0 = const;  
(6) 
 
 
(
) r
r
r
U
r
E
t
r
E
t
1
/
ln
)
(
)
,
(
max
0
0
0
0
⋅
−
=
=
=
;  
 
 
(
)
(
)
max
0
max
0
0
0
/
ln
/
ln
)
(
)
,
(
r
r
r
r
U
r
t
r
t
⋅
−
=
ϕ
=
ϕ
=
. 
 
 
These conditions correspond to a low initial charge density (residual from the previous 
pump pulse) having no effect on the field and potential distributions in the discharge gap. 
This problem statement is limited by the fact that it is impossible to consider main types 
of discharge instability within the one-dimensional model. In particular, it is impossible to 
describe filament formation. We also note that the diffusion-drift approximation not quite 
adequately describes the region of recombination-nonequilibrium plasma formed after 
BEMW passing. However, the set of equations (5) describes the BEMW front for initial 
condition (6). 
 
7.1.3. Nature o f  ionization processes  
The calculations were oriented to the parameters at which the highest efficiency of xenon 
excilamps was experimentally achieved, i.e., the xenon density N = 4.4 l018 cm–3 and the 
electrode voltage U0 ~ –(2.5-3) kV. A series of calculations were performed at various U0 and 
r0 = 0.5 mm, rmax=15 mm, and rbar = 13 mm. In what follows, we present the results for U0 = 
–2500 and –3000 V at an initial charge density N0 = 106 cm–3. 
The following stages of discharge gap ionization can be distinguished. Initially, the 
BEMW directed to the anode is formed near the cathode. The multiplication wave travels to 
the barrier and shorts the discharge gap. Then the charge is accumulated on the barrier and the 
discharge current decays. 
The ionization develops as follows. Near the cathode, in a layer of thickness Δx ~ 10/a ~ 
100 μm, intense electron multiplication and wire charge screening by the uncompensated ion 
charge occur. Then the ionization goes in two directions. First, the multiplication wave 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
303
propagates to the anode, in which the electron density is higher than the ion density. Second, 
the ion density peak is formed near the cathode (Figure 11).  
Under weak ionization, the field breaks plasma; hence, the electron density cannot have a 
peak in the ion peak region (Figure 11(a)). However, even if the ion and electron density 
peaks coincide, the ion density near the peak somewhat exceeds the electron density. 
Electrons prevail in the region closer to the anode. As the BEMW propagates, the density of 
both ions and electrons near the ion peak increases. At a sufficiently strong ionization, the 
initial field and potential distribution becomes appreciably distorted near the ion peak. In a 
strong field, this distortion occurs significantly earlier than in a weak field. 
When the multiplication wave reaches the anode, the discharge gap becomes as though 
shortened. Approximately at the same time, the density of both ion and electronic charges 
near the barrier sharply increases, and the parameters of the near-cathode layer change. In the 
near-cathode region, the ion and electron density peaks shift to the cathode and spread. The 
near-cathode layer becomes significantly narrower. As the ionization develops, a field 
strength dip is formed in the near-cathode region. The potential jump in the near-cathode 
layer is much smaller than the potential difference U0 on electrodes due to the small thickness 
of this layer.  
 
Ni, cm-3
Ne, cm-3
0
5000
1.104
1.5.104
1.105
1.106
1.107
1.108
1.109
1.1010
1.1011
5000
1.104
1.5.104
1.104
1.105
1.106
1.107
1.108
1.109
1.1010
1.1011
a) 
r-r0, μm
r-r0, μm
 
Ni, cm-3
Ne, cm-3
0
5000
1 .104
1.5 .104
1 .105
1 .106
1 .107
1 .108
1 .109
5000
1 .104
1.5 .104
1 .104
1 .105
1 .106
1 .107
1 .108
1 .109
b)
r-r0, μm
r-r0, μm
 
Figure 11. Radial distributions of the ion and electron density at the initial discharge stage at U0 = –
3000 V (a) and –2500 V (b) at different time points: (a) 13 ns (short dashed curves), 18 ns (dashed 
curves), 23 ns (dash-dotted curves), and 30 ns (solid curves); (b) 7 ns (short dashed curves), 10.5 ns 
(dashed curves), 11.7 ns (dash-dotted curves), and 14 ns (solid curves). 

A. M. Boichenko 
304 
Since the discharge is the barrier one, the electron current after shortening the discharge 
gap remains essentially limited. The quasi-steady mode of electronic charge flow from the 
cathode to the barrier is formed, which is characterized by stationary distributions of plasma 
and field parameters in a major region of the discharge gap. 
Various discharge stages are well traced when considering the time dependence J (t) of 
the electron current to the barrier, relative to the tube length (Figure 12). The electron current 
J (t) is calculated as the product of the electron flux taken at r = 11 mm < rbar to the 
corresponding circumference 2πr and to the electron charge. 
Initially, when the multiplication wave did not reach the barrier, the electron current is 
very low. At the instant the multiplication wave reaches the barrier, the electron current 
peaks. Then the electron current decreases as the electronic charge is accumulated on the 
barrier, 
 
 
∫
′
′
=
t
td
t
J
t
Q
0
)
(
)
(
.  
 
The electronic charge and current are taken relative to the tube length. 
The charge closing the discharge gap on the barrier per unit length, Qbl corresponds to the 
situation when the total potential difference on the barrier drops, 
 
 
(
)
bar
max
0
bl
/
ln
2
r
r
U
Q =
. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Time dependence of the electron current to the barrier at U0 = –3000 V (solid curve), –2500 
V (dotted curve) and the charge accumulated at the barrier at U0 = –3000 V (dashed curve), –2500 V 
(dash-dotted curve). Horizontal dashed lines correspond to the blocking charges at the barrier: Qb1 = 
11.7 nC/cm at U0 = –3000 V and Qb1 = 9.7 nC/cm at U0 = –2500 V. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
305
 
3 
2 
1 
2 
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1 .1013
1 .1014
1 .1015
1 .1016
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1 .104
1 .105
1 .106
r − r0, cm 
r − r0, cm 
E, V/cm 
Ne, cm-3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
4 
3 
a) 
b) 
 
Figure 13. Radial distribution of the (a) electron density and (b) field strength at time points t = 1.3 ns 
(1), 1.4 ns (2), and 1.5 ns (3). Curve 4 corresponds to the field distribution in empty space 
r
r
r
U
r
E
1
)
/
ln(
)
(
1
0
⋅
−
=
 at U = 100 kV, r0 = 0.25 mm, and r1 = 8 mm. The time dependence of the set 
electrode voltage U(t) was assumed to be linear with peak value U0 = –100 kV reached at t = 1 ns. 
 
At high voltages U0, the current peak is larger, but both the peak appearance time and 
duration are smaller. The charge at lower voltages U0 is accumulated more slowly (see Figure 
12). 
For comparison, we present the result of the BEMW calculation in dense xenon (p = 1 
atm), based on the above model (Figure 13). We can see that the BEMW velocity in dense 
gas is significantly larger than for low pressures. 
 
 
7.2. On an Increase in the Lamp Intensity on Xe2
* Transitions 
 
Let us consider possible power characteristics of Xe2
* lamp according model described in 
Sec. 6 [18, 20, 61]. It is well known that Xe2
* lamps involving barrier discharges exhibit 
efficiencies of over 50 % when employing cathodes with a small radius of curvature (for 

A. M. Boichenko 
306 
example, wires) [65, 68]. Experimental [65, 68, 72, 90] and theoretical [63, 72, 73, 91] 
investigations of these excilamps allow a conclusion that the volume ionisation in them takes 
place by way of precisely the electron multiplication wave. It is not until the passage of the 
multiplication wave that the shorting of the discharge gap and the quasistationary charge 
accumulation at the barrier are realised [63]. However, these lamps operate at not-too-high a 
pressure (p = 100-200 Torr), and pump pulse duration is therefore relatively long (~ 1 μs). 
To maximise the pulsed output power of these excilamps with retention of their high 
average efficiency is of interest for some applications. As suggested by our simulations 
(Figure 8b), to do this requires going over to higher pressures (p > 1 atm). In this case, it is 
possible to attain a spontaneous emission specific power of 1 MW cm–3 for p = 2 atm. 
Consequently, it is required to employ voltage pulses with a subnanosecond rise time. 
Note that according to the calculations of [82] the efficiency of input-energy conversion 
to the energy of spontaneous emission was high (η ≈ 50-60 %) for long pump pulses (~ 1 μs) 
and moderate pressures (p = 100-200 Torr). For short pulses (~ 0.1 ns), as suggested by the 
simulations outlined above, to attain a high conversion efficiency necessitates directing 
attention towards higher gas pressures (p > 1 atm) (Figure 9). We also mention that the 
optimal input power increases, according to the calculations of [82], with shortening the 
pump pulse duration. The output efficiency of the lamps depends only slightly on the pressure 
when it is higher than the optimal one. 
The occurrence of the optimum for pressures of ~ 5 atm in our calculations is related to 
the quenching of excited excimer states by electrons. The characteristic electron quenching 
time for excimer states for an electron density of ~ 2 1016 cm–3 is equal to 5 ns, the excimer 
production time at a pressure of 5 atm is also about 5 ns. Furthermore, the heating of gas is 
also partly responsible for the shift of the optimum towards higher pressures (in comparison 
with the above pressures p = 100-200 Torr), because the emission efficiency lowers with 
increasing gas temperature, and the gas temperature lowers with increasing pressure. For a 
pressure of 1 atm, for instance, by the end of the pumping pulse the gas temperature rises 
from 300 K to a value higher than 400 K, while it remains practically invariable for a pressure 
of 20 atm. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Thus, the study performed shows that it is expedient to distinguish one more type of 
pulsed discharges. In these discharges, ionization in atmospheric-pressure gases propagates 
not due to electron or photon transport during breakdown, but due to multiplication of 
background electrons and electrons produced in the gap by fast electrons due to enhancement 
of the electric field near the cathode and in the gap. 
Such a background-electron multiplication wave (BEMW) arises in a nonuniform field 
on small-curvature-radius conducting surfaces where the electric field is concentrated. Its 
front moves against the gradient of the electric field magnitude, and the velocity is 
proportional to the gas pressure. In this case, the electric field direction does not affect the 
BEMW propagation direction. To obtain the BEMW-based volume discharge, generators 
with nanosecond pulse rise times and voltages of about l00 kV should be used. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
307
An important property of BEMW discharges is that recombination-nonequilibrium 
plasma (being an active medium of plasma lasers) is formed behind the multiplication front.  
All discharge formation and lasing stages of the Penning neon laser in a Ne-H2 mixture 
obtained from the theoretical treatment are experimentally confirmed as follows. 
 
(i) Fast electron formation results in efficient production of secondary electrons with a 
density of the order of ne = 1013 cm-3 in the discharge gap. This stage takes up to 1 ns. 
(ii) After secondary electron formation, the experimental discharge gap voltage drops to 
3-6 kV. This value is in good agreement with the value corresponding to Ohm's law 
at the medium resistivity corresponding to the density of produced secondary 
electrons. 
(iii) The time 100 ns of the existence of this voltage (3-6 kV) is in good agreement with 
the time of multiplication wave passage through a medium with obtained 
parameters. 
 
As a result of the multiplication wave passage, the electron density behind its wave front 
increases to a value at which the external field is screened. After field screening, electron 
heating by the field in these regions sharply weakens. Electrons are cooled due to collisions 
with gas atoms. Since the degree of ionization is low at a high gas density, electrons are 
cooled to a low temperature limited only by recombination heating; hence, recombination-
nonequilibrium plasma is formed. Experimental lasing delays are in good agreement with 
calculated values. 
The optimum ratios of neon and hydrogen in the mixture, radiation energies and powers 
are also in good agreement with experimental data. 
All the above allows us to conclude that the active medium was excited in the case at 
hand due to multiplication wave passage through the discharge gap. 
The consideration also shows that plasma formed in the multiplication wave afterglow of 
the nanosecond discharge with a subnanosecond front is of interest for developing various 
plasma lasers, including inert-gas dimer lasers. 
In other words, BEMW afterglow plasma is promising to achieve lasing on the transitions 
on which lasing was previously obtained in dense gas pumped by the electron beam and in a 
pulsed discharge afterglow. In particular, BEMW afterglow plasma is promising for pumping 
excimer and exciplex lasers. 
Moreover, BEMW discharges are of interest for developing pulsed excilamps with high 
spontaneous emission pulse power. In particular, such lamps can be of interest for photolytic 
pumping of lasers intended to generate powerful femtosecond pulses [92-94]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Gudzenko, LI; Yakovlenko, SI. Plasma Lasers; Atomizdat: Moscow, SU, 1978. [in 
Russian]. 
[2] 
Visible and UV Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; Proceedings o f  the General 
Physics Institute; Nauka: Moscow, SU, 1989, Vol. 21. [in Russian]. 
[3] 
Yakovlenko, SI. Las. Phys., 1991, vol. 1, 565-589. 

A. M. Boichenko 
308 
[4] 
Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Quant. Electr., 1997, vol. 27, 1111-1119.  
[5] 
Yakovlenko, SI. In: Plasmatechnical systems. XI.3.2. Gas and Plasma Lasers; Fortov, 
VE; Ed; Encyclopedia o f  Low-Temperature Plasma; Nauka: Moscow, RU, 2000, 
Introductory Vol. IV, 262-291. [in Russian]. 
[6] 
Gas and Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; Encyclopedia o f  Low-Temperature 
Plasma. Series B: Reference Appendices, Bases, and Databases; Fortov, VE; Ed; 
Fizmatlits: Moscow, RU, 2005, Vol. XI-4. [in Russian]. 
[7] 
Boichenko, AM; Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Las. Phys., 2000, vol. 10, 1159-1187. 
[8] 
Boichenko, AM; Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. In: Gas and Plasma Lasers; 
Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; Encyclopedia o f  Low-Temperature Plasma. Series B: Reference 
Appendices, Bases, and Databases; Fortov, VE; Ed; Fizmatlits: Moscow, RU, 2005, 
Vol. XI-4, 471-503. [in Russian]. 
[9] 
Yakovlenko, SI. In: Gas Lasers; M; Endo, RF; Walter, Eds; CRC Press, Taylor and 
Francis Group: Boca Raton, London, New York, 2007, 369-411. 
[10] Basov, NG; Bogdankevich, OV; Danilychev, VA; Kashnikov, GN; Kerimov, OM; 
Lantsev, NP. Kratkie Soobshcheniya Fizike, 1970, N7, 68 (in Russian). 
[11] Basov, NG; Balashov, EM; Bogdankevich, OV; Danilychev, VA; Kashnikov, GN; 
Lantzov, NP; Khodkevich, DD. J. Luminesc. 1970, vol. 1-2, 834-841. 
[12] Basov, NG; Danilychev, VA; Popov, YuM; Khodkevich, DD. JETP Letters. 1970, vol. 
12, 329-330. 
[13] Basov, NG; Danilychev, VA; Popov, Yu. M. Oyo Butsuri (Japan). 1971, vol. 40 (9), 
139. 
[14] Molchanov, AG. Quant. Electr., 2003, vol. 33, 37-44. 
[15] Sasaki, W; Shirai, T; Kubodera, S; Kawanaka, J; Igarashi T. Opt. Lett., 2001, vol. 26, 
503-505. 
[16] Nakamura, K; Ooguchi, Y; Umegaki, N; Goto, T; Jitsuno, T; Kitamura, T; Takasaki, 
M; Horiguchi, S. Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2001, vol. 4747, 286. 
[17] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Phys.-Usp, 2004, vol. 47, 887-905. 
[18] Boichenko, AM; Yakovlenko, SI. Quant. Electr., 2006, vol. 36, 1176-1180.  
[19] Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a Dense Gases, Based on a Wave o f  
Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; Proceedings o f  the 
Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: Moscow, RU, 2007; vol. 63. [in Russian]. 
[20] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI; Boichenko, AM; Kostyrya, ID; Lomaev, MI; Tkachev, 
AN. Physics of Wave Phenomena, 2008, vol. 16, 180-198. 
[21] Derzhiev, VI; Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI; Yancharina, AM. In: Visible and UV 
Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; Proceedings o f  the General Physics Institute; 
Nauka: Moscow, SU, 1989, vol. 21, 5-43. [in Russian]. 
[22] Lomaev, MI; Tarasenko, VF. Opt. Spectrosc, 1986, vol. 61, 689. 
[23] Lomaev, MI; Panchenko, AN; Tarasenko, VF. Sov. J. Quant. Electr., 1987, vol. 17, 631. 
[24] Lomaev, MI; Tarasenko, VF. Sov. Tech. Phys. Lett., 1988, vol. 14, 460. 
[25] Lomaev, MI; Tarasenko, VF.  Sov. J. Quant. Electr., 1992, vol. 22, 129. 
[26] Fedenev, AA; Yakovlenko, SI. Las. Phys., 2007, vol. 17, 1-4. 
[27] Boichenko, AM; Panchenko, AN; Telminov, AE; AA. Fedenev, AA. Bulletin of the 
Lebedev Physics Institute, 2008, vol. 35, 142-147. 
[28] Boichenko, AM; Fedenev, AA; Panchenko, AN; Tel’minov, AE. Physics of Wave 
Phenomena, 2008, vol. 16, 283-291. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
309
[29] Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys. Lett, 2004, vol. 30, 354-357. 
[30] Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2004, vol. 49, 1150-1157. 
[31] Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys. Lett, 2005, vol. 31, 169-172. 
[32] Yakovlenko, SI. In: Gas and Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; Encyclopedia o f  
Low-Temperature Plasma. Series B: Reference Appendices, Bases, and Databases; 
Fortov, VE; Ed; Fizmatlits: Moscow, RU, 2005, vol. XI-4, 354-361. [in Russian]. 
[33] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Runaway of Electrons in Dense Gases and Mechanism 
of Generation of High-Power Subnanosecond Beams. Central Europ. J. Phys., 2004, 
vol. 2(4), 579-635. (www.cesj.com/ physics.html). 
[34] Tarasenko, VF.; Yakovlenko, SI. Physica Scripta, 2005, vol. 72, 41-67. 
[35] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Plasma Dev. Operations, 2005, vol. 13, 231-279. 
[36] Yakovlenko, SI. Bull. Lebedev Phys. Inst., 2006, vol. 33, N2, 10-12. 
[37] Yakovlenko, SI. Las. Phys., 2006, vol. 16, 403-426. 
[38] Yakovlenko, SI. In: Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a Dense Gases, 
Based on a Wave o f  Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; 
Proceedings o f  the Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: Moscow, RU, 2007, 
vol. 63, 132-147. [in Russian]. 
[39] Gundienkov, VA; Yakovlenko, SI. Bull. Lebedev Phys. Inst., 2006, vol. 33, N2, 13-17. 
[40] Gundienkov, VA; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2006, vol. 51, 1237-1239. 
[41] Kaptsov, PA. Electronics; GITTL: Moscow, SU, 1954, [in Russian]. 
[42] Raether, H. Electron avalanches and breakdown in gases; Butterworths: London, UK, 
1964. 
[43] Lozanskii, ED; Firsov, OB. Theory of a spark; Atomizdat: Moscow, SU, 1975, [in 
Russian]. 
[44] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. In: Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a 
Dense Gases, Based on a Wave o f  Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; 
Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; Proceedings o f  the Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: 
Moscow, RU, 2007; vol. 63, 7-63. [in Russian]. 
[45] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. In: Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a 
Dense Gases, Based on a Wave o f  Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; 
Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; Proceedings o f  the Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: 
Moscow, RU, 2007, vol. 63, 64-101. [in Russian]. 
[46] Tarasenko, VF; Rybka, DV; Baksht, EKH; Kostyrya, ID; Lomaev, MI. Instrum. Exp. 
Tech., 2008, vol. 51, 213-219. 
[47] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Physics of Wave Phenomena, 2008, vol. 16, 207-229. 
[48] Baksht, EKH; Kostyrya, ID; Lomaev, MI; Rybka, DV; Tarasenko, VF. Physics of Wave 
Phenomena, 2008, vol. 16, 199-206. 
[49] Tarasenko, VF; Baksht, EKH; Burachenko, AG; Kostyrya, ID; Lomaev, MI; Rybka, 
DV. Plasma Devices and Operations, 2008, vol. 16, 267-298. 
[50] Kostyrya, ID; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2006, vol. 51, 
356-361. 
[51] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI; Shunailov, SA; Kostyrya, ID; Tkachev, AN. Laser 
Phys., 2006, vol. 16, 526-534. 
[52] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. In: Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a 
Dense Gases, Based on a Wave o f  Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; 

A. M. Boichenko 
310 
Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; Proceedings o f  the Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: 
Moscow, RU, 2007, vol. 63, 102-131. [in Russian]. 
[53] Kostyrya, ID; Orlovskii, VM; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. 
Phys. Lett, 2005, vol. 31, 457-460. 
[54] Babich, LP. Phys. Usp., 2005, vol. 48, 1015-1038. 
[55] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Phys. Usp. 2006, vol. 49, 767-770. 
[56] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI. Preprint No. 43; Moscow: A.M. Prokhorov General 
Physics Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, 2006. 
[57] Loeb, L. Basic Processes o f  Electric Discharges in Gases; GITTL: Moscow, SU, 
1950. [in Russian]. 
[58] Granovsky, VL. Electric Current in Gas; GITTL: Moscow, SU, 1952, vol. 1; Nauka: 
Moscow, SU, 1971, vol. 2. [in Russian]. 
[59] von Engel, A. Ionized Gases; Clarendon Press: Oxford, UK, 1965. 
[60] Raizer, YP. Gas Discharge Physics; Springer: N.Y., 1991. 
[61] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI; Boichenko, AM; Kostyrya, ID; Lomaev, MI; Tkachev, 
AN. In: Beams o f  Runaway Electrons and Discharges in a Dense Gases, Based on a 
Wave o f  Multiplication o f  Background Electrons; Yakovlenko, S. I; Ed; Proceedings 
o f  the Prokhorov General Physics Institute; Nauka: Moscow, RU, 2007, vol. 63, 148-
182. [in Russian]. 
[62] Tarasenko, VF; Yakovlenko, SI; Orlovskii, VM; Tkachev, AN. Tech. Phys. Lett, 2004, 
vol. 30, 335-337. 
[63] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Laser Phys., 2003, vol. 13, 1345-1356. 
[64] Alekseev, SB; Gubanov, VP; Kostyrya, ID; Orlovskii, VM; Skakun, VS; Tarasenko, VF. 
Quant. Electr., 2004, vol. 34, 1007-1010. 
[65] Kogelschatz, U. In: International Conference on Atomic and Molecular Pulsed Lasers 
V (Tomsk, Russia, 2003); Ed; Proc. SPIE., 2004, vol. 5483, 272-286. 
[66] Lomaev, MI; Skakun, VS; Sosnin, AE; Tarasenko, VF; Shitts, DV; Erofeev, MI. Phys.-
Usp., 2003, vol. 46, 193-210. 
[67] Boichenko, AM; Yakovlenko, SI. In: Gas and Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; 
Encyclopedia o f  Low-Temperature Plasma. Series B: Reference Appendices, Bases, 
and Databases; Fortov, VE; Ed; Fizmatlits: Moscow, RU, 2005, vol. XI-4, 569-608. [in 
Russian]. 
[68] Vollkommer, F; Hitzschke, L. In: Proceedings o f  8th International Symposium on 
Science and Technology o f  Light Sources; Greifswald, Germany, 1998, 51-60. 
[69] Mildren, RP; Carman, RJ. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2001, vol. 34, L1-L6. 
[70] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. In: International Conference on Atomic and Molecular 
Pulsed IV (Tomsk, Russia, 2001); Ed; Proc. SPIE, 2002, vol. 4747, 271. 
[71] Lomaev, MI; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; Shitts, DV; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 
2004, vol. 49, 790-794. 
[72] Arnold, E; Lomaev, MI; Lisenko, AA; Skakun, VS; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; 
Shitts, DV; Yakovlenko, SI. Laser Phys., 2004, vol. 14, 809-817. 
[73] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Laser Phys., 2002, vol. 12, 1022-1028. 
[74] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2003, vol. 48, 190-198. 
[75] Panchenko, AN; Suslov, AI; Tarasenko, VF; Tel'minov, AE. Quant. Electr., 2007, vol. 
37, 433-439. 
[76] Karelin, AV; Yakovlenko, SI. Quant. Electr., 1995, vol. 25, 739-745. 

Lasers and Lamps with Excitation by Background-Electron Multiplication… 
311
[77] Karelin, AV; Simakova, ОV. In: Gas and Plasma Lasers; Yakovlenko, SI; Ed; 
Encyclopedia o f  Low-Temperature Plasma. Series B: Reference Appendices, Bases, 
and Databases; Fortov, V. E; Ed; Fizmatlits: Moscow, RU, 2005, vol. XI-4, 665-689. 
[in Russian]. 
[78] Tkachev, AN; Fedenev, AA; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2005, vol. 50, 447-454. 
[79] Eletskii, AV; Smirnov, ВM. Physical Processes in Gas Lasers; Energoatomizdat: 
Moscow, SU, 1985, [in Russian]. 
[80] Massey, HSW; Burhop, EHS. Electronic and Ionic Impact Phenomena; Clarendon: 
Oxford, UK, 1952. 
[81] Tkachev, AN; Fedenev, AA. Atmospheric and Oceanic Optics. 2008, vol. 21, 678-681. 
[82] Boichenko, AM; Yakovlenko, SI; Tarasenko, VF. Laser and Particle Beams. 2000, vol. 
18, 655-660. 
[83] Lo, D; Shangguan, C; Kochetov, IV; Napartovich, AP. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 
vol. 38, 3430-3437. 
[84] Boichenko, AM; Derzhiev, VI; Zhidkov, AG; Yakovlenko, SI. Sov. J. Quant. Electr., 
1989, vol. 19, 182-184. 
[85] Boichenko, AM; Yakovlenko, SI. Quant. Electr., 1994, vol. 24, 236-242. 
[86] Boichenko, AM; Derzhiev, VI; Yakovlenko, SI. Laser Phys., 1992, vol. 2, 210-220. 
[87] Boichenko, AM; Yakovlenko, SI. Sov. J. Quant. Electr., 1992, vol. 22, 1094-1097. 
[88] Boichenko, AM; Tarasenko, VF; Fomin, EA; Yakovlenko, SI. Quant. Electr., 1993, 
vol. 23, 3-25. 
[89] Alekseev, SB; Orlovskii, VM; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. 
Phys., 2005, vol. 50, 1623-1627. 
[90] Arnold, E; Lomaev, MI; Skakun, VS; Tarasenko, VF; Tkachev, AN; Shitts, DV; 
Yakovlenko, SI. Laser Phys., 2002, vol. 12, 1227-1233. 
[91] Tkachev, AN; Yakovlenko, SI. Tech. Phys., 2003, vol. 48, 190-198. 
[92] Mikheev, LD. Laser Part. Beams., 1992, vol. 10, 473-478. 
[93] Malinovskii, GYA; Mamaev, SB; Mikheev, LD; Moskalev, TYU; Sentis, ML; 
Cheremiskin ,VI; Yalovoi, VI. Quant. Electr., 2001, vol. 31, 617-622. 
[94] Tcheremiskine, VI; Sentis, ML; Mikheev, LD. Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, vol. 81, 403-405. 
 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 313-330  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
PHASE TRANSITIONS AS POSSIBLE SOURCES OF 
HIGH POWER RADIATION 
 
 
Mark E. Perel'man* 
Racah Institute of Physics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Removal of the latent heat at vapor condensation and/or crystallization (with 
temperature T << Tc) occurs, as is shown by theoretical calculations and the resulted 
experimental data, on characteristic frequencies and their higher harmonics'. Intensity of 
this radiation can be very high and can explain, in particular, the bright flashes at the 
phenomenon of sonoluminescence. Under the general laws of the quantum theory these 
processes can be stimulated by resonant frequencies, therefore it is possible to carry out 
the laser on such “condensation” radiation. Potential capacity and, in principle, simplicity 
of such devices should attract to them attention of researchers. 
Spectral features of atmospheric clouds correspond to characteristic frequencies of 
water vapor condensation and of CO2, CH4 condensation, etc. Radiative stimulation of 
their phase transitions can lead to control of atmospheric processes and of heat fluxes 
from the Earth, to regularization of its thermal regime. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Searches of new opportunities and mechanisms of realization of laser effect are one of the 
most attractive features of laser physics. In this connection it is possible to pay attention to 
chemical lasers and a search of their analogs as systems of the greater potential possibilities 
and power. 
Chemical reactions of synthesis with eduction of bound energy, are inevitably leading to 
a generation of electromagnetic radiation. However, a number of conditions are necessary for 
realization of the laser effect: a transparency of environment on the basic frequencies of 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: E-mails: m.e.perelman@gmail.com; mark_perelman@mail.ru 

Mark E. Perel'man 
314 
transitions (desirable electro-dipole ones), the narrowness of levels providing their sufficient 
population density, a sufficient and cleared volume and mass of reagents. Therefore a suitable 
selection of chemical reactions is critical for practical realization of the laser effect. 
Within the frame of thermodynamics and statistical physics the description of phase 
transitions of the first kind are very close to the description of chemical reactions: the 
phenomena of vapor condensation, solidification and crystallization also lead to liberation of 
bound energy. And if these energy liberations occur in the form of electromagnetic radiation, 
it is possible to think, in principle, about realization of laser-type emission of the latent heat of 
phase transitions. The most attractive side of such radiators, if they managed to be carried out, 
would be the cheapness and simplicity of preparation of working substance (e.g. water vapor), 
and also possible limitlessness of working volume. 
On the other hand stimulation of phase transitions by characteristic radiation would have 
many applications as the control processes in solid state physics, including cristallophysics, in 
nanotechnology, in the weather control and so on. 
The necessity of investigations of removal problems have been put forward and 
elaborated, in the frame of quantum electrodynamics, in the papers 1], but without 
concretization of elementary acts. 
Thus the investigation of possibilities of realization of this new type of laser sources can 
be divided onto such parts. First, it must be show that the liberation of latent heat can lead to 
determined characteristic radiation and corresponding frequencies must be fixed (we followed 
primary [2]) . Then, in the Section 3, the QED theory of this radiation with possibilities of 
their stimulation must be constructed. In the Section 4 the obvious microscopic considerations 
allow to establish some additional thermodynamic correlations 
Thirdly, the observations data of phenomena, which can be explained by considered 
radiation, must be described. Then, in the Section 6 features of the atmospheric spectra are 
described as results of phase transitions of pollution gases [3], this approach can lead to 
analyses of atmosphere and, in principle, to control of weather processes by radiative 
stimulating of transitions in clouds. 
The unique radiative phenomena that can be connected with latent heat are the 
sonoluminescence, described in the special Section 7. General results are summed in the 
Conclusions. 
 
 
2. EMISSION OF LATENT HEAT AT PHASE TRANSITIONS 
 
All peculiarities of phase transitions should be definable, in principle, by electromagnetic 
properties of constituents. Thus, the basic parameter of the first-order phase transition, its 
molar latent heat (T) should be determinable, undoubtedly, via electromagnetic parameters 
of particles and substances as a whole and via their external parameters. And in the known 
theory [4] and further in [5] it was shown that such approach leads to the satisfactory 
estimation of the latent heat of Helium liquefaction. 
It may be supposed that the processes of removing of liberated latent heat, i.e. the energy 
generated during transition, can be examined as a key to such consideration, since the 
possibilities and channels of such removal can indicate on changes of constituents' 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
315 
interactions during the transition processes. On the other hand this removing energy can has 
some special features that can be interesting in applications. 
The processes of latent energy removing are not usually considered as a problem at all. 
Apparently it is tantamount to an implicit assumption that the removal of latent heat (bond 
energy) at transition into the more condensed phase at constant temperature should be 
occurred via heat conductivity. Such assumption must be recognized as logically inconsistent: 
heat conductivity depends on a difference of temperatures and is executing as a continuous 
process, but phase transition can be executed as a set of discrete processes at the constant 
temperature. 
Note that the imperative existence of certain interrelation of the latent heat generated in 
the first-order phase transition with optical characteristics of forming phases can be 
predictable at consideration of certain residual rays [6] or dielectric anomalies [7]: the factor 
of reflection aspires to unit for the frequencies corresponding to the half of latent heat per 
atom/molecule of many crystals (cf. [8]). 
Here we shall attempt to consider the process of transition into more ordered state 
microscopically as the conversion, completely or partially, of generated latent heat into 
electromagnetic transitive radiation of Ginzburg-
9]. The intensity and spectrum of 
such phase radiation should depend on existence of suitable electron levels. The observations 
of this characteristic radiation were executed in some special experiments, they followed a 
line planned in [1, 8], but their analysis, in our opinion, has not been completed. 
Let's notice that some close effects are described as crystalloluminescence. Its effects are 
investigated for a long time, they including, apparently, displays of several very different 
phenomena: crystallization including nucleation processes, accumulation of transitions energy 
on the introduced radiative centers, polymorphic transformations, chemiluminescence, 
luminescence with fractures and cracks formation, triboluminescence, etc. (e.g. [10]). Such 
mixture complicates their examination and we try to separate from possible sources of 
radiation such ones that are caused exclusively by phase transitions of the first kind. 
If medium contains particles possessing any electric or magnetic moment, the phase 
transition of the first kind can be considered as an instantaneous change at the time t = 0 of 
the dielectric susceptibility of substance and also, probably, the value of moments and 
positions of particles (it is accepted for simplicity that  = 1 and only dipole moments are 
considered): 
 
 
                                                             (2.1) 
 
where       is the Heaviside step function. 
The intensity of transient radiation can be calculated directly. But these calculations are 
not necessary, since they can be simply estimated by the known analogy between transient 
radiations of (nonrelativistic) charge q and dipole d [9]. So, if a charge q is entered, under an 
angle    and with a velocity v from vacuum into medium, the intensity of transient emission 
is 
 
 
(2.2) 
After averaging over angles it can be assumed that for the transition from radiation of 
charges to radiation of dipoles such replacement in (2.2) is enough: 

Mark E. Perel'man 
316 
 
        
      
                        
(2.3) 
 
Let's specify the expression (2.2) by substitution the usual magnitude      with only 
one, for simplicity, resonant frequency: 
 
 
             
     
                       
                         (2.4) 
 
where                is the plasma frequency, N is the density of scatterers, r0 is the 
classical radius of an electron with mass of free particle. 
In view of the subsequent integration 
 
                
     
                           
     
                  (2.5) 
 
 
 
By integrating (2.2) over angles and frequencies with the help of (2.5), it is received that 
the energy radiated at the entering of single dipole into condensate is equal to 
 
 
     
                           
(2.6) 
 
where d is the average value of dipole moments in both substances, 
 is the Thompson 
cross-section. 
With taking into account the collisional broadening of spectral lines        and two 
determinations of substance polarizability  1/N and   d2/3BT, this relation can be 
rewritten as     
        which is equivalent to the universal expression for molar latent 
energy of the condensed phase formation              
  consisting from particles with 
dipole moments: 
 
 
       
 
             J/mol К, 
(2.7) 
 
where      is the universal gas constant. 
This result proves the universality of correlation between energy of the condensed state 
formation for dipole particles and temperatures of transition at      . So, it ascertains that 
the potential energy of bonds of simple particles at (normal) temperature of phase transition 
into the condensed phase is 2 - times bigger their average kinetic energy. 
The numerical evaluations of (2.7) practically coincide with the well-known empirical 
Trouton's rule for latent energy of vapor condensation:           = 80 J/mole K. Some 
distinction between energies of formation and boiling can be connected to certain simplifying 
guesses and approximations of our estimations and does not belittle the general importance of 
this correlation. 
For indicative numerical estimations, one can be taken on          = 10  CGSE, 
density of particles of substance     1022 cm  and   108. From here an estimation WR
 
      10  erg/particle or a latent molar heat of transition  = NAWR
    33 kJ/mole follow 
at normal temperature and pressure. Such estimations generally correspond to the order of 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
317 
magnitudes of observable values and support our assumption of removals of latent heat by 
radiation. 
We accept that when the particle (atom, molecule, cluster) enters into a new phase, it 
radiates the latent heat of transition as one or several quanta which, however, can be 
termalized before their exit from the substance. The presence of suitable levels is necessary 
for realization of the radiation act. But the latent heats of condensation and crystallization are 
not constants; they change with pressure and/or other extensive parameters. 
The most characteristic for substance levels are the levels determined by the gas-crystal 
transition at the zero, in an ideal, pressure. For monatomic substances it is the heat of 
atomization, for multi-atomic it can be determined, possibly, as the heat of atomization minus 
energy of molecules formation. 
Thus, for the first time, the connection between thermodynamic and spectral 
characteristics of substances is established. 
Heat of sublimation for many substances is close to the heat of condensation (it must be 
specially underlined, that for heats of sublimation and/or of atomization the data of different 
directories are rather inconsistent). Therefore, it is possible to think, that the deep overcooling 
of vapor is complicated or even is impossible: for a particle almost enough latent heat of 
condensation exists for its emission with taking into account width of levels. Hence, we can 
predict the radiation during the crystallization in a vapor phase. 
In phenomena of melt crystallization the situation is more complicated. For transition to 
the radiating level the crystallization heat is not obvious enough, therefore additional energy 
can be achievable by overcooling and/or to be borrowed from the thermal energy of melt. 
So, there are such opportunities of radiation: 
 
1. If radiation has the one-photon character, 
 
 
          or           , 
(2.8) 
 
 
where  is expressed in kJ/mole, and lengths of waves in mcm, NA is the Avogadro 
number. 
2. The n-photon transition with equal frequencies: 
 
 
           or            . 
(2.9) 
 
 
Here n can be connected with the number of formed bonds in condensate, i.e. it can 
be of the order of coordination number: n = 1, 2, 3, … . The singularities of spectra 
of condensate media can describe the number of bonds, i.e. their structure for simple 
substances at least. For monatomic substances the two-photon emission in the 1S0 
state with unchanging symmetry of systems are most probable. 
3. In the case of more complex molecules transitions with quanta of various frequencies 
is possible, e.g. for the two-photon case 
 
 
                  or                    
 
        
 . 
(2.10) 
 
 
More complicated combinations of frequencies can be similarly considered. 

Mark E. Perel'man 
318 
4. Dimers and more complicate formations, clusters, can be examined as single 
particles and if bound energy of atoms/molecules in them is small enough, 
wavelengths of radiation for a cluster of M particles will be of the type: 
 
 
  
         ,           
          ,  
(2.11) 
 
 
(Here uncertainties can be connected with differentiation of bonds at formation of 
little clusters). 
5. The more complicated situation with aggregation of M particles and additionally 
 (m is the maximal coordination number) bonds can not be a 
priori excluded. It will mean the emission of           times latent energy: 
 
 
    
                 
(2.12) 
 
Such expression can be connected with appearing of certain bonds even at a stage of 
cluster formation. 
The removal of all generated bond energy by one photon (the dipole radiation) seems the 
most simple and just it was assumed in the initial papers [1]. But such process can not be the 
general feature. In the article [11] is shown that on surfaces always must exist virtual double 
electromagnetic layers of dipoles or higher moments: they absorb incident electromagnetic 
waves and generate reflecting and transmitted ones. 
In an analogy with these considerations the entering of particles with dipole moments 
may be considered as formation and subsequent neutralization of the system of anti-parallel 
dipoles (the anti-parallelism is marked by arrows): 
 
 
                                         
(2.13) 
 
where through A(x, y, 0) an neutral "particle", which already had emitted the energy of 
transition and had been included in substance, is designated. Notice that the interaction 
between these dipoles takes place in the near field [12], i.e. can be instantaneous [13], the 
transferring of excitations between anti-parallel dipoles in near field had been supervised 
experimentally [14]. 
This dipoles system has the positive charge parity and therefore can be neutralized by 
emission of two photons, probably of equal frequencies, in the 1S0 state with     , i.e. by 
(4.2) with n = 2 . 
The decay rate of dipoles system with emission of two photons, if they are entangled, 
coincides with the decay rate of single dipole and can be very roughly estimated via the usual 
expression for such radiation: 
 
 
3
2
3
2
/
)
2
(
)
(
~
/
1
 
 
 


 
d
ka
E

. 
(2.14) 
 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
319 
With the characteristic values d   D;     mcm for water it leads to 
3
10
~
 
E

sec that 
leads, for example, to spontaneous drops growth in the vapor phase with the maximal velocity 
of the order from mcm till tens mcm per second. Such estimation seems non-inconsistent. 
This process is equivalent to the emission of one scalar particle and in an accord to the 
Goldstone theorem of the field theory can lead to changing of system symmetry, e.g. at 
crystallization in the vapor phase. As one example here can be added that the spectrum of 
water contains the lines of order of 6 mcm, two photons of which correspond to the generated 
latent heat at vapor condensation. (Corresponding lines can be determined and shown for 
many other substances.) The calculations of their probability, i.e. the determination of 
processes duration, can be carried out by a close analogy with the positronium decay. 
The two-photon, the very often, removal of energy generated at the first-order phase 
transitions may be explicable by such reasons also. The van-der-Waals interaction is 
describable in QED by the two-photon exchange [15] and the imaginary part of its matrix 
element is proportional, in the spirit of optical theorem, to probability of emission of two 
photons. Therefore such removal of latent energy corresponds to the van-der-Waals 
intermolecular bonds. 
 
 
3. QUANTUM THEORY OF PHASE TRANSITION RADIATION 
 
For revealing quantum features of this radiation, its thresholds, possibilities of radiative 
stimulating of phase transitions and so on, they must be considered in the frame of QED, by 
the analogy with consideration in the our article given above. 
Let us consider such simple model of media: two phases, e.g. gas and solid or liquid are 
presented as a system of two levels separated by the latent energy       per particle at 
constant temperature,  is the molar latent heat,    is the Avogadro number. Then the 
photons generated in the course of transition, i.e. at descent of each particle onto the 
condensate level, can be termalized in media or, at some conditions, can be emitted as real 
photons. Moreover, an existence of induced radiation is not excluded in such picture and it 
can lead, in principle, to stimulated phase transitions into definite condensate state [1]. 
The main difference with the QED calculations of atomic radiation, considered in our 
article above, consists in the kind of electron propagator. Instead of the Low propagator here 
must be taken the temperature-temporal propagator of bound electron in media (e.g. [16]): 
 
                   
          –    
   
                                 (3.1) 
 
where    is the wave function of atomic electron, n are numbers of levels with halfwidths 
; at T = 0  this expression turn into the Low propagator. 
For non-ferromagnetic media the Fourier transformation of (3.1) over time takes the 
form: 
 
 
 

Mark E. Perel'man 
320 
        
          –    
     
 
                          
   
               
          
 
 
   
 
(3.2) 
 
Direct calculations of bound electron-photon interactions at     are not necessary 
because in all respects they differ only by the extra factor 
 
 
                                    
(3.3) 
 
for each electron line from the expressions given in the above article. The number of photons 
emitted at transition of single particle is not specialized here, if the symmetry of each particle 
is not changed at the course of transition, the most probable will be emission of two photons 
in the 1S0 state. 
Hence the unique difference of such relations for phase transitions from the formulae of 
stimulated emission reaction rates consists in a replacement of the flux density threshold 
values: 
 
 
     
              
 
                 
(3.4) 
 
The existence of pole (3.4) in every infinite virial series for bound electron-photon flux 
interactions leads to the following picture: when the temperature is increasing and the density 
of thermal radiation in frequency band near resonance becomes equal to (3.4), then the phase 
transition takes place: a saturation of one type of interactions and the including of following 
channel of interaction with another features (condensate turns into gas phase and so on). 
Let's consider the free energy jump determining the saturation of some e-γ interaction 
channels. From (3.3) and (3.4) follows 
 
 
                                           
(3.5) 
 
At transition from one type of interaction to another the jump of energy is of the order of 
 
 
                                               
(3.6) 
 
This relation can be rewritten via the molar latent heat and with the universal gas constant 
 as 
 
 
                 
(3.7) 
In the infrared range, where characteristic emissions of latent heat may be expected, it 
can be proposed that  0/    104. It leads to  /T ~ 24 cal/mol⋅K that just corresponds to the 
cited Trouton rule established in 1884 for many substances (non-polar or weakly polar): latent 
heat and temperature of boiling are connected at normal pressure by the relation of order 
         cal/mole⋅K
 
 (cf. (2.7)). This rule is often used for physicochemical 
estimations (cf. [1, 2]). However, till now this rule has not been substantiated theoretically; its 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
321 
sense and significance remained unknown. The estimation (2.19) can be indubitably 
concretized for different transitions and substances. 
 
 
4. RECOMBINATION OF COUPLED ANTI-PARALLEL DIPOLES 
 
Let us return to the obvious microscopic considerations that allow the establishment of 
further thermodynamic correlations 
If the particle of condensable gas possesses certain multipole moment, constant or virtual, 
at the approach to a surface it induces the redistribution of charges in medium, which is 
describing as the occurrence of a "mirror" moment (charge dislocation) in its near-surface 
adsorption layer. The arising attraction accelerates the sedimentation of condensable particles 
on the surface of condensate, i.e. their adsorption and/or phase transition [17]. 
Let's consider, as well as above, the condensation of vapor atoms or sufficiently simple 
molecules with the dipole moment 
 on a flat surface of condensate at constant temperature 
much lower critical one and at such pressure that the vapor can be considered as an ideal gas. 
Kinetic energies of particle and of its image are equal to       
       the energy of 
interaction of two identical dipoles on distance R, averaged over angles, is equal to    
     . 
According to the virial theorem (e.g. [18]) the "temperature" part of potential energy of 
system, potential of which depends on distance as 
, is           , i.e. in our case 
           for each dipole. Inasmuch as at entering of such particle into condensate its 
temperature should not be altered, i.e. the kinetic energy and corresponding part of potential 
energy should be kept, the liberated energy (the latent heat generated in the first-order phase 
transition of single particle) should be equal 
 
 
                                
(4.1) 
 
In this expression, obviously, dynamic polarizability of atom, retardation and Casimir 
forces are not taken into account. Their role can be more significant at consideration of 
completely neutral particles (atoms of noble gases, molecules СО2, СН4, etc.). It is possible to 
notice that, apparently, just this circumstance essentially lowers their temperatures of phase 
transitions in comparison with atoms/molecules possessing such moments (atoms of metals, 
at which the S-state is basic, e.g. Lithium, can form dimers and more complex aggregates 
with diversified momenta in a gas state). 
Feasibility of the condition (4.1) is determinable, certainly, by an opportunity of 
approximation of substance polarization via only one "mirror" dipole. Hence the condensable 
dipole must be completely outside of condensate, i.e. the distance R in (4.1) should exceed 
the sizes of particle. Therefore this expression can be unfit or too complicated for 
consideration of big molecules. 
The expression (4.1) can be considered, within the framework of described restrictions, 
as the strict one; in substances with orientation polarizability (e.g. [19])         
   and therefore it somewhat specifies (2.7): 
 

Mark E. Perel'man 
322 
 
                         
(4.2) 
 
In many substances, for which α0 can be neglected, polarizability is inversely proportional 
to specific spherical volume, in which dipoles are cooperating, i.e.          . Thus, it 
leads to such form of latent heat per particle: 
 
 
                    
(4.3) 
 
or, accordingly, for the molar condensation energy, 
 
 
                    
(4.4) 
 
that just corresponds to (2.7), however now such expression can be already cited as the 
theorem. But for such generalization the necessary and sufficient conditions must be properly 
defined. 
One more checking of usefulness of (4.1) as the general expression can be carried out as 
follows. The latent heat of transition into liquid state must tends to zero at approach to the 
critical temperature and pressure, therefore the general expression (4.1) would be rewritten 
for critical parameters as 
 
 
     
          
(4.5) 
 
Let's check up this relation, as an example, for water. As the critical temperature     
     K and if the dipole moment keeps its value d = 1.855 D, then Rc = 2.6810  cm or the 
critical density must be of the order of            g/cm3 at comparison with the 
experimental value   
             g/cm3. 
But in general it is possible to assert that in spite of all approximations, including 
constancy of dipole moments, this result seems not unreasonable. It means that the offered 
theory allows the establishing of correspondence of the critical parameters, at least, for certain 
substances. Notice that on the other hand, such relation can give possibility for investigation 
of possible changing of the dipole and other moments of molecules with changing of 
extensive parameters and for a certain tentative estimation of such changes. 
Possible deviations from (3.4) in the scope of conducted discussion are evident. They can 
occur at approaching of temperature to the critical one, for particles of big sizes, with change 
of the dipole moment of particles at transition from one phase into another (usually      
   ), by virtue of difference of a mirror dipole in dielectrics with the inducement dipole 
(difference is definable by values of dielectric susceptibility of both substances, e.g. [20]), in 
dependence on the form of condensate surface. All these changes, in principle, need to be 
taken into account directly in (4.1). More generally we can not assert that the interaction of 
complex molecules or clusters with condensable surface can be restrictively considered via 
influence of only one single electromagnetic moment. 
It must be noted that the similar rules for processes of solidification of liquids are 
considerably less definite and practicable. The most simple of them assert that      
         cal/mole К for simple substances,           cal/mole К for inorganic 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
323 
molecules and             cal/mole К for organic ones. The consideration of these 
processes through proposed transitive radiation of own and induced momenta requires a 
revealing of "mirror" momenta inside the particles. Therefore their consideration should be 
much more complicated or would have less definite and more restricted heuristic significance. 
On the other hand their consideration is possible on the base of relation (3.7) deducted in [8], 
the Appendix, via assumptions of frequencies and width of emitting levels responsible for 
phase transitions. 
 
 
5. EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND OBSERVATIONS 
 
Several observations of radiation that can be described as the latent energy removal are 
known [2]. The most power between them is the gigantic IR excess observed in new born 
stars and nebulae [21]. Some observations connected with the condensation of water vapor 
will be mentioned below. But more convincing must be the laboratory investigations. 
Let's consider concrete substances in which transitive radiation is experimentally 
recorded (data of corresponding heats are taken from [22]). 
Aluminum. The heat of sublimation            kJ/mole, accordingly, at one-photon 
transition  1
(subl) = 0.364 mcm that corresponds to observable radiation splash on   = 0.36 
mcm [23]. Supervision, however, mark also peak of radiation with   = 0.43 mcm, it 
corresponds to the heat of condensation into intermediate liquid state before crystallization 
cond = 294 kJ/mole leading  1
(cond) = 0.41 mcm. It would be interesting to check up the 
frequency corresponding to the heat of crystallization cryst = 10.8 kJ/mole in deep IR:   
= 
11.1 mcm. Note that  1
(subl) corresponds to the maximum of reflectivity of Al and its 
minimum is close to 0.75 mcm, i.e. corresponds to two-photon emission of latent energy. 
Copper. The heat of sublimation subl         kJ/mole, the heat of condensation into 
intermediate liquid state before crystallization 
 = 300.4 kJ/mole. Accordingly, at two-
photon transition for sublimation  2 = 0.71 and for condensation  2 = 0.8 mcm that 
correspond to observable splashes of radiation on   = 0.7, 0.8, 0.85 mcm. Splash in radiation 
with   = 1.5 mcm can be attributed to four-photon transition of the atom. 
Tellurium. In the experiment [24] with very rapid crystallization of overcooled Tellurium 
melt, the increase of radiation intensity in the range 24 microns was observed. If to accept 
the latent heat of crystallization 
, with respect to (2.11), it leads to 
emission of the characteristic radiation corresponding to two-atoms cooperative transition  2 
= 3.4mcm. 
Sapphire. The heat of crystallization is 114 kJ/mole. At one-photon transition it leads to   
= 1.07 mcm, the observable value   = 1.1 mcm [25]. 
Alkali halides and PbCl2. At crystallization of NaCl, NaBr, NaI, KCl, KBr, KI, PbCl2 the 
peaks fully complying heat of crystallization are shown [26]. 
Lithium fluoride. At its crystallization the most interesting characteristic spectrum was 
 (2.1) = 4.34,   (2.2) = 4.05,   (2.3) = 3.45,   (2.4) = 2.80 mcm [23]. For LiF, the latent 
heat of crystallization cryst        kJ/mole and coordination number is 6. The observable 
lengths of waves of radiation with the accuracy of 7% correspond to the formula (2.12) with 
M = 1, n = 0 for   (2.1); M = 1, n = 1 for   (2.2), M = 1, n = 2 for   (2.3) and M = 1, n = 4 for   (2.4) 

Mark E. Perel'man 
324 
Water. The heat of sublimation is 46.68 kJ/mole, the heat of condensation into liquid 
phase at normal conditions is 40.6 kJ/mole and the heat of crystallization is 6.01 kJ/mole. 
They can lead to such emissions:  1(subl)= 2.57,  1(cond)= 2.96,  1(cryst)= 20. In the paper [27] 
the surpluses of radiation corresponding to sublimation or condensation (an interval     
    mcm) and crystallization (      mcm), apparently, have been determined, both 
correspond to two-photon transitions. The peak with        mcm fixed from the satellite 
[28], relates, apparently, to condensating water vapor at the lowered pressure, when it is about 
35.8 kJ/mole. 
Dimers and more complicated formations are always present in water vapor. So, the peak 
with  =1.5 mcm corresponds to condensation of water dimmers  
three molecules formation and so on (there are some previous supervisions that can be 
attributed as emissions at water condensation in atmosphere [29] and the most valuable for 
next section are observations of frequencies that may be attributed as higher harmonics of 
characteristic phase radiation [30]). 
 
 
6. RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS IN BALANCE OF ATMOSPHERIC 
HEATING, POSSIBILITY OF THEIR CONTROL 
 
At consideration and comparison of different channels of heat removing from the Earth is 
usually assumed that latent heat of precipitations (the power of 78 W/cm2 from 324 W/cm2 of 
general flux) is accumulating directly on the Earth surface (e.g. [31]). 
Let us show that possible processes of repeated emissions of latent heats at condensation 
and crystallization of certain atmospheric gases with their subsequent sublimation and anew 
solidifications can lead to augmentation of the role of this channel of the heat removal from 
the Earth. 
Here must be taken into account that really the emission is connected with formation of 
bonds between an entering particle and particles in the condensate; for comparatively simple 
particles can be assumed that all such bonds are identical. As the molecules H2O are 
connected with neighbors by four bonds, at water condensation each molecule establishes two 
new bonds with the energy      . But as in the process of emission energies of some bonds 
can be accumulated and then emitted as one quantum and such joining can include dimers and 
even more complex formations, it can be proposed that emitted quanta are described primary 
by (2.9). 
All observable peaks are very wide and this feature must be discussed. At laboratory 
investigations the variation of energies of condensable or crystallizing particles are restrained 
by usual equilibrium distributions. But in the case of atmospheric observations there is a 
natural distribution over altitudes and temperatures. For initial estimation the cited and proved 
above Trouton rule can be taken into account. It can be supposed that analogical relation, with 
another and now still undetermined numerical value, would be proposed for transitive 
emission also. Therefore for considered cases can be assumed such estimation: 
 
 
        
  
 
 
(6.1) 
 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
325 
Differences of temperatures within atmosphere evidently can lead to observable values of 
peaks wideness. 
Let’s compare experimental (observable, e.g. [31]) data with estimations by the general 
expression (2.9) for water vapor. 
In the Table are written out all its observable maxima from 1 till 6 mcm; they are 
compared with wave lengths calculated by (2.9) at            with the heat of 
sublimation (subl) = 46.68 kJ/mole and the heat of condensation into liquid phase at normal 
conditions (cond) = 40.6 kJ/mole (the heat of water crystallization (cryst) = 6.01 kJ/mole leads 
to a far IR and is omitted). 
All these lines are between radiated wave lengths corresponding to mixture of condensing 
and sublimation processes. The radiation with     mcm corresponds to dimers or even more 
complex formations (notice that by their intensities relative to density of dimers can be 
estimated and so on). Note evident possibilities of splitting these maxi’s onto condensation 
and sublimation types. 
 
Table: Singularities of water clouds spectra in the Earth atmosphere. 
 
 observ 
0.72 
0.81 
0.93 
1.13 
1.42 
1.89 
2.01-2.05 
2.25-3.0 
5.9 
n 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
 n
(subl) 
0.73 
0.86 
1.03 
1.285 
1.71 
2.57 
5.14 
 n
(cond) 
 0.84 
0.985 
1.18 
1.48 
 1.97 
2.96 
5.91 
 
In this range are another max’s also. The peaks with  = 3.1 mcm and with  > 6.5 mcm, 
that are not written out here, correspond to the well-known proper vibrations of molecule 1 
(  = 3.05 and 3.24 for liquid and solid states correspondingly) and 2 (  ~ 6.06 ÷ 6.27 in 
dependence on phase state). 
Now we can briefly consider some other gases that can be organized in clusters or even 
form drops in the atmosphere: CO2, CH4, N2O, their possible density and temperatures in the 
upper atmosphere can be, in principle, sufficient for such transitions. 
For CO2, the carbon dioxide, (subl) = 25.23 kJ/mole and by (2.3)  1 = 4.76 mcm,  2 = 
2.38 mcm. Observable peaks are located between 4.3 ÷ 4.5 mcm, 2.4 ÷ 2.8 mcm. Thus a 
qualitative correspondence can be claimed. The difference can be connected with the energy 
needed for bend of pure linear molecule in solid substance. 
For N2O, the nitrous oxide, (subl) = 23 kJ/mole, (cond) = 16.56 kJ/mole and 
correspondingly  (s)
1 = 5.2 mcm and   (c)
1 = 7.25 mcm. They also correspond to observable 
peaks at 5 and 8 mcm. 
For CH4, the methane, (subl) = 8.22 kJ/mole and by (2.3)  1 = 14.6 mcm, but observable 
peaks are located near to 8 and 5 mcm. Formally they can be attributed to condensation of 
dimers, trimers, and so on. But for more realistic consideration the knowledge of spectra of 
corresponding crystals are needed. 
Thus it shows that all peaks of water vapors and of some air pollutions are identified as 
relating to phase transitions. It can lead to simple methods for detection of air pollutions and 
can be generalized by consideration of other gases. Moreover as processes of solidification 

Mark E. Perel'man 
326 
and evaporation can be reiterated and its repeating leads toward several mechanisms of 
reorganization or canalization of electromagnetic energy in atmosphere. 
Possibilities of stimulating phase transitions by external resonant radiation can lead, in 
principle, to the control of atmospheric processes. 
For further development of offered theory some experiments seem needed. The most 
simple between them can be the establishing a difference of "gases peaks" during daylight 
hours and nightly. But laboratory investigation of latent energy emission should be also very 
desirable. 
The offered theory can has direct significance for examination of planetary and nebulae 
atmospheres. So, it can be applied, in particular, to the very old problem of the Great Red 
Spot of Jupiter: its coloration can be connected, at least particularly, with processes of 
condensation and crystallization of ammonia and its compounds. But such approach requires 
laboratory investigations. 
 
 
7. SONOLUMINESCENCE AS UNIQUE EFFECT OF ENERGY 
CONCENTRATION 
 
The phenomenon of sonoluminescence (SL) consists in the lightening of cavitation 
bubbles, induced in liquids by acoustical waves (general reviews [32,33]. The investigations 
of the single-bubble SL even in pure water gave surprising results: the period of irradiation T 
< 50 psec for acoustical wave with      kHz under compression of the bubble from      
mcm till        mcm. Hence it seems that concentration of energy reaches no less that 1012 
fold, a record value for all known nonnuclear processes, and even approaches to the threshold 
of D-T reactions. 
As yet there is not any adequate or conventional theory, which could elucidate the origin 
of onset of SL, its spectrum, its influence on some exotical chemical reactions, etc. 
We attempt to explain these phenomena on such a way [34]. The cavitation bubbles must 
be filled by vapor molecules, which will condense on the surfaces under compression with 
liberating of their latent energy by formation of new n electron bounds for each molecule 
(    for water). Therefore the latent energy may be irradiated on the characteristic 
frequencies. These quanta may be reabsorbed by neighboring resonance bounds and so on 
(confinement of radiation in the extended two-level system) till possible complete 
termalization. But if their density becomes sufficiently big, it may begin the processes of 
multiphoton harmonics generation, described in our article above [35], for which the liquid is 
transparent, and it can be just the effect of SL. 
In our case the density of phase radiation can be estimated on such manner: under normal 
conditions into the vapor bubble of radius      mcm enter          moleculae of 
vapor with complete latent energy       erg. The rate of single bound radiation can be 
taken as 
 
 
   
 
    
                      , 
(7.1) 
 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
327 
where 
D is the moleculae dipole moment. If the number of excitation in such 
effectively two-level system (molecules bounds in liquid and vapor states) is sufficiently big, 
then the Dicke cooperative mechanism may come into effect with time correlation of the 
impulse of order 
 
 
       
 
                           
(7.2) 
 
 is the radius of volume with excited molecules across squeezed bubble, 
 is the 
Löschmidt number. It gives the duration of the Dicke cooperative flash               
psec, which does not contradict to the observations [31, 32]. The mean power of cooperative 
radiation becomes 
 
 
  
 
                          
 
  
(7.3) 
 
which must be compared with thresholds of multiphoton processes. 
The main MPP for our purposes is the high harmonics generation           
    , where     . Its rate could be calculated in the scope of QED via (   )-order 
one-connected S-matrix element without account of intermediate states, which can not be 
developed between fast photon absorptions. 
In the MPPs theory it demonstrates that in the strong radiation field sequential photon 
absorptions are such sufficiently fast, that the electron wave function could not altered 
between them. As the result the N-photon reaction goes as one-photon process with photon 
frequency    , but with accept of the rate of virtual absorption of N photons. 
From (7.3) follows that the threshold for N photon harmonics generation is 
 
 
                
 
            [W/cm2] 
(7.4) 
 
(   is in eV-s), which is in agreement with the known experimental data for MPPs. At 
comparison with (7.3) it gives       , which just present the visible SL spectra. It 
must be noted that at the Poisson-type quasicontinuous background there can be manifested 
some peaks, connected with recombination lines of OH and so on, and with resonant lines of 
dissoluble atoms/molecules, as the probability of their levels occupation may be high enough. 
So in dilute solutions of alkali salts appear the intensive emission peaks of Li      0,67 
mcm, i.e. the radiation with 
8 or 9), Na     0,59 mcm; N = 9, 10), K     0,77 
mcm, N = 7, 8), Ca     0,42 and absence of line with   0,39 mcm) etc. It must be 
marked the spectrum of dodecane with series of broad peaks, corresponding to N = 8
12. 
Some chemical reactions in the cavitation bubbles can be considered as photochemical ones, 
etc. 
It may be claimed that the proposed theory is responsible for all present effects of SL and 
in addition gives the essential arguments in favor of existence of phenomena of radiative 
phase transitions. On the other hand it can be concluded that further significant increasing of 
SL power concentration is impossible, since its flashes depend on the position of transparence 

Mark E. Perel'man 
328 
band of liquids, but not from the initial acoustical power. Hence this phenomenon does not 
seem to be a perspective one for cold nuclear reactions. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Let us enumerate the results and some further perspectives. 
 
1. Characteristic radiation corresponding to the first order phase transitions in more ordered 
states exists and can remove out the latent energy of transition. 
2. General quantum view requires an existence of stimulated emission along a spontaneous 
one. Therefore it predicts possibility of high intensity laser effects realized fast removal of 
latent energy on the characteristic frequencies and their harmonics. 
3. Besides technology the observation of transition radiation may have a big role for climatic 
problems. Possibility of stimulating phase transitions by resonance irradiation can lead to 
control of weather processes. 
4. In the pure scientific sense must be mentioned that this phenomenon, for the first time, 
ascertains the internal conformity between the thermodynamic and spectroscopic 
magnitudes. It demonstrates possibilities and perspectives of spectroscopy of phase 
transitive radiation and even perspectives for control the speeds and directions of 
crystallization processes. 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The most part of experimental and observational data were compiled and discussed with 
V. A. Tatartchenko and J. Lapides, theoretical bases were repeatedly discussed with M. I. 
Molotsky, I. I. Royzen, M. Ya. Amusia and M. Tsindlekht, all problems were continuously 
considered with G. M. Rubinstein. I am deeply indebted to them. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Perel'man, M. E. (1971). Phys.Lett. A, 32, 411; Sov.Phys.-Doklady, 203, 1030 (1972); 
214, 539 (1974). 
[2] 
Perel’man, M. E. & Tatartchenko, V. A. (2008). Phys. Lett. A, 372, 2480. 
[3] 
Perel’man, M. E. http://arxiv.org/abs/0905.0471.  
[4] 
Schwinger, J., De Raad, L. L. & Milton, K. A. (1978). Ann. Phys. (NY), 115, 1, 388.  
[5] 
Milonni, P. W. & Lerner, P. B. (1992). Phys. Rev. A, 46, 1185; Milonni, P. W. (1994). 
The Quantum Vacuum. L.: Academic,.  
[6] 
Baly, E. C. (1920). Phil. Mag., 40, 15; Schaefer, C. & Matossi, F. (1930). Das 
Ultrarote Spektrum, B.: Springer, S. 284.  
[7] 
Kittel, C. (1963). Quantum Theory of Solids. NY, Wiley, 320. 

Phase Transitions as Possible Sources of High Power Radiation 
329 
[8] 
Perel'man, M. E. (2007). Phil. Mag., 87, 3129. 
[9] 
Ginzburg, V. L. & Tsytovich, V. N. (1979). Phys. Rep., 49, 1; Transient Radiation and 
Transient Scattering. M.: Nauka, 1984 (In Russian).  
[10] Barsanti, M. & Maccarrone, F. (1991). Riv. Nuovo Cimento  # 14; Chandra, B. P., 
Verma, P. K. & Ansari, M. H. (1997). J. Phys. C., 9, 7675.  
[11] Perel'man, M. E. (2009). Int. J. Theor. Phys. 48, 2579; arXiv: quant-ph/0903.2780 
[12] Perel'man, M. E. (2007). Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 16, 305. 
[13] Perel'man, M. E. (2005). Ann. Phys. (Leipzig), 14, 733. 
[14] Kawazoe, T. et al. (2005). e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotech., 3, 74 and references therein. 
[15] Berestetski, V., Lifshitz, E. & Pitaevski, L. (1971). Relativistic Quantum Theory. 
Oxford: Pergamon.  
[16] Lifshitz, E. M. & Pitaevskii, L. P. (1981). Statistical Physics II, Pergamon Press, NY. 
[17] Perel'man, M. E., Rubinstein, G. M. & Tatartchenko, V. A. (2008). Phys. Lett. A, 372, 
4100.  
[18] Hirschfelder, J. O., Curtiss, Ch. F. & Bird, R. B. (1954). Molecular Theory of Gases 
and Liquids. J.Wiley.  
[19] Braun, W. F. (1956). Dielectrics. In: Handbuch der Physik (Heraus. S.Flügge). XVII, 1. 
Springer.  
[20] Jackson, J. D. (1962). Classical Electrodynamics. J.Wiley. 
[21] Perel’man, M. E. (1981). Astrophysics, 17, 213. 
[22] D. R. Lide (Ed.), Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. CRC Press, 2003; Lange's 
Handbook of Chemistry. 16th Ed., McGraw-Hill, 2005; P. Patnaik. Handbook of 
Inorganic Chemicals. McGraw-Hill, 2002.  
[23] Molotsky, M. I. & Peregud, B. P. (1981). Sov. Tech. Phys., 26, 369; Abramova, K. B. 
et al. (1985). Sov. Opt. Spectr., 58, 809. 
[24] Nikolaev, I. V., Kidyarov, B. I. & Kozharo, A. P. (2004). Abst. III Int.Conf. “Kinetics 
and mechanisms of crystallization”, Ivanovo, Russia, 34. 
[25] Tatarchenko, V. A. & Umarov, L. M. (1980). Sov. Phys. – Crystallography, 25, 748. 
[26] Tatarchenko, V. A. (1979). Sov. Phys. – Crystallography, 24, 238; Umarov, L. M. & 
Tatarchenko, V. A. (1984). Sov. Phys – Crystallography, 29, 670. 
[27] Mestvirishvili, A. N., Directovich, J. G., Grigoriev, S. I. & Perel’man, M. E. (1977). 
Phys. Lett., 60A,  143. 
[28] Hasler, F. et al. http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/ap020323.html. 
[29] Nichols, L. W. & Lamar, J. (1968). Applied Optics, 7, 1757.  
[30] Potter, W. R. & Hoffman, J. G. (1968). Infrared Physics, 8, 265; Ayad, M. (1971). 
Infrared Physics, 11, 249. 
[31] Kiehl, J. T. & Trenberth, K. E. (1997). Bull. Am. Met. Soc., 78, 197. 
[32] Brenner, M. P., Hilgenfeldt, S. & Lohse, D. (2002). Rev. Mod. Phys., 74, 425. 
[33] Suslick, K. S. & Flannigan, D. J. (2008). Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 59, 659. 
[34] Perel'man, M. E. (1996). In: Int. A. D. Sakharov Conf. Phys., Proc., 2nd, (I. M. Dremin, 
& A. M. Semikhatov, Eds.), World Sc. Pub., Singapore, 1997, 660-3. 
[35] Perel'man, M. E. This collection, Chapter 2. 
 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 331-349  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
APPLICATION OF PULSED LASER DEPOSITION FOR 
PUTTING MULTI-LAYER COATINGS ON THE INNER 
SURFACES OF HOLLOW OBJECTS 
 
 
Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan,  
Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov  
and Denis Vladimirovich Chulkov*  
“MATI”-RSTU named after K.E. Tsiolkovsky 
121552, Orshanskaya street, 3, Moscow, Russian Federation. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Presented here are the analysis results of the ability of Pulsed Laser Deposition 
methods for putting a multi-layer multi-component coating with single-layer thickness in 
the nano-scale range as well as micro- and nano-composite coatings on the inner surfaces 
of hollow objects. Also reviewed are mass-transporting processes, occurring during the 
application of double-component coatings by Pulsed Laser Deposition methods on the 
inner surface of long tubes of small diameter (L/d>50 L≈900mm, d≈13mm). With XPS 
and RBS methods, the structure and composition of double-component multi-layer 
coatings with single-layer thickness ≈30 nm, obtained on special installation equipped 
with YAG:Nd+ Laser LTI-207, is investigated. A device to provide target changing 
during the deposition process without vacuum braking is developed. We determined 
conditions of obtaining multi-layer coatings with single-layer thickness in nano-scale 
range and methods of preliminary inner surfaces cleaning of said objects by means of 
hollow cathode glowing discharge with partial plasma filling of cathode cavity. We 
considered different schemes of cleaning inner surfaces of tube-like objects. Possible 
applications of the presented method for treating of said objects in individual or serial 
production, instrument decisions providing realization of the presented process and its 
perspective are discussed. 
 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: e-mail: plasma@mati.ru 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
332 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The use of ion-plasma processes (such as ion implantation, application of coatings) for 
treatment of intricate shaped product surfaces presents a number of difficulties relating to 
obtaining uniform surface treatment over the entire surface of the products. The difficulties 
are aggravated when treating the inside surfaces of hollow products such as tubes. The 
analysis of papers related to coating deposition onto inner surfaces of tubes by ion-plasma 
methods showed that the main limiting parameter is the minimal diameter of tubes. Moreover, 
in most considered processes of deposition, there is a problem of securing of the thickness 
uniformity along the treated surface.  
Ion-plasma methods of coating deposition onto inner surfaces of tubes may be divided 
into two classes: 
 
- 
particle flux is formed outside of the cavity under treatment and then transferred to 
the surface of the cavity; 
- 
source of the particles is inside the cavity. 
 
Solutions of the first type must guarantee good flux controllability to secure the 
uniformity of deposition along the surface, which is practically impossible with long tubes.  
In the second case certain difficulties appear when constructing a deposition device 
(especially for small cavities), capable of securing controllable process of deposition and at 
the same time providing simple retuning in case of change in the size of workpieces. 
Therefore, modification of the inside surfaces of tubes by well-known methods (for instance, 
magnetron sputtering of coatings [1]) were carried out with tubes of 50 mm or greater inner 
diameter. The possibility of using a coaxial discharge system [2] for long thin tubes is also 
doubtful. Modern industry requires tubes with parameters d = 5 — 10mm, L/d = 50—100 
(L—tube length, d – inner diameter) for such treatment. Thus, the problem of modification of 
the inner surface of relatively long tubes, small in diameter, is rather pressing. 
It is obvious that a plasma source of small size conveyed inside tubes could be exploited 
for ion-plasma treatment of the inner surfaces of long thin tubes. When treating inner surfaces 
of straight tubes, this task can be accomplished by means of the laser plasma generated while 
a target, placed inside the tube, is exposed to pulsed laser irradiation. 
Unique characteristics—high power density, low angular divergence and ability to 
transfer energy over a long distance—make laser beam a highly suitable instrument for 
depositing onto inner surfaces of long straight tubes with small diameter. 
During the previous years, PLD (Pulsed Laser Deposition) became commonly used for 
depositing of thin films as a method providing the possibility to obtain films of controllable 
composition. Composition and structure of metal films essentially depend on the deposition 
speed and energy of particles, which are noticeably higher in PLD process than in common 
vapor deposition processes. Intensity of radiation of pulse lasers, used for PLD is in the range 
5⋅1012–1014 W/m2, that is in the range of intensive vaporization of materials by nanosecond 
duration of pulse. Thus at the present time PLD method by its own characteristics practically 
has no alternative for applying coatings onto inner surfaces of long tubes of small diameter. 
This method provides precise control of coating thickness, deposition at low temperatures 
of substrate, sputtering of nanocrystalline and amorphous films with good structure. The 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
333
properties of thin films generated by PLD are widely dependent on plasma plume 
characteristics [6]. The ionic component in plasma plume gives wide abilities of varying of 
coating properties. 
Recently intensive investigations were carried out in the field of developing new 
nanostructured hard and super hard coatings, notable by high wear and oxidation resistance [7]. 
  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
a)  The work chamber of the laser testing bench: 1—turbo-molecular pumps, 2— vacuum chamber, 3—
high-voltage transformer, 4—target holder pin, 5—fluoroplastic bush, 6—conical target, 7—
longitudinal transposition gear, 8—tube, and  9—door. 
b) The test bench scheme for applying multi-layer coatings with prior cleaning by discharge: 1– 
transporter transferring mechanism, 2–vacuum chamber, 3–transporter, 4–window for laser beam, 
5–block of targets, 6–anode, 7–target, 8–link with a second anode, 9–processing workpiece, 10– 
insulator preventing gas flow-out of the tube during cleaning process. 
Figure 1. Inner surface treatment process chart.  

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
334 
However, in spite of impressive achievements in creating hard and super hard 
nanostructured coatings, it would be well to notice, that most of them were applied to outer 
surfaces of specimens. Applying nanostructured coatings on inner surfaces of cavities of 
different shape (including tubes) is one of the most complicated tasks of ion-plasma surface 
modification technology.  
Here we present a review of previous and recent results in the field of using the PLD 
method for applying metal coatings (single-component [8], double-component, multi-layer 
[9], etc…) on inner surfaces of long tubes with small diameter. 
 
 
2. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT 
 
The investigations were run on a laser testing bench designed specifically for this purpose 
and consisting of seven separate units: the processing unit comprising the work chamber and 
beam with laser beam scanning system, control unit, laser power supply, glow discharge 
power supply, pulse generator of accelerating voltage and vacuum system.  
An LTI-207 laser based on yttrium aluminum garnet activated by neodymium, with pulse 
pumping and modulated quality was selected as a laser emission source with the following 
parameters: wavelength λ = 1.06 μm, maximum pulsed ray energy W = 1J; pulse duration τ1 
= 5–13ns; pulse frequency f = 1–30 Hz; emission divergence γ = 3 mrad. 
The laser beam enters through the window into the work chamber (Figure 1а) and is 
scanned over the surface of the conical target (6). Scanning is relied on to extend a lifetime of 
the target and secure a constant density of vaporizable material (when laser emission has a 
constant power) since it inhibits the formation of craters on the surface. 
The work chamber represents three cylindrical compartments mounted horizontally and 
joined together into a single vacuum module. The chamber (2) is pumped by two turbo-
molecular pumps (1). A high-voltage transformer (3), to which the target holder pin (4) is 
fixed and connected electrically, is mounted at one end of the chamber. The other end of the 
pin is supported by a centring fluoroplastic bush (5). There is a door (9) with a window for 
laser emission fixed at the other end of the chamber. When being treated, the tube (8), 
conveyed along the chamber axis in the course of spraying, is secured to the longitudinal 
transposition gear (7) including a rack-and-pinion drive. The target is rigidly connected to the 
focusing system (the target is fixed firmly to the focus of the optical arrangement), both being 
coaxial with respect to the tube surface treated. 
The focal length is 1.2 m. The focused beam diameter being 0.3–0.4mm in the working 
laser mode without modulation, the scanning circle diameter determined by a laser beam trail on 
a photographic paper is equal to 5 mm at the focusing point. The laser beam trail on the target is 
2 mm wide in the modulation mode at maximum power, the scanning circle size being the 
same. The maximum density of laser emission on the target is 1.3 x 1013W/m2, which is enough 
to secure the formation of the plasma flame on targets made of any material. This provides a 
way of obtaining ions of any solid substances, including those of refractory materials. 
To impart additional power to ions of the laser plasma, a high-voltage pulse between the 
target and the product is applied to the pin of the target holder through the pulse transformer 
from a high-voltage power generator. The generator operates in standby mode and is triggered 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
335
by synchronized pulses from the laser power supply. The pulse duration of the accelerating 
voltage is chosen on the basis of the relation: 
 
 
τ1 <τa <τb, 
 
where τ1 is the pulse duration of laser emission, τa the pulse duration of the accelerating 
voltage, and τb is the time required to initiate a discharge inside the tube. 
To make a fine-tuning of principles of depositing multi-component and multi-layer 
coatings on inner surfaces of tubes the laser testing bench was modernized (fig 1b). Special 
device providing alternate (by use of targets of different composition) applying of coating 
layers and prior surface cleaning in one technological circle. 
This device consist of block of targets (5), with several pins holding targets of different 
composition (7) and one pin holding anode (6) fixed on it. Anode is fixed on the pin through 
insulator (10), which is preventing flow-out of the orifice gas during the cleaning process. All 
pins and the block of targets are insulated from each other to prevent appearing of parasitic 
discharges.  
Whole device can make controlled shift perpendicular to the tube axis. Position of each 
target is also adjustable to provide precision. 
Pin’s length exceeds the tube’s length to allow anode holding pin to push away 
diaphragm, fixed on one end of the tube to free the way for laser beam.  
 
 
3. THEORY ANALYSIS 
 
Specificity of mass transfer, occurring during surface cleaning and coating applying in 
almost closed cavity of tube requires the following:  
 
- 
definition of optimal scheme and mode of inner surface cleaning of long tubes with 
small diameter before applying the coating. 
- 
investigation of influence of process geometry on forming of the coating. 
- 
investigation of mass transport processes during applying multi-layer coatings of 
nano-scale thickness.  
 
Surface cleaning. As is well known surface cleaning before deposition is indispensable. 
After chemical cleaning specimens are cleaned in working chamber by glow discharge 
plasma or ion beam. At present time the laser surface cleaning becomes more and more 
widespread. With optimal parameters of laser it is possible to clean the surface with grazing 
incidence of laser beam, which is positive in our case. 
However cleaning by glow discharge plasma was chosen considering following 
circumstances: 
 
- 
need in simultaneous impact on considerable part of processing surface for 
continuous destruction of oxides including recurring deposition of oxygen atoms. 
- 
complexity with using on our laser test bench of additional high speed laser beam 
scanning system for linear and circular inner surface scanning.  

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
336 
 
  
(a) 
(b) 
a) - plasma spread: 1—neutral zone, 2—solid opaque plasma, 3— recombining plasma, R—size of 
plasma, Rz—length from the center of emission zone to different parts of the tube surface, t—time 
of process, n—density of plasma;  
b) - process geometry: I—course of laser beam. 
Figure 2. Diagram of the coating application process:  
Inner surface cleaning by glowing discharge plasma represent a hollow cathode 
discharge. In [8] cleaning of relatively short tubes (300 mm) was configured as cylindrical 
diode with inner anode where the target holder made of stainless steel played the role of 
anode. Main objective here was prevention of discharge between outer surface of the tube and 
chamber, which was achieved by selecting optimal parameters of the process and schemes of 
power supplying of the discharge.  
In case with longer tubes (longer than 1m) realization of diode discharge scheme is 
technically difficult (for instance – because of anode deflection). A scheme with hollow 
cathode glowing discharge with short inner anode, conveyed along tube axis during the 
cleaning process could be used here. 
For fast removal of oxygen atoms from the inner volume of the tube the cleaning process 
should be carried out at a minimal pressure. However thermal load of anode considerably 
restricts discharge current at low pressures. In hollow cathode discharge plasma we have two 
types of electrons – fast electrons and slow plasma electrons. In a hollow cathode discharge at 
low pressure [10], with anode surface area Sа ≈ (2m/M) 1/2Sк (where Sк – cathode surface area, 
m и M – electron and ion mass, respectively) a positive anode potential fall is appearing and 
increasing with decreasing Sa. Anode current density becomes more than (M/2m) ½ times 
greater (i.e. in two orders) than cathode current density, and so electrons speeded up in the 
negative volume charge at anode surface able to heat it up to melting temperature.  
Thus, in case of inner position of anode and Sа < (2m/M) 1/2Sк it is necessary to secure 
transfer of slow plasma electrons to anode, preventing reaching of anode surface by fast 
electrons, in other words – raise the pressure. 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
337
In that case energy on anode Wа will be mainly determined by energy of plasma electrons 
diffused to anode Wdif and less – by plasma irradiation, which may be neglected. Then, 
according [11]  
 
 
Wa = Wdif = (2κTe/e)Ia 
 
where: κ - Boltsman constant, Te – electron temperature, e – electron charge, Ia – anode 
current.  
Discharge current may be restricted by using of glowing discharge with partial filling of 
the cavity by plasma. Therefore the task for experiments with surface cleaning is finding 
optimal pressure and discharge current.  
 
Deposition process geometry. The plasma spread is shown in Figure 2a (plasma spread 
curves are taken from Ref. [12]) and it has spherical geometry. The rise-up portion of the 
plasma plume consists of an electron halo. Then, after a neutral zone, there is a collisionless 
plasma (n≈1011 cm-3) followed by a recombining plasma (n≈1018 cm-3) and, finally, goes solid 
opaque plasma (n≈1021 cm-3). Spreading electrons and ions of the plasma flame move within 
self-coordinated field until they collide with the product surface. At this point the ion energy 
may reach several hundreds of eV. The plasma contains multicharged ions. As Figure 2b 
illustrates, under certain experimental conditions (d = 10 mm, Rz min = 2.5 mm), different 
parts of the tube surface are exposed to plasma of varied density: the areas near the centre of 
emission zone (in Rz min direction) are subjected to solid plasma; with increase in Rz, the 
collisionless plasma and recombining plasma act in succession. As this takes place, the 
density of plasma flow at the tube wall is j(z) ~ Rz
-2. 
It is clear that this description of the process is rather approximate since the presence of 
the tube wall near the plasma plume will distort substantially the process pattern compared to 
the free plasma spread in vacuum shown in Figure 2a. 
Angular distributions of laser plasma particles, both it’s neutral and ion component, have 
great effect on forming of coating. Because of angular distributions of particles, and also 
because particles flux forming at conic surface disposed inclined to substrate surface, 
different zones of the surface are exposed to fluxes of considerably different energy density 
and particles charge state. 
As it is known for angular distribution of point source f(θ ) = cospθ cross-section of film 
thickness distribution will be d(θ ) = cos 
P+3θ, where θ – angle between normal to target 
surface and direction of particle escape (Figure 2b). Then subject to conicity of target and in 
case of moving of the escape point of plasma A onto the tube axis in point B longitudinal 
distribution of deposited atoms will be d(θ ) ~ cos θм cos 
P+3θ. Thus angular distribution of 
plasma particles f(θ ) = cos θ will result in longitudinal cross-section of film thickness d(θ ) ~ 
cos θм cos4 θ . In our case the angle θм = 45°. However described mass transport processes 
will affect considerably on coating growth.  
 
Mass transfer influence on forming of multilayer coatings of nano-scale range 
thickness. Particles spread of laser plume has rather wide angular distribution. In this case 
hade of atoms to the surface is in the range from 0° to near 90°. As the atoms and ions of laser 
plume reach the inner surface of tube both deposition and scattering are occurring. In case of 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
338 
relatively low energy of atomic particles (energy of laser plasma ions is in range of tens to 
hundreds eV and higher) it is caused by oblique incidence to the surface and dependence of 
sputtering ratio Y(θo) and reflection factor R(θo). With all this, redeposition of considerable 
part of sputtered atoms on the tube surface and transfer of reflected particles to more distant 
from target zones of tube surface are taking place.  
Quantitatively erosion of surface by ion sputtering is characterized by sputtering ratio Y, 
which is found as average amount of extracted from the surface of solid atoms by one 
incident ion (atom/ion). In our case during plasma spread ions mainly recombine and become 
fast atoms. However for univocacy of description these incident atomic particles will further 
be called ions independently of charge state. 
During sputtering of multi-component targets partial sputtering ratio of surface Yi is used. 
It is equal to average amount of i-kind atoms extracted by one incident ion Y=∑ Yi. [13] 
Sputtering ratio depend on ion properties (energy, mass, charge), target properties (mass, 
structure) and irradiation conditions (hade). Values of Y increase with energy of ions. 
Y increases with hade θ0 and has a maximum at certain for every material angle of 
incidence, and then sharply decreases to zero. Approximately for small angle of incidence 
[13] 
 
 
Y (θ0) = Y (0) cos –f θ0, 
 
where f = 1÷1,7 for different ion-target pairs. 
Escape angle distribution of sputtered particles for polycrystalline and amorphous 
materials under normal irradiation impact angle is a cosine function, thus intensity of 
sputtered particles flux with S direction is described by [13] 
 
 
I (θs) = I (0) cos θs , 
 
were θs – escape angle counted from surface normal. 
When the angle of ion impact is not normal to surface and the energy of sputtered 
particles is not big then angular distribution of escaped particles tend to mirroring. The 
described process of surface sputtering generates flux of sputtered atoms, which mainly will 
be accumulated on surface again. 
A part of impact ions with angle of incidence θ0 will be reflected from the tube’s wall in 
compliance with reflection factor value equal to [14]: 
 
 
R(θ0)=R(0)+b(l-cos θ0)β 
 
where: 0.2 < b < 0.6 and 1 < β < 2.6 for different target materials. Some of the ions with the 
highest energy will be implanted in the wall. 
Joint action of deposition, sputtering and reflection of atomic particles results in mixing 
of atoms in forming layer. Taking into account that target is conveyed lengthwise inside the 
tube, processes with equal impact angle will occur in every surface element. The final result 
will be superposition of processes shown before. 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
339
Finally, presented analysis shown, that an intensive mixing will take place as a result of 
described mass transfer processes. And that will lead to degradation of the layer boundaries in 
multi-layer coating. 
Finding a function describing such mass transfer seems impossible. Mathematic 
simulation is also ineffective for various reasons. One of the reasons is roughness of the 
substrate. In most papers related to applying coatings of nano-scale thickness by PLD an 
ideally smooth substrates were used (for example – monocrystalline) [15-17]. In our case a 
polycrystallic polished substrates were used. Thus exact data may be obtained only by 
experiment.  
Additional acceleration of laser plasma ions by applying pulse fields [18-20], was used 
only for single-layer coatings, as it will increase degradation of layer boundary in case of 
multi-layer coating. 
 
 
4. EXPERIMENTAL 
 
Single layer coatings. In order for adhesion to be increased, cleaning of the tube inside 
surface by a glow discharge was performed. X18H10T stainless steel tubes with parameters d 
= 10 mm, L = 300 mm and foil tubes made of the same material with the same parameters 
were used as specimens. The specimens were rinsed in acetone and alcohol before treatment. 
The targets were made of copper and molybdenum. 
Adhesion was tested by a film elasticity check procedure (bending the film and checking 
its elasticity) and was additionally tested by the standard peeling check procedure. In this, 
scotch tape was affixed to the specimen and torn off sharply and the scotch tape was then 
examined under the microscope for any evidences of coating being peeled. 
The coating thickness was measured by two methods: a visual method with the help of a 
scanning electron microscope (for 0.5 μm or more thick coatings), and the electron 
microprobe analysis (EMA) method (for thinner coatings) by means of a "Link-860" 
attachment to the "Camscan-4" (England) scanning electron microscope which was used to 
determine the coating composition with the standard processing program ZAF-4. 
The following three coating experiments were run: 
 
I. 
without surface cleaning by the glow discharge and without ion acceleration;  
II. with surface cleaning by the glow discharge;  
III. with surface cleaning by the glow discharge and with acceleration of sprayed ions of 
the coating material. 
 
Long tubes cleaning. It would be well to notice, that cleaning of inner surface of long (L 
≈ 1m and more) tubes with diameter in range Ø10-20 mm is difficult task in the view of it’s 
practical realization, quality control and significant duration of the process. In [1] a tube with 
inner diameter din = 56 mm and 120 mm long was cleaned with use of magnetic system 
during 60 min.  
How it was shown before, a hollow cathode discharge with inner anode of small surface 
area may be used avoiding overheating of anode by limited discharge current and partial 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
340 
filling cathode with discharge plasma. The results of experiments with current distribution 
along hollow cathode for described scheme are presented further.  
Bit-sliced copper hollow cathode with din = 13,5 mm (Figure 3) consisted of two long 
sections 430 mm long at each end with five short sections 40 mm long between them. The 
sections were insulated from each other by insulators < 1 mm thick. Hemispheric anode with 
radius 4 mm was made of stainless steel and inserted in insulator which completely closed 
cross-section of tube. Anode had an outlet, which was used to feed gas in discharge gap. The 
other side of the tube was closed by diaphragm of diameter in range 2-5 mm. Anode was 
conveyed inside the cathode. Anode position and current of each section were measured. 
Discharge was run in Ar at a pressure in vacuum chamber 4-54 Pa. Such scheme allowed to 
measure lengthwise current distribution of cathode at different pressures and diaphragms. To 
know pressure directly in the tube, an additional experiment was carried out.  
Obtained current distributions are shown on Figure 4. 
It is evident that with the pressure decreasing a depth of penetration plasma into cathode 
cavity is also decreasing, which corresponds to data obtained in [22] for hollow cathode 
discharge with external anode.  
By conveying anode inside the tube and controlling voltage of discharge it is possible to 
carry out successful cleaning of inner surface of cathode on conditions that temperature of 
cathode and anode will be in acceptable range. 
 
Multi-layer coatings. Chemically cleaned tube with diameter din = 13,5 mm and length 
L=500 mm made of stainless steel was put in a vacuum chamber. Then the chamber was 
evacuated to the pressure р = 3,5 ⋅ 10-3 Pa and inner surface was cleaned by hollow cathode 
discharge with partial filling of cavity by plasma. After that Ti/Al and Ti/Nb multilayer 
coatings with single layer 5-30 nm thick were applied. 
 
 
Figure 3. Experiment with bit-sliced cathode. 1-5 – short sections; 6,11 – long sections; 7 – gas and 
current feeding tube covered by insulator; 8 – anode; 9 – splitting insulator; 10 – anode insulator.  

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
341
 
 
 
Figure 4. Current distribution along the cathode at different Ar pressure inside the tube. a) – diaphragm 
dd = 2mm; b) – diaphragm dd = 3mm; c) – diaphragm dd = 5mm. 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
342 
 
Figure 5. Depth profile of Ti/Al №1 (substrate – stainless steel 12Х18Н9Т). Estimated single layer 
thickness for Ti – 6.1nm, for Al – 9.1 nm. Applied 5 pairs of layers. 
Target changing device able to operate with up to 4 targets of different materials. 
However to work out the method of depositing multi-layer coatings and for simplifying of 
composition analysis only two materials were used.  
Cross-section element distribution profile was obtained by RBS method. Investigations 
was carried out on electrostatic accelerator EG-8 at Institute of Nuclear Physics MSU by 
means of helium ion beam of 2MeV [23] and also on ion-beam complex “Sokol-3” at 
Institute of Microelectronics Technology and High Purity Materials with energy 1 MeV. The 
results of RBS analysis are presented on Figure 5 – 8. 
Investigation of chemical and phase composition of near-surface layers was carried out 
by XPS method with XSAM-800 at energy resolution 1eV, stimulating irradiation of Мg Kα 
with energy E=1253,6 eV and pressure P=5÷10-7 Pa. Size of region being analyzed is 2mm. 
As XPS able to analyse surface and a thin near-surface layer, after analysis of one layer 
etching by Ar+ was carried out with energy 2,5 keV and current density j=0,4 mkA/mm2 and 
then the analysis was repeated again and so on. Content of elements and chemical links were 
determined. The results are shown on Figure 9 and 10. 
 
 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Single layer coatings. Experiments of type (I) described above demonstrated a 
satisfactory thickness uniformity and a satisfactory continuity of copper and molybdenum 
coatings, though their adhesion to the substrate is very poor. 
Type (II) experiments showed that while performing cleaning by glow discharge, there is 
no discharge between the tube and the shell of the vacuum chamber, same at the tube edge 
where plasma areas of the same size (about 30 cm) are noticed. 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
343
Copper spraying carried out after the above-mentioned cleaning shows a satisfactory 
adhesion during both film elasticity and peeling check procedures. However, for molybdenum 
the coating peeled when the specimen was bent. 
The set of experiments reveal that application of a high-voltage pulse at approx. 9 kV was 
needed to cause a discharge between the target and the tube because of the small clearance (1 
mm). 
Copper and molybdenum coatings formed under the conditions of accelerating voltage 
and preliminary cleaning by the glow discharge demonstrated satisfactory adhesion for up to 
2μm thick coatings for both test procedures. Coating composition was unchanged within the 
range of the analysis sensitivity (0.5-1% depending on an element's atomic number). 
Variation in uniformity of the 2 μm thick coatings did not exceed 10%. 
Experiments to determine the distribution of coating thickness along the tube longitudinal 
axis were run for films formed using the third set of coating conditions. This was for Mo 
deposition on a motionless tube over a period of 30 min. The distribution of coating thickness 
obtained is shown in Figure 11. 
Such distribution is caused not only by the j(z) ~ Rz
-2 function but also by ions going out 
of the plasma flow to the tube wall under the influence of the accelerating voltage. The work 
of Abramov et al. [26] indicates that, given the longitudinal plasma input to the tube and 
ignoring recombination, the distribution of coating thickness along the tube axis is also of 
exponential nature when Ua >>eTe and nit(z)=ni(z) (i.e. when the ion concentration is 
independent of the radius) which is given by 
 
 
δ(z) = δ0 exp[-(Vis/Vpl)(2z/d)], 
 
where Vis = (Te/mi)1/2 is the velocity of the ionic sound, Vpl the rate of plasma flow movement, 
δ0 the coating thickness at the tube input (under these experimental conditions δ0 = δmax), and nit 
is the concentration of ions at the tube wall. 
The tube movement distributions are superimposed upon each other during the coating 
process with the result that each part of the tube surface is treated in the same way and 
experiences deposition, ion implantation and dynamic ion intermixing. The type of coating 
treatment can be selected by appropriate choice of the I, Ua or τ1 values. 
Experiments conducted to determine the greatest possible thickness of Mo coatings that 
can be applied by the third method have shown that, with coatings of 5 μm or more thickness, 
areas of considerable peeling are observed, indicating substantial stress within these coatings. 
 
 
Cleaning of Long Tubes 
 
Basing on the results of experiments of studying current density distribution along hollow 
cathode made of copper tube of diameter din=13.5 mm and length L=1060mm at different 
pressures and diaphragms we can say following. 
Cathode current density at all studied pressures and diaphragms exceeds 0,4 mA⋅cm-2 
over 400 mm from anode. This is satisfactory value for cleaning. It is also noticeable 
polysemantic character of the current distribution near anode during first 100mm, which is 
significantly depend on pressure. Current density may both raise or decrease at this length. 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
344 
Such irregular current distribution was noticed earlier by other authors, but for quite clean 
surfaces. In this work parameters of discharge were investigated during the stage of cleaning.  
Obtained value Lо/din ≈ 30( where Lо – zone of effective cleaning) allows significantly 
increase speed of cleaning and treat long tubes by mean of anode conveying.  
Selection of optimal pressure and limitation of discharge current let us transmit heating 
load mainly to cathode. That resulted in satisfactory thermal condition of cathode and heating 
of cathode, what is useful both during cleaning and deposition. 
 
Multilayer coatings. Analysis of depth distribution of elements of Ti/Al №1 is shown on 
Figure 5. Two things are calling attention: 
 
- 
high concentration of oxygen along the depth 
- 
distribution of Ti and Al practically identical, that is evidence of complete mixing of 
layers.  
 
The thickness of coating is 55nm. 
Distribution, obtained for Ti/Nb №1 (Figure 6) on the same substrate also has high 
concentration of oxygen and high degree of mixing. Thickness is 40 nm. 
Increasing of layer number to 17 in Ti/Nb №2 has no effect (Figure 7). Thickness is 
60nm. 
On Figure 8 one can see initial separation of layers. Mixing of atoms with substrate is 
visible only at the first stage of forming of coating. 
 
 
Figure 6. Depth profile of Ti/Nb №1 (substrate – stainless steel 12Х18Н9Т). Estimated single layer 
thickness for Ti and Nb – 2 nm. Applied 11 pairs of layers. 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
345
 
Figure 7. Depth profile of Ti/Nb №2 (substrate – stainless steel 12Х18Н9Т). Estimated single layer 
thickness for Ti and Nb 1.4 nm. Applied 17 pairs of layers.  
 
Figure 8. Depth profile of Ti/Al №2 (substrate – stainless steel 12Х18Н9Т). Estimated single layer 
thickness for Ti and Al – 30 nm. Applied 3 layers. 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
346 
 
Figure 9. XPS depth profile of Ti/Al №1. 
Examined distributions show that while applying very thick layers — in order of several 
nm — an intensive mixing is occurring. With the increasing of single layer thickness of each 
material, there gradually starts to form a layered structure, but interpenetration is still 
significant. High concentration of oxygen at near-surface region also affects the element 
distribution. 
Smaller in comparison with expected thickness of coating on all specimens confirms 
assumption about mass transport, induced by spraying of substrate and reflection of 
depositing atoms. Moreover a high oxygen concentration near the surface inserts 
amendments.  
Thus, investigation of implanted specimens was carried out by means of XPS which 
gives information about not only composition but also about chemical link types of surface 
elements and of elements in nearest monolayers. 
Obtained distributions of elements (Figure 9 and 10) confirmed conclusions based on 
RBS results. 
High concentration of carbon in XPS results call attention. However the reason is well-
known. The specimens studied by XPS were studied before by RBS method and it is known 
that RBS leaves carbon film on the surface of specimen. 
XPS spectrum also registered presence of pure metal and oxides of TiO2 and Al2O3. At 
the same time TiOx oxides are also present. 
Investigations displayed that deposited coating has complicated phase composition, 
consisting of metals and their oxides. Presence of certain phase at certain depth is determined 
by ratio of components at thin near-surface layers.  
In conclusion it may be stated that such change of phase composition of surface layer 
with depth is connected with intensive mixing process of atoms of different material layers 
and substrate. 
 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
347
CONCLUSION 
 
Proposed scheme of hollow cathode discharge with partial filling of cathode cavity by 
plasma may be efficiently used for cleaning of long tubes of small diameter by conveying of 
discharge gap along the cathode. 
Combined use of plasma cleaning and heating with proper parameters allows us to carry 
out high-quality cleaning of inner surface of the tube. It is easier to control the completion of 
cleaning for the described discharge schemes by current or voltage level of discharge. 
The major result of this work is that the use of a pulsed laser evaporation technique for 
coating of metals over the inner surface of thin tubes has been very promising. The results show 
strong evidence for the importance of acceleration of the laser plasma ions. These experiments 
suggest that this technique is essential for adhesion to be increased especially for mono-layer 
coatings and for improvement of adhesion of the first layer to substrate in multilayer coatings. 
 
 
Figure 10. XPS depth profile of Ti/Al №2. 
An analysis of processes of mass transfer during PLD-ing on inner surfaces of tubes was 
carried out. It is ascertained that for thin layers (thickness at 1–10nm) made by PLD an 
intensive mixing process leads to the forming of a coating with complicated phase 
composition.  
Shown before mixing process prevents forming of super lattice coating discussed in [7], 
but obviously multilayer coatings with thickness of single layer in order of tens and hundreds 
of nm may be created. 
However, the present experimental evidence is not enough for a final analysis and further 
experiments are in progress. 

Alexandr Alexandrovich Lozovan, Stanislav Vladimirovich Frangulov et al.  
348 
 
Figure 11. Distribution of coating thickness over the tube longitudinal axis; coating is applied when the 
tube is motionless: δ—thickness of the coating, x—length along the tube. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Pavlov, DA; Turin, VN; Uchakov, AM. 12th International Conference on Ion-Surface 
Interaction—1995, Zvenigorod, Russia, vol. T.2. Moscow: MP Informpoligraf, 
September, 5-8, 1995. 248-250 in Russian. 
[2] 
Fetherston Robert, P; Shamim Muhammad, M; Conrad John, R. Apparatus for plasma 
source ion implantation and deposition for cylindrical surfaces. U.S. Patent Number, 
1999, 5, 988, 103. November, 23. 
[3] 
Ferris, SD; Learn, HJ; Poate, JM. Laser-solid interactions and laser processing. 
Proceedings of the 1978 Material Research Society, AIP Conference Proceedings, 
1979, No. 50. 
[4] 
Jordan, R; Cole, D; Lunney, JG; Mackay, K; Givord, D. Appl Surf Sci, 1995, 86, 24-8. 
[5] 
Draper, CW. Lasers in metallurgy. In: Mukherjee K; Mzumder J; editors. Proceedings 
of the Conference of Metallurgical Society of AIME, Chicago. February, 1981. 67. 
[6] 
Novodvorsky, ОA; Khramova, OD; Filippova, EO; et al. Optics and Lasers in 
Engineering, 32, 2000, 449-457. 
[7] 
Musil, J. Surface Coating Technology, 2000, 125, P.322. 
[8] 
Lozovan A. Vacuum, 2003, 70, 477. 

Application of Pulsed Laser Deposition for Putting Multi-Layer Coatings… 
349
[9] 
Lozovan, A; Frangulov, S. Bulletin of the Russian Academy of Sciences: Physics. Vol., 
2008, 72, No. 7, 953-955. 
[10] Metel, A; Crigoriev, S. Glowing discharge with electrostatic keeping of electrons. 
Monograph. – М.: Yanus-K, MSTU "Stankin", 2005, 296 in Russian. 
[11] Moskalev B. Hollow cathode discharge. M:. Energiya 1969.P.184 
[12] Basov, NG; Boiko, VA; Krokhin, OV; Skliskov, GV. J Exp Theor Phys, 1966, 51(4) in 
Russian.  
[13] 
Sputtering of solids by ion bombardment. Editor R. Berish, 2nd Issue-М.: Mir. 1986. 
448. 
[14] Martynenko, UV. Interaction between plasma and surface. Overal results of science and 
engeneering. Plasma physics. Vol. 3.- М., 1982, С.119-175. in Russian.  
[15] Kazi, IH; Wild, PM; Moore, TN; et al. Thin Solid Films, 2003, 433, P.337-343. 
[16] Jen, SU; YU CC; Liv CH; Lee GY. Thin Solid Films, 2003, 434, P.316-322. 
[17] Liu, HD.; Zhao, YR; Ramanath, G. et al. Thin Solid Films, 2001, 384, P.151-156. 
[18] V. N. Nevolin, V. Yu. Fominskii, A. G. Gnedovets and V. E. Koshmanov. Technical 
Physics, 2005, 50, Vol.6, P. 705-710. 
[19] Fominski, VYu; Nevolin, VN; Romanov, RI; et al. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, Vol. 89. P. 
1449-1457. 
[20] Fominski, V; Nevolin, V; Romanov, R. et al. Thin Solid Films. 2002, Vol.422/1-2. 39-
47. 
[21] Lozovan, A; Frangulov, S. Svarochnoe Proizvodstvo, 2009, Vol. 1, in Russian. 
[22] Kraindel, UЕ; Nikulin, SP. Technical Physics, 1992, 62, Vol. 4, P. 89-94 in Russian. 
[23] Burdel, KK., Chechenin, NG. Overral results of science and engeneering. Ser.: Charged 
particle beams and solid., Vol., 1. М. VINITI, 1990, С. 35 in Russian. 
[24] Doolittle, LR. Algorithms for the rapid simulation of the Rutherford backscattering 
spectra. NIM, B9, 1985, 344-351 in Russian. 
[25] Egorov, VK., Okhulkov, AV. Materials of 22nd international debate on physics of 
interaction between charged particles with crystals. M. MSU, 1993, 167-169 in 
Russian. 
[26] Abramov, IS; Vildgrube, VG; Kuznetsov, VG; Lisenkov, AA. Industrial developments 
in the deposition of metallic coatings. In: Soviet Union Conference on Progresivnai 
texnologii nanesenia metalopokrbitii, Cheliabinsk. Cheliabinsk: ChPI, 1986, 57-61 in 
Russian. 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 351-366  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
UNDERGROUND CAVITY 3D DETECTION USING 
LASER SYSTEM 
 
 
Liu Xiling1, Li Xibing1, Anthony Comber2 and Liu Kewei1 
1School of Resources and Safety Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410083, China. 
2Measurement Devices Ltd, Silverburn Crescent, Aberdeen, AB23 8EW, Scotland. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Safe and precise cavity detection, especially of dangerous or inaccessible voids, is 
essential to safe production in a working mine. Conventional underground cavity 
detection methods are briefly reviewed and their limitations discussed. Accurate 3D laser 
measurement systems are introduced. One of these laser systems was used to detect 
inaccessible underground cavities from the surface through boreholes at Luanchuan 
molybdenum open pit in China. The results from the scanner demonstrated very well the 
detailed level of information that can be collected in a cavity using this method, with the 
cavities’ layout under various benches being fully mapped. The processed data can be 
imported into existing models in SURPAC and CAD and the roof and floor elevations 
from the model of the cavity was used to output sections which would be required at a 
later design stage. A minimum number of exploration boreholes can be coordinated based 
on the scanned data which therefore not only fully details the extent of the cavity, but 
also saves on the costs of exploration drilling. Finally, the advantages and disadvantages 
of laser detection systems are analysed, and a combination of laser scanning techniques 
and conventional survey methodology is proposed to detect these unknown underground 
cavities. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The worldwide demand for mineral products is rising due to the increasing shortage of 
resources and rising consumption resulting from rapidly expanding economies & international 
trade. These conditions have led in the last few years to a particularly prosperous time for the 
mining industry. However, in many places, further exploration has been seriously restricted or 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
352 
been made extremely hazardous due to the presence of various abandoned, & unmapped 
underground cavities left over from previous mining operations. The disasters caused by 
cavities have been numerous & disastrous[1]. For example, in Chinese mines in recent years, 
disasters caused by underground cavities have frequently caused multiple fatalities: 29 people 
dead in a gypsum mine caused by the collapse of a cavity roof; 81 people dead in a gold mine 
caused by cavity water inrush in 2001; 13 people dead and 9 injured in a stone mine caused 
by a cavity roof collapse, 11 people dead in a copper mine cause by cavity water inrush in 
2004; 36 people dead and another 33 injured in a gypsum mine caused by cavity roof collapse 
in 2005; 6 people dead and other 4 injured in a gypsum mine caused by large area roof 
collapse of an old cavity in 2006. It is clear then that accurate cavity detection & mapping is 
vital for dealing with such cavities & for ensuring safe mineral exploitation. Similarly, the 
accurate detection of cavities and voids under highways, construction sites and buildings etc 
is essential for their operation & the safety of those people who use and work on them. 
Regarding conventional detection methods of detecting & mapping out cavities, these 
have required an understanding of the high precision equipment, of the complex theories 
behind this equipment, its deployment. It has also required deep analysis of the acquired data 
and details of the geology in the vicinity of the cavity. However, the geology around the 
cavity is often very complex & this greatly limits one’s ability to interpret results, making 
accurate detection extremely difficult. Previously, the major goals of attempts to develop 
methods of cavity detection have been, firstly, designing more precise equipment to take the 
required observations; studying & interpreting the results of the observations to gain an 
understanding of the complex geology around the cavity; choosing different detection 
methods according to different prevailing geological conditions; and adopting multiple 
detection methods for each cavity. This latter point is to try to ensure that the different 
techniques verify each other, thus hopefully establishing more accurate & reliable results. 
However, cavity detection by these conventional methods can still not obtain a sufficiently 
accurate model of the cavity. 
3D laser scanning however, does provide a means of highly accurate modelling of 
cavities. This method uses a pulsed, infra-red laser, measuring the ‘time-of-flight’ of the laser 
pulse to calculate distance measurements. This method is not affected by the geology around 
the cavity and obtains a very clear visual 3D model of the cavity in a very short time. It is the 
most accurate way to perform cavity detection. 
Currently, the main methods of detecting cavities are: engineering drilling, geophysical 
exploration, hydrological experiments, gravity observation and magnetic observations. The 
main cavity detection methods are: micro-gravity method, DC electrical method, transient 
electromagnetic method (TEM), high-density resistivity method, ground penetrating radar 
technique, transient Rayleigh wave method, seismic tomography method (CT), shallow 
seismic exploration and radioactive gas measurement technique etc[2]. Different detection 
methods are favoured around the world depending on local conditions & preferred 
technologies. For example, in the USA, comprehensive detection techniques are used, 
particularly - the electrical method, electromagnetic method, micro-gravity method and 
seismic method. Japan is one of the leading places in the world for employing geophysical 
techniques: most commonly, the seismic wave method, electrical method, electromagnetic 
method and geophysical well logging; electrical method, transient electromagnetic method 
(TEM), seismic reflecting wave method, electromagnetic wave transmission method and 
radioactive gas measurement are mostly used in Russia, while ground penetrating radar is 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
353
well used in many European countries. Due to severe disasters in China caused by cavity 
collapses, various geophysical detection techniques have been used to carry out cavity 
detection[1,2]. 
There is much ongoing research into different detection techniques. Ground penetrating 
radar can provide a high resolution map at different levels of a geological body, and carry out 
scatheless detection of underground objects[3-5]; the high frequency electromagnetic 
detection method has the advantage of high detecting speed, low cost and a large control area, 
making it an effective method for geological disaster prevention[6]; based on a 2D simulation 
model, the 2D electrical method can obtain more accurate results than a conventional 
electrical method, and cost less than 3D one, making it the most economical method for 
cavity detection[7-9]; seismic share-wave reflection method can better distinguish the object 
in shallow stratum, which is difficult for conventional seismic methods to distinguish by 
detected shallow seismic information[10]. An on-site experimental study was performed in 
paper [11] aiming at investigating the difficulty of seismic signal interpretation caused by 
complicated geological condition; BIE (Boundary Integral Equation) was used to analyze 
shallow seismic measurements in paper [12]; the detection results tested by geological radar 
method, transient electromagnetic method (TEM), shallow seismic reflecting wave method, 
transient Rayleigh wave method and high-density resistivity method were commented in 
paper [13].In order to overcome the limitations of single detection methods, a combined 
method which integrates different detection techniques was proposed to carry out cavity 
detection to achieve more accurate results; and this method was used to perform cavity 
detection which proved to be valid, especially for complex cavities[2,14-17]. 
In general, these various conventional methods do not easily produce accurate 3D models 
of the cavity under investigation. Further, since the detection of abnormalities by these 
methods is dependent on the rock mass and geological conditions around the cavity, different 
methods must be used according to the local geological condition. Given the complexity of 
geological conditions commonly found around cavities, the accurate interpretation of the 
results is very difficult. For this reason, various methods are combined to overcome the 
limitation of a single detection method, causing the operation to become more complex & 
costly. 
In recent years, 3D cavity detection methods based on laser range finding techniques 
have been widely used in mines around the world. Results have proved it to be a very 
successful method of 3D cavity detection. As early as 1989, AFGANDML853 laser system 
was tested by the Gaspé mining company, its detection range was limited in 60 meters, and 
the system was not automated in any way. OPTECHG150 laser rangefinder with 100 meters 
detection range and 0.05% accuracy was tested also in Gaspé in Feb 1990[18]. A laser 
detector and automatic scanning equipment were fixed on a rigid rod to measure an excavated 
space at Noranda’s technique centre in 1992 with encouraging performance[19]. Thereafter, 
laser rangefinders have been increasingly utilised in mines for automatic measurements, with 
the measured models being imported into existing, integrated mine maps & models[20]. 
These laser rangefinders and scanners have been used in mines for a wide variety of 
applications: performing the detection of cavities and excavation spaces; 3D modelling of 
underground spaces by mounting the laser on a moving vehicle[21]; scanning of rock mass 
joint surfaces[22], and monitoring vehicles in underground mines and open pits[23] etc. Some 
of the main manufacturers of laser surveying systems used in these applications are I-SITE in 
Australia, MDL in United Kingdom, OPTECH in Canada, CYPA in Unite states, RIEGL in 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
354 
Austria and CALLIDUS in Germany. However, for particular, inaccessible cavities such as 
those under open pits, cavities under highways or buildings etc, the laser scanner needs to be 
deployed through a borehole if we want to carry out laser 3D detection as there is no other 
way of entering the void with laser equipment. This laser system therefore needs to have an 
extremely small cross-section to fit through the drilled hole. It also needs to be flexible, 
rugged, easy to deploy & recover, and to incorporate an orientation system to automatically 
correct the resulting data according to the angle of the instrument during the survey. At 
present, there are two kinds of laser detection system in the world which are designed to be 
suitable for surveys of inaccessible cavities: OPTECH’s CMS (Cavity Monitoring System) 
and MDL’s C-ALS (Cavity Auto-scanning Laser System). The CMS and C-ALS have been 
widely used in mines around the world[24-28] since the 1990s, but their application in mines 
of China commenced just a few years ago[29,30]. 
There have been many mines in China which have suffered terrible tragedies resulting from 
underground cavities. An open pit run by Luoyang Luanchuan Molybdenum CO., LTD. is 
severely threatened by such cavities under the working pit. Detection of cavities needs to be 
carried out on the surface, rather than from underground, and in this case, the laser instrument 
needs to be deployed through a borehole. For these reasons, due to its 50mm diameter, the C-
ALS is the only suitable system for underground cavity detection in Luanchuan open pit. This 
is the mine where we choose to use the C-ALS to perform accurate 3D cavity detection with 
the object of providing detailed information on the layout and extent of the cavities in order to 
increase the safety of production on the mine. 
 
 
2. CAVITY LASER 3D DETECTION TECHNIQUE 
 
2.1. Principle of Laser 3D Detection 
 
A laser is a device which emits light formed by stimulated radiation which is intense, 
concentrated and highly monochromatic. The lasers used in 3D cavity measurements are 
generally based on a laser measuring technique called ‘time-of-flight’. The basic principle is 
to measure the time taken for a laser pulse to travel from the receiving optic to the target and 
back to the receiving optic. This time is then used to calculate the distance travelled, L , by 
the laser pulse. The conversion equation is[31]: 
 
 
1
2
L
ct
=
 
 
where c  is laser propagation speed in the atmosphere, and t  is the time taken for the laser 
travelling the measuring distance and back to the laser. 
The raw data observed by the 3D laser scanner will be as follows: 1) the horizontal and 
vertical direction of the laser beam based either on the angle of a continuously rotating mirror, 
used to reflect the laser, or on the angle of the laser head, moved mechanically by motors in 
the instrument; 2) the distance between the instrument and the measured point, calculated 
from the laser pulse’s ‘time-of’flight’; 3) the intensity of the reflection of the scanned point. 
The data from 1) and 2) are used to calculate the three dimensional coordinate values, and the 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
355
reflection intensity is used to colour the measured points according to their signal 
strength[32]. 
Commonly, 3D laser scanners will uses the instrument’s own internal reference frame 
shown in Figure 1. 
Axes x  and y  are in the cross direction scanning plane and are perpendicular to each 
other. Axis z  is perpendicular to the cross direction plane. Observation value S  is the range 
observed with the laser, the horizontal scanning angleα and vertical scanning angleθ of 
every laser impulse are measured simultaneously through accurate timing. Using this data, the 
equation for calculating the 3D laser coordinate is[33]: 
 
 
cos
cos
y 
cos
sin
z 
sin
x
S
S
S
θ
α
θ
α
θ
=
⎧
⎫
⎪
⎪
=
⎨
⎬
⎪
⎪
=
⎩
⎭
 
 
 
2.2. Cavity Auto Scanning Laser System (C-ALS) 
 
Having a small cross-sectional profile and accurate, integrated orientation system, MDL’s 
C-ALS laser scanner was selected to carry out the detection of cavities under the open pit 
under investigation. C-ALS scans the cavity by using the “time-of-flight” laser measurement 
technique described above. The C-ALS probe, which incorporates the laser. is just 50mm in 
diameter. The unit is designed to be deployed down boreholes up to 300 m long, as well as to 
be deployed uphole and along horizontally holes up to 100 m long. Due to the mechanical 
rotation of the laser head on the probe, a 3D scan can cover the entire void up to a range of 
150 m with an accuracy of ±5 cm. The scanned data in its raw form of a 3D ‘point cloud’ can 
be processed into a 3D model, and then exported & integrated into most current mining 
software packages such as SURPAC, VULCAN, AutoCAD, DATAMINE etc[34]. 
 
O  
θ  
α
S
( , , )
P x y z
z
y 
x
 
Figure 1. Imaging principle of Laser 3D scanning. 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
356 
2.2.1. System’s composition and application 
The complete C-ALS system is composed of hardware and software. The full hardware 
system includes: 
 
- 
the main probe which houses: the laser scan head, the motors which rotate the scan 
head horizontally and vertically, and the pitch & roll sensors which monitor the 
orientation of the probe, allowing the software to automatically align the scan 
appropriately; 
- 
the nose cone infra-red camera (Figure 2 (a)) which is also integrated into the 
scanning head. This is used to check the condition of the borehole during 
deployment, as well as to gauge exactly when the probe enters the cavity; 
- 
Boretrack rods (Figure 2 (b)) for deploying the probe at fixed, regular intervals and to 
prevent the probe rotating in the borehole which would cause the orientation of the 
data to be compromised; 
- 
Toughened, load-bearing cable for power, data transmission and to assist deployment 
and recovery; 
- 
the surface unit (Figure 2 (c)) which manages power & data transmission & which 
remains on the surface. 
 
The software includes a module for controlling the C-ALS during operations (Figure 3 
(a)), a module allowing real-time viewing of the scan as it is carried out (Figure 3 (b)) and 3D 
modelling software (Figure 3 (c)) for creating surfaces, models & calculating volumes. 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 2. (a) Ore pass survey; (b) Underground space detection; (c) Underground void measurement. 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
357
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
Figure 3. (a) CavityScan software during deployment; (b) CavityScan during a scan; (c) 3D modeling 
software. 
    
    
 
Figure 4. Detection procedure of C-ALS. 
Due to the flexibility of the equipment and various customised deployment methods 
which have been devised, the C-ALS is capable of many different types of cavity scanning 
operations, including stope surveys, abandoned mine workings, orepass surveys, pillar 
recovery areas, backfilling areas, silo or ore bin surveys, tunnel profiling, structural 
monitoring, and surveys of any inaccessible location etc. 
 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
358 
2.2.2. System detection procedure and data processing 
The procedure for using the C-ALS involves the following three steps: 
(1) Deploying the scanner into the cavity while measuring the deviation of the borehole; 
(2) Carrying out the scan through the remote control software module; 
(3) Processing the measured data using modelling software to obtain a 3D cavity model. 
 
Figure 4 shows the detecting procedure of C-ALS. 
 
 
3. C-ALS DETECTION OF CAVITY UNDER OPEN PIT LIMIT IN 
LUANCHUAN MINE 
 
3.1. Present Situation and Problems of Luanchuan Mine 
 
Sandaozhuang mine of Luoyang Luanchuan Molybdenum Co. LTD. is an active mine 
with 5.29×108 tons molybdenum and tungsten geological reserves. The average geological 
grade of molybdenum and tungsten is 0.11%. There are 6.725×105 tons of metal reserves, 
with the verified molybdenum reserve comprising 2.52% of the world’s total. Sandaozhuang 
is an open pit mine with 30kt/d production capability and an annual production value of 2 
billion RMB. The mine experienced unreasonable underground mining for more than 20 
years since the 1980s. There have massive cavities left by sublevel open stope mining and 
large numbers of unmapped and abandoned cavities have been left by private mining. There 
are in total more than 100 cavities of various shapes and sizes, with a combined volume of 
around 1×107 m3 under the open pit. This has left the ore body in a perilous state. Since being 
excavated, these cavities have suffered ground pressure, weathering and blasting vibration. 
The rock mass around the cavities is in a fractured and distorted condition, with the cavities’ 
location, size and shape already having altered. As Sandaozhuang open pit continues 
exploiting the minerals present, the layer between the bench surface and the cavities is 
becoming thinner. Both workers and their equipment are directly threatened by these 
underground cavities, and it is possible for fatal accidents to occur at any time due to surface 
collapse. The major aim of the mine is to deal with those cavities under the open pit, and, for 
this purpose, it is first vital to accurately detect the shape, location and size of the cavities. 
Thus, this situation presents a good stage to investigate the suitability of the C-ALS. 
 
   
 
Figure 5. Present Sandaozhuang open pit Figure 6 Deploying the C-ALS to detect cavities. 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
359
Table 1. Detected cavities under various bench. 
 
Cavity position 
Borehole depth /m 
Cavity height under borehole /m 
Cavity volume /m3
Bench 1330  
15.2 
4.2 
647 
Bench 1414  
14 
2.4 
174 
Bench 1438-1 
29.4 
70.3 
157078 
Bench 1438-2 
17.8 
8.1 
2722 
Bench 1450 
21 
7.8 
3198 
Bench 1462-1 
16 
5.9 
2177 
Bench 1462-2 
16 
5.4 
2087 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
Boundaries of 
detected cavities 
under bench 1438
Bench 1450
Bench 1438
 
 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 7. (a) Oriented laser point cloud under bench 1438-1; (b) 3D solid model of cavity under bench 
1438-1; (c) Cavity boundary under bench 1438-1 in exploitation ichnography. 
 
3.2. Detection Results 
 
The cavities underneath Sandaozhuang open pit will be a source of risk throughout the 
exploitation of the mine. To illustrate the problem, in Table 1 below are listed the details of 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
360 
some of the cavities already detected. We know from various surveys that safe mine 
production is increasingly threatened by those cavities under the open pit boundaries, as the 
bench blasting continues to progress. The potential danger from these cavities, situated at 
various depths and with various shapes and volumes, is extremely severe. This is especially 
true of the largest cavities with complex shapes and which are often interconnected with other 
adjacent voids. 
After each cavity was fully surveyed, the scanned data was edited in CavityScan 
processing software and a 3D modelling package to form an oriented, geo-referenced point 
cloud (Figure 7(a)) and 3D solid model (Figure 7(b)), either of which can be exported into 
SURPAC and CAD. The projective ichnography of the cavity was of most use on-site. This 
data can be transformed into exploitation ichnography in CAD to outline the cavity boundary 
(Figure 7(c)). 
 
1408.296
1376.5
the area circled by this curve in 
elevation about 1384 maybe the 
interpenetration part between this 
cavity and the cavity under it
1396.121
1365.976
1384.083
1358.251
1370.431
1363.365
1412.447
1386.168
1407.56
1389.055
1406.579
1403.5
1402.738
1394.288
1398.778
1385.483
1391.027
1374.199
1372.736
1369.048
1385.832
1360.784
1383.000
1377.452
1392.297
1377.400
1400.462
1367.010
1393.965
1375.451
1411.385
1378.300
1402.380
1379.340
6050
4800
4800
6100
Borehole in bench 1438
S=8683.63 m2
V=157thousand m3
4750
6050
4750
6100
 
Figure 8. Cavity ichnography with roof and floor elevation of grid intersection point. 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
361
3.3. Special Cavity Analysis 
 
3.3.1. Huge cavity under bench 1438-1 
The cavity under bench 1438-1 is huge, complex and multi-layered and has the cavity 
under bench 1438-2 in its cap rock, which was of the most concern in July 2007. Detailed 
detection was carried out through a borehole on the surface of bench 1438-1. In order to 
provide practical information for cavity disposal and the bench blast, the roof of the cavity 
and the elevation of the floor were measured at grid intersection points in ichnography taken 
from the laser point cloud (shown in Figure 12). The grid spacing can be altered according to 
the required accuracy, with the roof and floor elevation at each specified point measured from 
the scan data. This data enabled the creation of section charts which would be vital for a later 
design stage. In Figure 11 (a), there is one area of the cavity which is not covered by the point 
cloud data. The furthest achievable range to a good reflection surface is about 150 meters of 
C-ALS and considering this fact, together with an analysis of the other scanned data, we 
conclude that this part may interconnect with the lower cavity at an elevation of about 1384. 
The interpenetration part is curve circled in Figure 8. 
After the cavity under bench 1438-1 was fully detected, the blast was performed on the 
thinner cap rock of this huge cavity. The collapsed surface (shown in Figure 9) is spectacular, 
with an area of 4900 m2 after the blast. The distance between the surface and the bottom of 
collapsed pit is about 75 meters as shown in Figure 10. After investigating the collapse on-
site, we found small cavities and laneways in its cap rock as shown in Figure 11, this is in 
agreement with the small cavities and laneways detected during surveys through other 
boreholes in bench 1438. These are visible in Figure 7 (c). As further blasting continues on, 
the collapsed surface is enlarging further. Accurate data collected with the C-ALS is 
constantly providing reliable information for blast design. 
 
 
Figure 9. Collapsed surface after blast. 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
362 
      
Figure 10. Side view of the collapse  
 
Figure 11 Small cavity and laneways in cap rock. 
 
3.3.2. Dangerous cavity under bench 1462 
Due to the fragmented cap rock, the cavity under bench 1462 was partly collapsed. We 
drilled two boreholes to deploy the laser probe after investigating the collapsed area. 
However, this cavity is extremely complex: pillars and collapses make the survey extremely 
difficult. The scan data showed that the height throughout the cavity is fairly constant. Also, 
from the point cloud it is apparent that there still have other parts of the cavity beyond the 
‘line-of-sight’ of the laser and thus beyond the extents of the point cloud. These areas are 
marked in the cavity ichnography-Figure 12. This illustrates that a small number of boreholes 
are insufficient for a full picture of this cavity. More boreholes need to be drilled, through 
which the C-ALS can be deployed. The location of the drilling will be based on the data 
already collected in previous scans. The final cavity shape will be obtained by combining data 
collected from deployments through numerous boreholes. Figure 13 is the cavity final 
ichnography under bench 1462 detected through multiple boreholes. 
 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
363
       Borehole 62-1
             1462.1
there may have 
cavities away from 
this dashed line
       Borehole 62-2
             1462.8
there may have 
cavities away from 
this dashed line
there may have 
cavities away from 
this dashed line
 
Figure 12. Detected cavity ichnography through two boreholes. 
Callpsed area
 
Figure 13. Final cavity ichnography detected through multiple boreholes. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
3D laser scanning is an advanced cavity detection method which can detect and survey 
cavities far more precisely than conventional methods. With a small diameter, high accuracy 
and unique deployment method, the C-ALS can ensure not only the accurate cavity analysis, 
but also the safety of the personnel deploying the equipment who are able to remain removed 
from the dangerous areas being investigated. The unit has proved to be very suitable for 
underground cavity detection in Sandaozhuang mine of Luoyang Luanchuan Molybdenum 
Co. LTD. 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
364 
The detected laser point cloud can be processed to obtain accurate cavity ichnography. 
The cavity roof and floor elevations at grid intersection points are used to provide detailed 
information for blast design. Minimal exploration boreholes can be located based on the 
scanned data which can therefore not only obtain 3D cavity information, but can also save on 
the cost of exploration drilling. 
Laser reflections from water and glass back to the receiving optics is almost zero, and the 
ability of the laser to measure ranges is limited by the ‘line-of-sight’ within the underground 
cavity. For these reasons, the influence of water, fog (such as blasting fumes) and humidity in 
the cavity can have a detrimental affect on laser scanning technology and continues to be 
further researched. Further, although laser equipment has been used in underground coal 
mine, the C-ALS is not specifically rated as being intrinsically safe, the detection feasibility 
of C-ALS in any area where there is risk of flammable gas (such as gas in coal mine) needs to 
be validated. 
In contrast with other, conventional cavity detection methods, operators using a 3D laser 
scanner will need to know in advance the rough location of the cavity and this will then 
determine the position of the borehole to be drilled. However, the location of most cavities 
and voids encountered is unclear, especially if they are inaccessible. Therefore, the 3D laser 
scanning method described should be combined with the conventional detection methods. The 
location of the cavity can be determined by conventional detection methods first, and then the 
borehole position can be chosen, through which the C-ALS can be deployed to carry out an 
accurate, detailed scan of the void. Data from the C-ALS can then be used to pin-point further 
locations for drilling and investigation. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Tong Liyuan, Liu Songyu, Qiu Yu, et al. (2004). Current research state of problems 
associated with mined-out regions under expressway and future development. Chinese 
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Engineering, 23(7), 1198-1202. (in Chinese) 
[2] 
Yan Changbin, Xu Guoyuan & Zhong Guosheng. (2005). Research of composite 
prospecting and its application complicated underground mined-out areas. Journal of 
Liaoning Technical University, 24(4), 481-484. (in Chinese) 
[3] 
Liu Dunwen, Xu Guoyuan, Huang Rendong, et al. (2000). A new technique for 
prospecting exhausted areas in metal mines. China Mining Magazine, 9(4), 34-37. 
(in Chinese) 
[4] 
Cheng Jiulong, Hu Kefeng, Wang Yuhe, et al. (2004). Research on detecting of 
underground mined-out areas by using GPR. Rock and Soil Mechanics, 25(Supp), 
79-82. (in Chinese) 
[5] 
Liu Hongjun & Jia Yonggang. (1999). The application of ground penetrating radar 
survey in probing the underground mined area. Journal of Geological Hazards and 
Environment Preservation, 10(4), 73-76. (in Chinese) 
[6] 
Xu Baishan, Wang Ende, Chen Qingkai, et al. (2006). Determination of coal mine gob 
edges by EH-4 system. Journal of Northeastern University (Natural Science), 27(7), 
810-813. (in Chinese) 

Underground Cavity 3D Detection Using Laser System 
365
[7] 
Hu Yunbing, Wu Yanqing, Song Jing, et al. Simulating model and example analysis of 
applying electric surveying to detect gob. Mining Safety and Environmental Protection, 
33(Supp), 39-41. (in Chinese) 
[8] 
Michael van Schoor. (2002). Detection of sinkholes using 2D electrical resistivity 
imaging. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 50(4), 393-399. 
[9] 
Ugur Yaramanci. (2000). Geoelectric exploration and monitoring in rock salt for the 
safety assessment of underground waste disposal sites. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 
44(2-3), 181-196. 
[10] Xu Baishan, Wang Ende, Tian Gang, et al. (2006). Determination underground water-
bearing caves by seismic transverse wave reflection method. Journal of Northeastern 
University (Natural Science), 27(1), 84-87. (in Chinese) 
[11] Gilles Grandjean, Donatienne Leparoux. (2004). The potential of seismic methods for 
detecting cavities and buried objects: experimentation at a test site. Journal of Applied 
Geophysics, 56(2), 93-106. 
[12] Bojan B. Guzina, Sylvain Nintcheu Fata, Marc Bonnet. (2002). An Elastodynamic BIE 
Approach to Underground Cavity Detection. Electronic Journal of Boundary Elements, 
BETEQ2001 (2), 223-230. 
[13] Gao Yong, Xu Baishan, Wang Qijun, et al. (2003). Study of geophysical sounding 
effect on the underground mined-out areas. Contributions to Geology and Mineral 
Resources Research, 18(2), 126-130. (in Chinese) 
[14] Li Xibing, Li Diyuan, Zhao Guoyan, et al. (2006). Detecting, disposal and safety 
evaluation of the underground goaf in metal mines. Journal of Mining & Safety 
Engineering, 23(1), 24-29. (in Chinese) 
[15] Liu Jinghua, Wang Zhuwen, Zhu Shi, et al. (2005). The geophysical exploration about 
exhausted area and sinking area in coal mine. Journal of China Coal Society, 30(6), 
715-719. (in Chinese) 
[16] Shi Zhichun, Zhao Guoyan & Li Faben. (2005). Detection of underground complicated 
mined-out areas. Mining Technology, 5(4), 103-104. (in Chinese) 
[17] Yan Changbin & Xu Guoyuan. (2005). Research of composite geophysical methods 
and its application in detection complicated mined-out areas. Journal of Hunan 
University of Science & Technology (Natural Science Edition), 20(3), 10-14. (in 
Chinese) 
[18] Miller, F., Potvin, Y. & Jacob, D. (1993). Laser measurement of open stope dilution. 
Foreign Metal Mining Magazine, 4, 5-7. (in Chinese) 
[19] Miller Fabien, Potvin Yves & Jacob Denis. (1992). Laser measurement of open stope 
dilution. CIM Bulletin, 85(962), 96-102. 
[20] Shaffer Gray & Stentz Anthony. (2006). Automated surveying of mines using a laser 
rangefinder. Emerging Computer Techniques for the Minerals Industry, 1993: 363-370. 
[21] Huber Daniel, Vandapel Nicolas. Automatic three-dimensional underground mine 
mapping. International Journal of Robotics Research, 25(1), 7-17. 
[22] Fardin, N., Feng, Q. & Stephansson, O. (2003). Application of a new in situ 3D laser 
scanner to study the scale effect on the rock joint surface roughness. International 
Journal of Rock Mechanics & Mining Sciences, 41(2), 329-335. 
[23] Syddell, M. (2005). Company maps way forward for mining (laser scanning and digital 
imaging system). Australian Mining, 97(4), 30. 

Liu Xiling, Li Xibing, Anthony Comber et al. 
366 
[24] Gilbertson, R. J. (1995). The Application of the cavity monitoring system at olympic 
dam operations. Proc. Underground Operators Conference, Kalgoorlie, Western 
Australia, 245-252. 
[25] Jarosz, A. & Shepherd, L. (2000). Application of cavity monitoring system for the 
control of dilution and ore loss in open stopes. 11th International Congress of ISM, 
Cracow, Poland: 155-164. 
[26] John D Lupton. (2004). Cavity monitoring system and stope analysis. Proceedings, 
MassMin Chile, Santiago, Chile, August 2004, 56-62. 
[27] Stuttle, M. C. (1998). Combined probe drilling and laser surveying for complex 
underground mapping. Canadian Mining Journal, 119(6), 21-23. 
[28] Stuttle, M. C. (1999). Laser scanning aids underground mine mapping. Mining 
Engineering, 51(3), 45-46. 
[29] LIU Xi-ling, LI Xi-bing, LI Fa-ben, et al. (2008). 3D cavity detection technique and its 
application based on cavity auto scanning laser system. J.Cent.South Univ.Technol., 
15(2), 285-288 
[30] Guo Jiang, Luo Zhouquan & Deng Jian. (2005). Application of cavity monitoring 
system in underground mines. Chinese Journal of Underground Space and 
Engineering, 1(7), 994-996. (in Chinese) 
[31] LI Xiang-yin, YAO Min-yu, LI Zhuo, et al. (2004). Laser principle technic and 
application. Harbin：Harbin Institute of Technology Press, (in Chinese) 
[32] ZHANG Yuan-zhi, HU Guang-yang, LIU Yu-tong, et al. (2001). Application of 3D 
laser scanning system in engineering projection. Highway Transportation, 9, 38-40.  
(in Chinese) 
[33] GAO Shan. (2004). Application of the I-SITE 3D laser imagery system in mine survey. 
Railway Investigation and Surveying, 30(6), 38-40. (in Chinese) 
[34] Measurement Devices Ltd. Cavity Auto Scanning Laser System (C-ALS) Manual. 
v[1].2.0, 2006, York, UK. 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 367-382  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
LASER CLADDING: AN OVERVIEW 
 
 
L. Santo1 and J. Paulo Davim2* 
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Via del 
Politecnico 1, 00133 Roma, Italy. 
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Aveiro, Campus Santiago, 3810-
193 Aveiro, Portugal. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter presents a basic overview on laser cladding. Among laser technologies, 
laser cladding has received great attention in recent years, mainly due to the reduced 
costs of laser sources, the increasing potential for material processing, the development of 
new coating materials, the emergence of rapid prototyping and other manufacturing 
applications.  
In this chapter the process and different systems for laser cladding have been 
described, some case studies have been discussed, some predictive models have been 
proposed, and new perspectives have been discussed. Some aspects and advantages of 
laser cladding process have been highlighted.  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
What Is Laser Cladding? 
 
Laser cladding is a non-traditional process mainly used for metallic coating and high-
value part surface repair, to increase resistance to wear, corrosion, erosion and oxidation. 
Other interesting applications are rapid prototyping and low volume manufacturing [1]. 
During laser cladding process the laser beam is used as the heating source to melt the 
coating material in order to clad the surface of the substrate. The coating material can be 
deposited on the substrate by different methods: lateral or coaxial powder injection, pre-
placed powder on the substrate, or by wire feeding.  
                                                           
* Corresponding author: E-mail: pdavim@ua.pt  

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
368 
The advantage of laser cladding is the great process flexibility and the possibility of 
selectively cladding small areas, by depositing different metals and alloys on the substrate to 
form a layer with thickness ranging from 0.05 to 2 mm and widths as narrow as 0.4 mm. 
Due to the intrinsic properties of laser radiation, high input energy, low distortion, 
avoidance of undesirable phase transformation, controlled shape, minimal diffusion of the 
substrate elements into the coating, fine microstructure and low porosity in the layer can be 
obtained. The process is very useful for application in machine-tools and engine 
manufacturing, in particular for the aircraft and automotive industries. 
In the case of layered manufacturing or prototyping technique the integration of laser 
cladding with CAD/CAM manufacturing systems has been used also to fabricate complex 
shapes. 
Based on its different applications, different names have been given to this technology. 
For example, researchers use without distinction the terms laser coating, laser powder 
deposition, or laser surfacing for coating applications. For rapid prototyping they use 
selective laser sintering of metals, or direct metal laser sintering in the case of pre-placed 
powder laser cladding, while direct metal deposition, laser direct casting, laser powder 
fusion, shape deposition manufacturing, or others in powder injection laser cladding process. 
 
 
Equipments  
 
The process basically requires a laser system, equipped with a positioning device, that in 
advanced systems are governed by CAD/CAM software, and with a powder feeder in the case 
of co-deposition technique [1].  
The laser commonly used for cladding are CO2 lasers, diode-pumped Nd:YAG lasers, 
and high-power diode lasers (HPDL). Their wavelengths are different, 10.6 μm for CO2 
lasers, 1.06 μm for Nd:YAG lasers, and in the range 0.65-0.98 μm for HPDLs. This causes 
different laser-material interaction, affecting the material reflectivity, absorption and 
transmission and consequently the coating deposition.  
 
Table 1. Main characteristics of commonly used laser in cladding process. 
 
Characteristics 
CO2 
Nd:YAG 
diode-pumped 
HPDL 
Wavelength [μm] 
10.6 
1.06 
0.65-0.98 
Maximum power [kW] 
45 
6 
6 
Average power density 
[W/cm2] 
106…8 
106...9 
103...5 
Efficiency [%] 
5-10 
10-12 
30 
Service period [hour] 
1000-2000 
5000-10000 
5000-10000 
Beam parameter product 
(BPP)[mm × mrad] 
12 
12 
100-1000 
Fiber coupling 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
369
 
Figure 1. Laser material processing: power density and interaction time [1]. 
Table 1 reports the main characteristics of lasers for cladding and Figure 1 shows the 
operating window of laser material processing.  
The CO2 laser is the most commonly used, even if for cladding of small areas on 
components the pulsed Nd:YAG seems the best choice for the high control of the heat input 
[2-3]. 
CO2 laser and Nd:YAG are already implemented in industry for repairing and 
regenerating structures and engine part, while recent developments for HPDLs could establish 
new applications. This is due to the high efficiency of HPDLs and the shape intensity 
distribution that could not be Gaussian. In fact, its modular structure permits a segmented 
intensity distribution. In particular it is possible to use a rectangular spot with an uniform 
power intensity [3-4]. 
Many kind of powder feeders are used in industry and they can be classified in terms of 
different principles of operation: gravity-based, mechanical wheel, fluidized-bed and 
vibrating, even if sometimes a combination of more methods is employed to better perform 
the deposition. Generally, in the deposition system a carrier gas transports the powder 
particles from the starting point to the desired location. The powder feeder has to provide a 
continuous and uniform powder stream, avoiding powder agglomerations. For this reason, it 
is necessary to control the feed rate in real-time [1]. 
The choice of a powder feeder strictly depends on the application. It is very difficult to 
indicate the more suitable, by considering that powders have different size, shape, physical 
and mechanical properties. Therefore, it is practically impossible to convey each type of them 
with a steady-state flow using the same feeder machine. 
 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
370 
Process Description 
 
In laser cladding process, a laser heat source is used for depositing a thin layer of a 
desired metal on a substrate, generating a fusion bond between the two with minimal dilution 
(see following) of the clad by the substrate. The alloying material can be introduced into the 
laser melted volume either from pre-deposited layers or directly, by using a co-depositing 
technique and alloying materials in the form of wire, sheet, paste or powder, as shown in 
Figure 2.  
The cladding with pre-placed powder, also named two-step process, is the simplest 
method and the powder remains in place until melted, while the area is covered by an inert 
gas. By means of co-depositing technique, also known as one-step process, the additive 
material can be supplied out in different ways: wire feeding, paste laser cladding, lateral or 
coaxial powder injection. In the case of powder injection the carrier gas is used for forming a 
cladding powder stream blown under the laser beam while it scans the surface of the 
substrate. A melt pool with a depth corresponding to the thickness of a single clad is 
generated. It is possible to cover large surfaces, making overlapping tracks. Argon gas is 
commonly used as shielding and carrier gas. 
Figure 3 reports a schematic view of common cladding systems, a) pre-placed cladding 
material powder and b) blown powder cladding.  
 
 
Figure 2. Different methods of laser cladding. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
371
 
a) pre-placed cladding material powder 
 
 
b) blown powder cladding 
Figure 3. Schematic view of cladding systems [3]. 
The process with pre-placed powder has usually a small process window, it is time-
consuming and sometimes difficult to adapt on complex geometrical shapes. Laser cladding 
by wire feeding is difficult to control, and it usually leads to high dilution rates. Laser 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
372 
cladding by powder injection is the most attractive process, as it requires minimum surface 
preparation and it is applicable for complex geometries. Two ways of feeding powder are 
available: from a side or coaxially to the laser beam. If the powder stream is delivered 
coaxially to the laser beam, all the directions of the substrate movement on a plane 
perpendicular to the laser beam are equivalent, being independent of the cladding direction. 
Therefore, it is possible to build equivalent tracks independently on the moving direction of 
the specimen.  
The resulting thickness of the clad is typically from 50 μm to 2 mm in one step. When a 
thicker protection layer is needed, the process can be applied again. 
The clad geometry is associated to several parameters, schematically depicted in Figure 
4: h is the clad height, w is the width, θ is the wetting angle and b is the clad depth, i.e. the 
thickness of substrate that was melted during the cladding process. The latter represents the 
thickness of the melted substrate, that after the laser irradiation becomes part of the clad bead. 
The wetting angle θ, also known as clad angle, can be calculated by the following 
expression [4-5]: 
 
 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
w
h
2
arctan
2
180
θ
 
(1) 
 
Many parameters influence the laser cladding process and determine good or poor quality 
of the clad bead. They are related to the laser, material, motion device, feeder system and 
environment. The most important are laser power, scanning speed and powder feeding rate, 
even if several additional parameters play an important role like the beam spot size, the laser 
beam energy distribution, the amount and sort of shielding and carrier gas, the size, speed and 
feeding direction of powder particles. Furthermore, the nature and properties of the substrate 
material cannot be neglected. 
In literature [1-3] a lot of indicators of quality assessment have been used: geometry, 
microstructure, hardness, porosity, residual stress, surface roughness, cracks, dilution. 
The last mentioned has two definitions, the first is geometrical, the second is 
metallurgical.  
The geometrical definition of dilution d is (see Figure 4):  
 
 
b
h
b
dilution
+
=
 
(2) 
 
According to the metallurgical definition, it may be defined as the percentage of the total 
volume of the surface layer contributed by melting of the substrate. The dilution generally 
increases with the increase of laser power, but decreases with the increase of speed. 
Besides, in laser cladding, either pre-placed or powder injection, wetting angle and 
interfacial free energies are important parameters that indicate the quality of the clad. As 
schematized in Figure 5, the cross sections represent the amount of dilution, corresponding 
wetting angle θ, and interfacial free energies γ [J/m2]. Three interfacial energies for laser 
cladding can be considered as solid-liquid interfacial free energy γSL, solid-vapour interfacial 
energy γSV, and liquid-vapour interfacial energy γLV [1]. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
373
 
b 
w
h
substrate
clad bead
θ
 
Figure 4. Schematic view of the typical cross section of a clad bead. 
 
Figure 5. Laser cladding cross sections, associated wetting angle and interfacial free energies: a) high 
dilution, good wetting, b) ideal clad, c) no dilution, non-wetting [1]. 
The shape of the clad bead is governed by a balance between the mentioned energies, as 
shown in Figure 5. 
In the applications section, a discussion on process parameters and their influence on clad 
quality has been reported for each application. 
 
 
Governing Equations and Modeling 
 
Several models have been developed on laser cladding process with injection powder into 
a laser melt pool, that is the most representative method [6-8]. A complete description and 
modelling is however very complex, because of numerous interactions like laser 
beam/powder, laser beam/substrate, powder stream/melt pool, powder stream/solid substrate. 
Physical phenomena like mass and heat transfer, fluid flow, phase transformation are also 
involved as underlined in [1,4]. 
They are described as follows.  
 
• 
The laser beam reaches the substrate, a considerable amount of its energy is directly 
absorbed by the substrate, a very small part is absorbed by powder particles. The 
substrate develops a melt pool because of such absorption. The melted particles are 
simultaneously added into the melt pool. This step of the process can be expressed 
only by the heat conduction equation. 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
374 
• 
Surface tension gradient governs the material ﬂow within the melt pool. As far as the 
ﬂow penetrates in the substrate, the energy transfer mechanism changes to a mass 
convection mechanism. During this phenomenon, the melted powder particles are 
mixed rapidly in the melt pool. This step of the process should be expressed by the 
momentum, the heat transfer, and continuity equations. 
 
Based on these physical phenomena, heat conduction, momentum, and continuity are the 
equations that govern the process [1]. 
In laser cladding process, the laser passes on the additive material at t = 0 and forms the 
clad, as shown in Figure 6. The transient temperature distribution T(x, y, z, t) is obtained from 
the three-dimensional heat conduction in the substrate [1]: 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
Q
T
K
UT
c
t
T
c
p
p
=
∇
⋅
∇
−
⋅
∇
+
∂
∂
ρ
ρ
 
(3) 
 
where Q is power generation per unit volume of the substrate [W/m3 ], K is thermal 
conductivity [W/m·K], cp is specific heat capacity [J/kg·K], ρ is density [kg/m3], t is time [s], 
and U is the speed of the workpiece [m/s]. 
The momentum equation is : 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
U
p
g
U
U
t
U
∇
⋅
∇
+
∇
−
=
∇
+
∂
∂
μ
ρ
ρ
ρ
 
(4) 
 
where g is acceleration gravity [m/s2], μ is viscosity [kg/s·m], and p is pressure [N/m2].  
The last equation is continuity and is represented by  
 
 
0
=
∇U
 
(5) 
 
The above equations can be solved analytically only in special cases or numerically with 
assumptions and/or simplifications, adding the boundary conditions.  
 
Base metal 
U
Z
X 
Y 
Clad
Laser 
Beam 
 
Figure 6. Schematization of laser cladding process. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
375
In literature several steady-state models for laser cladding have been proposed, neglecting 
the transient response of the process, that plays an important role in the process.  
They take into account many important physical phenomena such as thermal conduction, 
thermocapillary (Marangoni) flow, powder and shield gas forces on melt pool, mass transport, 
diffusion, laser/powder interaction, melt pool/powder interaction, and laser/substrate 
interaction in the process zone [1]. 
 
 
Applications 
 
Many papers discussed laser cladding on steel substrate, a few on aluminium and 
magnesium [9-25]. The process offers a wide range of possible cladding materials. Some of 
them are Stellite SF6 (Co based Alloy), Diamalloy 2002 (WC 12 Co) 33 Ni 9Cr 3.5Fe 2Si 2B 
0.5C blend, Ni- Cr3, Ni-WC, Tribaloy (CoMoCrSi), Fe-Mn-C alloy, AISI 431, AISI M2, Ni-
20Cr/xAl2O3, Ni-Cr-B-Si, NiTi, Co-Ti, WC-Si-Ni, used for steel substrate, while Al2O3, 
AlSi40, Ni-based alloy /Y2O3 used for aluminium. 
Various coatings promote different mechanical and physical properties. Some tests are 
carried out in order to determine such properties: scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
analysis to observe microstructures, energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) to find the 
chemical composition, X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigation to analyze clad phases, optical 
microscopy to study the clad geometry, the liquid penetrant test to reveal surface breaking 
flaw, wear test to determine the mass loss and wear rate, corrosion and oxidation test, micro-
hardness test and nanoindentation test. 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used for investigating the influence of processing 
parameters in the form of single-cladding layer and hardness of coating; study for the 
prediction of the geometric form of clad is made by using multiple analysis regression.  
Two case studies are proposed in the following section. The former is focused on a metal 
matrix composite obtained by laser cladding. The latter deals with a statistical method for the 
prediction of the geometric form of clad using multiple regression analysis. 
 
 
Case Study: Laser Cladding of Ni-Based Alloy/Y2O3 Powder on 
6061aluminium Alloy 
 
In [26] laser cladding of Ni-based alloy/Y2O3 powder on 6061aluminium alloy was 
carried out by using 3 kW CW Nd:YAG laser. Metal matrix composite was obtained. It is 
composed of aluminium, Ni-based alloy, refining and dispersion strengthening Y2O3, and 
particle hardening W, Cr. The chemical composition of 6061 Al alloy and Ni-based alloy 
powder are reported in Table 2. The specimens are 60x50x30 mm3 in dimensions. Argon 
atmosphere was used for performing the tests. 
The average grain size of mixture powder was 30 mm. To prepare Ni-based alloy + Y2O3 
deposited materials, four kinds of pressed compacts 1 mm in thickness were obtained. They 
were preset on the surface of aluminium after a thermal treatment (dried at 120° C). 
Subsequently, the Nd-YAG laser was used for obtaining the matrix composite material. The 
process conditions were: the laser power 1688 W, the overlap ratio 30%, the scanning speed 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
376 
10 mm/s, the gas flow rate 1.4 L min-1, and four compositions of cladding materials ( Ni-
based alloy + 0%,2%, 6%, 8 % Y2O3 respectively). 
After laser cladding the specimens were characterized along the position of cross-section 
direction and longitudinal direction. 
The microstructure and morphology, phase identification, element diffusion, and 
composition analysis of Ni-based alloy/ Y2O3-deposited metal and of substrate interface were 
examined by using optical observation, SEM, electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) with 
EDS, and XRD. In addition, the micro-hardness distribution and corrosion-resistance property 
were investigated. 
The corrosion rate was calculated by following equation 5: 
 
 
(
)
St
m
m
loss
1
0 −
=
ν
 
(6) 
 
where vloss is corrosion rate, mo is mass before corrosion, m1 is mass after corrosion, S is 
surface area of specimen, and t is corrosion time. 
For instance, the SEM observation of morphology distribution in the case of Ni-based 
alloy and 2% Y2O3 as clad metal on 6061 aluminium substrate shows that the weld bead of 
deposited metal/aluminium substrate with well-metallurgical bonding is obtained with 
acicular structure, free from faults such as porosity and slags. The SEM observations show 
also that the interface reaction has occurred near the fusion line and that the addition of Y2O3 
alters the microstructures, as more fine microstructures are obtained, and promotes shorter 
transition zones near deposited metals/6061 aluminium substrate interface.  
Micro-hardness investigations of clad metal shows that the micro-hardness is much 
higher (780-1100 HV02) than of aluminium substrate (62 HV02), as expected. 
Corrosion rate of aluminium substrate is nearly the double of deposited metal (16.5889 
gm-2h-1 , 8.2451 gm-2h-1 and 6.3669 gm-2h-1 for Al alloy, Ni-based alloy and Ni-based alloy + 
8 % Y2O3 respectively). 
By using different cladding materials, coatings with higher micro-hardness and better 
corrosion resistance can be obtained. Also by increasing the Y2O3 percentage the micro-
hardness increases and consequently the corrosion rate of coating metal decreases. 
 
 
Case Study: Experimental Study for the Prediction of the Geometric form of 
Clad Using Multiple Regression Analysis 
 
In [27] laser cladding of nickel alloy Diamalloy 2002 on 100 Mn Cr W4 (DIN) steel 
plates was carried out by using a 6 kW CO2 continuous laser, a three/axis CNC controlled 
table, a powder feeder, and a coaxial cladding head. After the process the specimens were 
sectioned transversally to study the clad track by using a shop microscopy.  
A plan of experiments with 27 tests with repetition was performed to evaluate the effect of 
the process parameters (laser power, scanning velocity, and powder flow rate) on the geometry 
of the clad. The main aim was to establish a model by using multiple regression analysis (MRA) 
between process parameters and the geometry of single-cladding layer. Finally, further 
experimental tests were used for making a comparison with the foreseen results. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
377
Table 2. Chemical composition of 6061 alloy and Ni-based alloy powder [26] 
 
Materials 
Si Fe Ni Cu Co Mn Mg Cr Mo C Zn W Al 
6061 Al 
0.4-0.8 0.7 - 0.15-0.4 - 0.15 0.8-1.2 0.04-0.35 0.15 - 0.25 - Bal. 
Ni-based Alloy 
 - 6 48 - 8 - - 14 5 1 - 12 6 
 
Table 3. Experimental results of the measurement of the clad geometry as a function of 
process parameters [27]. 
 
Test 
number 
Processing parameters 
ha Clad 
height 
wa Clad 
width 
Pa Penetration 
Depth 
  
P (kW) 
V (mm/s) 
C (g/min) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
1 
2 
5 
5 
0.410 
4.392 
0.866 
2 
2 
5 
7.5 
0.610 
4.737 
0.876 
3 
2 
5 
11 
0.756 
5.156 
0.991 
4 
2 
10 
5 
0.358 
4.455 
0.795 
5 
2 
10 
7.5 
0.380 
4.683 
0.889 
6 
2 
10 
11 
0.695 
4.954 
0.943 
7 
2 
15 
5 
0.255 
4.683 
0.606 
8 
2 
15 
7.5 
0.420 
4.741 
0.741 
9 
2 
15 
11 
0.570 
4.893 
0.886 
10 
3 
5 
5 
0.430 
4.321 
0.815 
11 
3 
5 
7.5 
0.451 
4.784 
0.889 
12 
3 
5 
11 
0.781 
5.621 
0.921 
13 
3 
10 
5 
0.321 
4.653 
0.795 
14 
3 
10 
7.5 
0.493 
4.893 
0.815 
15 
3 
10 
11 
0.682 
5.383 
0.793 
16 
3 
15 
5 
0.318 
4.671 
0.764 
17 
3 
15 
7.5 
0.483 
4.829 
0.794 
18 
3 
15 
11 
0.644 
4.805 
0.832 
19 
4 
5 
5 
0.650 
4.850 
1.24 
20 
4 
5 
7.5 
0.732 
4.990 
1.512 
21 
4 
5 
11 
0.912 
5.290 
1.716 
22 
4 
10 
5 
0.550 
4.880 
1.143 
23 
4 
10 
7.5 
0.620 
4.950 
1.473 
24 
4 
10 
11 
0.754 
5.061 
1.704 
25 
4 
15 
5 
0.510 
4.830 
1.24 
26 
4 
15 
7.5 
0.420 
4.970 
1.138 
27 
4 
15 
11 
0.653 
5.020 
1.629 
a All measurements are repeated (mean values) 
 
Table 3 shows the results in terms of clad height (h), clad width (w) and penetration 
depth (p) as a function of the process parameters: laser power, scanning velocity and powder 
mass flow rate.  

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
378 
Table 4. Comparison between the experimental results and the values obtained by MRA 
model [27]. 
 
Geometric form of clad 
 (P=4 kW, V=5 mm/s and C=11 g/min) 
Experimental 
Model 
Error 
(Vexp) 
(Vm) 
(%) 
Clad width, w (mm) 
5.62 
5.28 
6.0 
Clad height, h (mm) 
0.79 
0.85 
7.6 
Depth penetration, p (mm) 
1.24 
1.50 
20.1 
 
From Table 3 it is possible to observe that the value of h increases with the increase of 
laser power and powder mass flow, while it decreases with the increase of scanning velocity. 
This means that with a higher scanning velocity, a lower laser power and powder mass flow it 
is possible to obtain a smaller clad height. It is also evident that p increases with the increase 
of laser power, and it decreases with the increasing of scanning velocity. The clad width w 
increases with the increasing of powder mass flow rate. 
By applying the multiple linear analysis regression, that is a statistical technique to 
analyze multifactor data, the following relationship are obtained [27] :  
 
 
w=3.94 + 0.000119×P - 0.0077×V + 0.082×C  R=0.86 
(7) 
 
 
h= 0.099 + 0.0000748×P - 0.0162×V + 0.049×C  R=0.69 
(8) 
 
 
p=-0.0168 + 0.000289×P - 0.013×V + 0.039×C  R=0.66 
(9) 
 
where, P is the laser power in kW, V is the scanning velocity in mm/s, and C is the powder 
mass flow rate in g/min. 
Table 4 shows instead the comparison between the predicted values for geometric clad 
using the MRA Eqs. 7-9 respectively, and the experimental results.  
From Table 4 it is evident that the calculated errors for clad width and for clad height are 
good, while those calculated for depth penetration are too high.  
 
 
Case Study: Investigation on Technological and Scientific Spreading of Laser 
Cladding 
 
In [28] an analysis of the patents and scientific publications in the laser cladding field, for 
the period ranging from 1985-2007, was performed by using some strategies. All the laser 
cladding processes and all the substrates used for coating, repairing and 3D fabrication were 
taken into account. For the technological activities (patents) the used dataset were USPTO’s 
US Granted (US), and US application (US-A), the European Patent Office (EP), Patent 
Cooperation Treaty (PCT-WO), the Japan Patent Office through Wisdomain Inc’s FOCUST 
product, PlusPat database on Questel-Orbit, regional patent offices (France and Germany), 
INPADOC database; for the scientific activities (scientific publications) ISI’s Web of 
Science®database was the main used database. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
379
 
 
Definition of the area to paint 
Electrostatic deposition 
 
Laser cure 
Figure 7. System scheme.  
The main results of the analysis were as follows. The number of patents increased from 9 
to 28 between 1984 and 1985, whereas the highest number was 43 in 1997. In the following 
years the number was in the range 23-42 per year. Toyota and Nissan have the highest 
number of patents, 51 and 49, respectively. Their research and development activities were 
mainly performed between 1985 and 1992 for Toyota, and 1993 and 2001 for Nissan. The 
patents primarily protect applications related to the laser cladding of valve seats, pistons and 
cylinders for automotive engines. General Electric Co. ranks 3rd with 36 patents from 1989 to 
2001, for applications mainly related to the rebuilding of turbine blades (aeronautic or 
electric). For the number of the scientific papers, an exponential growth of publication 
activity was recorded from 1985 to 2007. 588 scientific publication were recorded by using 
ISI’s Web of Science®database, while 2115 records by using also other databases as (Inspec, 
EI compendex, Metadex, Weldasearch, Aluminium Industry Abstract) until 2007. In the last 
case different kinds of publications including proceedings were considered.  
By comparing the results it has been noted an high increase of the number of the 
scientific publications in the laser cladding field, while that does not occur for the patents. 
The one great increase of patents after 1985 is probably correlated to the first high-power CO2 
laser, higher than 1 kW. 
In any case this states that great and growing interest is addressed to this specific topic. 
 
 
New Perspectives 
 
A lot of papers were written on laser cladding, showing the great interest for this topic and 
several attempts were made to optimize the process, mainly in terms of coating performance, 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
380 
process modelling and process control. There is a significant growth of the research activity in 
Asia, particularly in China. Europe is also active, with specific research on aluminium 
components [28]. 
Future works could concern the development of self-governing machines for the process, 
which cannot only deposit a wide range of alloys, but can also make complex shapes. Other 
research efforts could focus on increasing the speed of the process, because the current 
processing speed is still slow, compared to the competitive techniques such as plasma and 
thermal spraying. Efforts should be also dedicated to the process modelling, after a better 
understanding of the process and of the relationship between laser energy, process speed, 
powder feed rate, and mechanical and metallurgical properties. In repair application of large 
parts it could be useful to build a laser cladding system that works in-situ, without removing the 
components, which means to develop new accurate positioning devices. This will be very useful 
also for rapid prototyping application to build very complex shapes. 
Further fields of development are surely the micro and nano-technologies. In particular, 
laser cladding process can be used for the microstructure fabrication and some papers deals with 
these topics. 
Finally, for coating application a new idea was proposed for future industrial application: 
the diode laser cure of thermosetting powders on metallic surface [29-31]. It has been developed 
for aesthetic purposes, in order to make writings and to personalize parts, but it can be also 
interesting for functional application when applied to small parts. The physical principle is 
different from traditional laser cladding one, because no melting of the substrate occurs, but a 
paint coating is obtained. The process can be divided in two main phases, in the first an 
electrostatic deposition of commercial thermosetting powder is performed on metallic surfaces, 
in the second the laser beam passes on the powder following a fixed path and cures it, making 
the coating. In order to obtain a high definition of the borders, a further preliminary phase has 
been put, the generation of the area to paint by using an adhesive tape. The adhesive tape can be 
cut by laser, corresponding to the area to paint, then it can be removed to allow the powder 
deposition and laser cure. Figure 7 shows a scheme of the new system. This way the process can 
be performed to produce the coating in a completely automatic process, as shown in [29-30]. 
By using an AISI 304 steel sheet substrate, 90x90x1mm3 in size, subjected to cataphoresis 
treatment, and epoxy-polyester powders, the diode laser power was found in the range 50-65 W 
for a scan speed of 1 or 2 mm/s. Very good results in terms of aspect and adhesion to the 
substrate were found, demonstrating that the diode laser is a useful tool to cover small parts 
using a thermosetting powder.  
Future work will be necessary to thoroughly understand the physical phenomena involved 
in the process and to characterize the coating and the adhesion. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Ehsan Toyserkani, Amir Khajepour, Stephen Corbin, Laser Cladding, 2004, CRC 
Press. 
[2] 
Hans Gedda, Laser Surface Cladding A Literature Survey, Technical Report, 2000, 
ISSN:1402-1536. 
[3] 
Santo, L. Int. J. Surface Science and Engineering, 2008, Vol. 2, No. 5, 327, 336. 

Laser Cladding: An Overview 
 
381
[4] 
de Oliveira, U; Ocelik, V; Th. JM. De Hosson, Surface and Coating Technology, 2005, 
197, pp.127-136. 
[5] 
Paulo Davim, J; Oliveira, C; Cardoso, A. Journal of Engineering Manufacture, part B, 
2006, 220 pp. 1549-1554.  
[6] 
Nan Yang Optics & Laser Technology, 2009, 41, 94-98.  
[7] 
Plati, A; Tan, J.C; Golosnoy, IO; Persoons, R; van Acker, K; Clyne, TW. Advanced 
Engineering Materials, 2006, 7, 619-624. 
[8] 
Jendrzejewski, R; Sliwinski, G; Krawczuk, M; Ostachowicz, W. Surface & Coatings 
Technology, 2006, 201, 3328-3334. 
[9] 
Knut Partes; Carlo Giolli; Francesca Borgioli; Ugo Bardi; Thomas Seefeld; Frank 
Vollertsen Surface & Coatings Technology, 2008, 202, 2208-2213.  
[10] Viswanathan, A; Sastikumar, D; Harish Kumar, AK. Nath Surface & Coatings 
Technology, 2009, 203, 1618-1623.  
[11] Janne Nurminen; Jonne Näkki; Petri Vuoristo International Journal of Refractory 
Metals & Hard Materials, 2009, 27, 472-478.  
[12] Navas, C; Conde, A; Fernandez, BJ; Zubiri, F; de Damborenea, J. Surface & Coating 
Technology, 2005, 194, 136-142. 
[13] Feng, J; Ferreira, MGS; Vilar, R. Surface & Coatings Technology, 1966, 88, 212-218. 
[14] Cheng, FT; Lo, KH; Man, HC. Materials Science & Engineering, 2004, 380, 20-29. 
[15] Chengyun Cui, Zuoxing Guo, Yuhua Liu, Qiongqiong Xie, Zheng Wang, Jiandog Hu, 
Yuan Yao, Optics & Laser Technology, 2007, 39, 1544-1550. 
[16] Paul, CP; Alemohammad, H; Toyserkani, E; Khajepour, A; Corbin, S. Materials 
Science & Engineering, 2007, 464, 170-176. 
[17] Sun, S; Durandet, Y; Brandt, M. Surface & Coatings Technology, 2005, 14, 225-231. 
[18] Anjos, MA; Vilar, R; Qiu, YY. Surface & Coatings Technology, 1997, 92, 142-149. 
[19] Hamidreza Alemohammad, Shahrzad Esmaeili, Ehsan Toyserkani, Materials Science & 
Engineering, 2007, 456, 156-161. 
[20] Dawei Zhang, Xinping Zhang, Surface & Coatings Technology, 2005, 190, 212-217. 
[21] Tobar, MJ; Amado, JM; Alvarez, C; Garcia, A; Varala, A; Yanez, A. Surface & 
Coatings Technology, 2008, 202, 2297-2301.  
[22] Conde, A; Zubiri, F; de Damborenea, J. Materials Science and Engineering A, 2002, 
334, 233-238. 
[23] Guojian Xu, Muneharu Kutsuna, Zhongjie Liu, Katsusige Yamada, Surface & Coatings 
Technology, 2006, 201, 1138-1144. 
[24] Dubourg, L; Ursescu, D; Hlawka, F; Cornet, A. Wear, 2005, 258, 1745-1754. 
[25] Godfrey, C; Onwubolu, J; Paulo Davim; Carlos Oliveira; A. Cardoso Optics & Laser 
Technology, 2007, 39, 1130-1134.  
[26] Pei Quan Xu; Hong Ying Gong; Guo Xiang Xu; Jian Ping He; Zhi Shui Yu J Mater Sci 
2008, 43, 1559-1567.  
[27] Paulo Davim, J; Carlos Oliveira; A. Cardoso Materials and Design, 2008, 29, 554-557.  
[28] Dubourg, L; Archambeault, J. Surface & Coatings Technology 2008, 202, 5863-5869.  
[29] Italian Patent n° IT:RM2008A000580. 
 
 

L. Santo and J. Paulo Davim 
 
382 
[30] Santo L; Tagliaferri V; Trovalusci F; Proceedings of ASME 2009 International 
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conferenze (MSEC2009), October 4-7, 2009, 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA, 
[31] Quadrini, F; Santo L; Tagliaferri V; Trovalusci F., Polymer-Plastics Technology and 
Engineering, in press. 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 383-397  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
 
 
 
LASER PROTOTYPING OF POLYMER-BASED 
NANOPLASMONIC COMPONENTS 
 
 
Andrey L. Stepanova,b*, Roman Kiyana, Carsten Reinhardta 
and Boris N. Chichkova 
aLaser Zentrum Hannover, 30419 Hannover, Germany 
bKazan Physical-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, 420029 Kazan, 
Russian Federation 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Growing interest in the field of surface plasmon polaritons comes from a rapid 
advance of nanostructuring technologies. The application of two-photon polymerization 
by pulse laser technique for the fabrication of dielectric and metallic SPP-structures, 
which can be used for localization, guiding, and manipulation of plasmonic waves on a 
subwavelength scale, are studied. This fast technology is based on nonlinear absorption 
of near-infrared femtosecond laser pulses. Excitation, propagation, and interaction of SPP 
waves with nanostructures are controlled and studied by leakage radiation imaging. It is 
demonstrated that created nanostructures are very efficient for the excitation and focusing 
of plasmonic waves on the metal film. Examples of passive and active plasmonic 
components are presented and discussed. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Miniaturization is a central guideline in modern science and technology. Semiconductor 
electronic devices, which are fabricated today in industry, are characterized by low heat 
dissipation and limited propagation speed of electrical signals [1, 2]. An alternative, allowing 
a solution of these problems, is to use an optical data transmission. Therefore, miniaturized 
light sources and detectors are required as key elements for modern telecommunication and 
interconnector systems to combine with or to replace conventional electronic devices, 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: e-mail: a.stepanov@lzh.de ; anstep@kfti.knc.ru 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
384 
sensors, and actuators. Nowadays, both improved preparation and analytical methods allow 
the realization of structures in the range of nanometers. Many physical properties of material 
structures are dramatically modified when their sizes are reduced below one micrometer and 
thereby, approach the length scales of the effective light wavelengths. It is expected that the 
understanding and application of these novel effects will allow the development of a wealth 
of new methods and devices for applications in medicine, electronics, photonics, and material 
science. 
Research at the nanoscale level has already been conducted for many years, whereas in 
optics, only first attempts towards nanophotonics have been undertaken recently. The 
miniaturization of conventional optical elements such as, for example, waveguides as well as 
the resolving power of optical microscopes is restricted by the diffraction limit. In the visible 
spectral range, this limit corresponds to about half a micron. A promising solution to 
overcome the diffraction limit is to use optics based on light field coupled to collective 
electron oscillations at the interface of a metal and a dielectric [3, 4]. Such mixed 
photon/electron surface modes are known as surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) [5]. When 
SPP waves are excited on metal nanostructures, the surface structure dimension rather than 
the exciting light wavelength determines the special SPP electromagnetic field profile. This 
allows the overcoming of the diffraction limit and the realization of optical devices at the 
nanoscale dimensions. 
As a propagating electromagnetic wave, SPPs in an extended metal structure can be used 
for the guiding of light fields, corresponding to signal transfer or optical addressing [6, 7]. A 
dispersion relation characterizes SPP waves and predicts that the plasmon wavelength is 
smaller than the vacuum light wavelength for any given light frequency [5, 7]. The metals of 
choice are usually gold or silver, as these metals possess high concentration of free 
conducting electrons and show SPP wave modes in the visible or near-infrared spectral range. 
In summary, propagating SPPs in surface nanostructures can be used for electromagnetic 
signal transfer and nanoscale light field manipulation. Propagating plasmon effects can lead 
to the realization of nanoscale plasmon-based (plasmonic) optical devices. SPP waves can 
provide an interface between macrooptics and plasmonic nanocomponents. Examples 
demonstrating the broad prospects of SPP nanodevices: 
 
• 
in analogy to electronics higher integration densities and easier fabrication 
techniques allow the realization of 2D- and 3D-devices using SPPs modes; 
• 
the ongoing increase of the computer processor frequency can soon lead to a 
situation when the processor will be working faster than the communication speed 
via electrical signals in metal wires. Faster intra- and inter-chip connections are 
required. Conventional optical waveguides cannot be miniaturized to meet the 
demand of present and future integration densities. Instead of that, SPP waveguides 
could serve as optical interconnects with nanoscale sections; 
• 
as mixed photon/electron oscillations, SPP waves could offer an elegant solution for 
the transformation of optical and electrical signals in a new generation of electro-
optical devices. 
 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
385
The aim of this article is to present a short overview of the state-of-the-art in 2D- and 3D- 
laser nanomanufacturing by two-photon polymerization (2PP) technique and recent progress 
in the field of SPP and SPP-based nanodevices.  
 
 
LASER NANOMANUFACTURING OF SPP OPTICAL ELEMENTS 
 
The possibility of very high localization of laser energy has led to more and more 
advanced laser applications. Particularly, the interaction of lasers with polymers and 
dielectrics is of high technological interest. The adaptation of polymers to laser characteristics 
and vice versa is very challenging from the scientific and technological points of view. A 
method which has recently attracted considerable attention is 2PP using femtosecond lasers 
[8-13], where complicated microstructures can be produced in photosensitive materials. It is 
very attractive 2D and 3D rapid microstructuring technology which provides much better 
structural resolution and quality than the well-known stereo-lithography (SL) technique. In 
spite of 2PP being a very young technology (ten years old), there are already several very nice 
and informative reviews published on this subject [14-16].  
The very important distinction between the 2PP and SL technologies is that in the case of 
2PP, near-infrared (IR) laser pulses, and in the case of SL, ultraviolet (UV) laser radiation are 
used for curing of photosensitive materials. From the first glance, it does not look like a big 
difference whether multiphoton (IR) or single photon (UV) absorption initiate polymerization 
processes. Taking into account that photosensitive materials are usually transparent in the 
infrared and are highly absorptive in the UV range, one can initiate polymerization with IR 
laser pulses within the volume and fabricate 3D structures, whereas with UV laser radiation, 
due to single photon absorption, polymerization also occurs at the surface. 3D structures 
made with tightly focused UV light have usually poor resolution. Therefore, for the 
fabrication of 3D structures, SL is used as a planar technology with layer-by-layer 
polymerization steps, whereas 2PP is a truly high-resolution 3D technology. 
In this study the novel optical SPP components were produced by 2PP technique which is 
a very attractive technology for the fabrication of 3D structures on dielectric substrates with 
resolutions down to 100 nm. For 2PP and 3D material processing, usually near-infrared 
Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser oscillators working at a wavelength around 800 nm are 
applied. When femtosecond laser pulses are tightly focused into the volume of a 
photosensitive material (or photoresist), they initiate the 2PP process by two-photon 
absorption in certain photostarters and subsequent polymerization. After illumination of the 
desired structures inside the resist volume and development, e.g., washing out of non-
illuminated regions, the polymerized material remains in the prescribed 3D structure. This 
allows the fabrication of any computer-generated 3D structure by direct laser recording into 
the volume of a photosensitive material. 
The dielectric SPP elements are fabricated on glass or metal substrates by 2PP of the 
inorganic-organic hybrid polymer ORMOCER and the commercial lithographic resist maN-
1405, both provided by microresist technology GmbH. The polymer can be polymerized by 
using a radical photoinitiator Irgacure 369 from Ciba Specialty Chemicals Inc.. The 
lithographic resist undergoes a bond cleavage upon illumination. Both materials change their 
refractive index during this process, allowing real-time observation of the polymerization. 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
386 
For the fabrication of dielectric structures by 2PP, a femtosecond oscillator, Spectra-
Physics Model Tsunami, is used. This system delivers laser pulses at a wavelength of 780 nm 
with a pulse duration of 80 fs (FWHM), and a repetition rate of 80 MHz. In present 
experiments, the average laser power of up to 40 mW is applied. The schematic of the setup 
used for the sample preparation is shown in Figure 1 
Femtosecond laser pulses are focused by an immersion-oil objective (Nikon, 100x 
magnification, 1.3 NA). In case of the ORMOCER, a liquid polymer droplet is sandwiched 
between the substrate and a cover glass with the thickness of 150 μm. Their separation is 
fixed by a plastic frame with the size of 18 x 18 mm2 and thickness of 100 μm. For 
fabrication of surface structures, the laser beam is focused through the cover glass and the 
ORMOCER layer on the substrate surface. During structuring, the laser beam can additionally 
be scanned along the sample surface by a galvo-scanner system from Scanlab. After 
completion of the 2PP and development of the surface polymer structures, the samples are 
washed in isobutyl-methylketon (4-metheyl-2-pentanone) to remove remaining liquid 
material. At the final fabrication stage, 50-nm-thin gold films can be deposited on the dried 
samples with surface dielectric structures by electron or thermal sputtering / evaporation. 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of the experimental setup for sample preparation by 2PP. 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic of setup for the fabrication of SPP surface structures from ORMOCER. 
Dielectric SPP structures can also be fabricated directly on the gold film, see Figure 2. 
Laser-induced polymerization on the reflecting metal surface is more problematic due to 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
387
interference effects and poor polymer adhesion to metals. 2PP of ORMOCER on a gold layer 
is possible for a smaller range of laser powers compared to the 2PP on a glass substrate. 
Simultaneously the required threshold power for 2PP process decreases. The first effect is 
related to adhesion problems and laser heating of the gold layer. The reduction of the 2PP 
threshold can be explained by the interference of the incoming and reflected laser beams in 
the vicinity of the gold surface. In the interference maxima the polymerization threshold is 
reduced due to higher intensity. In addition, the high intensity laser pulse creates free 
electrons by multiphoton photoelectric effect which can also influence the polymerization 
process. Possible laser heating effects at the gold surface can result in a chemical destruction 
of the material. To avoid these effects, the interaction time of the laser beam with the material 
(and the gold surface) should be possibly short. Therefore, for fabrication of line structures, 
the laser beam is scanned with a velocity of 40 μm/s. Multiple scanning of the fabricated 
structures reduces the 2PP threshold, since the total illumination time increases. With this 
procedure polymerization was observed in a range of laser powers between 8 mW and 16 
mW. However, for powers exceeding 16 mW the possibility of structural defects during the 
fabrication process strongly increases. This can be explained by field enhancement effects at 
point-like inhomogeneities on the sputtered gold surface. The visibility of the interference 
pattern can be further reduced when a structure is written several times with a gradually 
increasing laser power, starting from the lowest power of 6 mW. With this procedure also the 
possibility of structural defects decreases. In this case, the field enhancement effects at point-
like inhomogeneities are reduced due to a thin layer of polymerized material created during 
the first lower power scan. 
Fabrication of dielectric SPP structures from maN-1405 is accomplished in a similar way. 
The resist is spin coated onto the substrate surface to the desired thickness, e. g. 500 nm layer 
thickness for 3000 rpm. The laser beam is then focused without immersion oil as depicted in 
Figure 3. The structures are scanned twice at laser powers around 20 mW. 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic of setup for the fabrication of SPP surface structures from maN-1405. 
 
Structuring by 2PP of ORMOCER on transparent dielectric substrates has been studied in 
details. Some examples of 3Dstructures are shown in Figure 4. In contrast, the fabrication of 
polymerized structures by 2PP directly on metal surfaces has not been explored so far. Laser-
induced polymerization on the reflecting metal surface is more problematic due to 
interference effects and poor polymer adhesion to metals. 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
388 
 
Figure 4. Prisms with optical quality fabricated by 2PP. 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of laser fabricated dielectric line structures from ORMOCER on a) a metal 
covered and b) a bare glass substrate and maN-1405 on gold (c,d). 
 
 
FABRICATION OF OPTICAL WAVEGIDING DIELECTRIC COMPONENTS 
 
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is used for the visual inspection of the fabricated 
samples. In Figure 5, SEM images of waveguide structures fabricated from ORMOCER on 
gold and glass surfaces are shown. Longitudinal modulations of the waveguide sidewalls due 
to interference of the incoming and reflected beam are evident in the structure fabricated on 
the gold surface by a single scan (Figure 5a), whereas they are not observed in the case of 
transparent glass substrate (Figure 5b). Structures fabricated from maN-1405 are generally 
less high, so that interference does not cause any problems. Lines of different width can be 
realized by adjusting of the applied laser power (Figure 5c and Figure 5d). Examples of 
dielectric couplers fabricated by 2PP of the ORMOCER and bond cleavage of maN-1405 on 
gold surfaces are shown in Figure 6 a and Figure 6b, respectively. 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
389
Longitudinal modulations of the waveguide sidewalls (Figure 4a) are evident in the 
structure fabricated on the gold surface, whereas they are not observed in the case of 
transparent glass substrate. This modulation appears due to the interference effects. The 
measured period of the interference pattern is 251 nm. This value is in good agreement with 
the interference period d = λ/2 nuc ~ 254 nm, determined by the half of the laser wavelength 
in uncured ORMOCER. The slight transversal modulation of the sidewalls observed on the 
glass substrate can be addressed to small mechanical vibrations in the system. To compare 
resolution limits of 2PP technique on transparent (glass) and reflecting (gold) substrates, 
single polymerized voxels are fabricated in Ormocer on different surfaces using the same 
experimental setup. The diameter of the voxels fabricated on the glass and gold surfaces are 
measured as a function of the applied laser power. The experimental results are fitted by a 
simple expression, where σ2 = 3·10-55 cm4s is the effective two-photon polymerization cross 
section measured before, and t=80 fs is the laserpulse duration. The number of applied laser 
pulses n=ν t is determined by the repetition rate ν=80 MHz of the laser system and the 
illumination time of a single voxel t, which has been set to t=200 ms in these experiments. 
The dimensionless parameter C=ln[ρ0/(ρ0 - ρth)] depends on the primary initiator density ρ0 
and the threshold density of radicals required for polymerization ρth. For the used Ormocer 
material we have ρ0=1.5 wt.% and ρth=0.25 wt.%. The photon flux is defined by N0 = 2PT ( π 
r0
2 τ ν h ω), where r0 is the beam radius, P is the average laser power, ω is the laser 
frequency, and T is the factor taking into account light transmittance through the scanner and 
microscope objective, T =0.20 in the present case. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of coupling structures fabricated from ORMOCER (a) and maN-1405 (b). 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
390 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of the structuring parameters on gold and glass. 
The experimental measurements of the voxel diameter and the results of the calculations 
are shown in Figure 7. In calculations of the voxel diameter on the glass surface, the beam 
radius r0 = 520 nm is used as a single fit parameter. To reproduce the experimental data for 
the voxel diameter on the gold surface, the influence of the reflected beam has to be taken 
into account. In this case the experimental data can be reproduced by replacing the photon 
flux N0 by 1.6·N0. This value is well below the maximum possible flux enhancement in the 
interference maxima given by a factor of 4. The reason for this is that, in our experiments, 
tightly focused laser pulses with a focus position slightly above the surface are used. 
Therefore, the reflected beam is divergent and has lower intensity. The interference 
enhancement factor of 1.6 corresponds to the expected value. Possible laser heating effects at 
the gold surface can result in a chemical destruction of the ORMOCER material. To avoid 
these effects, the interaction time of the laser beam with the material (and the gold surface) 
should be possibly short. Therefore, for the fabrication of the line structures the laser beam is 
scanned with the velocity of 40 μm/s. 
To reduce the visibility of the interference pattern and to create more smooth structures, 
waveguides have been written two times keeping the laser power constant. Multiple scanning 
of the fabricated structures reduces the 2PP threshold, since the total illumination time 
increases. With this procedure polymerization was observed in a range of laser powers 
between 8 mW and 16 mW. However, for powers exceeding 16 mW the possibility of 
structural defects during the fabrication process strongly increases. This can be explained by 
field enhancement effects at point-like inhomogeneities on the sputtered gold surface. The 
visibility of the interference pattern can be further reduced when a structure is written several 
times with a gradually increasing laser power, starting from the lowest power of 6 mW. With 
this procedure also the possibility of structural defects decreases. In this case, the field 
enhancement effects at point-like inhomogeneities are reduced due to a thin layer of 
polymerized material created during the first lower power scan. To fabricate SPP structures 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
391
like waveguides, bends, and beam splitters with a smooth surface quality, the laser power is 
set initially to 6 mW and is gradually increased to 14 mW. For every laser power the structure 
is scanned two times. The resulting structures still show a weak interference pattern close to 
the metal surface but have much better surface quality. SEM pictures of a bend and y-splitter 
fabricated with this procedure are shown in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8. Structures fabricated on gold with multiple scanning. 
 
 
Figure 9. SPP near-field intensity distribution (right) of waveguide demonstrating guiding of SPP 
waves. 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
392 
 
Figure 10. Plasmon excitation on topological surface structures and emission of leakage radiation. 
SPP device technology makes use of the properties of surface waves – electromagnetic 
excitations propagating along and bound to interface between a metal and a dielectric. The 
intrinsically two-dimensional nature of SPPs is ideally suited for the planar waveguide 
realization, which can be implemented from polymers. Guiding properties of the dielectric 
SPP structures was studied with straight 60 µm long ridges fabricated by 2PP. The SPPs are 
launched at the gold–air interface by a focused laser beam at a wavelength tip of 1520 nm in 
the Kretschmann-excitation configuration. The topography of the polymer ridges and the SPP 
near-field distribution imaged with a scanning near-field optical microscope are shown in 
Figure 9 [17]. It can be seen that a relatively wide SPP beam is partially coupled into, 
propagating along, and coupled out of the polymer ridge. At the same time, the rest of the 
(diverging) SPP beam continues to propagate along the air–gold interface and is reflected by 
the neighbouring ridge. 
 
 
LEAKAGE RADIATION IMAGING 
 
The intensity decay length of a plane SPP wave in a metal film located between two 
dielectric media defines its intrinsic decay length Lint=1/2k”, where k" is defined as the 
imaginary part of the complex surface plasmon wave vector kSPP=k’+ik”. Intrinsic losses are 
caused by inelastic scattering of conduction electrons, scattering of electrons at interfaces, and 
leakage radiation (LR). Leakage radiation is emitted from the interface between the metal thin 
film and a higher-refractive-index dielectric medium (Figure 10), for example, glass [18]. 
When the electromagnetic plasmon field crosses the metal film and reaches the substrate, 
leakage radiation appears at a characteristic angle with respect to the interface normal. This 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
393
radiation permits the detection of SPPs in the far-field [19, 20] and this approach was used in 
our study. 
The experimental setup used for leakage radiation imaging is shown in Figure 11. For the 
local excitation of SPPs, the linearly polarized light from a Ti:Sapphire laser at wavelengths 
between 760 and 900 nm is focused through a microscope objective onto the surface of 
nanostructured gold or silver films. LR is detected by means of an oil immersion objective in 
optical contact with the glass substrate. By focusing this objective on the metal/glass 
interface, this radiation can be collected and either imaged or focused onto a photo-detector. 
The distribution of SPP is photo- or videotaped with a charge-coupled-device (CCD) camera. 
Each pixel element of an image captures the flux of LR emerging from the corresponding 
position at the metal-air interface. The latter is a direct quantitative measure of the SPP 
intensity at this position. 
 
 
Figure 11. Experimental scheme of leakage radiation microscope. SPPs are excited by laser light on a 
structured metal film on a glass substrate. F (gray) filter, P polarizer. 
 
Figure 12. SEM image of (a) the sample with several surface structures, (b) an individual structure. The 
radius of the curved chains of nanoparticles is equal to 10 μm. The particle in-plane size (diameter) and 
inter-particle distance are 350 nm and 850 nm, respectively. 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
394 
 
Figure 13. Experimental LR image of the SPP focusing by the surface structure. The arrow indicates the 
incident light polarization. 
 
 
NANOPLASMONIC COMPONENTS 
 
SPP wave focusing on the flat metal surface was studied with a curved (circular) line of 
nanoparticles. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) os these structures are presented in Figure 12. 
Focusing of SPPs by the curved chains of nanoparticles was observed with by LR for moderate 
sizes of the incident laser beam (Figure 13, left). The SPP excitation was obtained by a focusing 
laser beam (at normal incidence) directed to the centre of the chain. The exciting laser spot was, in 
this case (Figure 13, right), equal to approximately 10 μm in diameter. Interference of divergent 
SPPs excited by different particles results in the SPP focusing with a focal point located at the 
centre of curvature of the nanoparticle chain. As can seen, the focal SPP waist is very well 
localized and has relatively small value. In addition to the SPP focusing one can see that there is a 
system of SPP rays on the other side from the nanoparticle chain. The origin of this effect is again 
in the interference between the SPPs produced by the individual particles. Details of the numerical 
modelling of plasmon focusing efficiency are presented in [21]. 
When the incident laser spot is decreased down to 3 μm, the SPP focusing effect becomes 
less pronounced (Figure 14), since only a few scattering centers are excited by the laser beam. 
The position where the laser beam is focused on the structure is indicated by the dashed 
circles. The SPP focal waist broadens resulting in a nearly parallel and relatively narrow SPP 
beam. In such case it is possible to control the propagation direction of the narrow SPP beam 
(always directed perpendicular to a local tangent of the particle chain) simply by changing the 
incident laser spot position along the chain (Figure 14). This effect is useful for the SPP 
manipulation in complex micro-optical elements utilizing chains of separated scatterers. 
2PP provides possibilities for the realization and investigation of plasmon propagation on 
3D surface structures. The schematic of first experiment is shown in Figure 15, where 
plasmons are excited on the left defect structure and propagate over a ramp structure. In this 
case leakage radiation from plasmons on the ramp structure is less visible compared to the 
leakage radiation from SPPs on the plane surface. 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
395
 
Figure 14. LR images of the SPPs excited by the surface structure. The diameter of the incident light 
spot for the SPP excitation (dashed circles) is equal to 3 μm. (a) The exciting laser spot is at the centre 
of the structure, (b) and (c) the laser spot is shifted away from the centre. The arrow indicates the 
incident light polarization. 
 
 
Figure 15. Schematic of a 3D surface structure for SPP propagation. 
The LRM image together with the corresponding SEM image of the test structure is 
demonstrated in Figure 16. This result clearly indicates that SPPs can propagate on smoothly 
curved surfaces with curvatures larger than the SPP wavelength. 
In conclusion, laser fabrication of dielectric 2D and 3D surface plasmon polariton (SPP) 
structures on metal surfaces by two photon induced polymerization of a high refractive index 
inorganic–organic hybrid polymer has been studied. Optical properties of the fabricated 
dielectric SPP structures have been investigated by leakage radiation microscopy of the 
propagating SPPs. Effective excitation and focusing of the SPPs have been demonstrated with 
dielectric structures. The demonstrated results on excitation and manipulation of SPP fields 
and the simplicity of laser fabrication technique provide interesting prospects for the 
realization of future plasmonic devices. 

Andrey L. Stepanov, Roman Kiyan, Carsten Reinhardt et al. 
 
396 
 
Figure 16. SEM image of the 3D structure fabricated by 2PP (left) and LR image of the SPPs excited on 
the ridge and propagating over the 3D structure (left). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The author (A.L.S.) is grateful to the Alexander Humboldt Foundation (Germany) and 
the Austrian Scientific Foundation in the frame of the Lise Meitner program for financial 
support. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Wong, H. & Ieai, H. (2005). Physics World, 18, 40. 
[2] 
Hitz, B. (2005). Photonics spectra, 39, 52. 
[3] 
Barnes, W. L., Dereux, A. & Ebbesen, T. W. (2003). Nature, 424, 824. 
[4] 
Ozbay, E. (2006). Science, 311, 189. 
[5] 
Raether, H. (1988). Surface Plasmons (Springer Tracts in Modern Physics: Berlin). 
[6] 
Weeber, J. C., Lacroute, Y.  & Dereux, A. (2003). Phys. Rev. B, 68, 115401. 
[7] 
Drezet, A., Hohenau, A., Koller, D., Stepanov, A. L., Ditlbacher, H., Steinberger, 
B., Aussnegg, F.R., Leitner, A. & Krenn, J. R. (2008). Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 149, 220. 
[8] 
Maruo, S., Nakamura, O. & Kawata, S. (1997). 22, 132. 
[9] 
Cumpston, B. H., Ananthvel, S. P., Barlow, S., Dyer, D. L., Ehrlich, J. E., Erskine, L. 
L., Heikal, A. A., Kuebler, S. M., Lee, I. Y. S., McCord-Maughon, D., Qin, J. , Röckel, 
H., Rumi, M., Wu, X. L., Marder, S. R. & Perry, J. W. (1999). Nature, 398, 51.  
[10] Kawata, S., Sun, H. B. Tanaka, T. & Tanaka, K. Nature, (2001). 412, 697. 
[11] Serbin, J., Egbert, A., Ostendorf, A., Chichkov, B., Houbertz, R., Domann, G., Schulz,  
J., Cronauer, C., Frohlich, L. & Popall, M. (2003).  Opt. Lett. 28, 301. 
[12] Deubel, M., von Freymann, G., Wegener, M., Pereira, S., Busch, K. & Soukoulis, C. M. 
(2004). Nature materials., 3, 444. 
[13] Serbin, J., Ovsianikov, A. & Chichkov, B. (2004). Opt. Express, 12, 5221. 
[14] Sun, H. B. & Kawata, S. (2004). Two-photon polymerization and 3D lithographic 
microfabrication (Springer: Berlin). 

Laser Prototyping of Polymer-Based Nanoplasmonic Components 
 
397
[15] Blanco, A., Busch, K., Deubel, M., Enkrich, C., von Freymann, G., Hermatschweiler, 
M., Koch, W., Linden, S., Meisel, D. C. & Wegener, M. (2004). Three-dimensional 
lithography of photonic-crystal in photonic crystal. Eds. K., Busch, S., Lölkes, R. B., 
Wehrspohn, H., Föll., (Wiley-VCH,). 
[16] Prasad, P. N. (2004). Nanophotonics (John Wiley & Sons). 
[17] Reinhardt, C., Passinger, S., Chichkov, B., Murquart, C., Radko, I. & Bozhevolnyi, S. 
Opt. Lett., 31, 1307 (2006). 
[18] Raether, H. (1988). Surface plasmons (Springer: Berlin,). 
[19] Stepanov, A. L., Krenn, J. R., Ditlbacher, H., Honenau, A., Drezet, A., Steinberger, B.,  
Leitner, A. & Aussenneg, F. R. (2005). Opt. Lett., 30, 1524. 
[20] Kiyan, R., Reinhardt, C., Passinger, S., Stepanov, A. L., Hohenau, A., Krenn, J. R. & 
Chichkov, B. N. (2007). Opt. Express, 15, 4205. 
[21] Evlyukhin, A. B., Stepanov, A. L., Kiyan, R. & Chichkov, B. N. (2008). J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. B, 25, 1011. 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 399-413  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
 
 
 
STRUCTURED BEAMS IN LASER  
REFRACTOGRAPHY APPLICATIONS 
 
 
I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, and A.V.Tolkachev 
 
V.A. Fabrikant Physics Department, Moscow Power Engineering Institute  
(Technical University), Moscow, Russia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this chapter, the applications of structured laser beams in laser refractography 
technology are considered. The basic principles of laser refractography, a new method for 
diagnostics of optically inhomogeneous media and flows are described. This technology 
is based on the refraction of the structured laser beams in transparent inhomogeneity, 
digital registration and computer processing of the refraction pattern. The experimental 
setup allowed quantitative visualization of the transparent media by using 2D- or 3D-
refractograms. The 3D-refractograms are used for visualization of the boundary layer 
near the hot or cold ball in water that are present. The problem of laser sheet (plane 
structured laser beam) also cylindrical beam propagation in media with radial variation of 
the temperature and refractive index is solved and the trajectories of geometrical rays are 
calculated. The comparison of the parameters for experimental and corresponding 
calculated refractograms allows recognizing the temperature fields in the boundary layer, 
i.e., gives quantitative information. The method is modified for studying edge effects and 
micro layers in liquids and gases. Due to nearly inertialess measurements, laser 
refractography can be used for diagnostics of fast and transient processes. 
 
Keywords: Laser beam, structured laser beam, refraction, laser refractography, quantitative 
visualization. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Laser beams have been widely used for diagnostics in the fields of acoustic pressure, 
temperature, density, and flow velocity in transparent media [1-5]. First of all, optical 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
400 
measurements do not distort the fields under study because the energy being absorbed by the 
medium is quite low in most cases. In addition, laser methods almost have no inertial errors 
which makes it possible to perform precision measurements of fast processes. The possibility 
to perform remote measurements is an additional advantage of these methods. Laser methods 
can be used to study the refraction index field, which can be subsequently recalculated into 
the field of another physical quantity being sought. The modern stage of development of laser 
and computational techniques is characterized by the advent of visible semiconductor lasers, 
commercial production of Diffraction Optical Elements (DOE), digital video and photo 
cameras with the number of pixels exceeding millions, and the development of new effective 
digital methods for optical image processing. All these factors have made it possible to create 
optical diagnostic methods for inhomogeneous media at a qualitatively new scientific and 
technical level by developing methods for obtaining information on the medium or a flow in 
the chosen cross section (2D-diagnostics) and in the bulk (3D-diagnostics). 
Refraction methods for diagnostics of flows have been revived in recent years due to the 
above-listed factors. Array photodetectors and computers have made it possible to work out 
new methods of laser gradient refractometry (speckle method [6], as well as computer-laser 
[7] and Background Oriented Shadow (BOS) methods [8]). High-quality laser beams of 
various shapes are produced by using simple optical systems. Scanning and multichannel 
refractometric systems with computer-assisted image processing have been developed [5]. 
Main laser refraction gradient methods for diagnostics of flows and corresponding laser 
beams are shown in Figure 1. 
 
Laser refractography (LR) [4] is a new technology of laser diagnostic for optically 
inhomogeneous media such as liquid, gas and plasma flows. Laser refractgraphy is based on 
refraction of structured laser beams in optically inhomogeneous media and digital recording 
of the refraction pattern. This method is a quantitative integral method used for studying 
transparent stationary and nonstationary media. 
 
 
Figure 1. Main laser gradient refraction methods. 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
401
 
А) Dot laser beam near a hot 
cylindrical inhomogeneity 
b) Astigmatic Gaussian 
laser beam near a 
cooled ball in water 
c) Besselian laser beam 
near a hot ball in water 
Figure 2. Typical 2D-refractograms of SLB. 
 
Figure 3. The main types of SLB. 
 
2. MAIN TYPES OF THE STRUCTURED LASER BEAMS 
 
Structured Laser Beam (SLB) is a spatially amplitude-modulated radiation obtained 
mainly with the help of DOE [9-10]. DOE is a pervious or reflective plate with a phase micro 
relief calculated in the diffraction theory context. An evolution of microelectronics and laser 
techniques has made it possible in a practical manner to create a DOE with a complex zone 
profile and unique characteristics, unattainable in the context of traditional optics. The most 
perspective for use in LR are DOE that focus laser radiation into thin lines or small areas, 
which corresponds to a structured beam with an intensity modulation. The structured laser 
beam passing through a medium forms a 2D-refraction pattern on the screen, whose shape is 
determined by the type of SLB and the spatial distribution of the refractive index depending 
on temperature, pressure, density, salinity and other parameters of the medium [11]. In this 
case, beam structure elements are directly traced in its section and refractograms (refraction 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
402 
pattern) are of a contour graphic nature (Figure 2), which was actually the reason for the 
“refractography” term to appear. 
The main types of SLB sources are given in Figure 3 and classified according to the 
shape of 3D geometrical figures formed by the beams from the sources of line-, plane- and 
cone-structured laser radiation. The two-dimensional figures shown in Figure 3 are cross 
sections of the beams formed by a family of geometrical optics rays from the source. 
Combining the main types of sources, we can also create other sources adapted to the 
structure of inhomogeneities and to the shape of the surface of bodies near which the 
boundary layers are studied. For the diagnostics of spatial inhomogeneities, it is expedient to 
form measuring "networks" of elementary sources. 
Obviously, the above approach is valid in the geometrical optics approximation. Hence, 
to determine the range of applicability of the method, the error associated with diffraction 
effects in actual measuring devices should be estimated. For example, plane-structured laser 
radiation, also known as the "laser sheet" (LS), is actually an astigmatic Gaussian laser beam 
with an elliptical cross section whose diffractional divergence is determined by using the 
familiar quasi-optical methods. The complex amplitude of the Gaussian astigmatic laser 
beam at z = 0 (at the entrance to the medium) be E(x,y,0): 
 
 
(
)
[
]
{
}
(
)
0,
,
sin
exp
0,
,
0
y
x
A
kx
i
y
x
E
α
=
, 
(1) 
 
where A0(x, y, z) is the beam envelope in the medium 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)⎪⎭
⎪⎬
⎫
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
+
−
+
−
+
=
=
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
exp
1
,0,0
)
,
(
)
,
(
,
,
D
w
y
D
w
x
D
z
A
z
y
A
z
x
A
z
y
x
A
F
y
x
,(2) 
 
where 
),
,
(
0
z
x
Ax
 
)
,
(
0
z
y
Ay
 are corresponding x and y depended components, zF is the waist 
coordinate and 
 
 
(
)
F
F
R
z
z
D
−
=
. 
(3) 
 
with RF – confocal radius. 
The laser beam with elliptical cross section has two effective radiuses at the waist w1 (x-
axis direction) and w2 (y-axis direction). There is laser sheet when w1<<w2 or w2<<w1. Laser 
sheet forming can be done using cylindrical lenses or DOE. Refractograms of the Gaussian 
laser beam with elliptical cross section (plane beam or LS) are shown on Figure 2 b. 
The cylindrical or conical beams correspond to the Besselian beam. Besselian beam is a 
laser radiation model that has a number of peculiarities: intensity distribution in its section 
defines by Besselian functions of different orders; the beam has a central symmetry and is 
practically non-diffractive (i.e., its structure is invariable when the beam spreads through 
space). 
The use of Besselian beams in optically heterogeneous medium diagnostics is rather 
perspective thanks to a high spatial radiation concentration within tight laser cord or tube 
boundaries. It allows to obtain tight laser probes and investigate with their help heterogeneous 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
403
mediums or flows on a long distances. Besselian beam of zero order defines by Besselian 
function of the same order in cylindrical coordinates (r, ψ, z) when spreading along z axis; 
amplitude distribution is 
 
(
)
(
)
(
),
cos
exp
sin
,
,
0
0
0
0
0
θ
θ
ψ
nz
ik
nr
k
AJ
z
r
E
=
 
(4) 
 
where A – field amplitude, J0(х) – first kind Besselian function of zero order, θ0 – angular 
beam parameter, n – medium refraction index, k0 – mode number for vacuum. 
Beam amplitude does not depend on ψ angle, i.e. the beam has a central symmetry. Beam 
phase changes in z axis direction with the velocity v = c/(ncosθ0), more than v = c/n, while 
amplitude doesn’t depend on z. Using spectral approach Besselian beam can be presented as a 
result of interference of plane waves, spreading with an θ0 angle to z axis, the resulting 
interference field is practically concentrated in an area, bounded by first zero of the J0(х) 
function. 
The easiest way to obtain a Besselian beam is the use of cone lenses – axions [9]. 
Besselian beam appears as a result of interference of plane waves spreading with the same 
angle to axion axis. Interference figure will look like bright centeral beam circled with a 
system of rings. 
Besselian beam forming can also be done using DOE. Refractograms of the Besselian 
beams are shown on Figure 2 c. 
 
 
3. PLANE SLB REFRACTION IN A SPHERICAL INHOMOGENEITY 
 
For developing the method for constructing theoretical refraction patterns, LS refraction 
is studied [11-13] in a spherical layered medium with refractive index n = n(r). Figure 4 
illustrates the geometry of the problem. A laser beam in the form of LS 1 at right angles to the 
x axis propagates along the z axis. The origin of coordinates coincides with the centre of 
spherical inhomogeneity 2. The projection of the laser sheet is observed on screen 3 in a plane 
perpendicular to the z axis and located at a distance z1 from the origin. The Cartesian and 
spherical coordinates are related by the expressions: 
ϕ
θ
=
cos
sin
r
x
, 
ϕ
θ
=
sin
sin
r
y
, 
θ
=
cos
r
z
. 
 
 
Figure 4. Geometrical parameters need for refractograms calculation: 1 – laser sheet; 2 - spherical 
inhomogeneity; 3 - screen. 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
404 
For z = z0, the LS equation has the form x = x0. The impact parameter ρ of a beam lying 
in the LS is determined by angle ϕ (beam parameter) 
 
 
ϕ
=
ϕ
ρ
cos
)
(
0
x
. 
(5) 
 
In the case of spherical symmetry, this beam remains in the plane defined by parameter ϕ 
and its trajectory is described by the dependence r(θ,ϕ). The trajectories of beams are 
calculated using the relations describing their propagation in the spherical inhomogeneity 
[14]. The method for determining the trajectory of propagation of a beam in such a medium 
involves the splitting of the trajectory into two segments: from the point of entrance to the 
turning point and from the turning point to the plane of observation. In the case considered 
here, the turning point is determined by the minimal distance rt from the beam trajectory to 
the origin (centre of the inhomogeneity) and can be determined from the equation 
 
 
( )
)
(
0
ϕ
ρ
= n
r
n
r
t
t
, 
(6) 
 
where n0 is the unperturbed refractive index (for z = z0). 
The radial coordinate of the beam at the input to the medium (for z = z0) is given by 
 
 
( )
2
0
2
0
)
(
z
r
+
ϕ
ρ
=
ϕ
. 
(7) 
 
The angle θ0 characterizes the direction of the beam entering the medium: 
 
 
( )
)
(
arctg
2
0
0
ϕ
ρ
+
π
=
ϕ
θ
z
. 
(8) 
 
The angle corresponding to the turning point is given by 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
∫
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ρ
−
ϕ
+
ϕ
θ
=
ϕ
θ
tr
r
t
n
r
r
n
r
r
x
n
0
)
(
cos
d
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
0
. 
(9) 
 
The equation of the trajectory of the beam up to the turning point has the form 
 
 
(
)
( )
( )
( )∫
ϕ
ϕ
ρ
−
ϕ
+
ϕ
θ
=
ϕ
θ
r
r
n
r
r
n
r
r
x
n
r
0
)
(
cos
d
,
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
0
, 
(10) 
 
while the equation for the trajectory beyond the turning point is 
 
 
(
)
( )
( )
( )
∫
ϕ
ϕ
ρ
−
ϕ
+
ϕ
θ
=
ϕ
θ
tr
r
t
n
r
r
n
r
r
x
n
r
)
(
cos
d
,
2
2
0
2
2
0
0
. 
(11) 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
405
a) Plane SLB 
b) Cylindrical SLB 
c) Dot SLB 
Figure 5. Calculated 2D-recfractograms of the main SLB near a heated ball in water. 
Relations (9) and (10) form the basis for calculating refraction of the laser sheet in a 
spherical inhomogeneity. The angle ϕ is a parameter specifying an arbitrary beam in the LS, 
which allows us to describe the entire family of beams belonging to the laser sheet. The radial 
coordinate r(z1,ϕ) of the beam on the screen lying in plane z= z1 can be determined from the 
relation 
 
 
1
)
,
(
cos
z
r
r
=
ϕ
θ
, 
(12) 
 
while the coordinates of laser sheet projection on the screen can be found from the equations 
 
 
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
θ
ϕ
=
ϕ
cos
)
),
,
(
(
sin
)
,
(
)
,
(
z
r
z
r
z
x
, 
 
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
θ
ϕ
=
ϕ
sin
)
),
,
(
(
sin
)
,
(
)
,
(
z
r
z
r
z
y
. 
(13) 
 
These relations define the structure of refraction pattern for the given spherical 
inhomogeneity. For the cylindrical SLR we use the same equations (6-13) but instead of (5) 
 
 
ϕ
ξ
−
±
ϕ
ξ
=
ϕ
ρ
2
2
0
2
0
2
,
1
sin
cos
)
(
ir
, 
(14) 
 
where ρ1,2 are two benches of the solution ρ(φ) for the cylindrical surface of radius ri with the 
axis (ξ0 , 0). 
 
 
4. 2D- AND 3D-REFRACTOGRAMS 
 
2D-refractograms [4] is the 2D-image of a source of spatially structured radiation formed 
by an optical system whose role is played by the medium under study. In this respect, the 
refractography technique is close to the BOS method in which images of the structured screen 
with randomly distributed points are studied in natural light passing through an optically 
inhomogeneous medium. The fundamental difference between laser refractography and the 
BOS method is the use of coherent laser radiation which allows a quantitative diagnostics of 
the medium and an analysis of interference effects carrying additional information. Moreover, 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
406 
observation of laser radiation scattered by small particles makes it possible to visualize the 
region under investigation. 2D-retraction patterns can be used for quick diagnostics of 
inhomogeneities even without subsequent computer processing. Figure 5 shows typical 2D-
refractograms of the main SLB near a heated ball in water. 
 
3D-refractograms is a 3D image of the surface formed by the rays from SLB refracted in 
the medium (Figure 6), and can be obtained from the entire body of experimental and 
theoretical 2D-refraction patterns for various cross sections with the help of a special 
technique [4]. A 3D-refraction pattern can be visualized experimentally in scattered radiation. 
2D- and 3D-refraction patterns are recorded with a digital video camera attached to the 
PC used for their processing. By comparing experimental and theoretical refraction patterns 
we can reconstruct the inhomogeneity profile and verify the numerical methods of computing 
the flow parameters. 
 
 
5. SLB REFRACTOGRAMS FOR A SPHERICAL TEMPERATURE 
BOUNDARY LAYER 
 
Note that all optical methods in fact describe the field of the refractive index, which can 
be subsequently transformed into the temperature field T(x,y) or the field of some other 
parameter. Following [l5], we shall analyze thermal processes assuming that for laser 
wavelength 0.6328 µ, the temperature dependence of the refractive index of water is 
determined by the approximate dependence n(t) [4]. The mathematical simulation of 
refraction of a LS in a spherically symmetric thermal boundary layer around a sphere of 
radius R is performed for the radial temperature dependence described by the expression 
 
 
( )
(
)
2
2
0
a
R
R
r
Te
T
r
T
Δ
−
−
−
Δ
+
=
, 
(15) 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Calculated 3D-refractograms of the LS propagating near hot (a) and cold (b) ball in water 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
407
 
a) x0 >R, a=2 mm, z=100 mm 
b) x0 < R, a=0,5 mm, z=200 mm 
Figure 7. Typical calculated 2D-refractograms of the cylindrical SLB propagating in water under a hot 
ball at T=90°C, R=20 mm: 1-ball, 2-coordinate lines, 3-cylindrical SLR 2D-refractograms. 
 
where To, ΔT, ΔR, and a are model parameters of the temperature field. The parameter T0 is 
determined by the temperature of the walls of a cell filled with a liquid, temperature T(R) is 
equal to the temperature Ts at the surface of the sphere, and the ratio ΔT/a corresponds to the 
temperature field gradient in a boundary layer of thickness a. For a hot sphere, ΔT > 0, while 
for a cold sphere, we have ΔT < 0. 
For example, figure 6a shows 3D-refractograms for model of temperature distribution 
(15) in the vicinity of a hot sphere in water. Figure 6b shows 3D-refractograms for model of 
temperature distribution (15) in the vicinity of a cooled sphere in water with parameters R = 
25.4 mm, T0 = 70 C°, ΔT= -57 °C, ΔR = -1 mm, a = 2 mm, x0=25.5 mm and distance z 
increasing. 
A typical feature of the "cold" spherical in homogeneity in water is the formation of a 
loop on refractograms. For temperature gradients close to zero, a characteristic extremum 
(Figure 6b) is observed on the loop directly at the surface of the sphere, which is associated 
with a slight deviation of beams in this region. The temperature distribution in the layer in 
this case is nearly Gaussian. No extremum is formed for an exponential distribution. 
Thus, visualization of an inhomogeneity in the medium with the help of refraction 
patterns makes it possible to carry out quick diagnostics of the type of the inhomogeneity and 
draw conclusions about the temperature distribution in a thin boundary layer. The formation 
of a loop on the refraction pattern is directly linked with the presence of axial caustics [4] that 
can be visualized experimentally. 
Figure 7 shows typical 2D-refractograms of the cylindrical SLB for model of temperature 
distribution (15) in the vicinity of a hot sphere in water at T=90°C, R=20 mm. Figure 8 
shows typical calculated 3D-refractograms of the cylindrical SLB at the same conditions. 
 
 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
408 
Figure 8.Calculated 3D-refractograms for a cylindrical SLB propagating in water under a hot ball. 
 
6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP USING STRUCTURED BEAMS FOR 
TEMPERATURE PROFILE RECONSTRUCTION 
 
Figure 9 shows a principal scheme of the experimental setup for visualization of thermal 
physical processes under natural nonstationary convection [15] in a liquid in a vicinity of 
heated (cooled) bodies with the help of SLB. 
The setup consists of laser 1 with a DOE fixed on it’s frame, and an adjusting bench 2. At 
the exit from DOE, an SLB 3 is formed and directed into water-filled cuvette 5 with a heated 
or cooled object 4 in it. The object’s temperature is measured by means of thermocouple and 
digital voltmeter. Refraction image is viewed on a semitransparent screen 6. This image is 
recorded by the digital video camera 7. Signal from camera 7 are transmitted to the personal 
computer 8. The metal object was then heated to a temperature of 50–100°C, or cooled to 9– 
10°C and then immersed in a vessel filled with water. After this, video recording of the 
refraction pattern on screen was performed for several minutes. The recorded image of the 
refraction pattern was loaded into a computer and processed with the help of a special 
software. 
Figure 10 shows the experimental 2D-refractograms of the SLB propagating near the 
surface of the typical bodies. The measuring technique provides simultaneous diagnostics of 
the process in the region of passage of SLB in the boundary layer immediately over the 
sphere. 
 
 
Figure 9. The experimental setup scheme: 1 – laser, 2 – adjusting bench, 3 – SLB, 4 – object,                
5 – cuvette, 6 – semitransparent screen, 7,8 – digital video camera, 9 – computer. 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
409
 
Figure 10. The library of typical experimental 2D-refractograms. 
Even a preliminary observation of the refraction patterns depicted for example in Figure 
2 makes it possible to draw qualitative conclusions concerning the evolution of the 
inhomogeneity in the layer using the library of typical refractograms. These calculated or 
experimental (Figure 10) libraries allow carrying out quick diagnostics of the process. 
The technique of the temperature profile quantitative diagnostics for the boundary layer 
is performed on the basis of the method described in [4]. The digitized experimental 
refraction pattern is compared with the set of library refraction patterns calculated for the 
given setup and for various parameters of the temperature layer for the given model. The 
criterion of minimization of the mean square deviation is used for selecting the theoretical 
refraction pattern having the best coincidence with the experimental one. The temperature 
profile corresponding to the chosen theoretical refraction pattern is chosen as the measured 
profile. 
 
 
7. STRUCTURED BEAMS APPLICATION TO ACOUSTIC FIELD 
VISUALIZATION AND DIAGNOSTICS 
 
The distortions of the envelope I0(x,0) of the laser beam with an elliptical cross-section 
(laser sheet) in the presence of a traveling acoustic wave are considered. The laser sheet 
intensity I(x,0) modulation allows to solve the inverse problem of the acoustic field 
parameters investigation [16]. Figure 11 shows the geometric parameters of the problem on 
consideration. 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
410 
 
Figure 11. The geometric illustration of the mathematical model. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 12. The beam intensity envelope in the media with acoustic wave Λa=1 mm, w =1 mm,              
δn =3·10-5 at different distances z: a – 110 mm, b – 115 mm, c – 120 mm, d – 125 mm. 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
411
Parameters Ka and k are the acoustic and optical wave vectors, where its absolute values 
are respectively: 
 
 
a
a
K
Λ
π
= 2
 , 
λ
π
= 2
k
, 
(16) 
 
and Λa and λ are the acoustic and optical wavelengths in the medium. The refractive index of 
the medium modulated by the standing acoustic wave can be represented 
 
 
))
cos(
)
sin(
2
1(
)
,
(
0
x
K
t
n
n
t
x
n
a
a
Ω
δ
+
=
,     
1
0
<<
Δ
=
δ
n
n
n
, 
(17) 
 
where Ωa - the acoustic frequency, t – time, 
0
n  - the refractive index of the unperturbed 
medium and n
Δ  - the maximum deviation from 
0
n . 
The computer simulation technology based on representing of the beam field as a spatial 
spectrum and describe propagation of each spectral component in the inhomogeneous 
medium in the approximation of geometrical optics using methods of eikonal and amplitude 
perturbation. 
Figure 12 shows the variation of beam intensity envelope I=׀A׀
 2 in the media with 
acoustic wave at different distances z for the case when sheet radius w ≈ Λa. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The use of the structured beams in laser refractography application appreciably expands 
capabilities of traditional gradient laser methods. 
Firstly, the right choice of a beam structure elements’ configuration allows us to adapt 
measurements for a certain heterogeneity type, for example, for an investigation of boundary 
micro layers near surfaces of different shapes. 
Secondly, a beam structure of elements’ plurality and their spatial extension make it 
possible to conduct measurements simultaneously in chosen areas of a medium under 
consideration; that is important for dynamic heterogeneities diagnostics, for time-dependent 
convection flows, for example. 
Thirdly, the main informative parameter in quantitative diagnostics is a beam structure 
element displacement because of a refraction in a heterogeneity. Measuring of this 
displacement is possible thanks to elements’ identification, since discrete and regular beam 
structure nature allows us to define which initial structure element an element of refractogram 
corresponds to. 
In fact the use of structured beams in LR allows us to accomplish a multi-channel 
medium probe with a spatial division of identifiable channels as well as with an ability to 
spatially adapt to a medium under investigation form. A refractogram can be interpreted as a 
two-dimensional discrete multiway signal, which makes it possible to use correlation analysis 
methods for its processing for heterogeneity profile reconstruction. Listed structured beam 

I.L. Raskovskaya, B.S.Rinkevichyus, A.V.Tolkachev et al. 
 
412 
features allows us to talk about the fact that LR technology provides opportunities not only to 
render optical heterogeneities, but also to accomplish quantitative diagnostics of them. 
In a certain sense, a refraction pattern is a 'portrait' of the medium under study and can be 
compared with the set of elementary refraction patterns of typical inhomogeneities. This 
makes it possible to perform quick diagnostics of the medium right in the course of 
observations. The use of SLB also allows a 3D visualization of the beam caustics and to trace 
their formation by analyzing the evolution of 2D-refraction patterns. 
Various combinations, orientation and arrangement of elementary sources of SLB make it 
possible to adapt the measuring setup to the structure of the inhomogeneity. In view of the 
extended nature of the radiation source, a simultaneous diagnostics of processes can be 
carried out in various regions. It follows from the above technique of measuring the 
temperature of boundary layers that the possibility of quantitative diagnostics of parameters 
of the medium (reconstruction of the inhomogeneity profile from a comparison of the 
experimental and theoretical refraction patterns) is a significant advantage of the laser 
refractography technique. 
Because refraction measurements are virtually inertialess, structured beams can be used 
for diagnostics of stationary as well as rapid transient processes, including thermal processes 
in liquids, gases and plasma, natural convection in liquids in the vicinity of heated or cooled 
bodies, ultrasonic flows, and mixing of various liquids in apparatuses used in chemical 
technology. Moreover, structured beams in laser refractography technique can be adapted for 
diagnostics of boundary layers and edge effects, as well as for studying processes in micro- 
and nanochannels due to the possibility of formation of narrow probe beams. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Rinkevichius, B. S. (1998). Laser Diagnostics in Fluid Mechanics. New-York, NY: 
Begell House, Inc. 341. 
[2] 
Karasik, A. Ya., Rinkevichius, B. S. & Zubov, V. A. (1995). Laser Interferometry 
Principles. Ed. B. S. Rinkevichius. Mir Publishers: Moscow, CRC Press: Boca    Raton 
:, 448. 
[3] 
Settles, G. S. (2001). Schlieren and shadowgraph techniques: visualizing phenomena in 
a transparent media. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, 376. 
[4] 
Evtikhieva, O. A., Raskovskaya, I. L. & Rinkevichyus, B. S. (2008). Laser 
refractography. Fizmatlit: Moscow, 176 (in Russian). 
[5] 
Gumennik, Y. V. & Rinkevichius, B. S. (1990). The flow visualization by schlieren 
methods with Fuco knife and scanning light beam. In: Flow visualization V, ed. R. 
Reznicek. Hemisphere Pub., N.Y., pp. 113-118. 
[6] 
Shatokhina, N. A., Rinkevichius, B. S., Sultanov, T. T. & Zubov, V. A. (1997). Using 
specle interferometry for the analysis of the refractive index gradient distribution in 
fluid and gas flows. In: Laser anemometry. Advances and applications. Eds. B. Ruck, 
A. Leder, & D. Dopheide, Karlsruhe, pp. 399-406. 
[7] 
Evtikhieva, O. A., Rinkevichyus, B. S. & Tolkachev, A. V. (2004). The computer aided 
laser refractive method for investigation of optical inhomogeneous flows. Measur. 
Techniq., Vol. 47, No. 6. 

Structured Beams in Laser Refractography Applications 
 
413
[8] 
Skornyakova, N. M., Popova, E. M., Rinkevichyus, B. S. & Tolkachev, A. V. (2004). 
The investigation of heat transfer by Background Oriented Shlieren Method. In: CD-
ROM Proc. 12th International Symposium on Application of Laser Techniques to Fluid 
Mechanics. Lisbon. 
[9] 
Soifer, V. A. (Ed.) (2007). Diffraction Computer Optics. Fizmatlit: Moscow, 736 (in 
Russian). 
[10] Evtikhieva, O. A., Rinkevichyus, B. S. & Tolkachev, A. V. (2006). Visualization of 
nonstationary free convection in liquids with structured laser beam. Proc. 12th 
International Symposium on Flow Visualization. September 10-14, Geottingen, paper 
051. 
[11] Raskovskaya, I. L., Rinkevichyus, B. S. & Tolkachev, A. V. (2007). Laser 
refractography of optically inhomogeneous media. Quantum electronics, Vol.37, No.12, 
1176-1180, 
[12] Lapitski, K. M., Raskovskaya, I. L. & Rinkevichyus, B. S. (2006). Quantitative 
visualization of transparent spherical temperature layer. Proc. 12th International 
Symposium on Flow Visualization. September 10-14, Geottingen, paper 055. 
[13] Lapitskiy, K. M., Raskovskaya, I. L. & Rinkevichyus, B. S. (2008). Modeling of edge 
effects influence on the laser beam refraction in a temperature inhomogeneity. Measur. 
Techn., Vol.51, No.7, pp. 740-746. 
[14] Kravtsov, Yu. A. & Orlov, Yu. I. (1980). Geometrical Optics of Inhomogeneous Media 
Nauka: Moscow, (in Russian). 
[15] Artyomov, V. I., Evtikhieva, O. A., Lapitski, K. M., Rinkevichyus, B. S., Tolkachev, A. 
V. & Jankov, G. G. (2005). Investigation of Unstable Temperature Field of Free 
Convection by COLAR Method. Optical Methods of Flow Investigation. Proc. 8th Sci. 
and Tech. Conf., Ed. Y. N.Dubnistchev, B.S.Rinkevichyus. Moscow, Russia, June 28-
July 1, (Moscow Power Energ. Inst. Publ.:, Moscow), 478-481. 
[16] Raskovskaya, I. L. (2004). Propagation of a Laser Beam through a Medium in the 
Presence of an Acoustic Wave. Journal of Communications Technology and 
Electronics,Vol.49, No. 11, pp.1293- 1297. 
 


In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 415-500  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 13 
 
 
 
OPTICAL BREAKDOWN IN GASES INDUCED BY 
HIGH-POWER IR CO2 LASER PULSES 
 
 
J. J. Camacho1, L. Díaz2, M. Santos2, L. J. Juan1 
and J. M. L. Poyato1* 
1Departamento de Química-Física Aplicada. Facultad de Ciencias. Universidad 
Autónoma de Madrid. Cantoblanco. 28049-Madrid. Spain 
2Instituto de Estructura de la Materia, CFMAC, CSIC, Serrano 121. 28006-Madrid, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter reviews some fundamentals of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
(LIBS) and describes some experimental studies developed in our laboratory on gases 
such as nitrogen, oxygen and air. LIBS of these gases at different pressures, in the 
spectral range ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-Vis-NIR), was excited by using a 
high-power transverse excitation atmospheric (TEA) CO2 laser (λ=9.621 and 10.591 μm; 
τFWHM=64 ns; and different laser power densities). The spectra of the generated 
plasmas are dominated by emission of strong atomic, ionic species and molecular bands. 
Excitation temperatures were estimated by means of atomic and ionic lines. Electron 
number densities were deduced from the Stark broadening of several ionic lines. The 
characteristics of the spectral emission intensities from different species have been 
investigated as functions of the gas pressure and laser irradiance. Optical breakdown 
threshold intensities in different gases have been measured experimentally. The physical 
processes leading to laser-induced breakdown of the gases have been analyzed. Plasma 
characteristics in LIBS of air were examined in detail on the emission lines of N+, O+ 
and C by means of time-resolved optical-emission spectroscopy (OES) technique. The 
results show a faster decay of continuum and ionic spectral species than of neutral atomic 
and molecular ones. The velocity and kinetic energy distributions for different species 
were obtained from time-of-flight (TOF) OES measurements. Excitation temperature and 
electron density in the laser-induced plasma were estimated from the analysis of spectral 
data at various times from the laser pulse incidence. Temporal evolution of electron 
density has been used for the estimation of the three-body recombination rate constant. 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: E-mails: j.j.camacho@uam.es; luisol@cfmac.csic.es; magna@iem.cfmac. csic.es; 
jml.poyato @uam.es. 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
416 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
A remarkable demonstration of the interaction of radiation with matter is the plasma 
production which occurs when a powerful laser is focused in a gas. Strong pulses of infrared 
(IR) laser light can cause breakdown and plasma formation in gases which are usually 
transparent at these wavelengths. By this means gases are transformed into opaque, highly 
conducting plasmas in times of the order of nanoseconds. If the radiant energy in the focus 
exceeds the threshold value for breakdown, as happens with high-power lasers (ruby, 
Nd:YAG, CO2, excimer, etc), the gas becomes highly ionized and the plasma thus produced 
will practically absorb the beam. In atmospheric air, for example, laser-beam-induced 
breakdown is characterized by a brilliant flash of bluish-white light at the lens focus 
accompanied by a distinctive cracking noise. This transformation from neutral gas into hot 
plasma takes place in three quite distinct stages: initiation, formative growth, and plasma 
development accompanied by shock wave generation and propagation in the surrounding gas. 
A fourth and final stage, extinction, follows.  
The formation of laser-induced breakdown (LIB) plasma in a gas has been investigated 
since its discovery by Maker et al [1] resulting in several studies that have been summarized 
by different authors [2-16]. Several hundred papers describing various aspects of the 
phenomenon have been published, and a healthy controversy appears to be in existence 
concerning the mechanisms by which gases can become almost perfect conductors under the 
influence of short-duration pulses of long-wavelength light alone. The LIB plasma develops a 
shock wave into the ambient medium and the gas is heated to high temperatures [17]. It is 
evident that after breakdown, the plasma becomes very opaque and an abrupt shutoff of the 
laser transmitted light occurs. Due to the many experimental parameters involved in the LIB, 
an exhaustive investigation of the plasma would involve the processing of an impressive 
number of records. To investigate LIB of gases several diagnostic techniques have been 
employed in the last years. Optical emission spectroscopy (OES) is a powerful tool to get 
information on the LIB species. Because of the transient features of the plume created by 
LIB, OES technique with time and space resolution is especially appropriate to obtain 
information about the behaviour of the created species in space and time as well as the 
dynamics of the plasma evolution. Although OES gives only partial information about the 
plasma particles, this diagnostic technique helped us to draw a picture of the plasma in terms 
of the emitting chemical species, to evaluate their possible mechanisms of excitation and 
formation and to study the role of gas-phase reactions in the plasma expansion process.  
The objectives of this work are: (i) to show some fundamentals of laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and, (ii) to review of our recent results on LIBS analysis of 
chemical species in gases plasmas induced by high-power IR CO2 laser, adding some new 
results. This chapter describes the experimental results obtained from UV-Visible-near IR 
spectra of LIB plasmas generated by carbon dioxide laser pulses in gases such as N2, O2 and 
air. The major parts of this work are already published by us in different journals [18-21]. We 
consider here only research on the plasma induced when a high-intensity laser radiation is 
focused in a gas. The emission observed in the laser-induced plasma region is due to 
electronic relaxation of excited atoms, ions and molecular bands of different diatomic 
molecules. Excitation temperatures and electron number densities were calculated by means 
of different atomic and ionic lines. Estimates of vibrational and rotational temperatures of 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
417
some molecules electronically excited species are also reported. The characteristics of the 
spectral emission intensities from different species have been investigated as functions of the 
gas pressure and laser irradiance. Optical breakdown threshold intensities in the different 
studied gases have been determined.  
For air we discuss the dynamics of the plume expansion and formation of different 
atomic, ionic and molecular species for different delay times with respect to the beginning of 
the laser pulse. The velocity and kinetic distributions for the different species were obtained 
from the time-of-flight (TOF) measurements using time-resolved OES. Possible mechanisms 
for the production of these distributions are discussed. Line intensities from different atomic 
and ionic species were used for determining electron temperature and Stark-broadened 
profiles of some lines were employed to calculate electron density. The temporal behavior of 
electron number density has been employed for the estimation of three-body recombination 
rate constant and recombination time. The present paper is aimed at discussing thermo-
chemical processes produced by a high-power IR CO2 pulsed laser on several gases and at 
evaluating LIB changes which are of fundamental importance in establishing the mechanisms 
responsible for the plasma emission. 
 
 
1.1. Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) 
 
Excellent textbooks and reviews about the fundamentals of laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy (LIBS) and examples of various processes are readily available today [13-16]. 
LIBS, also sometimes called laser-induced plasma spectroscopy, is a technique of atomic-
molecular emission spectroscopy which utilizes a highly-power laser pulse as the excitation 
source. LIBS can analyze any matter regardless of its physical state, being it solid, liquid or 
gas. Because all elements emit light when excited to sufficiently high energy, LIBS can detect 
different species (atomic, ionic and molecular) and limited only by the power of the laser as 
well as the sensitivity and wavelength range of the spectrograph/detector. Basically LIBS 
makes use of OES and is to this extent very similar to arc/spark emission spectroscopy. LIBS 
operates by focusing the laser onto a small volume of the sample; when the laser is triggered 
it breaks a very small amount of gas which instantaneously generates a plasma plume with 
temperatures of about 10000–30000 K. At these temperatures, the gas dissociates 
(breakdown) into excited ionic and atomic species. At the early time, the plasma emits a 
continuum of radiation which does not contain any known information about the species 
present in the plume and within a very small timeframe the plasma expands at supersonic 
velocities and cools. At this point the characteristic atomic/ionic and molecular emission lines 
of the species can be observed. The delay between the emission of the continuum and 
characteristic radiation is of the order of 1 µs, this is one of the reasons for temporally gating 
the detector. LIBS is technically similar and complementary to a number of other laser-based 
techniques (Raman spectroscopy, laser-induced fluorescence etc). In fact devices are now 
being manufactured which combine these techniques in a single instrument, allowing the 
atomic, molecular and structural characterization of a sample as well as giving a deeper 
insight into physical properties. A typical LIBS system consists of a pulsed laser and a 
spectrometer with a wide spectral range and a high sensitivity, fast response rate and time 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
418 
gated detector. The principal advantages of LIBS over the conventional analytical 
spectroscopic techniques are its simplicity and the sampling speed.  
 
 
1.2. Laser Parameters 
 
The variables that can influence the LIBS measurements are mainly the laser properties 
i.e. wavelength, energy, pulse duration, focusing spot size, shot-to-shot energy fluctuations, 
ambient conditions, physical properties of the sample and the detection window (delay time 
and gate width). How these parameters affect the precision and accuracy of LIBS are 
addressed below. In LIBS a high-power laser is used to breakdown a gaseous sample in the 
form of plasma. The primary energy related parameters influencing the laser-gas interaction 
are the laser peak power PW (or radiant pulse energy per time, in W) and the laser peak 
intensity IW (power density or irradiance; energy per unit area and time, W cm-2) given by 
 
 
,
/
Las
FWHM
W
W
τ
E
P =
 
(1.1) 
 
 
2
W
W
/ r
P
I
π
=
,  
(1.2) 
 
where EW (in J) is the pulse energy, 
Las
FWHM
τ
 (in s) is the laser pulse duration of the full width 
at half maximum (FWHM) and 
2r
π
 is the focal spot area (cm2). The fluence ΦW (in J cm-2) 
on the focused spot area, the photon flux density Fph (photon cm-2 s-1), electric field FE (V cm-
1) and pressure radiation pR (in Pa) are given by 
 
 
2
W
W
/ r
E
π
=
Φ
, 
(1.3) 
 
 
hc
I
F
/
W
ph
λ
=
, 
 (1.4) 
 
 
0
W
E
/ ε
c
I
F =
,  
(1.5) 
 
 
c
I
p
/
2
W
R =
,  
(1.6) 
 
where λ is the laser wavelength, h is the Planck constant, c is the speed of light, and ε0 is the 
electric constant. In Eq. (1.6) we suppose that the laser radiation is totally reflected and 
therefore the pressure radiation can be doubled. The laser peak intensity IW, fluence, photon 
flux, electric field and pressure radiation are inversely proportional to the focused spot area. 
For LIBS, the peak intensity IW (and the other properties ΦW, Fph, FE and pR) that can be 
delivered to the sample is more important than the absolute value of the laser power. For the 
formation of plasma, the laser irradiance needs to exceed the threshold value, typically of the 
order of several GW cm-2 for a nanosecond laser pulse. If the laser energy is very close to the 
breakdown threshold, the pulse-to-pulse fluctuations can cause the plasma condition to be 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
419
irreproducible, which results in poor measurement precision. The intensities of the emission 
lines are proportional to the laser energy while the laser plasma is in the optical thin region. 
When the laser energy increases further, it produces very dense and hot plasma that can 
absorb laser energy. This will lead to an increase in the continuum emission and a decrease in 
the signal intensity. Besides, the laser pulse duration and the shot-to-shot fluctuations can also 
affect the signal reproducibility and hence LIBS precision. 
 
 
1.3. Focal Properties 
 
The laser power density at the focal volume is inversely proportional to the focused spot 
size. For a laser beam with a Gaussian profile, the focused bean waist w0 is given by 
 
 
s
0
w
f
w
π
λ
=
, 
(1.7) 
 
where f is the focal length of the lens and ws is the radius of the unfocused beam. The higher 
laser power density at the focal point can be achieved by reducing the focused beam waist 
using a shorter focal length lens. On the other hand, the angular spread in laser light generated 
by the diffraction of plane waves passing through a circular aperture consists of a central, 
bright circular spot (the Airy disk) surrounded by a series of bright rings. The beam 
divergence angle θ, measured to edges of Airy disk, is given by θ=2.44 λ/d, where λ is the 
laser wavelength and d is the diameter of the circular aperture. It can be shown that a laser 
beam, with beam divergence θi, incident on a lens of focal length f, whose diameter is several 
times larger than the width of the incident beam, is focused to a diffraction-limited spot of 
diameter approximately equal to f θi. If the focal region of the laser beam is assumed to be 
cylindrical is shape, the spot size in terms of length l, can be approximated as  
 
 
d
f
l
i
/
)1
2
(
2
θ
−
=
. 
(1.8) 
 
 
2. OPTICAL BREAKDOWN IN GASES 
 
Optical breakdown in gases leads to the generation of free electrons and ions, electrons in 
gases are either bound to a particular molecule or are quasifree when they have sufficient 
kinetic energy to move without being captured by local molecular energy potentials. Thus, 
transitions bound and quasi-free states are the equivalent of ionization of molecules in gases. 
The optical breakdown process describes in greater detail by Raizer [2-3, 23], starts when a 
laser beam with sufficient power density is focused down, and a sufficient radiation flux 
density is achieved, leading to a discharge/spark. This discharge is somewhat similar to the 
discharge induced by a sufficient electric field between the electrodes of a spark plug in an 
internal combustion engine. The temperature and pressure of the gas in the region of this 
discharge will be increased significantly as the energy of the laser is absorbed to cause this so 
called laser induced optical breakdown. The energy deposition into a gas by a focused laser 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
420 
beam can be described by four progressive steps: (i) initial release of electrons by multi-
photon effect; (ii) ionization of the gas in the focal region by the cascade release of electrons; 
(iii) absorption and reflection of laser energy by the gaseous plasma, rapid expansion of the 
plasma and detonation wave formation; and (iv) the propagation of the detonation wave into 
the surrounding gas and relaxation of the focal plasma region.  
 
 
2.1. LIB Plasma 
 
Plasma is a local assembly of atoms, molecules, ions and free electrons, overall 
electrically neutral, in which the charged species often act collectively. The LIB plasma is 
initiated by a single laser pulse. If we consider the temporal evolution of LIB plasma, at early 
times the ionization grade is high. As electron-ion recombination proceeds, neutral atoms and 
molecules form. A recombination occurs when a free electron is captured into an ionic or 
atomic energy level and gives up its excess kinetic energy in the form of a photon. LIB 
plasmas are characterized by a variety of parameters, the most basic being the degree of 
ionization. A weakly ionized plasma is one in which the ratio of electrons to other species is 
less than 10%. At the other extreme, high ionized plasmas may have atoms stripped of many 
of their electrons, resulting in very high electron to atom/ion ratios. LIB plasmas typically, for 
low power laser intensities, fall in the category of weak ionized plasmas. At high laser power 
densities, LIB plasmas correspond to strong ionized plasmas. 
 
 
2.2. Initiation Mechanism: Multiphoton Ionization (MPI) and Electron 
Impact Ionization (EII) 
 
Plasma is initiated by electron generation and electron density growth. The conventional 
LIB plasma can be initiated in two methods: multiphoton ionization (MPI) and electron 
impact ionization (EII) both followed by electron cascade. EII is sometimes denominated as 
cascade ionization process or avalanche ionization due to inverse bremsstrahlung (IB) 
heating of electrons. MPI involves the simultaneous absorption of a number of photons n, 
required to equal the ionization potential IP(A) of an atom or molecule A  
 
 
nhν + A → A+ + e + IP(A); nhν ≥ IP(A), 
(2.1) 
 
where n is the number of photons needed to strip off an electron, which corresponds to the 
integer part of the quantity: 
 
 
1
osc
P
+
+
=
ν
ε
h
I
n
. 
(2.2)  
 
Here
osc
ε
 is the oscillation energy of a free electron in the alternating electric field. 
Within the classical microwave breakdown theory [22], a free electron oscillates in the 
alternating electric field E of the laser electromagnetic wave with frequency ω  and 
wavelength λ (µm), and its oscillation energy,  

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
421
 
[
]
2
W
14
2
W
3
2
2
2
2
osc
10
67
.4
4
4
λ
λ
π
ω
ε
I
I
c
m
e
m
E
e
eV
−
×
=
=
=
, 
 (2.3) 
 
remains constant. In Eq. (2.3) e is the electron charge and Iw is the laser intensity [irradiance, 
power density or flux density in W cm-2; Eq. 1.2]. The probability of MPI 
MPI
W
, by 
absorbing simultaneously n laser photons to strip off an electron, is expressed by the classical 
formula [23] 
 
 
[ ]
n
n
n
I
I
n
I
n
W
⎭
⎬
⎫
⎩
⎨
⎧
×
×
=
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
≅
−
−
−
P
W
14
2
/
3
1
2
15
P
osc
2
/
3
1
MPI
10
35
.6
10
88
.1
36
.1
s
λ
ε
ω
,  (2.4) 
 
where IP is in eV. Besides, the probability of simultaneous absorption of photons decreases 
with the number of photons n necessary to cause ionization. Therefore, the MPI rate is 
proportional to IW
n and inversely proportional to IP
n. 
EII process consists on the absorption of light photon by free or quasifree electrons, 
producing electrons with enough kinetic energy e* to ionize one atom or molecule 
 
 
e + nhν + A → e* + A → 2e + A+. 
(2.5)  
 
Two conditions must co-exist for EII to initiate: (i) an initial electron must reside in the 
focal volume; and (ii) the initial electron must acquire energy which exceeds the ionization 
energy of the material in the focus. These free or quasifree electrons can be produced by the 
effect of cosmic ray ionization (natural ionization), by means of MPI, or by a breakdown 
induced in some impurity. The equilibrium number of free electrons and ions per cm3 in the 
atmosphere at the earth’s surface is about 500 [24]. The electron cascade ionization process 
requires the presence of either free electrons or excited atoms or molecules in the focal region 
for their initiation, but the possibility of a free electron or an excited atom produced by 
natural causes being present there during the laser flash can be discounted, as Tozer pointed 
out [25]. They occur naturally in the earth’s atmosphere, produced at a rate of about 10 cm-
3 s-1 at the earth’s surface by the presence of local radioactivity and the passage of ultraviolet 
radiation and cosmic rays. Most electrons become rapidly attached to electronegative atoms 
and molecules to form negative ions. The mean lifetime of a free electron in the atmosphere is 
about 10-7 s, so that the aggregate life of free electrons is about 10-6 s when liberated at the 
rate of ≈ 10 cm-3 s-1. The probability of finding a free electron in the focal region ≈ 10-4 cm3 
during a laser flash ≈ 10-8 s is thus entirely negligible, as is the chance for finding an excited 
atom. One concludes that the laser light itself produces the initiatory electrons. These 
electrons in the focal volume gain sufficient energy, from the laser field through IB collision 
with neutrals, to ionize atoms, molecules or ions by inelastic electron-particle collision 
resulting in two electrons of lower energy being available to start the process again  
 
 
e*[ε ≥IP(A)] + A → A+ + 2e; e*[ε ≥IP(A+)] + A+ → A2+ + 2e. 
(2.6) 
 
Thus a third species (atom-molecule/ion) is necessary for conserving momentum and 
energy during optical absorption. The recurring sequences of IB absorption events and 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
422 
subsequent EII lead to a rapid growth in the number of free electrons, if the laser intensity is 
sufficient to overcome the losses of free electrons through diffusion out of the focal volume 
and through recombination. The MPI mechanism dominates electron generation only for low 
exciting wavelengths. Therefore initial EII becomes a problem at a higher wavelength 
because neither cascade nor MPI can furnish sufficient number of electrons. At higher laser 
intensities, electric field of the laser is able to pull an outer shell electron out of its orbit. After 
the initial electron ejection the LIB plasma is commonly maintained by the absorption of 
optical energy and the EII. Electrons in the laser field will gain energy through electron-
neutral IB collisions and will lose energy by elastic and inelastic collisions with the neutral 
species through excitation of rotational and vibrational degree of freedom of molecules and 
excitation of electronic states. While some electrons will be lost by attachment, new electrons 
will be produced by ionizing collisions. At high laser intensity, few electrons will be 
generated with energy larger than the ionization energy. The wavelength-resolved emission 
spectra from the laser plasma are not expected to vary due to the plasma origin. However 
plasma origin may be relevant, if the enhancement is observed between UV, visible and IR 
excitation wavelengths.  
Once that LIB plasma is formed, its growth is governed by the continuity rate equation 
for the electron density [26] due to the combined effect of EII and MPI 
 
 
e
2
e
2
e
R
e
a
W
n
e
i
e
n
D
n
n
N
I
W
n
dt
dn
n
∇
+
−
−
+
=
ν
ν
ν
, 
 (2.7) 
 
where νi is the impact ionization rate, Wn is the multiphoton ionization rate coefficient, Iw is 
the intensity of the laser beam, n is the number of photons required for MPI, N is the number 
of atoms/molecules per unit volume, νa is the attachment rate, νR is the recombination rate 
and De is the electron diffusion coefficient. The term dne/dt is the net rate of change in 
electron concentration at a point in the focal volume at a time t after the release of initiatory 
electrons. On the right side of the equation (2.7), the first term is the electron generation due 
to impact ionization. The second term on the right is MPI rate. The third, fourth and fifth 
terms are sink terms which represent electron attachment, recombination and diffusion, 
respectively. Impact ionization is defined by multiplying the number of electrons per unit 
volume to the impact ionization rate νi. The impact ionization rate refers to the rate at which 
electrons are generated as a result of ionizing collisions. At high laser intensity, a few new 
electrons can be generated and gain energy larger than their ionization energy which leads to 
the generation of new electrons by impact ionization, thereby leading to the cascade growth. 
Recombination losses are usually not important in the breakdown forming stage. 
 
 
2.3. Electron attachment, recombination and diffusion 
 
Electron attachment is the rate of electron attachment νa multiplied by the number of 
electrons per unit volume. The LIB plasma typically loose electrons to the neutral species via 
the attachment mechanism in the form of three-body attachment or two-body dissociative 
attachment. Three-body attachment is: e + AB + X → AB- + X, where X appears to be a 
facilitator that allows the electrons to be gained by AB even through X remains unchanged 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
423
throughout the process. Two-body dissociative attachment is: e + AB → A- + B. In this 
mechanism the electrons must exhibit a threshold electron energy that is equal to the 
difference between the dissociative energy of AB and the attachment energy of A, which 
results in the separation of A and B. 
Electron recombination is the rate of electron recombination νR multiplied to the number 
of electrons per unit volume. When the electron density is high, such as during the last stage 
of cascade breakdown, the LIB plasma can lose electrons to ions through electron-ion 
recombination. Similar to the electron attachment, three-body recombination and two-body 
recombination occurs as: e + AB+ + X → AB + X, e + AB+ → A + B. The electron-ion 
recombination rate has been studied theoretically for a three-body recombination by Gurevich 
and Pitaevskii [27]  
 
 
]
[
10
8.8
1
3.5
e
2
e
27
−
−
×
=
s
T
n
R
ν
, 
(2.8)  
 
where ne is the electron density in cm-3 and Te is the electron temperature in eV. The electron 
diffusion term is expressed as
e
2
e
n
D ∇
[Eq. (2.7)]. This loss mechanism, more important for a 
small diameter laser beam, is the diffusion of electrons out of the focal volume. Morgan [6] 
referred to the combined effect of diffusion and cascade ionization as the responsible for top-
hat intensity profile. By imposing an electron skin at the edge of the intensity profile, they 
found that the electron density grows exponentially as 
 
 
2
e
e
408
.2
r
D
v
=
, 
(2.9)  
 
where 
ev
 is the average electron velocity, De is electron diffusion coefficient and r is the 
radius of the beam. The equation (2.9) is intended to be an upper boundary for diffusion 
losses only because laser beams typically have a radial distribution closer to the Gaussian 
rather than top-hat distribution.  
In LIB plasmas, the decrease of electron density ne is mainly due to recombination 
between electrons and ions in the plasma. These processes correspond to the so-called 
radiative recombination and three-body recombination processes in which a third body may 
be either a heavy particle or an electron. The electron number density ne (cm-3) in the laser 
induced plasma is governed by the kinetic balance equation [28, 29] 
 
 
,
d
d
3
e
rec
i
e
ion
e
n
k
N
n
k
t
n
−
=
 
(2.10) 
 
where Ni indicates the concentration of heavy particles (neutrals and ions) and kion (cm3 s-1) 
and krec (cm6 s-1) denote the rate constants of ionization (e + A → A+ + 2e) and tree-body 
electron-ion recombination (2e + A+ → A* + e), respectively. The excess of energy in three-
body electron-ion recombination is deposited as kinetic energy to a free electron, which 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
424 
participates in the recombination process as a third body partner. The three-body electron-ion 
recombination energy can be converted into radiation in the process of radiative electron-ion 
recombination (e + A+ → A* → A + hν). The cross section of this process is relatively low and 
it can be competitive with three-body electron-ion recombination only when the plasma 
density is low. If dne/dt=0 an equilibrium condition can be established; if dne/dt≠0, then the 
ionization (dne/dt>0) or the three-body recombination (dne/dt<0) prevails and departure from 
equilibrium occurs [28]. The second derivative of Y=dne/dt with respect to the electron 
number density is given by  
 
 
.
6
d
d
e
rec
2
e
2
n
k
n
Y
−
=
 
(2.11) 
 
The recombination time can be determined by the value of the rate constant of the 
recombination process as trec=1/(ne
2.krec) [29].  
In summary, the process of plasma initiation essentially consists of the formation of free 
or quasi-free electrons by interplay of MPI and EII. Therefore, two mechanisms MPI and EII 
can initiate a conventional LIB plasma formation. After the LIB plasma formation the 
temporal growth is governed by the equation (2.7). The recombination of these two source 
terms (MPI and EII) and three sink terms (electron attachment, electron recombination and 
electron diffusion) controls the development of the conventional LIB plasma. The decrease of 
ne is mainly due to the so-called radiative recombination and three-body recombination 
processes in which a third body may be either a heavy particle or an electron. These 
mechanisms that directly affect the temporal development of the LIB plasma, determine the 
necessary spectroscopic techniques required to spectrally resolve elemental species inside the 
LIB plasma. 
 
 
2.4. Optical Breakdown Threshold Intensities 
 
The minimum power density required to form a plasma is called the breakdown 
threshold; different types of laser, sample, and environmental conditions will have different 
breakdown thresholds. Breakdown thresholds of solids and liquids are usually much lower 
than those for gases. The principal method of investigation has been to measure the beam 
intensity required for electron liberation and the minimum intensity needed to produce 
breakdown as a function of the radiation wavelength and pressure of a variety of gases. 
Precise measurements of the intensities of laser radiation required to release initiatory 
electrons or to lead to breakdown are made only with the greatest difficulty. The difficulties 
arise on account of the imprecise definition of the extent of the focal region and inaccurate 
knowledge of the spatial-temporal characteristics of the beam intensity within the focal 
region, which, in turn, lead to uncertainties in the absolute value of the instantaneous 
radiation intensity. The parameters which characterize a focused laser beam are its 
polarization, wavelength, line width, duration, divergence and the temporal and spatial 
distribution of intensity. For a given pulse these are functions of the laser and focusing system 
governed by the mode structure within the laser cavity, by the aberration functions of the lens 
or focusing mirror, and by the beam diameter at the lens or mirror. In specifying the electron 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
425
liberation or breakdown threshold intensities all these factors should ideally be specified, but, 
regrettably, in the literature there is often inadequate detail and essential features of 
experimental procedures are frequently omitted. In consequence many published data are of 
little value, serving merely to indicate orders of magnitude and broad trends only rather than 
absolute values in well-defined conditions. For these reasons data published by various 
workers are often contradictory, and reliable interpretation is sometimes difficult to make. 
For gases to breakdown, a certain concentration of electrons has to be reached before the 
end of the laser pulse. Laser-induced breakdown is frequently defined [5, 30] as an electron 
density multiplication during the laser pulse by a factor of 1013 corresponding to 43 electron 
generations. In fact, multiplying the natural electron density by 1013 leads to ne≈1016 cm−3 
which is the electron density of plasmas at atmospheric pressure for which electron-ion IB 
dominates electron-neutral IB. With respect to electron-neutral IB, the electron-ion IB has a 
much higher efficiency as a result of the long range Coulomb interaction, and a plasma with 
an electron density ne=1016 cm−3 is quasi instantaneously completely ionized. 
The condition for optical breakdown is taken to occur when the number density of the 
induced electrons equals the critical density for the laser wavelength. The critical plasma 
density 
[
]
[
]
μm
/
10
1.1
4
/
cm
2
21
2
2
3
crit
e
λ
π
ω
×
≅
=
−
e
m
n
 (
3
19
crit
e
10
−
≅
cm
n
 for CO2 laser) is the 
density where the electron plasma frequency equals to the laser frequency. When the electron 
density exceeds the critical density the sample is not transparent any more. Energetic 
electrons produce excited species through impact excitation, dissociation and ionization of 
gas molecules. According to the microwave theory [22], electrons gain energy from the laser 
radiation 
field 
by 
elastic 
collisions 
with 
neutral 
atoms 
at 
the 
rate:
)]
/(
[
)
/
(
)
d
/
d
(
2
c
2
2
c
2
E
2
gain
ν
ω
ν
ε
+
⋅
=
m
F
e
t
, where FE and ω are the root-mean-square 
electric field and angular frequency of the radiation and νc is the electron-neutral collision 
frequency. 
Several models have been developed to describe the optical breakdown and to compute 
the breakdown threshold. Chan et al. [30] proposed a model based on the energy balance of 
electrons neglecting their energy distribution. According to this work, breakdown occurred if 
the laser heating of electrons by IB induces a gain of electron energy that overcomes the 
energy losses. Thus, one requires a laser power density (power threshold density) 
 
 
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
Λ
+
+
+
Λ
+
+
≥
c
2
P
c
2
las
c
2
c
2
2
P
las
)
(
2
ln
2
2
ln
43
2
ln
e
4
ν
β
α
ν
ε
τ
ν
ν
ω
π
I
M
m
D
I
c
m
I
e
, 
 (2.12) 
 
where m and e are the mass and charge of electrons, c is the light velocity, and IP and M are 
the ionization potential and the atomic mass of the gas. The terms ω, νc, τlas, De, Λ and <ε> 
are the laser frequency, effective electron-neutral collision frequency, laser pulse duration, 
diffusion coefficient, diffusion length and average electron energy, respectively. The terms α 
(dimensionless) and β (length2) are two parameters which depend on the atomic structure of 
the gas. The terms inside the brackets represent various loss terms. The first term in the 
brackets stands for the generation of 43 electrons necessary for breakdown. The second, third, 
and fourth terms take into account the electron energy loss due to diffusion out of the focal 
volume, elastic and inelastic collisions, respectively. The loss due to electron attachment is 
very low and therefore not considered in Eq. (2.12). The losses due to elastic and inelastic 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
426 
collisions are proportional to νc that increases linearly with the gas pressure p. At low 
pressure, collisional loss can be neglected and electron heating by IB varies linearly with p 
according to νc
2<<ω. Thus, the threshold decreases with p in the low-pressure range. When 
increasing p to sufficiently high values, the collisional losses overcome the terms of electron 
generation and diffusion loss. If νc
2<<ω still holds, both gain and loss terms are proportional 
to p and the threshold is pressure independent. In the high pressure range (νc
2>>ω) the gain 
by IB diminishes as p−1 and the threshold increases. Thus, it exists an optimum pressure for 
which the optical breakdown threshold is minimum. According to Eq. (2.12), the breakdown 
power threshold density in general is directly proportional to the ionization potential of the 
gas. Moreover, the breakdown threshold passes through a minimum at the pressure when 
laser angular frequency ω is equal to the effective electron-neutral collision frequency νc as 
indicated by the term outside the brackets. Depending on their relative magnitudes, 
breakdown may be termed to be limited, diffusion limited or attachment limited [30].  
Time-limited breakdown occurs if the first term in the brackets dominates, that is when 
the laser pulse duration τlas is so short that the growth rate of electron density required to 
induce a visible breakdown exceeds any losses. Thus, the threshold power density varies 
inversely with pulse duration and the breakdown is determined by the product of the intensity 
times the pulse duration. Diffusion-limited processes occur when the second term in the 
brackets dominates, that is for gas breakdown to take place in a small focal volume at low gas 
pressure. The breakdown power density threshold in this case decreases as Λ-2 with the focal 
size and it also decreases as p-2 with the gas pressure in the range of pressure so that ω>>νc. 
The third and fourth terms are the attachment and elastic collision loses. They are relatively 
unimportant and are dependent on the type and masses of the gas. For inert gases, the 
attachment loss can be completely neglected. The last term is the energy loss due to inelastic 
collision and it should be important for molecular gases because the large number of excited 
states they possess. Because the attachment rate and collision frequency are assumed to be 
proportional to the gas pressure p, these three terms are independent of the gas pressure. 
At low pressure and in particular for small waist, the electron diffusion out of the focal 
volume is the dominating loss term. The electron diffusion length Λ can be estimated 
assuming a focal volume of cylindrical shape with radius 
 
 
2
Θ
= f
r
,  
(2.13) 
 
and length 
(
) d
f
l
Θ
−
=
2
1
2
 (Eq. 1.8), where f is the focal length of the focussing lens, Θ the 
angle of laser beam divergence, and d the laser beam diameter incident on the lens. For a 
Gaussian laser beam, one has 
 
 
2
2
2
405
.2
1
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
+
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
=
Λ
l
r
π
,  
(2.14) 
 
For a large numerical opening (≥f /5), Eq. (2.14) is simplified to Λ=r/2.405. Using this 
expression with r from Eq. (2.13) and computing the electron diffusion coefficient as 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
427
 
eff
e
3
2
ν
ε
m
D =
,  
(2.15) 
 
the energy loss due to electron diffusion is evaluated. With respect to the loss due to elastic 
collisions, the energy loss by diffusion can be neglected if 
 
 
Θ
>>
mf
M
I P
3
81
.4
eff
ν
.  
(2.16) 
 
A large dispersion of breakdown threshold values exists in literature. It is attributed to the 
large number of parameters on which the optical breakdown depends. Several mechanisms 
have been found to reduce the threshold of optical breakdown. Smith and Haught [31] 
observed threshold lowering by Penning effect during ruby laser breakdown in a high-
pressure Ar atmosphere when adding 1% Ne. The phenomenon was due to Ar ionization by 
collisions with excited Ne atoms which were produced by a resonant excitation process. 
However, the threshold lowering was at maximum of about 50% [31]. For CO2 laser 
radiation, a resonant excitation process can be excluded because of the small photon energy 
and the Penning effect does not contribute to optical breakdown threshold lowering in the far 
IR spectral range. For laser radiation of sufficiently high photon energy, the presence of 
impurities with low ionization energy led to the threshold lowering [32] that was attributed to 
multiphoton ionization. However, this effect was not observed for CO2 laser radiation. Gas 
impurities with the lowest ionization potential like hydrocarbon radicals require at least the 
simultaneous absorption of more than 50 photons that is a process of vanishing probability. 
Contrarily, molecular species such as hydrocarbon or other radicals brake the ionization 
avalanche. They have many vibrational and rotational excitation levels which cause electron 
energy loss by inelastic collisions [see Eq. (2.12)].  
Several authors [33, 34] reported threshold lowering when initiating the breakdown by 
ablation of a solid target. A threshold reduction by a factor of 102 was observed for CO2 laser 
radiation [33]. The threshold lowering was explained by shock wave generation as an effect 
of strong material ablation. The shock wave heats up the surrounding gas which is 
instantaneously transformed in a strongly ionized plasma. The optical breakdown from solid 
material ablation has been shown to be a multistage plasma initiation process that is 
characterized by three thresholds [34]: (i) the material ablation threshold Ivap; (ii) the 
breakdown threshold of the evaporated material Ivap
*; and (iii) the breakdown threshold of the 
surrounding gas Igas
*. It is noted that Ivap* and Igas
* are the thresholds of preionized vapour and 
the gas, respectively. For the case of CO2 laser ablation, the initial ionization stage of the 
ablated material vapour is ne/nvap<10−5-10−4[34], nvap being the ablated material vapor density. 
As a consequence of preionization, the number of electrons generations necessary for 
complete ionization is strongly reduced (<<43). Thus, the electron generation term can be 
neglected in Eq. (2.12). The diffusion loss can be also neglected according to the relative 
large volume preionized by the shock wave. In the case of rare gases, the loss by inelastic 
collisions is much smaller than that due to elastic collisions and the avalanche ionization is 
determined by the balance between IB heating of electrons and losses by elastic collisions. 
The breakdown threshold (in W cm-2) given by Eq. (2.12) is simplified to [34] 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
428 
 
M
I
I
I
EC
P
7
*
las
10
8.1
×
=
≥
, 
 (2.17) 
 
where the ionization potential is in eV and the atomic mass of the gas is in atomic mass units. 
The index EC stands for elastic collisions to recall that only this loss term has been taken into 
account. Barchukov et al. [33] proposed a threshold criterion similar to Eq. (2.17) with a three 
times larger numerical constant. The difference is due to the average electron energy which 
was supposed to be equal to the ionization potential by Barchukov et al. [33] while 
<ε>=(1/3)IP was taken for Eq. (2.17).  
 
 
2.5. Laser-Plasma Interaction 
 
The interaction between the laser radiation and free electrons of the plasma is described 
by the Drude model considering the electron motion in the laser field as a harmonic oscillator. 
For collision frequencies ωP
2>>νc
2, where ωP is the plasma frequency. The dielectric constant 
is given by ε≈1 – ωP
2/ω2, where ω is the laser frequency. Optical breakdown in gases at 
atmospheric pressure leads to an electron density equal to the critical density (for CO2 laser 
radiation 
3
19
crit
e
cm
10
−
≅
n
). In the region where the critical density is reached, the plasma 
frequency is equal to the laser frequency and 
0
=
=
ε
n
. The plasma is thus completely 
reflecting in the corresponding zone. Only a few authors have investigated the laser beam 
reflection by the plasma. In fact, the studies show that breakdown plasmas reaching the 
critical density absorb most of the incident laser energy [35-37]. The fraction of reflected 
radiation is small because of strong absorption in the zone adjacent to the plasma sheet of 
critical density. Donaldson et al. [36] showed that 80% of incident laser energy was absorbed 
in a zone of weak thickness where the electronic density varied from 0.83ne
crit to ne
crit when 
generating breakdown with a (Nd:YAG) laser of τlas=35 ps and IW=1014 Wcm−2. Offenberger 
and Burnett [35] measured the reflected and transmitted power of TEA-CO2 laser pulses 
during breakdown in hydrogen. The reflected power was always below 2% of the incident 
laser power. The major absorption mechanism of CO2 laser radiation during breakdown 
ignition is electron-neutral IB. Once strongly ionized plasma is formed, the electron impact 
ionization or electron-ion IB dominates as a result of the long range Coulomb interaction 
between charged particles.  
Several experimental and theoretical studies have been performed to investigate the IB 
effect. Among numerous expressions for the determination of the IB absorption coefficient [2, 
5, 36] the formula 
 
 
(
)
T
k
h
i
B
e
T
Z
f
n
π
ω
ν
α
2
/
3
e
2
i
i
2
e
8
IB
1
10
69
.3
−
−
×
=
∑
 [cm-1], 
 (2.18) 
 
proposed by Spitzer [38] was used by many authors to estimate the laser energy absorption by 
the plasma. Here, Te and ne are in K and cm−3, respectively. The factors fi are the fractional 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
429
abundances of ions, Zi the corresponding ion charge. In the case of CO2 laser radiation, one 
has (
)
T
k
h
e
B
T
k
h
B
π
ω
π
ω
2
/
1
2
/
≈
−
−
and Eq. (2.18) simplifies for a singly ionized plasma to 
 
 
2
/
3
2
e
35
IB
10
8.1
eT
n
−
×
=
α
 [cm-1],  
(2.19) 
 
where Te is in eV. Equation (2.19) shows that the efficiency of IB absorption decreases with 
increasing electron temperature. At high plasma temperatures, other absorption mechanisms 
dominate. They have been made in evidence during studies of laser-plasma interaction related 
to thermonuclear fusion using power densities several orders of magnitude higher than 
breakdown thresholds.  
 
 
2.6. Absorption wave Propagation 
 
After breakdown ignition, the strongly absorbing plasma will propagate in the direction 
opposite to the laser beam. The absorption wave formation has been observed in many 
experiments using CO2 laser sources [33, 35, 39]. The theoretical analyses of optical 
breakdown and absorption wave propagation performed by Raizer [2] using a hydrodynamic 
model have been widely accepted and became a standard theory in the field. According to this 
model, the laser-induced absorption waves propagate by the following stepwise mechanisms: 
(i) A small plasma zone is heated up by the laser beam. It reaches the critical density and 
strongly absorbs the laser radiation. (ii) The electron density in the adjacent zones increases. 
(iii) The adjacent preionized zone that is irradiated by the laser beam is heated up and 
becomes absorbent. Thus, the strongly absorbing plasma zone propagates in the direction 
opposite to the laser beam. 
Three different propagation modes are distinguished. The breakdown wave is 
characterized by the following propagation mechanism: (i) breakdown occurs initially in the 
region of the highest laser power density and later in the zones of lower power density. The 
expansion of high pressure plasma compresses the surrounding gas and drives a shock wave. 
Thus, the breakdown propagates in the direction opposite to the laser beam. The plasma also 
tends to expand back along the beam path toward the laser, a phenomenon known as moving 
breakdown. The velocity of the breakdown wave is given by 
 
 
ϕ
tg
v
0
bw
bt
w
=
, 
(2.20) 
where w0 and ϕ are the minimum radius and opening angle of the focused laser beam, 
respectively. For example, for our typical experimental conditions with the CO2 laser, taking 
w0=0.05 cm, tb=100 ns and tgϕ=0.2, the breakdown wave propagates with vbw=2.5 106 cm/s; 
(ii) Propagation through the detonation wave mechanisms occurs when rapid heating of 
the gas in the region of strong absorption induces a spherical shock wave. The latter 
propagates into the surrounding gas that is heated and preionized. The part of the preionized 
gas that is further illuminated by the laser beam absorbs the laser radiation and becomes 
opaque. Thus, the absorption zone follows the shock wave. The propagation velocity of the 
detonation wave is given by 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
430 
 
(
)
3
/
1
0
W
2
bw
1
2
v
⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡
−
=
ρ
γ
I
, 
(2.21) 
 
where γ and ρ0 are the adiabatic constant of the gas and the specific mass, respectively. The 
specific energy that is injected into the gas is 
 
 
(
)(
)
2
bw
2
bw
v
1
1
+
−
=
γ
γ
γ
ε
. 
(2.22) 
 
It is noted that detonation wave propagation velocity and injected specific energy are 
independent of the atomic structure of the gas. The gas influences the detonation wave 
propagation only through its specific mass and adiabatic constant. Thus, a change of gas 
nature is equivalent to a pressure variation if γ is unchanged. Consequently, the detonation 
wave propagation velocity in Ar is equal to that in Xe at three times lower pressure. For Xe at 
atmospheric pressure and IW=108 W cm−2, the detonation wave propagates with a velocity of 
6 105 cm s−1 and heats up the gas to a temperature of 28 eV. The temperature is obtained by 
assuming an ideal gas, for which the specific energy is related to the temperature by εbw=(3/2) 
kB T NA/M. Here, kB, T, NA and M are Boltzmann’s constant, plasma temperature, Avogadro’s 
constant and mass, respectively. 
(iii) For IW>1010 Wcm−2, the plasma is heated up to T<102 eV. According to the high 
temperature, the plasma strongly radiates in the UV and soft X-ray spectral range ionizing 
thus the surrounding gas. Once preionized, the gas in the zone illuminated by the laser beam 
absorbs the laser radiation and a laser sustained radiation wave propagates in the direction 
opposite to the laser beam. The dominating propagation mechanism of the absorption wave 
depends on the experimental conditions. Breakdown waves are formed in the case of very 
small opening angle of the focused laser beam whereas radiation waves occur at very high 
laser power density. For moderate power density and sufficiently wide opening angle, the 
optical breakdown propagates as a detonation wave. 
A portion of the laser pulse energy is absorbed by the expanding plasma generating three 
different types of waves: (i) laser-supported combustion (LSC) waves; (ii) laser-supported 
detonation (LSD) waves; and (iii) laser-supported radiation (LSR) waves [40]. They differ in 
their predictions of the opacity and energy transfer properties of the plasma to the surrounding 
gas. At low-power laser regime (IW<1 MW/cm2), LSC waves are produced, which comprise 
of a precursor shock, that is separated from the absorption zone and the plasma. The shock 
wave results in an increase in the ambient gas density, temperature and pressure, whereas the 
shock edges remain transparent to the laser light. At medium-power laser regime (1 
MW/cm2<IW<4 GW/cm2), the precursor shock is sufficiently strong and the shocked gas is 
hot enough to begin absorbing the laser radiation without requiring additional heating by 
energy from the plasma. The laser absorption zone follows directly behind the shock wave 
and moves at the same velocity. In this case a LSD wave is produced and has been modelled 
by several Raizer [2-3, 23]. The propagation of the LSD wave is controlled by the absorption 
of the laser energy. At high-power laser regime (IW >4 GW/cm2), the plasma is so hot that, 
prior to the arrival of the shock wave, the gas it heated to temperatures at which laser 
absorption begins. Laser radiation is initiated without any density change and the pressure 
profile results mainly from the strong local heating of the gas rather than a propagating shock 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
431
wave. The LSR wave velocity increases much more rapidly with irradiance than those of the 
LSC and LSD waves. 
 
 
3. LIB PLASMA ANALYSIS 
 
In contrast to conventional spectroscopy, where one is mainly concerned with the 
structure of an isolated atom and molecule, the radiation from the plasma also depends on the 
properties of the plasma in the intermediate environment of the atomic or molecular radiator. 
This dependence is a consequence of the long-range Coulomb potential effects which 
dominate the interactions of ions and electrons with each other and with existing neutral 
particles. These interactions are reflected in the characteristic radiations in several ways. They 
can control population densities of the discrete atomic states, spectral shift and broadening by 
Stark effect, decrease of ionization potentials of the atomic species, cause continuum 
radiation emissions and emission of normally forbidden lines. Generally, the radiation emitted 
from self-luminous plasma can be divided into bound-bound (b-b), bound-free (b-f), and free-
free (f-f) transitions. 
 
 
3.1. Local Thermodynamic Equilibrium (LTE) 
 
Plasma description starts by trying to characterize properties of the assembly of atoms, 
molecules, ions and electrons rather than individual species. If thermodynamic equilibrium 
exits, then plasma properties can be described through the concept of temperature. 
Thermodynamic equilibrium is rarely complete, so physicists have settled for a useful 
approximation, local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE). In LTE model it is assumed that the 
distribution of population densities of the electrons is determined exclusively through 
collisional processes and that they have sufficient rate constants so that the distribution 
responds instantaneously to any change in the plasma conditions. In such circumstances each 
process is accompanied by its inverse and these pairs of processes occur at equal rates by the 
principle of detailed balance. Thus, the distribution of population densities of the electrons 
energy levels is the same as it would be in a system in complete thermodynamic equilibrium. 
The population distribution is determined by the statistical mechanical law of equipartition 
among energy levels and does not require knowledge of atomic cross sections for its 
calculation. Thus, although the plasma density and temperature may vary in space and time, 
the distribution of population densities at any instant and point in space depends entirely on 
local values of density, temperature, and chemical composition of plasma. If the free electrons 
are distributed among the energy levels available for them, their velocities have a Maxwellian 
distribution 
 
 
v
v
2
v
exp
2
4
2
2
2
/
3
v
d
T
k
m
T
k
m
n
dn
e
B
e
B
e
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
=
π
π
, 
(3.1) 
 
where ne is the electron density, m is the electron mass, kB is the Boltzmann constant, Te is the 
electron temperature and v is the electron velocity. For the bound levels the distributions of 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
432 
population densities of neutrals and ions are given by the Boltzmann (3.2) and Saha (3.3) 
equations  
 
 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
=
e
B
i
i
j
i
j
T
k
E
E
g
g
N
N
)
(
exp
j
, 
(3.2) 
 
 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
=
+
+
e
B
e
B
k
z
k
z
k
z
e
k
z
T
k
I
h
T
k
m
g
g
N
n
N
k
z,
2
/
3
2
,
,1
,
,1
p
exp
2
2
π
, 
(3.3) 
 
where Ni, Nj, Nz+1,k and Nz,k are the population densities of various levels designated by their 
quantum numbers j (upper), i (lower) and k (the last for the ground level) and ionic charge z 
and z+1. The term gz,i is the statistical weight of the designated level, Ej and Ei are the energy 
of the levels j and i and Ipz,k is the ionization potential of the ion of charge z in its ground 
level k. Equations (3.1)-(3.3) describe the state of the electrons in an LTE plasma. For 
complete LTE of the populations of all levels, including the ground state, a necessary 
condition is that electron collisional rates for a given transition exceed the corresponding 
radiative rates by about an order of magnitude [41]. This condition gives a criterion [42] for 
the critical electron density of the level with energy ΔE=Ej-Ei 
 
 
,
)
(
10
6.1
8
5
3
2
/
1
e
12
H
2
e
B
3
H
2
7
3
0
crit
e
E
T
E
z
T
k
E
z
E
z
a
n
Δ
×
≅
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛Δ
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
≥
α
π
 
(3.4) 
 
where α is fine-structure parameter, a0 is Bohr radius, and EH is the hydrogen ionization 
potential. In the numerical relationship of Eq. (3.4), ne
crit is given in cm-3, Te in K and ΔE 
(energy difference between the two neighboring states) in eV. Many plasmas of particular 
interest do not come close to complete LTE, but can be considered to be only in partial 
thermodynamic equilibrium in the sense that the population of sufficiently highly excited 
levels are related to the next ion’s ground state population by Saha-Boltzmann relations, 
respective to the total population in all fine-structure levels of the ground state configuration 
[41]. For any atom or ion with simple Rydberg level structure, various criteria were advanced 
for the minimum principal quantum number ncrit for the lowest level, often called thermal or 
collision limit, for which partial thermodynamic equilibrium remains valid to within 10%. 
One criterion with quite general validity is given by Griem [42]: 
 
 
.
2
10
17
/
1
2
17
/
2
3
0
7
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
≈
H
e
B
e
crit
E
z
T
k
a
n
z
n
α
π
 
(3.5) 
 
 
3.2 Line Radiation 
 
Line radiation from plasma occurs for electron transitions between the discrete or bound 
energy levels in atoms, molecules or ions. In an optically thin plasma of length l along the 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
433
line of sight [43], the integrated emission intensity Iji of a spectral line arising from a 
transition between bound levels j and i is given by  
 
 
l
N
A
h
ds
N
h
A
I
j
ji
ji
j
ji
ji
ji
ν
π
ν
=
=
∫
4
, 
(3.6) 
 
where Nj is the population density of the upper level j, hνji is the photon energy (energy 
difference between levels j and i), and Aji is the spontaneous transition probability or Einstein 
A coefficient. The integration is taken over a depth of plasma viewed by the detector, and the 
intensity of radiation is measured in units of power per unit area per unit solid angle. 
Transition probabilities can be sometimes expressed via the oscillator strength fji. This is 
defined as the ratio of the number of classical oscillators to the number of lower state atoms 
required to give the same line-integrated absorption [44]. Its relationship to the Einstein 
coefficient is 
 
 
ji
i
j
ji
ji
A
g
g
mc
e
f
ν
π
πε
2
3
2
0
8
4
=
. 
(3.7) 
 
The usefulness of fji is that it is dimensionless, describing just the relative strength of the 
transition. The detailed values of Aji , gi, and gj can be obtained from reference compilations 
or from electronic databases, i.e by NIST [45]. 
 
 
 3.3. Continuum Radiation 
 
The origins of continuum radiation are both bound-free and free-free transitions. Free-
free emission or IB radiation is due to the interaction of free electrons with positively charged 
ions. In free-bound emission (recombination radiation), a free electron is captured by an ion 
in a bound level. The energy of the photon given off is the difference between original energy 
of the electron and its new energy in whatever level of whatever atom it ends up in. Since this 
difference can have any value, the result of many free-bound transitions is a continuous 
spectrum. Transitions between two free energy levels can occur in plasmas increasing the 
energy exchanges of charged particles. Classically, this takes place because a moving charge 
radiates when it is accelerated or retarded. For most cases of practical importance, these free-
free transitions are classified as bremsstrahlung or cyclotron spectra. In bremsstrahlung, the 
acceleration of charged particle takes place via the Coulomb field of charged particles. In 
cyclotron radiation, the acceleration is due to the gyration of charged particles in a magnetic 
field. The total continuum radiation at any particular frequency I(ν) is the sum of the 
contributions from all such processes having components at the specified frequency. Thus 
 
 
ν
ν
ν
α
ν
γ
π
ν
ν
d
ds
h
T
j
i
T
i
N
n
d
I
i
p
i
∫∑
∑
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
+
=
)
,
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
4
1
)
(
e
e
e
, 
(3.8) 
 
where γ(i, Te, ν) is the atomic probability of a photon of frequency ν being produced in the 
field of an atom or ion (specified by i) by an electron of mean kinetic temperature Te making 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
434 
free-free transition; α(i, j, Te, ν) is the corresponding probability where the electron makes a 
free-bound transition into a level j. As before, the integration is taken over the plasma depth s. 
 
 
3.4. Line Broadening; Determination of Electron Number Density from 
Stark Broadening of Spectral Lines 
 
The shape of the spectral lines in the LIB has been studied since the first observation of 
the laser-induced breakdown in early 1960s. It plays an important role for the spectrochemical 
analysis and quantification of the plasma parameters. The observed spectral lines are always 
broadened, partly due to the finite resolution of the spectrometers and partly to intrinsic 
physical causes. In addition, the center of the spectral lines may be shifted from its nominal 
central wavelength. The principal physical causes of spectral line broadening are the Doppler, 
resonance pressure, and Stark broadening. There are several reasons for this broadening and 
shift. These reasons may be divided into two broad categories: broadening due to local 
conditions and broadening due to extended conditions. Broadening due to local conditions is 
due to effects which hold in a small region around the emitting element, usually small enough 
to assure LTE. Broadening due to extended conditions may result from changes to the 
spectral distribution of the radiation as it traverses its path to the observer. It also may result 
from the combining of radiation from a number of regions which are far from each other. 
 
3.4.1. Natural broadening  
The uncertainty principle relates the lifetime of an excited state (due to the spontaneous 
radiative decay) with the uncertainty of its energy. This broadening effect results in an 
unshifted Lorentzian profile. The FWHM of natural broadening for a transition with a natural 
lifetime of τji is: ΔλN
FWHM=λ2/πcτji. The natural lifetime τji is dependent on the probability of 
spontaneous decay: τji=1/Aji. Natural broadening is usually very small compared with other 
causes of broadening.  
 
3.4.2. Doppler broadening  
The Doppler broadening is due to the thermal motion of the emitting atoms, molecules or 
ions. The atoms in a gas which are emitting radiation will have a distribution of velocities. 
Each photon emitted will be "red" or "blue" shifted by the Doppler effect depending on the 
velocity of the atom relative to the observer. The higher the temperature of the gas, the wider 
the distribution of velocities in the gas. Since the spectral line is a combination of all of the 
emitted radiation, the higher the temperature of the gas, the broader will be the spectral line 
emitted from that gas. This broadening effect is described by a Gaussian profile and there is 
no associated shift. For a Maxwellian velocity distribution the line shape is Gaussian, and the 
FWHM may be estimated as (in Å): 
 
 
M
T /
10
16
.7
7
D
FWHM
⋅
⋅
×
=
Δ
−
λ
λ
,  
(3.9) 
 
being λ the wavelength in Å, T the temperature of the emitters in K, and M the atomic mass in 
amu. 
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
435
3.4.3. Pressure broadening  
The presence of nearby particles will affect the radiation emitted by an individual 
particle. There are two limiting cases by which this occurs: (i) Impact pressure broadening: 
The collision of other particles with the emitting particle interrupts the emission process. The 
duration of the collision is much shorter than the lifetime of the emission process. This effect 
depends on both the density and the temperature of the gas. The broadening effect is 
described by a Lorentzian profile and there may be an associated shift. (ii) Quasistatic 
pressure broadening: The presence of other particles shifts the energy levels in the emitting 
particle, thereby altering the frequency of the emitted radiation. The duration of the influence 
is much longer than the lifetime of the emission process. This effect depends on the density of 
the gas, but is rather insensitive to temperature. The form of the line profile is determined by 
the functional form of the perturbing force with respect to distance from the perturbing 
particle. There may also be a shift in the line center. Pressure broadening may also be 
classified by the nature of the perturbing force as follows: (i) Linear Stark broadening occurs 
via the linear Stark effect which results from the interaction of an emitter with an electric 
field, which causes a shift in energy which is linear in the field strength (∼E and ∼1/r2); (ii) 
Resonance broadening occurs when the perturbing particle is of the same type as the emitting 
particle, which introduces the possibility of an energy exchange process (∼E and ∼1/r3); (iii) 
Quadratic Stark broadening occurs via the quadratic Stark effect which results from the 
interaction of an emitter with an electric field, which causes a shift in energy which is 
quadratic in the field strength (∼E and ∼1/r4); (iv) Van der Waals broadening occurs when the 
emitting particle is being perturbed by Van der Waals forces. For the quasistatic case, a Van 
der Waals profile is often useful in describing the profile. The energy shift as a function of 
distance is given in the wings by e.g. the Lennard-Jones potential (∼E and ∼1/r6). 
 
3.4.4. Stark broadening  
Stark broadening of spectral lines in the plasma occurs when an emitting species at a 
distance r from an ion or electron is perturbed by the electric field. This interaction is 
described by the Stark effect. The linear Stark effect exists for hydrogen and for all other 
atoms. Stark broadening from collisions of charged species is the primary mechanism 
influencing the emission spectra in LIBS. Stark broadening of well-isolated lines in the 
plasma can be used to determine the electron number density ne(cm-3). In the case of a non-H-
like line, an estimation of the Stark width (FWHM) and line shift of the Stark broadened lines 
is given as [41-44]:  
 
 
(
)
,
10
1
10
5.3
10
2
16
e
3
/
1
D
4
/
1
16
e
16
e
Stark
FWHM
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
+
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
=
Δ
−
n
W
BN
n
A
n
W
λ
   
(3.10) 
 
 
(
)
,
10
1
10
2
10
16
e
3
/
1
D
4
/
1
16
e
16
e
Shift
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
±
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
=
Δ
−
n
W
BN
n
A
n
D
λ
   
(3.11) 
 
where W is the electron impact parameter or half-width, A is the ion impact parameter both in 
Å, B is a coefficient equal to 1.2 or 0.75 for ionic or neutral lines, respectively, D (in Å) is the 
electron shift parameter and ND is the number of particles in the Debye sphere 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
436 
ND=1.72 109T3/2ne
-1/2. The electron and the ion impact parameters are functions of 
temperature. The first term on the right side of Eq. (3.10) refers to the broadening due to the 
electron contribution, whereas the second one is the ion broadening. The minus sign in Eq. 
(3.11) applies to the high-temperature range of those few lines that have a negative value of 
D/W at low temperatures. Since for LIB conditions Stark broadening is predominantly by 
electron impact, the ion correction factor can safely be neglected, and Eq. (3.10) becomes  
 
 
.
10
2
16
e
Stark
FWHM
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
≈
Δ
n
W
λ
 
(3.12) 
 
The coefficients W are independent of ne and slowly varying functions of electron 
temperature. A comprehensive list of width and shift parameters W, A and D is given by 
Griem [42].  
In the quasi-static approximation, the interaction between slowly moving ions and 
radiating species can be approximated by a perturbation which remains nearly constant over 
the whole time that the species is radiating. Hydrogen and hydrogen-like ions exhibits linear 
Stark effect. The FWHM (in Å) of a hydrogen or H-like ion spectral line, in the quasi-static 
approximation, is given by [41, 42] 
 
 
(
)
,
)
)(
(
7.0
1
10
16
.8
2/3
e
3
/
1
2
1
2
2
2
0
3
/
1
19
Stark
FWHM
n
Z
Z
n
n
N
e
p
D
−
−
−
×
=
Δ
−
−
λ
λ
 
(3.13) 
 
where λ0 is the wavelength line centre, n2 and n1 are the principal quantum numbers of the 
upper and lower states, respectively, Zp and Ze are the nuclear charge on the perturbing ion 
and the emitting species (atom or ion) and ne is the electron number density in cm-3. Although 
the line shapes do depend on the electron contribution, the FWHM are generally insensitive. 
Eq. (3.13) represents a very good estimate of the Stark broadening in those hydrogenic lines 
that do not have a strong undisplaced Stark component as for example Lβ, Lδ, Hβ (Balmer) 
and Hδ transitions. On the other hand, the FWHM of hydrogenic lines with strong central 
Stark components are dominated by interaction of the electrons with the emitting hydrogenic 
species such as Lα and Hα transitions. Such lines have a Lorentzian line shape and FWHM for 
Lα transition in the impact approximation is given by 
 
 
,
log
76
.
13
10
62
.1
2
/
1
e
17
Stark
FWHM
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
×
≈
Δ
−
T
n
T
n
e
λ
 
(3.14) 
 
where 
Stark
FWHM
λ
Δ
 is in Å, T is in K and ne is in cm-3. It is seen from Eqs. (3.13) and (3.14) that 
the ion broadening, in the quasi-static approximation, varies as ne
2/3 and is independent of the 
temperature whereas the collisional broadening varies approximately as ne and it is very much 
temperature dependent. It is to be noted the electron densities determined from Eqs. (3.13) 
and (3.14) are only crude estimations and one must compute the entire line profile to extract 
the total line width for an accurate estimation of ne. 
 
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
437
3.5. Determination of Excitation, Vibrational and Rotational Temperatures 
 
The excitation temperature Texc can be calculated according to the Boltzmann equation 
under the assumption of LTE (Section 3.1). The significance of this temperature depends on 
the degree of equilibrium within the plasma. For plasma in LTE, any point can be described 
by its local values of temperature, density, and chemical composition. By considering two 
lines λji and λnm of the same species, characterized by different values of the upper energy 
level (Ej≠En), the relative intensity ratio can be used to calculate the plasma excitation 
temperature 
 
 
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
−
=
nm
n
ji
ji
ji
j
nm
nm
n
j
A
g
I
A
g
I
k
E
E
T
λ
λ
ln
B
exc
. 
 (3.15) 
 
When selecting a line pair, it is advisable to choose two lines as close as possible in 
wavelength and as far apart as possible in excitation energy. This is to limit the effect of 
varying the spectral response of the detection system. The use of several lines instead of just 
one pair leads to greater precision of the plasma excitation temperature estimation. In fact, 
though the precision of the intensity values can be improved by increasing the signal 
intensity, the transition probabilities Aji reported in the literature exhibit significance degree 
of uncertainty (5-50%). The excitation temperature can be calculated from the relative 
intensities of a series of lines from different excitation states of the same atomic or ionic 
species from the slope of the Bolztmann plot ln[Iji·λji/gj·Aji] versus Ej/kB  
 
 
exc
B
ln
T
k
E
C
A
g
I
j
ji
j
ji
ji
⋅
−
=
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
⋅
⋅λ
 ,  
(3.16) 
 
where Iji is the emissivity (W m-3 sr-1) of the emitted j→i spectral line, λji is the wavelength, 
gj=2Jj+1 is the statistical weight, Aji is the Einstein transition probability of spontaneous 
emission, Ej/kB is the normalized energy of the upper electronic level and C=ln(hcNj/4πQ(T)) 
(Q(T) is the partition function). The values of the λji, gj, Aji and Ei for selected atomic or ionic 
lines can be obtained from the NIST Atomic Spectral Database [45]. A set of selected spectral 
lines can be chosen based on their relative strengths, accuracies and transition probabilities.  
The emission spectra of the diatomic species reveal a relatively complex structure which 
is due to the combination of the electronic transitions from the different rotational and 
vibrational states [46-48]. The emission intensities of the molecular bands can be analyzed in 
order to calculate the molecular vibrational temperature Tvib. For a plasma in LTE, the 
intensity of an individual vibrational v’-v” band Iv’-v” is given by 
 
 
vib
B T
k
c
h
G
A
q
I
⋅
−
=
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⋅
−
−
−
)'v
(
ln
"
v
'v
4
"
v
'v
"
v
'v
λ
 ,  
(3.17) 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
438 
where A is a constant, λv’-v” is the wavelength corresponding to the band head, 
2
0
"
v
'v
)
(
)
(
"
v
'v
∫
∞
Ψ
Ψ
=
−
dR
R
R
q
is the Franck-Condon factor and 
B
k
c
h
G
/
)'v
(
 is the 
normalized energy of the upper vibrational level. A line fit to 
(
)
"
v
'v
4
"
v
'v
"
v
'v
/
ln
−
−
−
⋅
q
I
λ
 as a 
function of the upper normalized electronic-vibrational energies has a slope equal to -1/Tvib.  
On the other hand, the emission intensities of the rotational lines of a vibrational band can 
be analyzed in order to estimate the effective rotational temperature Trot. In this case it is 
necessary to consider the Hund´s coupling case for the both electronic states implied in the 
transition. From the assignment of the rotational spectrum it is possible to estimate the 
effective rotational temperature by considering the J value for the maximum of the band 
Trot=(2 Bv h c/kB)(Jmax+1/2)2, 
being Bv the rotational constant for v’ vibrational level and Jmax the total angular 
momentum at the maximum.  
Another method for estimating the vibrational and rotational temperatures is based on a 
simulation program of the spectra. Software developed in our laboratory [49] calculated the 
spectra of a diatomic molecule by summing the intensity of all rovibrational levels and 
convoluting the results with the instrumental line shape of the optical system. The emission 
intensity Iv’,J’-v”,J” of a molecular line can be approximated by 
 
 
J"
J',
v"
v',
2
e
J'
v',
J"
,
v"
J'
v',
4
4
J"
,
v"
J'
v',
)1
'
2
(3
~
64
S
q
R
N
J
I
+
≈
−
−
ν
π
, 
(3.18) 
 
where 
J"
,
v"
J'
v',
~
−
ν
 is the wavenumber of the transition, 2J’+1 is the rotational degeneracy of the 
upper state, Nv’,J’ is the population in the initial (upper) state, 
e
R  is the average electronic 
transition moment, qv’,v” is the Franck-Condon factor and SJ’,J” is the Hönl-London factor [50]. 
Spectrum simulations are based on comparison of experimental and calculated spectra for 
different rotational and vibrational population distributions which depend on temperature.  
 
 
3.6. Ionization Degree of the Plasmas: Saha Equation 
 
In plasma there is a continuous transition from gases with neutral atoms to a state with 
ionized atoms, which is determined by an ionization equation. The transition between gas and 
plasma is essentially a chemical equilibrium, which shifts from the gas to the plasma side 
with increasing temperature. Let us consider the first three different ionization equilibria of an 
atom A: 
 
 
A ↔ A++e+IP(A-I), 
 
 
A+ ↔ A2+ + e + IP(A-II), 
 
 
A2+ ↔ A3+ + e + IP(A-III). 
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
439
For each ionization equilibrium, considering the atoms and ions in their ground electronic 
state, the LTE between ionization and recombination reactions at temperature T is described 
by the Saha equation (see Eq. 3.3) 
 
 
(
)
T
k
I
i
e
i
e
h
T
k
m
g
g
g
N
N
n
B
P /
3
2
/
3
B
0
0
e
2
−
⋅
=
⋅
π
, 
(3.19) 
 
where ne = Ni are the electron and ion densities in the different ionization equilibria in the 
second member of ionization equilibria. From this equation, ionization degree ne·Ni/N0 can be 
estimated.  
 
 
4. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 
 
LIBS is a plasma based method that uses instrumentation similar to that used by other 
spectroscopic methods (atomic emission spectroscopy, laser-induced fluorescence etc). A 
typical LIBS apparatus utilizes a pulsed laser that generates the powerful optical pulses used 
to form the plasma. Principles of laser operation in general and the operation of specific lasers 
are described in detail in numerous books. The discussion here will be limited to the 
fundamentals of the operation of the transversely excited atmospheric (TEA) carbon dioxide 
laser used in this work. The CO2 laser is a near-infrared gas laser capable of very high power 
and with the highest efficiency of all gas lasers (≈10-20%) and for cw operation the highest 
output power. Although CO2 lasers have found many applications including surgical 
procedure, their popular image is as powerful devices for cutting, drilling, welding or as 
weapons for military applications. The linear CO2 molecule has three normal modes of 
vibration, labelled ν1 (symmetry stretch), ν2 (bending vibration) and ν3 (asymmetric stretch). 
The fundamental vibration wavenumbers are 1354, 673 and 2396 cm-1, respectively. The 
vibrational state of the molecule is described by the number of vibrational quanta in these 
modes. The bending vibrational mode is twofold degenerate and can have a vibrational 
angular momentum along the CO2 axis. The number of quanta of this vibrational angular 
momentum is stated as an upper index to the vibrational ν2 quanta. The upper laser level 
(0001) denotes the ground vibrational state for the mode ν1, the ground vibrational state for 
the mode ν2 which is doubly degenerate, and the first excited vibrational state for the mode ν3. 
The active medium is a gas discharge in a mixture of He, N2 and CO2. By electron impact in 
the discharge excited vibrational levels in the electronic ground states of N2 and CO2 are 
populated. The vibrational levels v = 1 in the N2 molecule and (ν1, ν2, ν3) = (0001) in the CO2 
molecule are near-resonant and energy transfer from the N2 molecule to the CO2 molecule 
becomes very efficient. This populates the (0001) level in CO2 preferentially, creates 
inversion between the (0001) and the (0200) levels, and allows laser oscillations on many 
rotational transitions between these two vibrational states in the wavelength range 9.6-10.6 
µm. The main laser transitions in CO2 occur between the excited states of the mode ν3(0001) 
and the symmetric stretching mode ν1(1000) (10.6 μm) or the bending mode ν2(0110) (9.6 
μm). A single line can be selected by a Littrow-grating, forming one of the resonator end 
mirrors. Helium atoms do not take part directly in the excitation of CO2 molecules but do play 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
440 
an important role in heat-transfer from the gas mixture to the tube walls, as well as facilitating 
the depopulation of the lower vibrational levels in CO2, contributing in this way to the 
maintenance of the population inversion. The power of CO2 lasers depends on their 
configuration. The laser used in these experiments was a transversely excited atmospheric 
(TEA) CO2 laser in which the gas-flow is transverse to the laser cavity’s axis. The pressure in 
the tube is close to atmospheric pressure. The CO2:N2:He mixture is exchange in a continuous 
way, enhancing the output power of the laser. The laser can achieve a power of 50 MW. The 
optical materials used in lasers emitting radiation in the infrared range are obviously different 
than those used in the visible range. For example, materials such as germanium (Ge) or 
gallium arsenide (GaAs) are completely opaque in the visible range, while being transparent 
in the infrared range. Some materials, such as zinc selenide (ZnSe), are transparent in both 
spectral ranges. Typical materials transparent in the IR range are: NaCl or CsI. Metal mirrors 
(copper, molybdenum) are used in the IR range, owing to their small absorption (and large 
reflectivity) as well as their large heat capacity which enables removal of heat from the active 
medium. 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up used for time-resolved TEA-CO2 pulsed laser 
gas breakdown diagnostics.  
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
441
 
 
 
Figure 2. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
442 
 
Figure 2. Four images of the LIB of nitrogen at atmospheric pressure (λ=9.621 μm and power density of 
4.5 GW×cm-2), oxygen at 49.0 kPa (λ=10.591 μm and power density of 1.93     GW×cm-2), air at 
atmospheric pressure (λ=9.621 µm and intensity of 5.86 GW×cm-2) and He at atmospheric pressure 
(λ=10.591 μm and power density of 6.31 GW×cm-2) at different times of the experiment induced by a 
TEA-CO2 laser pulse. Laser beam direction is from right to left. 
A schematic diagram of the experimental configuration used for time-resolved TEA-CO2 
pulsed laser gas breakdown diagnostics is shown in Figure 1. The experiments were carried 
out with a transverse excitation atmospheric (TEA) CO2 laser (Lumonics model K-103) 
operating on an 8:8:84 mixture of CO2:N2:He, respectively. The laser is equipped with frontal 
Ge multimode optics (35 % reflectivity) and a rear diffraction grating with 135 lines mm-1 
blazed at 10.6 μm. The laser pulse repetition rate was usually 1 Hz. The divergence of the 
emitted laser beam is 3 mrad. The laser delivered up to 3.16 J at a wavelength of 10.591 µm, 
leading to an estimated power of 49.5 MW (Eq. 1.1), intensity (power density or irradiance) 
of 6.31 GW cm-2 (Eq. 1.2), fluence of 403 J cm-2 (Eq. 1.3), photon flux of 3.1 1029 
photon cm-2 s-1 (Eq. 1.4), electric field of 1.54 MV cm-1 (Eq. 1.5) and radiation pressure of 
421 kPa (Eq. 1.6) on the focal position. The focused-spot area (7.85×10-3 cm2) of the laser 
beam was measured with a pyroelectric array detector (Delta Development Mark IV). The 
temporal shape of the TEA-CO2 laser pulse, monitored with a photon drag detector (Rofin 
Sinar 7415), consisted in a prominent spike of a FWHM of around 64 ns carrying ∼90% of 
the laser energy, followed by a long lasting tail of lower energy and about 3 μs duration. The 
primary laser beam was angularly defined and attenuated by a diaphragm of 17.5 mm 
diameter before entering to the gas cell. A beam splitter was used to redirect 10% of the laser 
pulse energy on a pyroelectric detector (Lumonics 20D) or on a photon-drag detector (Rofin 
Sinar 7415) for energy and temporal shape monitoring and triggering, respectively, through a 
digital oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 540). The laser-pulse energy was varied with the aid of 
several calibrated CaF2 attenuating plates. The shot-to-shot fluctuation of the laser energy was 
approximately 5%. In time-resolved gas breakdown, the pulsed laser light was focused by a 
NaCl lens of 24 cm focal lens onto the surface of a 0.7 mm 0.7 mm stainless steel mesh in 
gas at atmospheric pressure. This allows us to fix the focal position for LIB at any fluence 
inducing strong gas breakdown plasma. No lines from metals were found in the spectra, 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
443
meaning that the metal mesh was practically never ablated. The high purity gases (~99.99 %) 
were placed in a medium-vacuum cell equipped with a NaCl window for the laser beam and 
two quartz windows for optical access. The gas is initially at ambient temperature (298 K). 
The cell was evacuated with the aid of a rotary pump, to a base pressure of 4 Pa that was 
measured by a mechanical gauge. Optical emission from the plume was imaged by a 
collecting optical system onto the entrance slit of different spectrometers. The light emitted 
from the laser-induced plasma was optically imaged 1:1, at right angles to the normal to the 
focal volume, by a quartz lens (focal length 4 cm, f-number = f/2.3) onto the entrance slit of 
the spectrometer. The distance between gas plasma axis and entrance slit was typically y=16 
cm. Optical emission accompanying the laser-induced gas plasma was viewed in a XZ parallel 
plane to the front face of the metal mesh for different distances z along the plasma Y axis. 
Two spectrometers were used: 1/8 m Oriel spectrometer (10 and 25 μm slits) with two 
different gratings (1200 and 2400 grooves mm-1) in the spectral region 2000-11000 Å at a 
resolution of ~1.3 Å in first-order (1200 grooves mm-1 grating), and an ISA Jobin Yvon Spex 
(Model HR320) 0.32 m equipped with a plane holographic grating (2400 grooves mm-1) in 
the spectral region 2000-7500 Å at a resolution of ~0.12 Å in first-order. Two detectors were 
attached to the exit focal plane of the spectrographs and used to detect the optical emissions 
from the laser-induced plasma: an Andor DU420-OE (open electrode) CCD camera 
(1024x256 matrix of 26x26 μm2 individual pixels) with thermoelectric cooling working at –
30 ºC; A 1024 1024 matrix of 13 13 μm2 individual pixels ICCD (Andor iStar DH-734), 
with thermoelectric cooling working at –20 ºC. The low noise level of the CCD allows long 
integration times and therefore the detection of very low emission intensities. The spectral 
window in high-resolution experiments was about 12 nm. The intensity response of the 
detection systems was calibrated with a standard (Osram No.6438, 6.6-A, 200-W) halogen 
lamp and Hg/Ar pencil lamp. Several (Cu/Ne, Fe/Ne and Cr/Ar) hollow cathode lamps (HCL) 
were used for the spectral wavelength calibration of the spectrometers.  
In time-resolved measurements, for synchronization, the CO2 laser was operated at the 
internal trigger mode and ICCD detector was operated in external and gate modes. The 
external trigger signal generated by the laser was fed through the scope and delay generator 
into the back of the ICCD detector head. The total insertion delay (45 ± 2 ns) is the total 
length of time taken for the external trigger pulse to travel through the digital delay generator 
and gater so that the ICCD will switch on. The time jitter between the laser and the fast ICCD 
detector gate was about ± 2 ns. The delay time td is the time interval between the arrival of the 
laser pulse on the metal mesh and the activation of the ICCD detector. The gate width time tw 
is the time interval during which the plasma emission is monitored by the ICCD. Both 
parameters were adjusted by the digital delay generator of the ICCD detector. The CO2 laser 
pulse picked up with the photon drag detector triggered a pulse generator (Stanford DG 535) 
through the scope and this pulse was used as external trigger in the ICCD camera. The laser 
pulse and the gate monitor output were displayed in a digital oscilloscope. In this way, by 
using the output of the photon drag detector, the oscilloscope, the delay pulse generator and 
the gate monitor output of the ICCD camera, the gate width time tw and the delay time td 
could be adjusted without insertion time. 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
444 
2 0 0 0
3 0 0 0
4 0 0 0
5 0 0 0
6 0 0 0
7 0 0 0
8 0 0 0
9 0 0 0
2 0 0 0
3 0 0 0
4 0 0 0
5 0 0 0
6 0 0 0
7 0 0 0
8 0 0 0
9 0 0 0
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-II
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
N-I
A ir W a v e le n g th  / Å  
 
Figure 3. An overview of the LIB emission spectrum of nitrogen at a pressure of 1.2×105 Pa, excited by 
the 9P(28) line at 1039.36 cm-1 of the TEA CO2 laser, compared with atomic lines of           N (red), N+ 
(blue) and N2+(green). 
 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
When a gas is irradiated by CO2 laser lines of sufficient power, a visible breakdown 
occurs. The onset of LIB in air is a sudden dramatic event involving the production of more 
than ∼ 1016 electron-ion pairs and the emission of radiation characteristic of the gas-plasma. 
Figure 2 shows a series of images of the LIB nitrogen (up to the left), oxygen (up to the 
right), air (below to the left) and helium (below to the right) plasma at different times of the 
experiment. Although the laser-induced plasma appears spatially uniform to the naked eye, it 
is indeed elongated along the direction of the incoming carbon dioxide laser beam. For a laser 
power density around 4.5 GW×cm-2, the laser-induced plasma may be ≈ 6 cm long and a few 
centimeters in diameter. A number of plasma lobes can be distinguished as well as diffuse, 
luminous cloud surrounding the central plasma core. The observations of the LIB geometry 
during the experiments indicate that the actual plasma region is not spherical, but elongated in 
the direction of the laser beam propagation. There is an expansion back toward the laser that 
essentially fills the converging cone of the CO2 laser radiation. The growth of the plasma in 
the direction opposite to the laser beam had lead to the model of a radiation-supported 
detonation wave (Section 2.6). A shock wave propagates from the focal region (a point at the 
centre of the cell) into the gas and absorption of energy from the laser beam drives the shock 
wave, causing it to spread. The structure of the LIB plasma is complex, and indeed there may 
be several distinct plasma regions produced along the laser beam axis. This multiple collinear 
plasmas in gases at pressures around the atmospheric level are observable by the naked eye. 
The CO2 laser pulse remains in the focal volume after the plasma formation for some 
significant fraction of its duration and the plasma formed can be heated to very high 
temperatures and pressures by IB absorption. Since plasmas absorb radiation much more 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
445
strongly than ordinary mater, plasmas can block transmission of incoming laser light to a 
significant degree; a phenomenon known as plasma shielding [51]. The high temperatures and 
pressures produced by plasma absorption can lead to thermal expansion of the plasma at high 
velocities, producing an audible acoustic signature, shock waves, and cavitation effects. The 
plasma also tends to expand back along the beam path toward the laser, a phenomenon known 
as moving breakdown. The shock wave heats up the surrounding gas which is instantaneously 
transformed in strongly ionized plasma.  
 
 
5.1. LIBS of Nitrogen 
 
In this section we present our results on the large-scale plasma produced in nitrogen gas 
at room temperature and pressures ranging from 4×103 to 1.2×105 Pa by high-power TEA- 
CO2 LIB plasma [18]. The time-integrated spectrum of the generated plasma is dominated by 
emission of strong N+ and N and very weak N2+ atomic lines and molecular features of 
N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+), N2
+(D2Πg-A2Πu), N2(C3Πu-B3Πg) and very weak N2(B3Πg-A3Σu
+). Figure 3 
displays an overview of the optical emission spectrum of LIDB in nitrogen (2000–9565 Å) 
compared with atomic lines of N, N+ and N2+ [45]. Strong atomic N+ lines dominate the 
spectrum but, atomic N lines (about 3 times weaker) and very weak N2+ lines (about 102-103 
times weaker) also are present. The assignments of the atomic N (mainly in the 5700–9565 Å 
spectral region), N+ (2000–6000 Å) and N2+(2000–5500 Å) individual lines are indicated by 
stick labels. In the upper part of Figure 3 we indicate in a column graph, the relative 
intensities of atomic observed N, N+ and N2+ lines tabled in NIST Atomic Spectral Database 
[45]. There is a good agreement between line intensities tabulated in NIST and the measured 
intensities observed here for N, N+ and N2+. The spectrum of Figure 3 has been obtained with 
six successive exposures on the CCD detector using a 1/8 m Oriel spectrometer (1200 
grooves/mm grating). In addition to identified atomic lines, molecular bands associated to N2
+ 
and N2 diatomic molecules are observed. The analysis of the molecular emission has already 
been used for a long time to get information on the structure and symmetry of excited states 
[46-48]. Studies of the electronic spectra of N2 and N2
+ in a number of discharge tubes, such 
as electrodeless microwave discharges and conventional ac and dc discharges, are well 
known. In many electrical discharges, the most prominent electronic transitions of N2 are the 
first positive B3Πg-A3Σ+
u system (between 480 and 2530 nm) and the second positive C3Πu-
B3Πg system (between 270 and 550 nm) [52]. For the electronic states implied in the 
electronic transitions of N2(C-B and B-A) and N2
+(B-X and D-A) the vibrational quanta 
ΔG(v+½) in the upper and lower electronic states have similar magnitudes and therefore the 
vibrational transitions with Δv=v’-v” constant (sequences) appear quite close. The known 
part of the C-B second positive system of molecular nitrogen consist of the Δv = 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 
-1, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6 and -7 triple-headed band sequence, all degraded to the violet. A sharp 
cutting-off of the rotational in v’=4 vibrational level of the C state is observed, which 
Herzberg [53] attributed to a predissociation. Pannetier et al [54] observed the 5-5 band of the 
C-B system with band-head at 3259.2 Å. Also Tanaka and Jursa [55] studied this band system 
with high intensity in the aurora afterglow observed for weak red-degraded triplet bands 
originate from v’=5 (C3Πu). Perturbations of various types in the C3Πu state of molecular 
nitrogen were also observed. Moreover, the most prominent electronic transitions of N2
+ are 
the first negative B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+ system (between 280 and 590 nm) and the A2Πu-X2Σg
+ Meinel 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
446 
system (550 and 1770 nm) [52]. The A-X Meinel bands for nitrogen cation were first 
identified in the aurora borealis [56]. The analysis of these band systems of N2 and N2
+ was 
accomplished in the early work of many authors and played an important part in the 
development of our understanding of the spectra of diatomic molecules. 
 
2100
2200
2300
2400
2500
2600
2700
2800
2900
2000 2100 2200 2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800
2000 2100 2200 2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800 2900 3000 3100 3200 3300 3400
4-1
3-0
Air Wavelength / Å 
2-2
N
+
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg;
Δv=2
14-11
11-6
Δv=1
Δv=2
4-3
4-2
3-1
2-0
3-2
2-1
1-0
4-4
3-3
1-1
0-0
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
5-5
6-6
4-4
2-2
1-1
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
++
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
++
N
++
N
++
N
+
2: D
2Πg-A
2Πu
0-0
 
4400 4500 4600 4700 4800 4900
3500 3600 3700 3800 3900
3400 3500 3600 3700 3800 3900 4000 4100 4200 4300 4400 4500 4600 4700 4800 4900
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
v'-v"
1-7
2-8
3-9
4-7
4-6
1-2
0-1
0-0
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å 
4-8
Δv= -3
Δv= -2
Δv= -1
Δv=1
3-4
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+(6)
N
+
N
+
N
+(3)
N
+(3)
N
+
N
+N
+
N
+
N
+
0-5
2-7
3-8
4-9
1-6
3-7
0-4
1-5
2-6
0-3
3-6
2-5
1-4
0-2
3-52-4
1-3
2-3
Δv=0
 
Figure 4. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
447
4800 4900 5000 5100 5200 5300 5400 5500 5600 5700 5800 5900 6000 6100 6200
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
N2:0-0: c
'
4
1Σ
+
u-a"
1Σ
+
g
N2: B
3Πg-A
3Σ
+
u
N
N
+
N
+
N
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
++
N
+
N
+
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å 
9-4
8-3
10-5
11-6
12-7
7-2
5-0 6-1
13-914-10
5-1
9-5
8-4
7-3
4-0
12-8
11-7
10-6
6-2
3-10
1-8
2-9
0-6
4-11
2-8
1-7
Δv= -4
Δv= -3
N
N
++
N
 
6200 6300 6400 6500 6600 6700 6800 6900 7000 7100 7200 7300 7400 7500 7600
8-5
7-4
5-2
8-6
11-8
9-6
10-7
8-5
7-4
6-4
4-2
6-3
5-3
3-0
5-2
4-1
7-5
N2: B
3Πg-A
3Σ
+
u
Air Wavelength / Å 
5-3
6-4
7-5
4-1
N2: B
3Πg-A
3Σ
+
u
3-0
N
N
N
N
+
N
+
N
 
Figure 4. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
448 
7800
7900
8000
8100
8200
8300
8400
8500
8600
7500 7600 7700 7800 7900 8000 8100 8200 8300 8400 8500 8600 8700 8800
v'-v"
2-1
7-6
6-5
3-1
5-2
4-3
2-0
3-2
Air Wavelength / Å 
N
+
N
N
+
N
N2: B3Πg-A3Σ+u
 
9000
9100
9200
9300
9400
9500
9600
8500 8600 8700 8800 8900 9000 9100 9200 9300 9400 9500 9600
N2: B3Πg-A3Σ+u
Air Wavelength / Å 
N
4-4
5-5
2-1
3-2
1-0
3-3
N
N
 
Figure 4. An overview of the low-resolution emission spectra observed in the 2000-9690 Å region. 
Upper panel: LIDB in nitrogen at a pressure of 1.2×105 Pa, excited by the 9P(28) line at 1039.36 cm-1 
of the CO2 laser; Lower panel: dc electric glow discharge spectrum of nitrogen at low pressure. 
In order to assign the molecular features of the LIDB in nitrogen, its spectrum is 
compared to that of the dc electric glow discharge at low pressure (~5 Torr). Typical spectra 
recorded with the oriel spectrometer (25 μm slit and grating of 1200 grooves/mm) after CO2 
laser excitation and in the cathode glow discharge of N2 are given in Figure 4. A global 
analysis of the latter allows one to distinguish the second positive C-B system (between 270 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
449
and 530 nm) and the first positive B-A system (between 570 and 970 nm) of N2 and very 
weak emissions corresponding to the first negative B-X system of N2
+ ions. Moreover, 
spectroscopic measurements performed on the dc electric glow in N2 spectrum showed that 
although numerous molecular bands appear, nitrogen atomic lines are not present. Besides, 
the second positive system of N2 and the first negative system of N2
+ spectra are frequently 
observed simultaneously in plasma containing nitrogen. In the glow discharge in N2 at 5977.4 
Å, the 0-0 band of the c4
1Πu-a”1Σg
+ Ledbetter Rydberg series [57] of nitrogen is observed 
overlapped with the 8-4 band sequence of the first positive B-A system. The LIB emission 
spectrum of N2 (Figure 4) shows six red-degraded heads in the region 225-275 nm which 
were readily assigned to the Δv=0 (v=0, 1, …6) band sequence of the D2Πg-A2Πu Janin-
d’Incan system [52] of N2
+. In the spectral range between 2700-5300 Å, the second positive 
system of N2(C-B) and the first negative system of N2
+(B-X) spectra are observed 
simultaneously. Table 1 lists the different molecular species that have been observed in the 
LIB spectrum of nitrogen.  
 
Table 1.- List of the most intense observed molecular bands in the LIB in nitrogen, 
corresponding electronic transition and wavelength in Å (air) for the major band heads. 
 
Molecule 
Name 
system 
Observed 
band 
system 
Major band heads (Å) (v’, v”) 
N2
+ 
Janin-
d’Incan 
D2Πg –
A2Πu
 
2343 (0, 0); 2398 (1, 1); 2456 (2, 2); 2516 (3,3); 2579 (4, 4); 
2645 (5, 5); 2714 (6, 6) 
N2
+
 
First 
negative 
B2Σu
+- 
X2Σg
+ 
2861.7 (11, 6); 3033.0 (11, 7); 3065.1 (15, 10); 3076.4 (4, 
1); 3078.2 (3, 0); 3291.6 (5, 3); 3293.4 (4, 2); 3298.7 (3, 1); 
3308.0 (2, 0); 3319.9 (8, 6); 3349.6 (18, 13); 3381.5 (10, 8); 
3419.6 (14, 11); 3447.3 (23, 16); 3460.8 (17, 13); 3493.4 
(12, 10); 3532.3 (5, 3); 3538.3 (4, 3); 3548.9 (3, 2); 3563.9 
(2, 1); 3582.1 (1, 0); 3588.6 (16, 13); 3612.4 (10, 9); 3806.8 
(5, 5); 3818.1 (4, 4); 3835.4 (3, 3); 3857.9 (2, 2); 3884.3 (1, 
1); 3914.4 (0, 0); 4110.9 (6, 7); 4121.3 (5,6); 4140.5 (4, 5); 
4199.1 (2, 3); 4236.5 (1, 2); 4278.1 (0, 1); 4459.3 (7, 9); 
4466.6 (6, 8); 4490.3 (5, 7);  4515.9 (4, 6); 4554.1 (3, 5); 
4599.7 (2, 4); 4651.8 (1, 3); 4709.2 (0, 2); 4864.4 (7, 10); 
4881.7 (6, 9); 4913.2 (5, 8); 4957.9 (4, 7); 5012.7 (3, 6); 
5076.6 (2, 5); 5148.8 (1, 4); 5228.3 (0,3); 5485.5 (4, 8); 
5564.1 (3, 7); 5653.1 (2, 6); 5754.4 (1, 5); 5864.7 (0, 4) 
N2 
Second 
positive 
C3Πu-B3Πg
2953.2 (4, 2); 2962.0 (3, 1); 2976.8 (2, 0); 3116.7 (3, 2); 
3136.0 (2, 1); 3159.3 (1, 0); 3268.1 (4, 4); 3285.3 (3, 3); 
3311.9 (2, 2); 3338.9 (1, 1); 3371.3 (0, 0); 3500.5 (2, 3); 
3536.7 (1, 2); 3576.9 (0, 1);  3641.7 (4, 6); 3671.9 (3, 5); 
3710.5 (2, 4); 3755.4 (1, 3); 3804.9 (0, 2); 3857.9 (4, 7); 
3894.6 (3, 6); 3943.0 (2, 5); 3998.4 (1, 4); 4059.4 (0, 3); 
4094.8 (4, 8); 4141.8 (3, 7); 4200.5 (2, 6); 4269.7 (1, 5); 
4343.6 (0, 4); 4355.0 (4, 9); 4416.7 (3, 8); 4490.2 (2, 7); 
4574.3 (1, 6); 4667.3 (0, 5); 4723.5 (3, 9); 4814.7 (2, 8); 
4916.8 (1, 7); 5031.5 (0, 6); 5066.0 (3, 10); 5179.3 (2, 9); 
5309.3 (1, 8) 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
450 
2925
2950
2975
3000
3025
3050
3075
3100
2925 2950 2975 3000 3025 3050 3075 3100 3125 3150 3175
3-2
2-1
Air Wavelength / Å
Δv=2
3-0
4-1
v'-v"
11-7
v'-v"
Δv=1
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
4-3
3-2
2-1
1-0
1-0
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
N
+:2s
22p3p 
1P1-2s
22p4p 
1P
0
1
(a)
4-1 3-0
4-2
4-2
3-1
3-1
2-0
2-0
 
3175
3200
3225
3250
3275
3300
3325
3350
3150 3175 3200 3225 3250 3275 3300
3150 3175 3200 3225 3250 3275 3300 3325 3350 3375 3400 3425
v'-v"
v'-v"
4-4
1-1
2-2
3-3
1-1
0-0
1-0
1-0
Δv=0
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å
2-2
0-0
16-12
4-2
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Δv=0
14-11
(b)
3-3
18-13
8-6
2-0
3-1
 
Figure 5. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
451
3425
3450
3475
3500
3525
3550
3425 3450 3475 3500 3525 3550 3575 3600 3625 3650 3675
4-6
3-5
2-3
4-5
0-1
3-4
1-2
2-3
0-1
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å
10-9
12-10
16-13
1-0
2-1
2-3
1-2
3-2
N
+:2s
22p3s 
1P
0
1-2s
22p3p 
1P0
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
(c)
 
3675
3700
3725
3750
3775
3800
3825
3825
3850
3875
3900
3925
3675 3700 3725 3750 3775 3800 3825 3850 3875 3900 3925
N
2+:2s2p3s 
4P
0
6-2s2p3p 
4P
0
4
N
2+:2s2p3s 
4P
0
4-2s2p3p 
4P
0
4
0-2
3-6
1-3
2-4
1-3
0-2
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
N
+:2s
22p3p 
1P1-2s
22p3p 
1P
0
1
Air Wavelength / Å
4-4
0-0
0-0
2-4
(d)
3-3
2-2
2-2
1-1
1-1
N
+:2s
22p3p 
3P2-2s
22p4s 
3P
0
2
4-7
 
Figure 5. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
452 
3925
3950
3975
4000
4025
4050
4075
4100
4125
4150
N
++
3-7
2-5
1-4
4-8
0-3
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å
(e)
4-5
5-6
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
++
6-7
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
 
4275
4300
4325
4350
4375
4150 4175 4200 4225 4250 4275 4300 4325 4350 4375
N
++
N
++
N
++
N
++
4-9
4-9
3-4
2-3
3-4
0-1
1-2
4-5
2-6
1-5
0-4
N
+
N
+
N
++
N
+
N
++
N
+
0-1
3-7
N2: C
3Πu-B
3Πg
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Air Wavelength / Å
2-6
(f)
0-4
 
Figure 5 (a)-(f). Comparison between high-voltage dc electric discharge (lower panels) and LIDB 
(upper panels) emission spectra for nitrogen in several spectral regions. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
453
In order to investigate the different electronic bands of N2 and N2
+ both LIDB and high-
voltage dc electric glow discharge spectra were recorded with a resolution of ~0.12 Å by a 
ISA Jobin Yvon Spex 0.32 m spectrometer. The high-resolution of LIB spectrum allowed us 
to resolve partially the vibrational bands of the second positive C-B system of N2 and the first 
negative B-X system of N2
+. Both spectra have been obtained with forty successive exposures 
on the CCD camera in the spectral region 2000-7500 Å. In the high-resolution spectra, no 
new processes were detected but allow us to identify unequivocally the band structure of the 
different transitions. As examples, Figure 5(a)-(f) shows a comparison between two spectra, 
the lower one obtained for the high-voltage dc electric discharge, and the upper one recorded 
in the LIB experiment. We indicate with italic the position of the band-head (v’-v”) of first 
negative system of N2
+(B-X) while in regular typeface the bands of the second positive 
system of N2(C-B). The upper panel of Figure 5(a) shows the LIB emission spectrum of 
nitrogen in the spectral region 2925-3175 Å of nitrogen. Assignment of the emission band 
heads is shown in table 1 and indicated also on the spectra. The two sets of three blue 
degraded band heads (2925-2980 Å) and (3105-3165 Å) are readily assigned to the Δv=2 and 
Δv=1 sequences of the second positive system of N2(C-B), respectively. The series of bands 
between 3020-3095 Å belong to any of the bands 11-7, 4-1 and 3-0 of the first negative 
system of N2
+(B-X). The lower panel, corresponding to the dc electric glow discharge of 
nitrogen at low pressure, shows practically the same bands with different intensity 
distributions and spectral widths. In the spectrum of the lower panel of Figure 5(b) (nitrogen 
electric glow discharge) we easily identified five bands of the Δv=0 sequence and the 1-0 
band of the second positive system of N2(C-B). The main intensity is observed for the 
dominant transition N2(C, v’=0)→(B, v”=0) which corresponds to the most intense nitrogen 
laser line at 3371 Å. However, this simple picture changes drastically in the LIB emission 
spectrum of nitrogen excited by the CO2 laser, being now the 0-0 band very weak. A large 
number of additional strong bands mainly in the region 3260-3410 Å are detected in the 
LIDB spectrum and can be attributed to emissions from the first negative system of N2
+ 
(especially for Δv=2). The B-X system of N2
+ has been observed over a wide range of 
vibrational levels. The highest values so far observed are v’=29 for the excited B state and 
v”=23 for the X state. The main bands of this system lie in the -2≤Δv≤2 with v’<5 sequences 
and all of these bands are blue degraded. However under certain circumstances many more 
bands, some red degraded, are observed, most being tail bands of these sequences. The 
observed bands with v’≤7 and also those with 8≤v’≤11 and Δv<-1 are shaded to the violet. 
All the observed bands with v’≥12 and those with v’=10 and 11, Δv≥0 are shaded to the red 
although some bands appear headless. These bands are so-called tail bands taking place a 
reversal in the successions of the bands in the sequence. Moreover, in the bands of the first 
negative system of N2
+ have been observed numerous rotational line displacements and 
intensities anomalies arising from perturbations in the B state. The perturbing state is A2Πu. In 
the Deslandres table listing the observed band heads, there is a pronounced gap in on arm of 
the Condon locus, and a less marked one in the other [52]. Franck-Condon factors indicate 
that the missing bands should be as intense as many of the observed. The few bands observed 
in the region of the gap are 8-6 and 9-8, which are headless and the 10-9 and 10-8 which have 
no definite heads. The missing bands coincide with the strong bands of either first negative 
system of N2
+(B-X) or the second positive system of N2(C-B), and are difficult to detect. In 
the spectrum of the lower panel of Figure 5(c) corresponding to the nitrogen electric glow 
discharge we easily identified several bands of the Δv=-1 sequence and two weak 4-6 and 3-5 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
454 
bands of the second positive system of N2(C-B). In this spectral region (3425-3675 Å) the 
most intense bands are due to the transitions N2(C, v’=0)→(B, v”=1) and N2(C, v’=1)→(B, 
v”=2), also present in the LIB emission spectrum of nitrogen in the upper panel of Figure 
5(c). As in the previous cases, the LIB emission spectrum excited by the CO2 laser changes 
drastically regarding the emission spectrum of nitrogen electric glow discharge. In it a large 
number of additional strong bands corresponding mainly to the Δv=+1 sequence B-X band 
system of N2
+ are detected which are partially overlapped by the weak bands of the C-B 
system of N2. For low v’ the 1-0, 2-1, 3-2 … bands of the B-X system of N2
+ are degraded to 
shorter wavelengths and for high v’ values the bands are degraded to longer wavelengths (tail 
bands). In the nitrogen electric glow discharge spectrum [lower panel of Figure 6(d)] we 
identified 3-6, 4-7, 0-2, 1-3 and 2-4 bands of the second positive system of N2(C-B) and 0-0, 
1-1 and 2-2 bands of the first negative system of N2
+. In this spectral region (3675-3935 Å) 
the most intense band is the 0-2 band of N2(C-B). The LIB emission spectrum in this region 
hardly shows bands of the second positive system of N2(C-B). However, this emission 
spectrum exhibits a large number of bands corresponding mainly to the Δv=0 sequence B-X 
band system of N2
+. In the spectra of the lower panel of figs. 5(d)-(f) (nitrogen electric glow 
discharge) we identified several bands of the second positive system of N2(C-B), indicated on 
the spectra, and some very weak bands of the first negative system of N2
+. As in the previous 
cases, the spectra change drastically in the LIDB emission of nitrogen excited by the CO2 
laser. A large number of N+ and N2+ atomic lines and additional strong bands of the first 
negative system of N2
+ are now present. 
 
0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
SECOND NEGATIVE
C
2Σ
+
u
JANIN-D'INCAN
FIRST NEGATIVE
MEINEL
SECOND POSITIVE
FIRST POSITIVE
D
2Πg N(
4S
0)+N
+(
3P)
B
2Σ
+
u
A
2Πu
X
2Σ
+
g
14N
+
2
N(
4S
0)+N(
2D
0)
A
3Σ
+
u
C
3Πu
B
3Πg
X
1Σ
+
g
14N2
Energy / cm-1
Internuclear distance / Å  
N(
4S
0)+N(
4S
0)
VEGARD-KAPLAN
 
Figure 6. RKR potential energy curves for some bound electronic states of N2 and N2
+. 
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
455
To understand the different processes involved in the analyzed emission, Rydberg-Klein-
Rees (RKR) potential energy curves for some bound electronic states of N2 and N2
+ have 
been calculated. The potential energy curves for the X1Σg
+, A3Σu
+, B3Πg, C3Πu states of N2 
and X2Σg
+, A2Πu, B2Σu
+, C2Σu
+ and D2Πg states of N2
+ were obtained from the experimental 
information reported by Huber and Herzberg [58] and Laher and Gilmore [59]. Figure 6 
shows the calculated RKR potentials and associated transitions for electronic states of N2 and 
N2
+ which can be relevant to interpret the results of the present work. Many perturbations are 
known in molecular states of nitrogen although a depth explanation of these features in terms 
of mixing of electronic states is not yet available. A useful graphical summary of many 
potential energy curves has been reported by Gilmore [60]. Perturbations are often 
accompanied by complex intensity irregularities as happens in the first negative system of 
N2
+. Whereas the vibrational and rotational constants run quite normal for the X2Σg
+ state of 
N2
+, this is not at all the case for the B2Σu
+ electronic state. Both the Bv and G(v) curves 
versus the vibrational quantum number v have unusual shapes. This can be interpreted as 
caused by a strong mutual vibrational perturbation between the B2Σu
+ and C2Σu
+ states of the 
same species of N2
+ (see Figure 6). As this perturbation is homogeneous (i.e., ΔΛ=0) the 
shifts in both levels will be nearly independent of J producing that the B2Σu
+ potential curve 
to flatten out in the middle of its energy range. The minimum of the C2Σu
+ potential energy 
curve should be moved to smaller internuclear distances. There are also observed numerous 
rotational perturbations in the B-X system of N2
+, caused by an interaction between the A2Πu 
and the B2Σu
+ states. 
The excitation temperature Texc was calculated from the relative intensities of some N+ 
ionic lines (3400–4800 Å spectral region) according to the Boltzmann equation (3.16). The 
estimated excitation temperature was Texc= 21000±1300 K. However, if the excitation 
temperature is determined using only the relative intensities of N atomic lines (7300–8800 Å 
spectral region) a value of Texc=7900±1300 K is obtained. This behaviour is observed by other 
authors [61] and may be interpreted to result from the different emissivity distributions of 
neutral atoms and ion lines. The emissivity of the ion lines is produced, on the average, near 
the inner region with higher temperature. On the contrary, the emissivity of the neutral atom 
lines comes, on the average, from the low temperature region close to the plasma front, where 
the neutral atom density is higher. The intensity measurements correspond to the integration 
of the local emissivity values along the line-of-sight, integrated in turn in the perpendicular 
directions. As a consequence, the neutral atom Boltzmann plot provides a temperature value 
which is a certain average of the low-temperature values in the plasma (7900 K), whereas the 
temperature obtained from the ion Boltzmann plot (21000 K) averages the values existing in 
the high-temperature region. On the other hand, we have carried out simulations of the Δv=+1 
sequence of B-X band of N2
+ for different vibrational temperatures finding that a value 
around 20000 K reasonably reproduces the experimental spectrum. Also, if we consider a 
temperature of 7900 K the ionization degree obtained by means of the Saha equation is of 
0.00064. Such a low ionization degree does not justify the observed emission spectra of N+ 
and N2
+. Keeping in mind these results, the temperature obtained from relative intensity of N+ 
atomic lines (21000±1300 K) was chosen as the first approximation for the excitation 
temperature.  
 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
456 
Table 2. Laser parameters for the TEA CO2 LIB experiments of oxygen. 
 
Laser 
λ(μm) 
Energy 
EW (mJ) 
Power 
PW (MW) 
Intensity 
IW 
(GW cm-2) 
Fluence 
ΦW 
(J cm-2) 
Photon Flux, Fph 
(ph. cm-2 s-1) 
Electric Field FE 
(MV cm-1) 
9.621 
2685 
42.1 
5.36 
342 
2.60×1029
1.50 
9.621 
2256 
35.4 
4.50 
287 
2.18×1029 
1.37 
9.621 
1732 
27.1 
3.46 
220 
1.67×1029 
1.20 
9.621 
1209 
19.0 
2.41 
154 
1.17×1029 
1.01 
9.621 
503 
7.88 
1.00 
64.0 
4.86×1028 
0.65 
10.591 
3161 
49.5 
6.31 
402 
3.36×1029
1.63 
10.591 
2145 
33.6 
4.28 
273 
2.28×1029 
1.34 
10.591 
1481 
23.2 
2.96 
189 
1.58×1029 
1.11 
10.591 
968 
15.2 
1.93 
123 
1.03×1029 
0.90 
10.591 
624 
9.78 
1.25 
79.5 
6.64×1028 
0.72 
10.591 
436 
6.83 
0.87 
55.5 
4.64×1028 
0.60 
 
 
5.2. LIBS of Oxygen 
 
In this section we present our recent results on LIBS in oxygen gas and pressures ranging 
from 4.6 to 75 kPa was studied using a high-power transverse excitation atmospheric CO2 
laser (λ=9.621 and 10.591 μm; τFWHM=64 ns; power densities ranging from 0.87 to 6.31 
GW×cm-2) [20]. For the present experiments the measured focused-spot area was 7.85×10-3 
cm2. This value is higher than the calculated area (2.2×10-4 cm2) obtained from the beam 
waist (Eq. 1.7). This fact is due to the non-Gaussian profile of the CO2 laser beam. Moreover 
the CO2 laser beam passes through a circular aperture of diameter 17.5 mm. For this 
diaphragm the calculated divergence angle for the laser beams at 9.621 and 10.591 µm are 1.3 
and 1.5 mrad, respectively. Thus, considering the total beam divergence (∼4.4 mrad), the 
calculated diameter of the focused TEA-CO2 laser (beam waist) is 1.06 mm, which is very 
similar to the measured value (∼1 mm). If the focal region of the laser beam is assumed to be 
cylindrical in shape, the spot size in terms of length l (Eq. 1.8) of the focused TEA-CO2 laser 
is 6.0 mm, which is similar to the measured value (∼7 mm). For the different pulse laser 
energies measured in LIB of oxygen, the calculated laser peak power (Eq. 1.1), intensity (Eq. 
1.2), fluence (Eq. 1.3), photon flux (Eq. 1.4), electric field (Eq. 1.5) and pressure radiation 
(Eq. 1.6) are given in Table 2. 
Figures 7(a-f) display an overview of the low-resolution LIB emission spectrum (2320-
9690 Å) in oxygen at a pressure of 53.2 kPa, excited by the 10P(20) line of the CO2 laser, and 
assignment of the atomic lines of O, O+, O2+, N and N+ [45]. Strong atomic O lines dominate 
the spectrum but, ionic O+ lines (about 8 times weaker) and weak O2+ lines (about 150 times 
weaker) also are present. Some atomic and ionic nitrogen lines were also present, as well as, 
the first negative band system 330-400 nm corresponding to the transition 
+
+
Σ
−
Σ
g
u
X
B
2
2
 in 
N2
+. In the acquisition of the spectrum of the Figure 7(d-f) a cut-off filter was used to 
suppress the second order intense UV oxygen atomic lines. This cut-off filter produces a 
decrease of the intensity with regard to the spectra of the Figure 7(a-c). In order to get more 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
457
insight into LIB of oxygen and to obtain an unambiguous assignment of the emission lines, 
we have scanned the corresponding wavelength regions with higher resolution (~0.10 Å in 
first-order), which was sufficient to distinguish clearly between nearly all observed lines. The 
spectra have been obtained with fifty successive exposures on the ICCD camera in the 
spectral region 1900-7500 Å. As example, Figure 8(a-f) shows several spectra recorded in the 
LIB experiment. These LIB emission spectra were recorded under the following experimental 
conditions: oxygen pressure of 48.8 kPa, excitation line 10P(20) at 10.591 μm and CO2 laser 
power density 4.28 GW×cm-2. Figs. 8(a-f) display some details of the large features found in 
Figs. 7(a-f). No new features were observed in these high-resolution spectra. In these Figures, 
multiplet transitions between different J levels for O+ and O2+ are observed. In some cases 
these multiplet structures are not completely resolved due to Stark broadening of ionic lines. 
The spectral features clearly show the complexity of the relaxation process and bring out the 
possibility of cascading processes.  
 
2400 2500 2600 2700 2800 2900 3000 3100 3200 3300 3400
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
O
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
+
O
+O
+
O
+
O
+
Relative Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
(a)
 
3600
3800
4000
4200
4400
4600
4800
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
(b)
O
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
Relative Intensity / a.u.
 
Figure 7. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
458 
50005100520053005400550056005700580059006000610062006300
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
100000
(c)
N
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
Relative Intensity / a.u.
 
Figure 1 
6400
6600
6800
7000
7200
7400
7600
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
(d)
N
O
+
O
+ O
+
O
+
O
+
O
O
O
O
O
Air Wavelength / Å 
Relative Intensity / a.u.
 
7600770078007900800081008200830084008500860087008800
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
7900 8000 8100 8200 8300 8400 8500 8600 8700 8800
(e)
N
N
N
O
O
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
Relative Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 7. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
459
8800 8900 9000 9100 9200 9300 9400 9500 9600
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
(f)
O
N
O
O
O
O
O
Air Wavelength / Å 
Relative Intensity / a.u.
 
Figure 7(a-f). Low-resolution LIB emission spectrum observed in the 2320-9690 Å region in oxygen at 
a pressure of 53.2 kPa, excited by the 10P(20) line of the TEA-CO2 laser at 10.591 μm and a power 
density of 0.87 GW×cm-2, and assignment of the atomic lines of O, O+, O2+, N and N+.  
2300
2320
2340
2360
2380
2400
2420
(a)
C
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
N
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
  
3230 3240 3250 3260 3270 3280 3290 3300 3310 3320 3330 3340
(b)
O
2+
Air Wavelength / Å
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
N
+
2 : B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g (Δv=2)
 
Figure 8. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
460 
3370 3380 3390 3400 3410 3420 3430 3440 3450 3460 3470 3480
(c)
N
+O
2+
O
3+ ?
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
  
3730374037503760377037803790380038103820383038403850
(d)
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
 
4080 4090 4100 4110 4120 4130 4140 4150 4160 4170 4180 4190
(e)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
 
Figure 8. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
461
4300 4310 4320 4330 4340 4350 4360 4370 4380 4390 4400 4410 4420
(f)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+ O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
 
Figure 8 (a-f). High-resolution LIB emission spectrum observed in several spectral regions in oxygen at 
a pressure of 48.8 kPa, excited by the CO2 laser at 10P(20) line (10.591 μm) with a power density of  
4.28 GW×cm-2, and assignment of some atomic lines of O+, O2+, and N+.  
The excitation temperature was calculated from the relative intensities of several O+ 
(3270–3310 Å spectral region) and O2+ (2900–3350 Å spectral region) atomic lines and the 
slope of the Boltzmann plot (Eq. 3.16). The values of the λki, gk, Aki and Ek for O+ and O2+ 
selected atomic lines were obtained from the NIST Atomic Spectral Database [45]. The 
excitation temperatures were determined under the following experimental conditions: 
oxygen pressure of 48.8 kPa, excitation line 10P(20) at 10.591 μm and CO2 laser power 
density 4.28 GW×cm-2. The obtained excitation temperatures, in the case of O+ and O2+, were 
23000 ± 3000 K and 31500 ± 1600 K, respectively (Figure 9). This behavior can be due to the 
different quenching rate coefficients between each species. Also this fact may be interpreted 
to result from the different emissivity distributions of single ionized and double ionized 
oxygen lines.  
When LIB is produced in oxygen under high intensity laser radiation, some molecules 
can obtain an energy that exceeds the binding energy. Also some of their electrons become so 
energetic that the atoms and molecules ionize. Taking into account our experimental spectral 
observations, at these high temperatures oxygen becomes a mixture mainly of primary O2, O, 
O+, O2+ and electrons. The transition between a gas and plasma is essentially a chemical 
equilibrium which shifts from the gas to plasma side with increasing temperature. Let us 
consider the first two different ionization equilibria of oxygen: 
 
 
O (2s22p4 
2
3P ) ↔ O+(2s24p3
0
2
/
3
4S
)+e+IP(O - I), 
 
 
O+(2s22p3
0
2
/
3
4S
) ↔ O2+(2s22p2 
0
3P )+e+IP(O - II), 
 
where the first two ionization potentials for oxygen are 
618
.
13
)I
O
(
=
−
PI
eV, and 
121
.
35
)
II
O
(
=
−
P
I
eV [62]. Taking into account the consideration of section 3.6, we can 
obtain the ionization degree. Figure 10 shows the ionization degree Ni/(N0+Ni) of O and O+, 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
462 
plotted as a function of the gas temperature T at a constant total pressure P=(N0+ne+Ni)kBT of 
53.2 kPa. The graph shows that oxygen is already fully ionized at thermal energies well 
below the first ionization-energy of 13.618 eV (equivalent to 158000 K). If we consider a 
temperature of 23000 K, the ionization degrees of O and O+ obtained by means of the Saha 
equation are 0.994 and 0.022, respectively. For T=31500 K, the ionization degrees of O and 
O+ obtained by means of the Saha equation are 0.999 and 0.34, respectively. These so high 
values of the ionization degrees justify the observed emission spectra.  
 
345000 350000 355000 360000 365000 370000 375000
-6.5
-6.0
-5.5
-5.0
-4.5
3270.855
3273.437
3277.566
3294.992
3301.407
3305.005
3306.449
Texc=23000 ± 3000 K
O+
Ek/kB (K-1) 
ln(Iki λki/gk Aki) (a. u.)
430000
440000
450000
460000
470000
-7.5
-7.0
-6.5
-6.0
2983.780
3047.130
3059.300
3260.980
3265.460
3267.310
3312.300
3340.740
Texc=31500 ± 1600 K
O
2+
ln(Iki λki/gk Aki) (a. u.)
Ek/kB (K-1) 
 
Figure 9. Linear Boltzmann plots for several O+ and O2+ transition lines used to calculate plasma 
temperature, Texc. Plots also show linear fit to the data. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
463
5000
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000 45000
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
O-II
Ionization degree
T / K
 O (2s
22p
4  3P2)   ↔ O
+(2s
22p
3 
4S
0
3/2) + e 
 O
+(2s
22p
3 
4S
0
3/2) ↔ O
2+(2s
22p
2 
3P0)  + e
O-I
 
Figure 10. Temperature dependence of the ionization degree Ni/(N0+Ni) of atomic oxygen O and 
oxygen singly ionized O+ at a constant pressure of 53.2 kPa. 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
λ = 3809 Å 
λ = 2738 Å 
λ = 3386 Å 
λ = 4075 Å
Δλ
D
1/2 / Å
T / K
λ = 4418 Å 
O+
 
Figure 11. Doppler line widhs for some lines of O+. 
The electron number density was obtained by considering the discussion reported in 
section 3.4. The Doppler line widths for some lines of O+ for different temperatures are 
shown in Figure 11. In our experiments, for O+ lines, the Doppler line widths are 0.07-0.12 Å 
at 23000 K. The choice of plasma emission for ne measurements is made to ensure that the O+ 
spectral lines are sensitive enough to Stark effect and do not suffer from interference by other 
species. The estimation of electron density ne
 has been carried out by measuring the 
broadening of the spectral profiles of isolated lines of O+ (2738, 3386, 3809, 4075, and 4418 
Å) from the high-resolution spectra. The electron impact parameters for the different O+ lines 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
464 
were approximated to a first-order exponential decay. The electron number densities of the 
laser-induced plasma were determined from the high-resolution emission spectra in oxygen at 
a pressure of 48.8 kPa, excited by the CO2 laser at 10.591 μm with a power density of 4.28 
GW×cm-2. A Lorentz function was used to fit the spectra. In order to extract the Stark 
broadening from the total experimentally measured line broadening, we have to previously 
deconvolute the different effects that contribute to the broadening of the spectral line: The 
instrumental, Doppler and Stark broadenings. Electron densities in the range (3.5-16.5)×1016 
cm-3, with an estimated uncertainty of 10%, were determined from the Stark broadening [Eq. 
(3.12)] data of several singly ionized oxygen lines.  
At the evaluated temperature of 23000 ± 3000 K, Eq. (3.4) yields ne≈(0.54-2.3)×1016 cm–
3. These electron densities are lower to deduced values from the Stark broadening (3.5-
16.5)×1016 cm-3, approximately one order of magnitude. Based on these calculations, the 
validity of the LTE assumption is supported.  
The interactions between the incoming laser radiation and the gas sample depend upon 
numerous variables related to the laser and the gas. These variables include laser wavelength, 
energy, spatial and temporal profile of the laser beam, and the thermal properties of the 
sample. The incident beam is partially reflected and partially absorbed by the bulk to a degree 
that depends on the nature of the gas and the temperature it reaches under laser irradiation. 
LIBS spectra of oxygen obtained by laser irradiation at the different wavelengths are 
compared in Figure 12. These high-resolution LIB emission spectra in oxygen were obtained 
to a pressure of 48.8 kPa, excited by two TEA-CO2 laser wavelengths at 10.591 μm (IW=6.31 
GW×cm-2) and 9.621 μm (IW=5.36 GW×cm-2). The spectral range was chosen in order to 
detect both single and double ionized oxygen species. Also this spectral region has been 
selected to show differences in signal intensity and background emission in detail. The first 
remark that we should make is that the background continuum emission after the same 
optimization was performed on the data acquisition window is much stronger for spectrum 
produced by the 10.591 μm laser line. This is due to the higher laser power density (IW=6.31 
GW×cm-2) and the higher absorption in the plasma caused by the IB, whose cross-section is 
proportional to λ3[1-exp(-hc/λkBT)]-1 or approximately λ2 (T is the electron temperature during 
the electron avalanche or cascade growth of ionization and λ is the laser excitation 
wavelength). The spectral lines of O+ and O2+(2983.78, 3017.63, 3023.45, 3043.02, 3047.13, 
3059.30 Å) were clearly observed. It is clear that the ionic spectral lines for both O+ and O2+ 
were enhanced by a factor of 4 when the LIBS is induced by the TEA-CO2 laser at 10.591 
μm. Besides, the irradiation at this wavelength favors the formation of the doubly ionized 
species (∼ 30%), as it is obtained from the ratio of the intensities of the O2+ and O+ lines. 
Moreover, plasma electron densities were determined from Stark broadening of the O2+ 
double ionized line at 2983.78 Å. The measured electron densities for the LIB emission 
spectra in oxygen were (3.5±0.2)×1016 cm-3 and (3.2±0.2)×1016 cm-3 for excitation at 10.591 
μm and 9.621 μm, respectively. Values of the electron impact half-width W for O2+ were 
taken from the reported values given by Sreckovic et al [63]. It is noted that the emission 
intensity for O+ and O2+ shows different picture than the electron density possibly due to the 
effect of the laser wavelength.  
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
465
2980 2990 3000 3010 3020 3030 3040 3050 3060 3070 3080 3090 3100
O
2+
O
2+
λLaser=  10.591 μm
EW   =  3161 mJ
λLaser=  9.621 μm
EW = 2685 mJ
Air Wavelength / Å
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
 
Figure 12. High-resolution LIB emission spectra in oxygen at a pressure of 48.8 kPa, excited by two 
TEA-CO2 laser wavelengths at 10.591 μm (EW=3161 mJ) and 9.621 μm (EW=2685 mJ). 
To see the effect laser irradiance the measurements were also carried out at different laser 
fluences. Optical emission spectra of the oxygen plasma plume at a pressure of 48.8 kPa as a 
function of the laser intensity are shown in Figs. 13(a) and 13(b). These spectra were recorded 
after the incidence of only one pulse of the TEA-CO2 laser. The data were measured at a 
delay of 20 ms. An increase of atomic/ionic emission intensity and of the doubly ionized O2+ 
formation respect to O+ with increasing the laser irradiance was observed. Also the 
background increases with the laser power. At higher laser power densities (6.31-4.28 GW 
cm-2), the spectral lines are more broadened than at lower power densities as a result of the 
high pressure associated with the plasma. It is assumed that at higher laser fluence the LIB 
plasma is more energetic and more ionized. 
The emission characteristics of the laser-induced plasma are influenced by the 
composition of the gas atmosphere. The pressure of the gas is one of the controlling 
parameters of the plasma characteristics, as well as the factors related to the laser energy 
absorption. Also the presence of air gas (vacuum conditions) during the LIB process has 
consequences on the expansion dynamics. An interesting observation was the effect of the 
oxygen pressure. Nanosecond TEA CO2-laser produced plasma emission has been 
characterized as a function of oxygen pressure. Experiments were performed in the pressure 
interval from 8 to 50 kPa and at pulse energy of 3161 mJ. Figure 14 shows LIB emission 
spectra at various oxygen pressures, excited by the 10.591 μm line at a power density of 6.31 
GW cm-2. As can be seen in Figure 14, the intensities of different spectral lines of O+ and O2+ 
increase with decreasing pressure, reach a maximum at about 12.5 kPa, and then decrease for 
lower pressures. Characteristic emission lines from O+ and O2+ elements exhibited significant 
enhancement in signal intensity at a few kPa oxygen pressure as compared to high pressures 
below atmospheric pressure. However, the ratio of the intensities among the O2+ and O+ lines 
remains the same at all pressures. The measurements indicate enhancement due to a longer 
lifetime of the plasma expanding to a larger size at lower oxygen pressures. Further reduction 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
466 
in oxygen pressure down to ~ 12.5 kPa resulted in a decrease in signal intensity, as a result of 
a reduction of collisional excitation of the emission lines which occurs when the plasma 
plume expands into the oxygen atmosphere.  
 
3960397039803990400040104020403040404050406040704080
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
Air Wavelength / Å
 IW= 4.28 GW cm
-2
 IW= 1.93 GW cm
-2 
 IW= 1.25 GW cm
-2
4200 4210 4220 4230 4240 4250 4260 4270 4280 4290 4300 4310
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
  IW= 6.31 GW cm
-2
  IW= 0.87 GW cm
-2
 
Figure 13 (a-b). High-resolution LIB in oxygen (at a pressure of 48.8 kPa) emission spectra observed in 
the (a) 3957-4085 Å and (b) 4195-4310 Å regions, excited by two TEA-CO2 laser wavelengths at 
10.591 μm as a function of the laser power density. 
 
 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
467
2980 2990 3000 3010 3020 3030 3040 3050 3060 3070 3080 3090 3100 3110 3120
POxygen=48.8 kPa
POxygen=19.7 kPa
POxygen=8.0 kPa
POxygen=12.5 kPa
POxygen=31.0 kPa
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
Air Wavelength / Å
O
2+
O
+
 
Figure 14. High-resolution LIB emission spectra at various oxygen pressures, excited by the TEA-CO2 
laser (10.591 μm) at a power density of 6.31 GW cm-2. 
 
5.3. LIBS of Air 
 
A spectroscopic study of ambient air plasma, initially at room temperature and pressures 
ranging from 32 to 101 kPa, produced by TEA-CO2 laser (λ=9.621 and 10.591 μm; τFWHM≈64 
ns; power densities ranging from 0.29 to 6.31 GW cm-2) has been carried out in an attempt to 
clarify the processes involved in laser-induced breakdown (LIB) air plasma. To understand 
the detailed aspects of laser-beam interaction with air and recombination processes following 
the breakdown, OES studies of the emission spectra from the plasma offer the most 
convenient method. The strong emission observed in the plasma region is mainly due to 
electronic relaxation of excited N, O and ionic fragments N+. The medium-weak emission is 
due to excited species O+, N2+, O2+, C, C+, C2+, H, Ar and molecular band systems of 
N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+), N2(C3Πu-B3Πg), N2
+(D2Πg-A2Πu) and OH(A2Σ+-X2Π). Figure 15(a-f) 
displays an overview of the low-resolution LIB emission spectrum in air at atmospheric 
pressure, excited by the 10P(20) line of the CO2 laser with an intensity of 2.2 GW×cm-2, and 
assignment of the atomic lines of N, O, C, C+, H, Ar, N+, O+, N2+, O2+, C2+ tabulated in NIST 
Atomic Spectral Database [45] and molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+), N2
+(D2Πg- A2Πu), 
N2(C3Πu-B3Πg) and OH(A2Σ+-X2Π). Strong atomic N+, N and O lines dominate the spectrum 
but, atomic lines of C, C+, H, Ar, O+, N2+, O2+, C2+ also are present. LIB spectrum of air was 
compared with the LIB spectra obtained in our laboratory for nitrogen [18] and oxygen [20]. 
The spectra have been obtained at higher resolution with fifty successive exposures on the 
ICCD camera in the spectral region 2000-7500 Å. As examples, Figure 16(a-l) shows several 
spectra recorded in the air LIB experiment. These LIB emission spectra were recorded under 
the following experimental conditions: air pressure of ∼101 kPa, excitation line 9P(28) at 
9.621 μm and laser irradiance of 5.36 GW×cm-2. Note that spectra of Figs. 15(a-f) and 16(a-l) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
468 
were excited by two different laser wavelengths. No new features were observed in these 
high-resolution spectra. In these Figures, multiplet transitions between different J levels for 
N+ and O+ are observed. In some cases these multiplet structures are not completely resolved 
due to Stark broadening of atomic/ionic lines. The spectral features clearly show the 
complexity of the relaxation process. In Figures 16(a-l), a rather complex structure is 
observed, in consequence of the overlapping between rovibrational lines of different 
molecular band systems and atomic/ionic lines. Figure 16(a) displays the overlapping 
between some bands of the N2
+(D2Πg-A2Πu) system and some lines of N+, O+, C2+ and O2+. In 
this spectrum the predominant emitting species is the triplet structure of N+ 2s22p(2P0)4d 
3F0
3,2,4 → 2s22p(2P0)4d 3D2,1,3 around 2317 Å overlapped with the 0-0 band of the N2
+(D-A) 
system. In the spectrum of Figure 16(b), the most intense emitting species is the line of C 
2s22p(2P0)3s 1P0
1→ 2s22p2 1S0 at 2478.56 Å, and several ionic lines of O+ 2s22p2(3P)4p 
2D0
5/2→2s22p2(1D)3s 2D5/2 at 2425.56 Å, O+ 2s22p2(1D)3p 2D0
3/2→2s22p2(3P)3s 2P1/2 at 
2433.53 Å, and the doublet O+ 2s22p2(1D)3p 2D0
3/2,5/2→2s22p2(3P)3s 2P3/2 at 2444.25 Å and 
2445.54 Å, respectively. Several medium intensity ionic lines of N+ also overlapped with 
different bands of N2
+(D-A) and many weak lines of O2+ and O+ are also present. In the 
spectrum of Figure 16(c), the most intense emitting species is the line of N+ 2s22p(2P0)4s 1P0
1 
→ 2s22p(2P0)3p 1P1 at 3006.83 Å. This Figure displays the overlapping between the N2(C-B) 
v’=2-v”=0 band, OH(A-X) Δv=0 sequence and many weak lines of O+ and O2+. In the 
spectrum of Figure 16(d), N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) Δv=2 sequence and many weak lines of O+ and 
O2+ are recorded. This spectrum shows the reversal of the bands from v’=11, which is due to 
the overlap between high vibrational quantum number bands with low quantum number 
bands. So, the first vibrational bands of N2
+(B-X) (2-0, 3-1, 4-2 … and 10-8) are shaded to 
the violet and after reversal (11-9, 12-10, 13-12 …) are shaded to the red. In the spectrum of 
Figure 16(e), the most intense emitting species is the line of N+ 2s22p(2P0)3p 1S0 → 
2s22p(2P0)3s 1P0
1 at 3437.15 Å. Many medium intensity ionic lines of O+ and O2+, weak 
molecular bands of N2(C-B) and N2
+(B-X) are also present. Surprisingly, the relative intensity 
of the 0-0 band head in the N2(C-B) system is very weak. In the spectrum of Figure 16(f), 
many medium intensity rovibrational molecular bands of N2(C-B; Δv=-1 sequence) and 
N2
+(B-X; mainly Δv=1 sequence) are observed. In the spectrum of Figure 16(g), the most 
intense emitting species are the lines of O+ 2s22p2(3P)3p 4S0
3/2→2s22p2(3P)3s 4P3/2 at 3727.32 
Å, O+ 2s22p2(3P)3p 
4S0
3/2→2s22p2(3P)3s 
4P5/2 at 3749.49 Å, N+ 2s22p(2P0)4s 
3P0
2 
→2s22p(2P0)3p 3P2 at 3838.37 Å and N2
+(B-X) Δv=0 sequence. Several weak intensity ionic 
lines of O+ and O2+ also overlapped with different bands of N2
+(B-X) are also present. As in 
the spectrum of Figure 16(d) a reversal of the bands for high vibrational levels is produced. 
So, the first vibrational bands of N2
+(B-X) (0-0, 1-1, 2-2, …) are shaded to the violet and after 
reversal are shaded to the red. In the spectrum of Figure 16(h), several strong intensity ionic 
lines of N+, O+ and N2+ also overlapped with different bands of N2
+(B-X) Δv=0 sequence. The 
relative intensity of the 0-0 band head at 3914.9 Å in the N2
+(B-X) system is quite weak and 
partially overlapped with one O+ line. Nevertheless, the 0-0 band is the most intense of their 
band sequence. In this spectrum, many weak intensity rovibrational molecular bands of 
N2
+(B-X) can be appreciated. The strong emission observed in Figures 16(i-l) is mainly due 
to the relaxation of excited ionic fragments N+ and O+. In Figure 16(j) various ionic lines 
overlap with molecular bands of N2
+(B-X) transitions and produce rather complex structure, 
but this high-resolution spectra allow for a precise attribution of almost all observed 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
469
transitions. The six lines of single ionized nitrogen between 4600-4650 Å correspond to the 
multiplet structure of N+ 2s22p(2P0)3p 3P0
J’ → 2s22p(2P0)3s 3P0
J” . As it can see, the LIB of air 
includes mainly contributions of both nitrogen and oxygen. It should be noted that the 
nitrogen and oxygen line intensities maintain the proportions of the air composition. 
On the other hand, excitation temperatures of 23400 ± 700 K and 26600 ± 1400 K were 
estimated by means of N+ and O+ ionic lines, respectively. Electron number densities of the 
order of (0.5-2.4)×1017 cm-3 and (0.6-7.5)×1017 cm-3 were deduced from the Stark broadening 
of several ionic N+ and O+ lines, respectively.  
 
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
3400
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
200021002200230024002500260027002800
5-5
4-4
v'-v"
0-0
1-1
1-0
3-3
2-2
O
2+
O
+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
C
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Intensity / a.u.
C
0-0
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
2-0
3-1
4-2
Δv=2
2-1
1-0
3-2
Δv=1
N2:C3Πu-B3Πg
Δv=2
N
+
N
2+ N
2+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
(a)
N
+
2:D
2Πg-A
2Πu
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
 
3600
3800
4000
4200
4400
4600
4800
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
(b)
Δv=-1
N2:C-B
Hβ
N
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
Δv=-1
N
+
2:B-X
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
2:B-X
Δv=0
Δv=+1
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
2:B-X
Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 15. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
470 
5000
5200
5400
5600
5800
6000
6200
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
(c)
v'-v"
2-9
N2:C3Πu-B3Πg
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
O
O
O
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
N
+
N
+
O
+
N
+
Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å
 
6400
6600
6800
7000
7200
7400
7600
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
(d)
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
Ar
H2O ?
O
+
O
+
N
+ O
O
N
N
N
O
O
O
Hα
Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 15. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
471
7800
8000
8200
8400
8600
8800
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
(e)
Ar
Ar
Ar
O
O
O
O
N
N
Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
8600
8800
9000
9200
9400
9600
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
(f)
Ar
Ar
N
N
N ?
O
O
O
O
Intensity / a.u.
Air Wavelength / Å 
N
 
Figure 15 (a-f) Low-resolution LIB emission spectrum observed in the 2000-9690 Å region in ambient 
air at atmospheric pressure, excited by the TEA-CO2 laser at 10.591 μm and a power density of 2.2  
GW×cm-2, and assignment of the atomic lines of N, O, C, C+, H, Ar, N+, O+, N2+, O2+, C2+ and 
molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) and N2(C3Πu-B3Πg).  
LIBS spectra obtained by laser irradiation at the different wavelengths are compared in 
Figure 17. These high-resolution LIB emission spectra in air were obtained at atmospheric 
pressure, excited by two TEA-CO2 laser wavelengths at 10.591 μm (IW=6.31 GW×cm-2) and 
9.621 μm (IW=5.36 GW×cm-2). The spectral range was chosen in order to detect the emission 
lines of different atomic, single and double ionized species (C, C+, N+, O+, O2+). Both spectra 
have been obtained after the incidence of only one laser pulse. The relative intensities for 
different species practically do not change with the laser wavelength. The atomic C line at 
2478.56 Å was enhanced when the LIBS is induced by the CO2 laser at 10.591 μm. This fact 
is probably due to a self-absorption process in such resonance line. Figure 18 shows high-

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
472 
resolution LIB emission spectra in air at atmospheric pressure, excited by the CO2 laser line at 
9.621 μm (IW=5.36 GW/cm2), recorded with cell and without cell. We see similar intensities 
for O+ and different bands of N2
+(B-X) Δv=0 sequence in both spectra. However, the intensity 
of N+ and N2+ lines was increased when the LIB is with cell. Also, there is a line in the 
spectra at ∼3860 Å, possible due to H2, which intensity increases without cell. This fact is 
probably caused by differences in relative humidity of air in both situations. 
 
4800
5000
5200
5400
5600
5800
6000
6200
N
+
N
+
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Air
N
+ N
+
N
+
N2:C3Πu-B3Πg
v'-v"
2-9
N
N
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Air Wavelength / Å 
O
+
O
O
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
Hβ
N
+
N
+
 
Figure 16. Low-resolution LIB emission spectra in air, nitrogen and oxygen, excited by the TEA-CO2 
laser at 10.591 μm and a power density of ∼1 GW×cm-2, and assignment of the atomic lines of N, O, H, 
N+, O+ and 2-9 molecular band of  N2(C3Πu-B3Πg).  
2275
2300
2325
2350
2375
2400
2425
(a)
5-2
1-1
C
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
N
+
v'-v"
0-0
1-0
O
+
O
+O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
N
+
2:D
2Πg-A
2Πu
O
+
N
+
 
Figure 16. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
473
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
(b)
Si ?
Air Wavelength / Å 
v'-v"
8-5
2-2
O
2+
C
+
C
+
C
N
+
N
+
O
2+
3-3
N
+
2:D
2Πg-A
2Πu
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
 
3000
3025
3050
3075
3100
(c)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
0-0
Δv=0
OH:A
2Σ
+-X
2Π
2-0
N
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
2+
N2:C
3Πu-B
3Πg
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
3275
3300
3325
3350
3260
3270
3280
3290
3300
3310
3320
11-9
10-8
9-7
8-6
7-5
4-2
3-1
2-0
Δv=+2
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
2+
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
O
2+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
(d)
6-4
5-3
 
Figure 16. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
474 
3375
3400
3425
3450
3475
(e)
9-8
10-9
11-10
12-11
13-12
15-14
14-13
0-0
N2:C
3Πu-B
3Πg
v'-v"
23-16
19-14
11-9
14-11
10-8
16-12
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
O
2+
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
3500
3525
3550
3575
3600
(f)
9-8
8-7
7-6
6-5
2-3
1-2
0-1
v'-v"
N2:C
3Πu-B
3Πg
16-13
15-12
12-10
4-3
3-2
2-1
5-4
1-0
18-14
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
3725
3750
3775
3800
3825
3850
3740 3750 3760 3770 3780 3790 3800 3810 3820
O
+
O
+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
8-8
7-7
6-6
5-5
4-4
3-3
2-2
N
+
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
(g)
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 16. (Continued) 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
475
3850
3875
3900
3925
3950
(h)
v'-v"
O
+
3-3
O
+
O
+
O
+
2-2
O
+
1-1
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
0-0
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
2+
Δv=0
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
3975
4000
4025
4050
4075
(i)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
2+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
4075
4100
4125
4150
4175
(j)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
v'-v"
Δv=-1
4-5
5-6
6-7
N
2+
N
+
3-4
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 16. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
476 
4525 4550 4575 4600 4625 4650 4675 4700 4725 4750
(k)
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+N
+
N
+ N
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
Air Wavelength / Å 
4980 4990 5000 5010 5020 5030 5040 5050 5060 5070 5080
(l)
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
 
Figure 16 (a-l) High-resolution LIB emission spectrum observed in several spectral regions in ambient 
air at atmospheric pressure, excited by the CO2 laser at 9.621 μm with a power density of 5.36 GW×cm-
2, and assignment of some atomic lines of N+, O+, N2+, O2+, and band heads of the molecular bands of 
N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+), N2(C3Πu-B3Πg), N2
+(D2Πg-A2Πu) and OH(A2Σ+-X2Π). 
To see the effect that the laser irradiance has on the air breakdown measurements were 
also carried out at different laser intensities. Low-resolution LIB emission spectra of the air 
plasma at atmospheric pressure, excited by the TEA-CO2 laser wavelength at 9.621 μm, as a 
function of the laser intensity is shown in Figure 19. These spectra were recorded after the 
incidence of only one pulse of the TEA-CO2 laser. An increase of atomic/ionic emission 
intensity with increasing the laser irradiance was observed. Also the background increases 
with the laser power. At higher laser power densities (6.31-4.00 GW cm-2), the spectral lines 
are more broadened than at lower power densities as a result of the high pressure associated 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
477
with the plasma. It is assumed that at higher laser fluence the LIB plasma is more energetic 
and more ionized. In order to see the effect of the laser intensity on molecular band emission, 
high-resolution LIB emission spectra of the air plasma at atmospheric pressure, (excited by 
the TEA-CO2 laser wavelength at 9.621 μm) as a function of the laser intensity is shown in 
Figure 20. The assignment of this spectrum can be found in Figure 4(f). An increase of 
molecular band intensity of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) and N2(C3Πu-B3Πg) with increasing the laser 
intensity was observed.  
Nanosecond TEA CO2-laser produced plasma emission has been characterized as a 
function of air pressure. Figure 21 shows LIB emission spectra in the pressure interval from 
32 to 101 kPa, excited by the TEA-CO2 laser (10.591 μm) at a power density of 6.31 GW cm-
2. As can be seen in Figure 21, the intensities of different spectral lines of C, N+, O+, O2+ and 
N2
+(D-A) molecular bands increase with increasing pressure, reach a maximum at about 79.6 
kPa, and then decrease with higher pressures. The measurements indicate enhancement due to 
a longer lifetime of the plasma expanding to a larger size at lower air pressures (p<79.6 kPa). 
Further increase in air pressure above to ~ 79.6 kPa resulted in a decrease in signal intensity, 
as a result of a reduction of collisional excitation of the emission lines which occurs when the 
plasma plume expands into the air atmosphere.  
The detection of the N2
+(B-X) bands is of particular interest since it provides an 
estimation of the effective vibrational and rotational temperatures. The emission intensities of 
the N2
+ Δv=-1 and Δv=0 band sequences were analyzed in order to estimate the molecular 
vibrational temperature Tvib (see section 3.5). Two Boltzmann plots (Equation 3.17) of the 
band intensities against the vibrational energy at the laser irradiance 5.36 GW cm-2 are given 
in Figure 22(a-b) along with the corresponding Franck-Condon factors. The estimated 
effective vibrational temperatures were Tvib=12100 ± 700 K and 12000 ± 900 K, respectively. 
On the other hand, the emission intensities of the 0-0 (B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) band of N2
+ were 
analyzed in order to estimate the effective rotational temperature Trot. In 2Σ-2Σ transitions both 
electronic states belong to Hund´s (b) coupling case (ΔN=±1) [46-48]. Each line of the R and 
P branches are doublet since they separate in two sublevels with J=N±½ each one subscripted 
with i=1, 2 (1 for J=N+½ and 2 for J=N-½) 
 
),
(
)1
(
~
)
(
"
'
0
N
F
N
F
N
R
i
i
i
−
+
+
=ν
 
(5.1) 
 
 
).
(
)1
(
~
)
(
"
'
0
N
F
N
F
N
P
i
i
i
−
−
+
=ν
 
(5.2) 
 
In Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) the Q-branch forms satellite branches, whose intensities are much 
lower than the main ones, very close to the corresponding R and P branches lines (called R-
form or P-form Q branches) with wavenumbers: 
 
 
),
(
)1
(
~
)
(
"
1
'
2
0
21
N
F
N
F
N
Q
i
R
−
+
+
=ν
 
(5.3) 
 
 
).
(
)1
(
~
)
(
"
2
'
2
0
12
N
F
N
F
N
Q
i
P
−
−
+
=ν
 
(5.4) 
 
The subscripts 21 and 12 indicate the transition which takes place from a term of the F2 
series to one of the F1 series or vice versa: 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
478 
2430 2440 2450 2460 2470 2480 2490 2500 2510 2520 2530
C
+
O
2+
N
+
2:D
2Πg-A
2Πu
C
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
C
8-5
2-2
v'-v"
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
2+
O
+
Air Wavelength / Å
λLaser=  9.621 μm
EW = 2685 mJ
λLaser=  10.591 μm
EW   =  3161 mJ
 
Figure 17. High-resolution LIB emission spectra in air at atmospheric pressure, excited by two TEA-
CO2 laser wavelengths at 10.591 μm (IW=6.31 GW/cm2) and 9.621 μm (IW=5.36 GW/cm2).  
3850
3875
3900
3925
3950
H2?
3-3
2-2
1-1
0-0
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
v'-v"
Air Wavelength / Å
N
+
N+
2 : B2Σ+
u-X2Σ+
u 
Δv=0 Sequence
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
2+
N
+
 Pair ≈ 101 kPa (with cell)
 Pair ≈ 101 kPa (without cell)
 
Figure 18. High-resolution LIB emission spectra in air at atmospheric pressure, excited by the TEA-
CO2 laser line at 9.621 μm (IW=5.36 GW/cm2) recorded with cell and without cell. 
 
2
...
)1
(
)
2
1
(
1
N
N
N
B
J
N
F
v
γ
+
+
+
=
−
=
, 
(5.5) 
 
 
2
1
...
)1
(
)
2
1
(
2
+
−
+
+
=
+
=
N
N
N
B
J
N
F
v
γ
.(5.6) 
 
In Eqs. (5.1)-(5.6) N is the total angular momentum excluding spin of nuclear rotation, 
0~ν  is the wavenumber of the pure vibrational transition, Bv is rotational spectroscopic 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
479
constant and γ is the spin-rotation coupling constant. Moreover, in the case of a molecule with 
two identical nuclei such as N2
+, relative line intensities are affected by the nuclear spin (I=1). 
The nuclear spin governs the intensities through the Pauli exclusion principle; all 
wavefunctions are antisymmetric with respect to the interchange of fermions (half-integer 
spin particle) and symmetric with respect to the interchange of bosons (integer spin particle). 
Then the ratio of the statistical weights of the symmetric and antisymmetric rotational levels 
is I+1/I for bosons or I/I+1 for fermions. In the case of N2
+ the B2Σu
+ electronic state has only 
odd J values and then the ratio of the statistical weights of the symmetric and antisymmetric 
rotational levels is 2/1.  
The assignment of rotational spectrum of 0-0 B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+ band of N2
+, recorded in 
experimental conditions indicated above, is shown in Figure 23(a). In Figure 23(b) we display 
the calculated fortrat diagram for P1, P2, R1, R2, RQ12 and PQ21 branches corresponding to this 
band. The alternation of the intensities of the rotational lines is observed.  
To estimate the effective rotational temperature, we consider the J value for the 
maximum of the 0-0 band (B-X) of N2
+ (Jmax) (Section 3.5) 
 
 
2
max
0
)
2
1
(
2
+
=
J
k
hc
B
T
B
rot
, 
(5.7) 
 
being B0 the rotational constant for v’=0 and Jmax the total angular momentum at the 
maximum. This effective rotational temperature is found to be Trot=1900 ± 100 K. As in any 
gas, temperature in LIB plasma is determined by the average energies of the plasma species 
(e-, N2, O2, Ar, H, N, O, C, OH, N2
+, N+, O+, N2+, O2+, C+, C2+ etc) and their relevant degrees 
of freedom (translational, rotational, vibrational, and those related to electronic excitation). 
Thus, LIB plasmas, as multi-component systems, are able to exhibit multiple temperatures. In 
LIB for plasma generation in the laboratory, energy from the laser electric field is first 
accumulated by the electrons and, subsequently, is transferred from the electrons to the heavy 
particles. Electrons receive energy from the electric field and, by collision with a heavy 
particle, lose only a small portion of that energy. That is why the electron temperature in 
plasma is initially higher than that of heavy particles. Subsequently, collisions of electrons 
with heavy particles (Joule heating) can equilibrate their temperatures, unless time or energy 
are not sufficient for the equilibration (such as in LIB and pulsed discharges). The 
temperature difference between electrons and heavy neutral particles due to Joule heating in 
the collisional weakly ionized plasma is conventionally proportional to the square of the ratio 
of the electric field E to the pressure p. Only in the case of small values of E/p do the 
temperatures of electrons and heavy particles approach each other. Numerous plasmas are 
characterized by multiple different temperatures related to different plasma particles and 
different degrees of freedom. Plasmas of this kind are usually called non-thermal plasmas. 
Although the relationship between different plasma temperatures in non-thermal plasmas can 
be quite sophisticated, it can be conventionally presented in LIB strongly ionized plasmas as 
Te (electron temperature) > Ti (ions or excitation temperature) > Tvib > Trot. In LIB non-
thermal plasma studied here, electron temperature is about 10 eV, ions temperature ∼2 eV, 
vibrational temperature ∼1 eV, rotational temperature ∼0.2 eV, whereas the gas temperature is 
close to rotational temperature.  

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
480 
4300
4400
4500
4600
4700
4800
4900
5000
N
+
N
Air Wavelength / Å
N
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
2+
Hβ
N
+
O
+
 IW= 1.09 GW cm-2
 IW= 1.51 GW cm-2
 IW= 2.58 GW cm-2
 IW= 4.00 GW cm-2
 IW= 5.36 GW cm-2
 
Figure 19. Low-resolution LIB emission spectra in air at atmospheric pressure observed in the 4300-
5080 Å region, excited by the TEA-CO2 laser wavelength at 9.621 μm, as a function of the laser power 
density. 
3500
3525
3550
3575
3600
Air Wavelength / Å 
IW= 1.51 GW cm-2
IW= 2.58 GW cm-2
IW= 4.50 GW cm-2
IW= 5.36 GW cm-2
 
Figure 20. High-resolution LIB emission spectra in air at atmospheric pressure, excited by the TEA-
CO2 laser wavelength at 9.621 μm, as a function of the laser intensity. 
The strong atomic and ionic lines observed in LIB spectra of air indicate the high degree 
of excitation/ionization and the high rate of the N2, O2 dissociation processes achieved in the 
plasma. As we mentioned in section 2.2, when a high-power laser beam of intensity IW 
interacts with a gas, electrons involving the formation of laser-induced plasma can be 
generated through two main processes: MPI and EII both followed by electron cascade. The 
ionization rate in MPI varies as 
n
W
I
 where n is the number of photons needed to strip off an 
electron. MPI is relatively improbable for nitrogen and oxygen atoms or molecules in the 
ground state [N(2s22p3 4S0
3/2), O(2s22p4 3P2), N2(
+
Σg
X 1
) and O2(
−
Σg
X 3
)], since their high 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
481
ionization potentials (14.534, 13.618, 9.567 and 12.070 eV, respectively), means that more 
than 100 photons are required for these processes. Besides, the probability of simultaneous 
absorption of photons decreases with the number of photons n necessary to cause ionization. 
In general, this probability is 
n
E
n
W
MPI
F
W
2
∝
Φ
∝
. Calculations of MPI probability (Eq. 2.4) 
for N, O, N2 and O2 give WMPI≅0 s-1 for the CO2 laser at λ=9.621 µm and IW=4.5 GW×cm-2. 
For example, for a 193 nm (ArF) at the laser intensity IW=1 GW×cm-2 (n=2), the probability 
of MPI for O2 gives WMPI=1058 s-1. EII consists on the absorption of light photon by free or 
quasifree electrons. These electrons in the focal volume gain sufficient energy, from the laser 
field through IB collisions with neutrals, to ionize mainly nitrogen and oxygen atoms, 
molecules or ions by inelastic electron-particle collision resulting in two electrons of lower 
energy being available to start the process again. EII is the most important process for the 
longer wavelengths used in this work. On the other hand, we have made experimental 
measurements of breakdown threshold laser intensities of N2, O2 and ambient air (Section 
2.4). The threshold power density is dependent on the kind of laser, laser wavelength, pulse 
length, beam size of the focal volume, and gas pressure. Breakdown thresholds of solids and 
liquids are usually lower than for gases. Experimental threshold power densities for air is 
measured for the TEA-CO2 laser at λ=10.591 µm. The threshold power densities for air at a 
given pressure are measured in the two following manners. First the cell was evacuated with 
the aid of a rotary pump, to a base pressure of 4 Pa that was measured by a mechanical gauge 
and then it was filled with air up to the desired pressure. The TEA-CO2 laser was fired and its 
energy transmitted through the cell was increased until the breakdown was observed in 50% 
of laser pulses. The threshold was easily determined because it was always associated with 
the appearance of a blued bright flash of light in the focal region, with a cracking noise, and 
the abrupt absorption of the laser pulse transmitted through the focal region. Another way to 
measure the threshold was to induce a previous breakdown at a pressure over the desired 
value, later the pressure is lowered and the energy adjusted until the breakdown begins with 
some probability, usually around 50%. This method is similar to induce the breakdown with 
energy in excess and to attenuate the laser until the spark disappears. In these cases it could be 
that initial free electrons have been produced by previous breakdowns and they are the seed 
of the avalanche process. In this last method the obtained threshold value is normally lower. 
The present experiments have shown that when high laser energy was used, air breakdown 
occurred easily and it was reproducible. When the laser energy was reduced to its threshold 
power density value, air breakdown became a sporadic event. Such sporadic behavior might 
be due to the difficulty of generating the seed electrons at the breakdown threshold values.  
Figure 24 shows the measured breakdown threshold intensity for air, N2 [18] and O2 [20] 
as a function of pressure. We have measured the breakdown threshold intensity in air at 
atmospheric pressure finding 4.5×109 W×cm-2 (1.3×106 V×cm-1) for an air fresh charge and 
1.1×109 W×cm-2 (6.4×105 V×cm-1) for an air non-fresh charge. As can be seen from Figure 
24, if a breakdown has been previously induced in the gas (open symbol), the pressure range 
to induce the breakdown is bigger and the power density is lower than when no previous 
breakdown is induced (solid symbol). The number of free electrons is higher in conditions of 
previous breakdown than in the case of no previous breakdown, lowering the threshold for the 
plasma initiation. This has been observed by different authors. LIB threshold intensity of air 
at atmospheric pressure has been measured by Alcock et al [∼4×1010 W×cm-2 (Ruby, 0.3472 
μm) and ∼1011 W×cm-2 (0.6943 μm)] [64], Haught et al (∼4×1014 W×cm-2) [65], De Michelis 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
482 
(∼4×1010 W× cm-2) [66], Ireland et al (∼4×1010 W×cm-2) [67], Aaron et al (∼4×1014 W×cm-2) 
[68], Phuoc and White (∼2.5×1012 W×cm-2) [69], Tomlinson et al [∼2×1011 W×cm-2 (Ruby, 
0.69 μm) and ∼7×1010 W×cm-2 (Nd:YAG, 1.06 μm)] [70], Chan et al [∼1.5×109 W×cm-2 
(CO2, 10.6 μm, Λ(diffusion length)=4.8×10-3 cm), ∼3×109 W×cm-2 (Λ=3.2×10-3 cm), and 
∼7×109 W×cm-2 (Λ=1.6×10-3 cm)] [30], Kawahara (∼7×1010 W×cm-2, Nd:YAG, 1.06 μm)] 
[71] and Zhuzhukalo et al [∼7×1010 W×cm-2 (focal length = 1.4 m) and ∼2×1010 W×cm-2 
(focal length =14 m)] [72]. Alcock et al [64] reported a decrease of the breakdown threshold 
intensity from ∼9×1010 to ∼4×1010 W×cm-2 at 0.3472 µm and ∼2×1011 to ∼1×1011 W×cm-2 at 
0.6943 µm for air pressures between ∼200 Torr and ∼800 Torr. Chang et al [30] reported for 
several gases (O2, N2, air, He, and Ne) that the threshold power density decreases as the 
pressure increases and that it decreases as the focal volume increases. For air they reported a 
slow decrease with a minimum of the breakdown threshold intensity from ∼1.5×109 to 
∼1×109 W×cm-2 at Λ=4.8×10-3 cm, ∼3×109 to ∼1.5×109 W×cm-2 at Λ=3.2×10-3 cm, and 
∼10×109 to ∼5×109 W×cm-2 at Λ=1.6×10-3 cm for air pressures between ∼200 Torr and 
∼10000 Torr. In this work, they used a CO2 laser and the focal diameter range from 0.75×10-2 
to 3×10-2 cm. Phuoc and White [69] reported a decrease of the breakdown threshold intensity 
from ∼2×1013 to ∼2×1012 W×cm-2 at 0.532 µm and ∼8×1012 to ∼1×1012 W×cm-2 at 1.064 µm 
for air pressures between 50 Torr and 3000 Torr. It has to be noted that we have obtained 
similar threshold power densities for air than those given by Chan [30], but lower values than 
reported in Refs. [64-72]. This fact can be related in part to the used focal length (24 cm) and 
beam size in the focal region (7.85×10-3 cm2) that is one order of magnitude, at least, higher 
that the values commonly used in the literature, favoring the probability of existence of free 
electrons to seed the process and decreasing the threshold laser intensity due to the lack of the 
diffusion losses.  
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
v'-v"
3-3
8-5
2-2
C
+N
+
N
+
O
2+
C
O
2+
N
+
2:D
2Πg-A
2Πu
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
O
+
Pair = 79.6 kPa
Pair ≈ 101 kPa
Pair = 50.2 kPa
Air Wavelength / Å 
Pair = 32.0 kPa
 
Figure 21. High-resolution LIB emission spectra at various air pressures, excited by the TEA-CO2 laser 
(10.591 μm) at a power density of 6.31 GW cm-2. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
483
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
39.0
39.5
40.0
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
42.5
43.0
43.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1314 15
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Franck-Condon factor, qv'-v"
v'=14
v'=12
v'=8
v'=5
v'=3
v'=2
v'=4
v'=6
v'=16
v'=10
v'=1
v"
N
+
2: B
2
Σ
+
u-X
2
Σ
+
g; Δv=−1 
ln(Iv'-v" λ
4
v'-v" / qv'-v") (a. u.)
G(v')hc/kB / K 
Tvib=12100 ± 700 K
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g; Δv=0 
(a)
35000
40000
45000
50000
55000
60000
65000
40.0
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
42.5
43.0
43.5
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
v'=8
v'=7
v'=6
v'=5
v'=3
v'=2
v'=1
v'=4
v'=9
v'=0
v"
N+
2: B2Σ+
u-X2Σ+
g; Δv=0 
Franck-Condon factor, qv'-v"
G(v')hc/kB / K
ln(Iv'-v" λ
4
v'-v" / qv'-v") (a. u.)
Tvib=12000 ± 900 K
N
+
2: B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g; Δv=0 
 
Figure 22. Left (a) panel: Linear Boltzmann plot of the N2
+ (B-X) Δv=-1 band sequence intensity versus 
the normalized energy of the upper vibrational level; Right (b) panel: Linear Boltzmann plot of the N2
+ 
(B-X) Δv=0 band sequence intensity versus the normalized energy of the upper vibrational level; 
Experimental conditions: laser power density of 5.36 GW cm-2 and atmospheric pressure. Plots also 
show linear fit to the data and the corresponding Franck-Condon factors. 
It has been established [3-10] that the threshold photon flux density or equivalently the 
threshold power density for MPI varies with p-1/n, where p is the gas pressure and n is the 
number of simultaneously absorbed photons (see section 2.4). Therefore, MPI predicts a very 
weak dependence of the threshold power density on pressure. However, as we can see from 
Figure 24, the breakdown threshold power density in air versus pressure shows a minimum 
around 5×104 Pa if previous breakdown have existed and 8×104 Pa without previous 
breakdown. Therefore, it can be seen from Figure 24 that the pressure dependence is not in 
harmony with MPI which predicts a very weak p-1/n dependence for the threshold power 
density, while it is in qualitative agreement with electron cascade. A minimum in the 
variation of the threshold power density versus pressure is predicted by the classical theory 
[2-3, 23]. In our experiments, a minimum in the threshold power density versus pressure 
curve (Figure 24) is observed. Therefore, starting from our experimental observations and 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
484 
calculations, we can conclude that although, the first electrons must appear via MPI or natural 
ionization, electron impact is the main mechanism responsible for the breakdown in air.  
 
5.3.1. Temporal evolution of the LIB plasma 
The absorption of light and heating of a gas is of primary significance for important 
practical problems (the fire ball of an explosion, the heating of artificial satellites during re-
entry into the atmosphere, detection of environmental pollutants, ignition systems, laser 
machining, inertially confined fusion, etc). In this section, time-resolved OES analysis for the 
plasma produced by high-power tunable IR CO2 pulsed laser breakdown of air is presented 
[21]. In these series of experiments, the CO2 pulsed laser (λ=10.591 μm, 64 ns (FWHM), 47-
347 J/cm2) was focused onto a metal mesh target under air as host gas at atmospheric pressure 
[21]. It was found that the CO2 laser is favorable for generating strong, large volume air 
breakdown plasma, in which the air plasma was then produced. While the metal mesh target 
itself was practically never ablated, the air breakdown is mainly due to electronic relaxation 
of excited N, O, C, H, Ar and ionic fragments N+, O+, N2+, O2+, C+ and molecular band 
systems of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+; D2Πg-A2Πu), N2(C3Πu-B3Πg) and OH(A2Σ+-X2Π).  
The difficulties arise on account of the imprecise definition of the extent of the focal 
region which, in turn lead to inadequate or inaccurate knowledge of the spatial- temporal 
characteristic of the beam intensity within the focal region for gases. On the other hand, it is 
well known that a pure gas plasma, due to the gas breakdown process, is produced when a 
TEA CO2 laser is focused onto a metal sample at a gas pressure of around 1 atm, in which 
case practically all the laser irradiance is absorbed in the gas plasma [33, 73]. It is expected 
that, in some medium range pressures between 0.01 torr and 1 atm, both gas plasma and 
target plasmas are produced. In such a case, some interaction inevitable takes place between 
the gas and the target laser induced plasmas. The plasma is a mixture of electrons, atoms, 
molecules and ions, and mass from both the ablated target and the ambient gas. The 
interaction between the ejected mass (plume) and the surrounding air slows the expansion of 
the plasma. If a metal mesh is used as a target, low amount (if any) of ablated material will be 
formed and the spatial origin of gas breakdown process will be accurately defined 
independently of the laser fluence. After its formation in the vicinity of the metal mesh 
surface, the air breakdown plasma propagates towards the laser source at a supersonic speed. 
The shock wave heats up the surrounding air which is instantaneously transformed in strongly 
ionized plasma.  
Two different types of spectra were recorded: time-integrated and time-resolved. In the 
acquisition of time-integrated spectra, a good signal to noise ratio has been obtained 
averaging each spectrum over several successive laser pulses. Typically the signals from 20 
laser pulses are averaged and integrated over the entire emission time. In time-resolved 
measurements, the delay td and width tw times were varied. It was verified that the plasma 
emission was reproducible over more than 7 ablation events by recording the same spectrum 
several times. The temporal history of LIB air plasma is illustrated schematically in Figure 
25. The time for the beginning of the CO2 laser pulse is considered as the origin of the time 
scale (t=0). Inserts illustrate some emission spectra recorded at different delay and width 
times at two observed distances of z=2.5 and 5 mm. The temporal shape of the CO2 laser 
pulse is also shown. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
485
387.0 387.5 388.0 388.5 389.0 389.5 390.0 390.5 391.0 391.5
J=59/2 
J=53/2 
J=47/2 
J=41/2 
J=35/2 
J=31/2 
J=25/2 
J=81/2 
J=47/2 
J=43/2 
J=39/2 
J=35/2 
J=31/2 
J=25/2 
J=J"=1/2 
J=63/2 
J=73/2 
J=77/2 
J=81/2 
J+1,f - J,f
R2
J-1,f - J,f
P2
J,e - J,f
RQ12
J,f - J,e
PQ21
J+1,e - J,e
R1
J=J"=1/2, 3/2, ...
J-1,e - J,e
P1
O
+
O
+
O
+
1-1
0-0
v'=0-v"=0
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Vacuum Wavelength / nm 
(a)
380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392
0
5
10
15
20
J-1,f - J,f P2
J,f - J,e
PQ21
J,e - J,f
RQ12
J-1,e - J,e P1
J+1,f - J,f R2
J+1,e - J,e R1
v'=0-v"=0
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
Vacuum Wavelength / nm 
Intensity / a. u.
(b)
 
Figure 23. (a) Detailed LIB spectrum of air and partial rotational assignments of the 0-0 B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+ 
band of N2
+. (b) Calculated fortrat diagram for P1, P2, R1, R2, RQ12 and PQ21 branches in the 0-0 band (B-
X) of N2
+ at Trot=1950 K. 
The LIB spectra of air were measured at different delay and width times. In a first set of 
experimental measurements, the spectra have been obtained in the spectral region 2423-2573 
Å, at a delay time ranging from 0 to 30 μs at 0.5 μs intervals and at an observed distance z 
from 1 to 10 mm. The spectral range was chosen in order to detect both single and double 
ionized oxygen species, several single ionized nitrogen lines and atomic carbon. Figure 26 
illustrates the time-resolved evolution from laser-induced (106 J/cm2) air plasma monitored at 
0, 0.1, 0.7, 2, 3, 4, and 5 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs and z=2.5 mm. 
One can see that after the laser pulse, the plasma emission consists in an intense continuum. 
This continuum radiation is emitted by the laser-induced plasma as a result of free-free and 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
486 
free-bound transitions. As seen in Figure 26 during the initial stages after laser pulse (td≤0.5 
μs), continuum emission dominates the spectrum. As time evolves (0.5 μs≤td≤3.5 μs), N+, O+ 
and O2+ emissions dominate the spectrum. These ionic lines decrease quickly for higher delay 
times, being detected up to ∼ 4.5 μs. The emission lines become progressively narrower as a 
consequence of the electron number density distribution. It points out that the electron density 
and excitation temperature must decrease during the plasma expansion. As the delay is 
increased (td>3.5 μs) C atomic emission line dominates the spectrum. This atomic line 
decreases for higher delay times, being detected up to ∼ 30 μs. The maximum intensity of 
continuum and spectral lines is reached after a characteristic time, depending on the 
observation distance z. Figure 27 shows time-resolved emission spectra from LIB (106 J/cm2) 
in air collected at different distances (z=1 and 7.5 mm) and recorded at 2, 3, 4, and 5 μs gate 
delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs. By analyzing Figures 26 and 27 it is possible to 
see that C atoms are produced both in the ablated target and in the air breakdown. When the 
spectra were recorded near the target surface (z<2.5 mm), the main contribution of C atoms is 
due to the target surface. For z>2.5 mm, practically the spectrum is due to air breakdown. At 
far away distances from the metal mesh target surface, the plasma front arrives later than for 
close distances. Figure 28 displays several time-resolved emission spectra from LIB (106 
J/cm2) in air monitored at 1, 2.5, 5, and 7.5 mm observed distances and after the laser pulse 
(td<0.5 μs). In this Figure, one can see that at short time after the TEA CO2 laser pulse, the 
plasma emission consists in an intense continuum that decreases with distance. Figure 29 
shows time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced air plasma (106 J/cm2) recorded at 
td=3 μs with tw=0.5 μs monitored at 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mm. In these recording conditions, 
the most intense plasma is monitored at 5 mm from the mesh target surface.  
 
0.1
1
1x10
8
1x10
9
1x10
10
Threshold Intensity (W/cm2) 
Pressure (105 Pa)
 Fresh Charge Air
 Fresh Charge Nitrogen
 Fresh Charge Oxygen
 After previous breakdown Air
 After previous breakdown Nitrogen
 After previous breakdown Oxygen
0.02
 
Figure 24. Experimental laser-induced breakdown thresholds excited by the TEA-CO2 laser (10.591 
μm) in air (square), nitrogen [18] (circle) and oxygen [20] (triangle) for different pressures. Solid: fresh 
charge (without previous breakdown); Open: after previous breakdown.  

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
487
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5
0.00
0.05
0.10
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
Wavelength / Å 
td=0 ; tw=0.5 μs; z=2.5 mm
td=0 ; tw=0.5 μs; z=5 mm
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
Wavelength / Å 
td=0.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs; z=2.5 mm
td=0.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs; z=5 mm
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
O
+
N
+
N
+
C
N
+
O
2+
O
+
O
2+
O
+
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs; z=5 mm
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs; z=2.5 mm
Wavelength / Å 
tw (gate width time)
Laser Power / a. u.
Time / μs
τFWHM= 64 ns
CO2 Laser
 pulse
td (delay time)
 
Figure 25. A schematic overview of the temporal history of LIB air plasma. Here td is the delay time 
and tw is the gate width time during which the plasma emission is monitored. Insets plots illustrate some 
spectra observed at different delay times (0, 0.5 and 3 μs) for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs and 
z=2.5 and 5 mm. The temporal shape of the CO2 laser pulse is also shown.  
Figure 30 displays the temporal evolution of the LIBS air plasma (160 J/cm2) in the 
spectral region 3725-3860 Å region monitored at 2.5, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate 
width time of 0.5 μs (z=1 cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). The inset 
plot shows the assignment of some ionic lines of N+, O+ and O2+ and band heads of different 
molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+; Δv=0 sequence) [see Figure 17(g)]. At early times (td<1 
μs) (not shown), the plasma emission consists in a weak continuum. When the delay 
increases, some ionic lines of N+, O+ and O2+ and band heads of the molecular bands of 
N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) enhanced steeply as a consequence of the expansion and heating of the air 
plasma. At longer times (td>3 μs), the ion lines significantly decrease steeply in intensity as a 
consequence of the expansion and cooling of the plasma plume and its recombination into 
ground state ions. At td>4 μs, N+ and O+ ionic lines and N2
+ rovibrational lines disappear. 
Figure 31 shows the temporal evolution of the LIBS air plasma (71 J/cm2) in the spectral 
region 3830-3960 Å region monitored at 2, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time 
of 0.5 μs (z=1 cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). This plot also shows 
the assignment of some ionic lines of N+, O+ and N2+ and band heads of different molecular 
bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+; Δv=0 sequence). At early times (td<1 μs) (not shown), the plasma 
emission consists in a continuum. When the delay increases, some ionic lines of N+, O+ and 
N2+ and band heads of the molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) enhanced as a consequence 
of the air plasma expansion. At longer times (td>3 μs), the ion lines significantly decrease 
steeply in intensity. At td>5 μs, N+, N2+ and O+ ionic lines and N2
+ rovibrational lines 
disappear. Figure 32 displays the temporal progress of the LIBS air plasma in the spectral 
window 4070-4195 Å observed at 2.5, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 
0.5 μs (z=1 cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). The assignments of some 
ionic lines of N+, O+ and N2+ and band heads of different molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-
X2Σg
+; Δv=-1 sequence) are indicated. As before, at early times (td<1 μs), the plasma emission 
consists in a weak continuum. When the delay increases, some ionic lines of N+, O+ and N2+ 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
488 
and band heads of the molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) enhanced. At longer times (td>3 
μs), the ion lines significantly decrease steeply in intensity. At td>4 μs, N+, N2+ and O+ ionic 
lines and N2
+ rovibrational lines disappear.  
 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Relative Intensity / a. u.
td=0.7 μs ; tw=0.5 μs
td=0.1 μs ; tw=0.5 μs
td=0 ; tw=0.5 μs
Wavelength / Å 
 
 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Relative Intensity / a. u.
td=5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
O
2+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
C
N
+
O
2+
O
+
td=2 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 26. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced (106 J/cm2) air plasma observed in the 
region 2423-2573 Å monitored at 0, 0.1, 0.7, 2, 3, 4, and 5 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 
0.5 μs and z=2.5 mm. 
 
5.3.2. Time of flight, velocity, kinetic energy and electron density 
Space-and-time resolved OES measurements could be used to estimate plasma expansion 
rate and kinetic energy. The temporal evolution of spectral atomic, ionic and molecular line 
intensities at a constant distance from the target can be used to construct the time-of-flight 
(TOF) profile. TOF studies of the emission provide fundamental information regarding the 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
489
time taken for a particular species to evolve after the laser-induced plasma has been formed. 
Specifically, this technique gives an indication of the velocity of the emitted species. A coarse 
estimation of the velocity for the different species in the plume can be inferred from the time 
resolved spectra by plotting the intensities of selected emission lines versus the delay time, 
and then calculating the velocity by dividing the distance from the target by the time where 
the emission peaks. This method for determination of plasma velocity should be used with 
care due to the superposition of both expansion and forward movements of the plasma plume. 
We assumed a plasma model consisting in two plasmas [74]: primary plasma that acts as 
initial explosion energy source and emits an intense continuum emission background for a 
short time just above the surface of the auxiliary target; secondary plasma expands with time 
around the primary plasma. The secondary plasma is formed by the excitation from the shock 
wave and by the emitting of atomic, ionic and molecular species characterized by a low 
background signal.  
 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
td=5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=2 μs; tw=0.5 μs
O
+
z=1 mm
C
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
2+
O
2+
O
+
O
+
Wavelength / Å 
Relative Intensity / a. u.
(a)
 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
(b)
Relative Intensity / a. u.
C
O
2+ O
2+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
N
+
td=5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=2 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Wavelength / Å 
z=7.5 mm
 
Figure 27. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced (106 J/cm2) air plasma observed in the 
region 2423-2573 Å monitored at 2, 3, 4, and 5 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs and 
(a) z=1 mm; (b) z=7.5 mm. 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
490 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
 z=1 mm
 z=2.5 mm
 z=5.0 mm
 z=7.5 mm
Wavelength / Å
Relative Intensity / a. u.
 
Figure 28. Time-resolved emission spectra from LIB (106 J/cm2) in air at 1, 2.5, 5, and 7.5 mm along 
the plasma expansion direction (Z-axis) and recorded at td=0 and tw=0.5 μs. 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
z=10 mm
z=7.5 mm
z=5 mm
z=2.5 mm
z=1 mm
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
O
+
C
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
2+
O
+
O
2+
O
+
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 29. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced air plasma (106 J/cm2) observed in the 
region 2423-2573 Å at td=3 μs for tw=0.5 μs monitored at 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mm along the plasma 
expansion direction. 
Figure 33(a) displays the TOF profiles for the air breakdown experiments induced by 
CO2 laser pulses (106 J/cm2), of continuum radiation, O+(2433.53 Å), O+(2455.53 Å), 
N+(2461.27 Å), N+(2478.56 Å), N+(2522.23 Å) and C(2478.56 Å) lines as a function of the 
delay time. We notice the appearance of a strong maximum for continuum background for a 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
491
delay of 1 μs at z=5 mm. When td increases, the continuum drops steeply as a consequence of 
the reduction of electron density and temperature as the plume expands. For O+ and N+ ionic 
species and C atomic, the maxima appear for a delay of 2.5, 3 and 4.5 μs, respectively. The 
emission intensity of O+ and N+ ionic lines decreases more rapidly than the emission intensity 
of the C lines. The time duration of ionic species was nearly 5 μs, while the time duration of 
C atomic emission was nearly 20 μs. The experimental TOF distributions N(t) are essentially 
number density distributions. They are converted to flux distributions dN/dt by employing a 
correction factor z/t, where z means the flight distance along the plasma expansion and t is the 
delay time after the laser pulse incidence. It should be mentioned that the estimation of 
velocity distributions assumes that the emitting species are generated on the assisting metal 
mesh target. The velocity distributions that are derived from these TOF distributions are 
display in Figure 33(b). At the laser fluence used in this series of experiments (106 J/cm2) and 
z=5 mm, TOF distributions present different characteristics. Thus, the velocity distributions 
of ionic species O+(2445.54 Å) and N+(2522.23 Å) are comparatively wider (∼3.7 and ∼4 
km/s (FWHM), respectively) than the velocity distribution of carbon neutral species [∼1.2 
km/s (FWHM)]. The velocity distributions of O+, N+ and C lines species are centred at about 
2, 1.7 and 1.1 km/s, respectively. From TOF spectra, the translational kinetic energy can be 
deduced [KE=(1/2)m(z/t)2] by measuring the time t required to transverse the distance from 
the target to the detector z. The kinetic energy obtained for some species are plotted in Figure 
34. We have observed small atomic and ionic average kinetic energies. As we have stated 
above, for a better understanding of the physical mechanisms underlying the plasma emission 
breakdown in air, LIB spectra were obtained by varying both the distance z (up to 10 mm) 
with respect to the auxiliary metal mesh and the laser energy. It is expected, in fact, that these 
two parameters would affect strongly the dynamic evolution of the plasma and the shock 
wave induced by the CO2 laser. Different lines originating from atomic and ionic species of 
both nitrogen and oxygen were analyzed. O+ doublet (2s22p2(1D)3p 2D0
3/2,5/2→2s22p2(3P)3s 
2P3/2) at ∼ 2445 Å and N+ triplet (2s22p(2P0)4d 3D0
1,2,3→2s22p(2P0)3p 3P0,1,2) at ∼ 2522 Å were 
chosen as representative of ionized lines. The energies of the lower levels of both multiplets 
are high (189068.514 for O+ and 170572.61, 170607.89 and 170666.23 cm-1 for N+) so that 
the self-absorption effect can be neglected. Figures 35 and 36 show TOF and velocity 
distributions of multiplet structures of N+(∼2522 Å) and O+(∼2445 Å) at different distances 
(1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mm) as for a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2 The temporal emission features 
are affected by the presence of strong continuum at short distances (z≤3 mm) and at early 
delay time. But at distances greater than 3 mm, the continuum radiation is considerably 
reduced and the interference of continuum on the TOF distributions is negligible. The spike 
observed in TOF and velocity profiles is the prompt signal that is used as a time maker. By 
the shift of the TOF peaks for each distance it is possible to calculate approximately the mean 
velocities of LIB along the propagation axis Z. The measured peak velocities of multiplet 
structures of N+(∼2522 Å) and O+(∼2445 Å) monitored at 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mm (for a laser 
fluence of 106 J/cm2) are 0.5, 1, 1.7, 2.1 and 3.6 km/s and 0.5, 1, 2, 2.5 and 5 km/s, 
respectively. The peak velocities of N+ and O+ increase with the distance from the target 
surface. This is due to the initial acceleration of the ablated partials from zero velocity to a 
maximum velocity. Also we have studied OES of the air plasma by varying the laser energy. 
We observed that when the laser fluence is increased, the N+ and O+ TOF distributions 
broaden and move towards lower delay times. On the other hand, plasma temperature was 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
492 
determined from the emission line intensities of several N+ and O+ ionized lines observed in 
the laser-induced plasma of air for a delay time of 3 μs and a distance of z=5 mm. The 
obtained excitation temperatures, in the case of N+ and O+, were 23400 ± 900 K and 26600 ± 
1300 K, respectively. For N+ and O+ lines, the Doppler line widths vary between 0.08-0.17 Å 
at 23400 K and 0.11-0.13 Å at 26600 K, respectively.  
 
3740
3760
3780
3800
3820
3840
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
N
+
3 7 3 0 3 7 4 0 3 7 5 0 3 7 6 0 3 7 7 0 3 7 8 0 3 7 9 0 3 8 0 0 3 8 1 0 3 8 2 0 3 8 3 0 3 8 4 0 3 8 5 0
3 7 4 0
3 7 5 0
3 7 6 0
3 7 7 0
3 7 8 0
3 7 9 0
3 8 0 0
3 8 1 0
3 8 2 0
O
+
O
2 +
O
+
O
+
8 - 8
7 - 7
6 - 6
5 - 5
4 - 4
3 - 3
2 - 2
N
+
N
+
2 : B
2 Σ
+
u -X
2 Σ
+
g
O
2 +
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Δ v = 0
A ir W a v e le n g th  / Å  
O
+
O
+
td=0 ; tw>>30 μs
td=2.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Wavelength / Å 
Normalized Intensity / a. u.
 
Figure 30. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced (160 J/cm2) air plasma observed in the 
region 3725-3860 Å region monitored at 2.5, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 
μs (z=1 cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). The inset plot shows the assignment of 
some ionic lines of N+, O+ and O2+ and band heads of the molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+). 
3850
3875
3900
3925
3950
0
500
1000
1500
2000
3-3
2-2
1-1
0-0
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
N
2+
N
+
td=0 ; tw>>30 μs
td=2 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Wavelength / Å 
 
Figure 31. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced air plasma (71 J/cm2) observed in the 
region 3830-3960 Å monitored at 2, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs (z=1 
cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). The assignments of some ionic lines of N+, O+ 
and N2+ and band heads of the molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) are indicated. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
493
4075
4100
4125
4150
4175
0
500
1000
1500
2000
v'-v"
3-4
5-6
4-5
N
+
2:B
2Σ
+
u-X
2Σ
+
g
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
N
2+
N
+
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
td=0 ; tw>>30 μs
Wavelength / Å 
td=4 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=3 μs; tw=0.5 μs
td=2.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Relative Intensity / a. u.
 
Figure 32. Time-resolved emission spectra from laser-induced air plasma (71 J/cm2) observed in the 
region 4070-4195 Å monitored at 2.5, 3 and 4 μs gate delays for a fixed gate width time of 0.5 μs (z=1 
cm) and time-integrated spectrum (td=0 and tw>>30 μs). The assignments of some ionic lines of N+, O+ 
and N2+ and band heads of the molecular bands of N2
+(B2Σu
+-X2Σg
+) are indicated. 
10
0
10
1
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
(a)
Relative Intensity / a. u.
 Continuum
 O
+: 2433.53 Å
 O
+: 2445.53 Å
 N
+: 2461.27 Å
 C:  2478.56 Å
 N
+: 2498.8 Å
 N
+: 2522.23 Å
z=5 mm
Delay time / μs
 
Figure 33. (Continued) 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
494 
 
10
3
10
4
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Velocity / ms
-1
z=5 mm
 O
+: 2433.53 Å
 O
+: 2445.53 Å
 N
+: 2461.27 Å
 N
+: 2522.23 Å
 N
+: 2498.8 Å
 C:  2478.56 Å
(b)
 
Figure 33. (a) Number density TOF distributions of continuum radiation, O+(2433.53; 2445.54 Å), 
N+(2461.27; 2478.56; 2522.23 Å) and C(2478.56 Å) lines as a function of delay time (fixed gate width 
time of 0.5 μs) for a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2 and z=5 mm. (b) Velocity distributions derived from the 
experimental TOF profiles for the indicated species. 
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
z=5 mm
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Kinetic energy / eV
 O
+: 2433.53 Å
 O
+: 2445.54 Å
 N
+: 2461.27 Å
 N
+: 2498.8  Å
 N
+: 2522.23 Å
 C:  2478.56 Å
 
Figure 34. Kinetic energy distributions of O+(2433.53 Å), O+(2445.54 Å), N+(2461.27 Å), N+(2478.56 
Å), N+(2522.23 Å) and C(2478.56 Å) lines derived from the TOF spectra  at z=5 mm. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
495
1
10
3
10
4
0.5
 z= 1 mm
 z=2.5 mm
 z=5.0 mm
 z=7.5 mm
 z=10  mm
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Delay time / μs
5
N
+: 2s
22p(
2P
0)4d 
3D
0
J' → 2s
22p(
2P
0)3p 
3PJ"
 
1
10
3
10
4
O
+: 2s
22p
2(
1D)3p 
2D
0
J' → 2s
22p
2(
3P)3s 
2PJ"
Relative Intensity / a. u.
Delay time / μs
 z= 1 mm
 z=2.5 mm
 z=5.0 mm
 z=7.5 mm
 z=10  mm
5
 
Figure 35. Number density TOF profiles of multiplet structures of N+(∼2522 Å) and O+(∼2445 Å) at 1, 
2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mm as a function of delay time for a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2.  
The N+ triplet (2s22p(2P0)4d 3D0
1,2,3→2s22p(2P0)3p 3P0,1,2) at ∼2522 Å was identified as 
candidate for electron-density measurements. By substituting the Stark line widths at different 
time delays in Eqn. (3.12) and the corresponding value of Stark broadening W (0.372 Å from 
Griem [41] at plasma temperature of 23400 K), we obtain the electron density. Figure 37 
gives the time evolution of electron density and its first derivative with respect to time by 
setting the gate width of the intensifier at 0.5 μs. These values have been obtained by Stark 
broadening of the N+ TOF curves at z = 5 mm and for a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2. The initial 
electron density at 0.1 μs is approximately 1.3 1016 cm-3. Afterwards, the density increases 
and reaches a maximum (1.7 1017 cm-3) at ∼0.8 μs, and then decrease as the time is further 
increased. At shorter delay times (<0.1 μs), the line to continuum ratio is small and the 
density measurement is sensitive to errors in setting the true continuum level. For times >0.1 
μs, the line to continuum ratio is within the reasonable limits and the values of electron 
density shown in Figure 37 should be reliable. After 6 μs, the electron density is about 
2.7 1016 cm-3. For a long time >6 μs, subsequent decreased N+ emission intensities result in 
poor signal-to-noise ratios, and there exits a limitation in the spectral resolution. The decrease 
of ne is mainly due to recombination between electrons and ions in the plasma. These 
processes correspond to the so-called radiative recombination and three-body recombination 
processes in which a third body may be either a heavy particle or an electron. The electron 
number density ne (cm-3) in the laser induced plasma is governed by the kinetic balance 
equation 2.10. By considering the discussion reported in section 2.3, the equilibrium 
condition can be established at 0.8 μs (dynamical equilibrium) and t>2 μs (stationary 
equilibrium). For t ≤ 0.8 μs the ionization prevails while for 0.8 μs<t<2 μs the three-body 
recombination dominates. In the case of TEA-CO2 laser at a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2 and 
z=5 mm, the recombination rate constant estimated is approximately 5 10-28 cm6 s-1 (Eq. 
2.11). The recombination time can be determined by the value of the rate constant of the 
recombination process as trec=1/(ne
2.krec) obtaining trec≈0.4-3 μs.  

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
496 
10
3
10
4
10
3
10
4
Velocity / ms
-1
 z=1 mm
 z=2.5 mm
 z=5.0 mm
 z=7.5 mm
 z=10  mm
Relative Intensity / a. u.
N
+: 2s
22p(
2P
0)4d 
3D
0
J' → 2s
22p(
2P
0)3p 
3PJ"
 
10
3
10
4
10
3
10
4
 z=1 mm
 z=2.5 mm
 z=5.0 mm
 z=7.5 mm
 z=10  mm
O
+: 2s
22p
2(
1D)3p 
2D
0
J' → 2s
22p
2(
3P)3s 
2PJ"
Velocity / ms
-1
Relative Intensity / a. u.
 
Figure 36. Velocity profiles of multiplet structures of N+(∼2522 Å) and O+(∼2445 Å) at 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5 
and 10 mm as a function of delay time for a laser fluence of 106 J/cm2.  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-1x10
17
0
1x10
17
2x10
17
2440 2460 2480 2500 2520 2540 2560
N
+
td=0.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Wavelength / Å 
2425
2450
2475
2500
2525
2550
O
2+
O
2+
C
N
+
N
+
O
+
O
+
O
+
Wavelength / Å 
N
+
td=2.5 μs; tw=0.5 μs
2425 2450 2475 2500 2525 2550
Wavelength / Å 
N
+
td=0.8 μs; tw=0.5 μs
Delay time / μs 
 ne[cm
-3]
 dne/dt [cm
-3 μs
-1]
 
Figure 37. The temporal evolution of electron density ne and dne/dt for different delay times from 
plasma ignition and z=5 mm. Inset plots illustrate some spectra observed at different delay times. 
Optical emission accompanying TEA-CO2 nanosecond LIB in air is very long lived (∼20 
μs) relative to the average radiative lifetimes of the excited levels that give rise to the 
observed emission lines. All of the emission lines of N, N+, N2+, O, O+ and O2+ expected in 
the 2000-10000 Å wavelength range are observed, illustrating that the excited species giving 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
497
rise to the optical emission are produced by non-specific mechanism during the TEA CO2 
LIB process. However, a direct excitation-de-excitation mechanism cannot explain the 
observed emission spectra. Electron impact ionization would explain the emission intensity 
variation with the time for N, N+, N2+, O, O+ and O2+ species. On the other hand, the 
formation of the excited molecular species would happen in the gas phase by collisions 
between atomic or ionic species present in the plume at times far away from the plasma 
ignition. The emission process at this plasma stage is divided into two different process 
associated, respectively with the shock formation and the plasma cooling. During the former, 
the atoms, molecules and ions gushing out from the laser focal region are adiabatically 
compressed against the surrounding gas. During the latter stage the temperature of the plasma 
and consequently the emission intensities of atomic lines and molecular bands decrease 
gradually.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
This article reviews some fundamentals of LIBS and some experimental studies 
developed in our laboratory on N2, O2 and air gases using a high-power IR CO2 pulsed laser. 
In this experimental study we used several laser wavelengths (λ=9.621 and 10.591 µm) and 
laser intensity ranging from 0.87 to 6.31 GW cm-2. The spectra of the generated plasmas are 
dominated by emission of strong atomic, ionic species and molecular bands. For the 
assignment of molecular bands a comparison with conventional emission sources was made. 
Excitation, vibrational and rotational temperatures, ionization degree and electron number 
density for some species were estimated by using different spectroscopic methods. The 
characteristics of the spectral emission intensities from different species have been 
investigated as functions of the gas pressure and laser irradiance. Optical breakdown 
threshold intensities in different gases have been measured experimentally. The physical 
processes leading to laser-induced breakdown of the gases have been analyzed. Plasma 
characteristics in LIBS of air were examined in detail on the emission lines of N+, O+ and C 
by means of time-resolved OES technique. The results show a faster decay of continuum and 
ionic spectral species than of neutral atomic and molecular ones. The velocity and kinetic 
energy distributions for different species were obtained from TOF measurements. Excitation 
temperature and electron density in the laser-induced plasma were estimated from the analysis 
of spectral data at various times from the laser pulse incidence. Temporal evolution of 
electron density has been used for the estimation of the three-body recombination rate 
constant. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
We gratefully acknowledge the support received in part by the DGICYT (Spain) Projects: 
MEC: CTQ2007-60177/BQU and MEC: CTQ2008-05393/BQU for this research. 
 
 
 
 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
498 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Maker, PD; Terhune, RW; Savage, CM. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Quantum Electronics; 
(Paris: Dunod) 1963, Vol. 2, 1559. 
[2] 
Raizer, YP. Breakdown and heating of gases under the influence of a laser beam; Soviet 
Physics: Uspekhi. Vol. 8, Nº 5, 1966. 
[3] 
Raizer, YP. Laser-Induced discharge phenomena; Consultants Bureau: New York. 
1977. 
[4] 
Bebb, HB; Gold, A. Multiphoton Ionization of Hydrogen and Rare Gas Atoms; Physics 
of Quantum Electronics; ed P L Kelly et al McGraw-Hill: New York. 1966. 
[5] 
De Michelis, C. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 1969, 5, 188-202. 
[6] 
Morgan, CG. Rep. Prog. Phys., 1975, 38, 621-665. 
[7] 
Bekefi, G. Principles of Laser Plasma; Wiley: New York. 1976. 
[8] 
Lyman, JL; Quigley, GP; Judd; OP. Multiple-Photon Excitation and Dissociation of 
Polyatomic Molecules; Ed. Cantrell, CD. Springer: Berlin., 1980. 
[9] 
Rosen, DI; Weyl, GJ. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., 1978, 20, 1264-1276. 
[10] Gamal, YE. EDJ. Phys, D. Appl. Phys., 1988, 21, 1117-1120. 
[11] Smith, DC. Laser induced gas breakdown and plasma interaction 38th Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno: Nevada., 2000. 
[12] Yueh, FY; Singh, JP; Zhang, H. Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry (Laser-lnduced 
Breakdown Spectroscopy, Elemental Analysis); ed R A Meyers. Wiley: Chichester., 
2000. 
[13] Cremers, DA; Radziemski, LJ. Handbook of Laser-lnduced Breakdown Spectroscopy; 
Wiley: Chichester., 2006. 
[14] Miziolek, AW; Palleschi, V; Schechter, I. Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy; 
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge., 2006. 
[15] Singh, JP; Thakur, SN. Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy; Elsevier:, New York. 
2007. 
[16] Yong-Ill, L. Laser Induced Breakdown Spectrometry; Nova Science Publishers: New 
York 2000. 
[17] Marpaung, AM; Kurniawan, H; Tjia, MO; Kagawa, KJ. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., 2001, 34, 
758-771. 
[18] Camacho, JJ; Poyato, JML; Diaz, L; Santos, MJ. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 2007, 
40, 4573-4590. 
[19] Camacho, JJ; Poyato, JML; Diaz, L; Santos, MJ. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 103302-10. 
[20] Camacho, J. J; Santos, M; Diaz, L; Poyato, J. M. L. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 
215206-13. 
[21] Camacho, JJ; Santos, M; Diaz, L; Juan, LJ; Poyato, JML. 2009 (Submitted for 
publication) 
[22] MacDonald, AD. Microwave Breakdown in Gases; Wiley: New York. 1966. 
[23] Raizer, YP. Gas Discharge Physics; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg., 1991. 
[24] Kopiczynski, TL; Bogdan, M; Kalin, AW; Schotwau, HJ; Kneubuhl, FH. Appl. Phys. B. 
Photophys. Laser Chem., 1992, 54, 526-530. 
[25] Tozer, BA. Phys. Rev., 1965, 137, 1665-1667. 

Optical Breakdown in Gases Induced by High-Power IR CO2 Laser Pulses 
 
499
[26] Radziemski, LJ; Cremers, DA; Laser-induced plasma and applications; New York: 
Dekker. 1989. 
[27] Gurevich, A; Pitaevskii, L. Sov. Phys. JETP., 1962, 19, 870-871. 
[28] Capitelli, M; Capitelli, F; Eletskii, A. Spectrochim. Acta B., 2000, 55, 559-574. 
[29] Capitelli, M; Casavola, A; Colonna, G; Giacomo, AD. Spectrochim. Acta B., 2004, 59, 
271-289. 
[30] Chan, CH; Moody, CD; McKnight, WBJ. Appl. Phys., 1973, 44, 1179-1188. 
[31] Smith, DS; Haught, AF. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1966, 16, 1085-1088. 
[32] Young, M; Hercher, M. J. Appl. Phys., 1967, 38, 4393-4400. 
[33] Barchukov, AI; Bunkin, FV; Konov, VI; Lubin, AA. Sov. Phys. JETP, 1974, 39, 469-
477. 
[34] Hermann, J; Boulmer-Leborgne, C; Mihailescu, IN; Dubreuil, B. J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 
73, 1091-1099. 
[35] Offenberger, AA; Burnett, NH. J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 43, 4977-4980. 
[36] Donaldson, TP; Balmer, JE; Zimmermann, JA. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 1221-
1233. 
[37] Meyerand, RG; Haught, AF. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1964, 13, 7-9. 
[38] Spitzer, L. Physics of Fully Ionised Gases; John Wiley: New York. 1962. 
[39] Hermann, J; Boulmer-Leborgne C; Dubreuil, B; Mihailescu, IN. J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 
74, 3071-3079. 
[40] Ready, JF. Effect of high power laser radiation; Academic Press., New York. 1971. 
[41] Griem, HR. Principles of plasma spectroscopy; University Press: Cambridge., 1997. 
[42] Griem, HR. Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 515-523. 
[43] Huddlestone, RH; Leonard, SL. Plasma Diagnostic Techniques; Academic Press: New 
York. 1965. 
[44] Hutchinson, IH. Principles of plasma diagnostic; University Press: Cambridge. 2002. 
[45] NIST Atomic Spectra Database online at http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/ 
ASD/index.html 
[46] Herzberg, G. Spectra of diatomic molecules; Van Nostrand: New York. 1950. 
[47] Steinfeld, JI. An introduction to modern molecular spectroscopy; MIT Press: London. 
1986. 
[48] Bernath, PF. Spectra of atoms and molecules; Oxford University Press: New York. 
1995. 
[49] Camacho, JJ; Pardo, A; Martin, E; Poyato, JMLJ. Phys. B, At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 2006, 
39, 2665-2679. 
[50] Kovacs, I. Rotational Structure in the Spectra of Diatomic Molecules; Hilger: London. 
1969. 
[51] Drogoff, LB; Margotb, J; Chakera, M; Sabsabi, M; Barthelemy, O; Johnstona, TW; 
Lavillea, S; Vidala, F; Kaenela, VY. Spectrochim. Acta Part B., 2001, 56, 987-1002. 
[52] Lofthus, A; Krupenie, PHJ. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data., 1977, 6, 113-307. 
[53] Herzberg, G. Ergeb. Exakten Naturwiss. 1931, 10, 207-284. 
[54] Pannetier, G; Marsigny, GL; Guenebaut, HCR. Acad. Sci. Paris., 1961, 252, 1753-
1755. 
[55] Tanaka, Y; Jursa, ASJ. Opt. Soc. Amer., 1961, 51, 1239-1245. 
[56]  Meinel, AB. Astrophys. J., 1950, 112, 562-563. 
[57] Ledbetter, JW. Jr. J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1972, 42 100-111. 

J. J. Camacho, L. Díaz, M. Santos et al. 
 
500 
[58] Huber, KP; Herzberg, G. Molecular spectra an Molecular structure. IV. Constants of 
diatomic molecules; Van Nostrand Reinhold: New York. 1979. 
[59] Laher, RR; Gilmore, FR. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data., 1991, 20, 685-712. 
[60] Gilmore, FRJ. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer., 1965, 5, 369-389. 
[61] Aguilera, JA; Aragon, C. Spectrochim. Acta B., 2004, 59, 1861-1876. 
[62] Martin, WC; Zalubas, RJ. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data., 1983, 12, 323-379. 
[63] Sreckovic, A; Dimitrijevic, MS; Djenize, S. Astron. and Astroph., 2001, 371, 354-359. 
[64] Alcock, AJ; Kato, K; Richardson, MC. Opt. Comm., 1968, 6, 342-343. 
[65] Haught, AF; Meyerand, RG; Smith, DC. Physics of Quantum Electronics; In P. L. 
Kelley, B. Lax, & P. E. Tannenwald (Eds.), MacGraw-Hill: New York. 1966. 509. 
[66] De Michelis, C. Opt. Comm., 1970, 2, 255-256. 
[67] Ireland, CLM; Morgan, CG. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1973, 6, 720-729. 
[68] Aaron, JM; Ireland, CLM. Morgan, CG. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 1974, 7, 1907-1917. 
[69] Phuoc, TX; White, CM. Opt. Comm., 2000, 181, 353-359. 
[70] Tomlinson, RG; Damon, EK; Buscher, HT. Physics of Quantum Electronics; In P. L. 
Kelley, B. Lax, & P. E. Tannenwald (Eds.), MacGraw-Hill., New York. 1966. 520. 
[71] Kawahara, N; Beduneau, JL; Nakayama, T; Tomita, E; Ikeda, Y. Appl. Phys., B 2007, 
86, 605-614. 
[72] Zhuzhukalo, EV; Kolomiiskii, AN; Nastoyashchii, AF; Plyashkevich, LN. J. Quantum 
Electron., 1981, 11, 670-671. 
[73] Marcus, S; Lowder, JE; Mooney, DL. J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 2966-2968. 
[74] Kagawa, K; Yokoi, S. Spectrochim. Acta, B 1982, 37, 789-795. 

In: Laser Beams: Theory, Properties and Applications 
ISBN: 978-1-60876-266-8 
Editors: M. Thys, E. Desmet, pp. 501-516  
 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 14 
 
 
 
MACHINING STEEL XC42 BY HIGH-POWER 
CONTINUOUS CO2 LASER  
(PHYSICAL PROCESS DESCRIPTION,  
ENERGETIC AND THERMAL MODELING) 
 
 
Neila Jebbari*1, Mohamed Mondher Jebari2, AnnieTarrats-
Saugnac3 and Jean Paul Longuemard3 
1 Faculté des Sciences de Tunis, L.P.M.C., Département de physique,  
Campus Universitaire 2090 Al-Manar, Tunis, Tunisie 
2 Faculté des Sciences de Tunis, Département de Physique,  
Campus Universitaire 2090 Al-Manar, Tunis, Tunisie 
3 Ecole Centrale de Paris, Grande Voie des Vignes 92 295  
Chatenay Malabry Cedex, France 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Manufacturers who use laser cutting are interested in the optimization of productivity 
and the subsequent quality of components made by the laser cutting process. Both aspects 
are governed by the selection of appropriate laser process parameters. These parameters 
include laser power, assist gas and cutting speed. The last parameter must be able to 
provide a good quality of machined components. The inert gas is used to minimize the 
number of laser process parameters. So, only the absorbed energy by steel Ea contributes 
in the machining processes. Ea depends on power laser, interaction time and absorbed 
coefficient. 
Good quality of components made by the laser cutting process is deduced from 
groove specific characteristic parameters like the width (LS), the groove depth (Pr) and 
the width of the Thermal Affected Zone (ZTAZ).  
The condition that must be used to write the energy balance is to fix the adequate 
assumption. The energy balance will give the theoretical values of the characteristic 
machining parameters and will permit the evaluation of lost energy if the energy quantity 
able to create the TAZ is calculated from the resolution of the heat propagation equation. 
                                                           
* E-mail: neila2710@yahoo.fr  

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
502 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The description of the physical and dynamic nature of the laser cutting process, in the 
first paragraph, fixes the measured values of the specific characteristic parameters of the 
groove: the interaction time (ti), the melt-solid interaction time (tTAZ) and the laser illuminated 
surface (ST) considered as heat source. 
In the second step, the experimental behavior permits us to determine the values of 
incidence angles that must be used to calculate the theoretical absorbed coefficient (A).  
The third paragraph details the experimental results which permitted us to establish how 
the parameters of machining can act on the parameters of the groove. One can establish the 
relations driving the groove width with the impact diameter (LS , D), the groove depth with 
the absorbed power (Pr , Ea) and the TAZ width with the machining parameters. 
The last paragraph deals with the evaluation of the part of energy that serves to heat the 
removed solid volume (
1
c
E
), the conduction energy quantity enable us to create the TAZ 
(
2
c
E
) and the energy lost in the medium (
l
E
Δ
). 
 
 
DYNAMIC NATURE OF LASER CUTTING PROCESS 
 
The high-power continuous CO2 laser beam is the machining tool that illuminates the 
material surface to be machined [1-2]. The used laser wavelength drives the Drude interaction 
laser-matter, where the main quantity of absorbed energy is converted into heat by photonic 
effects. So the absorbed laser energy transformed in thermal motion agitates the molecules 
and warms-up the material. According to the thermal properties of the material, this heat 
quantity will be diffused toward the material core. Various studies, focused on laser 
machining [3-12], led to the following dynamic nature of the laser cutting process. 
In the first step, when the movement of the beam starts up, the absorbed laser energy 
increases with the area of the enlightened surface, so the warm-up of the material increases. 
The temperature of the enlightened surface arise from the ambient temperature Ta to the 
merger temperature Tf.. The energy, brought in that way by laser beam, is sufficient to heat 
and to melt the material [13]. The melted material flows from the surface towards the depth 
creating the cutting front. The cutting front propagates from the center of the thermal fields 
with a front speed (Vf). The motion of the beam laser, relative to the piece, is called cutting or 
machining speed (V).  
After this first step, which one can describe as a transitional mode, appears a periodic and 
permanent mode. 
In fact, the laser lights up two surfaces: the first one, on the top of the piece, has a 
crescent-like form and the other one, in the lower part, looks like a half inclined cylinder. 
However, and since the front speed Vf, is greater than the machining speed V [4], the surface 
in crescent form disappears because it is outside the influence of the beam. Then the laser 
interacts directly with the half inclined cylinder surface form which leads the laser beam to 
reach the depth Pr.  
The beam progress has constant speed V, the laser lights-up again the two kinds of 
surfaces and this process takes place periodically. 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
503
In the same manner, to cut or to groove [14-17], one can provide an optimum pressure 
gas jet to remove the melted piece beneath the laser beam. 
The temporal period ti of this mechanism corresponds to the duration of time where one 
point, of the surface, remains illuminated by the laser beam (Figure 1). If D is the laser beam 
diameter (impact diameter), taken at the surface of the sample, the temporal period ti can be 
written as: 
 
V
D
ti =
 
(1) 
 
 
Figure 1. Illuminated surface ST during the interaction time ti (ST=2D2).  
From the irradiated surface towards the exterior of the sample, the heat propagation on 
the top of the surface remains isotropic. Then one can consider that the groove width is the 
same in all directions and the melted surface is bigger than the impact surface.  
The second assumption is to consider that the enlightened surface and the energy 
absorbed by the crescent are superior in the direction of manufacturing than in the extremities 
which allow uniform streaks to appear at the superior zone level of the internal surface groove 
(Figure 2). 
At this stage, the beam is out of interaction with the superior level of the groove surface; 
it interacts only with deeper levels and does not act any more on the width of the groove. This 
assumption can lead us to suppose that the groove width Ls does not depend on increasing 
power or decreasing speed, but it must depend only on the impact diameter D and on the 
thermal material properties. 
The calculation of the absorption coefficient must take account of some assumptions: The 
laser beam in deeper levels interacts with an inclined surface, so the incidence angle may vary 
on large range of values (Figure 3). On the other hand, the metallic properties impose the skin 
effect penetration [18]; the totality of absorption takes place on the surface excluding neither 
bulk absorption nor transmission. At the interface melt-solid (the inclined surface), the 
temperature is the same as that of fusion. 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
504 
 
Figure 2. Regularly spaced striations in the upper part of cutting surface (top view) 
 
Figure 3. Incidence angle θ at each point of the front surface 
The machined materials usually present a phase change named thermal affected zone 
(TAZ) which is caused by the dissipated heat in the un-removed material.  
The total surface ST enlightened by the laser during the time of interaction ti (Figure 1) 
serves to maintain the temperature of the melted front simulated as heat source and it can be 
supposed equal to:  
 
ST = 2D2 
(2) 
 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
505
The principal parameters contributing in the manufacturing mechanism are defined and 
some of them will be calculated such as the impact diameter D and the average absorption 
coefficient A. Other parameters like the laser power P or the machining speed V will be fixed 
according to the needs of user. 
The absorbed laser energy Ea during a temporal period is then written as: 
 
V
D
P
A
Ea =
 
(3) 
 
This quantity of energy is sufficient to manufacturing a groove characterized by the 
parameters: Ls, TAZ and Pr.  Well on for the cut, the optimized thickness e takes place of Pr. 
 
 
IMPACT DIAMETER AND ABSORPTION COEFFICIENT 
 
Impact Diameter (D) 
 
To determine the values of the waist D0 and the impact diameter D at z height, a laser 
beam is assumed to be Gaussian [7]. The propagation equation solution proves that the 
Gaussian beam is characterised by a complex curvature ray. The imaginary term contains the 
impact diameter D of the laser beam. From the propagation law and according to the shape of 
the laser resonant cavity, the relation between D0 and D(z) is: 
 
2
2
0
0
D
z
4
1
D
D
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
+
=
π
λ
 
(4) 
 
The resonant cavity of the used laser is constituted in one side by a plan mirror and in the 
other side by a spherical half-reflecting mirror. This specific shape of the resonant cavity and 
the 127 mm focal length lens placed 4 m behind the cavity makes it possible to determine the 
value of the waist: D0 = 0.096 mm. 
 
 
Absorption Coefficient (A) 
 
The sample surface is not treated and the maximum intensity attained by the CO2 
continuous laser is lower than critical plasma intensity, it is in the order of 107 W/cm2. So this 
laser can provide just enough energy to melt XC42 steel. In this case the absorbed power A, 
depends mainly on surface temperature and incidence angle θ. The beam, being a Gaussian 
one, presents some divergence, but this latter is relatively weak to affect the A value. On the 
other hand the melting front curve which is directly irradiated by the beam is relatively 
important (Figure 3).  To each point of the front surface corresponds an incidence angle θ and 
an absorbing coefficient A(Tf, θ). In a first approximation, one can consider that the absorbing 
power of the irradiated surface is the average < A(Tf, θ) >: 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
506 
< A(Tf, θ) > = A = 
n
i ,
A(T
 
1
-
n
i
0
i
f
∑
 )
<
=
=
θ
Δ
 
(5) 
with (n-1)Δθ =  90°.  
To calculate the absorption capacity of each of those angles, in the case of metals in 
infrared wave lengths, it is necessary to calculate the reflection power R [18-19]. 
In metallic behavior, absorption takes place over a very low penetration distance and may 
be assimilated to a surface absorption. One can write: 
 
A = 1- < Rp > 
 (6) 
 
For XC42-steel obtained average absorption capacity is around of 25%, for a p-
polarization. 
 
 
CHARACTERISTIC PARAMETERS OF THE GROOVE OR CUT 
 
Groove Width (Ls) 
 
During the grooving process, for several values of P and V, the experimental results 
show that the groove width Ls remains the same and evolves linearly as a function of impact 
diameter D according to the relationship: 
 
β
α
+
=
D
Ls
 
(7) 
 
Where α and β are constants depending only on the optical and thermal properties of the 
material.  
For XC42, α = 0.8 and  β = 0.16 mm [20]. 
 
 
Thermal Affected Zone Width (Ztaz) 
 
The TAZ are characterized mechanically by micro-toughness and optically by optical 
microscope [1]. The measurements make it possible to estimate the width of the TAZ at 
optimal morphology of the groove [21]. 
The experimental TAZ widths ZTAZ are measured at the top of the groove and the average 
values of the ZTAZ are reported on experimental curves.  
Figure 4 represents the evolution of the experimental value of the TAZ width as a 
function of impact diameter D. ZTAZ increases to reach a maximum at D = 0.17 mm, then it 
decreases toward a limit value. This result confirms the optimization between the interaction 
time (increasing with D) and the laser power density (decreasing with D) [20]. 
 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
507
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
Impact diameter (mm)
T. A. Z. (mm) 
1500Watt;1,5m/mn
1500Watt; 2m/mn
 
Figure 4. Influence of impact diameter on the Thermal Affected Zone (T.A.Z.) 
0,2
0,25
0,3
0,35
0,4
0,45
0,5
0,55
0,6
4,5
5
5,5
6
6,5
7
7,5
8
P0.25 (Watt)0,25
ZTAZ (mm)
D=0.17 mm; V=1.5 m /min
 
Figure 5. Influence of laser power on the Thermal Affected Zone (TAZ) 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1/V (m-1 s)
ZTAZ (mm)
D=0.17 mm;  P=1000  Watt
 
Figure 6. Influence of machining speed on the Thermal Affected Zone (TAZ). 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
508 
 
Figure 7. Influence of laser power on the Thermal Affected Zone (TAZ). 
These evolutions are repetitive and can be fitted as a function of power and speed 
parameters. Figure 5 shows that ZTAZ evolves linearly with 4 P  and at the same time it is 
linear with V-1 (Figure 6). 
In general, the width of the TAZ evolves as a linear function with
1
4
1
V
P
−
×
and can be 
written as: 
 
δ
γ
+
=
V
P
Z
4
TAZ
 
(8) 
 
Figure 7 shows that γ and δ depend on impact beam diameter D. 
At optimal value of impact diameter (D = 0.17 mm) and from the fitting curves of the 
ZTAZ (Figure 7), it could be deduced that γ = 0.0012 mm0.75 (Kg s)-0.25 and δ = 0.027 mm.  
During the interaction time ti, the laser power melts a preheated volume Vf. At the same 
time, the quantity of heat is diffused by conduction from the melted zone to the material core 
[21]. As a result, the zone having the temperature greater or equal to 720 °C will change the 
structure and will be the TAZ.  
Let us suppose that this heat, put down on the surface ST, is transferred in the core of the 
material during the presence of the melted matter, whose temperature is approximately equal 
to the fusion temperature. The surface ST is simulated as the heat source and t the time of the 
melted matter maintained on this surface. So, t can be defined as the interaction time between 
the melted surface and the solid surface, it is called "melt-solid interaction time". 
This heat will be diffused by conduction, perpendicularly to the melted surface ST, in the 
Z direction. The zone situated between the surface ST, with a fusion temperature Tf, and the 
parallel surface with the temperature TTAZ, is called Thermal Affected Zone, defined by the 
thickness ZTAZ and the temperature TTAZ. The general heat equation in the case of a semi-
infinite medium is:  

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
509
0
t
)
t,
Z
,
Y
,
X
(
T
d
1
)
t,
Z
,
Y
,
X
(
T
=
∂
∂
−
Δ
 
(9) 
 
where: 
 
- T(X, Y, Z, t) is the temperature inside the metal, 
- d is the thermal diffusivity of the steel. 
At the last conditions, using method of changing variables (
d
t
2
Z
u =
), heat equation 
solution is:  
 
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
=
−
−
t
d
2
Z
erfc
T
T
T
T
0
f
0
 
(10) 
 
Where t is the time needed to keep the front Z at the temperature T. If the temperature T 
is imposed to be the TAZ temperature (TTAZ), the time t will be defined as the needed time to 
create the TAZ. 
 
Using the value of the temperature T=TTAZ =720°C, for XC42, in relation (10) the 
interaction time (t=tTAZ) between the melted surface and the solid surface can be obtained: 
 
TAZ
TAZ
TAZ
TAZ
TAZ
TAZ
0
f
0
TAZ
t
d
Z
2
1
t
d
2
Z
t
d
2
Z
erfc
45
,
0
T
T
T
T
≈
⇒
≈
⇒
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
≈
≈
−
−
(11) 
 
 
Melt-Solid Interaction Time (Ttaz) 
 
To determine the evolution of the melt-solid interaction time tTAZ the relations (8) and 
(11) are used. For optimum value of impact diameter D=0.17 mm, deduced value of tTAZ is 
equal to:  
 
2
0.25
2
TAZ
TAZ
)
027
.0
V
P
0012
.0
(
d
1
d
Z
t
+
=
=
 
(12) 
 
To calculate the limit of the TAZ, ZTAZ, it is more precise to use the melt-solid interaction 
time tTAZ in the thermal model. The use of the laser-matter interaction time ti to calculate ZTAZ 
leads to a divergence with the experimental results.  
At this stage, it is interesting to compare the melt-solid interaction time tTAZ to the laser-
matter interaction time ti (ti = V
D ). To be able to do it, it should be put in mind that the melt-

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
510 
solid surface ST requires to be constant and equal to the sum of illuminated surfaces during 
the laser-matter interaction ti (
2
T
D
2
S =
). 
0
0,005
0,01
0,015
0,02
0,025
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Inverse of machining speed V-1 (s.m-1 )
Time (s)
ti
tTAZ
 
Figure 8. Influence of machining speed on the laser-matter interaction time ti and on the melt–solid 
interaction time tTAZ 
Figure 8 shows the evolutions of ti and tTAZ versus the inverse of machining speed V. At 
low speed, tTAZ is higher than ti. The low speed implies a big quantity of melted matter, thus 
this big quantity of melted volume will maintain the surface ST in the melt state for a long 
time (higher than ti). Conversely, at high speed, the melt volume is less important and the 
surface will stay at fusion temperature for a short time (lower than ti).  
 
 
Groove Depth (Pr) 
 
- Assumptions 
 
In order to model the machining process, it is assumed that: 
1. The laser-metal is considered a locally isolated system. 
2. During ti, the conduction energy Ec (heating energy) is proportional to the absorbed 
energy Ea:  
 
a
c
E
b
E =
 
(13) 
 
where Ea is the unique source of energy.  
3. The volume Vf brought to melting during the interaction time is equal to the product of 
the groove depth Pr and the melted surface S during the interaction:  
 
S
P
V
r
f =
 
(14) 
 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
511
where S is equal to:  
 
2
s
2
L
S
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
= π
 
(15) 
 
4. The energy Ef required to change the phase of the volume Vf  is: 
 
f
f
f
V
L
E
ρ
=
 
(16) 
 
Where ρ Lf  is the latent melting energy per unit volume [19]. 
5. The volume brought to melting is locally removed. 
 
- Energy Balance  
The energy balance must be studied during the interaction time ti. The initial state will be 
defined by the energy already stored, by conduction, in the metal not yet irradiated by the 
laser beam. Let Wi be the energy of that state: Wi = Ec 
The final state energy Wf corresponds to the laser energy Ea brought to the metal minus 
the quantity Ef corresponding to the change phase energy: Wf = Ea – Ef . 
The system being isolated, so Wf – Wi = 0, then: 
 
Ec = Ea – Ef 
(17) 
 
Substituting relations (3, 13-16) in (17), the following is obtainable: 
 
V
D
P
A
P
2
L
L
1
b
r
2
s
f
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
=
π
ρ
 
(18) 
 
The proportional coefficient b depends only on the type of material and not on machining 
parameters. For XC42 these is b = 0.86 [20]. 
 
- Calculation Of Pr   
Since b is independent on machining parameters and remains constant for the same 
material it is sufficient to determine b, for any machined material, to deduce previously the 
depth of the groove. From (7) and (18) one can write:  
 
(
)
2
f
r
2
D
L
V
D
P
A
b
1
P
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
+
−
=
β
α
π
ρ
 
(19) 
 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
512 
MODELING THE CONDUCTION ENERGY (EC) 
 
From the energy balance model [20], the characteristics of the groove related to the 
machining parameters have been obtained. In this paper, the heat suitable model is added in 
order to calculate the predicted TAZ width which will be compared to the experimental 
results. 
In the case of machining laser, the time of interaction being very short (some 
milliseconds) and the heat would not have the time to be dissipated in the air. The convection 
is slower than conduction so, owing energy lost by convection, the conduction energy Ec 
dissipated, deduced from energetic balance, is distributed in three quantities
1
c
E
, 
2
c
E
and
l
E
Δ
:  
 
l
c
c
c
E
E
E
E
2
1
Δ
+
+
=
 
(20) 
 
− 
1
c
E
 is the energy that serves to heat the part of solid volume, that would be 
removed, from the ambient temperature T0 to the fusion temperature Tf :  
 
∫
=
f
0
1
T
T
f
c
dT
)
T
(
C
V
)
T
(
E
ρ
 
(21) 
 
where  ρ (T) is the specific mass and C(T) the specific capacity. 
For T0 = 20 °C and Tf = 1500 °C, 
f
9
c
V
10
08
.9
E 1 =
 (Joule) is obtained. 
 
− 
2
c
E
is the energy dissipated in the metal helping to create the TAZ. The energy 
2
c
E
can be imposed to be the quantity Q of heat, diffused by conduction from the 
melted surface to the core: 
 
Q
E 2
c
=
 
(22) 
 
The quantity Q is detailed and calculated in the next section 
 
− 
l
E
Δ
 is the lost energy. This quantity of energy is supposed to be a part of energy Ea 
dissipated in the evacuated melted matter. 
 
 
 
 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
513
Required Energy 
2
c
E
to Create the Taz 
 
The density Φ of heat flux and the quantity Q of heat traversing surface ST, during the 
time t, and causing the TAZ are equal to:  
 
(
)
d
t
)
T
T
(
K
t,
0
Z
0
f
π
Φ
−
=
=
 
(23) 
 
(
)
t
d
)
T
T
(
K
2
S
t,
0
Z
Q
0
f
T
π
−
=
=
 
(24) 
 
where K is the thermal conductivity. 
Using the relations (2), (11), (24) and (
C
d
K
ρ
=
), the following is reached:  
 
(
)
TAZ
2
0
f
Z
D
)
T
T
(
C
4
t,
0
z
Q
E 2
c
π
ρ
−
=
=
=
 
(25) 
 
 
Lost Energy (ΔEl) 
 
The following relation is used to calculate ΔEl: 
Q
dT
)
T
(
C
V
)
T
(
bE
E
E
E
E
f
0
2
1
T
T
f
a
c
c
c
l
−
−
=
−
−
=
∫ρ
Δ
 
(26) 
 
The bigger quantity of lost energy is observed at higher power and increases with the 
machining speed (Figure 9). This is in well agreement with dissipated energy phenomena 
where the high power yields to put high quantity of energy in the system. Some quantity of 
this energy is stored in the melted volume before being evacuated.  
In the grooving experiments, the melted volume flows out in the bottom of the groove 
and cuts a channel with a characteristic evacuated length le. In fact, a part of the called lost 
energy ΔEl serves to further deepen the groove. 
 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
514 
0,05
0,06
0,07
0,08
0,09
0,1
0,11
0,12
0,13
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
V (m/min)
 El/Ea 
4000 Watt
3500 Watt
3000 Watt
2500 Watt
2000 Watt
1500 Watt
1000 Watt
 
Figure 9. Influence of machining speed on the lost energy  
Figure 9, represents the evolution of the ratio ΔEl /Ea versus the machining speed V. For 
any power the curves are linear but the slope κ decreases with increasing power (Table 1): 
 
μ
κ
Δ
+
=
V
E
E
a
l
 
(27) 
 
where κ and μ depend on the laser power P. For D = 0.2 mm the following is obtained: 
 κ = 4.8 P-1 (s m-1) and  μ = 5.5 10-3 P0.5 – 4 10-5 P– 0.081  
 
Table 1. Effect of laser power on slope curve of equation: 
μ
κ
Δ
+
=
V
E
E
a
l
   
 
P (Watts) 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
4000 
κ (min /m) 
0.0048 
0.0032 
0.0024 
0.0019 
0.0016 
0.0014 
0.0012 
μ 
0.0528 
0.0717 
0.0849 
0.0929 
0.0982 
0.102 
0.1049 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
This chapter clarified some laser machining mechanisms. We used an energetic model, 
considering the system to be locally isolated and assuming that the laser beam interacts with a 
preheated surface during the laser–matter interaction time. The absorbed power melts a part 
of the material and preheats the part that would be manufactured during the following 
interaction time. 
The proposed dynamic of the machining processes explain the experimental results. The 
coherence between experimental and theoretical results is available only at optimal 

Machining Steel XC42 by High-Power Continuous CO2 Laser … 
 
515
conditions. In fact the relationship (19) shows the evolution of the depth of the groove as a 
function of three parameters: the laser beam power, the machining speed and the impact 
diameter. 
On the basis of this relationship, the depth Pr depends on interaction time (
V
D
ti =
) and 
on power density 
( (
)2
D
P
β
α
+
). So the depth Pr passes by a maximum when the impact 
diameter D is equal to the ratio β/α. This ratio is the optimal value of the impact diameter to 
obtain the best parameters of the groove with minimum of laser energy.  
Experimentally at normal incidence, when value of impact diameter is equal to the waste 
D0 (focus beam), one obtains non parallel cut walls and non repetitive groove characteristics. 
This result is basically due to the feed-back effect (return by reflection of a part of the beam 
into the resonant cavity). For greater diameters, the lost convection energy is more important 
and one cannot neglect it in the energetic model [20]. 
To calculate the width of the TAZ (ZTAZ), it is more precise to use the melt-solid 
interaction time (tTAZ) in the thermal model than to use the interaction time (ti) 
If the gas used to remove the melted matter is oxygen, an extra energy (Eex) due to the 
metal oxidation appears to be a major component in the process. For this reason, writing the 
energy balance according to the appropriate assumptions will permit the calculation of the 
new characteristic parameters of the groove. So the effect of the extra energy due to the 
oxidation must be taken into consideration. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Steen, W.M. J Opt A: Pure Appl Opt, 2003, 5, S3–7. 
[2] 
Ciofini, M.; Lapucci, A.; Lolli, S. J Opt A: Pure Appl Opt 2003, 5, 186–191. 
[3] 
Arata, Y.; Maruo, H.; Miyamoto, I.; Takeuchi, S. Proceedings of symposium on 
electron and ion beam science and technology, Washington, 1986, 111–128. 
[4] 
Yuan, S. PhD thesis, Institut National des Sciences appliquées de Lyon, 1989. 
[5] 
Arata, Y.; Maruo, H.; Miyamoto, I.; Takeuchi, S. Trans JWRI, 1979, 8, 15–26. 
[6] 
Arata, Y.; Maruo, H.; Miyamoto, I.; Takeuchi, S. Trans JWRI, 1981, 10, 129–39. 
[7] 
Vannes, A.B. Laser et industrie de transformation; Technique et documentation; 
Lavoisier: Paus, 1986, 225. 
[8] 
Kogelnik, H.; T.L.I.: Appl Opt, 1966, 5. 
[9] 
Jebbari, N.; Tarrats-Saugnac, A.; De Contencin, F.X. OPTO, 1992, 536. 
[10] Jebbari, N.; Tarrats-Saugnac, A.; Melhaoui, A. Mécanique Industrielle et Matériaux, 
1995, 48, 232 
[11] Jebbari, N.; Tarrats-Saugnac, A. Mécanique et optique; I.S.L., Saint Louis, 25 April 
1995 
[12] Chrissolouris, G. Laser Machining – Theory and practice; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 
1991 
[13] Pantelis, D. Techniques de l’ingénieur, traité généralités A 1 095, 1–18. 

Neila Jebbari, Mohamed Mondher Jebari, AnnieTarrats-Saugnac et al. 
 
516 
[14] Kamalu, J.N.; Steen, W.M. Lasers in metallurgy, held at the 110th American institute of 
mining, metallurgical and petroleum engineers (AIME) annual meeting, Chicago, IL, 
1981, 263–77 
[15] Adams, M.J. Proceedings of conference on advanced in welding processes; Abington, 
Cambridge, UK: Welding Institute; 14–16 April 1971. p. 140–146. 
[16] Babenko, V.P.; Tychinskii, V.P. Sov J Quantum Electron, 1973, 2, 399 
[17] Kechmair, D. PhD thesis, Université de Paris — Sud centre d’Orsay, 1989. 
[18] Born, M.; Wolf, E.  Principles of Optics, 5th edition; Pergamon Press: Oxford, 1975 
[19] Metals handbook; ninth edition —Volume 2—Properties of pure metals.  741–759. 
[20] Jebbari, N.; Jebari, M.; Ahdad, F.; Tarrats-Saugnac A.; Longuemard, J.P. Appl Phys B, 
2000, 70, 99–103 
[21] Jebbari, N.; Jebari, M.M.; Saadallah, F.; Tarrats-Saugnac, A.; Bennaceur R.; 
Longuemard, J.P. Opt. Laser Technol. 2008, 40, 864–873. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
abortion, 74 
absorption coefficient, 260, 261, 262, 265, 428, 503, 
505 
acceleration, vii, 44, 65, 67, 81, 95, 99, 112, 115, 
124, 125, 126, 166, 339, 347, 374, 433, 491 
accelerator, 112, 124, 127, 342 
accidental, 14 
accidents, 358 
accounting, 71, 74 
accuracy, 2, 68, 80, 177, 197, 238, 245, 266, 279, 
324, 353, 355, 361, 363, 418 
acetone, 227, 237, 249, 339 
acid, 184 
ACM, 93 
acoustic, 50, 54, 132, 207, 399, 409, 410, 411, 445 
acoustical, 326, 328 
actuators, 207, 384 
adaptation, 385 
adhesion, 34, 63, 212, 339, 342, 343, 347, 380, 387 
adiabatic, 23, 58, 106, 430 
adjustment, 200 
adsorption, 209, 219, 238, 239, 240, 241, 321 
AFM, 176, 177, 180, 181, 183, 184, 186, 187, 188, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 
199, 207 
aggregates, 321 
aggregation, 318 
aid, 209, 227, 442, 481 
AIP, 91, 92, 209, 210, 214, 222, 348 
Albert Einstein, 96 
alcohol, 227, 339 
 
 
algorithm, 26, 49, 50, 51 
alkali, 328 
alkaline, 176 
alloys, 86, 88, 247, 368, 380 
ALS, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 361, 362, 363, 364, 
366 
alternative, viii, 66, 96, 159, 161, 332, 383 
alters, 376 
aluminium, 375, 376, 380 
aluminum, 39, 41, 42, 238, 247, 248, 289, 323, 334 
ambient air, 161, 165, 467, 471, 476, 481 
amendments, 346 
ammonia, 1, 237, 326 
amorphization, 35 
amorphous, 193, 195, 197, 332, 338 
amplitude, 17, 29, 38, 39, 99, 106, 108, 132, 135, 
139, 145, 152, 170, 172, 173, 401, 402, 403, 411 
Amsterdam, 157, 158 
analog, 99, 151 
analytical models, 260 
angular momentum, 438, 439, 478, 479 
anisotropy, 140 
annealing, 208, 223, 247, 261, 274, 275, 276, 277, 
279 
Annealing, 86, 88 
anode, 284, 285, 288, 291, 294, 299, 301, 302, 303, 
333, 335, 336, 337, 339, 340, 343, 344 
anomalous, 100 
ANOVA, 375 
appendix, 64 
aqueous solutions, 210, 213 
argon, 212, 218, 220, 223, 287 
argument, 38, 199 
arsenide, 192, 440 
ASD, 499 
ASI, 157 
Asia, 380 
aspect ratio, 161, 185 
assessment, 365, 372 
assignment, 438, 456, 459, 461, 467, 471, 472, 476, 
477, 479 
assumptions, 17, 19, 34, 46, 68, 96, 323, 374 

Index 
 
518 
asymptotically, 110 
atmosphere, 209, 210, 213, 214, 215, 218, 219, 220, 
222, 225, 226, 228, 229, 230, 232, 287, 314, 324, 
325, 326, 354, 375, 421, 427, 465, 477, 484 
atmospheric pressure, ix, 283, 284, 285, 425, 428, 
430, 440, 442, 465, 467, 471, 476, 478, 480, 481, 
483, 484 
atomic force microscopy (AFM), 85, 89, 207 
atomic positions, 30, 57 
attachment, 339, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426 
attribution, 468 
Au nanoparticles, 218 
Australia, 353, 366 
Austria, 354 
automatic scanning, 353 
averaging, 49, 69, 109, 122, 123, 129, 138, 140, 152, 
316, 484 
Avogadro number, 317, 319 
avoidance, 368 
B 
back, 9, 12, 56, 57, 58, 59, 65, 68, 112, 132, 164, 
180, 184, 354, 364, 429, 443, 444 
backscattered, 227 
backscattering, 349 
band gap, 38, 75 
bandwidth, 163 
barrier, 112, 288, 299, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305 
baths, 227 
BCS theory, 150 
behavior, ix, 12, 17, 20, 28, 39, 40, 43, 77, 172, 180, 
220, 228, 233, 234, 239, 245, 247, 256, 261, 271, 
272, 417, 461, 481, 502 
bell, 297 
bell-shaped, 297 
bending, 33, 44, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 
252, 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 266, 267, 268, 270, 271, 272, 273, 
274, 275, 276, 277, 279, 280, 339, 439 
Bessel, 38 
bias, 213 
binding, 138, 142, 153, 206, 461 
binding energy, 138, 142, 153, 206, 461 
binomial distribution, 114, 116, 137 
biocompatibility, 206 
biocompatible, 208 
biomedical applications, 208 
biophysics, 2 
biosensors, 208 
black body, 117, 142 
blocks, 275 
Bohr, 142, 153, 157, 432 
boiling, 15, 19, 188, 316, 321 
Boltzmann constant, 431 
Boltzmann distribution, 138 
bonding, 78, 376 
bonds, 30, 80, 141, 316, 317, 318, 319, 324 
boreholes, x, 351, 355, 361, 362, 363, 364 
Bose, 4, 129, 138, 139, 152, 154, 155 
Bose-Einstein, 4, 138, 139, 152, 154, 155 
bosons, 479 
boundary conditions, 12, 26, 27, 33, 48, 51, 54, 56, 
59, 60, 63, 169, 172, 173, 302, 374 
bounds, 326, 327 
branching, 170 
breakdown, xi, 176, 183, 289, 294, 296, 306, 309, 
415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 
425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 434, 440, 442, 444, 
467, 476, 481, 483, 484 
bremsstrahlung, 97, 420, 433 
broadband, 183 
bubble, 326, 327 
bubbles, 326, 328 
buffer, 196, 209, 215, 224, 291, 301 
buildings, 352, 354 
butane, 237 
C 
CAD, x, 246, 351, 360, 368 
cadmium, 287 
calcium, 287 
calibration, 261, 262, 265, 266, 267, 443 
CAM, 368 
Canada, 353 
capacitance, 285, 297 
capillary, 116 
carbon, 208, 237, 247, 248, 249, 326, 346, 416, 439, 
444, 485, 491 
carbon dioxide, 326, 416, 439, 444 
carbon film, 346 
carbon monoxide, 237 
carbon nanotubes, 208 
carrier, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 81, 237, 369, 370, 372 
casting, 368 
catalyst, 208, 209, 213, 217, 218, 221, 223, 225, 227 
cathode, x, 285, 294, 301, 302, 303, 304, 306, 331, 
336, 339, 340, 341, 343, 344, 347, 349, 443, 448 
cation, 209, 446 
cavitation, 326, 328, 445 
cavities, x, 207, 332, 334, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 
358, 359, 361, 363, 364, 365 
CEA, 157 
cell, 9, 26, 27, 28, 36, 48, 49, 50, 52, 59, 61, 63, 65, 
68, 69, 71, 79, 80, 82, 163, 407, 442, 444, 472, 
478, 481 
ceramic, 209, 215, 217 

Index 
 
519
CH4, ix, 313, 325, 326 
channels, vii, 7, 9, 95, 96, 105, 138, 314, 320, 324, 
411 
charge density, 302 
charged particle, vii, 95, 99, 137, 349, 428, 433 
chemical bonds, 143 
chemical reactions, 166, 212, 291, 314, 326, 328 
chemical stability, 206 
chemical vapor deposition, 210 
chemiluminescence, 315 
Chile, 366 
China, x, 218, 219, 224, 351, 353, 354, 364, 365, 380 
cholesterol, 237 
cladding, x, 248, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 
374, 375, 376, 378, 379, 380 
cladding layer, 375, 376 
classical, vii, 3, 6, 8, 19, 26, 29, 47, 55, 60, 80, 95, 
101, 106, 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 127, 128, 133, 
134, 139, 213, 225, 316, 420, 421, 433, 483 
cleaning, x, 208, 331, 333, 335, 336, 337, 339, 340, 
342, 343, 344, 347 
cleavage, 385, 388 
clouds, ix, 313, 314, 325 
clusters, 26, 50, 108, 213, 228, 229, 232, 318, 323, 
325 
coal mine, 364, 365 
coatings, ix, 167, 175, 176, 182, 183, 211, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 335, 337, 339, 340, 342, 343, 344, 347, 
349, 375, 376 
coherence, 133, 163 
cohesion, 275 
collisions, 4, 5, 18, 36, 37, 38, 39, 145, 151, 155, 
212, 230, 286, 287, 291, 293, 307, 422, 425, 427, 
428, 435, 479, 481 
colors, 178 
combined effect, 279, 422, 423 
combustion, 419, 430 
communication, 384 
compatibility, 119 
competition, 113, 228, 232 
complement, 15 
complexity, 55, 68, 246, 258, 335, 353, 457, 468 
compliance, 338 
complications, vii, 95, 112 
components, x, 33, 59, 103, 116, 131, 138, 149, 211, 
232, 248, 294, 295, 298, 346, 369, 380, 383, 385, 
402, 433, 436 
composites, 247 
composition, ix, 116, 148, 166, 199, 212, 227, 331, 
332, 335, 339, 342, 343, 346, 347, 356, 375, 376, 
377, 431, 437, 465, 469 
compounds, 213, 326 
comprehension, 131 
Compton scattering, 112, 125 
computation, 137 
computer simulations, 182 
computing, 406, 426 
concentration, 65, 150, 238, 239, 240, 291, 326, 328, 
343, 344, 346, 384, 402, 422, 423, 425 
conception, 96, 130, 155, 285 
concordance, 114, 117 
concrete, 106, 323 
condensation, ix, 139, 154, 155, 208, 313, 314, 316, 
317, 319, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326 
condensed media, 153 
conductance, 237 
conductivity, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 29, 50, 77, 
138, 148, 149, 151, 162, 174, 190, 280, 315, 374, 
513 
configuration, 44, 45, 168, 192, 193, 194, 195, 197, 
198, 250, 254, 270, 392, 411, 432, 440, 442 
confinement, 8, 15, 29, 46, 55, 60, 64, 65, 67, 327 
conformity, 120, 136, 137, 151, 328 
conjecture, 106 
conjugation, 164, 165 
conservation, 32, 37, 38, 51, 76, 80, 113, 114, 127, 
129, 132, 133 
construction, 232, 352 
construction sites, 352 
consumption, 63, 351 
continuity, 169, 301, 342, 374, 422 
contracts, 246 
control, ix, 39, 51, 76, 148, 149, 165, 200, 245, 248, 
313, 314, 326, 328, 332, 334, 347, 353, 358, 366, 
369, 371, 394, 431 
convection, 374, 408, 411, 412, 413, 512, 515 
convective, 44 
convergence, 96, 105, 108, 111 
conversion, 166, 207, 291, 298, 300, 306, 315, 354 
conversion reaction, 291 
convex, 275, 276 
cooling, 4, 14, 34, 40, 41, 42, 43, 55, 64, 66, 67, 81, 
82, 132, 245, 246, 248, 249, 256, 261, 263, 265, 
266, 268, 287, 443 
Cooper pairs, 149 
correlation, 28, 29, 55, 65, 143, 147, 150, 153, 248, 
256, 259, 279, 316, 327, 411 
correlation analysis, 411 
correlation function, 28, 29 
correlations, 28, 29, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 148, 155, 314, 321 
corrosion, 367, 375, 376 
cosine, 338 
cosmic rays, 421 
cost-effective, 176 
costs, x, 245, 248, 351, 367 

Index 
 
520 
Coulomb, 38, 39, 79, 80, 100, 125, 131, 140, 153, 
293, 425, 428, 431, 433 
Coulomb interaction, 39, 79, 80, 140, 425, 428 
coupling, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 36, 41, 43, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 60, 61, 79, 207, 246, 368, 389, 
438, 477, 479 
covalent, 80 
covalent bond, 80 
covalent bonding, 80 
CPU, 37 
crack, 46, 70, 91 
cracking, 220, 416, 481 
CRC, 308, 329, 380, 412 
critical density, 322, 425, 428, 429 
critical points, 144 
critical temperature, 142, 143, 322 
cross-sectional, 234, 355 
crystal lattice, 59 
crystal structure, 6, 30, 31, 63, 79, 80, 235 
crystalline, 28, 31, 56, 57, 58, 60, 64, 65, 191, 195, 
197, 212, 275 
crystallites, 65, 66, 219 
crystallization, ix, 20, 66, 313, 314, 315, 317, 319, 
323, 324, 325, 326, 328, 329 
crystals, viii, 36, 46, 145, 159, 160, 175, 183, 208, 
218, 222, 224, 229, 232, 234, 315, 326, 349 
curing, 385 
CVD, 209 
cycles, 227, 268, 273 
cyclotron, 433 
D 
damping, 145 
danger, 360 
data analysis, 28, 180 
data processing, 358 
database, 378, 379 
debates, 6, 19 
decay, xi, 43, 100, 105, 298, 319, 392, 415, 434, 464 
decisions, x, 331 
decomposition, 19, 96, 97, 100, 101, 103, 105, 106, 
108, 109 
deduction, 108, 155 
defects, 35, 59, 199, 236, 237, 387, 390 
deficiency, 98, 212 
definition, vii, 10, 37, 48, 50, 69, 71, 73, 95, 97, 102, 
117, 121, 131, 134, 137, 138, 139, 140, 143, 144, 
145, 151, 258, 260, 335, 372, 380, 424, 484 
deformation, 8, 29, 32, 45, 46, 61, 64, 65, 67, 71, 77, 
81, 246, 247, 248, 258, 261, 263, 266, 270, 272, 
273, 277 
degenerate, 152, 439 
degenerate electron gas, 152 
degradation, 339 
degree of crystallinity, 31 
degrees of freedom, 112, 114, 116, 117, 479 
delocalization, 148 
density fluctuations, 30 
deposition rate, 227 
deposits, 209 
derivatives, 154 
desorption, 89, 227 
destruction, 64, 167, 188, 189, 335, 387, 390 
detachment, 124 
detection, x, 228, 326, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 
358, 361, 363, 364, 365, 366, 393, 418, 437, 443, 
477, 484 
detection techniques, 352, 353 
detonation, 420, 429, 430, 444 
deviation, 28, 32, 40, 42, 166, 167, 358, 407, 409, 
411 
DFT, 35, 36, 37, 79, 80 
diamond, viii, 160, 162, 185, 190, 192, 200, 211 
diamond grains, 191 
diamonds, 56, 57, 59, 60, 162, 190, 192, 200 
diaphragm, 164, 335, 340, 341, 442, 456 
dielectric constant, 428 
dielectrics, 3, 37, 322, 385 
differential equations, 9, 39 
differentiation, 318 
diffraction, viii, 6, 44, 97, 164, 176, 177, 179, 180, 
185, 205, 235, 275, 280, 384, 401, 402, 419, 442 
diffusion, 5, 9, 36, 47, 48, 51, 61, 62, 73, 74, 75, 166, 
188, 194, 195, 228, 232, 287, 301, 302, 368, 375, 
376, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 427, 482 
diffusion process, 61, 73, 74, 232 
diffusion time, 232 
diffusivities, 301 
diffusivity, 55, 259, 280 
dimensionality, 206 
dimer, 297, 298, 307 
diode laser, ix, 245, 246, 248, 249, 250, 279, 368, 
380 
diodes, 207, 288, 289 
dipole, 79, 110, 141, 143, 145, 146, 314, 315, 316, 
318, 319, 321, 322, 327 
dipole moment, 141, 145, 146, 315, 316, 318, 321, 
322, 327 
dipole moments, 146, 315, 316, 318, 322 
disaster, 353 
discharges, 284, 285, 286, 288, 305, 306, 307, 335, 
445, 479 
discretization, 9, 28, 48, 49, 50, 52 
dislocation, 64, 275, 321 
dispersion, 39, 79, 98, 100, 101, 128, 131, 132, 133, 
151, 154, 219, 375, 384, 427 

Index 
 
521
displacement, 65, 129, 254, 262, 263, 266, 268, 270, 
271, 272, 273, 274, 411 
dissociation, 119, 232, 236, 284, 425, 480 
distortions, 59, 60, 409 
distribution function, 7, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 75 
divergence, 116, 164, 332, 334, 402, 419, 424, 426, 
442, 456 
division, 117, 125, 130, 411 
donor, 235 
doped, 207 
Doppler, 125, 126, 291, 434, 463, 492 
drying, 208 
E 
earth, 421 
eating, 286, 307 
elaboration, 71, 73 
elastic deformation, 32, 65 
elasticity, 68, 339, 343 
electric field, 38, 39, 137, 284, 286, 290, 292, 296, 
301, 306, 418, 419, 420, 422, 425, 435, 442, 456, 
479 
electrical breakdown, 148 
electrical conductivity, 138, 151 
electrical properties, 208 
electrical resistance, 237 
electricity, 3, 207 
electrodeposition, 210 
electrodes, 289, 296, 297, 299, 303, 419 
electromagnetic, 1, 98, 104, 127, 138, 140, 141, 144, 
148, 155, 163, 313, 314, 315, 318, 323, 326, 352, 
353, 384, 392, 420 
electromagnetic wave, 163, 318, 352, 384, 420 
electromagnetic waves, 163, 318 
electron beam, 200, 283, 286, 287, 295, 297, 299, 
307 
electron beam pumping, 283 
electron charge, 286, 292, 304, 337, 421 
electron density, xi, 4, 12, 36, 37, 39, 286, 292, 293, 
294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 303, 305, 306, 307, 415, 
417, 420, 422, 423, 425, 426, 428, 429, 431, 432, 
463, 464, 486, 488, 491, 495, 496, 497 
electron gas, 3, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 152 
electron microscopy, viii, 205 
electron state, 121 
electronic structure, 12 
electron-phonon, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
32, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 45, 47, 48, 49, 51, 54, 
55, 60, 61, 63, 79, 81 
electron-phonon coupling, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 36, 41, 
47, 48, 49, 51, 54, 55, 60, 61 
electrostatic force, 80 
emission source, 334, 497 
emitters, 208, 434 
energy density, 74, 75, 76, 162, 183, 184, 187, 188, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 195, 197, 199, 337 
energy emission, 326 
energy of system, 321 
energy transfer, 5, 15, 18, 19, 36, 37, 40, 43, 49, 50, 
54, 55, 56, 64, 74, 245, 374, 430, 439 
energy-momentum, 102, 127, 129 
engines, 379 
England, 339 
entropy, 20, 21, 23, 24, 55, 56, 57, 142 
environment, 55, 176, 208, 213, 237, 313, 372, 431 
environmental conditions, 424 
environmental contaminants, 227 
epitaxial films, 162, 190 
epitaxial growth, 196 
epoxy, 380 
equality, 102, 117, 119, 145, 146, 154 
equating, 117, 135 
equilibrium, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 15, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 
27, 28, 29, 34, 37, 39, 42, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51, 56, 
57, 60, 63, 66, 79, 117, 213, 287, 325, 421, 424, 
431, 432, 437, 438, 439, 461 
equilibrium state, 20 
erosion, 338, 367 
estimating, 143, 247, 438 
etching, 175, 176, 177, 178, 181, 183, 184, 185, 190, 
342 
ethanol, 213, 237 
Eulerian, 247 
Europe, 380 
European Community, 201 
evanescent waves, 129, 130, 131 
evaporation, 6, 44, 166, 188, 208, 209, 210, 212, 
326, 347, 386 
evolution, xi, 3, 5, 9, 14, 20, 24, 39, 45, 46, 48, 51, 
54, 55, 56, 64, 262, 263, 401, 409, 412, 415, 416, 
420, 484 
examinations, 100, 107 
excimer lasers, ix, 211, 212, 213, 283, 284 
exciton, 206, 235 
exclusion, 479 
execution, 107 
experimental condition, 68, 187, 260, 337, 343, 429, 
430, 457, 461, 467, 479 
exploitation, 352, 359, 360 
explosion energy, 489 
exposure, 238, 239, 245, 254, 263, 266, 270, 289, 
294 
extinction, 416 
extraction, 49, 266 
extrapolation, 28 

Index 
 
522 
F 
fabricate, 368, 385, 390 
fabrication, viii, x, 43, 159, 185, 378, 380, 383, 384, 
385, 386, 387, 390, 395 
factorials, 104 
family, 402, 405 
fast processes, 400 
Fata, 365 
fatalities, 352 
fatigue, 247 
faults, 376 
FCC, 51, 54, 63, 64 
feeding, 165, 340, 367, 370, 371, 372 
FEM, 91 
Fermi, 3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 17, 18, 35, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 61, 73, 74, 75, 79, 118, 136, 142, 148, 150, 
153, 157, 158 
Fermi energy, 39, 40, 42, 142, 148 
Fermi level, 4, 18 
Fermi surface, 148 
Fermi-Dirac, 3, 4, 5, 17, 18, 35, 37, 39, 41, 73, 74, 
79 
fermions, 479 
ferromagnetic, 166, 185, 320 
Feynman, 96, 100, 103, 113, 153 
fiber, 160, 175, 182, 207, 248 
fiber optics, 160 
field theory, 96, 97, 100, 319 
filament, 302 
film thickness, 11, 12, 63, 72, 81, 168, 172, 173, 174, 
183, 188, 213, 337 
film-substrate interface, 65 
filters, 163 
financial support, 396 
finite differences, 77 
Finland, 159 
fire, 484 
first principles, 45 
flame, 334, 337 
flare, 257 
flat panel displays, 161, 208 
flexibility, 200, 245, 357, 368 
flight, xi, 130, 139, 212, 352, 354, 355, 415, 417 
flow, 8, 9, 33, 44, 66, 67, 68, 69, 196, 232, 238, 239, 
240, 246, 304, 333, 335, 337, 343, 369, 373, 375, 
376, 377, 378, 399, 406, 412, 440 
flow rate, 376, 377, 378 
fluctuations, 27, 28, 29, 49, 52, 69, 71, 100, 102, 
109, 117, 199, 238, 418 
fluid, 207, 373, 412 
fluorescence, 417, 439 
fluoride, 324 
focusing, x, 6, 7, 211, 249, 334, 383, 393, 394, 395, 
417, 418, 424 
Fourier, 33, 97, 174, 320 
fractures, 315 
fragmentation, 19 
France, 157, 159, 281, 378, 501 
free energy, 320, 372, 433 
free surface energy, 220 
freedom, 112, 114, 116, 117, 422, 479 
friction, 78 
FTIR, 131 
fulfillment, 172 
fusion, 133, 368, 370, 376, 429, 484, 503, 508, 510, 
512 
fuzzy logic, 247 
FWHM, xi, 236, 386, 415, 418, 434, 435, 436, 442, 
456, 467, 484, 491 
G 
GaAs, viii, 90, 93, 160, 162, 192, 194, 195, 196, 197, 
198, 199, 200, 440 
gallium, 192, 440 
gas jet, 503 
gas phase, 221, 225, 230, 320, 497 
gas sensors, 237 
gases, xi, 18, 116, 138, 139, 154, 155, 211, 213, 237, 
283, 285, 287, 291, 306, 309, 314, 324, 325, 326, 
399, 412, 415, 416, 417, 419, 424, 425, 426, 427, 
428, 438, 443, 444, 481, 482, 484 
gauge, 100, 356, 443, 481 
Gaussian, 6, 11, 33, 44, 49, 51, 62, 77, 114, 369, 
401, 402, 407, 419, 423, 426, 434, 456, 505 
gel, 210 
General Electric, 379 
generalization, 102, 103, 134, 322 
generation, vii, 1, 2, 19, 35, 64, 67, 95, 96, 97, 99, 
100, 109, 111, 113, 136, 161, 207, 285, 291, 313, 
327, 374, 380, 384, 416, 419, 420, 422, 425, 427, 
479 
generators, 289, 306 
geology, 352 
geometrical optics, 402, 411 
geometrical parameters, 185, 266 
germanium, 440 
Germany, 1, 72, 82, 221, 310, 354, 378, 383, 396 
Gibbs, 8, 86 
glass, viii, 33, 34, 63, 160, 172, 174, 175, 176, 228, 
364, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 392, 393 
glow discharge, 296, 334, 335, 339, 342, 343, 448, 
453 
glucose, 237 
goals, 352 

Index 
 
523
gold, 2, 33, 40, 61, 67, 68, 210, 221, 352, 384, 386, 
388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393 
grain, 19, 61, 97, 135, 191, 221, 375 
grain boundaries, 61 
grains, 136, 190, 191, 192, 219, 222 
graph, 103, 105, 113, 153, 238, 239, 251, 445, 462 
graphite, 191, 192, 208, 228, 275 
gratings, 160, 161, 163, 164, 175, 176, 185, 443 
gravity, 352, 369, 374 
grazing, 335 
grids, 289 
groups, viii, 26, 80, 135, 205, 211, 213, 214, 215, 
225, 230, 240, 284, 291 
growth mechanism, 214, 215, 219, 221, 222, 226, 
231, 233, 234, 241 
growth rate, 426 
growth temperature, 231 
H 
H2, ix, 283, 284, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 294, 295, 
307, 472 
halogen, 443 
halogens, 124 
Hamiltonian, 99, 107, 108, 119 
hands, 109 
hardening, 245, 248, 261, 277, 375 
hardness, 79, 162, 190, 206, 208, 372, 375, 376 
harm, 483 
harmonics, vii, ix, 95, 96, 97, 99, 109, 111, 112, 113, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 136, 313, 324, 327, 328 
harmony, 483 
heat capacity, 10, 20, 22, 23, 24, 39, 40, 50, 64, 74, 
75, 77, 152, 440 
heat conductivity, 11, 15, 16, 17, 77, 138, 174, 315 
heat release, 167, 186 
heat removal, 324 
heat transfer, 168, 200, 259, 260, 261, 265, 271, 373, 
374, 413 
heating rate, 7, 9, 245 
heavy particle, 423, 424, 479 
Hebrew, 95, 313 
height, 28, 29, 176, 183, 188, 189, 192, 194, 224, 
230, 359, 362, 372, 377, 378 
helium, 218, 287, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 342, 444 
heterogeneity, 135, 411 
heterogeneous, 24, 26, 27, 28, 58, 402 
heterostructures, viii, 160, 196, 199, 201 
heuristic, 323 
Higgs, 101 
high power density, 332 
high pressure, 217, 218, 234, 288, 426, 429, 465, 
476 
high resolution, 353 
high tech, 385 
high temperature, 5, 16, 43, 150, 209, 249, 270, 416, 
430, 444, 461 
higher quality, 236, 241 
high-speed, 165 
highways, 352, 354 
histogram, 198 
Holland, 157, 158 
homogeneity, 407 
homogenous, 37 
host, 484 
human, 208 
humidity, 364, 472 
hybrid, 46, 47, 51, 68, 78, 207, 385, 395 
hydro, 208 
hydrocarbon, 427 
hydrodynamic, 6, 44, 46, 61, 66, 67, 68, 81, 429 
hydrofluoric acid, 184 
hydrogen, 142, 237, 287, 289, 294, 295, 296, 307, 
428, 432, 435, 436 
hydrological, 352 
hydrophilic, 208 
hydrophobic, 208 
hydrostatic pressure, 26, 59, 60 
hydrothermal, 210 
hydrothermal synthesis, 210 
hypothesis, 59, 143, 259, 284 
I 
IBM, 63, 91 
identification, 30, 138, 376, 411 
identity, 102, 103 
illumination, 208, 385, 387, 389, 390 
imagery, 366 
images, 2, 169, 174, 184, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 
197, 198, 209, 210, 214, 219, 220, 222, 223, 224, 
228, 229, 230, 231, 233, 238, 249, 388, 395, 405, 
442, 444 
imaging, x, 73, 163, 365, 383, 393 
imaging systems, 163 
immersion, 160, 386, 387, 393 
impact energy, 212 
implementation, 46, 49, 51 
impurities, 427 
in situ, 201, 365 
InAs/GaAs, 162 
incidence, viii, xi, 36, 159, 160, 163, 165, 166, 167, 
176, 197, 200, 201, 335, 338, 394, 415, 465, 471, 
476, 491, 497, 502, 503, 505, 515 
inclusion, 82, 153, 191 
India, 219, 223 
Indiana, 381 
indicators, 372 

Index 
 
524 
indices, 98, 127, 128, 129, 138, 143, 155 
individuality, 138 
induction, 140, 145 
industrial, 208, 246, 248, 256, 280, 380 
industrial application, 246, 248, 256, 280, 380 
industry, 1, 332, 351, 369, 383 
inelastic, 36, 287, 392, 421, 422, 425, 426, 427, 481 
inequality, 139 
inert, xi, 208, 212, 307, 370, 426, 501 
inertia, 127, 129, 141, 145, 146, 246 
infinite, 51, 96, 136, 168, 200, 320 
infrared, x, xi, 163, 320, 383, 384, 385, 415, 416, 
439, 506 
inherited, 200 
inhomogeneities, 387, 390, 402, 406, 412 
inhomogeneity, xi, 399, 401, 403, 404, 405, 406, 
407, 409, 412, 413 
initial state, 96, 104, 105, 136 
initiation, 11, 59, 127, 297, 416, 421, 424, 427, 481 
injection, 367, 368, 370, 372, 373 
inorganic, 323, 385, 395 
insertion, 443 
insight, 417, 457 
inspections, 234, 235, 240, 388 
instabilities, 6, 26, 28 
instability, 285, 302 
insulators, 7, 8, 47, 73, 78, 80, 340 
integrated circuits, 190 
integrated optics, viii, 159, 161, 175, 182, 185, 200 
integration, 39, 47, 49, 50, 52, 55, 57, 69, 77, 104, 
105, 126, 130, 207, 316, 368, 384, 433, 434, 443, 
455 
integrity, 255 
interaction process, 10, 46, 47 
interactions, vii, 3, 16, 19, 29, 35, 45, 78, 80, 95, 98, 
101, 102, 109, 116, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 
141, 143, 146, 150, 155, 315, 320, 348, 373, 431, 
464 
interface, 5, 6, 26, 27, 28, 29, 61, 376, 384, 392, 393 
interference, viii, 7, 97, 105, 123, 134, 159, 160, 161, 
163, 165, 166, 176, 187, 188, 189, 194, 197, 200, 
387, 388, 389, 390, 394, 403, 405, 463 
intermolecular, 319 
internal combustion, 419 
international trade, 351 
interstitials, 236, 237 
interval, 4, 5, 6, 104, 121, 122, 123, 129, 148, 152, 
232, 259, 280, 324, 443, 465, 477 
intrinsic, 163, 201, 206, 237, 291, 368, 392, 434 
inversion, 249, 439 
investment, 248 
ion beam, 36, 37, 79, 82, 176, 335, 342, 515 
ion bombardment, 3, 44, 81, 349 
ion implantation, 332, 343, 348 
ionic, xi, 79, 80, 208, 333, 343, 415, 416, 417, 420, 
432, 435, 437, 455, 456, 464, 465, 467, 469, 476, 
480, 484, 486, 487, 488, 491, 492, 493, 497 
ionization energy, 421, 422, 427 
ionization potentials, 431, 461, 481 
IOP, 209, 210, 214, 220, 222, 224 
IR, 163, 175, 181, 200, 212, 281, 323, 325, 385, 415, 
416, 417, 422, 427, 440, 484, 497 
IR spectra, 416, 427 
IR transmission, 181 
Ireland, 482 
iron, 1, 174, 175, 188 
irradiation, viii, 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 17, 19, 23, 35, 36, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 51, 54, 56, 59, 60, 63, 67, 74, 
109, 111, 153, 160, 161, 183, 247, 326, 328, 332, 
337, 338, 342, 372, 464, 471 
irradiations, 255 
island, 192, 195, 198, 199, 228 
isotropic, 127, 130, 131, 138, 145, 261, 503 
isotropy, 38, 39 
Israel, 95, 313 
Italy, 205, 225, 245, 367 
J 
Japan, 93, 218, 220, 223, 308, 352, 378 
JEM, 228 
Jerusalem, 95, 313 
jewelry, 162, 192, 200 
joining, 96, 280, 325 
Jordan, 91, 100, 348 
Joule heating, 479 
K 
kinematics, 112, 117, 124 
kinetic energy, xi, 35, 36, 48, 49, 73, 75, 119, 120, 
121, 130, 132, 140, 152, 154, 212, 229, 232, 316, 
321, 415, 419, 420, 421, 423, 488, 491, 497 
kinetic equations, 19, 29, 46, 298 
kinetic model, 291, 297, 298 
kinetics, vii, viii, 6, 9, 19, 26, 32, 46, 56, 60, 68, 95, 
96, 128, 133, 165, 291, 298 
Klein-Gordon, 100 
knots, 194 
Korea, 221 
L 
L1, 288, 310 
L2, 172, 288 
Lafayette, 381 
Lagrangian, 247 
Landau theory, 137, 144, 149, 155 

Index 
 
525
language, 138, 261 
Laplace transformation, 169 
laser ablation, viii, 20, 159, 167, 205, 210, 211, 212, 
213, 214, 218, 221, 225, 228, 234, 235, 236, 427 
laser rangefinders, 353 
lasers, ix, 1, 2, 109, 127, 136, 161, 175, 176, 209, 
212, 213, 232, 246, 248, 258, 279, 283, 284, 285, 
286, 287, 307, 313, 332, 354, 368, 369, 385, 416, 
439 
lasing threshold, 289 
lattice, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 
29, 30, 32, 36, 37, 39, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 70, 71, 
74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 145, 199, 237, 274, 347 
law, 11, 32, 33, 80, 114, 116, 120, 147, 151, 154, 
307, 431, 505 
laws, ix, 32, 99, 114, 129, 131, 132, 133, 313 
leakage, x, 383, 392, 393, 394, 395 
LED, 207 
left-handed, 98 
lens, 211, 226, 249, 416, 419, 424, 426, 442 
lenses, 402, 403 
liberation, 106, 122, 123, 314, 424 
LIBS, xi, 415, 416, 417, 418, 435, 439, 445, 456, 
464, 467, 471, 487, 497 
lifetime, 291, 298, 334, 421, 434, 435, 465, 477 
light beam, 117, 412 
light transmission, 180, 181 
light transmittance, 389 
limitation, 8, 19, 32, 68, 246, 344, 353 
limitations, x, 19, 43, 47, 227, 351, 353 
linear, vii, 10, 11, 17, 20, 24, 27, 28, 39, 40, 44, 48, 
57, 95, 97, 98, 108, 117, 127, 129, 145, 238, 247, 
256, 259, 261, 263, 266, 273, 276, 289, 305, 326, 
335, 378, 435, 436, 439, 462, 483, 508, 514 
linear dependence, 11, 17, 20, 57, 108, 273 
linear function, 10, 39 
links, 139, 146, 154, 342 
liquefaction, 314 
liquid interfaces, 58 
liquid phase, 5, 6, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 30, 52, 54, 55, 
57, 58, 324, 325 
liquids, xi, 213, 323, 326, 328, 399, 412, 413, 424, 
481 
Lithium, 89, 321, 324 
lithography, viii, 2, 160, 161, 162, 166, 190, 200, 
221, 385, 397 
local order, 26, 30, 31, 44, 54, 55, 57, 58, 64, 65, 70 
localization, x, 61, 134, 383, 385 
location, 263, 357, 358, 362, 364, 369 
locus, 453 
logging, 352 
London, 82, 88, 158, 308, 309, 438, 499 
long distance, 332, 403 
losses, 5, 76, 392, 422, 423, 425, 426, 427, 482 
low power, 279, 420 
low temperatures, 43, 151, 332, 436 
low-intensity, 289 
low-power, 430 
low-temperature, 17, 237, 455 
LSD, 430 
LTD, 354, 358, 363 
luminescence, 315 
lying, 167, 218, 404, 405 
M 
machines, 380 
magnesium, 249, 375 
magnetic, 97, 138, 141, 143, 146, 162, 166, 185, 
315, 339, 352, 433 
magnetic field, 433 
magnetic moment, 97, 141, 146, 315 
magnetron, 209, 332 
magnetron sputtering, 209, 332 
maintenance, 440 
manipulation, x, 383, 384, 394, 395 
manufacturing, x, 165, 245, 247, 248, 280, 367, 368 
mapping, 352, 365, 366 
market, 248 
mask, viii, 160, 176, 177, 178, 179, 190, 224, 226, 
227 
masking, 162 
mass loss, 375 
mass transfer, 335, 339, 347 
mass transfer process, 339 
mass-transport, ix, 331 
material surface, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 44, 77, 81 
materials science, viii, 205, 206 
matrix, 38, 96, 97, 99, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 108, 
109, 118, 119, 143, 247, 319, 327, 375, 443 
Maxwell equations, 127, 128 
MBE, 163, 196, 201, 209, 210 
measurement, x, 103, 177, 178, 238, 240, 254, 263, 
351, 352, 355, 356, 365, 377, 419, 495 
measures, 275 
mechanical energy, 207 
mechanical properties, 369 
media, x, 97, 101, 112, 115, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 
132, 133, 134, 138, 145, 146, 150, 151, 153, 154, 
158, 214, 283, 286, 317, 319, 320, 392, 399, 400, 
410, 411, 412, 413 
medium composition, 149 
melt, 6, 8, 56, 59, 81, 188, 317, 323, 367, 370, 373, 
374, 375 
melting temperature, 9, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 29, 34, 52, 
56, 57, 64, 66, 72, 218, 228, 336 

Index 
 
526 
melts, 20, 57 
memory, 63, 283 
mercury, 136 
mesons, 118 
metal ions, 287 
metal oxide, 237, 260 
metal oxides, 260 
metallurgy, 348 
metal-semiconductor, 207 
methane, 326 
methanol, 237 
microelectronics, viii, 159, 401 
microfabrication, 396 
micrometer, 384 
microscope, 339, 375, 388, 389, 392, 393, 394 
microscopy, viii, 205, 207, 375, 376, 395 
microstructure, 247, 275, 276, 277, 368, 372, 376, 
380 
microstructures, 375, 376, 385 
microwave, 210, 420, 425, 445 
military, 439 
minerals, 358 
mines, 352, 353, 354, 364, 365, 366 
miniaturization, 384 
mining, 351, 353, 355, 358, 365, 516 
Ministry of Education, 201 
mirror, 71, 72, 73, 127, 133, 136, 165, 289, 290, 295, 
321, 322, 323, 354, 424, 505 
MIT, 499 
mixing, 238, 338, 339, 344, 346, 347, 412, 455 
mobility, 148, 212, 232 
MOCVD, 209 
modeling, ix, 7, 12, 17, 37, 43, 45, 46, 62, 68, 70, 71, 
72, 73, 78, 81, 82, 245, 247, 261, 262, 266, 271, 
274, 279, 280, 283, 294, 296, 357 
models, ix, x, 3, 8, 10, 33, 37, 45, 46, 68, 70, 71, 73, 
78, 79, 81, 82, 116, 245, 246, 247, 258, 260, 264, 
273, 294, 351, 353, 356, 367, 373, 375, 425 
modulation, 173, 174, 175, 187, 197, 334, 389, 401, 
409 
modulus, 6, 32, 38, 40, 280, 284 
mole, 21, 142, 143, 144, 153, 316, 317, 321, 323, 
324, 325, 326 
molecular dynamics, 66, 146 
molecular mass, 151 
molybdenum, x, 339, 342, 343, 351, 358, 440 
momentum, 32, 37, 38, 39, 66, 96, 102, 106, 113, 
117, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 127, 129, 130, 
132, 133, 137, 141, 151, 153, 154, 155, 301, 374, 
421, 438, 439, 478, 479 
monochromator, 235, 275 
monolayers, 346 
morphological, 200 
morphology, viii, 2, 3, 6, 162, 178, 185, 187, 192, 
195, 197, 199, 201, 205, 219, 222, 228, 229, 230, 
232, 239, 240, 376, 506 
mosaic, 70, 275 
Moscow, 158, 283, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 331, 
348, 399, 412, 413 
motion, 6, 18, 19, 34, 43, 44, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 
54, 55, 61, 67, 73, 81, 129, 211, 213, 249, 255, 
259, 284, 372, 428, 434, 502 
motors, 354, 356 
movement, 125, 127, 343, 372 
MPI, 63, 99, 106, 118, 120, 121, 137, 420, 421, 422, 
424, 480, 483 
MPP, 99, 105, 107, 118, 122, 123, 135, 136, 327 
MRA, 376, 378 
MTS, 276 
multi-component systems, 479 
multidimensional, 61, 81 
multilayered structure, 201 
multiple regression, 375, 376 
multiple regression analysis, 375, 376 
multiplication, ix, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 293, 294, 
296, 297, 302, 303, 304, 306, 307, 425 
multiplier, 111 
N 
NaCl, 324, 440, 442 
naming, 148 
nanobelts, 207 
nanoclusters, 225 
nanocomposites, 91 
nanocrystalline, 66, 81, 332 
nanodevices, 384, 385 
nanodots, 36, 210, 218 
nanoelectronics, 162 
nanoimprint, 183 
nanoindentation, 375 
nanometer, 160, 162, 166, 183 
nanometer scale, 162, 183 
nanometers, viii, 159, 166, 185, 384 
nanonails, 218 
nanoparticles, 185, 208, 213, 218, 220, 225, 230, 
233, 393, 394 
nanophotonics, 162, 384 
nanorods, 207, 209, 210, 213, 214, 218, 219, 221, 
223, 224, 225 
nanostructures, viii, x, 2, 3, 45, 46, 61, 62, 73, 81, 
82, 160, 161, 162, 185, 200, 201, 205, 206, 207, 
208, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 215, 219, 220, 225, 
230, 231, 232, 234, 237, 383, 384 
nanotechnology, 162, 201, 314 
nanowires, 207, 208, 213, 214, 218, 220, 223 
Nanyang Technological University, 222 

Index 
 
527
National University of Singapore, 222 
NATO, 157 
natural, 49, 72, 109, 111, 115, 121, 135, 140, 143, 
153, 180, 284, 325, 405, 408, 412, 421, 425, 434, 
484 
needles, 206, 221 
negativity, 132 
neodymium, 334 
neon, ix, 283, 284, 287, 289, 291, 293, 294, 296, 307 
Netherlands, 282 
network, 219 
neutralization, 318 
Nevada, 498 
New York, 82, 83, 84, 86, 88, 90, 92, 156, 243, 282, 
308, 498, 499, 500 
New Zealand, 224 
Newton, 19, 241 
nickel, 55, 92, 376 
NIR, xi, 415 
NIST, 433, 437, 445, 461, 467, 499 
nitride, 211, 213 
nitrogen, xi, 237, 287, 293, 299, 415, 442, 444, 445, 
448, 449, 452, 453, 455, 456, 467, 472, 480, 485, 
486, 491 
nitrogen dioxide, 237 
nitrogen gas, 445 
nitrous oxide, 326 
noble gases, 321 
noble metals, 4, 16, 17, 43 
nodes, 264, 271, 273, 274 
noise, 416, 443, 481, 484, 495 
nonequilibrium, 4, 7, 8, 19, 24, 29, 32, 35, 37, 38, 
43, 45, 46, 56, 60, 61, 62, 68, 73, 77, 79, 81, 286, 
287, 294, 307 
nonlocality, 98 
non-thermal, 43, 479 
non-uniform, 192, 233, 249 
normal, 28, 59, 64, 65, 66, 128, 131, 132, 153, 166, 
167, 176, 197, 213, 218, 221, 232, 233, 316, 317, 
321, 324, 325, 327, 337, 338, 392, 394, 439, 443, 
455, 515 
normal conditions, 153, 324, 325, 327 
n-type, 237 
nuclear, 8, 45, 105, 138, 162, 328, 436, 478 
nuclear charge, 436 
nucleation, 5, 6, 8, 19, 24, 25, 26, 29, 58, 60, 66, 81, 
209, 216, 219, 220, 221, 222, 225, 228, 231, 232, 
233, 315 
nuclei, 6, 24, 25, 26, 30, 72, 479 
nucleus, 6, 19 
numerical tool, 29 
O 
observations, 20, 225, 234, 239, 314, 315, 323, 324, 
325, 327, 352, 376, 412, 444, 461, 483 
Ohmic, 207 
oil, 386, 387, 393 
omentum, 129 
opacity, 430 
operator, 99, 102, 103, 119 
optical absorption coefficient, 168 
optical coefficients, 207 
optical microscopy, 375 
optical properties, 17, 182 
optical pulses, 439 
optical systems, 31, 400 
optical transmission, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183 
optics, viii, 6, 7, 35, 37, 78, 82, 96, 159, 160, 161, 
165, 175, 182, 185, 200, 364, 384, 401, 402, 411, 
442 
optimization, xi, 464, 501, 506 
opto-electronic, 207 
optoelectronics, 202, 206 
orbit, 422 
organic, 323, 385, 395 
orientation, 30, 70, 185, 222, 234, 235, 249, 250, 
251, 252, 253, 254, 260, 322, 354, 355, 356, 412 
originality, 69 
oscillation, 266, 298, 420 
oscillations, 55, 57, 97, 107, 384, 439 
oscillator, 164, 165, 386, 428, 433 
oxidation, 166, 210, 260, 333, 367, 375, 515 
oxide, 196, 208, 210, 212, 220, 228, 229, 326 
oxides, 260, 335, 346 
oxygen plasma, 208, 465 
ozone, 209 
P 
PACS, 160 
parabolic, 39 
paradox, 126, 127, 137 
paradoxical, 127 
parallelism, 318 
paramagnetic, 166 
Paris, 157, 498, 499, 501, 516 
particle beams, 349 
partition, 437 
passive, x, 98, 383 
patents, 378, 379 
patterning, viii, 160, 161, 162, 183, 185, 187, 199 
PCT, 378 
percolation, 228 

Index 
 
528 
periodic, 4, 26, 27, 36, 51, 54, 56, 59, 60, 71, 72, 
160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 168, 176, 182, 183, 
185, 189, 190, 192, 194, 199, 200, 210, 502 
permit, xii, 257, 501, 515 
perovskite, 36 
perturbation, 39, 40, 132, 411, 436, 455 
perturbations, 3, 453, 455 
petroleum, 516 
phase conjugation, 164 
phase shifts, 97 
phase transformation, 6, 19, 24, 26, 29, 34, 45, 46, 
47, 49, 61, 68, 73, 77, 79, 81, 255, 368, 373 
phase transitions, viii, ix, 96, 98, 101, 138, 140, 141, 
142, 143, 155, 313, 314, 315, 319, 320, 321, 323, 
326, 328 
phonon, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 37, 38, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 43, 49, 54, 61, 74, 77, 83, 84, 85, 86, 
87, 90, 92 
phonons, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 17, 29, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 
43, 51, 73, 74, 77, 151, 152 
photochemical, 167, 328 
photodetectors, 165, 207, 400 
photoionization, 291 
photoluminescence, viii, 205, 225, 235, 237 
photonic, viii, 114, 159, 160, 175, 183, 208, 397, 502 
photonic crystals, viii, 159, 160, 175, 183, 208 
photonics, 175, 207, 384 
physical and mechanical properties, 369 
physical mechanisms, ix, 3, 64, 77, 245, 248, 260 
physical properties, 20, 167, 206, 237, 375, 384, 417, 
418 
physicists, 431 
physicochemical, 321 
physics, viii, 1, 3, 4, 19, 35, 46, 77, 96, 98, 105, 139, 
155, 158, 162, 176, 285, 309, 313, 314, 349, 499 
piezoelectric, 207 
piezoelectric properties, 207 
piezoelectricity, 206, 207 
pitch, 356 
PL, viii, 205, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241 
PL emission, 238, 241 
PL spectrum, 236, 238 
planar, 161, 163, 164, 175, 183, 297, 385, 392 
Planck constant, 418 
plane waves, 403, 419 
planetary, 326 
planning, vii, 95 
plasmons, 394, 397 
plastic, 6, 8, 29, 32, 33, 61, 64, 67, 68, 69, 71, 81, 
246, 247, 248, 249, 277, 386 
plastic deformation, 6, 8, 29, 32, 61, 64, 67, 68, 71, 
81, 246, 277 
plasticity, 46, 68 
play, 35, 37, 46, 167, 199, 212, 372, 439 
PLD, viii, 205, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
218, 221, 224, 225, 226, 230, 332, 333, 334, 339, 
347 
plurality, 411 
Poisson, 114, 123, 133, 280, 301, 328 
Poisson distribution, 114, 123 
Poisson equation, 301 
Poland, 366 
polar coordinates, 28 
polarity, 285 
polarizability, 316, 321, 322 
polarization, 39, 104, 116, 117, 132, 140, 164, 165, 
166, 179, 183, 192, 193, 194, 195, 197, 198, 201, 
321, 394, 395, 424, 506 
polarization planes, 166 
polarized light, 180, 393 
pollutants, 484 
pollution, 314 
polycrystalline, 72, 185, 190, 191, 192, 195, 219, 
338 
polycrystalline diamond, 185, 190, 191, 192 
polyester, 380 
polyimide, viii, 160, 161, 185, 189, 190 
polyimide film, 161, 185, 189, 190 
polymer, 143, 207, 385, 386, 387, 392, 395 
polymer blends, 207 
polymer molecule, 143 
polymer structure, 386 
polymerization, x, 146, 383, 385, 386, 387, 389, 390, 
395, 396 
polymerization process, 385, 387 
polymerization processes, 385 
polymers, 385, 392 
polystyrene, 221 
poor, 80, 163, 248, 274, 342, 372, 385, 387, 419, 495 
population, 284, 297, 298, 314, 431, 432, 433, 438, 
440 
population density, 297, 314, 433 
pores, 210 
porosity, 368, 372, 376 
porous, 219 
Portugal, 367 
powder, 208, 216, 223, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 
373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 380 
powders, 210, 369, 380 
powers, 250, 252, 254, 255, 256, 265, 289, 298, 307, 
387, 390 
predictability, 258 
prediction, 20, 57, 263, 268, 269, 274, 279, 375 
predictive model, x, 367 
predictive models, x, 367 
preference, 6, 76 

Index 
 
529
prevention, 336, 353 
probability, 38, 108, 113, 114, 115, 117, 119, 120, 
121, 124, 134, 319, 328, 421, 427, 433, 434, 437, 
481, 482 
probe, 17, 44, 355, 356, 362, 366, 376, 411, 412 
process control, 380 
production, x, 32, 185, 212, 231, 236, 245, 279, 285, 
294, 299, 306, 307, 331, 351, 354, 358, 360, 400, 
416, 417, 444 
productivity, xi, 161, 163, 183, 501 
program, 138, 339, 396, 438 
propagators, 99, 100 
proportionality, 142, 154 
proposition, 107, 127, 154 
protection, 372 
prototype, 246 
prototyping, 246, 279, 368 
pseudo, 130 
PUB, 157 
Puerto Rico, 219 
pulsed laser, viii, 3, 44, 48, 51, 60, 66, 159, 161, 162, 
166, 167, 175, 176, 185, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 197, 201, 209, 210, 211, 212, 247, 332, 
347, 417, 439, 440, 442, 484, 497 
pulsed laser deposition, 210, 211 
pumping, ix, 164, 226, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 
289, 290, 294, 295, 299, 306, 307, 334 
pumps, 333, 334 
pure line, 326 
pure water, 326 
pyramidal, 232 
Q 
QDs, 162, 185 
QED, 96, 97, 99, 100, 103, 106, 112, 113, 123, 130, 
136, 137, 138, 139, 153, 155, 314, 319, 327 
quality control, 339 
quanta, 111, 114, 116, 117, 122, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
142, 317, 318, 325, 327, 439, 445 
quantization, 96, 136 
quantum, vii, ix, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 110, 119, 120, 
121, 122, 123, 128, 133, 134, 138, 141, 162, 185, 
196, 201, 207, 313, 314, 319, 325, 328, 432, 436, 
455, 468 
quantum dots, 162 
quantum electrodynamics, vii, 95, 96, 119, 133, 314 
quantum optics, 96 
quantum theory, ix, 96, 134, 313 
quantum well, 185, 196, 201 
quartz, 33, 34, 218, 221, 289, 290, 301, 443 
quasiclassical, 96, 120 
quasi-equilibrium, 75 
quasiparticles, 4, 154 
R 
radar, 352, 353, 364 
radial distribution, 423 
Raman spectroscopy, 417 
random, 28, 49, 207 
rapid prototyping, x, 245, 367, 368, 380 
Rayleigh, 117, 218, 352, 353 
reaction rate, 99, 104, 105, 106, 108, 109, 111, 117, 
118, 122, 123, 136, 137, 209, 298, 320 
reactive ion, 177, 178 
reactivity, 232, 236 
reagents, 291, 314 
real time, 14, 16 
reality, 98 
recall, 428 
recombination, xi, 74, 112, 283, 286, 287, 291, 294, 
301, 302, 307, 328, 343, 415, 417, 420, 422, 423, 
424, 433, 439, 467, 487, 495, 497 
recombination processes, 74, 291, 423, 424, 467 
reconstruction, 411, 412 
recovery, 238, 239, 356, 357 
recrystallization, 61, 66, 166 
rectification, 164 
redistribution, 6, 18, 26, 37, 53, 54, 61, 321 
reference frame, 355 
refining, 375 
reflection, vii, 51, 55, 65, 95, 99, 127, 131, 132, 133, 
134, 135, 136, 164, 175, 180, 315, 338, 346, 353, 
354, 361, 365, 420, 428 
reflectivity, 11, 62, 165, 323, 368, 440, 442 
refraction gradient, 400 
refraction index, 128, 130, 400, 403 
refractive index, xi, 160, 176, 179, 207, 385, 395, 
399, 401, 403, 404, 406, 411, 412 
refractometry, 400 
refractory, 334 
regional, 378 
regression, 375, 378 
regular, 161, 162, 175, 176, 185, 189, 190, 192, 227, 
356, 411, 453 
relationship, 170, 248, 274, 378, 380, 432, 433, 479, 
506, 515 
relaxation, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 17, 23, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 42, 43, 47, 50, 55, 56, 59, 60, 61, 64, 
65, 67, 69, 74, 199, 416, 420, 457, 467, 484 
relaxation process, 457, 468 
relaxation time, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 17, 42, 43, 74 
reliability, 245, 248 
renormalization, 111, 153 
repair, 367, 380 
research and development, 201, 379 
reserves, 358 

Index 
 
530 
resistance, 65, 229, 237, 288, 333, 367, 376 
resistivity, 293, 307, 352, 353, 365 
resolution, xii, 17, 28, 36, 44, 66, 161, 165, 166, 235, 
238, 289, 342, 353, 385, 389, 416, 434, 443, 448, 
453, 456, 459, 461, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 471, 
472, 476, 478, 480, 482, 495, 501 
resonator, 117, 439 
resources, 351 
restructuring, 3, 6, 8, 20, 44, 45, 67 
retardation, 321 
retention, 306 
rings, 403, 419 
risk, 359, 364 
Robotics, 365 
rods, 206, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 
230, 234, 239, 356 
rolling, 189 
Rome, 245, 367 
room temperature, 37, 42, 148, 150, 165, 207, 227, 
235, 237, 238, 261, 445, 467 
root-mean-square, 425 
roughness, 28, 29, 271, 339, 365, 372 
routines, 93 
runaway, 284, 285 
Russia, 159, 163, 283, 310, 329, 348, 352, 399, 413 
Russian, 159, 163, 201, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 
329, 331, 348, 349, 383, 412, 413 
Russian Academy of Sciences, 163, 310, 349, 383 
Rutherford, 349 
Rydberg atoms, 231 
S 
safety, 352, 354, 363, 365 
salinity, 401 
salts, 328, 365 
sampling, 36, 418 
sapphire, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 221, 222, 225, 
385 
satellite, 324, 477 
saturation, vii, 95, 105, 106, 108, 109, 124, 135, 140, 
146, 147, 150, 153, 320 
scalar, 319 
scaling, 50, 80 
scanning electron, viii, 205, 394 
Scanning Electron Microscopy, 228 
scatter, 166, 180, 199 
scattering, vii, 19, 32, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 103, 
106, 109, 112, 113, 114, 117, 125, 128, 133, 134, 
135, 136, 137, 139, 145, 146, 148, 152, 155, 165, 
218, 220, 293, 337, 392, 394 
Schottky, 207, 228 
Schrödinger equation, 97, 99, 107 
search, 63, 119, 120, 313 
searching, 132, 241 
secret, 162, 192, 200 
security, 200 
sedimentation, 321 
seed, 216, 217, 224, 481, 482 
seeds, 221, 223 
seismic, 352, 353, 365 
selecting, 336, 409, 437 
self-assembling, viii, 160, 162, 192, 193, 200, 201 
SEM, viii, 2, 205, 209, 210, 214, 219, 220, 221, 222, 
223, 224, 225, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 
235, 238, 239, 375, 376, 388, 391, 393, 394, 395, 
396 
semiconductor, viii, 160, 161, 162, 166, 190, 192, 
200, 207, 237, 400 
semiconductors, 3, 7, 8, 37, 47, 73, 77, 78, 79, 82, 
168, 185, 197, 237 
sensing, viii, 205, 206, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241 
sensitivity, 30, 161, 239, 343, 417 
sensors, 207, 208, 237, 356, 384 
separation, 52, 64, 65, 70, 344, 386, 423 
series, 20, 21, 22, 34, 57, 59, 96, 98, 105, 106, 108, 
136, 185, 192, 249, 254, 255, 256, 302, 320, 328, 
419, 437, 444, 449, 453, 477, 484, 491 
Shanghai, 218 
shape, ix, 6, 14, 26, 28, 63, 67, 68, 77, 179, 185, 197, 
221, 227, 230, 231, 233, 234, 245, 246, 249, 257, 
273, 274, 289, 290, 334, 358, 362, 368, 369, 373, 
401, 402, 419, 426, 434, 436, 438, 442, 456, 484 
sharing, 26 
shear, 6, 32 
shock, 2, 30, 46, 61, 416, 427, 429, 430, 444, 484, 
489, 491, 497 
shock waves, 46, 445 
shortage, 351 
short-term, 112, 117 
Si3N4, 207 
sign, 100, 131, 132, 133, 139, 285, 436 
signals, 238, 239, 289, 383, 384, 484 
signs, 55, 100, 133 
silica, viii, 34, 70, 72, 160, 161, 162, 172, 173, 174, 
175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 
189, 190, 215, 218, 225 
silica glass, viii, 160, 172, 173, 174, 176, 177 
silicon, 78, 172, 173, 174, 175, 192, 194, 209, 215, 
216, 217, 218, 219, 222, 223, 225, 227, 228, 235, 
238 
silver, 135, 384, 393 
similarity, 143, 247 
Singapore, 222, 330 
single crystals, 195, 199, 207 
singular, 100, 101 
singularities, 98, 99, 140, 317 

Index 
 
531
sintering, 368 
sites, 5, 193, 219, 221, 222, 225, 228, 231, 233, 365 
skin, 133, 134, 135, 146, 154, 423 
SLAC, 157 
smoothing, 132 
software, 249, 355, 356, 357, 358, 360, 368, 408 
solar, 175, 207 
sol-gel, 210 
solid phase, 20, 22, 23 
solid state, 139, 161, 314, 325 
solid surfaces, viii, 159, 160, 163, 164, 200 
solidification, 66, 67, 70, 81, 314, 323, 326 
solid-state, 56 
sound speed, 39 
Soviet Union, 349 
space-time, 140 
Spain, 159, 415, 497 
spark discharges, 286 
spatial, 6, 8, 9, 28, 29, 36, 37, 43, 46, 50, 52, 55, 61, 
62, 97, 102, 103, 107, 122, 123, 161, 164, 165, 
168, 172, 173, 174, 175, 187, 190, 192, 199, 200, 
285, 401, 402, 411, 424, 464, 484 
spawning, 6 
species, xi, 208, 212, 213, 219, 220, 227, 228, 229, 
230, 231, 232, 234, 236, 237, 415, 416, 417, 420, 
421, 422, 424, 425, 427, 431, 435, 436, 437, 449, 
455, 461, 463, 464, 467, 471, 479 
specific heat, 169, 374 
Specific Heat, 90 
Specord M, 177 
spectral component, 411 
spectroscopic methods, 439, 497 
spectroscopy, xi, 328, 375, 415, 416, 417, 431, 439 
speed, 5, 8, 15, 19, 39, 116, 121, 128, 130, 134, 165, 
246, 248, 254, 255, 256, 257, 261, 265, 266, 268, 
271, 279, 284, 287, 332, 335, 344, 353, 354, 372, 
374, 375, 380, 383, 384, 418, 484 
speed of light, 418 
spin, 103, 387, 478 
sporadic, 481 
SPR, 237 
sputtering, 209, 210, 212, 332, 338, 386 
stability, 13, 40, 50, 52, 59, 60, 69, 164, 165, 206 
stabilization, 107, 120, 121, 238, 276 
stages, 4, 121, 163, 222, 223, 228, 268, 302, 304, 
307, 416, 486 
stainless steel, ix, 211, 226, 245, 247, 248, 249, 250, 
251, 252, 253, 254, 260, 261, 275, 289, 336, 339, 
340, 342, 344, 345, 442 
standard model, 36 
Stark effect, 431, 435, 436, 463 
stars, 323 
stationary distributions, 304 
statistical analysis, 198 
statistics, 3, 7, 37, 73, 74 
steel, ix, xi, 211, 226, 227, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 
250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 256, 260, 261, 275, 279, 
280, 289, 336, 339, 340, 342, 344, 345, 375, 376, 
380, 442, 501, 505, 506, 509 
steel plate, 376 
stoichiometry, 212 
storage, viii, 159, 160, 162, 166, 185, 288, 289, 290 
strain, 32, 162, 163, 192, 195, 199, 201, 246, 247, 
274 
strains, 247, 249, 270 
strategies, 378 
strength, 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 36, 40, 43, 55, 60, 63, 115, 
292, 293, 296, 297, 301, 303, 305, 355, 433, 435 
stress, 8, 15, 32, 33, 44, 55, 59, 60, 64, 65, 67, 195, 
196, 199, 246, 248, 249, 263, 264, 265, 274, 275, 
276, 277, 279, 280, 343, 372 
stretching, 439 
strontium, 287 
structural defects, 387, 390 
structural modifications, 35 
structuring, 6, 67, 77, 82, 386, 390 
substances, 137, 155, 314, 316, 317, 319, 320, 322, 
323, 334 
substitutes, 47 
substitution, 110, 125, 128, 143, 148, 152, 316 
substrates, viii, 160, 161, 162, 172, 174, 175, 176, 
182, 183, 185, 189, 190, 192, 196, 199, 200, 209, 
218, 220, 221, 225, 227, 228, 339, 378, 385, 387, 
389 
subtraction, 100, 129 
superconductivity, 138, 149, 150, 211 
superlattice, 200 
superposition, 20, 119, 249, 257, 338, 489 
supply, 334, 335 
suppression, 112 
surface area, 27, 53, 336, 339, 376 
surface diffusion, 166, 228 
surface layer, 51, 195, 342, 346, 372 
surface modification, viii, 6, 60, 159, 161, 166, 197, 
200, 334 
surface region, 9, 23, 29, 47, 51, 346 
surface roughness, 365, 372 
surface structure, 45, 67, 384, 386, 387, 392, 393, 
394, 395 
surface treatment, 248, 332, 333 
surface wave, 162, 167, 392 
surfactants, 213 
surgical, 1, 439 
surplus, 116 
surpluses, 324 
susceptibility, 101, 134, 140, 145, 146, 148, 315, 322 

Index 
 
532 
swelling, 189 
switching, 67, 240 
symmetry, 33, 36, 68, 101, 197, 317, 319, 320, 402, 
403, 404, 439, 445 
synchronization, 52, 68, 164, 443 
synthesis, 163, 210, 313 
T 
Taiwan, 223 
target zone, 338 
targets, 12, 45, 51, 54, 61, 62, 115, 116, 124, 127, 
333, 334, 335, 338, 339, 342 
technological developments, 176 
telecommunication, 384 
TEM, 210, 214, 352, 353 
temperature dependence, 5, 8, 15, 17, 21, 22, 23, 57, 
406 
temperature gradient, 5, 6, 8, 15, 17, 31, 34, 44, 46, 
55, 62, 66, 74, 75, 81, 246, 249, 407 
temporal, vii, 11, 51, 55, 62, 77, 81, 95, 96, 97, 98, 
99, 100, 102, 103, 105, 109, 113, 117, 120, 133, 
137, 138, 139, 155, 290, 319, 417, 420, 424, 442, 
464, 484, 487, 488, 491, 496, 503, 505 
tensile, 55, 65, 81 
tensile stress, 55, 65 
tension, 34, 44, 374 
terraces, 231 
test procedure, 343 
Thailand, 220 
thermal analysis, 261, 271 
thermal energy, 2, 6, 7, 26, 43, 52, 54, 55, 56, 143, 
317 
thermal equilibrium, 4, 5, 9, 39, 79 
thermal evaporation, 208, 209, 210 
thermal expansion, 8, 15, 20, 22, 51, 162, 195, 196, 
220, 246, 248, 249, 259, 266, 270, 280, 445 
thermal load, 261, 265, 336 
thermal plasma, 479 
thermal properties, 172, 464, 502, 506 
thermal stability, 59 
thermal treatment, 375 
thermalization, 4, 5, 7, 17, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 116, 
117, 226 
thermodynamic, 23, 112, 117, 144, 148, 150, 154, 
314, 317, 321, 328, 431, 432 
thermodynamic equilibrium, 431, 432 
thermodynamic parameters, 23, 148 
thermodynamic properties, 150 
thermodynamics, 55, 72, 314 
Thermoelastic, 89 
thermo-mechanical, 247, 248, 261, 264 
thermonuclear, vii, 95, 99, 127, 137, 429 
thermosetting, 380 
thin film, 63, 161, 162, 200, 211, 212, 213, 223, 332, 
333, 392 
Thomson, 118 
threatened, 354, 358, 360 
three-dimensional, 59, 365, 374 
threshold, xi, 6, 11, 39, 43, 44, 54, 60, 111, 112, 122, 
123, 124, 135, 136, 176, 183, 190, 195, 299, 320, 
326, 327, 387, 389, 390, 415, 416, 417, 418, 423, 
424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 481, 483 
time frame, 7 
time variables, 104 
timing, 355 
Titanium, 84, 89 
topological, 392 
total energy, 14, 20, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 74, 75, 136 
total internal reflection, 98 
toughness, 506 
Toyota, 379 
tracking, 9 
trade, 351 
trajectory, 404 
transduction, 237 
transfer, ix, 5, 15, 18, 19, 35, 36, 37, 40, 43, 49, 54, 
55, 56, 64, 74, 98, 99, 125, 155, 168, 176, 198, 
199, 200, 212, 245, 259, 260, 261, 265, 271, 283, 
284, 332, 336, 337, 373, 374, 384, 413, 430, 439 
transformation, 6, 24, 26, 29, 34, 46, 47, 61, 68, 73, 
77, 79, 81, 99, 107, 130, 169, 174, 320, 368, 373, 
384, 416, 515 
transformations, vii, 19, 46, 68, 77, 95, 315 
transient emission, 315 
transistors, 207 
transition metal, 4, 17 
transitions, 105, 111, 138, 143, 148, 154, 155, 236, 
284, 286, 287, 291, 299, 307, 314, 315, 318, 321, 
324, 325, 419, 431, 432, 433, 436, 437, 439, 445, 
453, 455, 457, 468, 477 
translation, 261 
translational, 479, 491 
transmission, 128, 163, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 
181, 182, 183, 352, 356, 368, 383, 445, 503 
transparency, 313 
transparent, vii, x, 63, 65, 95, 97, 99, 127, 128, 130, 
133, 137, 182, 191, 207, 327, 385, 387, 388, 389, 
399, 400, 412, 413, 416, 425, 430, 440 
transparent medium, 127 
transport, 4, 5, 18, 35, 36, 38, 46, 47, 54, 61, 73, 74, 
75, 79, 80, 207, 293, 301, 306, 335, 337, 346, 375 
transport processes, 335, 337 
travel, 354, 443 
trial, 70 
triggers, 8 
Tsunami, 386 

Index 
 
533
TTM, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18, 19, 29, 32, 36, 37, 41, 43, 46, 
47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 54, 60, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 
69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82 
tunneling, 97, 98, 100, 155 
twins, 275, 276 
two-dimensional, viii, 64, 66, 159, 162, 165, 167, 
168, 182, 185, 189, 192, 194, 200, 392, 402, 411 
U 
ultraviolet, xi, 84, 161, 207, 238, 385, 415, 421 
uncertainty, 97, 98, 101, 106, 113, 116, 118, 121, 
132, 136, 141, 154, 200, 266, 434, 437, 464 
uniform, 129, 162, 165, 174, 192, 200, 213, 226, 
233, 249, 253, 287, 291, 332, 369, 444 
United Kingdom, 353 
universal gas constant, 316, 320 
universality, 316 
UV, xi, 161, 162, 163, 166, 175, 176, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 192, 193, 194, 195, 200, 207, 208, 211, 212, 
307, 308, 349, 385, 415, 416, 422, 430, 456 
V 
vacancies, 236, 237 
vacuum, x, 39, 100, 102, 105, 127, 130, 132, 134, 
161, 164, 165, 180, 209, 211, 213, 214, 226, 227, 
289, 297, 315, 331, 333, 334, 337, 340, 342, 384, 
403, 443, 465 
validity, 112, 266, 432, 464 
van der Waals, 79, 435 
vapor, ix, 188, 208, 210, 228, 232, 313, 314, 316, 
317, 319, 321, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 332, 427 
vapor-liquid-solid, 208 
vapor-solid (VS), 209 
variables, 97, 99, 107, 249, 256, 418, 464 
variation, xi, 6, 26, 55, 99, 146, 149, 199, 238, 247, 
268, 276, 325, 399, 411, 430, 483 
vector, 30, 38, 39, 44, 45, 103, 104, 392 
versatility, 199, 213 
vibration, 176, 207, 247, 358, 439 
visible, xi, 6, 28, 40, 45, 163, 200, 231, 235, 251, 
254, 262, 263, 271, 275, 277, 279, 328, 344, 361, 
384, 394, 400, 415, 422, 426, 440, 444 
vision, viii, 96 
visualization, xi, 399, 407, 408, 412, 413 
VLS, 208, 209, 215, 216, 217, 219, 221, 223, 224, 
225 
voids, x, 351, 352, 360, 364 
W 
waste disposal sites, 365 
water, ix, xi, 176, 213, 256, 313, 314, 319, 322, 323, 
324, 325, 326, 327, 352, 364, 365, 399, 401, 405, 
406, 407, 408 
water vapor, ix, 313, 314, 323, 324, 325, 326 
wave number, 39 
wave propagation, 287, 429, 430 
wave vector, 38, 39, 392, 411 
waveguide, 388, 389, 391, 392 
wavelengths, viii, 116, 180, 205, 212, 227, 231, 234, 
241, 318, 368, 384, 393, 411, 416, 422, 454, 464, 
465, 466, 468, 471, 478, 481 
weak interaction, 141 
wealth, 286, 384 
weapons, 439 
wear, 333, 367, 375 
weathering, 358 
welding, 248, 439 
wettability, 208 
wetting, 221, 372, 373 
wide band gap, 206 
wires, 206, 218, 288, 306, 384 
workers, 358, 425 
writing, 103, 109, 515 
X 
xenon, ix, 283, 284, 287, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 
302, 305 
XPS, ix, 331, 342, 346, 347 
X-ray analysis, 274 
x-ray diffraction, viii, 205 
X-ray diffraction, 235, 274, 375 
X-rays, 285 
XRD, viii, 205, 235, 375, 376 
Y 
yield, 32, 33, 249, 266, 270 
Z 
Zener, 121 
zinc, viii, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 213, 217, 
218, 220, 225, 227, 228, 235, 236, 237, 287, 440 
ZnO, viii, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 221, 222, 223, 224, 
225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 236, 237, 240, 
241 
ZnO nanorods, 207, 209, 210, 214, 221, 225 
ZnO nanostructures, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 
213, 215, 225, 237 
 

