Delan The Mislaid
Laurie J. Marks
The Children of Triad 01
A 3S digital back-up edition v1.0 
click for scan notes and proofing history
Contents
|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|
|11|12|13|14|15|16|17|
|Epilogue|
|Glossary| 
DAW BOOKS, INC.
DONALD A. WOLLHEIM, PUBLISHER
1633 Broadway, New York, NY 10019
Copyright © 1989 by Laurie J. Marks
ö 
Cover art by Richard Hescox
DAW Book Collectors No. 774
First Printing March 1989
For my parents
Gretchen and Don Marks

Chapter 1
^ » 
In the spring of my  nineteenth  year,  the  elders  of  my  community
finally resolved the problem of what to do with me by  making  me
foreman of the ast gatherers. I spent a miserable season increasing
my unpopularity among the children, until I realized finally that I
really didn’t blame them for disliking the work that I myself hated
intensely. I gave up trying to impress the people that I knew would
take  no  notice  anyway,  and  my  days  settled  into  dreary  tedium
again.
One day, as we returned from a foray into the Glass Mountains,
we were met on the path by Crila, one of my nestmates. She danced
delicately  on  her  lively  toes,  beads  and  bells  jangling  with
self-importance  where  they  were  draped  in  loops  over  her  hips.
“There’s a stranger in.”
“A stranger!” Jabbering loud questions, the  children  surrounded
her. Even the one with a cut foot, whom I had been carrying on my
back all afternoon,  wiggled angrily and demanded to be put down.
Except for the Traders, who do not care to linger, no one visits the
Digan-lai.
“What does he look like?”
“He is very tall. Very dignified.”
“Where has he been?”
“All over the world,” Crila said grandly. The children sighed with
awe. Not one of them had traveled beyond the glowing peaks of the
mountains  and  the  dark  holes  in  the  ground  which  they  called
home. The Traders told tales, of beasts which flew and beasts which
swam,  and  awful  dangers  awaiting  the  unwary.  Despite  these
strange and frightening accounts, I used  to  daydream  of  following
the Trader path to wherever  it led me.  But  lately  I  had  ceased  to
daydream entirely.
Standing  with  the  ropes  heavy  on  my  back,  watching  the
children  milling  in  excitement,  knocking  each  other’s  hats  and
baskets  askew,  I  felt  something  like  hunger  in  the  hollow  of  my
belly,  and  my  throat  grew  tight  as  well,  and  my  heart  pounded

strangely. I interrupted the shrill voices of my workfellows.  “What
kind of stranger?”
She  wrinkled  her  broad  nose.  “Did  I  hear  something?  Phew!
Something stinks.”
I  laid  my  hand  on  my  glass  shard  knife,  but  she  only  danced
away a few steps, laughing. “What do you want to know, Hairy Del,
Hairy Del? Who was your father? Your father was a  medog!  Your
mother wanted his big—”
I  started  after  her.  Crila  ran  away  on  her  wild,  dancing  feet,
oblivious to the cutting edges of the bare pathway. She sang as she
ran:  “Hairy  Del,  Hairy  Del,  looks  like  a  swamp  rat,  has  a  bad
smell!”  Her  red  loincloth  stood  out  like  an  ast  flower  against  the
purpling  sky.  From  a  distance  she  shouted,  “He  bought  someone.
Someone we don’t want. Guess who!”
That was how I found out what I was truly worth to my people.
They had sold me to the stranger for a packet of crich, which would
give a lucky few some nice dreams, a bolt of blue cloth, a box full of
beads, and two  great baskets full  of  lowland  sweetbread.  This  the
children gleefully told me as I was waiting in the dormitory for the
elders  to  send  for  me.  I  did  wonder  dully  why  everyone  accepted
that I was a thing to be exchanged, and not a person belonging only
to myself.  But I knew why.  It was a lesson I had learned  by  rote,
one  in  which  I  was  drilled  day  in  and  day  out  until  I  could  not
distinguish it from  the air I breathed or the food I ate. I was ugly
and useless, only half human. If I had looked like everyone else, or
thought like everyone else, no one would ever consider doing this to
me.  But  I  was  Hairy  Del,  Delan  the  Freak,  and  I  deserved  no
better.
My  people  the  Digan-lai  are  not  much  like  me.  Their  leathery
skin  insulates  them  against  the  harsh  sun  and  the  killing  wind.
They  have  long,  nimble,  many-jointed  spinner’s  fingers.  They  can
see  in  the  dark,  but  bright  light  can  permanently  blind  them.
Except for their heads, they are hairless.
I  have  soft  skin  the  color  of  clouds  in  a  spring  shower,  and  a
short, pudgy body, thickly covered with fur. The hair of my head is
a wild  and  unmanageable  mane  which  grows  down  my  neck  and

blends into my body fur. I can look at the mountains and even the
sun  without  losing  my  sight,  but  I  cannot  see  in  the  dark.  My
fingers have only four joints rather than seven. As if this were not
enough,  my  back  is  marred  by  a  hideous  birth  defect:  big,  bony
protrusions, ugly lumps of tender flesh which make it impossible for
me to lie down on my back.
I am told I looked fairly ordinary when I hatched. I grew into my
ugliness like some people do into their beauty. Yet, as early as I can
remember, the people of my community would screw up their faces
and avert their eyes when I passed by,  and go  to  great  lengths  to
avoid touching me.
Being  a  pragmatic  people,  the  Digan-lai  would  probably  have
forgiven my ugliness had I not been incredibly clumsy as well. But
at the age when my clutchmates were working,  I still could not do
even the simplest of tasks without breaking or tangling something,
or hurting myself or someone else.
The  Digan-lai  live  and  hibernate  in  caves,  for  without
maintenance  no  structure  can  long  stand  against  the  winds  of
winter  which  come  roaring  down  the  jagged,  barren  slopes  of  the
mountains, stripping the surface bare of sucker plants and exposing
the  glass  to  the  sun.  Only  I  looked  upon  the  mountains  in  the
months  of  winter,  having  ceased  to  hibernate  when  I  was  very
young,  and  was  not  blinded  by  the  brilliance  of  the  sun  in  the
exposed  glass.  The  months  of  winter  were  a  very  lonely  time  for
me, but not much more lonely than any other season of the year.
After the hibernation of my first year I had not developed  male
genitals  and  so  it  was  decided  I  must  be  female.  But  after  the
hibernation of my thirteenth year when all of my nestmates awoke
from  sleep  to  find  they  were  adults,  I  remained  unchanged.  My
breasts were  little more than sensitive places under  my  fur.  I  felt
none of the sexual urges which seemed to govern their lives. But I
was seventeen years old before I discovered my ultimate deformity,
which I had the  wisdom  to  keep  a  secret:  I  was  neither  male  nor
female. I had no genitals at all.
My  people  wished  they  had  recognized  my  defects  and  exposed
me  as  a  hatchling  upon  the  jagged  ridge  where  the  spirits  of  the

dead join again with the howling wind. But after the day I realized
that  even  the  cheapest  kind  of  love  was  denied  me,  no  one  could
have wished more passionately than I that I had not been allowed
to live.
In despair and bitterness I learned how to fight. I fought with my
tongue,  and  I  fought  with  my  hands.  I  found  a  vicious  sliver  of
mountain glass which I bound to a wooden handle, and which made
me feel dangerous, although my attempts to use it were laughable.
Slivers of glass are rare and valuable, and my people thought mine
should be sold to the Traders so the entire community could benefit
from  my  luck.  I  told  them  they  could  sell  my  glass  knife  if  they
could take it away from  me.  Apparently they decided it was easier
to simply sell me.
 
I  had  been  waiting  in  the  dull  darkness  for  some  time  when
finally  one  of  the  elders,  a  wind-dried  old  woman  who  had  never
been particularly unkind to me, came to bring me to the stranger. I
asked as I followed  her  through  the  passageway  toward  the  main
hall, “What does he want with me?”
“He  wants  a  companion,  he  says,  someone  who  can  work  and
travel with him. We warned him that you are clumsy and can’t see
in the dark.”
At this I stumbled in the unlit passageway, as I had been doing
my entire life. I said bitterly, “Did you  tell  him  I  am  ugly  beyond
description? Did you tell him I am a half-beast?”
The  elder  stopped  short  and  turned  to  me.  I  felt  her  gaze
studying me in the gloomy passage. She spoke eventually, but her
tone was not angry. “You have this one opportunity to impress him.
If  he  dislikes  you,  he  will  cancel  his  agreement.  If  he  likes  you,
neither  you  nor  I  can  even  imagine  what  will  become  of  you,
whether good or bad. But you do not belong with us, and you never
have. Think carefully about your choices, Delan.”
I  thought  carefully.  When  they  took  me  into  the  main  hall,
where out of respect for their guest a few light wands were burning
faintly, I went up to him as modestly as I knew how, with my eyes
on my toes.

“This is Delan,” said the elder.
“Sir,” I said. When I looked up, it was to find my fellow Digan-lai
staring  at  me  in  some  amazement  for  I  was  famous  for  my  foul
temper  and  bad  behavior.  The  stranger,  a  Walker  male  as  tall
sitting  down  as  the  Digan-lai  were  standing,  examined  me  from
head to foot. I looked at my toes again.
“What  are  you?”  he  finally  asked.  “I  have  never  seen  anything
like you.”
“I don’t know,” I said.
“I see you have a weapon. Are you a trained fighter?”
“I can fight.”
One of the elders interrupted anxiously, no doubt seeing his crich
dreams  going  up,  as  they  say,  like  smoke.  “The  young  ones,  you
know  how  they  are;  they  give  Delan  a  hard  time,  and  she  scares
them to make them leave her alone. But she has never—”
“It might be useful to have a blade with me. If she can use it.”
“I can fight,” I said again. “Sir.”
“Can you read?”
“I can learn.”
“How do you know?”
I looked up at him, forgetting  modesty. “I want to.  So I can.” It
was  the  truth.  My  hands  might  have  been  clumsy,  but  my  brain
definitely  was  not.  I  have  often  wished  this  were  not  so,  for  my
abundance of wit only made it more difficult for me to  endure  my
unendurable life.
The  stranger  seemed  amused  rather  than  offended.  “Sit  down
and have something to eat.”
I did as I was told, though I was not particularly hungry. It took
the sudden relaxation among the elders to make me realize that  I
was truly going away with the stranger, into the mysterious world
where  monsters  lurked.  My  appetite  abruptly  came  to  me.
Monsters or no monsters, I could imagine no worse fate than that of
having to stay with the Digan-lai.

 
We left at daybreak. It was a  purple  morning,  cold  with  spring
chill. Most of the  Digan-lai  came  out  to  watch  my  owner,  Teksan
Lafall, teach me how to balance and secure the load of goods on the
back of his draf. I had seen drafs before,  and was fairly certain  of
their gentleness. But when he turned to look at me mournfully, as
he stood unsteadily under his tremendous load, I was not so certain
of his lack of sentience. I said under my breath, “Don’t blame me, I
have to do as he says just like you do.” But the draf only shifted his
six feet and swayed, sighing heavily and drooping his shaggy head.
“Good-bye! Safe trail!” the Digan-lai called politely as we started
away.
Crila  was  among  them.  “I  hope  you  enjoy  your  share  of  the
sweetbread,”  I  said  to  her  as  I  passed.  She  turned  away,  but  not
before I saw, to my astonishment, that her face was wet with tears.
It  had  been  with  Crila  that  I  discovered  I  was  not  female.
Knowing  her  perversity  all  too  well,  I  had  never  thought  it  was
because she liked me that she crawled into my bed that night two
years  ago.  Yet  my  loneliness  was  such  that  I  had  been  friendly
enough. We had never talked about  that  night,  she  and  I.  Now  it
occurred to me too late that I might  not  be  the  only  freak  among
the Digan-lai. What would become of her now that she had no one
to  point  her  finger  at,  thus  keeping  notice  away  from  herself?  I
should have been delighted to think of her as my replacement, but I
was not.
We had been walking a long time when I finally looked up from
my  feet.  The  draf  was  making  his  sure-footed  way  down  a  steep
part  of  the  path.  The  mountain  peaks  that  I  had  looked  at  my
entire  life  were  behind  me,  and  before  me  were  yet  more
mountains. The path lay twisted and shining as a stream of water
between the matted plants.
My  companion  trudged  in  silence.  I  looked  at  him  through  the
corner of my  eye.  Something  disturbed  me  about  him,  though  his
appearance  was  ordinary  enough.  He  wore  brown,  plain  clothing,
without ornament. His graying hair hung in limp strands to below
his ears. He had a high, frown-creased forehead, and he squinted in

the  gentle  spring  sun.  He  put  his  feet  down  without  much
attention, as if his thoughts were on higher things.
I said, “Sir? What is there in the world besides mountains?”
When he turned his gaze on me, something in his eyes opened a
hollowness in my stomach. “You don’t know? What do the Digan-lai
teach their children?”
“How to spin. How to gather ast.”
Teksan Lafall snorted,  and  fumbled  in  a  woven  satchel  that  he
carried over his shoulder. He took out a stiff roll, and spread it out,
thin as a leaf, so I could see what was drawn on it. “This,” he said,
“is a map of the world. These are mountains, this is ocean, and this
is the lowlands.”
The  world  did  not  seem  very  big.  The  lowlands  lay  like  three
splashes of spilled soup between the mountains and the ocean. Each
splash was connected to the other only by twisting lines like badly
spun  threads,  running  through  the  jagged  mountains.  “Those  are
trader  paths,”  Teksan  said.  He  tapped  a  thin  finger  to  one  of  the
twisting  lines.  “This  is  where  we  are.  We  are  going  here,  to  the
Lowlands of Derksai.”
I stared at the map, wondering what kept the ocean from spilling
over the edges of the world. I finally asked, “Why?”
“What do you mean, why?  I live there. I am the teacher for the
Community of L’din.”
“You’re a teacher?”
He frowned at me. “I am a scholar!”
“I beg your pardon.” Much humbled, and  wondering  at  my  own
fear, I looked at my toes again. “What do you want me for?”
“Cooking and cleaning.”
I did not speak again. I wished rather wearily that the desire to
read  had  never  occurred  to  me.  To  be  always  longing  after  what
was denied me was a miserable business. I tried to convince myself
that cooking and cleaning rather than gathering ast would be a nice
change. But I could not feel excited by the prospect.
 

When evening came, we stopped in a flat place so the draf could
spend  the  remaining  light  tearing  plants  from  the  mountain
surface.  Teksan  sent  me  to  find  a  nearby  stream  to  fill  the
waterbags, and to gather fuel for a fire, not an easy chore this time
of  year  when  the  only  thing  which  burns  is  medog  pellets.  The
stream ran silently in its narrow channel. The inner surface was as
smooth  and  red  as  my  glass  knife.  I  looked  up  from  filling  the
waterbags to see something like a speck of dust crossing the blazing
sky, but before I was sure I had seen it, it was gone.
I went back to where Teksan lounged on the plant  mat,  a  book
open  on  his  knees.  The  draf  was  still  chewing,  meditating  on  the
sun which blazed yellow and red fire onto the mountaintops. I put
down the waterbags and took a sling, and headed to an area we had
passed earlier, where the panja was blooming, panja blossoms being
a medog’s  favorite  food.  But  I  had  no  luck  there,  and  cast  about
farther, beginning to panic as the wild sunset faded. I could not see
in  the  dark—but  what  would  Teksan  do  to  me  if  I  returned
empty-handed? So I encountered my first monster through  all  but
stepping on it in my distraction.
It was lying on its side on the ground, with what seemed to be a
great mass of gleaming black leather spread about it. Its body was
shining  faintly  in  the  fading  light.  I  stared  at  it,  too  mystified  to
even  be  afraid,  wondering  at  the  way  the  light  lay  upon  it  in
rivulets, not having even realized yet that it was a living creature.
Then it turned its head, and I was looking into a sentient face, dark
skin showing through darker fur, and deep, unquiet eyes.
I  felt  inside  as  if  all  the  knots  which  held  me  together  were
coming  untied.  But  I  would  have  felt  foolish  running  from  those
eyes.  Suspended  between  fascination  and  terror,  I  stood  where  I
was and babbled, “Pardon me, I didn’t know anyone was here.”
The mass of black leather moved, lifted, spread, and then, with a
terrible, impossible grace, the monster was on its feet, with its huge
spread  wings  folding  again,  and  I,  breathless  at  the  beauty  of  it,
standing in its wind. If this was one of the rare carnivores of earth,
surely it would be a privilege to be eaten by it. But it only examined
me from head to toe as if as fascinated by me as I was by it. Then it
said, “I am just awaiting my onfrits. Who are you?” It had a husky,

soft voice that put a shuddering into my bones.
My  reply  stuck  in  my  throat,  but  I  wrestled  it  out  backwards.
“Someone’s mistake. Delan of the Digan-lai.”
It said, “Delan the Mislaid would be a better name.”
“If I am mislaid, then where do I belong?”
“Only you can answer that question. Why are you so far from the
Digan-lai community?”
“I am traveling with Teksan the Scholar. He bought me.”
“Ah.”  The  monster  smiled  to  itself,  seeming  to  understand  far
more  than  I  had  told  it.  “Even  among  the  Walker  race  it  is  not
considered legal to buy and sell people. Therefore it is your decision
whether he owns you or not.”
I  said  irritably,  “You  monsters  are  all  alike  with  your  word
games. Am I supposed to guess what your riddles mean? If I do, will
you eat me anyway?”
The monster stared at me. Then it began to laugh. After a while
I began to laugh, too; I couldn’t help it. A creature like a huge flying
insect appeared out of nowhere.  I ducked as it seemed to  lunge  at
my head, but it was only aiming at the monster’s shoulder, where it
clung with clawed feet, examining me, its eyes bright, its huge ears
twitching. “Happy?” it said.
“Funny,” corrected the  monster.  “Delan,  I  am  Malal  Tefan  Eia.
Malal and Tefan are my parent names, and Eia is my own name. I
am a person, just  like  you  are.  And  I  am  not  a  carnivore.  This  is
Ch’ta, an onfrit, one of my companions.”
“Sorry,  I didn’t know.  I have never met anyone like you  before.
Please, are you male or female?”
“Both,” it said. “What are you?”
“Neither,”  I  said,  without  thinking.  My  heart  thundered  as  I
realized  I  had  divulged  my  most  terrible  secret,  but  the  winged
hermaphrodite  nodded,  as  if  both  this  oddity  and  its  own  were
entirely  normal.  Still  I  waited,  disbelieving,  for  it  to  look  away,
embarrassed  by  my  ugliness,  to  make  some  awkward  casual
remark  and  find  a  reason  to  go  away.  I  waited,  but  it  did  not

happen.
“We are both travelers, too,” Eia said. “Where are you going?”
Stumbling over my own words, I answered. Having accepted that
it was a person, I realized slowly that except for its wings and the
incredible  musculature  of  its  torso,  it  was  not  so  different  from
myself.  It  seemed  no  less  furry  than  I,  and  was  dressed  in  a  soft
white  garment,  of  fine  astil  across  which  the  light  lay  so
wonderfully,  with  a  long  knife  hanging  at  one  hip,  tied  in  the
sheath and strapped to the thigh.
When  I  was  done  talking  about  Teksan’s  business,  the  being
reached into a  satchel  much  like  the  one  Teksan  carried.  What  it
brought out was so small that it lay in the palm of only one hand, a
ball  of  fur  from  which  huge  ears  stood  out,  and  bright  eyes
gleamed.  “I  have  a  problem,  this  onfrit  hatchling.  She  will  begin
talking in about fifteen days, and grow wings soon after. Would you
like to have her?  She  is  not  so  much  trouble  to  take  care  of,  just
keep her warm and feed her whatever you eat…”
But I was already reaching for the onfrit, feeling hew claws grip
tightly to my fingers as I took her out of the person’s hand, saying
something, I do not even remember what. “Good,” Eia said. “It was
not healthy for the onfritling to travel  in  my  satchel  all  the  time,
and receive so little attention. Better not tell your master how you
got her, though. His kind doesn’t like my kind. If you tell him you
found her in a crack, he’ll believe you. What do you want me to do
for you in return?”
I held  the  warm,  furry,  trusting  infant  to  my  chest.  My  hands
were trembling. When the winged being moved slightly, I looked up
wildly, ready to defend with everything I had  should  it  change  its
mind and want the onfrit back. But Eia was smiling, and the only
thing beyond that smile was an inexplicable sadness. I said, “I don’t
suppose you know where there is a pile of medog pellets.”
“Actually, I do,” said Eia, “You see, we are both people; we both
want a fire. I spotted the fuel before I landed.”
It  was  not  far.  As  we  walked,  two  more  onfrits  appeared,  but
shyly  kept  their  distance  as  they  swooped  earthward  and  rose  up
again on fluttering wings, munching flowers.

“Is everyone of your race both male and female?”
“Yes.  My  native  language,  H’ldat,  has  only  one  pronoun:  Id,
meaning a person of any gender. We use the H’ldat pronoun when
we  speak  the  Walker  tongue  also,  since  the  Walkers  consider  the
word  ‘it’  to  be  an  insult.  They  seem  to  think  there  is  something
special about being only one sex!”
“Id?” I said, bewildered by too many new  notions  coming  at  me
much too quickly.
“Id, idre, ids. She, her, hers.”
“Id,  idre,  ids,”  I  said  to  myself,  scooping  medog  pellets  into  my
sling, as Eia did the same into a nearly transparent bag that floated
in  air,  as  weightless  as  a  wind  pod.  More  than  once  our  hands
touched  casually.  I  kept  wondering  why  Eia  did  not  draw  away
from  me.  It  was  not  easy  for  me  to  get  accustomed  to  having
someone so close that I could feel their body
“I am wind-drift,” it—id—said. “My nests are burning behind me,
but as  for  where  I  am  going—”  Id  shrugged,  wings  whispering  in
the still twilight. “I don’t know.  Nowhere.”  The onfrits chirped and
played nearby, like leaves swirling on a whirlwind.
Our  bags  were  full  too  soon.  Eia  straightened,  a  black  shadow
against a darkening sky. “Delan,” id said, but did not continue.
I said, “I have to go back while it’s still light. I can’t find my way
in the dark.”
“I know. Walk carefully, child, it is a tricky path ahead of you.”
I waited to watch idre leap off  a point of rock and seem to float
like  a  stormcloud.  And  then  ids  great  wings  beat  down  and  the
onfrits swirled in ids windy wake.  Id was gone, leaving me with a
raw rent of pain and wonder inside of me.
By the time I reached my own camp, I would not have been able
to believe that any of it had happened, if not for the onfrit clinging
to  my  fur  inside  my  shirt  and  making  a  comfortable,  warbling
sound  which  I  took  to  mean  she  preferred  my  chest  to  Eia’s  bag.
Perhaps,  if  Eia  had  been  wrong,  this  would  be  a  much  different
story. But Teksan believed my tale of finding the onfrit in a crack,
and let me keep her. I named her Dulcie.

Chapter 2
« ^ » 
On the outer edge of the town,  the sight of a green field made the
draf  stretch  his  neck  longingly  away  from  the  dusty  road.  It  was
already  summer  hot  here  in  the  lowlands.  The  road  dust  burned
like hot ashes underfoot. A stream bumbled past the field,  singing
sweetly in its rocky  bed. Neck-deep in a pool below the footbridge,
bright  clothing  hooked  on  bushes  at  the  shore,  children  splashed
and  shouted.  I  looked  at  them  in  amazement  as  we  passed
overhead:  My  people  are  not  great  swimmers,  and  I  in  particular
had never been trusting of water. But it would have been wonderful
to dip my tired feet in the cool water.
The  draf’s  hooves  tapped  on  the  wooden  bridge.  “Look  at  the
hairy person!” one of the children cried.
They scrambled out of the water, shouting and pointing at me.  I
hastily  put  my  arm  around  the  draf’s  neck,  pretending  to  be
checking his girth straps. My onfrit Dulcie scrabbled  about  on  my
shoulder,  looking  wide-eyed  at  the  children,  and  chirping
breathlessly with wonder.
“Mind  your  manners,”  said  Teksan  sharply  to  the  children.  As
one they drew back, still staring, some of them gesturing respectful
greeting to my master with their fingers at their foreheads.  But  I
glared at Teksan from  behind  the  shelter  of  the  draf.  Only  at  his
convenience did he ever protect me from ridicule or remember  that
I  was  capable  of  hunger  or  thirst  or  weariness.  My  fragile  pride
would have survived utter indifference with far less damage.
Six days ago, the trader path had taken us around a sharp bend.
Suddenly Derksai lay below us, like a flat blanket spread between
the  knees  of  the  mountains.  The  way  was  steep  and  treacherous
here,  with  a  gulf  of  empty  air  at  one  elbow,  and  a  wall  of  sheer
glass at the other. We were making this part of the journey in the
pale  light  of  dawn,  to  avoid  both  the  darkness  which  my  vision
could not penetrate and the glare which could have blinded Teksan.
He edged along the path, hugging the side of the mountain. But I

felt  a  strange  thing  as  I  walked  that  terrible  way:  a  joy  at  the
emptiness below me, and a powerful desire to fling myself over,  as
if, like the unforgotten monster, I could trust the air to carry me on
its back.
The thick, humid air of the lowlands gradually embraced us. As
the  path  flattened,  Teksan  surreptitiously  wiped  sweat  from  his
face. Of all Walkers I had ever met, I alone did not share this fear.
It was my love of steep places, in fact, which had led the Digan-lai
to conclude that I was brain-damaged—that and my clumsiness,  a
combination which, like Dulcie’s curiosity and fearlessness, did not
seem  designed  to  promote  survival.  As  we  came  to  flat  land,
though, it was my turn to become uneasy.
During my first few days in the lowlands, I had to absorb a great
many new concepts all at once: plants that grew tall, soil, families,
great  numbers  of  people,  buildings  and  farming  and  complex
commerce, and all the colorful, wonderful and disorienting artifacts
of  civilization.  But  the  one  thing  I  did  not  seem  able  to  become
accustomed to was the sky stretching unobstructed from horizon to
horizon. My fears were exactly the reverse of normal: I delighted in
high places, but felt trapped and insecure on flat ground. With each
step I took under that dreadful expanse, I missed the mountains.
The chattering children trailed behind us, pulling clothes on over
wet skin as they walked. In the busy farms surrounding the town,
clusters  of  people  in  bandannas  and  wide  straw  hats  raised  dust
with their hoes. I had learned that  by  midday  the  fields  would  be
abandoned, but the workers  would return at sunset and work  half
the night.
Before us, the streets of the town were crowded. It was market
day. I cringed inside my skin, and drew closer to Teksan. In another
town, on another day, a child had  thrown  rocks  at  me,  as  several
adults looked on, glaring as if something I had done had made me
ugly and crooked, something so bad that I deserved to be stoned as
well.
Oblivious to my fear,  Teksan led the way  into the crowd.  Drafs
and  wagons  and  baskets  jostled  me.  Startled  and  shocked  faces
jerked around to stare at me. I fixed my gaze miserably on Teksan’s
heels,  wondering  how  I  had  ever  imagined  that  things  might  be

better away from the Digan-lai. They at least had been used to me.
We  turned  down  a  quiet  side  street.  “Wait  here,”  Teksan  said,
pointing  at  a  curbstone.  Red  curtains  hung  behind  open  shutters,
and a flagon of ale decorated a wooden sign over the door.
Sighing, I sat on the curb. “You can lie down if you  want  to,”  I
told the draf.
“Drafs are not sentient,” Teksan said.
“Yes, sir.”
As Teksan went through the open door, the draf began to kneel
with admirable grace, one set of legs at a time, until he was on the
ground  beside  me.  He  tugged  affectionately  at  my  sleeve  with  its
teeth. The children who had  followed  us  whispered  and  giggled  in
the middle of the empty street.
“Are you a traveling menagerie?” one of them shouted, and they
all laughed uproariously.
I  said,  “No,  poor  ignorant  child.  I  have  come  from  a  distant,
dangerous land where monsters live, just to look at you.”
The children backed hastily away. Dulcie chirped in my ear, and
crawled down the front of my shirt to be petted. “Are you hungry,
sweeting?”  I  murmured,  and  gave  her  a  bit  of  bread  out  of  my
pocket. She warbled in her throat as she crunched on the dry crust.
Teksan was gone long enough to consume more than one mug of
ale. When he came out, another was with him. Though Teksan had
told  me  there  were  a  hundred  different  Walker  races,  I  was  still
surprised when not  all  people  looked  like  the  Digan-lai.  This  man
was  even  taller  than  Teksan,  and  so  thin  his  limbs  seemed  like
sticks.  He  wore  an  eyeshade  against  the  afternoon  sunlight.  He
squinted  at  me  and  said  in  an  offended  voice  as  thin  as  he  was,
“This?”
“This is my servant, Delan. Delan, this is my friend, Presle, who
is a land-seller.”
“Sir,”  I mumbled, and said no more for fear I might be  insolent
rather than merely unfriendly.
“Well, get up,” Teksan said.

I nudged the draf, who sighed and scrambled to its feet,  and we
followed the two  men down the street.  The children trailed behind
us, at a cautious distance.
Teksan’s  house  was  like  all  the  others  in  town:  a  flat  building
made  of  manufactured  sandstone  blocks  the  color  of  dust,  with  a
small  courtyard  where  sunlight  filtered  through  a  slat  roof.  The
interior was cool and musty, and squares of blinding sunlight lay on
the dirty floor.
Except for the cheap roadhouses where we ate and slept on  our
journey,  I  had  never  been  inside  a  building.  Teksan  and  Presle
having gone down to the cellar, on my own I explored the house. It
was  plain  and  colorless,  with  the  hard,  dull  light  outlining  its
unsoftened angles. Its rooms included a kitchen, a storeroom, and a
bedroom  with  a  lock  on  the  door.  At  the  top  of  an  irregular
stairway,  I  found  an  empty  garret.  Dust  powdered  the  floor.  The
window shutters squawked as I opened them. In the street below, a
few adults stood with the children, talking vehemently and waving
their  hands  in  the  air  near  the  courtyard  entry.  Brown  tiled
rooftops stretched to the edge of town,  where  lush  trees  overhung
the stream. For the first time since we left the mountains, I took a
deep breath. It was a cramped, dirty little room,  but it was  safely
above ground. I hoped this was where I would sleep.
I  went  out  into  the  neglected  garden,  where  the  shed  leaned
wearily  to  one  side  and  the  few  flowers  were  blots  of  faded  color
behind dense vegetation.  Teksan had told me that my duties  were
to include gardening, but I had seen soil and cultivation for the first
time  in  my  life  only  five  days  ago.  As  I  stared  helplessly  at  the
mess, Dulcie crawled down my back and my leg, and nibbled a few
leaves  before  finding  on  a  bush  a  red  berry  which  she  consumed
completely, warbling with pleasure and licking the juice off her toes
afterward.
A voice said, “Are you sentient?”
I  turned  sharply,  heat  coming  into  my  face.  An  older  woman
leaned  on  the  chest-high  wall,  her  head  covered  with  a  blue
kerchief. The gloves on her hands were black with dirt.
“Of course I am,” I said.

“You’re a sorcerer’s creation, then?”
I schooled  myself  to  politeness,  though  my  heart  sank.  I  knew
that tone of voice: a busybody. “No, ma’am. I am the schoolmaster’s
new servant.”  I went over to the wall and looked into  her  garden,
which  was  a  humbling  contrast  to  mine.  Profuse  flowers  bloomed
along neatly raked pathways. Vegetable plants thrived in straight,
weedless rows.
“Where are you from?” she asked.
“The mountains.”
“I suppose  it  gets  cold  there,”  I  felt  her  eyes  examining  me,  as
she  tried  to  imagine  what  kind  of  environment  could  shape  a
Walker into something like me.
“You  have  a  nice  garden,”  I  said,  although  the  truth  is  that  I
found it dull in its overwhelming orderliness.
“Yours is a mess. Teksan is not much of a gardener.”
“Where do I begin?”
“With the weeds.”
“Which ones are weeds?”
“You  don’t  know?  You  poor  thing.”  She  scrambled  nimbly  over
the wall.
By the time Teksan came looking for me, I had brought the draf
through the gate.  He willingly  consumed  everything  I  told  him  to
eat, as I followed around after  him, pulling up the remains by the
roots.  Alyk,  the  neighbor,  had  been  amazed  that  I  did  not  even
know plants had roots, but no more amazed than I had been upon
learning  that  she  had  never  in  fifty  years  set  eyes  on  the  Glass
Mountains, or even, except on a few  occasions,  traveled  outside  of
the town limits. “Why should I?” she asked. But I was speechless.
“Well,” Teksan commented, unimpressed by my industry. “Come
in before you get heatstroke. There’s the unpacking to do.”
I tied  the  draf  in  the  shade  where  everything  within  its  reach
was  a  weed,  woke  Dulcie  from  her  nap  between  rocks,  and  went
into my new house. When I came out again in the evening, the draf
was gone. One of Presle’s offspring had come to take him to a farm

at  the  edge  of  the  village.  I  had  known  that  the  draf  was  only
borrowed,  yet  I  spent  a  long  time  wandering  vaguely  among  the
plants  he  had  cropped.  A  draf  was  not  much  of  a  friend,  but  I
missed him, even so.
 
“Delan. Delan.”
The  room  was  glowing,  red  and  gold.  The  dull  stone  walls
glittered in the light. I got up from  my makeshift bed and went to
the  window.  The  streets  of  the  village  below  were  empty.  Each
building stood in sharp-edged clarity, bright against black shadows.
The air was cool  and  fragrant.  The  light  of  sunrise  tipped  my  fur
with fire.
“Delan,”  the  chirpy  voice  said  again.  Dulcie  fluttered  up  to  the
window on wings like stretched astil.
“Dulcie!”  I  whispered.  She  landed  awkwardly  on  my  shoulder,
clinging  frantically  to  my  short  fur  and  flapping  wildly  until  she
was  balanced.  Then  she  folded  her  astonishing  wings  into  neat
bundles, only to  spread  them  again  for  my  admiration.  As  soft  as
powder under my touch, the membrane both gave and resisted,  to
embrace the wind and yet  control  it.  I  stroked  her  soft  fur.  “How
wonderful you are!”
Something unknown and mysterious ached inside of me,  ragged
with unattended hunger. I watched the sun until the light began to
dull,  and  a  few  figures  appeared  on  the  street  below.  But  my
sadness did not fade. My new place was rich at least in possibilities.
Yet, mistake or mislaid, I was still a freak. Only once in my entire
life had another person seemed unaffected by my ugliness. But now
even  the  memory  of  the  beautiful,  gentle-spoken  flying  monster
gave me pain.
“The Aeyries use them  as  message  carriers,”  Teksan  said  when
he  saw  the  onfrit  fluttering  around  the  kitchen.  “They  actually
believe they are intelligent beings.”
I put a spoonful of black honey into  a  pot  of  boiling  water,  and
stirred in the grain, handful by handful.
The  first  time  I  had  tried  to  cook  porridge  it  had  been  full  of

lumps, and Teksan had made me do it again. I frowned at the pot.
My unreasonable fear of Teksan had lingered, and I was not willing
to risk arguing with him. I decided to teach Dulcie to talk  only  to
me, rather than prove to Teksan that he was capable of making a
mistake. I said, “Who are the Aeyries?”
Immediately  I  was  sorry  I  had  asked.  He  said  violently,  “How
can you not know? They hold the earth in thrall!  They  snatch  the
bread from our children’s mouths!”
He continued on in this way  all the while I stirred the pot,  and
was still declaiming when I served breakfast. “Why?” I asked when
he finally paused to take a mouthful of food.
“Why what?”
“Why do they do it?”
“They are not human, of course. They think they are better than
the  rest  of  us.  They  think  they  deserve  to  spend  their  days  in
dreaming while they live on our honest labor!”
“But if they give us machines, and books, and new ideas—”
“Give us? Sell us! Knowledge is a right, not something to be sold
at a price so high it keeps us in poverty. While they live in luxury,
wearing nothing but  astil,  raising  up  their  spoiled,  fat  children  to
look down upon us from the top of their mountains—”
I was to hear a great deal about the Aeyries during the months
that followed. The entire population of  L’din,  and  Teksan’s  friends
in particular, hated them for the luxury in which they lived:  their
wastefulness,  their  leisure,  and  above  all  for  the  fact  that  it  was
thanks to them that the Lowlanders had to pay taxes. The Aeyries
lived  in  unapproachable  strongholds  in  the  mountains.  They  were
not  like  Walkers.  But  no  one  knew  what  they  looked  like,  or
anything  else  of  use  about  them,  except  for  the  fact  that  they
exploited hardworking people.
Occasionally,  I  did  wonder  that  the  Walkers  so  resented
something  that  they  did  to  me  every  day.  Teksan  insisted  that
knowledge was a right, yet when the school doors opened he refused
to allow me to attend. Teksan said that it was wrong for anyone to
avoid what he called honest labor, but I did all the honest labor in

our household while he spent his spare time in the tavern or behind
the  locked  door  of  his  room,  doing  mysterious,  smelly,  sometimes
noisy experiments. Not one of those who railed against the Aeyries
would  have  dreamed  of  living  in  a  mud  hut  rather  than  houses
made of sandstone manufactured in the Aeyrie designed foundry, or
of burning wax  candles  rather  than  using  the  Aeyrie  designed  air
lamps. My neighbor Alyk would happily complain about the Aeyries
for an entire afternoon as she watched me work in my garden. But
her  prize  flower,  a  night-blooming  lily  which  glowed  red  in
moonlight, had been bought from a peddler of Aeyrie goods.
I was smart enough to avoid  pointing  out  these  inconsistencies.
Growing up among the Digan-lai had taught me what little good it
did  to  argue  against  common  opinion.  I  had  no  interest  in  calling
attention  to  myself.  All  I  wanted  from  the  residents  of  L’din  was
that  they  become  blind  to  my  fur,  and  all  I  wanted  from  Teksan
was that he have no reason to regret my presence. It did not seem
like too much to want from life.
I worked hard. I joined the informal club of gardeners that met
at  Alyk’s  house.  My  garden  thrived.  The  floor  in  the  kitchen
sparkled  in  the  light  of  the  air  lamp.  I  learned  from  others  or
taught myself how to cook, how to grow  ornamental plants in pots
in the courtyard,  and  how  to  strike  hard  bargains  at  market  so  I
would have money left over to spend on kipswool to recover the old
furniture Teksan had bought, and woven grass blinds to soften the
light.  I  came  in  one  day  from  working  in  the  garden,  and  was
myself  surprised  by  the  welcoming,  warm  colors  of  the  unused
parlor. How beautiful I had made it! But for what purpose?
That  afternoon  I  scrubbed  the  kitchen  floor  in  a  fury.  I  rasped
the  metal  bush  accidentally  across  dry  sandstone,  showering
stinging  sparks  across  my  hand.  I  threw  the  brush  at  the  wall.
With  a  startled  cry,  Dulcie  headed  for  the  ceiling  and  clung
frantically to a curved  spoke  of  the  air  lamp.  “I  am  not  happy!”  I
shouted. “I work hard. I behave myself. But I am not happy!”
The next morning, I told Alyk I had to miss the  meeting  of  the
garden  club,  and  I  left  the  house  soon  after  Teksan  was  gone.  I
tried  to  look  casual  as  I  went  through  the  village,  for  it  was  too
much to hope that no one would notice me. Already the day was hot

and dusty. I sweltered in my fur. My heart pounded in my throat.
The  school  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  village  from  Teksan’s
house, a dull, square, windowless building which opened on the road
on one side and an unused alley on the other, where a broken-down
wagon  without  wheels  rested  on  its  axles,  and  full  trash  bins
awaited the dustman. I went cautiously, but the alley was empty of
people. The broken lock on the back door of the school,  of  which  I
had dutifully informed Teksan several times, was still broken. The
knob turned in my hand, squeaking softly,  bringing my heart  into
my throat. It opened into a storeroom, one which, as far as I could
tell,  only  I,  the  unofficial  janitor,  ever  used.  The  mop  and  broom
and  bucket  stood  neatly  in  their  corners  where  I  had  left  them
nearly a week  ago.  The hunter worm,  whose web  I  cleaned  out  of
the corner every week, was hanging from a thread, weaving busily.
I lay  down  on  my  stomach  on  the  floor  and  put  my  eye  to  the
crack  where  the  door  had  warped  away  from  the  jamb.  Chalk
squeaked on slate, and  Teksan’s  voice  droned  in  my  ear.  I  shifted
my angle until  I  could  see  him,  holding  up  his  slate  with  a  letter
written on it. I dug my stolen piece of brown chalk out of my pocket
and wrote  on  the  floor.  “Eh,”  said  Teksan.  “Eeeeeh.”  The  children
murmured in a disorganized chorus.
“Eh,” I whispered in the cool, dusty closet.
Only five mornings later, I was spelling out shop signs. I had no
idea  how  remarkable  this  was  until  I  overheard  Teksan
commenting proudly  on  his  best  student,  who  was  reading  simple
words  after  only  a  forty-day.  By  the  end  of  a  forty-day,  I  was  no
longer even going to school.
I  ingratiated  myself  with  a  locksmith  and  idly  watched  her
construct a  lock  and  a  key  for  the  school.  Then  I  went  home  and
picked the lock on  the  door  of  Teksan’s  bedroom.  I  was  careful  to
leave no telltale scratches on the keyhole, something I knew how to
do  thanks  to  the  locksmith’s  helpful  idle  chatter.  But  I  was
sweating  even  before  the  lock  was  undone,  and  when  the  door
creaked faintly on its hinges, a gulf of terror gaped suddenly in my
belly.  “How  silly,”  I  said  out  loud.  “He  won’t  be  home  for  hours.”
But even Dulcie clung to my shoulder, wide-eyed and silent.

I pushed the door open with my foot. In front of me was Teksan’s
bedroom, no bigger than the parlor. It was sparsely furnished, but
wildly  cluttered  and  very  dirty.  After  my  first  glance,  once  I  had
noticed what was in the center of the room, I was not able to focus
on  anything  else.  In  the  center  of  the  room  was  an  empty  space
where  the  walls  and  the  house  and  the  smooth  sandstone  floor
ceased to exist.  Inside  that  emptiness  I  sensed  rather  than  saw  a
swirling, like clouds in an advancing storm, and the weird flicker of
blue lightning.
Dulcie leapt from my shoulder and fled. Her terrified screeching
echoed down the hallway. But I stood as if turned to glass. It was a
long time before I was able to very  carefully  close  the  door  again,
and snap shut the lock.
“What is the matter with you!” Teksan shouted at me that night.
He  had  come  home  from  the  school  to  find  me  with  my  work
undone,  burning  dinner  in  distraction  as  the  storm  swirled  in  my
stomach.
I heard  myself  saying  softly,  “I  beg  your  pardon,  sir.  I  think  I
must be tired.”
“Tired? From what? You haven’t done anything today.”
I said, “Four months I have been working from sunrise to sunset.
Haven’t you gotten two baskets of sweetbread worth of work out of
me yet?” I listened to myself in horror, and yet I could not stop.
He went to his room  without  speaking.  I  frantically  stirred  the
pot,  trembling  with  an  angry,  reckless,  heady  joy,  wondering  if  I
should run away.  Too  late,  I  decided  it  would  be  a  good  idea.  His
returning steps were quick and angry on the sandstone. I looked up
into an expression I was all too familiar with. It was hatred, hatred
mixed not with the usual fear, but with an awful gladness. He had
a cane in his hand.
In that long, horrific moment as I watched the hissing arc of the
cane,  I  knew  that  Teksan  had  dearly  wanted  this  to  happen,  had
been  watching  and  waiting  impatiently  for  an  excuse  to  raise  his
hand against me. And I was nearly as certain that I deserved it, not
because I had not worked hard enough, or even because I had done
things  which  he  had  forbidden,  but  because  my  offensive

appearance and inexplicable differences were somehow my fault.
The cane caught me on the side. Clumsy as always, I caught my
foot on a leg of the table as I tried to flee, and went sprawling. The
cane  cracked  across  my  backbone,  and  my  body  jerked  under  the
impact.  It  cracked  again.  I  caught  sight  of  Teksan’s  face,  twisted
with his terrible joy.  I hardly even felt the  pain,  so  great  was  my
fear. He hit me over  and  over.  I  knew  he  was  going  to  kill  me.  I
huddled helplessly on the floor, as if I had no ability either to fight
back  or  to  flee.  “Stop,”  I  sobbed  incoherently.  “I’m  sorry,  please
forgive  me,  stop,  oh  stop.”  Then  his  cane  contacted  the  ugly,
sensitive  lumps  on  my  back.  Agony  exploded  white  lights  in  my
brain, and I fainted.
 
The sandstone was cold under my cheek. In terror I jerked up my
head,  and  nearly  blacked  out  again  from  pain.  The  kitchen  was
empty. Pieces of the broken cane were scattered around me. The air
lamp’s light burned in a fog of smoke, but Teksan had taken the pot
off the stove.
I forced myself to move.  Burning ropes of pain slapped onto  my
back. I crawled out of the kitchen, and into the dusky parlor. It was
a  long  way  to  the  foot  of  the  stairway.  I  deceived  myself  with
ridiculous  lies  as  I  dragged  myself  up  the  stairs:  “Just  one  more.
This is the last step.” Then deceit worked no longer and I buried my
face in my shirtsleeve, sobbing. I wished Teksan had killed me. I do
not remember fainting again.
I dreamed that I lay under a soft glow of light, and gentle hands
were  touching  me.  There  was  a  sweet  taste  in  my  mouth,  and  a
spreading  warmth  in  my  belly.  A  hushed,  profoundly  angry  voice
whispered  words  I  could  not  understand.  The  touch  probed  the
deformities  on  my  back.  Someone’s  voice  moaned,  ragged  and
hoarse.  Then  there  was  a  coolness,  quenching  the  fire  of  pain.  I
wanted to turn my head, but could not. I wanted to speak, but could
not.
Later I had another dream, that I had wings, and rode the back
of a swirling storm.  Lightning flickered around me,  and  I  laughed
as I flew.

When I awoke, the light told me it was late morning. I lay in my
bed.  My  clothes  were  folded  atop  my  small  clothes  chest.  Dulcie
huddled against me,  warm  and  quiet.  The  pain  was  not  nearly  as
bad as I expected it to be, as if in my dream of being tended I had
healed myself.
I got up and  went  back  to  Teksan’s  room,  and  carefully  fiddled
my  makeshift  pick  in  the  lock.  This  time  I  shut  my  eyes  before
nudging open the door, and went in backward so  that  what  I  saw
when  I  opened  my  eyes  was  the  disordered  bookshelf.  I  escaped
with a book this time, as I had originally intended. It was the only
one with a title I could easily read. It was called The World.
If Teksan was going to kill me, at least the reason would be not
that I had failed to be a perfect servant, but  that  I  had  chosen  to
become free.
Chapter 3
« ^ » 
The front door slammed. Teksan’s footsteps crossed the house to his
room.  I  had  returned  the  stolen  book  just  in  time.  Now  I  panted
with fear on my cot, where I had spent most of the day reading and
thinking and trying to avoid moving.  Dulcie huddled in the hollow
behind my legs, wide-eyed and silent.
Teksan’s  footsteps  started  up  the  stairs.  Under  the  covers  I
gripped my knife in a sweaty hand.
He opened the door. My heart stopped beating. My single brave
candle guttered before him. He  stared  at  me  from  black,  lightless
hollows. His clothing wrapped him like a midnight shadow.
The walls of the room veered abruptly away at impossible angles,
stretching  into  a  vast,  monstrous  darkness.  What  had  been  air
seemed  solid,  shuddering  and  cracking  as  Teksan  moved.  He
stretched,  grew,  filled  the  doorway,  filled  my  entire  vision.  He
became the size of a storm. A thunder rumbled from his arms as he
wove his hands in the air, spinning out  of  the  twisting  shadows  a
Rope of darkness.

When  he  came  to  me,  I  could  not  move.  He  lifted  away  the
covers. I cringed away from him, shuddering with horror as his cold
hands touched me. I felt powerless to prevent him from his purpose.
Yet even in this abruptly changed Universe, I still gripped my glass
knife in my hand.
“Let go of your blade,” be said.  His  voice  was  no  sound,  but  an
unbearable pressure.
My  frozen  grip  relaxed,  and  I  moved  my  hand  away  from  my
weapon.  Now  he  will  take  it  from  me,  I  thought,  but  he  did  not
touch it. The Rope he  had  woven  floated  from  his  hand  like  mist,
substantial with gathered darkness. When he tied my waist with it,
and my arms, and my throat,  the touch of it  was  colder  than  any
ice, burning to the bone. As it burned, deeper and deeper, into the
very heart of me, I knew it was a death, an utter and irremediable
ending. Eia had been wrong: I had no choice, no choice at all.
He  said,  “You  will  be  downstairs  at  your  usual  time  in  the
morning.”
Confused  and  dazed,  I  stared  at  him.  In  the  course  of  only  a
moment, all had become ordinary again: the walls and atmosphere
of  my  room,  the  candleflame  straightening  and  sputtering  in  the
corner, Dulcie shifting nervously against me,  and Teksan standing
in the doorway, frowning at me impatiently.
“Yes,  sir,”  I  said.  The  door  closed,  and  he  was  gone.  I  reached,
and found my knife handle again, only a fingerlength away,  as hot
and sweaty as the palm of my hand.
I told  myself  the  strange  thing  had  not  happened.  Once  it  was
over, I remembered it  no  more  clearly  than  a  dream.  But  I  knew
that it had not been one. On a level of awareness which was new to
me  I  continued  to  feel  the  awful,  deadening  cold  of  the  Rope.
Somehow  I  even  knew  its  name:  Despair.  But  I  was  no  less  a
prisoner for being able to name that which bound me.
 
As  I  had  read  the  stolen  book  that  day,  I  had  daydreamed  of
following  the  road  to  wherever  it  led  me.  The  book  declared  the
world  to  be  a  single  gigantic  glass  mountain  hurtling  though  the

air, with the five moons whirling crazily around it. Thinking of the
Walkers of L’din, going placidly about their predictable business,  I
could understand why they might prefer to  believe  that  the  world
was  a  flat  disk  floating  peacefully  in  an  infinite  ocean,  with  the
moons and the sun tethered to it by pieces of string. But something
in me delighted in fearful knowledge.
I had read that, contrary  to  what  I  had  understood  all  my  life,
our world is inhabited by three primary races of intelligent beings,
all  of  which  have  enough  in  common  with  each  other  to  be
considered  human.  My  book  was  apparently  a  translation  of  one
written by and for  Aeyries,  for  they  were  listed  but  not  described
although  some  of  the  Walkers’  Hundred  were  described  in  detail.
The  book  also  mentioned  the  Mers,  the  mysterious  herdfolk  who
live in the sea, a migratory people with no language but a wordless
song  which  expresses  only  emotion.  And  apparently  even  the
Aeyries  had  never  heard  of  freaks  like  me  or  people  like  the
remarkable winged stranger.
As  I  read,  I  had  dreamed  of  heading  northward,  deep  into  the
Glass  Mountains,  searching  for  other  Walkers  like  me  who  had
adapted as I had to the cold wind and the glaring sun. They would
be people who even thought like me, who delighted in knowing they
inhabited a glass mountain hurtling through space, who wanted to
talk to a Mer about the sea and an Aeyrie about inventiveness, who
delighted in asking questions even when there was no answer, who
wanted to love and be loved.
Now I knew I was not going anywhere.  If there was a  place  on
earth where I belonged, I was not destined to find it.
I cooked for Teksan the next day, but I did not eat with him. In
the  cool  of  the  morning,  despite  the  lingering  pain  of  the  bruises
and welts across my back, I worked in the garden. For breakfast I
ate vegetables I had grown myself, raw, with the dirt still on them.
As soon as the fearful weight of the sorcerer’s presence was gone, I
broke  into  his  room  and  stole  the  book  again.  Throughout  the
morning,  word  by  word  and  page  by  page,  with  the  book  open
nearby wherever I was working, I read.
The summer was ending. All day long and far into the night, the
harvest  songs  of  the  field  workers  could  be  heard.  Teksan  closed

school  for  the  harvest,  and  spent  all  day  in  the  tavern  instead.
Sometimes,  he  brought  his  friends  home  for  dinner.  I  eventually
realized  that  everyone  knew  he  was  a  sorcerer  but,  rather  than
being  horrified  and  fearful,  respected  him  for  it.  His  numerous
friends were eager to listen to him talk, and equally eager to agree
with him. He talked tirelessly and hatefully about the Aeyries, and
every  word  he  spoke  seemed  intended  to  make  the  L’din  Walkers
feel even more victimized and self-righteous.
I listened sometimes from  the kitchen, where I  dutifully  cooked
dull  and  uninspired  meals  for  them.  As  I  listened,  I  came  to
understand  how  easy  it  is  to  blame  the  one  who  is  different  for
every  ill  which  befalls  the  people.  I  had  been  fortunate  to  have
hatched among the nonviolent Digan-lai, for I was a natural target.
It  was  inevitable  that  someday  someone  would  decide  that  Delan
the freak had brought a curse upon them, or had caused a drought,
or had given their draf some disease.
I used to love going to market,  where a few  people  smiled  with
welcome when they saw me coming. Some  of the  crafters  in  town
were accustomed to being visited by me  every  day:  the  locksmith,
for instance, and the wheelwright,  both  of  whom  had  frankly  told
me they wanted to apprentice me.  But now it took all my courage
to  make  myself  go  out  into  the  street,  and  I  did  my  business  in
haste.
The  Rope  which  bound  me  burned  into  my  soul.  I  remembered
my  recent  self  as  if  a  stranger,  remembered  my  little  joys  and
triumphs: how I had loved the little power  of  creating  beauty  and
making things grow, how I had felt the day I realized that because
I  could  read,  all  the  knowledge  of  the  world  could  be  mine.  I
remembered how it had been, but my small triumphs  were  empty
now.  Teksan  and  I  both  pretended  that  he  had  never  been
maddened by hatred for me, and that I was not a helpless prisoner
in his household. But I was unable to forget that joy on his face as
he  hit  me  with  his  cane.  Fear  made  me  unwilling  to  even  guess
what he meant to do with me. I worked hard and went to bed tired,
but I had trouble sleeping at night.
One day I looked at the swirling Hole in his room, and realized I
was no longer afraid of it. I thought it must be a door, opening into

the  ether  through  which  our  glass  mountain  world  was  falling.  I
wondered  what  could  happen  if  I  stepped  into  the  swirling
emptiness,  and  whether  Teksan  could  follow  me  or  call  me  back
from that darkness.
The  next  day  I  opened  one  of  his  books  of  sorcery.  Ï  leafed
through it with horrified interest at first, and then with increasing
boredom. Its faded pages contained little more than dull listings of
ingredients to mix and the order in which to lay out certain stones
and  say  certain  words.  Perhaps  Teksan  had  the  necessary
ingredients on his shelves, and perhaps he did not. All his jars and
bottles and boxes were unlabeled, and I had no means of identifying
them.
Nonetheless, when I found the spell for changing something into
something  else,  I  paused  to  consider.  If  I  could  be  anything  I
wanted, what would I want  to  be?  An  ordinary  Walker,  leading  a
Walker’s safe but dull and predictable life? A scholar like Teksan? A
child again, an egg to hatch anew? An onfrit? And did I really want
any  change  caused  by  only  a  few  fistfuls  of  powder  and  a  few
spoken  words?  What  would  be  the  value  of  a  change  so  cheaply
bought?
I  closed  the  book  and  put  it  back  on  the  shelf.  A  sickening
dizziness  suddenly  washed  over  me,  darkening  my  vision  and
twisting  my  stomach,  leaving  me  clinging  to  the  shelf,  with  the
blood  throbbing  in  my  ears  and  my  knees  weak  under  me.  I
stumbled  out  of  the  room  and  shut  and  locked  the  door,  but  the
dizziness and sickness did not leave me.
Dulcie  found  me  in  the  kitchen,  where  I  had  built  up  the  fire
under the pot. When the water boiled, I had been unable to get up
and  brew  a  cup  of  tea,  and  the  pot  was  boiling  dry.  “Sick?”  she
asked anxiously. “Delan?”
“Dulcie, I should never have touched that book.”
She clung to my shoulder, her soft fur tickling mine. “Love you.”
“Oh, Dulcie.” I petted her, and she chirruped as she always did,
happy in my affection and in the simple joy of her simple life. “You
went  away  again  today,”  I  said.  “Where  do  you  go  when  you  go
away?”

But  she  nuzzled  my  cheek  with  her  warm  nose  and  did  not
answer.
 
Teksan did not seem to notice that anything was wrong.  I went
to bed that night even more exhausted than usual, and plunged into
some deep secret dream place where I had never been before,  with
wild,  bright,  unpredictable  inhabitants  who  demanded  strange
things,  and  knew  without  asking,  and  were  both  dangerous  and
desperately beautiful.
I  awoke  late,  with  my  blankets  thrashed  and  twisted,  and
stumbled downstairs in a daze to hover anxiously over my cooking
as if somehow the laws  of  the  Universe  had  changed  in  the  night
and something awful would happen if I did not pay close attention
to the cereal. At last Teksan was gone and I could sink my  weary
and aching body into a chair. It was autumn, and chilly even near
the stove, but my clothes and fur were damp with sweat.  All down
my back, fierce, piercing pains drove into my flesh like spears.
“Delan, sad?” Dulcie clung to me.
“Leave me alone,” I said. “I feel bad.”
“Come. Come. Good place.” She pulled on my worn out shirt with
her sharp teeth.
“You don’t understand. I can’t go anywhere.”
“Can,” she said firmly.
I stared at her, offended. “Do you think I haven’t tried?” But she
kept tugging on my sleeve until I  stood  up,  absurdly  angry  in  my
misery, swaying on my feet. “I’ll prove it, then!”
She  jumped  from  my  shoulder  to  float  on  transparent  wings.
“Come.”
I  followed  her.  We  went  out  into  the  morning-busy  street,
crowded with people who avoided looking directly at me or my pet,
as was their habit.  I  pretended  to  them  and  to  myself  that  I  was
just running a routine errand. Dulcie fluttered overhead, with cold
sunlight  shining  through  her  wing  membranes,  coloring  them
amber.

When  we  came  to  the  edge  of  the  town,  nothing  had  yet
happened to prevent me from going so far from my house. I said to
the onfrit, “Where are you taking me? Dulcie, I am sick.”
She came down to me, digging her claws into my worn shirt and
bundling up her wings. “Good place.”
“Teksan will kill me.”
She  cocked  her  head,  examining  my  sweating  face  with  bright
eyes, as if I were a puzzle to be figured out. “Love you, Delan. Trust
Dulcie.”
“Trust!”  It  was  not  the  first  word  Dulcie  had  learned  which  I
never  used,  but  I  shook  my  head  in  bewilderment.  For  a  while  I
leaned  for  support  against  someone’s  garden  wall,  with  the
countryside spread before me.  How  shocked I had been when Alyk
told  me  she  hardly  ever  left  the  town!  But  since  my  arrival  six
months  ago,  I  had  not  left  it  either.  The  hay  was  being  cut,  and
turned golden where it lay. The workers,  wearing red stockings so
their  coworkers  would  not  accidentally  cut  their  ankles,  stood  in
crooked lines, singing and talking and swinging their scythes.  The
trees  had  turned  the  fiery  colors  of  sunset:  red  and  orange  and
yellow.
I had  never  been  forbidden  to  take  a  walk.  It  was  a  beautiful
day.  I  was  curious  now  about  why  I  was  so  convinced  the  Rope
would  keep  me  from  going  anywhere,  and  about  how  far  I  could
actually  go.  I  straightened  up  stiffly  from  my  supporting  wall,
wondering vaguely what could be wrong  with my back, to make it
hurt so much. My recovery  from  the caning had been complete, at
least in body.
I  pointed  at  a  spreading  tree  which  grew  near  the  road,  just
beyond the first farm. “I’ll go that far,” I told Dulcie.
When I reached the tree, I sat under it to rest for a while. I felt
very hot, and the throbbing in my temples made my vision blurry.
The  intense,  piercing  pains  in  my  back  had  been  joined  by  other
pains in my abdomen.
I felt  very  alone,  and  awfully  afraid.  I  had  never  heard  of  any
illness which felt like this. But if I was going to be  sick,  I  knew  I
would rather be alone than have Teksan take care of me, even if it

meant death.
“You’re taking me to a good place?” I asked Dulcie.
“Good. Very good.”
“Will I get wet if it rains?”
“Rrrains?” she  repeated.  “What  is  rrrains?”  Of  course,  this  was
the first autumn of her life, and she did not know.
“When  water  falls  from  the  sky.”  She  seemed  alarmed.  “Never
mind, it doesn’t hurt anything.” I stood up again. But as I walked,
she rode on my shoulder  and  told  me  wonderful,  incredible  things
about  this  place  where  we  were  going.  There  was  a  tremendous
quantity of food, and  it  was  high  up  in  the  air,  and  it  was  “soft,”
and  there  were  many  friends  there,  and  sweet,  running  water.  I
finally laughed at her. “You’re making this up, aren’t you.”
“No,” she said, but chortled gleefully.
I  threw  her  off  my  shoulder  and  made  her  fly.  Even  her  tiny
weight hurt my back.
Somehow,  I  kept  walking  all  day.  The  road  twisted  among
scattered farms and hills. The features of the countryside blurred in
my  vision  and  in  my  memory.  I  realized  I  was  very  ill,  but  my
recent wayfellow, indifference, kept me walking. I began stumbling
and  falling,  and  yet  when  Dulcie,  sun  golden  and  chirping  with
anxiety, tugged on my shirt, I got up and walked again. I lost track
of where I was or what direction I was going. I left the road without
noticing it, following Dulcie deep into trackless, uncultivated land.
Glass  shards  broke  out  of  the  loam  to  form  irregular  ragged
cliffs.  The  vegetation  became  scattered  and  scrubby.  The  ground
crunched and gave way  under my feet.  I came to a stream,  which
led between rising, shining blue walls of glass. When I fell, the sand
cut my hands and a thousand beads of blood formed on my palms. It
was a barren, beautiful place. When the sun set, the cliffs seemed
to glow from within. Light flowed up their riven sides like flame.
I fell again, and lay fainting with pain on the vicious sand. In the
fire of the sun, I felt as if I had been burnt to a cinder. I could not
go on.
 

“Delan?”
“Leave me alone,” I mumbled into the cutting sand.
Something  light  and  gentle  touched  my  hair,  and  then  slipped
under my mane to touch my neck. I heard a ragged sigh of breath. I
painfully lifted my head. The blaze of sunfire was fading. Over  me
bent a great, hooded shadow, black as night.
“How long since you ate?”
“Eia,” I whispered in disbelief.
“Yes. How long since you ate?”
I felt as if the glory and anguish of the sunset had gone inside of
me.  Cool  against  my  fever,  the  hand  rested  on  my  neck.  “Since
morning,” I said.
Dulcie  fluttered  overhead.  The  shadow  straightened  up  against
the  sky.  The  withdrawal  of  that  touch  seemed  beyond  bearing.
“Dulcie, go to my place and tell Ch’ta to bring me some food.”  Eia
bent over me again. “You will have  to  walk  a  little  farther.  I  will
help as much as I can. Can you sit up?”
I struggled  up,  dragging  my  heavy  body  to  its  knees.  A  warm
arm slipped carefully around my waist as if somehow the monster
knew that if id had touched my shoulders I would have screamed at
the pain of it. And then I was lifted in one motion to my feet.  The
flyer’s body pressed against me, supporting me along its length like
a  wall.  Id  was  fur-soft,  and  life-warm.  Ids  wings  lifted  to  cup
around  us  like  a  shield,  shutting  out  the  chill,  holding  in  the
warmth.
I huddled there.  I had never known  such  safety.  It  stunned  me
with its suddenness. After a while, I began to cry, I who never wept
even when I was alone. Then I was quiet, and still the vivid dream
(how could it be anything else?) did not fade. My face rested on the
flyer’s unclothed shoulder. Ids arms and wings embraced me. Under
my cheek, was fur like my own, damp with my tears.
I said, “Teksan will come after me. He has a Rope tied to me.”
The flyer asked mildly, “What kind of rope?”
“He  made  it  out  of  darkness.  The  candle  almost  went  out.  He

made me let go of my knife. Then he tied the Rope around me, even
around my throat.”
Id  was  silent.  I  realized  vaguely  that  my  words  were  utterly
nonsensical. But  then  Eia  whispered,  in  a  voice  of  such  rage  that
even I was afraid, “It was not enough that he starve you and hurt
you?  That  he  make  you  ashamed  of  what  you  are?  It  was  not
enough?”
I felt  utterly  bewildered.  How  did  Eia  know  these  things?  “He
loves to hurt me.”
“Oh Del!”
“The  name  of  the  Rope  is  Despair,”  I  said  helpfully.  I  did  not
understand  what  was  happening.  Above  all  else,  I  did  not
understand why I trusted the monster, or why my pain mattered to
idre.
Again there was silence, and the tightening of ids hands around
my  waist.  “Mislaid  Delan,  there  is  something  uncanny  in  you.  I
doubt  Teksan  suspects  that  you  know  and  see  so  much.  Despite
your binding, you were  able  to  come  this  far.  What  does  that  tell
you?”
I  said  dutifully,  like  a  child  at  a  lesson,  “The  Rope’s  greatest
power is its ability to make me believe that nothing I can do  is  of
any use.”
“Yes. Surely that power will be weakened here, among so much
elemental Glass. Teksan will not find you, either, in this maze.”
“If he does, he will kill me.”
“No. Not until you  have  done  what  he  wants  you  to  do.  Delan,
walk with me. I will keep you from falling.”
We  began  to  walk,  one  step  at  a  time,  through  the  heavy,
clinging  sand.  With  each  step  I  felt  further  unbalanced,  but  Eia
compensated for it and kept me on my feet.
“I am sick,” I said. “But I like this dream. I don’t want to wake
up.”
“No,” my dream companion said. “You are not sick, and you are
not dreaming, and you are definitely not going to die.”

“Then what? What is happening to me?”
The  flyer  held  me  tight  against  id’s  side,  taking  the  weight  of
each  step  I  took  onto  ids  own  feet.  “How  can  I  tell  you  so  you
believe me?” Ids voice was strange and ragged. “You do not see how
like me you are?” The black wing was still wrapped around me, and
the  other  one  moved  like  a  shadow  in  the  darkness,  lifting  and
folding  rhythmically  in  counterbalance  to  our  joined  weight.  The
body pressing against  my  fat  and  shapeless  side  was  muscle  hard
and sleek.
“I am not at all like you! You are—beautiful.”
“And  you  think  you  are  not?”  The  shadow  head  bowed  heavily
against  the  starry  sky  and  the  glimmering  cliffs.  “Well,  when  we
have light, I will show you.”
 
Dulcie returned with Eia’s Ch’ta, carrying between them a bag of
dried fruit.  We ate as we walked. It seemed a very  long way.  The
five  moons  rose  suddenly  from  the  horizon  in  the  grouped
configuration  called  The  Dance.  The  stark  cliffs  lay  black  and
brooding, but edged with white.  For a time my pain was dulled by
the drug of wonder.
Eia  paused  at  one  of  these  light-edged  cliffs,  and  plucked
something  out  of  the  darkness.  It  was  a  thick  rope,  lying  on  the
smooth glass like a braid decoration, fastened somewhere above our
heads. Id called, “Here I am; is it safe?”
Two  dark  shadows  dove  out  of  the  sky,  warbling  in  welcome.
Dulcie and Ch’ta shot up to greet the onfrits, and they tangled and
swooped wildly in the moonlight.
“You have to climb it, Delan.”
Just  watching  the  onfrits’  dance  had  made  me  dizzy.  I  put  my
shoulder  against  the  glass,  but  even  it  did  not  seem  solid  any
longer. “I have to?”
“Take off your shoes and trust your sensitive feet.  The rope will
make it easy.”
I fumbled  with  my  shoes,  and  Eia  gave  them  to  the  onfrits  to
carry away. “I will go up first, to help you over the ledge.”

Alone, I watched the rope twist and flap like a live thing as Eia
climbed  it.  This  dream  seemed  vivid  beyond  possibility:  a  death
dream maybe, or one which came of playing with a book of sorcery.
“Come up,” Eia said from above.
I took hold of the rope, and fumbled with my toes for a place to
put them. Solid purchase appeared as if by magic.  So long as I did
not think about my footing,  I found it. It was only when I stopped
to consider that I felt my fear.  The moonlit, sandy stream dropped
away below me, and then instead of rope I was gripping Eia’s wrist.
Id pulled me up over the ledge.  I  lay  sprawled  and  trembling,  my
breath knocked  out  of  me  by  hard  glass,  nearly  fainting  with  the
pain in my back.
“You said the rope would make it easy,” I gasped.
“Sometimes  saying  something  makes  it  true.  Here.”  Again  the
strong hands helped me up. “Duck your head; the entry is low.”
The  faint  glow  of  an  air  lamp  illuminated  the  ledge  and  the
cramped interior of the cave.  There was no bed, only a rug on the
floor, piled with  blankets  the  like  of  which  I  had  never  seen.  The
only  furniture  was  a  long-legged  stool  and  table  rudely  made  of
gnarled binewood. There were  books everywhere,  and a disordered
pile  of  paper  on  the  table.  On  a  ledge,  nesting  among  a  mess  of
sticks and leaves and scraps of cloth, all three of Eia’s onfrits were
grooming Dulcie, who seemed well satisfied with the arrangement.
Eia sat me on the stool and began undoing my clothing.  Id  was
wearing  only  a  knife  belt,  and  behaved  as  if  fur  was  more  than
enough clothes  for  anyone,  and  so  I  decided  not  to  be  offended  at
this liberty. Ids face was triangular like mine was, but with sharp,
fine bones. Ids mane floated in a soft, hazy tangle, like mine.
I looked in sudden curiosity at id’s crotch. Just as with me, there
was only fur,  coming to a neat point. Eia said, “I have  an  interior
penis,  which  on  appropriate  occasions  makes  its  appearance.
Sometimes  on  not  so  appropriate  occasions,  which  can  be  awfully
embarrassing- Here, sit still.” If it was rude of me to be looking for
ids genitals, ids voice did not tell me so.
Id  pulled  off  my  shirt.  The  release  of  tension  made  me  realize
how tight it had gotten. I twisted to look at my throbbing back, and

did not recognize it. Swollen bulbs of  flesh  poked  out  of  my  silver
fur like pale tumors. I stared, shocked and horrified. “Think of them
as flower buds,” Eia said.
I looked again at idre, at the beautiful, stretched astil wings with
the light shining through, outlining the tracery of veins. My horror
faded suddenly. I whispered, “Am I growing wings?”
“Yes. And genitals.”
“I am—you? What you are?”
“Yes.”
“Are there others?”
Eia almost laughed. “Yes, some four hundred.”
“Do they ask questions that have no answers? Do they love living
on a mountain falling through space? Do they want to talk to a Mer
about the water?”
Eia  looked  at  me  out  of  deep,  liquid  eyes  that  made  my  heart
turn over strangely. “What do you think?”
“Yes?”
“Yes.”
Chapter 4
« ^ » 
My memories of the next several days are like pages torn out of a
book.  On  each  of  those  pages  is  Eia:  writing  at  the  table;  asleep
beside  me,  curled  on  ids  stomach,  black  wings  drooping;  standing
out  on  the  ledge  in  the  blazing  sun;  supporting  me  in  ids  arms,
holding  a  cup  of  water  to  my  mouth.  I  also  have  a  strangely
shattered memory of ids pointed, triangular face,  wet  with tears. I
had  been  screaming,  I  think,  in  delirium  or  in  pain.  I  remember
that,  even  in  my  fevered  daze,  I  was  bemused  by  the  stranger’s
caring. I said nervously, “I’m sorry for being so much trouble.”
“It  is  a  privilege  to  attend  a  l’shil,”  Eia  said.  “Someone  was  a
Companion to my passage in this way,  and someday you, too,  may
be Companion to someone. This is as it is supposed to be.”

In  those  days  I  learned  lessons  that  would  serve  me  well.  I
learned that it was possible to  be  helpless  and  vulnerable  without
also  being  hurt.  I  learned  that  not  all  generosity  was  disguised
exploitation. I learned to trust a little.
At last, from a deep sleep, I opened my eyes to a brilliant sunrise,
and an uninhabited  cave,  with  even  the  onfrits  missing.  The  pain
and  fever  were  gone.  I  curled  on  my  side  in  Eia’s  bed,  so  relaxed
and peaceful that I scarcely recognized my own self. When I tried to
move,  air  tingled  on  delicate,  incredibly  sensitive  skin.  I  felt
muscles move in my torso that had never moved before. Something
waved  on  the  edge  of  my  vision,  awkward  as  an  infant  newly
hatched, white as a cloud. It was myself.
 
I knew that Eia was returning because the onfrits appeared in a
playful  crowd,  wrangling  lightheartedly  over  air  space.  Dulcie
swooped  over  to  be  petted,  chirping  with  good  cheer.  Eia  dropped
lightly to the ledge, ids black wings creating a brief twilight in the
cave. Then morning sun burned around ids folding wings, white sun
on blue glass. “Delan?” Eia said.
“Eia, they are so heavy.” My voice was hoarse with disuse—how
many days had it been?
Id  came  over  to  me  and  crouched  gracefully,  wings  briefly
brushing the floor. “You have little strength in your flight muscles
yet with which to support your wings. And you have lost about half
your  body  weight.  Everything  will  seem  heavy  to  you  until  you
become accustomed to being a small person.”
“Half!”
Eia  untangled  from  me  the  strange  blankets,  each  of  which
weighed no more than a dried leaf. “Look.”
I had never known how pudgy and shapeless I had been, until I
looked at myself that morning and saw a stranger’s body, stretched
across the rug in lean, clean lines, muscles standing out that I had
never  known  existed,  kept  from  spare  harshness  only  by  the
softening of my charcoal and silver fur. Whoever this stranger was,
I thought to myself in confusion, id was astonishingly beautiful.

Eia took hold of the edge of my wing and unfolded it.  Though  I
was lying down, the tip reached as high as the ceiling. It was cloud
white,  with  a  pearling  of  gray  on  the  leading  edge  and  along  the
ribs.  In  the  sunlight  its  red  blood  veins  shone  through  the  tough
membrane like lace. I lay speechless under its spread, fascinated by
the blood pulsing in the veins.
Eia said, “We are a rare people, but Silvers are the rarest among
us. And you have such contrasts, so dark and so light!”
“How could it be me? It doesn’t feel like me.”
“You are not awake yet.” Id stroked a fingertip down the leading
edge of my wing, where a few silver hairs were sparsely scattered.
That touch riveted and paralyzed me.  I  had  in  fact  been  asleep
and numb my entire life. I had never truly felt anything until I felt
that touch, brushing across my sensitive, innocent, newborn wing. I
felt it, not only  in  the  wing,  but  in  the  rest  of  me  as  well,  in  my
heart which froze for a moment in my chest, in my tough as glass
lightweight bones, and most powerfully in that secret place between
my  thighs  where  Crila’s  fingers  had  once  searched  and  found
nothing.
Eia’s voice was too quiet. “You seem to be awake now.”
“I am awake,” I whispered, wondering in terror and longing what
would happen now.
But Eia stood up abruptly, and suddenly was very far away. “Get
up, then. We’ll have some breakfast. I’ll teach you how to fly.”
 
Explaining the mechanics of flight, Eia sounded unnervingly like
Teksan in the schoolroom. But unlike Teksan, who talked at length
and repeated  himself  often,  Eia  said  each  thing  with  brevity,  and
only once. Id seemed to assume that I would remember it, and that
if  there  was  anything  I  did  not  understand,  I  would  ask.  I  did
remember, and the only thing I did not understand was how I was
supposed  to  continue  to  remember  when  I  was  in  the  air  and
terrified.
That  was  a  question  I  was  given  no  chance  to  ask.  Eia  and  I
stood on the ledge, with the crazy  glass maze stretching  as  far  as

could be seen below us. Id pointed. “It looks safest that way.  Make
your  landing  on  the  sand.  I  will  count  to  five  and  if  by  then  you
have not jumped, I will push you.”
“But,” I began.
“One,” Eia said, “Two.”
I jumped.
Heavy,  unmanageable,  and  uncoordinated,  my  wings  had  been
dragging  on  the  floor  and  banging  on  furniture  all  morning.  But
they spread of their own volition as I went over the ledge. Captured
under the cupped membranes, the wind picked me up. I did not fall;
I floated. And I was not terrified. All in one moment I knew why I
had  always  felt  so  misplaced,  why  I  was  always  longing  for  high
places  and  felt  at  home  on  precipices.  My  entire  life  I  had  been
traveling  in  the  wrong  element,  confined  to  the  ground  when  I
belonged in the air.
I could  not  help  myself.  My  shout  of  ecstasy  sang  in  the  glass
below.
“Turn,” Eia said. Id was hovering above me, ruddering gracefully
with id’s legs, laughing. “You’ll spike yourself on glass if you’re not
careful. Try to think of where you’re going to land.”
“Nowhere!”  I  shouted.  “Never!”  But,  nonetheless,  I  did  what  I
had practiced afoot in the cave,  lifting  one  wing  and  dropping  the
other, and so turning away from  my suicidal direction and  toward
the comparative safety of the streambed. It was a long, easy glide.
Eia had cautioned me against trying anything more complicated. I
had  to  build  up  my  endurance  slowly,  or  injure  myself  and  thus
become unable to fly again until I was healed. I landed messily  at
the end of the glide, with my face in the sand and the wind knocked
out of me.
“Delan!”  Eia  landed  a  handsbreadth  away,  light  as  a  leaf.  “If
you’ve hurt yourself—”
I got up on my elbows and turned my head, astonished. “I’m not
hurt. I’m just not very good at this.”
I saw  a  motion  in  id’s  face,  as  if  Eia  was  about  to  put  on  the
serene, schoolteacher mask again, but abruptly  decided  against  it.

For a long moment we looked at each other. “You’ll get the knack of
it,” id finally said.
I looked at the sky. The air brushing past me, insubstantial stuff.
“I  don’t  believe  I  just—”  The  moment  of  being  absolutely  certain
what I was and why I lived faded. I felt disoriented. I was hatched a
Walker. I belonged in the air. How was I to understand myself?
Eia’s  smile  contained  at  least  as  much  sadness  as  gladness.  “I
guess you’d better do it again, then. Until you believe it.”
Id gave me a hand up. I shyly put my hand on ids shoulder as we
walked side by side back to the hanging rope. Eia’s fur was hot with
the autumn sun. Ids knife was tied in  the  sheath  and  strapped  to
ids  thigh.  Id  had  a  fine,  thin  scar  in  one  wing  membrane.  In  the
inside of ids right wrist,  a triangle was branded in the flesh. I felt
small beside the mass of muscles in ids torso, even though we were
eye to eye in height. When  our  wings  brushed  accidentally,  it  left
me trembling.
We climbed the rope to the ledge again, for we could not take off
from  the  ground.  (Eia  had  tried  to  explain  why  not,  but  my
vocabulary  was  not  adequate  to  it,  and  my  mathematical  ability
ended  at  counting  my  change  at  market.)  When  I  looked  at  idre
before  my  next  jump,  I  spotted  in  ids  face  disquiet  and
self-possession  standing  hand  in  hand  like  old  friends.  The
schoolteacher  I  had  so  resented  was  gone,  and  never  came  back.
The one who was with me now was a person layered and folded like
a winter blanket in a storage cabinet. But with the door open.
 
When I was so tired that I could not even lift  my  wings  to  fold
them, Eia finally took pity on me and let me rest. After a meal of
cooked grains and draf cheese, I went back to bed. Id drew up the
rope  and  flew  out  with  Ch’ta  to  fetch  supplies  from  the  Walker
friends that were providing for idre. I dozed through the afternoon.
When I awoke,  Eia was still gone, and I was hungry again. Every
muscle in my body was sore, and my knees were weak. I ate what I
could find, and picked up one of the books.
Later, I lit the air lamp. I sprawled on my stomach on the  bed,
and  became  so  engrossed  in  the  book  that  Eia’s  breathless  voice

startled me as if out of sleep. “Who taught you how to read?”
I knew enough about flight by then to realize that the incredible
control  of  Eia’s  silent  landing  suggested  something  beyond  mere
experience. The light of sunset reflecting off the glass shone red and
smoky  through  ids  wing  membranes,  which  were  half  spread  to
disperse body heat. The tension in me was released in a sigh. I had
been  unreasonably  afraid  that  Eia  would  not  come  back.  “Teksan
did,” I said.
“I am surprised to hear it.”
“I  spied  on  his  schoolroom.  I  steal  his  books,  too.  He  does  not
have any stories, though.”
“You  steal  them?”  Eia  gave  a  delighted  laugh,  undoing  the
buckles  to  loosen  the  pack  strapped  between  ids  wings.  “Did  you
ever read any of his sorcery books?”
“Only  once.  You  know  a  lot  about  Teksan,”  But  I  remembered
that I myself had all but told Eia that he was a sorcerer,  when in
my fever daze I told about the Rope named Despair. I did not feel it
here, I realized suddenly. Beneath my confusion and disbelief over
what I had become, moved a dizzying joy.
Eia  said,  “Teksan  came  to  my  community  once,  before  I  was
winged, demanding to be taught  our  kind  of  magic.  But  he  would
not understand that our few  magicians grow  into their magic,  and
it cannot be taught.  He thought we were refusing him because  he
was a Walker. I have never forgotten him. He frightened me.”
“Perhaps he had grown into his magic, and you were refusing to
help him develop it.”
Eia seemed about to burst into angry speech, but took a  breath
and instead said mildly, “It is true that we withhold too much from
the Walkers. But it would have been a mistake to encourage power
in a man like him. You know that.”
“How is Walker magic different?”
“One of our magicians tried to study it once. Id determined that
sorcery’s power comes in part from  inflicted pain, and would go no
further with it.”
“Inflicted pain! The book was just a listing of recipes—”

“Del, you  are  the  one  who  told  me  that  he  enjoys  hurting  you.
Sadism is a requirement for sorcery, though most Walkers manage
to stay ignorant of the fact,  being  enamored  of  the  idea  of  magic.
The book which tells how the magic powders are made will give you
nightmares, at the very least.”
It was a new experience to have someone at least as bright as I,
and far better educated, in the same room with me. I said sullenly,
“Why do you know so much?”
Eia laughed suddenly. “Please  pardon  me.  I  have  enjoyed  being
protective of you, and am not as willing to give it up as I ought to
be. I have some berry wine; would you like a cup?”
I decided that Eia  was  an  altogether  surprising  person.  Having
emptied the pack, id took a bottle out of the storage box,  and filled
a couple of pottery cups. I got up willingly from my lazing, for I had
never been allowed to taste wine before.  After the  first  sip,  which
was more startling than pleasant, I liked  the  wine  a  great  deal.  I
began to feel as if my head was separated from the rest of my body.
I  sat  on  the  stool,  watching  Eia  construct  a  bean  and  vegetable
stew. “I was glad when you came home,”  I said. “I like being with
you.”
My own boldness unnerved me, but Eia said quietly, “Thank you.
I was glad to come home to you.”
“What race are we?”
Eia looked up from slicing, ids face inscrutible. “Aeyrie.”
“What?”
“Aeyrie.” Eia bent over the pot.
“But—” I fell silent, utterly dismayed.
“I  know  what  you  have  heard  about  the  Aeyries.  We  have  our
misconceptions  about  the  Walkers,  too:  they  are  incapable  of
abstract thought, we say. They are  hopelessly  narrow-minded  and
prejudiced.  Their  world  is  the  size  of  their  village  or  farm.  They
treat their drafs better than they treat their children. They prefer
simple  fictions  over  complex  truths.  But  none  of  these  things  are
necessarily  true—some  of  the  most  complex,  broad-minded,
courageous people I have ever known were Walkers.”

The fur on Eia’s sides was plastered  down  with  sweat  from  the
hard  flight.  Id  stood  up  to  shake  out  cramped  legs,  and  then
squatted down  again,  frowning  at  the  stewpot.  The  onfrits  awoke
from their naps and came over in a rush to fight over the vegetable
scraps.
I  said,  “The  Walkers  say  that  the  Aeyries  exploit  them,  make
them pay high prices for what should be theirs by right. They say
that  if  not  for  the  Aeyries  they  would  not  have  to  work  so  hard,
they would be rich—”
“Del, look at your body. Look at how much substance it has.”
I obediently looked again at my stranger’s legs and torso, which
had  only  the  same  color  of  fur  to  reassure  me  that  they  were
myself. The sharp relief of bone and muscle made me look underfed,
if not starving.
“You can build your  endurance  and  become  a  tireless  flyer,  but
your  entire  strength  will  be  concentrated  in  your  flight  muscles.
Even if you wanted to, do you think you could till a field?”
“I—no.”
“Our people used to gather food  in  the  wild  and  carry  it  to  our
homes  in  the  mountains.  But  now  the  Walkers  call  that  thievery
and shoot us down with their bows. They think we are rich! But the
truth is that we live on the edge of starvation.”
I said, after a very long time, “If that is the truth, then very few
Walkers actually know it.”
“You  have  grown  up  a  Walker.  You  tell  me  the  answer  to  this
question. If they knew what power they have over us,  would  they
exercise it well, or badly?”
I did not have to consider long. “Badly.”
“So,” Eia said.
“Do you hate them, then?”
“Most Aeyries do.”
“Do you?”
Eia swept more vegetable trimmings to the floor for the onfrits.
“No.”  Id  looked  up  at  me.  The  reflected  light  from  the  air  lamp

glittered in ids  eyes.  “It  is  ingrained  in  Walker  culture,  that  they
have rights to the land, that their primary purpose in life should be
to  form  a  family  unit  and  reproduce.  How  can  I  hate  them  for
failing to be aware of what they are doing to us?
“And  they  are  not  entirely  unaware,  not  all  of  them.  I  know
because I have  lived  with  Walkers,  as  you  have.  Two  years  ago  I
left my Ula to join the Community of the Triad, which is the  only
place in the world where members of the three races are trying to
live together in harmony. I was a taiseoch-dre, the offspring of the
chieftain of Ula t’Fon. My parent disinherited me for going against
ids will. You see, I have this difficult gift, which often seems more a
curse, the inability to see matters in yes or no, black or white.”
Id bent over the little stove which was scarcely bigger than  the
stewpot  id  set  upon  it.  I  looked  at  my  cup,  and  was  somewhat
surprised to find that it was empty. Eia sipped from ids cup, smiling
as  id  watched  the  onfrits,  who  having  each  secured  a  substantial
pile of food were  now generously exchanging pieces of it with each
other.
I said, “And then you left the Community of the Triad also? Why
is that?”
“Well—” Eia hesitated. “I fell in love with a Walker woman.  She
was in love also,  but  not  with  me.  I  left  because  my  unforgivable
behavior was causing me to lose my self-respect.”
Id looked up at me then, and laughed softly. “Are you shocked, or
just surprised?”
Never  in  my  entire  life  had  anyone  talked  to  me  so  frankly.  I
said, “I can’t imagine you badly behaved.”
Eia laughed again. “You don’t know me very well.”
“Are you going to go back to that place?”
“To Triad? If I can swallow my pride.”
“Haven’t you been lonely here, all these months?”
“Yes, very  lonely.  Not  nearly  as  lonely  as  you  must  have  been,
these twenty years.”
“How  did we end up living so near  each  other?  What  a  strange

coincidence!”
“No.” Id came up to me,  until I was bewildered by id’s nearness
and looked shyly away.  I had never seen anyone move like Eia, so
spare and flowing, so unlike my own clumsy awkwardness. Eia put
a hand to my back, between my wings. I quivered with tension. No
one ever touched me, not even by accident. My first reaction was to
want to pull away.
Eia pretended not to notice.  Ids  hand  smoothed  down  my  back,
like petting an onfrit. “It was not a coincidence at all. I followed you
and settled nearby on purpose. My onfrits contacted Dulcie, and she
came to  visit  sometimes.  One  night  I  went  to  you  because  Dulcie
fetched me.  I can tell you, now that we both know you have come
out perfect, how afraid I was that he had damaged your wing buds
with his cane.”
I remembered the dream hands on my beaten body, the  hushed
and angry voice, the sweet taste that blanked out pain. I wanted to
ask why, why had Eia followed and befriended a stranger, why had
id done so much and yet not told me what I was or rescued me.  At
first  I  was  afraid  of  what  the  answer  to  that  question  might  be.
Then I was too distracted to care. Eia’s hand stroked my sides and
shoulders, firmly and purposefully. “Does that hurt?”
“Not  very  much.”  I  did  not  tell  idre  about  the  other  things  ids
hands were doing to me, the things that were not pain, not quite. I
felt  a  new  sympathy  with  my  Walker  nestmates,  who  having
awakened  to  their  sexuality,  could  not  care  much  about  anything
else.
Behind  me,  Eia  said  softly,  “I  was  hard  on  you  today.  I  do  not
know what is going to happen, or how much time we have. I don’t
think your hard work today did any damage, but your muscles are
going to be awfully sore.”
Ids  careful  hands  kneaded  my  flight  muscles  like  a  baker  her
bread. I sat quiet, for a long time, though I did not feel quiet.
Then  ids  touch  grew  softer,  stroking  slowly,  and  finally  ceased
entirely.  “Do  you  want  some  more  wine?”  Eia’s  voice  was  not
entirely steady.
I turned on the stool, and reached up to touch ids folded wings on

the leading edge, touched softly, soft as air. With a jerk they lifted
and hooded out in a way which should have seemed menacing. But I
was on my feet, the wine cup clattering on the floor, and Eia’s arms
were around my  waist  and  on  my  back,  pulling  me  close  into  the
warm  and  sweat  damp  musk  of  ids  body.  My  half  spread  wings
shuddered against ids. The hard nipples of ids breasts pressed into
mine.  Ids  eyes,  near  and  dark  and  unquiet  told  me  of  a  losing
struggle,  a  hunger  deep  and  long  standing,  a  loneliness  as
unremitting and relentless as mine.
Eia  said,  “Del—”  Then  a  smile,  crooked  and  rueful.  “Oh,
hellwinds.”
Ids fingers stroked my face closer, and ids mouth touched mine. I
heard  the  sound  in  my  throat,  like  a  moan  of  pain.  Fingers  dug
suddenly  into  my  hair.  Eia  whispered  something;  beautiful,
incomprehensible, liquid words, yet the meaning was somehow very
clear to me.
 
Eia was playful as an onfrit. My shyness gave way to an intense,
demanding, fierce hunger. Untended, the vegetable stew threatened
to  scorch.  Eia  leapt  out  of  bed  at  last,  to  add  water  and  stir  it
vigorously, leaving me sprawled where I was, my life’s first orgasm
still shivering in my muscles, my nipples wet from Eia’s mouth and
standing up in the chill. Id returned to me in haste, the corners of
ids eyes crinkled with laughter, but came gasping and frantic from
our kiss, hands trembling as id turned a wing for me.
On  my  back,  I  realized  suddenly  why  Eia  had  seemed  afraid
earlier,  when  lying  helpless  under  me,  with  me  so  crazed  and
altogether  unknowing  of  what  I  was  doing.  But  by  the  time  we
were coupling again, I was beyond worrying about such things. Eia
sobbed  suddenly  in  the  tangle  of  our  bodies.  Black  wings  hooded
over  us,  fluttering  against  mine,  and  then  they  spasmed,  and
spread, and Eia’s wild, sweet voice rang agaist the glass walls.
Later,  id  lay  breathless,  holding  me  close.  I  wept  or  laughed,  I
did not know which. Eia’s hand stroked my mane, working out the
tangles one by one with ids fingers. A long, sweet time, long after I
became quiet, id touched me. It was awfully easy to believe that id

cared for me.
We ate scorched stew, sitting back to back on the one stool with
our wings spread to  make  room  for  each  other.  Eia  said,  “Is  it  so
bad, being an Aeyrie?”
I sputtered and choked on a mouthful of soup.
“Is that a yes?” Eia’s voice vibrated with laughter. “I fulfilled my
obligation?”
“What obligation?”
“As your Companion, to make certain your first lovemaking is a
good one.”
“This was supposed to happen?”
I tried belatedly to hide my dismay, but Eia said hastily, “I keep
forgetting  you  were  brought  up  a  Walker!  Yes,  the  Aeyries  do
arrange  these  things.  Why  leave  something  so  important  up  to  a
wingling’s  lack  of  discrimination?  Oh  dear,  that  will  offend  you,
too.”
“Yes,” I said stiffly.
Eia  sighed.  “Well,  the  Aeyries  expect  l’shils  to  be  somewhat  at
the mercy of their genitals, although it is hard to say how much of
that  is  culture  and  how  much  of  it  is  truth.  A  Companion  is
supposed to be as much parent as lover, to steady you through the
transition  year  and  then  to  let  you  go.  I  have  worried  over  it  for
months, knowing that you were  near maturity and I was the only
one who could watch over you, but I am entirely inappropriate for
the role! I will not, I told myself,  I will not touch  the  child,  under
any circumstance!”
I could not see Eia’s face, but ids voice was at once so distressed
and so amused that I might have laughed, except that  I  had  gone
from  dismay  to  giddiness  at  knowing  that  Eia,  beautiful  and
self-possessed Eia, had utterly failed to resist me.
“So now we are in this difficult situation. You want to be loved,
you want it desperately.”
I  said  after  a  while,  “Yes.”  I  felt  shy  again.  Maybe  intimacy
would never seem casual or ordinary to me.

“And  I  am—”  Eia  hesitated,  and  finished  wryly,  “entirely
overcome. Which feels wonderful and is awfully dangerous. I want
to stay your friend. I do not want to hurt you!”
I said, “Well, I will not hurt you.”
Eia  sighed,  and  then  laughed.  “I  think  you  underestimate
yourself.”
We washed our dishes in a pail. I went out on  the  ledge  as  Eia
put things away. It was night; the moons had scattered from  their
dance and the stars were  bright and close. Soon the month of rain
would be upon us, and after that the winter. I wondered what I was
going  to  do  with  myself.  I  thought  of  the  Rope  that  bound  me  to
Teksan,  and  wondered  how  I  could  become  free  of  it.  I  wanted
nothing more than I wanted to stay here with Eia, but would id ask
me to stay?
Eia came out to me. “Del?”
I said nothing. Eia took my hand. “There is a kind of wind, called
a hellwind. There is no fighting it. All you can do is ride it, and hope
your luck is good.”
We  drew  closer  under  the  star  bright  sky.  Eia  left  a  warm
burning place on my wing with ids mouth. I stopped thinking again.
We played a game without any rules, wrestling, and laughing with
delight  whether  we  won  or  lost.  And  then  we  traveled  beyond
laughter and came utterly undone together.
In the midst of our lovemaking, I cried, as if I knew that when I
opened my eyes in the morning I would no longer be able to avoid
knowing the truth.
Chapter 5
« ^ » 
Eia  huddled  in  ids  wings  beside  me,  ruffled  and  sleep  quiet  and
musky  with  sex.  Ids  tangled  mane  framed  ids  relaxed  face  in
contradictory  disarray.  I  lifted  a  hand  to  smooth  the  tangles,  but
did not. My wit, stunned by my metamorphosis, stirred at last from
its shock.

When Eia and I encountered each other for the first time in the
mountains,  id  had  certainly  known  immediately  that  I  was  an
immature  Aeyrie.  Id  had  not  told  me.  Id  had  known  of  Teksan’s
antipathy  for  the  Aeyries,  but  had  not  warned  me  or  tried  to
separate me from him. The night Teksan beat me, Eia had come to
me. and cared for me,  and yet once again left me ignorant in that
house, ignorant even of the fact  that I had a friend within calling.
Surely id had known long before then the danger I was in, a danger
which even I in my naïveté had recognized at last. Eia was brilliant
and  knowledgeable  and  widely  experienced.  Could  id  have  been
unaware of the hopelessness and loneliness with which I was living
my life?
Surely  this  tenderness  and  respect  and  delight  could  not  be
possible without love! But Eia’s six-month silence bespoke massive
indifference, if  not  cruelty.  I  tried  to  think  of  a  good  explanation,
and could not. Every possibility led me to the same conclusion: Eia
was  misleading  and  using  me.  Ids  honest  and  affectionate  ways
were a mockery, and I, in my misery and loneliness had been all too
easy to be made a fool of.
I lifted my hand to angrily shake Eia’s shoulder, but once again
drew it back. I  did  not  want  to  fight  with  idre  or,  even  worse,  to
discover  that  I  was  willing  to  accept  more  lies  for  the  sake  of
continuing happiness. I did  not  want  to  hear  Eia  deny  or  explain,
and tarnish this dizzying brightness in me with either lies or truth.
Perhaps I had been used, but I also had become human in this bed.
Somehow I had to keep what I had gained, even if it meant I had to
get up and go away while my gratitude and my independence both
were still intact.
When I  went  over  the  ledge  with  my  clothes  tucked  under  one
arm  and  Dulcie  fluttering  in  confusion  after  me,  Eia  was  still
asleep.  I  told  myself  that  the  whole  world  lay  before  me.  I  told
myself that even the tears which blinded me were good.
 
I flew through a crisp, pale morning which tasted of winter. Sun
shimmered over the maze.  The glass glowed, but rivers of  shadow
filled  the  sandy  canyons.  I  could  not  fly  far.  I  landed  within  the
maze, but I walked quickly, seeking to reach cover before Eia began

to  look  for  me.  It  was  cold  and  silent  here.  The  sand  whispered
under  my  feet.  The  cliffs  blurred  around  me.  My  stomach  ached
with grief. I walked in a daze of tears. The cliffs diminished around
me, but I did not notice.
Too late I sensed my danger. One step beyond the glass canyon,
the Rope had me.  In one moment it had consumed all the warmth
in me, like a winter wind. It even robbed me of my pain. Even as I
gave a choked cry, I was bewildered by my own anguish. What was
the matter with me? What had I lost?
There was some reason why I should not go back to L’din. But I
could not remember clearly what the reason was. Didn’t I need food
and shelter? Did I have anywhere else that I could go? Yes, Teksan
had hurt me, but I had deserved it, hadn’t I?
Under the first tree I turned back, searching the cold, bright sky
for a pursuer, but it remained empty. I could not remember if I had
followed a path when I  came  this  way,  and  Dulcie  was  no  help.  I
picked a direction and plunged into the bushes. My wings caught in
the  branches,  shivering  into  pain  as  the  sharp  twigs  scraped  the
sensitive  membranes.  My  flight  muscles  burned  in  my  torso,  so
worn out and sore that I could not keep my wings folded.
The  unremitting  struggle  to  fit  my  changed  self  through  the
thickets made the day long. I grew  weary  and  weak  with  hunger.
My  feet  dragged  under  the  burden  on  my  back.  By  afternoon  I
thought I was lost.
“Which way is L’din?” I asked Dulcie. But for once she refused to
help  me,  and  yearned  toward  the  way  we  had  come.  At  last  she
would go no  farther,  forcing  me  to  choose  between  leaving  her  or
carrying her. Raging, I tucked her ungently under my arm.
Eventually I came to a stone wall, with a harvested field on the
other side, and a cluster of flat buildings within sight. I shied away,
remembering  Eia’s  warning  about  Walker  bows  and  arrows.
Somewhat later I spotted a  black  figure  flying  into  the  sun.  With
Dulcie in my hands I hid in the bushes.
A  long  time  the  flyer  searched,  moving  in  wide  circles,  but
keeping  away  from  the  farmland.  I  lay  down  in  my  hiding  place,
but could not seem to find any rest. Not until sunset did my hunter

head  back  toward  the  maze,  flying  slowly,  as  if  id  was  weighed
down in the sky.
Only one moon rose, the tiny moon Lia, bright as a polished jewel
but too small to cast much light. Knowing that Aeyries cannot see
well in the dark, I was cautious, leaving the dense vegetation of the
wild countryside and coming to the road where traveling was much
easier. Even so, I was sick and stumbling with exhaustion  when  I
came into L’din.
The town was dark, and its streets were empty, except for a few
market-day drunks sleeping where they had fallen. But  as  I  came
near my own house, I saw that I was not the only one awake in this
town.
 Teksan
 stood
 at
 the
 doorway,
 amid
 the
 trailing,
light-diffusing plants with which I had filled the courtyard,  a  long
time  ago  it  seemed  now.  The  Rope  which  bound  us  to  each  other
reeled me in, like a waterwyth on a fishing line. But even as I drew
too close for escape, that secret thing inside of me, that uncanniness
which Teksan did not know about, spoke within me: I am a prisoner
, it said. So long as I remember that, I have hope of being free.
I walked past him through the door, and as I passed him it was
as if I passed into a mist, and entered from one world into another.
Now it was Eia and the glass maze which seemed to have happened
a long time ago,  to another person. This was my place; the place I
belonged. The dreaming was over.
The seer inside of me spoke again: No, it said. No, it is not over.
I went down the hall to the kitchen. When I passed through the
mist I had not lost the new body which certainly  belonged  in  that
other  place,  and  I  could  not  sit  on  Walker  furniture.  I  leaned  my
shoulder on the wall, a piece of bread in one hand and a dipper  of
water in the other. Teksan came in and looked at me.
“You must have known this was going to happen to me,”  I said,
my mouth full.
“Yes, I knew. You are an Aeyrie, did you guess?”
It was the seer in me who recalled and felt anew what I had felt
that first time,  when Eia told me.  I let Teksan read it in my face:
dismay  mixed  with  reluctant  relief  that  at  least  I  was  not  a

monster. “Why did you not tell me?”
“For  your  own  good.  Your  body  is  Aeyrie,  but  your  heritage  is
Walker. It was to spare you  what  confusion  I  could,  to  let  you  be
what you are and not what you felt you were supposed to be.”
“Why so kind to one of a race you hate?”
His thin face gave away no secrets. His mouth was narrow and
his  eyes  were  like  stones.  “Perhaps  I  was  curious.  Perhaps  I  was
thinking that  it  is  not  their  race  which  makes  Aeyries  what  they
are, but only their heritage. Where have you been, these six days?”
“I thought I was dying. I wanted to be alone for it.” I cut a chunk
of cheese and scooped more water  out of  the  pail.  The  cheese  was
dry and the water was stale. I felt as if I could eat all night. Teksan
might well believe that I had taken no food for six days.
“Where?”
I looked at him. “What does it matter?”
“I tried to find you.”
“I hid well. I didn’t want to be found.”
“You were in a place,” he said in a flat voice, “Where my Mirror
could not see.”
I straightened, lifting my shoulder from the wall. “What?”
“Delan,”  he  said  softly,  blocking  my  way  through  the  doorway.
“Someone has been in my room.”
I told myself he could not know how afraid I was. But  in  fact  I
knew  nothing  of  sorcery,  and  perhaps  he  was  able  to  look  right
through me, as if I were a bowl of water. Certainly he seemed to, as
he  stared  at  me  with  his  stone  eyes.  “Some  knowledge  is
dangerous.” he said.
“I am the one who was in your room.”
“What did you see?”
“Books. Something else, that made me  piddle  on  the  floor.  Was
that the Mirror?”
“That was the Door.”
There was silence.  Then  I  heard  my  voice  say,  “Is  there  a  way

sorcery can make something into something else?”
“What do you mean?” (Listen, Delan the seer said  inside  of  me.
Listen to his voice, how casual it is. Too casual.)
“Can you make an Aeyrie into a Walker?” My voice was shaking,
and the cup quivering in my hand. I set it down hastily.
“It might be possible.”
I  started  toward  him  then,  stopping  myself  only  when  I
remembered that my wings would not let me drop carelessly to my
knees. The breath hurt in my throat.
“You do not want to be an Aeyrie?” he asked softly.
“I  am  not  an  Aeyrie,  I  am  nothing!  All  I  want  is  to  belong
somewhere!”
“It  would  not  be  easy,  Delan.  And  all  sorcery  must  be  bought.
This one would take a high price.”
“I wish I had died, then. What do I have before me? I belong not
to both races but to neither!”
“There is something you might do,” he said. “Not a small thing,
but something the world would thank you for.”
“If I did it, would you be able to make me into a Walker?”
“Yes.”
“I will do it, then. Whatever you want.”
The night was half over when I went up the narrow stairway and
into  my  room.  When  I  lay  down  on  my  cot,  I  felt  so  weary  and
wretched  that  I  doubted  I  would  never  get  up  again.  But  my
feelings contested with each other in my belly: anxiety and despair
and exultation and a deep and terrible knowledge of my solitude. I
did not sleep soon, or well.
 
Even if there was no one  in  L’din  who  knew  that  Aeyries  were
winged, I could  no  longer  show  myself.  But  I  had  lived  on  enemy
territory my entire life,  and  if  now  I  had  to  lurk  in  a  dark  house
and  hide  in  my  room  when  Teksan  had  visitors,  it  seemed  only
inevitable. Afoot I was trapped, unable to take off  from  the ground

and  not  designed  for  fleeing;  in  every  way  overpowered  and
outweighed and outnumbered by those who hated and feared me.  I
could  think  of  no  safety  except  in  hiding,  an  uncertain  safety  at
best. Perhaps all Aeyries felt like this in a Walker world, with their
lightweight bodies and their vulnerability on the ground.
As  for  the  Walker  resentment  which  made  life  for  my  kind  so
dangerous in the first place, I  still  did  not  understand  it.  Without
ever  choosing  it,  I  had  been  different  from  everyone  else  since
before my egg sheath was slit. I could not imagine what it was like
to hate and fear that which was not like me,  when everyone I had
ever met on earth was not like me, save one.
Of that one I thought constantly, wretchedly.
Teksan ceased spending his days at the tavern. It rained, steadily
and drearily, day  after  day,  until  the  gutters  spilled  over  and  the
roads  became  rivers.  Through  the  window  of  my  room  I  watched
the  people  of  L’din  preparing  for  winter  hibernation:  shuttering
their  windows,  securing  their  food  supplies,  bringing  in  great
quantities of stove fuel. Everything was wet. I brought my blankets
down to the kitchen every  morning to dry out by the stove.  Dulcie
grew short-tempered and mischievious with the confinement.
I did  not  try  to  go  out,  even  at  night  when  I  lay  wakeful  and
tormented on my rope bed. Something about the windows and doors
of  the  house  made  my  fur  stand  on  end,  something  which  let  me
know that Teksan did not entirely trust my compliance, and that if
I even once rebelled, the spells  he  had  laid  across  the  exits  would
have let him know it. I awoke, day after day, to the sound of water
dribbling off the roof, with depression lying in my belly like a stone.
Bored and indifferent, I survived the day, and went to bed  a  little
earlier  each  night,  a  little  more  deadened,  a  little  more  enslaved.
And each night sleep evaded me.
One  afternoon,  five  of  Teksan’s  friends  came  up  the  walk  and
were admitted to the parlor. I  watched  them  through  the  cracked
shutter.  The  sound  of  their  voices  came  up  the  stairwell:  slow
speaking, solid Walker voices, with anger in them.
Teksan called, “Delan, come down.”
I got up from  my stool. My only other choice was to dive out of

the  bedroom  window,  into  the  pouring  rain.  I  told  Dulcie  to  stay
behind, and went hesitantly down the stairs and into the parlor.
I knew  the  visitors  all  by  name:  Caban  the  smithy,  Lekur  and
Hapstn  the  merchants,  Presle  the  land  seller  and  Jandra  the
market manager. I had seen them often enough, going about their
business. Their astounded stares confused me for a moment because
I  persisted  in  forgetting  how  changed  was  my  appearance.  They
wore work clothes, with quilted vests against the cold, holding hot
cups  in  chilled  hands.  Over  the  steam  of  their  cups  of  tea,  they
examined me, eyes wide and disbelieving. Then, as one, they looked
at Teksan, as if for the answer to a question already asked.
He hooked a stool over with his foot, and bid me sit. “All she has
to do is tell the truth. That she was hatched from  a misplaced egg,
and only when she came into her wings did  she  know  she  was  an
Aeyrie. They will take her in, especially since it will be winter, and
she  will  be  grounded.  They  would  do  anything  for  their  own,  and
never question her explanation.”
“How do you know she will then let us in?” Presle asked. In the
cold,  he  had  exchanged  his  eyeshade  for  a  knitted  hat,  dyed
berry-red.
“Delan will do as she is told, and be rewarded for it.”
Unfriendly, untrusting eyes looked back at me, where I sat with
my fingers twisted in the cloth of my shirt. “Yes,” I said.
“The roads are impassible during the winter, I have heard.”
“We  will  journey  by  another  way,  which  will  take  us  only
moments. As I have already told you, Caban. You do not believe me
yet?”
The  smithy,  a  crabby  woman  whose  overgrown  muscles  made
her  seem  misshapen,  grumbled  into  her  cup,  “I  have  heard  much
talk of sorcery, but I have yet to see any.”
Teksan said, “Delan, fetch the mirror from my room.”
I heard their voices pick up after I left. There was a feeling in my
belly as if I had just survived something.
The  lock  on  Teksan’s  bedroom  door  fell  into  my  hand  when  I
touched it. The Door still swirled in the center of his room. A mirror

stood innocently atop a clothes chest, a small thing only two  hands
wide, small enough that I had never noticed it on my other  visits.
The  face  reflected  there  was  closed  and  hostile,  with  challenging,
angry gray eyes, half shielded by the tangle of a silver and charcoal
mane. It scared me, that face, despite being mine. That face had a
secret, a power and a rage that I kept hidden even from myself.
I stole a single sheet of blank paper from  the desk,  folded  it  up
into a small package, and tucked it into my shoe. By the bookshelf,
I  hesitated,  sensing  there  the  tension  of  a  set  trap.  Did  Teksan
suspect I could read?
I went back to the parlor, and gave Teksan the mirror. “Did you
want me to lock the door again, sir?”
“Yes.”
When I came back again, the  Walkers  were  so  crowded  around
the  mirror  that  I  could  not  see  what  they  were  looking  at.  Their
faces were  tense with hidden  fear.  I  stood  back  indifferently  until
Teksan turned to me. “Come and look.”
The others made room for me then, hastily, trying to avoid being
touched even by my clothes.
The  mirror  no  longer  reflected  my  face.  I  was  looking  as  if
through  extremely  clear  water  at  a  distant  scene.  The  Glass
Mountains  were  already  stripped  bare  by  the  winter  wind.  One
peak was centered in the Mirror,  a  peak  on  the  top  of  which  was
glued an eccentric tumble of towers and rooftops. Around this wild
dwelling,  a  few  flyers  could  be  seen.  It  was  utterly  inaccessible;
even  a  medog  with  its  six  prehensile  feet  could  not  have  climbed
that steep peak. Clouds swept through the sky,  pushed by a fierce
wind  which  occasionally  threw  the  flyers  off  their  courses.  I  saw
one narrowly miss being tossed into the side of a tower.
Teksan was looking for a reaction. I said, “I doubt they do much
flying in winter.”
“One might say they are imprisoned by the wind for two months
of the year.”
“Once they accept me in, how am I supposed to give you access to
it?”

“Not  all  Aeyries  can  fly,  as  you  know,  and  they  are  extremely
protective of their juveniles.” He paused as the Walkers snorted and
snickered at the notion of coddling children. “Therefore,  there  is  a
stairway  inside  the  mountain  for  their  escape  in  case  of  some
mishap, but we would not easily find or open  the  entrance.  If  you
come on foot, claiming you cannot fly, they will have to take you in
that way.”
“Why do you want to get in?”
I  felt  the  others  stiffen  around  me,
 but  Teksan  said
disinterestedly, “To take something which should be ours by right:
knowledge. A few books.”
I  nodded,  and  the  Walkers  relaxed.  “Does  this  place  have  a
name?”
“Ula  t’Fon  the  Aeyries  call  it,  ‘Nest  of  the  Sun.’  Traders  call  it
Down Nest because it is farthest south of the three Aeyrie towns.”
Teksan  was  talking  in  his  superior  schoolteacher  voice.  I  stood
back,  pretending  boredom  to  cover  my  shock.  Eia’s  town,  with
which id had spoken with such sadness and longing!
How  was  Teksan  going  to  do  this  thing  in  the  dead  of  winter
when all Walkers including himself were hibernating? But this was
one thing they did not tell me.  Teksan turned to  me  abruptly  and
said, “You are excused now.”
“Sir.” I left.
In my own room I spread out the folded and crushed paper from
my shoe, and found my store  of  charcoal,  taken  one  bit  at  a  time
from  the  kitchen  stove.  I  thought  a  long  time  before  I  began  to
write.
“Eia,” I wrote, and suddenly my eyes were burning with tears. I
rubbed my face on my sleeve, and wrote through the blur. “Teksan
and his people intend to use me  to  gain  access  to  Ula  t’Fon.  They
say they will only steal some books, but they are angry and hateful
people,  and  I  know  they  mean  your  people  harm.  It  will  be  done
soon,  and  Teksan  will  use  his  sorcery  to  make  the  journey  there
short, and also to somehow prevent hibernation. I do not know if I
can ride this hellwind.  I  am  not  asking  you  to  help  me,  except  to
keep Dulcie safe. But I hope you can help your people. Delan.”

I folded up the paper again, and tied it with a piece of string to
one of Dulcie’s front legs. “Go to Eia,” I told her. “Do not come back
to me.”
“Delan,” she protested, clinging to me. “Love you, Delan.”
“I know.  Go,  Dulcie. There is  danger  here.”  In  haste,  for  fear  I
might change my mind, I untangled her claws from my clothes and
threw her out the window. The days had  grown  short,  and  it  was
near  dark  by  then.  The  rain  had  stopped,  but  the  clean  streets
remained empty.  The light  of  Teksan’s  lamps  scattered  across  the
wet,  narrow  street.  Dulcie  crossed  the  light  like  a  ghost.  As  I
watched, she seemed to falter, so briefly that as soon as I noticed, I
was telling myself it had been a trick of the light. She flew strongly
into the shadows, and was gone.
Shortly  afterward,  Teksan’s  guests  left  in  a  muted  group,
walking together but not talking. Teksan called from the foot of the
stairs, “I am going out. I am not certain when I will be back.”
I said, “My onfrit went out before sunrise.”
“So?”
“If you see her, would you tell her to come home?”
He did not bother to reply. I  heard  the  door  slam,  and  through
my window watched him go down the street,  in the same direction
that the others had gone.
I lay down on my bed and stared into the shadows. Dulcie would
awaken  Eia  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  Eia  would  read  my  note.
Perhaps id would lie in bed, awake, thinking, thinking of some way
to get a warning message to ids people. Maybe id would remember
me and how it had been  between  us.  Maybe,  I  thought,  maybe  id
cared for me a little. Maybe id would not leave me abandoned and
without recourse. Maybe id would help me.
Chapter 6
« ^ » 
Teksan was not home when I awoke in the morning. Ill at ease and
unable to do housework, I had been wandering the house for several

hours before I finally heard him unlatching the door. “Did you see
Dulcie?”  I  asked  anxiously  as  he  came  in,  to  keep  him  from
guessing what I had done.
His face was  pale  with  weariness.  I  could  see  the  first  signs  of
hibernation  on  him:  a  languidness  and  heaviness  of  motion,  a
vagueness of eye.  He snapped something at me and  went  into  the
kitchen. I kept out of his way. Eventually, he went to his room and
I did not see him again for the rest of the day. It was a very  long
day.
In  the  evening  the  people  began  to  come  to  him,  people  with
strange expressions on their faces: grim and afraid and determined.
I watched them coming from  all directions, some  of  them  walking
singly. Some were strangers, riding farm drafs which would soon be
set loose to fend for themselves in the winter countryside. Many of
them  were  from  L’din.  I  counted  individuals:  there  were  some
hundred of them in all, who came into the parlor, and after a short
time left again. I listened to the voices coming up the stairs. They
cursed the Aeyries, over and over. But when they were not cursing,
the people spoke in hushed voices.
They  left  as  they  had  come,  walking  singly  past  shuttered
windows.
By the end of the  day  I  was  desperately  afraid.  I  awoke  in  the
night with my heart in my throat, certain they had come to get me.
But no one was there.
The  next  day,  the  neighbor’s  windows  remained  shuttered,  and
not one door opened. It was a cold day, becoming even colder when
the  wind  stopped  blowing.  I  sat  by  my  window,  shivering
sometimes, watching the sky. Over the rooftops I saw bare treetops
shifting in the wind, the only motion in the entire town. But of Eia
I saw nothing, not even a message-carrying onfrit.
L’din had fallen asleep for the winter. I could not even remember
what it had been like, to sleep like that, so deeply and for so long,
coming out of it only occasionally to take care of personal matters,
eating  nothing  and  drinking  little.  And  then  to  awaken  and  find
that two months had passed. I wondered with dull dismay if I was
to spend the entire winter a prisoner in this house, with nothing to

occupy myself. I would go mad, surely.
In  the  late  afternoon  I  heard  Teksan  in  the  kitchen.  I  went
downstairs. He sat at the table with a cup of tea in his hand. I said,
feigning surprise, “Everyone else is sleeping.”
He  snorted.  “I  have  not  hibernated  in  fifteen  years.  It  is  a
carryover  of  a  more  savage  time,  before  we  learned  to  farm  the
land  or  to  store  food.  Then  it  was  the  only  way  to  survive  the
winter. Now it is unnecessary.”
“I never thought of it like that,” I said, for I was trying my best
to make him believe I wanted to please him. “Why do you suppose I
don’t hibernate?”
Teksan  looked  at  me  with  stone  eyes.  “Because  you  are  an
Aeyrie.”
I looked at my feet. “I keep forgetting. What did all those people
come here for?”
“Various things.” He buttered a slice of stale bread. I had done no
baking lately. I had developed a sudden violent hatred  for  cooking
and housework. My precious potted plants, which I had brought in
out of the cold, were now dying from  neglect. Teksan did not seem
to have noticed.
He said, “We are going tonight. Wear warm clothes.”
“Yes, sir.”
Though  I  was  lonely  and  desperate  with  boredom  and  anxiety,
and hungry as well, I could not endure being in the same room with
him. I went back upstairs. I stared out my window as the sun set,
trying  to  think  of  how  things  could  have  been  different  and  still
hoping despite myself for the sight of something moving in the sky.
My windows tingled with Teksan’s spell, but the shutters were not
locked.  Dulcie  had  made  it  out  safely.  Perhaps  I  could  have  leapt
out as well, but it would have made no difference. My entire life I
had been trapped, and I was still trapped. By what I did not clearly
know.
 
When it was dark, Teksan called me and I came down the stairs.
I had devised ways of adapting Walker clothes to my winged body,

and like  him  was  wearing  the  quilted  jacket  I  rarely  needed,  and
kipswool pants. I carried my glass knife, for  no  reason  other  than
that it made me feel better.  He looked at the sheath, but made no
comment. He took me to his room,  where he picked up his satchel
and gripped me by the elbow. “Do not lose contact with me,  or you
will be lost in the Void.”
Fear opened up like a wound in my belly. “No!” He turned to me
a disdaining face. And then my will was entirely gone, like the frail
flame  of  an  air  lamp  snuffed  out  for  the  night.  Empty  and  dark
within, step for step I walked with him, walking helplessly toward
the swirling storm in the Door, until the wind sucked us in.
It  was  cold,  cold  beyond  anything  I  had  ever  imagined.  And  it
was  empty,  with  nothing  for  my  senses  to  hold  onto  for  sanity.  I
saw nothing, neither darkness nor light. I heard nothing, not even
the  intangible  ringing  of  silence.  I  felt  nothing,  not  even  the
whisper  of  air  on  my  fur.  In  the  Void,  there  was  only  my  own
internal life, frozen and timeless, cut off from any other reference. I
looked  at  myself  because  there  was  nothing  else,  and  was
unimpressed. All I could see was cowardice.
And  then  I  was  falling,  falling,  hitting  something  dry  and
crackling,  using  my  wings  instinctively  and  landing  softly  on  my
hands  and  knees.  Near  me,  Teksan  was  still  rolling.  I  sprawled
myself hastily, lest he notice that I had landed too well for someone
who did not know anything about flying. Only then I realized that
my will was once again my own. I shivered with cold, but the bitter
winter  night  seemed  almost  warm  and  friendly  after  the  Void.  I
wanted  to  huddle  there  on  the  ground  and  never  open  my  eyes
again.
Teksan’s steps crackled in the dry stems of the sucker plants. He
toed  me  sharply  with  his  boot.  I  got  up  awkwardly.  Jagged
mountain  peaks  lay  against  a  black,  star-hung  sky.  “How—?”  I
began stupidly. At the edge of my vision, I saw the swirling opening
which was another Door.
Without  a  word,  Teksan  walked  away.  I  followed  him  hastily.
Until  he  snuffed  that  light  in  me,  I  had  not  truly  known  what
helplessness  was.  I  would  have  done  almost  anything  to  avoid
having that happen to me again.

We  followed  a  passage  between  mountain  ridges.  The  wind
shrieked  across  time-honed  edges  and  howled  in  the  hollows.
Sometimes  it  forced  me  to  struggle  against  it,  jerking  my  wings
askew.  Sometimes  it  pushed  me  from  behind,  as  if  to  hurry  me
impatiently forward, making me lose my footing in the darkness.
As we fought our way down the pass, three moons rose, one after
the other, like a string of beads. The dark moon, Abki was full and
in  the  lead,  red  and  smoldering,  a  bad  sign  some  would  say.  The
lucky moon Ahbi trailed near the end, with its brightness tarnished
and only partially visible and half of its body obscured in shadow.
I tripped in the dry tangle underfoot, and nearly fell into Teksan.
He took me by the elbow, holding me too tightly for kindliness. He
gestured into the impenetrable darkness. “A trader path lies ahead
of us. Do you see it?”
“No.”
“It is there. Follow it toward the west, and you will reach Down
Nest by tomorrow afternoon if you do not linger too much.”
“Tomorrow afternoon! I don’t even have anything to eat!”
“They would expect you to arrive tired and hungry. It is six days’
walk to the nearest Walker town, but you must make them believe
you  have  come  farther  still,  from  the  town  of  H’chan  which  is
similar to L’din. Say you have been eight days on the road. You had
better get your clothes dirty.”
“Yes, sir,” I said bleakly.
“Hold out your hand.”
I held  it  out.  I  could  not  see  it,  but  I  could  feel  it  shaking  as
Teksan took hold of my  wrist.  I  did  see  starlight  glittering  on  his
knifeblade, just before it cu into one of my fingers, cold as ice. My
arm  muscle  gave  a  shocked  spasm.  Still  he  held  my  wrist.  I  felt
blood collect and begin to drip.
Then the thing that Teksan was holding in his other hand began
to glow with a sickly, red light. I watched, paralyzed, as a drop of
my  blood  spattered  on  it  and  then  disappeared  as  if  it  had  been
consumed.  The  glow  brightened.  Another  drop  fell,  and  another,
until the thing was glowing like an air lamp, but casting no light.

Teksan let go of my wrist at last, and tossed the thing  into  the
air.  It  hung  suspended.  It  was  round  as  a  fruit,  and  seemed
featureless until it turned, and looked at me. It was an eye.
“Through  the  Eye  I  can  both  see  and  hear  you,”  Teksan  said.
“But to everyone else it will be invisible.  I  would  not  want  you  to
feel as if you were alone, Delan. It is a hard thing you are doing.”
He seemed to expect me to thank  him  for  his  thoughtfulness.  I
could make no sound. I felt as if I was choking.
“Two nights from now. I will be waiting at the base of the Aeyrie
Mountain. You will let us in.”
I nodded.  I  still  could  not  speak.  He  turned  and  walked  away,
until  I  could  see  him  no  longer.  But  the  awful,  glowing  Eye
remained  with  me,  and  with  it  the  oppressive  presence  of
overpowering evil.
 
It was a noisy night.  The  wind  wailed  its  eerie  song  across  the
elemental  glass.  It  buffeted  my  frail  body  like  a  rough-playing
friend, making as if to knock me down  or  carry  me  off.  I  was  too
aware of how fragile I was, how easy it might be to crush the fine
spokes  across  which  my  wing  membranes  were  stretched,  how
sharp  and  heartless  was  the  uncovered  glass.  The  occult  Eye
followed behind me. I set one foot in front of the other, fighting the
wind.
At first a wind blew within me as well, a whirlwind of plans and
rebellions:  I  would  not  go  to  the  Aeyrie  town  at  all.  I  would  go
there,  but  tell  them  everything.  I  would  find  an  enchanted  place
where  Teksan  could  no  longer  see  me.  I  would  ask  which  of  the
Aeyries was a magician, and point out to him where the Eye was,
so  it  could  be  destroyed.  But  soon  I  was  too  tired  and  cold  and
hungry for such thoughts, and all became hopeless and dead  quiet
within me.
Dawn was late coming, and still the sun delayed, as if hesitant to
face the chill. The path crossed a narrow channeled stream. I lay on
my belly to drink the ice cold water. It made my teeth ache and my
throat hurt I found I could not move to get up again. I lay my head
in my arms, too cold for rest, too weary for anything else.

A mountain peak exploded with light. And then another. In each
of  the  peaks,  the  sun  rose,  again  and  again.  Breathless  with
wonder,  forgetting  for  a  too  short  moment  how  helpless  and
wretched  I  was,  I  watched  the  darkness  take  flight.  Slowly,  light
dribbled  toward  me  in  rivulets  down  the  mountainsides  But  it
would be a long time before it reached me,  and even then it would
have little warmth in it.
I got  myself  to  my  feet  somehow,  stiff  with  cold  and  began  to
walk again. Six days to the nearest town Teksan had said. I knew
what  chance  there  was  of  finding  food  in  the  mountains,  even  in
midsummer. All my body fat had been transformed into wings, and
I had already been over a day without food. I had no choice but to
go to Down  Nest and unknown Aeyrie hospitality, and worry  then
about  Teksan  and  his  people.  It  was  either  that  or  die,  an  option
which, for all my misery, I did not consider seriously.
The  sun  hastened  to  its  peak,  and  even  more  hastily  started
toward its setting. I had to lie down to rest again, on a bed of dried
sucker plants which had soaked up a little of the sun’s warmth. My
dreadful  satellite  floated  above  me,  a  mere  shimmering  in  the
sunlight, which was fading too soon into nightfall again I huddled,
legs and arms drawn up under my wings, weak in all my muscles,
with Down Nest not even in sight.
For an abrupt moment, I was in the dark, and chilled by the loss
of the sun. Before I knew that it had been a shadow which crossed
over me,  the flyer had landed, so softly the  sucker  plants  scarcely
crackled  under  id’s  feet.  I  turned  my  head  and  looked  at  idre
stupidly. Ids startling, bright red fur was tipped with gold, with the
mane bound in a hundred tiny braids. Streaks of light quivered in
ids  gold-dyed  astil  clothing.  Ids  wings,  as  amber  as  my  Dulcie’s,
folded  as  I  watched.  Frowning,  the  flyer  said  something  in  words
that  sounded  like  the  sound  of  water  splashing,  then  turned  id’s
face to the sky and shouted.
I  looked  up  and  saw  the  other  one  hovering,  black  as  a
stormcloud, challenging the gale arrogantly and casually with each
stroke of the wing. There was such grace in that one that I thought
at  first  that  it  must  be  Eia.  I  struggled  to  get  up.  The  stranger
stepped  forward  to  help  me,  and  then  supported  me  as  I  stood

swaying and scrubbing my sleeve  on  my  wet  cheek.  Ids  body  was
hot with the exertion of flying. Id spoke again, in that wild, sweet
tongue that I would forever think of as the language of lovemaking.
It was H’ldat, that which should have been my native tongue.
I said, “How far is it?”
The Aeyrie hesitated, but replied in the Walker tongue, though id
spoke with a soft, haunting accent. “Is it Ula t’Fon you seek? Not so
far, by air. Are you walking because you are injured? Why are you
alone?”
“I do not know how to fly. I have always been alone.”
A  long  time  the  Aeyrie  looked  at  me,  examining  my  unkempt
mane  and  Walker  clothing.  No  doubt  id  felt  me  shivering  with
weakness against the support of ids arm. “Who are you?” id finally
asked. “Where are you from?”
I was hungry, and exhausted, and fearful of the coming cold. If I
told  the  truth,  would  I  be  given  shelter?  I  did  not  hesitate  long.
“Delan. From H’chin. I thought I was a Walker.”
“By  the  Great  Mountain!”  id  said.  Then,  “How  long  since  you
have  eaten?”  Not  waiting  for  my  reply,  id  tipped  back  ids  head
again and shouted.
The black Aeyrie landed, so softly that I had to look again to be
certain  it  truly  was  not  Eia.  Id  looked  at  me  in  puzzlement.
“T’Cwa-dre? Ishta-dre?”
“From H’chin, id says.”
“H’chin!”
“ ‘I thought I was a Walker,’ id says. Id does not speak H’ldat.”
Something  exchanged  between  them  that  told  me  they  were
lovers, intimate in ways I had never even imagined. The Red said,
“Id needs to eat; do you have anything left in your bag?”
While  the  Black  rummaged  in  ids  satchel,  I  asked,  “What  are
Ishta-dre and t’Cwa-dre?”
“Hana  was  just  speculating  wildly  about  who  you  are.  I  am
Gein—”
“Vida Orpha Gein,” the other said.

“And  this  is  Tefan  Malal  Hana,  who  will  be  successor  to  the
Chieftainship of Ula t’Fon.”
The  Black  muttered  something  fervently  in  the  Aeyrie  tongue.
Gein translated it politely: “May the season of change come late.”
While I stared in a daze, overwhelmed by too  many  names  and
realizations at once, Eia’s sibling gave me food, a bar of something
sweet  and  crunchy  which  melted  to  nothing  in  my  mouth,  and  a
transparent skin of something  like  milk  except  that  it  tasted  of  a
rich  and  exotic  nut.  “Flight  food,”  id  said  apologetically.  “It  will
scarcely pause in your stomach.”
I ate, and felt at once better and worse,  for  I  stopped  shivering
and  my  muscles  became  strong  enough  to  hold  me  up,  but  my
awakened  and  cheated  stomach  growled  in  rebellion.  “Will  I  be
welcome in Ula t’Fon? Can I reach there before it is dark?”
“You will be welcome,” Hana said. “We will walk with you.”
So  I  had  company  for  the  last  part  of  my  journey,  the  two  of
them  taking  turns  supporting  me  and  fending  off  my  apologies,
asking more questions  than  they  answered.  I  had  not  expected  to
find any Aeyries flying in this wind, but I did not question them on
it, for it occurred to me that Teksan would be even more anxious to
understand  it  than  I.  They  both  appeared  to  be  serious  flyers,
broad-chested  and  bulging  with  flight  muscles.  I  quieted  my
curiosity  by  concluding  that  they  were  athletes,  and  probably
reckless besides.
It was sunset when Down Nest came into sight. The community
appeared just as it had in Teksan’s mirror:  an eccentric,  incredible
construction,  with  windows  and  porches  of  all  sizes  jumbled  in
disorder  along  crooked,  wildly  angled  walls.  Hana,  without  much
apparent effort, climbed the sheer side of a spire of glass, and then
dove  off  it.  Id  struggled  at  first  against  the  rising  wind,  but
gracefully mastered it. Soon after, our arrival was announced with
a sweet,  faint horn call. Many  shuttered  windows  drew  open,  and
curious  faces  peered  down  at  us,  distant  triangular  Aeyrie  faces,
framed  by  manes  clipped  or  braided  or  combed  or  as  unkempt  as
mine, hooded behind by folded wings. I looked up until we were  so
close my neck ached from the tilt.

I wiped my blurring eyes and  chilling  face  dry  on  my  shoulder.
Gein looked at me inquiringly.
“There are so many! I thought I was the only one. The only one
like me in all the world.”
“Well,” said Gein, “Aren’t you?”
But I was silent in shame, not at my tears but at my knowledge
that I was an interloper and a danger to these people, Eia’s people
whom I wanted to also be mine. I hated the weakness in me which
made me able to care only about warmth,  a  bed,  and  solid  food.  I
had  already  lied  for  the  sake  of  these  things,  and  was  certain  I
would be doing it again before the evening was much older.
Hana had achieved the height of the town, and landed there on a
porch with no railings, where long streamers of bright cloth swam
in the wind. Soon after, id reappeared again, to dive over the edge
and  glide  down  to  us  in  extravagant  swoops,  with  all  the  curious
community  still  watching.  “Show  off,”  Gein  said  beside  me,
lovingly, rousing envy in me.
“I  brought  more  food,”  Hana  said  when  id  landed.  “They  are
opening the  lower  door,  but  it  will  be  a  dreary  climb  for  you  yet,
Delan. You should hear what they are saying!”
Gein mimicked an excited voice: “ ‘A white winged silver! Young,
and  without  a  Companion!’  You  said  it  yourself,  Hana,  when  we
first saw id. You have a very unusual coloring, Delan.”
Hana  distributed  more  flight  food  from  ids  satchel.  “How  long
since you were winged?”
I felt giddy with their fast, bright words. “Thirty days, maybe.”
Gein’s protective wing tucked around  me.  “Some  might  offer  to
bed you. Better to  say  no,  for  now,  for  your  own  sake.  Do  not  be
afraid to ask for advice.”
Hana  snorted,  and  crunched  down  on  a  bar.  “Everyone  will
advise you, too. Worthless and self important nonsense, most of it.”
I leaned against Gein, welcoming id’s solidity. The Aeyries indeed
are different from the Walkers, I said to myself, utterly dismayed.

Chapter 7
« ^ » 
At  the  top  of  a  short  pathway  amid  a  rubble  of  broken  glass,  we
waited  near  the  sheer  side  of  the  mountain.  In  the  depth  of  the
mountain  itself,  a  faint  shadow  moved  against  a  blurred  glow  of
light. Abruptly the thick door which was cut into the glass creaked
open  on  heavy,  strangely  designed  hinges,  revealing  an  old  and
wizened  flyer,  with  a  withered  wing  and  a  mane  gone  gray  with
age.
Hana  greeted  idre  and  brought  me  forward.  The  old  Aeyrie
examined me with eyes too wise and seeing for comfort, but did not
speak.
The  door  swung  shut.  I  watched  as  the  old  Aeyrie  latched  the
door. There were no keys, only knobs to be turned. I did notice that
the  door  could  not  be  opened  at  all  from  outside.  We  were  in  a
narrow  tunnel,  with  jagged  walls  indicating  that  the  passageway
through the mountain had not been painstakingly cut, but instead
the  glass  had  been  shattered  like  ice  before  a  thaw.  Until  now,  I
would have thought such a thing impossible.
The  tiled  floor  whispered  under  my  shoes.  Air  lamps  scattered
glittering light on the walls. Each lamp was unlike the next,  even
clinging  to  the  wall  in  a  different  manner,  as  if  the  lamp  crafter
made it a policy to never repeat idreself. The mountain surrounded
me  with  a  great,  still  silence.  I  wondered  that  this  rift  within  its
belly did not make the mountain uneasy. Once I  looked  back,  and
saw that the Eye was still following me.
The tunnel led us to the bottom of a well. A narrow stairway cut
into  the  glass  wound  around  the  inside  of  the  great  shaft,  lit  all
along the way by lamps. Even though it was not very  wide, it had
no railing. Even with a railing, not many Walkers would have had
the  stomach  for  voluntarily  climbing  a  height  like  that.  A
contraption like a cage rested on the floor,  tethered somewhere far
above with a multitude of thick ropes. This would be how supplies
were raised to the town, I guessed, assuming that the hard work of
raising  it  was  done  with  human  bodies  and  pullies.  I  wondered
suddenly  what  they  did  for  water,  so  high  in  the  air.  I  learned,

later,  about  cisterns  and  pipes  and  the  pumps  and  engines  which
harness the power of the wind.
Gein  said,  “You  can  ride  the  lift,  but  I  think  you  might  prefer
going on your own feet.”
“Yes,”  I  said,  knowing  I  would  regret  it  halfway  up  the  stairs.
And I did regret it, more than once.
The old Aeyrie stayed behind. I had spotted a rude bed near the
foot  of  the  stairs.  I  wondered  that  someone  who  was  treated  so
respectfully lived so humbly. “It is by choice,” Gein explained as we
paused to catch our breaths. “Id is a Sh’man, a wise one.”
Gein and Hana took turns half-carrying me the final few  turns.
At  the  top  of  the  long  stairway,  the  door  was  open,  leaking  the
sound  of  many  liquid  voices  which  echoed  eerily  in  the  well.  I
walked  through  the  door  on  my  own  two  feet.  Even  Gein,  as
sensitive to my pride as id had been to my need for support, let go
of me at the end.
A hush fell as we came through the door into a great,  tapestried
room crowded with comfortable,  well-used tables,  and  long-legged,
low-backed  chairs.  Black  and  red  and  gold  and  brown,  somewhat
less  than  a  hundred  and  a  half  Aeyries,  glimmering  with
undecorated  astil  and  hooded  by  translucent  wings,  stilled  their
spoons in their bowls at my entrance. Furred and maned and thin
as  starvelings,  casually  carrying  their  great  burden  of  wings  on
their  heavily  muscled  torsos,  a  weird,  alien  people  greeted  my
Walker eyes. The intelligence of their curious or distrustful, smiling
or expressionless faces was uncanny. Fear came over me like winter
twilight: sudden and unannounced.
I turned my  head,  catching  sight  of  my  own  pale  wings,  folded
against rough  Walker  wool  like  flowers  blooming  among  stones.  I
felt  utterly  disoriented.  My  rage  against  the  ground-walking  race
lay disemboweled within me.  When the Walkers looked at me,  the
entire  structure  of  their  Universe  shook  in  its  foundations.  How
could  I  blame  them  for  distrusting  me,  or  even,  out  of  fear,
maltreating me?
I am an Aeyrie, I said to myself. This is my people. This is where
I belong. Yet I knew it was not true, and would never be true.

Gein’s  warm  hand  took  my  elbow.  Perhaps  id  had  seen  my
trembling. “Wingling,” id said, muted and somber. “How can I help
you?”
“Stay  with  me,”  I  pleaded,  like  a  child  afraid  of  the  darkness.
Protect me, take care of me, make everything better.
“Of course.” Id looked at me as if peering down my eyes into my
soul.  “Ride  it  out,”  id  suggested.  “Don’t  struggle;  just  keep  your
wings spread.”
A Black stood up among the tables and made ids way to us. Hana
stepped forward to present me to idre. “My parent, chieftain of Ula
t’Fon,  the  taiseoch  Tefan.  This  is—”  id’s  mouth  quirked  with  a
half-sad  smile  that  reminded  me  so  of  Eia  that  my  throat  closed
shut. “This is Delan, who is alone and does not know ids parentage.
A wind-drift.”
The chieftain put out a hand that was wrinkled and gnarled with
age, but firm of grip as it took hold of mine. There was nothing to
distinguish  idre  from  the  rest  of  them,  no  trappings  or  symbols,
only  a  heaviness  of  experiences  on  ids  bowed  shoulders,  and  a
deliberation of speech that suggested the thought which went  into
each word. “Rest here,” id said. “You are welcome. In the morning I
will talk with you.”
 
As  I  ate  dinner,  hungry  despite  myself,  around  me  rose  a
confusion and interweaving of conversation the like of which I had
never heard  before.  Even  though  I  did  not  understand  the  words,
the intensity of it unnerved me.  Gein fended off  the curious at the
cost of ids own meal. Later id led me out in my exhausted daze, and
showed me to the guest room,  and I think even undressed me and
put me to bed.
I awoke in the morning to  the  sound  of  the  windmills  whirring
and singing on the rooftops as they were engaged. All my muscles
ached, but the bed was soft and warm,  and I lay a long  time  only
half awake.
I turned my head, and looked by accident into the awful gaze of
the Eye. I buried my face in the soft,  crinkled blankets. But there
was no hiding: I had eaten and rested and now it was time to decide

what to do.
But I could not decide. Every plan I considered had a flaw, or an
intolerable risk. I did not know and could not hope to guess at the
extent of Teksan’s powers. With  not  even  the  flick  of  a  finger,  he
had quenched my will, leaving me for a moment more dead than if I
were buried and disintegrating. Could he do it again, even over the
distance which separated us? So long as the Eye was watching me
and the Rope was binding me,  was I within  his  power?  One  thing
was certain: whatever thing I did in rebellion, it had to be decisive,
and so sudden that my master had no chance to react.
Why  had  Teksan  not  simply  emptied  me  out  and  used  my
disenfranchised  husk  to  open  the  locked  doors?  My  intact  and
willful self was a risk to him, and the traps he had set for me in his
house  showed  how  little  he  trusted  me.  The  only  answer  to  this
question  was  a  shred  of  hope  as  amorphous  as  mist.  Perhaps
because he has limits—I thought, and could go no farther.
I got up at last. I used the commode behind the painted screen,
and  fought  open  the  window  shutters.  My  room  was  high,
overlooking several levels of rooftops slanted to catch the rain and
carry it to storage. A hundred spinning windmills were in sight. The
big  ones,  though  colorful,  appeared  utilitarian  enough,  but  the
smaller  ones  were  whimsical  toys.  They  flapped  and  spun  and
jiggled  and  danced,  clattering  and  rattling  and  whirring  in  the
wind.  There  were  bells,  also,  tinkling  and  ringing  and  humming,
and astil streamers writhing like waterwythes  in a strong current.
Surely  these  were  a  people  who  unabashedly  loved  the  wind!  I
laughed with delight by my open window, but the feeling inside of
me was a kind of weeping, and there were tears on my face.
Gein  tapped  on  the  door  and  came  in  as  I  was  still  wiping  my
eyes, and paused there, looking at me. “Ah Del, there is complexity
in you.”
I  turned  to  the  Red,  forgetting  again  the  occult  Eye  and  the
unclear ways which were  before  me,  thinking  for  now  only  of  the
likeable, trustable, bright-furred Gein. “What do you do, Gein?”
“Most people can tell within a  moment  or  two  what  I  am.  ‘You
must be a healer, Gein,’ they say.”

“Of  course,”  I  said,  feeling  stupid  for  not  having  recognized  it.
But Gein’s impulse to ascertain and meet other people’s needs had
seemed to me too natural to be acquired. Walker-style healers are
very intellectual people.
“The taiseoch has asked me to serve as your Companion for now,
with  your  permission.  I  thought  I  was  too  young,  but  id  thought
that  since  we  were  already  acquainted  with  each  other  and  I  am
fluent in the Walker tongue—”
I had not even considered important the fact  that I was not yet
dressed,  but  now  I  reached  overhastily  for  my  clothes.  When  I
turned back, Gein was smiling. “To interpret. And to explain.  And
to support if you need it, in my capacity as a trained empath. That
is all.”
I clutched wool and quilt  to  my  chest.  Embarrassment  held  me
silent.
“Did  the  Walkers  assume  that  you  were  female?”  Gein  asked
gently.
I nodded.
“It must be very strange to grow up in a society where there are
two  sexes.  To  be  forbidden  to  love  someone  because  by  some
accident  both  of  you  can  lay  eggs,  or  cannot  lay  eggs.  What  a
strange and arbitrary notion!”
When  I  thought  about  it  that  way,  I  smiled  reluctantly.  It  did
indeed seem rather ridiculous.
Gein took my hand, and took my clothes away and threw  them
onto  the  bed,  and  drew  me  away  from  the  window,  closing  the
shutters in passing. “Come to  the  baths  with  me.  There  are  some
new clothes being brought there for you, Aeyrie clothes, and it is a
good place for talking.”
 
The Aeyrie town was a warren, laid out by designers as mad and
whimsical  as  those  who  made  the  whirligigs.  I  could  not  imagine
how  I  would  ever  find  my  own  way  alone  through  its  twisting
hallways and unexpected stairways, but I was hungry to wander at
my own pace, to look at the  things  which  hung  from  the  walls  or

hid  in  nooks:  weavings  and  paintings  and  carvings,  engine  parts
and  toys  and  things  I  could  not  even  name,  the  leavings  of  an
eccentric and creative people. I hung back to examine this and that,
until  Gein,  laughing,  dragged  me  the  last  few  steps.  “One  would
think  you  were  only  going  to  be  here  a  few  hours.  There  will  be
time to look at everything!”
Reminded that it was all too possible that this would be my only
day here, I was much muted as we came into the baths. In the plain
dressing  room,  a  few  articles  of  clothing  hung  from  hooks.  “This
must be yours,” Gein said, touching a soft, white, shining thing that
was folded on the bench. Gein hung ids golden garment on a hook,
and we went into the next room, a warm, steamy, echoing place cut
out  within  the  mountain  itself,  with  moisture  dripping  down  the
walls and lush plants in pots thriving in the damp half darkness. It
was dimly lit by a few lamps protected within clear bulbs from  the
worst of the moisture. The occult Eye glowed in the mist, watching
me.
It  was  unpeopled  except  for  ourselves.  We  showered  under
streams of hot water, soaping ourselves all over and lathering each
other’s backs and wings. The water ran brown and grimy  from  my
fur, for since I was winged I had not  been  able  to  bathe  properly.
Here there were no baths at all as a Walker would know them,  no
tubs or pools of water. “We sink,” Gein explained. “Our wings make
swimming impossible, and we have no fat to make us float.”
“All my life I have been afraid of water.”
“A wise fear.”
I shook the water out of my wings, and toweled it out of my fur
until I was merely damp. Gein  led  the  way  out,  to  another  warm
and dimly-lit place, but this one both hotter and drier than the last,
and  furnished  with  benches  and  tables  where  other  people  lay  or
sat, most of them solitary, some of them talking together. It was a
mystery to me how sound was swallowed up  in  that  place  so  that
their  voices  were  mere  wordless  murmurs.  I  had  never  imagined
one could be so private in an open room.
Gein took up a bottle from  a  rack.  “Lie  down,  Del,  you  are  the
guest.” I lay on one of the tables, feeling very  self-conscious until I

realized that the others had not even glanced at us. Gein oiled my
sensitive wings, and then perched on  the  table  beside  me,  fluffing
up my fur with ids hands as it dried. In a relaxed daze, I turned my
head  to  look  at  idre.  Gein  had  brought  us  here  because  it  was  a
good  place  to  talk,  and  both  of  us  had  scarcely  spoken.  My
half-unfolded  wings  gleamed  in  the  warm  light.  Beyond  them,
Gein’s face was alive with secret thoughts. A pair of Aeyries left the
room, fingers intertwined, wings touching.
The  Eye  was  out  of  sight,  somewhere  behind  and  above  me
probably,  keeping  its  arm’s  length  away.  I  murmured,  “Gein,
pretend that I am not talking. Think of a reason to bring your head
down to me.”
Id continued absently fluffing my fur as before, not even turning
ids  face  to  me,  so  that  even  I  wondered  if  id  had  heard  me.  But
after  a  time,  id  looked  down  at  me  with  a  smile.  The  fluffing
became a stroking, slow, and soft, and then ids hand came up to my
mane and ids torso pressed against my arm. My breath caught, and
for a moment I entirely forgot what I meant to do.
“Wingling, tell me what is troubling you.”
I whispered  words  that  were  scarcely  sound  at  all,  “I  have  an
Occult Eye on me, set there by a Walker sorcerer.  Tonight I am to
bring up danger through the lower door.”
I sat up then, pulling the Red’s body close to me, thinking to hide
in  our  embrace  whatever  reaction  id  had,  and  even  in  my
desperation worrying about what the others in the room must think
of my behavior. Gein breathed something in H’ldat and startled me
again  by  softly  kissing  my  mouth  before  murmuring  against  my
lips, “Be at peace,  l’shil,  it  will  be  all  right.  Thank  you  for  telling
me.”  And  then,  less  quietly,  “I  am  partnered,  though  I  am  sorely
tempted to forget it—maybe you will consider taking Hana and me
together. Shall I discuss it with idre? Do you like idre also?”
I  was  utterly  flustered.  But  to  the  watching  Teksan,  my
confusion certainly was not without apparent cause.
 
The Taiseoch’s rooms were high in the community, at the top of a
wide  stairway.  Id  received  me  in  a  small,  plain  room,  where  the

painted decorations on the wooden floor were  rubbed  away  by  the
passage  of  many  feet,  and  the  furniture  was  worn  as  well,  and
many times mended. Id seemed to have no servants or attendants.
It was Hana who brought in a tray of hot drinks  and  sweetbread,
balanced on one hand as  id  managed  the  doors  with  the  other.  Id
was not dressed, and had long streaks of dust and dirt in ids fur.
“Been mending a windmill?” asked Gein.
“A pump fitting broke.”
“Those pump fittings always break,” said Tefan absently.
“Someday someone will invent a metal that doesn’t wear out, and
Ula t’Fon will be rich.” Hana handed out steaming cups of spicy tea
and sweetbread crammed with nuts and cheese,  and  perched  on  a
stool, vibrant and cheerful in the cold sunlight spilling through  an
open window. “Then we’ll get too fat to fly,  and loll in luxury, and
hatch  as  many  children  as  we  want,  and  own  more  than  one
garment apiece even.”
Gein  smiled  indulgently.  “And  wreck  the  world  out  of  sheer
boredom.”
A pair  of  onfrits  appeared  on  the  windowsill,  but  waited  to  be
invited  in,  when  only  crumbs  were  left.  I  was  careful  to  spill
nothing on  my  new  clothes.  Despite  having  spent  most  of  my  life
producing  astil,  I  had  never  actually  worn  anything  made  of  it.
When  I  had  hesitated  to  put  on  something  so  beautiful  and
expensive,  Gein  had  said  gently,  “We  do  not  wear  astil  for  the
luxury of it, but for its light weight and its ability to cut the wind.
Remember you are a flyer.”
After we had eaten, the Taiseoch prompted me and, with  a  few
major  omissions,  I  told  idre  about  my  life.  The  chieftain  listened
intently, turning occasionally to Gein for a translation.
“So  I  knew  I  had  to  be  an  Aeyrie,”  I  concluded.  “But  I  did  not
know you would welcome me—I am very  grateful  for  it.”  I  looked
down at my hands, imagining what my life would be like if all the
tale I had told were  true,  and  how  I  would  be  feeling  now  with  a
new life ahead of me in  this  wonderful,  rich  place.  Would  I  spend
the rest of my life catching up with my peers? Could I learn how to
do as I liked? Might I someday vibrate as Hana did with energy and

creativity,  or  distribute  affection  and  acceptance  as  generously  as
Gein?
Tefan asked me some questions, but did not tell me what I most
wanted  to  know.  I  finally  said,  “Taiseoch  Tefan,  do  you  have  any
idea who my parents might be, or how I came to hatch among the
Digan-lai?”
The chieftain stood up, shaking out stiff joints. “Only a mating of
two  Silvers  will  make  a  Silver  child.  There  are  only  a  handful  of
Silvers  in  the  world.  It  should  not  be  difficult  to  identify  your
parents. As for how your egg came to the Digan-lai, or why it was
brought there, I do not know. But I am very curious to find out.”
Gein said softly. “Hana, will you host Delan for a while? I need to
make my rounds.”
I left that place feeling both haunted and relieved by the notion
that  much  had  been  withheld  from  me.  I  wondered,  despairing,
what  the  Taiseoch  would  think  of  me  when  Gein  relayed  my
muttered message, as would surely happen as soon as the door was
closed.
“You were carrying a weapon,” Hana said. “Do you know how to
use it?”
Suddenly  I  was  embarrassed  of  the  homemade  knife,  the
possession of which had once caused such controversy.  “It is just a
glass  shard,  bound  to  a  wooden  handle.  I  have  never  done  more
than threaten rude children with it.”
Hana  grinned,  and  drew  ids  own  blade.  Blue  glass  it  was,  of  a
length with mine. “We always make our weapons out of glass. It is
half  the  weight  of  metal,  and  stronger  by  far.  Let’s  go  look  at
yours.”
We  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  together.  We  went  to  one  of  the
community’s  many  workshops  where  a  glassmaster  helped  me  to
shape  my  blade.  Hana,  who  apparently  dabbled  in  many  crafts,
helped  me  to  bind  an  Aeyrie  style  handle  to  it,  attaching  it  with
metal screwed through two  holes we  had  drilled  in  the  glass  with
the  help  of  a  smoking  chemical.  The  handle  had  a  metal  loop
through which I could tether the knife to me. “So you won’t have to
land to retrieve it, if you lose it in the air,” Hana explained.

Id was a careful  and  deliberate  crafter.  I  could  see  why  id  was
the one who had been called to repair the windmill. As far as I could
ascertain, Hana had no regular duties, but dabbled in everything. I
thought it was because of ids station, but Hana told me that many
Aeyries had  no  defined  role,  and  simply  did  whatever  appealed  to
them. Some, on the other hand, were specialists, with a particular
love  or  gift  for  one  kind  of  work.  Out  of  these  a  handful  were
sh’mans: teachers, or wise ones. But even they had to share in the
common work of cooking, cleaning, and caring for the children.
“Are  you  Tefan’s  only  offspring?”  I  asked,  knowing  the  answer
perfectly well.
“I  have  an  elder  l’frer,”  Hana  said.  “Even  for  an  Aeyrie  id  is
talented, very good at an impossible variety of things. A politician,
a fighter,  an artist, a scholar. But prone to unpopular stances and
solitary ways. Id went over to the Triad, and my parent is ashamed
and will no longer speak ids name. But I miss my l’frer. Too long it
has  been  since  there  was  word  from  idre.  And  frankly,  id  would
make  a  far  better  taiseoch  than  I!  I  hope  id  will  give  up  playing
prophet someday and come home again.”
“What about your other parent. Malal?”
“Id is dead,” Hana said. “Walkers  shot  idre  out  of  the  sky.”  Ids
face  closed  and  I  did  not  ask  any  more  questions.  But  suddenly  I
understood why Tefan, who seemed a person of great restraint and
reason, might not be at all reasonable on the subject of Walkers.
“Shall we go to the h’shal Quai-du?” suggested Hana.
I had learned that a h’shal was any common room oi the Ula, one
to which anyone had right of access. “Quai-du?”
“You  will  hear  the  suffix  ‘du’  very  frequently  here:  it  indicates
that the noun has to do with flight.”
“And ‘Quai?’ ”
“Ah,  that  is  one  of  those  Aeyrie  words  which  doesn’t  easily
translate. It means at the same time, ‘fight’ and ‘dance.’ ”
“The room for fight-dance flying?” I translated.
“The place for study of the ancient martial art of Quai-du. I am a
master—see,  this  is  the  mark.”  Id  turned  a  wrist.  Branded  in  ids

flesh  was  the  same  triangle  I  had  noticed  on  Eia’s  wrist,  which  I
had assumed to be the symbol of the Triad.
Hana took me by the elbow. “Come with me and I’ll show you.”
The h’shal Quai-du was as big as the Common Hall but empty of
any  furnishings  except  for  a  ladder  leading  to  a  flight  balcony.  A
line of windows, made of a nearly colorless glass cut in  impossibly
thin  sheets,  let  in  the  pale  winter  light.  The  floor  was  of  inlaid
wood, but it was so smooth that I could not feel the joinings.
With my hand on ids shoulders for support, I stood on one foot so
Hana could examine the sole of the other. Hana snorted. “Shoes!”
“So?”  I  said,  for  I  was  quickly  growing  weary  of  the  Aeyries’
habit of denigrating even the Walker’s most mundane habits.
“You’ll blister badly, your feet are so soft.”
“Why not wear shoes then, so I won’t get blisters?”
Hana  found  this  suggestion  hysterically  funny.  “Why  don’t
Walkers  go  blindfolded  on  bright  days  when  the  sun  hurts  their
eyes?” Id asked when id could talk again. “Draw  your knife, Pshil.
There is something you need to learn.”
Anger made me reckless, and I drew my blade with a flourish.
The  next  few  seconds  were  among  the  most  hectic  and
frightening of my entire life. It ended  mercifully  quickly,  with  me
crashed up against the wall with the breath knocked out of me, my
blade  somewhere  on  the  other  side  of  the  room,  and  Hana’s  very
sharp edge tickling the fur  at  my  throat.  “Well,”  Hana  said,  “You
have it in you.”
“What?” I gasped.
“Your first reaction was to defend yourself, and  you  did  it  well.
Two things you did which are worth remembering. First, your feet:
what did you do with them?”
Naturally  I  had  no  idea.  My  body  was  still  shaking  as  Hana
demonstrated slowly how I had reacted to ids attack.  “You are still
awkward, but beginning to get your balance. Someday you will not
even  remember  your  childhood  clumsiness.  You  put  your  feet  so,
which made it very  difficult for me to offset  you. You  had  no  idea

what to do with your blade, of course, but you did know what to do
with your wings, like this.”
Crouched,  with  one  foot  well  behind  and  apart  from  the  other,
Hana’s  wings  lifted  and  flapped,  propelling  idre  forward,  knife
leading,  in  a  way  which  made  me  very  glad  that  knife  was  not
coming at me.
“You know the most important thing about Quai-du,” Hana said.
“Use your wings for momentum and power. That is a wise body you
live in, Del. You will learn quickly.”
I had been called wise twice that day.  But  it  was  a  measure  of
Hana’s  skill  that  I  was  not  injured  that  afternoon.  I  did  quickly
come  to  appreciate  just  how  important  it  was  that  my  feet  be  in
direct contact with the ground.
Hana  explained  that  the  life-fire  burned  hot  in  me,  and  that
keeping it fueled was a serious business, especially when flying. “To
faint in the air is to never fly  again.  If  you  even  survive.”  Id  also
instructed me on the care of my vulnerable wing membranes, which
would  not  heal  easily  if  damaged,  almost  inevitably  requiring  a
healer’s attention. I found myself wondering if the impulse to teach
was hereditary in Eia’s family.
Quai-du is as much an art of the air as of the ground, and after I
had announced the end of my efforts by sprawling exhausted on the
floor,  Hana  demonstrated  some  of  the  maneuvers  of  the  air.  Id
hovered, turned  with  impossible  swiftness,  and  dove  for  the  floor,
only  to  swoop  upward,  all  with  the  knife  glittering,  slicing  and
stabbing at an invisible attacker. It was both beautiful and awful to
watch. I was riveted not only by Hana’s precision and power, but by
a new respect for my own potential.
 
Although supper was a communal meal, Gein did not appear for
it, which seemed to puzzle Hana as much as it disturbed me. Hana
came grim from a private conference with ids parent to where I was
trying to focus my attention on the bread and stew, which had been
prepared  by  cooks  who  were  far  more  skilled  and  inspired  than  I
had ever been. “One of the children has taken seriously ill and Gein
cannot  leave  idre.  I  am  going  to  bring  my  partner  some

supper—will you be able to manage by yourself?”
“If  I  can  find  my  room  again,”  I  said,  smiling,  for  despite  the
terrifying afternoon I had learned to like Hana.
But  Hana  looked  away  from  my  smile.  “I  will  ask  someone  to
help  you.”  Ids  voice  was  cordial  enough,  but  it  had  an  undertone
that left me dismayed. For appearance’s sake, I finished my  meal,
but my appetite was gone.
Chapter 8
« ^ » 
With the voice of Teksan, the Eye spoke: “Delan. It is time.”
Despite the warm guest bed, my bones were ice. I had not been
able to sleep.
“Delan,” my master said.
I  didn’t  move  or  reply.  The  wind  sang  across  the  mountain
ridges, moaning in the hollows. My window shutters rattled.
The Eye spoke: “Do you remember this name? Eia,” it said. “Eia.”
 
I unscrewed an arm of the lamp and took  it  with  me,  the  little
flame  flickering  with  my  motion.  I  walked  alone  down  empty,
shadowy hallways. I passed a light  glowing  under  a  doorway,  and
for a few moments the murmuring and laughing of lovers haunted
my  way.  A  sculpture  cast  a  black,  winged  shadow.  It  said  in  my
memory, “I think you underestimate yourself, Delan.”
“I’m sorry,” I said. “I should have listened.”
I walked on, driven like a kip before the Eye. The Common Hall
swallowed up the whisper of my feet  on the tiles. The tables  were
cleared, and the chairs tucked neatly under them. It was dark, and
silent.
“I’m  sorry,”  I  said,  shivering  in  the  cold,  hoping  that  someone
was  there  hidden  in  the  shadows,  preferably  a  whole  troop  of
Quai-du fighters with weapons at their sides. I worked the bolts to
open the door to the stairwell, and drew it almost shut again behind

me.
The darkness seemed to drop endlessly below me.  I  went  down,
turn  after  turn,  until  the  stairway  seemed  something  from  a
nightmare, a way  I  had  no  choice  but  to  walk,  infinitely,  without
hope  of  arriving  anywhere.  Then,  bewildered  and  dazed,  I  was  at
the  bottom,  wondering  if  the  Sh’man  was  awake  in  ids  bed,
watching me. I was so dizzy from the darkness that I wandered in
circles before finally stumbling into the corridor. It was cold as the
Void  in  that  place.  Shivering  so  I  could  hardly  walk,  I  finally
arrived at the lower door, and turned its three bolts by feel.
It  was  a  dark  night.  Black  clouds  frayed  across  the  stars.  The
wind moaned like a ghost in the ravines. It flung a handful of  my
hair  across  my  eyes.  Through  the  haze  of  hair  I  saw  Teksan,
leaning against the jagged stone.
“How do you know about Eia?” I asked.
The two  who were  hidden in the  darkness  on  either  side  of  the
door grasped me by the arms, and there was a blade at my throat,
cold  metal,  awfully  cold.  “Teksan!”  I  cried  in  rage,  as  if  I  were
surprised.
He  straightened  from  his  slouch.  “Your  onfrit  led  us  to  the
Black’s cave, carrying your pathetic little note,”  he said. “But your
paramour is still alive. Remember that, Delan.”
My voice rang cold and empty in my ears. “Where is id?”
He stepped up to me. “Delan,” he said, softly and mockingly. His
fingers stroked my chin with an obscene gentleness. I cringed away
from  the  touch,  making  him  smile.  “Delan,  do  you  think  I  would
trust an Aeyrie?” Then he was gone.
In the grips of my captors, I dully watched the Walkers pass, one
or two at a time, through the door.
I  counted:  there  were  near  a  hundred  of  them,  a  great  many
people to steal only a few books. Every one of them was armed with
a long knife. I could hear the sound of their reluctant footsteps  as
they  climbed  the  long  stairs.  Single  file  they  would  be  going  up,
hugging the wall in their fear of heights. Two by two  at most they
would  be  going  though  the  door  at  the  top.  Was  a  bloody  battle

being engaged up there?
I  waited,  a  desperate  long  time.  My  two  captors  grumbled  at
having  been  left  behind.  I  thought  about  the  knife  at  my  side,
newly remade and deadly sharp. But each of my captors was twice
my size, and escaping the cruel grip of even one of them would not
be  easy.  I  waited,  thinking  too  late  of  all  the  things  I  could  have
done to prevent this disaster from happening.
I had violated Eia’s safety and betrayed idre to the enemy, and I
had done it out of selfishness, because I wanted idre to rescue me.
One  of  the  Walkers  said,  “Someone  coming  back,  is  that
Teksan?”
Footsteps came quickly across the tile. And then he was against
me, sweat stinking and breathless with anger. “Someone must have
noticed that the door was ajar, and latched it.”
I began to shake in the arms that held me.
“You will come upstairs and pound on the door to waken whoever
it is to let you in. You will tell them you were restless and wanted
to—”
“No.” I said, “I won’t do it.”
He hit me. His blow left me hanging in the grips of the Walkers,
looking dazedly at a Teksan who blotted out the stars like a figure
out of a nightmare. “No,” I said again, tasting and feeling the word
like blood in my mouth.
“For the Black’s life.”
“Why  should  I  believe  you?  Do  you  think  I  would  trust  a
Walker?”
Despite my bravado, I cowered when I saw his hand raise again.
He  stopped  himself,  probably  remembering  that  it  would  be
short-sighted to injure me so badly I could not climb the stairs. He
said to his two followers, “Make it walk.”
I said to his back, “I told Gein. They are ready for you.”
“You what?”
My voice was shrill with terror, yet I could not stop myself. “The
community will not let me in the door, they know better. Why don’t

you open it with sorcery, Teksan?”
After the shock of the blow came the awful,  mock gentle caress.
He  turned  my  chin  with  his  fingers  so  he  could  see  my  face,  and
then  he  hit  me  again.  After  he  left  to  gather  his  people,  the  two
who held me captive beat me as well. They were less dreadful, but
more brutal. By the time he came back, I was only half conscious,
puking from pain where I lay.
When  I  came  to  myself  again,  I  hung  upside  down,  slung  over
someone’s  shoulder.  My  head  lolled  on  a  broad  farmer’s  back,  my
wings  hanging  around  me  like  children’s  broken  kites.  My  hands
were  tied  behind  my  back.  The  Walkers  cursed  breathlessly  and
monotonously  in  the  darkness  around  me.  I  wondered  dully  why
they had not killed me yet, and wished they would get it over with.
When I moved, vaguely thinking to ease one of many pains, the one
who was carrying me set me down. I went to my knees. He jerked
me to my feet. “Walk,” he said.
I walked,  and  fell,  and  when  I  was  pulled  to  my  feet  I  walked
some more. I realized that Dulcie was dead. I wondered if they had
destroyed the book Eia had been writing. Then somehow we were in
the Void.
 
“Eia is captive of some very angry Walkers,” Teksan said. “Shall
I take you and let you see what they are doing to it?”
He had worn out his anger at last. I lay trussed and unclothed on
the  bare  floor  of  his  cellar.  He  had  gagged  me,  even  though  the
entire town except for his followers was in hibernation. I found this
puzzling. All I could think was that he feared that even his disciples
would be offended or distressed by the sound of my screaming.
The sodden gag choked me.  One of my eyes had swelled shut.  I
guessed hopefully at the number of days it would take  for  my  hot
life-fire to burn itself out without fuel. Surely it would not be long.
My injuries and the desperate cold would certainly hurry me along.
Teksan  stood  over  me,  breathing  heavily,  smiling  around  his
words. “You are doing this the hard way, Delan. In the end you will
do  anything,  and  beg  me  to  let  you  do  more.  You  can  reach  that
point intact, or you can reach that point a cripple. It is entirely up

to you.”
I shut my eyes. I felt very tired. At last he went away.
Little  had  remained  of  the  night  by  the  time  we  returned  to
L’din.  Teksan  had  given  a  speech  to  his  followers  and  spent  his
energy  until  sunrise  in  boosting  their  morale  and  distributing  ale
from  his  cellar.  I  lay  in  the  corner  like  an  old  rug  awaiting  the
junker.
I would have expected the night’s fiasco to be the end of Teksan’s
ambitions, but soon I realized it was not to be. Teksan claimed that
the Aeyrie communities could not communicate with each other in
winter. Therefore Out Nest and Up Nest would not be forewarned,
and the Walkers of the world could still awaken from hibernation to
discover that they were free of the Aeyrie tyranny. As for Ula t’Fon,
Teksan had a  plan,  and  I  found  it  too  easy  to  guess  what  it  was.
Surely  Eia,  natural  heir  to  the  taiseoch,  would  not  be  denied
entrance there, however wary the t’Fon-dre became.
The Walkers seemed willing to continue to support Teksan. Their
other option was to feel like fools. The terrible thing was that I now
knew  that  long  air  journeys  were  never  taken  in  winter  by  the
Aeyries,  because  the  cold  used  so  much  energy  that  even  the
strongest  of  flyers  could  not  carry  enough  food  to  support  a  long
flight.  Teksan  was  right:  t’Han  and  t’Cwa  would  be  his  for  the
taking.
Teksan’s people went away heartened. And Teksan took me down
to his cellar, and taught me just how helpless I was.
Now  it  was  full  daylight,  getting  toward  the  noon  of  the  brief,
too-long winter day. Pale sunlight fanned out from the one vent, at
ceiling level and smaller than a Walker child, with a grate fastened
over it.
Something in me had changed: I cried, now that I was alone, but
not for myself. I cried for the Walkers. Once they had wiped out the
Aeyries, they would likely focus their resentment and hatred on the
Mers.  When  they,  too,  were  extinct,  the  Walkers  would  start
destroying each other.  I cried for the Aeyries,  rich  and  proud  in  a
culture that gave them everything but what they needed to survive.
I cried for the mysterious Mers who were distant and safe in their

watery land and did not concern themselves with the  world  under
the sun.
I saw  too  much,  and  hoped  too  little.  Finally  my  ravaged  body
insisted on sleep.
 
With rest and time, Teksan became subtle. Hope having already
fled, dignity soon abandoned me as well. Not even my despair could
survive  his  artful  assault.  By  the  end  of  the  first  day,  I  had
promised  to  do  whatever  he  wanted,  if  only  he  would  stop.  He
looked down at me, smiling as always, where I was prostrate in dirt
and sweat and blood and vomit and the sharp stink of urine. “No,”
he said softly. “Not yet.”
By  the  third  day,  the  sound  of  Teksan’s  hand  turning  the  lock
made  me  whimper  with  terror.  His  pleasure  in  my  fear  and  pain
taught me what perversion was.
Even  in  sleep,  I  found  neither  escape  nor  rest.  Nightmares
assaulted  me,  one  after  another,  with  moments  of  desperate
wakefulness in between. Then there were horrible, vivid dreams of
escape: My bonds fell from my hands, the door opened before me,  I
went out and saw Eia waiting for me. The awakening was so awful
that I became convinced that Teksan  was  even  torturing  me  with
dreams.
The  fourth  or  fifth  night  I  dreamed  the  most  vivid  of  these
dreams. A scrabbling at the grate seemed to awaken me from sleep.
“Onfrit,” I said. My voice was hoarse and cracked with screaming,
for  Teksan  had  ungagged  me  when  I  became  too  weak  to  make
much noise. “There is a latch,” I croaked. One warm  summer day,
when I was out pulling weeds in the garden, I had opened the grate,
trying to figure out why it had been  designed  to  be  opened  in  the
first place.
I heard the struggle between small body and stiff latch. I heard
the hinges squeak. An onfrit fluttered down from  the dark ceiling.
“Delan?” it said.
“Yes. Who are you?”
“Eia’s Ch’ta.”

“Ch’ta, you are a very smart onfrit.”
“Yes,” he said agreeably.
In better times, a conversation like this would have  ended  with
me  dizzy  from  trying  to  understand  animal  sentience  and  how  it
was  different  from  mine.  Now  I  only  considered  how  amazingly
lucky  it  was,  that  the  one  survivor  of  Eia’s  three  onfrits  was  the
most intelligent and experienced, whom Eia credited with abstract
thought and a wide range of emotions, capable of reasoning through
difficult  and  complicated  tasks.  Suddenly  I  realized  that  it  was
suspiciously lucky: this was certainly another dream, and it would
have another unendurable ending. But I could not awaken from  it.
Apparently I had to dream it through to the end.
I decided to cooperate so it would be over quickly. I turned as far
as  I  could,  offering  Ch’ta  my  bound  wrists.  “Chew  through  the
rope.” His sharp teeth tugged on my numb hands. Time seemed to
keep its own pace. And then suddenly there was pain, and my own
voice  moaning  and  startling  me  into  awareness  as  my  arms  and
shoulder joints, so  long  immobilized,  came  unfrozen.  I  brought  up
one monstrously distorted hand before my eyes. The wrist was raw
meat. The onfrit crawled over my side, tense with distress over my
pain.
“Good,  Ch’ta,”  I  said  through  my  tears.  “Good  work.  Have  you
been a lonely onfrit?”
Ch’ta gave a low warble, an onfrit sound of sadness.
“I will be your friend.”
Ch’ta huddled against my chest. I  stroked  him  awkwardly  with
my  swollen  hand.  “You  did  good  work,”  I  said  again,  when  he
seemed calmer. “There is another rope. Will you chew through that
one, too?”
As Ch’ta worked on my ankles, my hands began to come alive. It
was as brutal as any pain Teksan had so cleverly imposed on me. So
as  not  to  frighten  the  onfrit  again,  I  endured  it  with  my  teeth
clenched, distracting myself with thinking of a way  to get through
the locked cellar door. My brain seemed frozen  in its works,  like a
clock left out in the rain. I could not even  remember  clearly  what
kind of lock the door had. Did it turn, or did it need a key? Could I

pick it from inside?
When Ch’ta had my ankles free, I crawled across the floor and up
the stairs to look at the door. I had come through it many times, to
fetch things or bring things down, in a life idyllically predictable it
seemed to me now, free of pain and above all free of responsibility.
At last, the image of the lock came to mind. It was little more than
a latch.
I  sent  Ch’ta  out  the  vent  to  find  a  way  into  the  kitchen  and
unlock the door. While he was gone, my feet came alive in the same
way my hands had done. I was still gasping  with  it  when  I  heard
the bolt  click.  I  grabbed  the  edge  of  the  door  with  my  fingernails
and wrestled it open.
Except for the onfrit,  the kitchen was empty.  But surely  it  was
time for the Dream Teksan to arrive, monstrous in the costume of
my fear. Maybe, I said to myself, with the first shred of hope I had
allowed  myself  in  this  nightmarishly  slow  and  strangely  logical
dream  escape,  maybe  Teksan  had  worn  himself  out  with  today’s
exertions, and was asleep, sound asleep.
I crawled back down the cellar stairs to the food store. I gave a
whole  winterfruit  to  Ch’ta,  who  seemed  overwhelmed  at  my
generosity. He peeled it neatly with his teeth, but I ate mine entire,
seeds, tough peel and all, my first food since Ula t’Fon.
When  I  stood  up,  my  legs  bore  me,  although  unwillingly.
Wobble-kneed, I stumbled on swollen feet around the room, filling a
basket with food. I told myself that this was no escape dream at all,
but a warm spring day, and I and the onfrit were going on a picnic.
I  put  Ch’ta,  still  occupied  with  his  winterfruit,  into  the  basket,
slung it over my shoulder, and climbed the stairs.
In the parlor, I stole a rug that lay across the back of one of the
chairs, a pretty kipswool weaving that I had gotten for a good price
one  lucky  shopping  day.  I  was  heading  for  the  back  door  when  I
missed  my  footing  in  the  dark,  and  entirely  by  accident  put  my
hand down on my knife and my astil clothes, which lay in a tangle
of other stuff on the kitchen table. I was giggling hysterically when
I went out the door and carefully shut it behind me.  “Well,  where
are you?” I asked the Dream Teksan. But the street was empty.

When  I  awoke,  the  earth  swayed  and  swung  rhythmically
beneath me. The back half of me was numb with cold, but the front
half was warm. Under my belly, I felt the working of muscles and
the  shifting  of  bones  in  joints.  I  opened  my  eyes  and  saw  the
impenetrable black of a cloudy night. I was not dreaming.
The  onfrit  nestled  between  my  shoulder  and  neck  in  a  tight
huddle. The beast beneath me had to be a draf. I tried to remember
how I had acquired a mount, and could only think of what I  must
have done: stolen the draf from  the stable. The  draf  had  not  been
let  loose  for  winter  because  his  owners  were  among  those  not
hibernating.  I  had  a  brief  memory  of  myself,  sobbing  over  the
buckles  and  straps  my  fingers  would  not  work,  of  Ch’ta’s  clever
hands solving the problem.
I  curled  my  arm  around  Ch’ta.  My  legs  were  hooked  under  a
strap  to  keep  me  from  falling  off.  I  wondered  vaguely  where  the
draf was taking us.
When I awoke again, the sky was beginning to pale and the draf
was  grazing  on  an  unappetizing  tangle  of  dead  plants.  “Ch’ta?”  I
said  hoarsely.  The  onfrit  warbled  overhead,  and  landed  on  my
shoulder as I sat up, head throbbing. “Love you,” I said. Ch’ta licked
my neck and clung to me anxiously. I felt sick: giddy and still half
dreaming,  with  my  bones  aching  dully  and  the  rest  of  me
shuddering with cold.
“Where are we, Ch’ta?”
“Going home.”
“How does the draf know where to go?”
Ch’ta  blinked  at  me;  the  question  seemed  too  much  for  him.
“Draf knows.”
“All right.”
I  gave  him  some  more  food  out  of  the  basket,  and  ate  some
myself. I was thirsty, but afraid to get down from my mount to look
for water, for fear I would not be able to get up again. I petted the
draf’s neck, and when he turned  his  sad  eyes  to  me  I  gave  him  a
piece  of  winterfruit.  He  seemed  to  take  this  as  a  signal  of
impatience, and started walking again, chewing as  he  walked  and

rumbling to himself deep in his belly.
The next time I awoke, we had entered the maze.  My astil garb
magnified the  insipid  sun  into  warmth.  Ch’ta  flew  high  overhead,
but  came  down  when  I  called,  in  great,  showy  swoops  that
reminded  me  wrenchingly  of  Hana.  I  stroked  him  when  he  had
settled  on  my  shoulder.  My  hands  were  still  swollen,  but  not  so
much, and had lost their purplish color. “Are you showing the draf
where to go?”
“Yes.”
“You speak draf language?”
“Onfrit,”  Ch’ta  said,  as  if  that  answered  my  question.  For  the
first time I considered how strange it was that Ch’ta was speaking
to me in the language  I  knew.  Eia’s  onfrits  had  always  spoken  to
idre in H’ldat.
“Onfrits speak all languages?”
Ch’ta  licked  his  paw  delicately,  looking  at  me  through  bright
eyes, as if to say disdainfully, “Of  course. Doesn’t everybody know
that?”
The  short  winter  day  ended  and  the  sun  sank  in  the  sky.  We
reached Eia’s cave  before  nightfall.  I  did  not  need  to  ask  Ch’ta  to
drop  down  the  rope  for  me,  for  it  hung  against  the  cliffside.  A
sickness dizzied me as I realized that Eia must  have  left  the  rope
down  that  night  the  Walkers  came,  left  it  down  every  night
regardless  of  ids  own  safety,  so  that  if  I  returned  I  would  know
beyond  doubt  that  I  was  welcome  to  come  in.  So  Teksan  and  his
people had climbed that rope.
The cliffs glowed faintly. The little stream lay frozen in its bed. I
did not want to climb up and go in, knowing that the place would be
inhabited  with  ghosts,  and  perhaps  even  with  dead  bodies.  But  I
was even less eager to spend the night  in  the  sand  with  the  draf,
knowing that Teksan was certainly not far behind me.
I climbed the rope, dragging myself up one handspan at a time.
After the first day, Teksan had  hurt  me  without  actually  injuring
me, for even in his madness he had remembered that he wanted me
to live. But I was exhausted, and unrecovered from the first brutal

beating. It was a long way  to  the  ledge.  I  dragged  myself  over  at
last, as the stars came out above me.
The  cave  was  ravaged,  the  books  scattered  and  shredded,  the
furniture broken up, the food rotting in the storage bins, the  floor
bloodstained.  There  were  no  corpses,  but,  on  the  onfrits’  ledge,
Ch’ta  greeted  and  fussed  over  another,  who  hissed  fiercely  at  me
when I drew near. One of her wings hung at a stiff angle,  broken
and beyond repair. A piled store of dry food lay within her reach. I
guessed by the droppings  collected  in  the  farthest  corner  that  she
had  not  gone  outside  in  a  long  time.  When  I  drew  close,  she
frantically  chattered  her  sharp  teeth  at  me,  but  did  not  give
ground. Injured and traumatized as she was, she was brooding over
an egg.
She  brooded  over  something  else  as  well.  It  was  Ch’ta  who
showed  it  to  me,  hidden  under  the  leaves  and  rags  piled  on  the
ledge: Eia’s manuscript, damaged and dirty, gathered page by page
by  the  loyal  Ch’ta  and  protected  in  the  best  way  an  onfrit  could
manage against the marauders who might come again.
Chapter 9
« ^ » 
Lying  in  Eia’s  tumbled  bed  that  night,  I  learned  a  new  kind  of
loneliness. The blankets were fragrant with id; musk, and even the
scent of my own body lingered faintly. I  had  never  before  been  so
weary, yet rest avoided me.
I awoke late. All my muscles hurt and my back throbbed as if the
crude  farmer’s  boot  had  kicked  it  only  yesterday.  My  wrists  and
ankles had scabbed over, but the joints were stiff.  I felt very  tired.
My  wings  drooped  like  old  rags.  I  would  have  given  much  for  a
Companion:  not  a  lover  even,  just  someone  to  pat  my  shoulder
sympathetically and brew me a cup of hot broth.
I knew  that  it  was  very  important  that  I  avoid  thinking  about
what  had  happened  to  me  in  Teksan’s  cellar.  I  shut  my  burning
eyes and considered my situation. This cave was as much a trap as
a haven. Teksan and his people could not get to me so long as the

rope was up, but neither could I escape. The cave’s supply of usable
food was small, and the water was going stale in the bucket.  I was
not safe here.
If I were a hero, I would have decided to return to L’din to rescue
Eia.  But  when  the  mere  thought  of  Teksan’s  footstep  rustling  on
the  floor  was  enough  to  make  me  wet  myself,  I  could  scarcely
consider myself  a  hero.  Even  if  my  courage  were  not  shattered,  I
could have done little. His sorcery would tell him when I drew near.
Only his heavy sleep and my good luck had made escape possible.
I could not rescue Eia. I could bring ids manuscript and onfrits to
a  safe  place,  where  perhaps  there  were  others  who  could  be  ids
champion. What I could do seemed insignificant to me,  but to do it
was far better than doing nothing at all.
I knew I was too weak to climb the rope more than once. I threw
over  the  cliff  edge  the  scented  blankets,  which  could  each  be
crumpled down to a bundle the size of my fist, a bag of flight food
and hard bread and other dried foodstuff, and Eia’s manuscript, tied
in a bundle. The draf, who was  wandering  about  in  pale  sunlight,
started with surprise at the objects falling from the sky. He spotted
me on the ledge, and rumbled complaint and hunger  at  me.  I  had
nothing to feed him, and the sand was barren.
The  broody  onfrit,  having  lost  mate,  master,  and  the  power  of
flight, lived only for her egg. I was claw marked and bloody before I
succeeded in taking it from her. The egg sheath was much like my
own  wing  membranes,  soft  and  tough,  giving  without  yielding.
Under  the  bleak  gaze  of  the  onfrit,  I  laid  the  warm  egg  very
carefully  in  the  basket,  which  I  had  lined  with  nesting  stuff,  and
stood back. But she cowered where I had put her, all the fight gone
out of her.
“We have to all go to a safe place. Your egg, too.”
The  onfrit  stared,  blank-eyed.  When  I  slipped  my  hands  under
her and picked her up, careful of her injured wing, she lay limp and
unstruggling.  I  put  her  hastily  in  the  basket.  I  was  beginning  to
wonder if I would have to devise a way to incubate the egg myself,
so long was it before she stirred to look under her belly. She settled
herself at last, making anxious trilling noises.

She did not budge when I picked up the basket, or when it rolled
from side to side on my back as I climbed down the cliff. Distracting
the complaining draf with a winterfruit, I loaded him with my gear,
packed into makeshift backbags, and hung the onfrit in her basket
against his side. Ch’ta landed abruptly on my shoulder, ice from the
upper regions of air shimmering in his fur.
I asked, “Did you see people coming?”
“No. No people.”
“Have  you  decided  where  to  go?”  My  muscles  were  trembling.
But I was still ahead of Teksan.
“I  know  the  way.”  Ch’ta  patted  me  reassuringly  with  his
miniature hands.
“All right. I trust you, Ch’ta.”
With  the  woven  rug  I  padded  myself  against  the  draf’s  hard
bones,  but  even  so,  getting  up  onto  his  back  was  an  agony.  I  lay
down  at  last,  my  face  against  the  coarse  fur  of  his  powerful
shoulders, dizzy with effort. Ch’ta warbled. The draf began to move
under me. I looked back at the confused depressions his feet  left in
the  sand.  But  the  helpful  wind  began  to  fill  in  the  marks  of  our
passage, one glittering handful of sand at a time.
 
The color of the glass and of the sand underfoot shifted gradually
from blue to purple. The wind died. For a while I felt warm,  until
vanguard  clouds  extinguished  the  sun.  By  afternoon  the  sky  had
turned  dull,  sullen,  and  snow  heavy.  I  indulged  myself  in  the
futility of trying to decide whether or not a storm would be in my
favor.
The  enigmatic  maze  surrounded  me.  Even  looking  at  it  from
above, as Ch’ta was, surely it was a puzzle beyond solution. Yet the
draf  and  I  did  whatever  the  wise  onfrit  told  us  to  do,  turning,
climbing,  sometimes  seeming  to  be  going  in  circles.  After  the  sun
disappeared behind clouds, I became hopelessly lost, having nothing
on which to base my sense of direction. When we stopped to rest in
the  afternoon,  I  gave  the  draf  a  drink  of  water  in  a  bowl,  and  a
piece  of  fruit  which  he  ate  in  one  bite  and  then  looked  at  me

accusingly.
By  nightfall  it  was  snowing.  Ch’ta  and  I  and  the  draf  and  the
broody  onfrit  all  huddled  together  in  a  makeshift  shelter
constructed  of  a  blanket  and  string  tied  into  Aeyrie-made  pins
which, crammed into fissures in the glass wall, clung there as if by
magic. I had neither fuel nor the means to light it. The onfrits and I
lay together  against the shaggy side of the draf, atop  the  rug  and
under  the  remaining  blankets.  The  food  supply,  shared  among  so
many,  was  rapidly  shrinking.  The  hungry  draf  would  have  a
struggle  of  it  in  the  snow  tomorrow.  How  long  would  the  fragile
tent and the tiny pins hold against the increasing weight of snow?
The survival of the animals and the manuscript depended on my
safety, so I lied to myself that I was safe. My bruises and aches and
deadness of heart had neither healed nor diminished. After only one
day, my journey seemed impossibly long.
I could not help but think of Eia, lying in filth and pain and fear
in  somebody’s  cold  cellar.  I  was  not  certain  how  much  time  had
passed since the night I sent Dulcie to be death’s guide through the
maze. Ten days, at least. How long could Eia endure imprisonment?
Now  that  I  had  escaped,  what  would  happen  to  my  betrayed
Companion? The possibilities, now that I knew Teksan so well, were
awful. I told myself not to think about it any more.
I  will  never  get  to  sleep,  I  thought,  staring  open-eyed  into
darkness,  where  with  hushed,  muffled  sounds  the  snow  drifted.
Ch’ta nuzzled closer into my chest and sighed.
My  feet  were  numb,  but  the  rest  of  me  was  warm.  Pale,  eerie
light illuminated the shaggy edge of the draf, who lay like a weary
monster  with  his  head  tucked  under  the  blankets  a  handbreadth
away  from  mine.  Ch’ta  stirred  against  me.  “Good  morning,  onfrit
friend.”
He chirruped sleepily.
Getting moving was a torturous chore. I had no shoes. My tender
feet  felt  the  cold  snow  like  burning  knives.  The  draf’s  method  of
coping with snow was a  form  of  hibernation,  which  he  abandoned
reluctantly only when I pounded on his ribs with my fists. The pins
were frozen in their fissures, and my fingers froze in working them

free. The broody onfrit snarled at me as I tied her basket to the side
of  the  blinking,  groggy  draf.  Ch’ta  flew  high,  and  came  down  to
report that although he could see the edge of the maze, he was not
at all certain he could get us out of it.
Shaking  with  cold  and  frustration  and  the  blood-drinking
parasite of depression, I wrapped myself in blankets  atop  the  draf
and  swore  at  him  until  he  finally  began  to  follow  the  onfrit
fluttering before us.
The  short  winter  day  dragged  strangely.  The  sun  was  finally
crawling  down  the  side  of  the  sky  when,  like  a  gigantic  painting
within  a  cliff-sized  frame,  a  monochromatic  countryside  frosted
with snow appeared, glittering in the exhausted sunlight. The draf,
catching sight of dead leaves on snow-coated bushes, broke abruptly
into a heavy trot, throwing clots of snow behind.
“Stop!”  I  shouted,  hastily  steadying  the  basket  where  the
unstable onfrit shrieked with rage.  But he did not even slow down
until his mouth was full. Then it was equally impossible to convince
him to travel as he chewed.
I finally gave up beating on his shoulder and slid to the ground.
Behind us a clear trail showed where we  had  crossed  otherwise
untouched snow. I leaned against the trunk of a stunted tree, which
spitefully threw  a handful of snow at me.  Ch’ta landed on  me,  his
experienced  claws  gripping  my  shoulder  gently.  “Ch’ta,”  I  said
automatically. “You got us out. You do good work. Thank you.”
“Sad?” he asked.
“Tired. I am so tired.”
“Delan,” he warbled affectionately. “Long traveling.”
“Too long.”
He licked my fur,  and I petted  him.  Slowly  my  cloud  of  misery
faded in the warmth of sympathy. The shadows were getting long,
but perhaps we would find a farmer’s shed where we could shelter
the night. Maybe I could  even  boil  some  water  and  have  a  cup  of
hot tea.
I cried out, jerking  upright.  With  a  startled  shriek,  Ch’ta  flung
himself  off  my  shoulder.  Snow  dislodged  by  my  motion  showered

around me. And then the Rope had me.
 
I fled on the draf down unmarked ways,  through the  scrub  and
the snow, leaving signs of my passage that a mere child could have
followed.  What  did  it  matter?  Teksan  knew  exactly  where  I  was.
How long would it take him to open a Door, I wondered? How  long
before he and his people came walking out of thin air  to  surround
me?
I knew it was hopeless, and yet I fled.
We stumbled upon a road in the darkness. A little later we came
to a farm, where a herd of drafs standing in the snow rumbled at us
as  we  passed  their  haystack.  The  windows  of  the  stick  and  mud
farmhouse were boarded shut for winter,  a Walker family sleeping
peacefully within.
I unloaded the draf in the middle of the walkway,  and sent him
to join the strange herd. I picked the lock of a storehouse crammed
with equipment. In a sheltered place, shielded by wooden boxes and
over-hung by a torn tarp, I hid the onfrit in her basket. Beside her I
laid  Eia’s  manuscript,  and  all  the  food  that  remained.  It  was  not
much, but maybe it was enough to sustain one small onfrit through
the winter.
“If you are  very  quiet  they  will  not  find  you,”  I  said.  “Wait  for
Ch’ta. He will come back for you.”
Ch’ta  had  told  me,  as  well  as  an  onfrit  could,  how  to  find  the
Community of the Triad. Fly east, he had said, until you get to the
great water, and then north, many days, until there is golden glass
and a high tower.  It sounded like a long way  to  go,  but  the  Triad
was  far  closer  than  any  of  the  Aeyrie  Ulas.  Now  I  knew  I  would
never make it even that far.
Perhaps I had always known it. Before I ever left Eia’s cave I had
used ids pens and paper to write an account of what had happened
to myself, and to Eia, and to Ula t’Fon. I tied it to Ch’ta’s leg now,
and bid him to go on without me, and to tell Eia’s friends where ids
manuscript  and  the  injured  onfrit  were  hidden.  I  watched  him
disappear into the twilight, in much the  same  way  I  had  watched
Dulcie disappear. But this time I knew the future all too well.

I felt very alone when he was gone.
Out  of  strips  of  blanket  cut  with  my  knife  I  fashioned  myself
some  protection  for  my  feet.  Then  I  set  about  putting  as  much
distance  as  I  could  between  myself  and  the  treasures  over  which
the  female  onfrit  brooded.  For  speed’s  sake,  and  because  of  my
limited  night  vision,  I  followed  the  wagontrack.  I  still  traveled
northward,  for  part  of  me  persisted  in  behaving  as  if  the  greater
the distance between myself and my enemy’s lair the safer I would
be. A single moon ascended to mock me:  the Walker’s lucky moon.
My wings became heavy behind me, dragging me down and a little
backward with each forward step.
The cold night grew colder. I shivered in spasms. My feet  felt as
numb and heavy and shapeless as chunks of wood. I walked on, too
tired  to  feel  anything,  too  stubborn  to  give  up.  The  road  ran
through  a  little  wood,  with  the  trees  naked  under  their  crust  of
snow. I passed several farms,  and came to a bridge over a narrow
river that ran in such silence that I feared to think of how deep it
was.
“We  sink  like  stones,”  Gein  had  said  to  me.  But  I  was  so
obstinate that I crossed the bridge without pausing, holding in my
mind a fearful image of myself going down fighting, with a bloody
weapon in my hand.
The  idea  of  actually  hurting  someone  was  so  awful  that  it
awakened my intellect and I pondered for a long time the curiosity
of it. I had been raised by a pacifist people. Why did I carry a blade
then? Why did I love it so?  Of  course,  the  weapon  symbolized  not
violence, but my longing to have control over my own destiny. How
could  I  have  gone  through  life  believing  I  wanted  nothing  more
than to be left alone? It was not true at all. I wanted, oh I wanted
many things, passionately, longingly.
When I fell down, I had already  been  stumbling  in  the  ruts  for
some time.
 
“Aeyrie magic begins where Walker magic ends.”
“Is this some kind of riddle? You monsters are all alike.”

“Don’t  you  deserve  better  than  to  be  eaten  alive  by  the
Animavore?”
I could not breathe. The Rope choked the air in my lungs and the
blood in my body. Deserve? I thought stupidly, as if I did not know
the meaning of the word.
The internal voice insisted, “Don’t you deserve better?”
“I—deserve—better.”
And then I knew what to do. Aeyrie magic begins where Walker
magic ends. With the maze through which Teksan could not see and
the doors Teksan could not open.
I could scarcely move,  so  tightly  did  the  Rope  have  me.  In  cold
and  ungiving  darkness  I  lay,  bound  many  times  over.  I  knew  he
would come soon; I could sense his will bending the pathways of the
Universe. And he would consume me this time.  With his  pain  and
his fear he would  easily  destroy  me,  take  me  beyond  mere  death,
make me live on, but crippled beyond recovery
“I  deserve  better!”  I  said.  My  voice  whispered  weakly  in  the
snow-still  night.  Painfully  I  moved  my  arm.  My  entire  body  was
heavy and nerveless. My limbs were scarcely more mobile than the
limbs of a tree. Yet I moved. My hands had gone numb. I drew my
glass knife but could not hold onto it. It fell into the snow.
I found the knife again, not by touch or sight, for neither of these
senses served me any longer, but by some other way,  sheer luck it
seemed. Did I actually see the Rope? I felt it so vividly I seemed to
see it, black and thick, pinning my wings, choking the breath in my
throat, holding captive that precious, fading flame in me.  Suddenly
I  knew  my  immobility  for  what  it  was:  it  was  anger,  vast  and
frozen anger.
Surely such great anger could be power.
I  shouted  aloud  in  my  vision:  “I  am  poor,  I  have  always  been
poor, yet you would  take  the  little  I  have!  You  will  regret  having
ever met me, Teksan Lafall!”
I brought  my  knife  down  on  the  Rope,  the  Rope  of  his  will.  It
shredded away like smoke in wind. And then I was myself, lying on
my face in the snow. I was cold and tired, but  not  so  that  I  could

not get up again.
I stood up, swaying and dizzy. I stared at the knife in my hand.
It glittered in the starlight. Suddenly my heart leapt with hope in
my chest.
In the distance, I could see something, not light exactly,  but the
suggestion of it. It did not lie in the direction I had been going, but I
left the road and headed toward  it.  Right  there  where  I  had  been
lying,  Teksan  would  construct  his  Door.  Perhaps  he  had  been
waiting for me to wear myself out in fleeing him. But he would not
delay any longer, for he would have realized as quickly as I that I
had cut my bindings.
Walking unsteadily on wobbly knees, I crossed rutted, icy fields.
My feet could not feel the ground. I thought about each step I took.
I hoped the ice would leave little sign of my passage for the hunters
to follow.
The light I had seen originated in a farmstead, a big one, with a
huge  barn.  I  walked  between  dark,  silent  buildings:  sheds  and
houses lying like abandoned ruins under their unbroken coating of
snow. Behind me a line of footprints showed where I had come out
of the field. I went to the house where the single air lamp  burned
through a window whose boarding was  falling  down.  Nothing  was
moving. No doubt someone had lit the lamp while looking for  food
and then had neglected to put it out again. I found a door. As with
most  farmhouses,  it  was  not  locked.  I  went  in  and  shut  the  door
again behind me.
I found no relief  from  the  cold,  but  it  was  food  I  wanted.  I  ate
some  winterfruit,  and  a  single  piece  of  hardbread.  Resisting  the
temptation to eat more, or at least bring some with me, I went out
again and stood very still, listening to the echoing emptiness of the
night.
My  ears  rang  with  the  silence  and  ached  with  cold.  Faint  as  a
whisper,  the  sound  of  a  hushed  voice  floated  across  the  field.
Another  responded,  harsh  and  impatient.  My  stomach  twisted:  it
was Teksan.
I forced myself to move slowly despite my panic. Even the snow
crunching under my feet seemed loud One step at a time I crossed

the yard to the barn, and bit by bit cracked the door open enough to
let me in. The barn was crammed with dark, ghostly shapes: plows
and wagons, draf harnesses hanging on the walls, it was a ladder I
needed, a long ladder. Shaking with cold and anxiety, I walked the
length  of  the  building,  peering  into  the  shadows  and  sometimes
feeling with my hands. I finally found three fragile pickers’ ladders,
but I needed one which was longer and sturdier. How did the height
sensitive Walkers get to the barn roof to repair it?
I went out the back door and listened  again.  I  heard  nothing.  I
walked on the bare ground under the eaves, leaving faint footprints
as  I  circled  the  outer  wall.  There  at  last  I  found  a  way  to  go  up,
more a stairway than a ladder, built firmly into the wooden wall.
I climbed. My legs were weak and weary. By the time I reached
the  handholds  at  the  top  and  dragged  myself  onto  the  roof,
showering snow into the shadows, my knees quivered with fatigue
and  fear.  Fortunately,  the  roof  did  not  have  much  of  a  slope.  I
crawled on the crust of slippery ice to the edge facing the road.
The land glowed silver under faint moonlight. Shadows wandered
on both sides of the road. Clearly Teksar rightly believed I was too
weak  to  travel  much  farther.  Even  at  this  distance  I  saw  the
weirdness in the air  which  was  the  Door,  shimmering  faintly  and
writhing with storm.
I crept to the edge of the roof farthest from my hunters. With my
knife, I dug out solid depressions for my feet, and then I unwrapped
the  strips  of  blanket  that  had  been  serving  me  for  shoes  and  left
them  in  a  tangled  pile  on  the  snow  to  mystify  whoever  came  up
here to make the repairs in the spring. I already carried little: one
of the blankets for warmth, a pocketful of attaching pins, and some
twine. I left it all, keeping only my weightless astil garment and my
knife tied down in its sheath.
I stood up on the edge of the roof.  The  ground  seemed  very  far
away.  Eia’s  voice  spoke  patiently  in  my  memory:  “It  is  gaining
altitude which uses your energy. But the higher you get, the longer
you can glide. On a good day, you can stay in the air from  sunrise
to sunset.”
“But I am afraid,” I said silently to the Eia inside of me.

“I will count to five.  If you haven’t jumped by  then,  I  will  push
you.”
I jumped. And the wind lifted me up.
Chapter 10
« ^ » 
I collapsed into landing  near  a  remote  farmhouse.  When  I  opened
my eyes, I lay where I had collapsed the second time, inside, on the
floor,  near  the  stove.  I  vaguely  remembered  the  tinderstick
dropping  over  and  over  again  from  my  numb  and  lifeless  fingers,
and  my  heart  thundering  with  panic  in  my  throat.  Then,  lucky
spark  at  last,  catching  in  tinder  with  maddening  reluctance  as  I
sighed  on  it.  Now  the  stove  radiated  warmth,  the  coals  cracked
softly in the silence, and I shivered in a huddle on the bare floor. A
purloined  winterfruit  lay  in  the  dust  where  I  had  dropped  it.  I
reached for it, my shaking hand  heavy  on  my  strengthless  arm.  I
ate it as a draf would: in two bites, frantic with hunger.
Later I was able to crawl to the stove and put in more fuel from
the  wood  basket  by  the  wall.  I  puffed  into  the  firebox,  and  got  a
faceful of ashes. In the depth of the cooling stove the secret red of a
coal’s heart sent out a tentative tendril of flame.
I  crawled  to  the  kitchen,  where  I  filled  a  bowl  with  fruit  and
hardbread.  Then  I  crawled  back  to  the  stove,  and  ate  until  my
stomach was a pain within me.  I knew there were things I needed
to do. But as the renewed warmth crept into my fur,  and dug deep
into my exhausted muscles, it made my very  bones go limp  in  my
body. I could do nothing; I could go no farther. I could not even care
that  my  feet  were  still  numb,  or  that  the  floor  was  not  kind  to
bruises and worn out muscles throbbing with  pain.  I  curled  under
my wings, and slept.
In  the  afternoon  I  took  a  few  shaky  steps.  I  had  frostbite,  of
course. I could not tell yet how bad it was. I had done something to
my right side which hurt abominably  and  made  my  wing  droop.  I
bound the wing up with cloth, easing the pain somewhat. I ate, and
lay down and slept again.

It  was  nearly  evening  before  my  anxiety  bestirred  itself  again.
Teksan would guess that I had taken to the air, and that I could not
have  flown  very  far.  If  I  stayed  long  where  I  was,  he  would
certainly find me. Perhaps even now he was drawing near.
I  wanted  to  shovel  out  the  ashes  from  the  stove  and  fill  the
basket  anew  with  fuel,  to  sweep  up  my  crumbs  and  peelings  and
wash  the  bowl.  But  apologizing  silently  to  the  people  who  lived
there, I left the mess as it was. Walking heavily to  make  my  feet
break through the frozen crust, I laid a false trail out to one of the
fields.  Then  I  wrapped  my  feet  in  stolen  rags  and  backtracked  a
roundabout  way,  walking  softly  atop  the  crust,  leaving  only  faint
depressions for a trail.
I  stole  supplies  from  the  household  which  involuntarily  hosted
me: a tinderstick, an armload of blankets from a storage cupboard,
a worn pair of workshoes, and a basket of food. I imagined that the
people  who  lived  here  were  kind-hearted  and  honest  folk,  who
would forgive my thievery when they realized that I had taken only
things  for  survival.  It  was  not  just  for  the  sake  of  my  uneasy
conscience  that  I  imagined  this.  If  I  could  not  believe  that
fellowship and kindness survived in this indifferent and cold world,
I could not have continued my journey.
Night  fell,  and  with  it  the  chill  turned  again  to  bitter,  heart
stopping cold. I headed for the woods.
I laid two more false trails among the trees, and had picked out a
possible refuge: an upthrusting spike of glass which blacked out the
stars on the horizon. The night was still young when I heard, in the
crisp,  echoing  night,  the  sound  of  my  pursuers’  distant  shouting
voices. The sound wove among the saplings. At times, they seemed
eerily, impossibly close.
Despite the voices trailing me, I kept walking at my steady pace,
eating as I traveled and keeping my eye on the red star which gave
me direction. I came upon a trail beaten into snow by the feet  of a
woods  creature  as  solitary  and  unsleeping  as  I.  Welcoming  the
cover  for  my  own  tracks,  I  followed  it.  The  five  moons  hung
overhead,  each  of  them  a  sliver  the  size  of  a  finger  nail.  My
footsteps crunched loudly in the snow.

I had not rested long enough. My brief energy burned itself  out
like dry grass in a stove. I stumbled as I walked. I dreamed awake.
I was in the baths at Ula t’Fon, where it was warm,  and soft,  and
dark.  Someone  was  tending  me,  hands  stroking  slowly  and  softly
through  my  fur.  My  wings  were  wet  with  oil.  The  hands  touched
them,  reawakening  the  extraordinary  sensitivity  which  after
Teksan’s subtleties I had feared forever lost. I turned onto my side
and  reached  up  to  touch  warm,  fragrant  fur,  a  thoughtful,
fine-boned face with a haunting, crooked smile—
The gulf of my loneliness gaped open under my feet, and I fell.
I was on my knees in the snow with my face in my hands when I
heard  the  Walkers  coming,  heard  their  voices  muttering  on  the
rising wind.
“There it is!”
“Kill the damned thing and be done with monsters, I say!”
I struggled to my feet with my blade in my hand. There were two
of them,  dressed in thick jackets against the cold, running heavily
out of the shadows, puffing white smoke out of their mouths. When
they overran me, I was still untangling myself from  the blankets I
had  wrapped  around  myself  for  warmth.  I  flung  my  little  weight
forward  behind  my  knife,  and  jabbed,  and  met  resistance.  One  of
them yelped. Then my hand was empty, my glass blade was flying,
and  I  was  being  wrestled,  half  fainting  and  crying  out  with  pain
from my outraged injuries, down to the ground.
I  brought  up  my  knee.  It  rammed  into  something,  and  in  the
haze  a  Walker  grunted  with  pain  and  cursed  furiously.  Then  ice
cold metal scratched at my throat, and I went limp.
“Kill it!”
“Teksan said to—”
“We have the other one.”
I  said,  “Dean.  I  saved  your  crunchfruit  plants  from  suckbugs.
Remember?”
There was silence, strange and explosive.
“I am a person.  I  am  a  person  just  like  you.  I’m  cold  and  tired

and scared and angry, just like you.”
“Shut  up!”  Knuckles  slammed  into  my  mouth.  And  then—I  did
not understand what was happening. There were incoherent  cries.
The ice cold blade at my throat disappeared abruptly. The bruising
grips  on  my  arms  disappeared  as  well.  I  scrabbled  across  snow,
grabbed my blade in my hand again, and did not even look around
myself until I was on my feet.
Something  huge  and  black  and  six-legged  was  chasing  the
Walkers among the saplings. They were screaming.
I ran in the other direction, twisting between  trees  and  leaping
over frozen  brooks. I ran until my breath was a pain in my chest,
until my feet tangled in the star-bright snow and my breath sobbed
in my burning  throat.  And  still  I  ran,  up  a  hillock  and  through  a
clinging thicket, until I came to an open, flat place where the snow
lay smooth as the frosting on a tea-cake. I fell down. I knew I would
die of cold if I lay long in the snow. I did not want to die, but I could
not stand up. At last, I lost interest and struggled no more.
I  heard  the  monster  coming.  Its  six-footed  progress  made  a
rhythmic confusion of crisp noises  as  each  step  broke  through  the
crust.  It  drew  close.  I  heard  a  soft,  musical  rumble,  like  distant
thunder.
My  mouth  tasted  of  blood.  “Leave  me  alone.  Please.  Just  leave
me alone.”
Breath whuffled against my shoulder. Somehow I found it in me
to  turn  my  head.  The  monster  was  big  as  a  draf.  Slanted  eyes
glowed yellow in the moonlight. Its breath steamed around it.
Inspired by the size of it, I raised my head further, offering it my
throat.  Its  head  came  down,  huge  and  shaggy,  with  white-tipped
pointed ears standing out in the darkness. I thought I did not care,
but I shuddered when it touched me.
A hot,  rough  tongue  brushed  my  neck.  “Brother,”  the  monster
said, in a distorted, growly, hesitant voice, almost shyly.
Cold  air  burned  down  my  throat  into  aching  lungs.  I  could  no
longer feel the cold of the snow. I said hoarsely, “Yes.” This did not
seem the time to try  to  explain  to  it  that  I  was  both  brother  and

sister.
“Hurt?”
“Yes.”
It  lay  down  beside  me,  full  length.  Its  breath  steamed  and
burned on my face. The warmth of its body was a shock against my
freezing flesh. “Ride me home.”
“You will not hurt me?”
The monster seemed shocked. “Hurt you! No.”
To  move  was  agony.  I  struggled  myself  out  of  the  mess  I  had
made of the beautiful snow, and dragged myself onto the monster’s
narrow, muscular back. It had a mane like  mine.  I  dug  my  numb
hands into it, and wrapped my aching legs around its middle as  it
stood up, graceful despite my weight.  It turned its head to look at
me anxiously as if expecting me to fall off. “How far is it?” I asked.
“Far? Not far.”
“All right.”  I rested my head against a lean, muscular shoulder.
It  shifted  smoothly  under  me,  moving  as  sinuously  as  water.  Its
feet  crunched  in  the  snow.  Its  warmth  began  to  warm  me.  All
around  me,  the  night  crackled  with  frost.  I  shut  my  eyes,  and
trusted. Why not?
He lived partway up  the  spike  of  glass  where  I  had  thought  to
find refuge.  I had to climb the steep trail on my  own  very  limited
strength,  but  he  clung  behind  me  in  impossible  positions,  helping
me  with  his  many  limbs,  of  which  he  seemed  to  always  have  at
least one spare, and encouraging me with musical growls that had
no threat in them.
He inhabited a spot where the elemental crystal had split open, a
cave  like  Eia’s,  only  narrower  and  higher.  He  had  closed  off  the
opening with  a  crudely  constructed  twig  and  mud  wall,  and  hung
over  the  doorway  a  flap  which  had  once  been  a  farmer’s  tarp.
Within,  it  was  crowded  with  primitive  twig  baskets  containing  a
winter store of food: nuts primarily, and dried fruit black as coal.
When  I  awoke  from  my  first  exhausted  sleep,  my  blankets
covered  me,  and  my  tinderstick  lay  beside  me.  The  monster  who
had  befriended  me  had  apparently  gone  back  before  daybreak  to

recover  my  lost  supplies.  He  (in  the  morning  light  I  saw  that  he
was male) was asleep next to me now,  as warm  as any fire.  I was
feverish  and  weak.  But  he  awoke  at  the  change  in  my  breathing
and delicately offered to help me outside so I could relieve myself.
His  forepaws  were  short-fingered  hands.  He  could  rear  up  the
front third of his body so his torso was as erect as any Walker’s. If I
had  first  seen  him  in  this  position  I  might  have  thought  him  a
creature from legend: half Walker, half draf.
I stood on the narrow path with his forelimb around my waist to
support  me  on  my  unsteady  feet.  My  urine  smoked  in  the  bitter
chill.  Far  below  me,  the  gray  and  white  wood  cast  stark,  long
shadows  in  the  cold  red  sunset.  Beyond  the  edge  of  the  wood,
brilliant  cliffs  broke  through  earth  and  aimed  skyward,  red  glass
burning  under  the  red  sky.  The  farmsteads  were  almost  invisible
under the smothering snow.
“What is your name?” I asked as he helped me back to shelter.
“Oorrrchth,” he said.
“Och?”
His  huge,  dark  green  eyes  sparked  with  amusement.  “Yes,”  he
said, though my attempt to repeat his guttural, musical growl had
obviously  been  an  utter  failure.  He  lay  me  down  and  tucked  the
blankets  around  me,  and  brought  me  food  from  his  stores,  and
water in a leaky bark bucket.
“I am Delan,” I said with my mouth full.
“Oorrrchth bring wood. Make fire, make Delan warm.”
“Do you eat meat?”
His expressive brows lifted. “Meat?”
“You have big teeth.”
He bared them.  The incisors were pointed, but the rest of them
were flat as a draf’s.  “Bite  enemy,  no  eat.  Crack  nuts.  Sunmelon,
apricocks.”
His command of the Walker tongue was extremely limited, but I
discovered that he spoke far more H’ldat than I. I was definitely not
the first Aeyrie he had met. His own rumbly, musical language was

entirely  beyond  me.  I  heard  enough  of  it  to  figure  out  that  his
people might be primitive, but they were far from simple.
He washed his paws one by one in the bark bucket after  he had
eaten. “Why did you befriend me?” I asked sleepily.
“Delan brother,” he replied, as if that explained everything.
“You chased the Walkers away, but you took me home.”
“Walkers bad. Put people in cage. Other Delan in cage,  too.  You
open door. You open Och’s door. You say, Och is my friend. Be free.”
I gathered that an Aeyrie had befriended him once, and therefore
Och in turn had befriended me. “What happened to Other Delan?”
“Walkers  come.  Run,  fly.  Never  see  Other  Delan  again.”  He
sighed. “Many seasons. Spring, summer, winter. Many, many.”
“Where is your birth home?”
“Go over water,  far away.”  He sighed again.  “Want  to  go  home
again! Want other Och.”
He  fetched  fuel  as  he  had  promised,  but  the  fire  he  helped  me
build  near  the  door  did  not  generate  much  warmth.  Och  was
nocturnal,  and  went  out  when  it  was  full  dark  to  check  his
territory.  I  huddled  miserably  by  the  open  flames,  too  cold  and
anxious to sleep well, starting awake nervously every time the frost
cracked or the wind whispered. Was that Teksan?  Was  he  coming
for  me?  But  the  only  one  who  came  was  Och,  and  I  heard  him
singing as he climbed the steep path, a sad tune in a minor key. He
slid in gracefully, scarcely moving the tarp, shielding his eyes from
the firelight. I put  my  arm  around  his  huge  head  as  he  lay  down
beside  me.  His  tangled,  frosty  mane  grew  wet  as  the  ice  thawed
under my hand. I thawed in the warmth and safety of his presence,
and slept deeply.
I  awoke  when  the  sun  rose,  throwing  a  pale  glimmer  of  light
across  the  rough  floor.  Och’s  fur  was  the  color  of  smoke.  He
rumbled  with  pleasure  deep  in  his  throat  as  I  stroked  his  long,
curved backbone.
He lifted his head to groom  my fur with his tongue as if I were
the Other  Och he longed for.  But  there  was  little  we  could  do  for
each other’s loneliness. He was Och, and I was Aeyrie; we were not

enough like each other. All we could do was keep each other warm.
I slept through another day. When I awoke again, my fever  was
gone  and  my  strength  was  returning.  For  the  first  time  since
Teksan’s  cellar,  I  felt  resilient  and  hopeful.  “I  have  to  go  in  the
morning,” I said, as Och cracked open nuts with a rock and I picked
out the meats for our evening meal.
Och  crushed  a  nut  as  easily  as  if  it  were  a  crisp  piece  of
hardbread. “Not stay?” His voice was very soft.
“Want Other Delan.”
Och  looked  up  at  me,  out  of  alien  yet  human  eyes.  “I  know.  I
know.”
“I  will  come  back.  I  will  find  out  where  your  home  across  the
water is. I will come back, and tell you how to get there. I promise.”
At daybreak, Och came home from  his  night-long  wandering  to
report  that  he  had  encountered  no  one  about  in  his  woods.  The
Walkers  who  had  been  pursuing  me  had  vanished,  and  had  not
come back. I hoped they assumed that I had been killed and carried
off by the monster.
He  gave  me  a  ride  to  the  edge  of  the  trees.  “Hurt,”  he  said
miserably as I hugged him good-bye. It was not easy to walk away
from him. I turned back once. Half invisible in the shadows, he still
watched me,  though the rising sun must have pained his sensitive
eyes.
 
Guideless  and  mapless,  I  followed  the  roads  as  well  as  I  could,
using the sun to give me direction. East and north I went,  walking
a long, dreary, lonely way, on feet which never ceased to hurt, in a
haze of weariness which never entirely lifted. I stole food and fuel,
and  used  many  a  kitchen  stove  without  permission.  I  might  have
been the only person alive in the world, so silent was it, so still, so
empty. I welcomed the sight of a herd of drafs, huddled against the
shelter of a barn wall. They were alive. Their breath and body heat
laid  mist  over  their  shaggy  backs.  I  did  not  even  consider  taking
one with me, but the reassurance that I was not alone in the world
made me glad.

As I lay down to rest that  first  night  after  leaving  Och,  on  the
wooden  floor  of  yet  another  farmhouse  filled  with  hibernating
Walkers, I could not sleep. As soon as I closed my eyes, I knew that
someone  was  following  me.  It  was  a  knowledge  beyond  reason,  a
physical  knowledge  that  throbbed  in  my  blood.  Tenaciously,
heartlessly, tirelessly, someone was following me.  My follower was
not close,  but  was  getting  closer.  How  my  follower  knew  where  I
was I could not begin to guess. How  I knew that  someone  was  on
my  trail  was  even  more  of  a  mystery.  I  scolded  my  active
imagination. I told myself that it was my inheritance from Teksan,
that because of him I was unable to believe in my own safety. But I
could not sleep.
My certainty never left me; not that night and not in all the days
and nights which followed. By the second night I was tired enough
that it didn’t matter.  I  slept  anyway,  but  in  a  room  with  an  exit,
with my knife beside me. In the morning I panicked and took flight,
walking at a grueling pace along a smooth road. My blood told me
that my pursuer lost ground. But I had worn myself out, and  so  I
lost  my  advantage  in  the  afternoon  when  weariness  slowed  me
down.
I decided to pretend that I was playing a game. All I had to do to
win  it  was  to  keep  ahead  of  the  one  following  me.  I  steadied  my
pace. I had a long way to go.
By  the  fourth  day,  my  anxiety  was  dulled  by  the  monotony  of
walking.  My  stolen  shoes  did  not  fit  well,  and  I  had  wonderfully
painful blisters to distract me. I slept soundly at night. Eventually I
was  laughing  at  myself:  how  ridiculous  this  game  was,  this
imaginary  pursuer  and  the  strange  compulsion  to  keep  ahead  of
him. But I did not stop walking, though I was footsore and all my
muscles  hurt,  though  my  torn  flight  muscle  throbbed  miserably,
though  I  had  lost  weight  rapidly  until  my  ribs  stood  out  sharply
under my clothes and fur.
In my imagination, I began to lose ground. I could not go as far
or cover as much distance as I had been able to at the beginning. I
thought of stealing a draf, but could not bring myself to do it. I felt
guilty enough about the hardbread and  winterfruit  and  coal,  none
of  which  I  had  properly  earned.  Unwilling  to  trust  the  certainty

which, much like the wings on my back, had sprung into existence
unexpected and unexplained, I heeded the advice of my guilt. It was
a mistake I probably could not have avoided, but I regretted it soon
enough.
Ahead  of  me,  mountains  appeared,  distant  and  hazy  points  on
the horizon. The snow melted slowly. A brief snow flurry dusted the
ground  again,  and  miniscule,  perfect  crystals  hung  suspended  for
long moments in my fur before suddenly being transformed to drops
of  water.  The  sun  came  out.  I  hesitated  at  a  crossroad,  trying  to
decide between a road which went more or less northward, and one
which  went  due  east.  I  had  lost  track  of  the  days  I  had  been
walking; but it did seem I should be getting near the ocean by now.
If so, the easterly road would be the one to take.
I stood there longer than I really needed to. I was awfully tired.
That mysterious  thing  inside  of  me  warned  me  to  look  back  at
the  way  I  had  come.  The  road  I  had  been  following  stretched
straight and flat behind me, overhung by a few barren trees.
Far away I saw a suggestion of motion. My heartbeat froze in my
throat.  Steady-paced,  making  no  attempt  to  hide,  my  follower
traveled down the middle of the road, walking step for step in  my
very tracks: the one I would not believe in, the one I had named a
mere shadow.
I took the easterly road. The dusting of snow had melted, and I
walked  carefully  on  frozen  places,  to  leave  no  mark.  This  was  a
stony land, with great chunks of red-orange glass lying in immense
broken  piles.  I  had  passed  an  occasional  kipsfold  and  attendant
house, but otherwise the land was uninhabited. The night before,  I
had slept in the open, so exhausted that even the bitter cold had not
kept me awake.
My  heart  pounded.  At  last,  out  of  fear,  I  obeyed  my  internal
prompting.  I  left  the  road  abruptly.  Knife-edge  sharp  boulders
defied me to try to climb them. Growing up in the Glass Mountains
had  not  prepared  me  for  this:  even  the  tough-skinned  Digan-lai
were  too  often  injured  or  even  killed  by  glass.  I  went  slowly,
thinking about each step, careful of my balance. Frost crunched in
shadows where the sun had never shown.

Soon the road had disappeared behind me.  I told myself I would
cut across to the northerly road, and leave my tracker  to assume I
had continued east. But the seer within me told me he would not be
fooled, for he, too,  was guided from  within, and  needed  no  sign  to
follow.
The  day  was  not  much  older  before  I  was  utterly  disoriented,
without landmarks to refer to, and without sensible shadows to tell
me what direction the sun was going. I struggled onward, stopping
only  to  wrap  my  hands  for  protection  against  the  sharp  edges,
consoling myself with the certainty that my follower, if he was still
behind me, was having as hard a time of it as I.
Suddenly, the sun was gone, and I was shivering with cold. The
sky  had  filled  abruptly  with  black  clouds  Soon  the  first  flakes  of
snow floated, white and dizzying in the  darkening  day,  landing  to
cling like tufts of white fur to the barren glass.
I had no shelter, little food, and no fuel. I said out loud, as if the
voice  inside  of  me  was  not  myself  but  a  misguiding  other,  “Why
have  you  led  me  into  such  dangerous  land,  into  the  teeth  of  the
storm?”
The stranger within me replied calmly, This way lies safety.
I  laughed  harshly.  But  there  was  nothing  to  do  but  walk  on,
uselessly cursing weather and bad luck, trying not to heed the panic
thundering  in  my  throat.  Silently,  relentlessly,  the  snow  fell.
Behind me, the pursuer stalked, unmystified by the complex way  I
had taken, slowed somewhat but not as much as I.
Day  sank  into  an  early  night.  I  edged  around  a  deadly  corner
that I could scarcely even see, and gradually realized there were no
more boulders ahead of me. My night blind eyes could not see what
lay  ahead,  whether  flat  land  or  precipice.  I  remembered  how  the
areas  of  broken  boulders  had  lain  in  north-south  lines  across  the
land,  like  hedgerows,  with  strips  of  comparably  opened  spaces
between. I turned left, with the nearly invisible broken glass at one
side to give me direction. I brushed the snow  out  of  my  eyes,  and
kept walking.
The darkness moved with snow.  When  I  became  dizzy,  I  closed
my eyes and made my way by feel, with my numbed hand dragging

along  glass  and  my  numbed  feet  setting  down  carefully,  step  by
step. Time slowed, and almost seemed to stop. I set down my foot,
settled it firmly, and picked up the other. I slid my hand along the
rough  side  of  the  glass  boulder,  beginning  to  shift  my  weight
forward.
My hand slid into empty air. My foot set down on a smooth slope,
and  I  was  slipping  in  the  snow,  falling  strangely  slowly,  gasping
with pain as my injured wing struggled to save me.  There seemed
an  infinity  of  time  in  which  to  think,  to  feel  the  muscle’s  ragged
pain like an arrow in my side, to shout silently my helpless despair.
And then the shuddering shock of glass sliced into my fragile flesh.
Chapter 11
« ^ » 
A dark  blotch  spread  across  the  white  and  glittering  snow.  Three
half moons hovered in a patch of sky. A voice shouted, echoing and
shattering in the brittle air: “Where are you? (Are you? Are you?)”
Snow  flurried  across  shadows.  The  moons  again,  ghostly  behind
shredding clouds. A lone Walker deliberately and  implacably  came
through the snow, step by step.
My  voice  cried  out  hoarsely.  The  Walker  multiplied  into  three.
Why were they making me feel this pain? Why didn’t they leave me
alone and let me sleep?
Liquid fire burned in my throat. “Swallow,” a voice ordered.
I cracked  open  my  eyes,  choking.  My  body  was  half  lifted.  My
head rested against a padded shoulder. Above and beside me I saw
a Walker face outlined by lamplight but hidden in darkness.
Cold metal rapped my teeth. “Swallow.”
“Leave me alone,” I mumbled feebly.  But I swallowed.  My  body
spasmed with terror and pain. I knew what Teksan would do to me!
I spotted  a  shred  of  my  sleeve,  black  and  stiff  with  frozen  blood.
Why hadn’t I hurt myself worse, and died?
The chest against which I lay moved in a deep breath. “Despair?”
the person said. It  was  a  soft  chest,  much  too  soft  to  be  a  man’s.

Someone else crouched over me, gripping my glass-sliced arm. That
one  spoke,  liquid,  questioning  words.  Someone  near  my  feet  also
said  something  in  H’ldat.  Walkers,  I  protested  to  myself,  do  not
speak H’ldat.
The Walker woman’s fingers burned hot against my chilled skin.
“Feili. Maybe id will trust an Aeyrie. Tell idre who we are.”
“Delan, we are Eia’s friends. We are from the Triad.”
I  turned  my  head  to  peer  up  at  the  speaker,  stupid  with
bewilderment.  The  triangular  face  above  me  was  outlined  by
lantern light. The gold  mane  flowed  out  from  ids  face,  burning  in
the lantern light. Pale wings glowed  against  the  black  sky.  Sharp
bones; bright eyes, an Aeyrie constructed of flame.
“Ch’ta?” My voice was hoarse with cold.
“He is guiding the others,” said the Walker  who  half  lay  beside
me.
I turned my head again. “But—”
“Guesswork  put  us  within  your  reach.  But  I  knew  when  you
were  near,  there  was  no  need  to  search.  Your  spirit  was  like  a
beacon in darkness. And you turned your way  toward us, as if you
sensed our coming as clearly as I did yours.”
I said, “I have a stranger in me,  a  person  who  knows…”  But  it
took  too  much  effort  to  try  to  explain  when  I  did  not  myself
understand it.
“Never mind,” the woman said. “It is not important. We reached
you in time. We can unpuzzle it later.”
“There is someone following me.”
The Aeyrie called Feili spoke, ids softly accented voice awakening
the warmth  of kinship in  me.  “The  Stalker  follows  you  no  longer.
Do not be concerned. You are truly safe.”
I  lay  quiet.  Something  very  strange  had  happened.  Perhaps
someday I would  understand  it.  Right  now  I  did  not  greatly  care.
The person who had spoken little chafed my feet  with snow until I
began to have some feeling in them,  a  pain  which  I  recognized  as
far better than numbness. I asked suddenly, “Will I get  to  meet  a

Mer?”
The Walker woman’s chest shuddered with kindly laughter. “Yes,
child, I promise you. Already, she wants to meet you as well.” The
padded jacket against my cheek smelled of woodsmoke. I breathed
it in, and shut my eyes. She smelled like  a  hearth,  she  felt  like  a
home. She settled me more firmly in the crook of her arm, and held
me close to her, like a very  young child. I felt  like  I  was  about  to
cry, but instead I sank, suddenly and helplessly, into the oblivion of
sleep.
Of the rest of that long night I remember nothing. I am told that
the  Triad-re  carried  me  in  a  sling  of  blankets  to  their  draf  sleigh
and alternated riding at the reins in the bitter wind and lying with
me under the blankets, using their body warmth to thaw the ice out
of  my  bones.  It  was  after  daybreak  when  we  arrived  at  the
community,  but  I  did  not  open  my  eyes  again  until  the  day  was
nearly  over.  I  was  blanket  wrapped  and  propped  on  pillows,  in  a
warm bed, in a small, plain room. I blinked groggily  at the woman
sitting  in  a  chair  beside  me.  She  was  gray  haired,  the  age  lines
fanning out from her eyes and accenting her mouth. An old Walker,
gentle as spring, strong as winter.
She said, “You are at the Triad. Do you remember?”
“What about Eia?” My voice sounded worn and frail.
“Two of the Aeyries have flown to L’din to deliver idre, two  who
can challenge Teksan himself if they must. How do you feel?”
My  brain  flapped  within  my  limp  and  strengthless  body,  but
remained earthbound. “There is something wrong with me.”
“What do you mean?”
“I feel like—am I going to die?”
“Gracious,  no.  You  are  recovering  very  quickly,  like  the  l’shil
Aeyrie you are.
“I am?” The emptiness in me did not feel like recovery;  far from
it.
“You  have  been  in  shock,  and  are  utterly  worn  out.  The  best
thing you can do for yourself is  to  relax,  and  trust  your  body  and
mind’s  common  sense.  When  it  is  time  for  you  to  feel  alive  and

normal again, it will happen.”
She leaned forward,  with the  warm  light  of  a  lamp  burning  on
her  weathered  face.  She  wore  a  simple,  rough-woven  shirt  that
opened  at  the  neck,  revealing  a  necklace  of  translucent  shells
striped with pink. Her eyes were a deep, bright  blue.  “How  is  the
level of your pain? I gave you something for it, but it was a cautious
dose.”  Her  hands  were  resting  on  her  knees;  the  long-fingered,
many-jointed hands of a Walker born to do delicate work.
“It hurts a little.”
“Tell  me  if  it  gets  worse  or  prevents  you  from  sleeping.  I  or
someone else will stay within call.”
“I wasn’t expecting to meet Walkers. Do you have sorcery, too, to
keep you from hibernating?”
She laughed. “No sorcery. All it takes is a stimulating tea and a
bright room for one or two days.”
I sighed. For some reason, knowing that Teksan’s sorcery was at
least partly fakery made no difference to me.  “How  badly hurt am
I?”
She  turned  down  the  covers  and  showed  me.  My  fur  had  been
shaved,  baring  the  dusky  skin  beneath.  The  long  gash  down  my
upper  arm  was  a  crooked  but  neatly  stitched  seam,  swollen  and
discolored, but clean.
“The frostbite—”
“—Would be disastrous if you were a Walker. Your feet will hurt
for a few days. Delan, be at ease. You truly are safe and healing.”
When I met her gaze directly, I felt utterly disoriented, the way I
felt when I looked into the Void, but without the fear. I looked into
her  eyes,  and  looked  away,  and  yet  looked  at  her  again.  She
watched me steadily and thoughtfully.
I finally said, “Thank you  for  taking  care  of  me—I  do  not  even
know your name.”
“I am the healer Lian of Troyis. Lian Merfriend I am also called.
I am the Triad Mer’s herd substitute; her mind-partner.”
I blinked, taken aback. “You are a—a telepath? Is that how you

found me in the snow?”
“Pilgrim is a se’an, one who communicates  in  thought.  I  am  an
em’an,  one  who  comprehends  feeling.  Between  the  two  of  us  we
know a great deal.”
“The Aeyries would not want to believe in a Walker like you.”
She laughed suddenly. “They do have difficulty with  it.  But  not
nearly as much difficulty as the Walkers have.”
Her  fingertips  tentatively  touched  my  tangled,  grimy  mane.  “I
am a monster in my way. Your acceptance of me is impressive. But
there is an anxiety in you, enough to inhibit your healing. What are
you afraid of?”
I was so  accustomed  to  fear  that  I  almost  denied  that  I  felt  it.
But Lian was right: my skin crawled with tension,  my  ears  ached
with  listening  for  that  one  step,  the  one  that  meant  degradation
and pain. I said, “Teksan will find me again. He always does.”
“We found your Stalker as we searched for you. It was not really
a person, but a thing of sorcery, though it used to be a man. Now it
is dead.”
“Dead?” A sadness,  sudden  and  unexpected  as  the  piercing  of  a
thorn, panged me.
“Outside of actual magic, the only way to get rid of a. Stalker is
to put  yourself  into  deadly  danger.  Because  of  its  nature,  it  must
share your danger. When you fell, your Stalker, too, had to fall. But
its injury and the cold killed it.”
“Why did he die, and I did not?”
“Maybe because you are an Aeyrie, and better able to survive the
cold. Maybe because you wanted desperately to survive, but all his
capacity for desire was burned out of him.”
“It is not right! It was his only life!”
Somewhere in the room there was a stove. I heard it crackle and
I heard the lamp flame flutter.  I heard  the  healer  breathe,  slowly
and deeply. When she finally spoke, her voice was hushed as if she
hesitated  to  interrupt  the  stillness.  “No,  it  is  not  right.  Who  is
Teksan  Lafall,  to  think  he  is  justified  in  using  and  abusing  and

wasting people?”
Something shuddered in me.  Lian looked down at me.  “Just the
sound of his name does this to you.”
“When I heard him coming…” My voice was shaking. “I could not
fight, or run, there was nothing I could do. And every time he came,
he stayed for hours.”
“What did he do to you?”
“He hurt me. Eia warned me—”
“Did he rape you?”
The gentleness in her made  it  possible  to  answer,  to  remember
something I had felt it necessary to forget. “It was—a kind of rape.”
“Did  he  penetrate  you  with  objects?  Did  he  masturbate?”  I  did
not  have  to  answer.  She  said  quietly,  “I  did  not  examine  you
thoroughly while you slept, but it would be best if I do it now, with
your permission. If for nothing else, for your reassurance.”
Despite being a Walker, she knew Aeyrie bodies. I expected pain
or  shame,  but  experienced  little  of  either.  Afterward,  she  cuddled
me against her, as I wanted her to do. She told me I was scarred,
but not so it would make any difference either in lovemaking or in
egg laying.
“The scars on your spirit are more worrisome.”
Of course, I knew that: that sex would never be the same; that
Teksan  had  carved  his  mark  into  me  like  initials  in  the  side  of  a
tree,  permanently.  I  rested  my  head  against  her  soft  shoulder,
tempted by despair.
I was  caught  unawares  in  what  seemed  a  gust  of  wind,  but  it
was a wind of alien thought, containing not words, but currents of
energy
 and
 emotion,
 moving
 like
 water,
 enveloping
 and
encompassing and expanding… Then I was myself again, dizzy and
disoriented and strangely aroused.
“Please  pardon  us.  We  have  learned  that  to  give  advance
warning does more harm than good.”
I felt it then, how the tight strings of fear had snapped and were
disintegrating within me as the memory of a nightmare does in the

light of morning. My eyelids were heavy.  “I know who  you  are,”  I
said sleepily. “You are the one, the one Eia—”
“The one who regrets that she could not return Eia’s love.”
I looked into those tranquil, disorienting eyes.
“Pilgrim  and  I  have  a  special  pool,”  she  said,  answering  a
question I had no right to even be wondering.
“I—”
“There are several Walker-Aeyrie pairs also. We can’t cross-breed
with each other,  but once it came out that, despite being different
races and the same sex, Pilgim and I are lovers,  the  gulf  between
air and earth ceased to seem so great.”
It  was  not  shock  which  made  me  unable  to  speak.  It  was
amazement.
 
I slept for two days. For two more days I remained disinclined to
move, incurious and enervated, weary  and sometimes  depressed.  I
got  to  know  the  walls  of  the  room  very  well.  I  got  to  know  the
rhythms  of  the  community  as  well:  the  flurry  of  activity  in  the
morning,  cheerful  voices  and  hurrying  footsteps  in  the  hall-way;
settling down  to  busy  silence  until  the  sunlight  took  on  a  reddish
hue.  The  evening  seemed  full  of  the  voices  of  children.  Once,
remotely,  I  heard  the  sound  of  a  stringed  instrument.  I  listened
until  my  ears  ached,  but  I  had  no  desire  to  get  up  and  find  the
musician.
Lian brought me a H’ldat grammar printed on the Triad Press. I
was content with leafing through it, seeking out the  Aeyrie  words
for  which  there  were  no  Walker  equivalents,  and  practicing  their
pronunciation under her tutelage. By the time I  was  on  my  feet  I
had acquired a limited, eclectic H’ldat vocabulary. I had learned the
words like l’shil, sh’man, and l’frer which described people without
implying  gender.  I  had  also  memorized  a  multitude  of  words  for
wind and the experience of flying, with subtle shadings in definition
that were beyond my experience and comprehension.
I  thought  I  was  merely  following  a  whim  in  my  eccentric
approach to the language. It was Lian who pointed out to me that I

could  not  think  of  myself  as  an  Aeyrie  until  I  knew  the  words  in
which to contain the concepts. I was not studying a language at all;
I was studying myself.
Weariness lay over my spirits like smoke palling the sky. But, on
the  fifth  day,  Lian  came  in  to  find  me  standing  shakily  at  the
window with one of the shutters opened. I was looking out at a neat
garden, bedded down for  winter,  bordered  by  a  tumbledown  stone
wall.  Beyond  the  wall  stretched  a  flat,  snowy  expanse  of  land,
scattered with white hummocks that might be bushes or bunches of
tall  grass.  The  land  ended  abruptly,  as  if  sliced  away  by  some
monstrous knife. Beyond  that  edge,  the  emptiness  was  filled  with
mist.
I shivered as Lian came up to me. “What is it? Is that where the
world ends?”
“It  is  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  and  beyond  that  lies  the  ocean.
Perhaps  the  mist  will  burn  off,  and  you  will  be  able  to  see  the
water.”
“It moves as if it were breathing.”
Lian  put  her  hand  on  my  shoulder.  She  was  smiling.  “You  see
differently from most of us. It is an important difference.”
My knees wobbled under me.  Her arm  slid  around  my  waist  to
support me. “Riddles,” I said.
Lian closed the shutter. “It’s time for you to sit down.”
I sat obediently on a stool, but at once I was itchy to be up again.
“I want to meet Pilgrim. I want to see the printing press.”
“Hold still.” She studied my wounded arm. I fell anxiously silent,
but  she  seemed  satisfied  with  what  she  saw.  “Breakfast.  A  bath.
And  the  press.  But  to  meet  Pilgrim  you  have  to  get  down  to  sea
level, and I don’t think you’re up to the climb yet. You do appear to
be feeling better.”
There  had  been  no  nightmares,  no  ghost  at  my  window,  no
imaginary  prowlers  at  my  door.  Even  as  I  felt  the  despair  of
knowing  I  would  forever  be  afraid  of  Teksan,  it  had  ceased  to  be
true. Out of the shell of my tiredness, I had hatched as eager and
curious as an onfrit.

I  could  not  trust  my  recovery.  It  was  unnatural.  “How  did  it
happen?”
Lian stood back. Her eyes were like lake water, always changing
their color. She said, “Even when you were a mere embryo,  others
interfered  with  you,
 displaced
 you
 to
 a
 hostile,
 loveless
environment,  deprived  you  of  every  kind  of  nourishment,  treated
you  indifferently  at  best,  though  you  are  no  stranger  to  cruelty
either. You do not need to  learn  yet  again  that  you  can  overcome
and recover and survive. Haven’t you done it every day of your life?
“Pilgrim and I do not interfere like this lightly. But the chance to
thrive for once, that was a gift we thought it safe to give you.”
“To thrive!” I said it as if I had never heard the word before,  in
mock horror.
Lian’s face was sober. “Delan. Now you are afraid.”
 
I had not realized how large was the building in which my room
was just one niche. Its regular shape and straight walls testified to
Walker  architecure,  but  the  Aeyrie  influence  had  transformed  its
dull  utilitarian  construction.  Windows  of  colored  glass  glowed
despite  the  misty  morning.  Rugs  or  straw  mats  which  felt  good
under  my  bare  feet  covered  the  cold  stone  floors.  Once  we  were
outside,  I  saw  that  the  building  we  had  just  exited  would  have
seemed  unspeakably  eccentric  to  a  conventional  Walker.  On  one
corner  a  round  flight  tower  pointed  skyward,  and  along  its
unheard-of  second  floor,  balconies  crowded,  with  streamers  and
whirligigs clattering and hissing in the wind.
“Walkers on the first floor and Aeyries on the second.”
“That was the idea when we built the building. But things have
not been nearly so neat or simple. Motivated Walkers can overcome
their fear of heights.”
We  walked  on  a  cleared  pathway  edged  by  piles  of  dirty  snow.
The  bathhouse  was  a  separate  building,  with  smoking  stovepipes
and  no  windows.  The  roof  was  covered  with  black  pipes,  but  the
sunheating system did not work  in the winter mist, and the water
was heated by coal. “It will be crowded,” Lian warned me. “We only

have hot water once a day in winter.”
The drying room was jammed with energetic children supervised
by four tolerant  adults,  all  of  them  naked,  races  and  sexes  mixed
indiscriminately  among  mounds  of  wet  towels.  But  nonetheless  I
was unpre pared for the bathing room. Aeyries and naked Walkers
of both sexes sat on stools, washing themselves with sponges dipped
in  buckets,  and  talking  energetically  in  languages  equally  mixed
together.  Standing in shallow tubs along one  wall,  a  Walker  male
emptied a bucketful of water  over the head of an Aeyrie  Red.  The
Aeyrie  shook  water  out  of  ids  eyes  and  laughed.  A  few  air  lamps
glowed fitfully.
If not for Lian’s grip on my elbow, I would have fled.
“Let’s  find  you  a  private  spot,  Del—I  always  forget  how
overwhelming  this  place  is  to  newcomers.  We  couldn’t  divide
bathing  time  according  to  sex,  you  Aeyries  just  make  it  too
complicated.”
Dumb  with  panic,  I  followed  her  through  the  steaming,  noisy
crowd.  She  sat  me  on  a  long-legged  stool  behind  the  artificial
shelter of a fragile woven screen. A familiar Gold appeared behind
her, wet fur plastered across ids muscular terrain, counterbalancing
with one partially spread wing the weight of a  bucket  of  water  in
the other hand. Each step id took was a kind of a graceful,  terribly
controlled dance.
The Aeyrie said, “Do you remember me?”
Lian stepped aside for idre. I said, “Of course, you are Feili. You
must be a Quai-du master.”
“By the summer sun, what makes you say that?”
“You walk like one.”
Grinning,  id  turned  ids  wrist  so  I  could  see  the  mark.  “You
unnerve me. We had better take care of this one, Lian.”
Lian  looked  offended.  “And  what  have  I  been  doing  these  five
days?”
“Do you trust me to help the l’shil?”
“Will you be all right, Del? Do not get your arm wet.”

Feili was already asking  as  she  walked  away,  “Do  you  like  our
bath?”
My panic was only beginning to quiet. “No.”
“Me  neither.  I  always  thought  that  if  the  Walkers  had  fur  it
would be a great improvement.”
“Or if the Aeyries didn’t.”
“But then we would look as funny as they do!”
I  looked  up  sharply.  Feili  was  grinning.  Suddenly  I  felt  much
better.
I could not bend over very far because of the lingering stiffness of
my torn muscle, and so I needed a great deal of help with the water
and soap. Feili radiated cheer and energy, and loved to talk. Id had
hatched in t’Han, and not only knew Gein before id moved to t’Fon,
but had been ids lover for a time. I had not realized until then just
how  small  was  the  Aeyrie  world.  Limited  to  three  small
communities,  the  entire  Aeyrie  population  totaled  no  more  than
four hundred, including the twenty-three at the Triad. For any one
Aeyrie to at least be acquainted with all of the others in the world
was not unusual. It was even more common for one person to have
strong connections in every Ula: lovers, ex-lovers, friends and kin.
Feili briskly sluiced me down in the tub as I protected my injured
arm  from  the  cooling  water.  The  worst  of  the  crowd  dispersed  to
breakfast, and soon we had the drying room to ourselves. Many of
the  Aeyries  had  gone  out  still  damp  and  undressed,  but  Feili
assured  me  that  Lian  would  be  profoundly  displeased  if  I  did  the
same. We oiled each other’s wings, and sat a long time in the drying
room.
Feili talked about Eia. They had been Quai-du shadrals, sparring
partners. Feili said, “Of course I have met ids l’frer and l’per, also.
And  the  t’Fon  taiseoch-dre  are  all  killers.  The  last  time  I  visited
t’Fon,  it  had  been  two  years  since  Gein  and  I  parted  ways,  but
every time I spoke to idre, Hana looked ready to challenge me to a
blood  battle.  It  was  not  a  restful  business  either,  being  Eia’s
shadral. Id is a ruthless  fighter.  But  it  was  certainly  good  for  my
style.”

I  remembered  the  hushed  voice,  the  hesitant,  gentle,  playful
fingers. “I do not think we are discussing the same Eia.”
“Of  course  not.  The  killer—that  personality  Eia  kept  in  the
storage  closet.  I  would  wager  you  never  knew  id  carried  a  black
blade.”
“Black blade?”
“There  are  only  ten  in  the  world.  The  Aeyries  who  carry  them
won  them  in  personal  combat,  at  the  Games  that  are  held  every
five years. But you knew Eia the healer, since id saw you through
the winging. And the lover, too? If so, I envy you. Or did the master
of discipline find even a l’shil resistible?”
Suddenly I was irritated. “What is so irresistible about a l’shil?”
“The wonder, mainly. And the—the Walkers do not have a word
for it. The c’lol-fe, the wildness which comes after  the confinement
of winter.”
The coals cracked in the warming stoves. A few  of my hairs had
stuck  to  my  fingertips.  I  held  one  up  to  the  lamplight.  The
individual hair had its own coat of fur, which trapped a fuzzy  aura
of  smoky  light.  No  wonder  I  was  so  much  warmer  than  the
Walkers. I said, “Well, Eia found me irresistible.  I  like  to  think  it
was not just because I am young.”
‘You are as touchy as a Walker,“ Feili said mildly. ”Why  did you
leave Eia and go back to Teksan?”
“You  think  I  went  back  to  him  because  I  wanted  to?  I  left
because I did not want to know Eia was exploiting me.”
“And yet you say you never knew Eia was ruthless!”
“Eia  is  the  only  one,  the  only  one  in  my  entire  life,  who  ever
cared about me, even just a little. Maybe I did not want to know.”
I  had  never  meant  to  say  so  much.  I  turned  my  head  after  a
while. Feili’s bright hair had dried, and now floated arounds ids face
like a cloud at sunset. “I’m sorry to hear that.”  Ids mouth quirked
up  at  the  corners.  “However,  it  is  not  true.  Lian  will  understand
why Eia concealed ids motives from  you. But I am certain  of  this:
Whatever  Eia  was  trying  to  accomplish,  to  have  to  use  you  for  a
tool  toward  some  end  would  have  made  idre  miserable.  I  have

known  Eia  a  long  time,  Del,  and  never  once  have  I  know  idre  to
care just a little.”
Chapter 12
« ^ » 
Lian eventually emerged from  the center of a  huddle  of  people,  to
join Feili and me at the end of one long table in the dining room. A
few  late  rising  Walkers,  and  one  red-eyed,  tousled  Aeyrie  who
appeared to have never made it to bed, lingered sleepily over their
breakfasts.  Within  hearing,  dishes  were  being  washed.  An  old
Walker slowly swept the red tile floor with a reed broom.
Lian  seemed  tired  and  harassed.  Someone  set  a  cup  near  her
hand. She breathed in the spicy steam as we recounted our recent
conversation to her. Then she let out her breath in sigh. “Yes, I do
understand what Eia was trying to accomplish. Though it hurts to
think of it. Eia told me that when a child, id met Teksan, and was
certain  even  then  that  he  was  dangerous  to  the  Aeyries.  Last
spring,  when  by  accident  id  spotted  him  from  the  air,  id  followed
him  to  the  Digan-lai  community.  Id  knew,  as  you  would  if  you
thought of it, that there is no imaginable reason for Teksan to go to
the  Digan-lai:  he  is  no  astil  trader,  and  the  community  is  not
exactly on a beaten path.”
I swallowed. “Except to fetch me.”
“That’s right, Del, it was no accident that he found you. Now let
me  tell  you  something  that  is  so  commonly  known  that  I  am
surprised no one has told it to you before.  Some  twenty  years ago,
three fertile Aeyrie eggs disappeared from  their nests. The Aeyries
do not lay fertile eggs lightly, knowing that twenty years of difficult
nurturing lie before them! So you may imagine the furor.  And one
of them was the egg of a white winged Silver, Gina Theli Ishta, the
taiseoch t’Cwa.”
My mouth was full this time, and I choked.
Feili  pounded  me  on  the  back  hard  enough  to  start  my  arm
throbbing.  Ids  sweet,  loud  voice  turned  heads  in  the  room.  “Ishta
never hatched an egg!  Id reluctantly named  a  cousin  taiseoch-dre!

And your other parent must be Mairli. Many years  id  wintered  in
the taiseoch’s bed. Great Winds, Del, you’re a taiseoch-dre!”
Lian  said  absently,  “Mairli  the  inventor?  Id  used  to  visit  us  all
the time, being Pehtal’s close friend. Id was an exhausting person, a
brilliant  eccentric,  the  inventor  of  the  air  lamps,  among  other
things: grab-pins, hollow needles, various new kinds of vegetable…
Id’s apparently dead now. Id was a loner and a wanderer; maybe a
hellwind got idre. L’shil, are you all right?”
I had stopped coughing, but I  felt  rather  dizzy.  I  said  hoarsely,
“What happened to the other two eggs?”
“I am surprised that even one survived. An Aeyrie could easily be
killed  by  normal  Walker  childrearing.  Aeyrie  hatchlings  die  from
boredom or lack of affection,  and they cannot take solid  food  until
the  middle  of  their  second  year.  There  must  have  been  someone,
some  Walker  woman  who  loved  you  and  nursed  you  for  a  second
year,  and  embarrassed  herself  with  ‘coddling’  you,  as  her  fellows
would call it.”
I remembered the elder who had never been unkind to me,  who
had advised me the day I was sold. “You have never belonged here,”
she had said, as if her eyes had been on me from  the beginning; as
if there was a sympathy and sadness in her that she thought it best
to keep hidden.
She had never told me.
After a long silence, I said to Lian, “So Teksan stole the eggs?”
“I believe  he  was  at  t’Cwa  that  year.  The  t’Cwa-dre  considered
Teksan a true rarity,  an unbigoted Walker who valued knowledge.
Of course they did not know he was practicing sorcery. He wintered
at the University many years in succession, studying—what was it,
Feili?”
Feili shrugged. “Everything and nothing, from what I hear.”
“Eia thought he was hoping to uncover the Aeyries’ ‘secret’ store
of  magical  books  and  lore.  There  are  usually  several  mages  at
t’Cwa, but Teksan apparently didn’t know it, or wouldn’t believe it,
or wouldn’t believe what they had to tell him…”
“And you think Eia knew all of this? Even who I was?”

“Id would certainly have deduced all of it, same as we did.”
“But in a matter of seconds rather than days of discussion,” Feili
added.
Lian smiled suddenly, and just as suddenly the smile was wiped
away.
I said, with stale bitterness, “Then why did id not tell me?”
“Why did you not trust idre?”
I stared at her. I had learned to expect more gentleness from her.
But Lian reached across the table to pat my arm. “Del,  you had no
reason  to  trust  anyone,  and  no  experience  with  it.  And  you  had
every reason  for  suspicion.  But  Eia  would  not  have  been  quick  to
trust you either. What reason did id have to believe that you would
not rush to Teksan with everything you knew?”
“Id knew I was an Aeyrie!”
Beside  me,  Feili  gave  a  humorless  snort.  I  recognized  my  own
simplicity almost at once, but Lian at least did not laugh. “You were
a  Walker  in  an  Aeyrie  body,  with  no  reason  for  loyalty  to  any
species.  Even  so,  Eia’s  first  impulse  would  certainly  have  been  to
rescue you, regardless of all other concerns, simply because you are
ids own kind. Yet id decided to subvert you instead.”
I  looked  up  sharply.  Lian’s  eyes  were  unfocused.  She  looked
elsewhere: she saw the warm and aloof, tortured and serene Eia. It
put sadness into her voice, and a depth of love  which  shamed  me.
She  said,  “Id  decided  to  be  kind  to  you,  so  you  could  know  what
kindness  was  and  be  equipped  to  see  through  Teksan’s  false
kindness.  To  give  you  an  onfrit  so  you  would  be  less  lonely,
therefore less vulnerable—and also so Eia could use her as a spy in
Teksan’s  household.  To  make  certain  that  at  your  winging,  that
important  time  of  transition  and  bonding,  it  was  Eia  who
Companioned  you  rather  than  Teksan.  To  do  all  these  things,
knowing  that  id  was  cheating  you  of  the  right  to  your  heritage,
knowing  that  id  was  wrongly  manipulating  you,  and  certainly
despising idreself for it.”
“But why?”
“To find out and undermine Teksan’s plans.”

Feili burst out, “Of all the egotistical, foolhardly—”
But I sat in silence, thinking of the desperate solitude with which
Eia must have acted, attaching ids own strings to me,  until  I  was
like  a  puppet  with  two  puppeteers.  It  did  not  make  me  angry
anymore. I had learned what the  difference  was  between  evil  and
mere error.
I remembered how I had seen Eia as a rescuer, a god, something
better than myself.  I  realized  suddenly  that  if  we  saw  each  other
again it would not be the same. To understand Eia was to kill my
bitterness. But the glamour also would be gone, and in its place—I
did not know.
Still I wondered at the choices Eia had made, wondered above all
why  id  had  chosen  to  be  alone,  when  the  forces  of  kinship,
friendship, race,  and ideology  could  have  been  all  standing  behind
idre.
Lian said softly,  “No, Del,  Eia has  always  been  alone.  Alone,  id
foresaw the extermination of the Aeyries. Alone, id recounted that
awful vision, only to have ids own people see idre as a renegade, a
doomsayer,  even  a  traitor.  But  it  was  here  at  the  Triad  that  I
finally  despaired  of  finding  someone,  anyone,  to  take  the  vision
seriously  enough  to  act  on  it.  Do  you  remember  when  id  finally
stopped talking about it, Feili? I do. I was relieved.”
Feili, who had heard  Lian  out  with  scarcely  less  agitation  than
myself, abruptly turned ids wonderful sun-bright eyes on her. “Now
that  is  hardly  fair.  The  Triad-re  listened,  we  agreed  on  the
danger—”
“And yet we insisted that there was nothing we could do, that it
was using all of our resources merely to survive—”
“And it is still true.”
“No. The truth is that we are afraid of risk.”
Feili  looked  down  at  ids  branded  wrist,  opened  ids  mouth  to
protest, but shut it again. I wondered in disbelief how a community
of  rebels,  people  who  had  voluntarily  turned  against  the  bedrock
truths of home and kin, could be afraid of risk.
I was not too surprised when Lian again answered my unspoken

question.  “We  are  no  longer  a  bunch  of  wild-eyed  idealists  with
nothing to lose. We are a thriving community.  We fear to sacrifice
all the hard work  we have put into building this house, this farm,
into  revising  our  understanding  of  each  other  and  ourselves,  into
raising  our  children.  For  the  same  reason  Eia  was  unpopular  in
t’Fon,  id  was  unpopular  here.  Because  ids  prophetic  voice
challenged our contentment. Mine, too, as much as anyone else’s.”
For a long time none of us said anything. I looked at the pile of
crumbs  on  my  plate,  and  realized  that  it  must  have  been  my
anxious fingers which had reduced the remains of my sweetbread to
this mess. How simple it had been, when all I had to do was to flee
my enemy until  I  had  found  haven.  But  now  I  understood  that  it
was  not  merely  Teksan  who  was  the  enemy,  and  Triad  was  no
haven  but  a  participant  in  the  problem,  and  matters  were  not
simple at all. I felt very tired. “What is going to happen?”
Lian’s  many-jointed  fingers  closed  firmly  around  mine.  “Right
now, nothing. We all have to think, and wait for A’bel and Pehtal to
return. You have to rest and regain your strength. Maybe Feili will
show  you  the  printing  press.  And  then  I  want  you  to  go  back  to
bed.”
 
By the time Feili and I started back to the house from the press,
I no longer thought Lian had been amusingly overprotective of me.
I  was  tired,  but  the  arm  Feili  put  around  me  was  not  really
necessary for my support. The Aeyries were  always  touching  each
other, I reminded myself.
The  Aeyrie  lithographer  and  Walker  craftsman  who  were  in
charge of the printing press had been willing enough to answer my
questions.  They  had  been  in  the  middle  of  an  argument  as  we
walked  in,  but  when  we  left  they  were  holding  hands  somewhat
absentmindedly,  studying  anew  the  disputed  proof-sheet  where  it
was  pinned  to  a  tabletop.  “They  have  children?”  I  said  to  Feili  in
disbelief.
“One of each. By other partners, of course. If cross-breeding were
possible, we would know it by now, believe me.”
“Do Aeyries prefer males or females?”

Feili laughed. “Don’t start thinking about it. It’ll drive you mad.”
“Have you made love with a Walker?”
“Well—yes.”
“And?”
“And I prefer Aeyries, you nosy creature.”
Id came into my room with me, still talking vigorously. But when
the door shut, it seemed to  cut  off  the  flow  of  words  as  well.  The
room was still  cold  from  the  chill  I  had  let  in  earlier  through  the
window. Feili preoccupied idreself with starting a fire in the stove.
I sat heavily on the stool. “I think Lian was right. I need to rest
some more.”
“Lian  is  always  right.”  Feili  turned  to  me  brushing  a  smear  of
soot out of ids burning bright fur. “How tired are you?”
Something in ids eyes made me avoid looking directly into them,
something  which  tried  to  be  playful  and  lighthearted  and  did  not
succeed  very  well.  The  friendship  I  wanted,  wanted  badly,  was
being taken heartlessly out of my grasp. This gulf of reluctance and
fear opening  up  in  my  belly  was  destined  to  become  a  familiar  of
mine. I understood too much.
Feili’s hand touched my arm tentatively. Too hastily I took it by
the wrist and lifted it away. “Very tired,” I said, standing up.
“Del—”
“Thank you for your time with me.”  By the time I had shut the
door firmly against ids irritated and startled face, I was trembling.
In solitude, I lay down on the bed and stared at the wall.
 
Feili  was  not  very  friendly  after  that.  The  rest  of  the  Triad-re
treated  me  like  an  honored  guest:  showing  me  around,  stopping
their  work  to  answer  my  questions,  and  watching  benignly  as  I
played with their children. The children, Walker and  Aeyrie  alike,
were  few  and  well  beloved,  for  the  Walkers  had  adopted  Aeyrie
ways of nurturing. The children did little work, but I was envious of
the schooling of which they complained so energetically.
I knew I should have felt lucky to be here, but I seemed to have

developed an aversion to contentment. I felt restless and miserable.
I went from bakery to workshop to kitchen to library, admiring the
busyness and good cheer of the people, and feeling entirely separate
from it.
The third morning I was on my feet, I rode a draf out across the
frozen fields in the company of a farmer.  The fields were edged by
lines of tall  trees,  bare-limbed  in  winter,  guardians  to  protect  the
crops from the unceasing wind. I was told that only the cooperation
of Aeyrie ingenuity and Walker experience had made it possible to
grow  crops  in  this  desolate,  notoriously  infertile  place.  Now,  the
farmer  said  proudly,  the  yield  doubled  every  few  years  as  their
methods and the soil were constantly improved.
When we returned, I found Lian in the common room. I had been
told  that,  in  the  warm  months,  the  Triad  was  hectic  with  sick
strangers desperate enough to seek  healing  even  in  this  forbidden
place. But the winter hibernation did not seem to afford Lian much
respite. I had rarely seen her without someone beside her, in need
of her attention.
She was alone now,  eating a solitary late breakfast.  I  hesitated
to interrupt her, but she smiled up at me standing in the doorway.
“Come sit. I am going to spend the afternoon with Pilgrim. Do you
want to come down with me?”
“Yes.”
“What’s the matter, Del?”
“I feel like something is going to happen.”
She nodded, and turned back to her meal. I sat, glad to be in her
restful presence, and watched her eat.
Afterward, we went together  out a back door, and down  a  path
from which the night’s snowfall had not yet been cleared. My bare
feet left a faint imprint in the  snow,  but  Lian’s  tracks  were  deep.
She wore  a pair of  soft  boots  made  of  cleata  skin,  a  tough,  water
resistant stuff which the giant sea lizards shed on the rocks every
summer.  The  sun  glittered  cold  overhead.  Our  breath  steamed
around us. Lian jammed her hands into her jacket pockets.
To  my  right,  I  could  see  a  strip  of  the  green  ocean,  with  faint

suggestions  of  colored  reflections  below  the  surface  of  the  water,
where lay the deadly reefs. There, twenty-five  years ago,  Lian had
sailed her coracle in  choppy  water,  in  the  wake  of  a  fierce  storm.
Her sensitivity to the emotions of others had made her take flight
from  pain,  to  live  alone  and  isolated,  in  a  solitary  cottage  on  the
edge  of  the  cliff.  Yet,  in  the  night’s  storm,  another’s  pain  had
reached  deep  into  her  sleep,  dragging  her  awake  to  lie  all  night
long, listening to the howling wind. At daybreak she had gone out,
and  found  the  Mer  on  the  reef,  injured  and  trapped  among  the
razor-sharp edges.
“I knew, before I even went out, that my life would never be the
same,” she had said when she told in the story.
A cluster of trees had rooted here near the cliff  edge.  The  wind
had  distorted  them  into  a  weird  grove  of  trunks  growing  nearly
parallel to the ground, branches all reaching landward. Their tiny,
tough leaves were crusted with frost. The path wove between them,
among black shadows  and  out  into  sunlight  again.  Then  we  came
upon an unexpected gash in the earth, into which the sea slid, far
below, among the shattered golden glass. Lian squinted against the
glare  of  light  as  she  fumbled  a  pair  of  smoked  lenses  out  of  her
pocket. The path had become a narrow, twisting walkway dropping
down the cliffside, shining with slick ice and bordered with railings,
at times suspended out over empty air.
I doubted  there  were  many  Walkers  willing  to  come  this  way,
even in the Triad where most of them had desensitized themselves
to heights. But Lian attached the lenses before her eyes and started
forward eagerly.
It was a long way  down.  At  the  bottom,  the  boardwalk  twisted
over and around great chunks of glass. Soon we were walking over
pools of still water.  White and blue mineral deposits decorated the
glass. In my nostrils lingered the sharp, sour smell of the sea.
From  a  small  building,  a  long  dock  stretched  across  the  water,
pointing at a pair of boats tethered off shore. The water shimmered
in  the  light,  still  and  yet  moving  with  that  slow  swelling  which
seemed  like  breathing.  Light  patterns  twisted  and  broke  and
reformed hypnotically across the surface.

“There,” Lian said.
A  form  broke  water  in  a  spray  of  light,  leaping  exuberantly
skyward,  only  to  turn  and  slide  into  the  water  again,  leaving
scarcely a ripple.
I let my breath out in a sigh. I think until that moment I had not
truly believed in the Mer.
We  walked  silently  to  the  wooden  dockhouse,  where  on  the
leeward  side  small  boats  were  racked  with  their  oars.  A  single
windmill spun wildly on the roof,  disengaged.  Inside,  long-handled
seaweed forks and caricha nets hung on one whitewashed wall. In
the center, a round hole cut in the floor gave access to a deep, tiled
pool. I could not see the bottom of it, but its water level swelled and
sank, telling me of its direct link to the sea. I put my hand in. The
water was not frigid, but it was far from warm.
“Is this the pool where you took her, and took care of her?”
“Yes.  I  camped  right  where  I’m  standing,  in  my  boat  which  I
dragged  onto  the  rocks  every  night.  I  went  out  every  morning  to
gather seaweed for her—she can only eat it fresh. I ate nothing but
seaweed, too. There was nothing else. But I cooked mine.”
Another hollow immediately adjacent to the pool  was  no  deeper
than my knees. It was tiled like a bathtub. A valve ended a narrow
pipe that ran down the wall, clamped against the stovepipe to warm
the water. Lian laid a fire in the stove, and lit it with a tinderstick.
A complicated switch in the ceiling engaged the windmill.
For a Walker to be a Mer’s lover was no simple business! Just to
make  an  environment  acceptable  to  both  of  them  required  more
than a little Aeyrie technology.
Lian laughed, overhearing my thought. “Of  course! I  sent  to  all
the Ulas, asking the Aeyries to design this building in return for a
chance to meet a Mer. A pair of them were intrigued enough to do
it.  A  few  months  later,  they  came  back.  That  is  how  the  Triad
began, right here in this building.”
I dipped my hand into the water  again. In the dark deep of  the
pool, another hand touched it.
She  came  up  from  the  darkness,  a  gliding  shadow  that  slowly

took form  in the light: long and sleek,  with  her  flat,  noseless  face
breaking  water  first  in  a  hot  spray  of  expelled  air.  She  was  six
limbed and furred like me, but practically legless, with oars instead
of  feet.  One  set  of  arms  had  hands,  though  much  different  from
mine.  The  other  set  were  little  more  than  rudders.  She  looked  at
me from  wide-pupiled  eyes,  gripping  my  hand  gently.  Despite  the
cold water, her hand was as warm as mine.
I looked into deep, disorienting eyes. “Hello, pilgrim.”
“She welcomes you,” Lian said.
“She will not speak to me?”
“Mer  brains  apparently  have  no  facility  for  speech.  Within  the
herd, there is no need for it. There is nothing one member of a herd
knows that they all do not know. They sing, though.”
“Did the herd abandon her because she was injured?”
“If they had found her, they would have killed her, out of mercy
and to protect themselves from the experience of her pain. But the
herd had been scattered by the storm, and she had lost contact with
them. It was the first time in her life that she was alone, and could
think  of  herself  as  an  individual.  The  Mers  have  live  births—and
even in the womb the infants already are telepathically linked with
the herd. For Pilgrim to be separated from them was a death. And a
birth.”
The Mer’s hands were  almost frighteningly strong.  She  reached
above water  to brush my dry fur  with  her  fingers,  and  then  sank
back into that cold embrace, until only her eyes were above water.
Unblinking,  she  studied  me.  I  wondered  what  it  was  like,  to  live
through another’s life, as she was doing with Lian. Did she see both
worlds at once, the sea and the land? Did she love only Lian, or did
she love through Lian as well? Was she lonely, or did she share in
Lian’s extensive connections? Did joining with Lian limit her, or did
it expand her?
I asked, “Why did you not go back to your people when you were
healed?”
Lian  said  softly,  “To  love  was  to  change  and  be  changed.  To
return  would  be  to  change  the  herd.  Perhaps  I  would  not  be

accepted. Perhaps I would lose and forget  what I have learned and
become. A thing I do not regret and do not wish to lose or forget.”
“I  do  not  regret.  I  do  not  wish  to  lose  or  forget.”  These  words
contained a world of answers.
“What is it like underwater?”
She sank away,  until even  her  fingers  were  no  longer  touching
mine. And then she showed me.
I  turned  and  dove  into  darkness  that  was  not  dark.  Sound
resonated round me; the sound of my own voice murmuring back at
me from the walls. A hollowness: time to turn. A thin ringing: time
to twist around a sharp edge. I was surrounded by the vibration of
my  voice  across  dangerous,  broken  edges  of  glass.  The  way  was
narrow and twisting, but I never touched anything but water.
Then:  light,  green  and  shimmering,  smoky  with  debris.  Long,
subtly  moving  stalks  of  seaweed,  stretching  like  bronze  ropes
toward  the  brightness  above,  exploding  suddenly  with  long,  flat
leaves. My body glided, knowing and trusting my element.
“Ah,”  my  host  sang,  and  the  sound  echoed  back,  altered.  I
scattered  a  crowd  of  translucent  shellfish;  I  twisted  among  the
seaweed and  though  a  garden  of  carichas  floating  on  their  fragile
tethers.  Up  I  looked,  at  the  mysterious  surface,  light-reflecting,
overlaid  by  foam  containing  distorted  pieces  of  sky.  And  then  I
pushed, pushed my body subtly against  the  water,  upward,  wildly
upward, through the pull and tug of the surface currents, upward,
and then I was breaking through.
 
I walked back alone, leaving behind me the Walker and the Mer
in  their  heated  pool.  After  the  weightless  flowing  of  swimming,  I
felt  strange  and  loose  in  my  body,  and  each  step  I  took  seemed
heavy and jarring. The open sky awoke hunger in me. The climb up
the cliff  had  been  almost  too  much  for  me.  How  long  would  it  be
before I was strong enough to fly again?
“Delan,”  someone  chirruped.  “Delan!”  A  bundle  of  brown  and
amber fur plummeted around the corner of the path, into my arms.
“Ch’ta!” He was dusty and damp. His frail bones stood out under

his  skin.  He  panted  in  my  arms,  chirping  incoherently  with
gladness. I hugged him to my chest, “Ch’ta, did you find Eia?”
But even before he spoke, somehow I knew the answer.
Chapter 13
« ^ » 
Two  strange  Aeyries  sat  in  the  common  room.  Their  loose  manes
tangled around their  faces,  wind  woven.  They  wore  flight  clothes,
astil  to  cut  the  bitter  wind,  and  quilted  vests  to  guard  against
hypothermia. A muted group of Triad-dre surrounded them as they
ate  with  concentration  from  steaming  bowls  of  stew.  Eia’s
manuscript lay on the table.
With Ch’ta on my shoulder, I slipped in through the side door to
join the group quietly and wait until the two  travelers were ready
to speak. But one of them,  a Red with ids vivid color beginning  to
soften with age, lifted ids head sharply.
I froze  in my tracks.  I heard a roaring in my ears,  as  if  I  were
standing under an avalanche. My  knees  gave  way  under  me.  And
then  strong  hands  caught  me  and  a  fierce,  hushed  voice  said,
“Hellwinds!”
My  vision  cleared  slowly.  I  trembled  in  the  arms  of  the  red
stranger. Ch’ta, knocked partway down my  back,  scrambled  up  to
my shoulder again,  scolding  the  stranger  in  onfrit  language.  “You
must  be  Delan,”  the  Red  said.  “Please  pardon  me—You  have  a
shadow of sorcery on you and I assumed you were dangerous.”
“I do?” I looked up, dismayed, into eyes like green glass. Id was
as unlike Teksan as a waterwyth  is unlike an onfrit.  Yet  I  sensed
the power in ids hands, in  ids  voice,  power  in  ids  very  decision  to
hold back from hurting me. I knew this was a mage.
Id  said,  “But  underneath  the  shadow  you  are  bright.  Very
bright.” The Aeyrie stood back somewhat, the better to examine me
from head to  toe.  When  the  startling  eyes  lifted  again,  there  was
something  more  in  the  narrow  age-marked  face:  gentleness,
warmth, welcome, even a kind of protectiveness. And I did not even

know who this person was.
I shook my head, utterly flustered.
“L’shil, Ishta is written on you, in your fur and your wings.”
“You know Ishta?”
“I am a native of t’Cwa,” id said. “I am Beta L’hem Pehtal. Come
and sit with us.”
The  Aeyrie  took  me  by  the  elbow  and  walked  with  ne.  At  the
table, the strange Brown had scarcely  inissed  a  mouthful  of  stew.
“My  partner,  A’bel,  a  sun  and  wind  crafter.  A’bel,  this  is  Delan.
Ishta Mairli Delan, it seems.”
The Brown nodded. “And you scared idre out ids wits. Very good.”
“I am absolutely mortified.”
I put my hand on the manuscript, still bundled roughly, with its
bindings inexpertly knotted by my own fingers. “The hurt onfrit—”
I said.
Pehtal sat on the bench, gesturing for me to sit also. “She  is  in
the  onfrit  house  now,  with  her  hatchling.  When  she  has  her
strength back, perhaps Lian will be able to repair her wing.”
I sat down jerkily. Ch’ta chirruped excitedly at the smell of food.
“Ch’ta told me you couldn’t find Eia.”
“All of the Teksan-dre are gone from  L’din,  and  Eia  with  them.
Here, Ch’ta.” Pehtal offered some bread, which the onfrit accepted
with delight. “Delan, do you know what they mean to do with Eia?”
“What  they  did  with  me.  Use  idre  for  entry  through  a  door
Teksan cannot open himself.”
“How?”
“He uses his sorcery to make  pain,  and  the  pain  to  make  more
sorcery.  He  will—”  This  time  I  could  not  shudder  away  from  the
thought of Eia in Teksan’s hands. Nor could I reassure myself any
more  with  the  knowledge  that  help  was  on  the  way  to  idre.  My
throat closed shut.
Pehtal did not press me, but bent to the business of eating. Days
of flying had worn both  the  Aeyries  down  to  sharp  bones.  After  a

long  time,  having  searched  my  limited  vocabulary  for  an
appropriate title, I said,  “Sh’man,  Teksan  will  destroy  Eia.  I  have
an  obligation  to  help  idre.  Even  if  I  have  to  do  it  alone.  Will  you
help me figure out what to do?”
The mage glanced up at me, a hard face, eyes glittering with an
anger which I was relieved to realize was not directed at me. “Yes, I
will do whatever I can But you will not need to be acting alone.”
 
The sun had set before Lian came up from the Gap with the look
of the otherworld in her eyes. She hugged Pehtal and A’bel in a way
I  would  not  have  dared.  The  three  of  them  spent  the  time
remaining  until  dinner  talking  in  a  warm  alcove,  holding  each
others’  hands.  A’bel  and  Pehtal  surely  were  the  two  who  had
traveled here long  ago  out  of  curiosity,  only  to  return  and  stay.  I
had met  their  children,  who  had  hatched  at  Triad,  and  now  were
nearly grown: A Red who would be winged next year, but who even
in  pudgy  immaturity  moved  like  flame,  and  a  pensive  solitary
Brown who at the age of seventeen was writing a novel.
After supper, the people remained for a council.  A  few  who,  for
one  reason  or  another  had  missed  the  meal,  were  fetched  from
whatever craft  or  study  held  them  so  absorbed.  Eventually,  all  of
the adults and older children were there.
It was Pehtal who  opened  the  meeting.  They  used  few  titles  in
that place, and I had assumed that Lian was the Triad’s version of
taiseoch. But as Pehtal stood up to speak, Lian sat at her ease with
her  eyes  half  shut,  looking  as  relieved  and  exhausted  as  a  draf
when the spring plowing is finally done.
Pehtal said, “All of you know Delan’s story, and of our decision to
go  to  L’din.  But  Eia  was  no  longer  there,  nor  any  of  ids  captors.
Either  they  have  already  gone  to  attack  another  Ula,  or  the
disappearance  of  Delan  made  them  decide  to  move  away  for  the
sake of caution. Therefore we are once again faced with a decision:
what should we do now?”
Sitting through the discussion that followed was not easy for me.
To my astonishment, the Triad-re immediately raised issues of cost
and backlash and did not even mention issues of right and  wrong.

Just as with every  Walker I had ever met,  most of what was said
began with the words “We can’t afford…” Every time I heard those
words,  a  shock  of  anger  clenched  my  fists  and  set  my  heart
pounding in my throat.
Pehtal finally looked up from the piece of brown paper on which
id  had  occasionally  been  scribbling.  “I  gather  the  Aeyries  do  not
think there is anything to discuss.” Throughout the discussion, the
Aeyries had all sat like me, listening grimly, with their arms folded
on their hairy chests.
I found myself on my feet.  “Is  the  Triad  just  another  farm  and
the  sole  reason  it  exists  to  raise  food  and  children?  I  thought  the
people of the Triad were different from other people. I thought you
were all living together because you want to change things, not just
because  Walkers  and  Aeyries  working  together  can  grow  more
vegetables and corn than anyone else.”
As soon as I sat down, I began to shake. But I was not the only
one who was angry. Several others spoke. A Walker and an Aeyrie
exchanged subtle insults, only half in jest. Feili stood up, “If we do
not  act  as  Triad-re;  then  as  members  of  a  race  threatened  with
extinction, we, the Aeyries, would have to act alone. Whether we do
something or not is not even the issue. The issue is whether we do
it with the support of our Walker kin, or without it. I cannot help
but wonder, if it were the lives of four hundred Walkers that were
threatened, would you Walkers still be arguing to do nothing?”
The room abruptly filled with an uproar of shouting. I cringed in
my seat, doubting that the truce in this community was as strong
as the Triad-re like to believe. But Pehtal calmly jotted notes like a
scholar at a lecture. Once id turned to Lian to ask a question, and
she smiled broadly and held out her hand in a reassuring gesture.
The uproar gradually died down. Some  of the Walkers  who  had
not  spoken  earlier  spoke  in  support  of  action.  Others  recanted  on
previous  statements.  Somehow,  however  uncertain  and  troubled,
unity hatched anew from the egg of dissention. The Triad agreed to
send a group of people, Walker and Aeyrie together,  to each of the
Ulas, to warn of what was  coming  and,  if  asked,  to  participate  in
the outcome.

When  the  meeting  was  declared  over,  the  Triad-re  gathered  in
mixed  groups,  arms  and  wings  around  each  other,  making  peace.
But  I  drifted  to  the  edge  of  the  room,  taking  no  part  in  the
reconciliation,  preoccupied  with  thoughts  of  Eia.  All  this  activity
would do idre no good. Depressed, I leaned against the wall. These
people belonged with each other. But I belonged with no one.
When I spotted A’bel and Pehtal heading out the door, I gave in
to  my  need  and  followed  them.  Behind  me  in  the  common  room
there was an explosion of laughter. Ahead  of  me,  the  pair  clasped
hands as they walked, and the sound of their voices murmured back
at me. The lamp flame blurred in my vision as Pehtal ruffled A’bel’s
mane with a gentle hand.
I hesitated at the corner  when  they  started  up  the  stairs.  Why
was I  following  them?  The  afternoon  had  been  so  hectic  for  them
that they had not even been able to go up to their room and change
their clothes.  Surely  they  had  left  the  common  room  prematurely
because they were  worn out and wanted to  rest.  I  called  myself  a
selfish creature, and my chest ached as I watched them go.
Pausing between one step and the next,  Pehtal  turned  ids  head
and looked down at me. Id did not seem surprised or displeased, but
touched  A’bel  and  said  something  softly.  They  both  turned  and
came back down the stairs.
“You should have spoken, Delan, we didn’t see you.”
“Come up with us.”
I  protested  feebly.  But  they  put  their  arms  around  me,
blanketing  me  generously  in  warm  wings,  enveloping  me  in  the
sharp-sweet scent of Aeyrie musk and sweat.  I walked with them,
as I had wanted so desperately to do.
“Lian tells me you and I have a friend in common,” A’bel said.
“Who?”
“The Orchth.”
I stopped short in my amazement. “Brother Och?”
They  pulled  me  forward  again,  A’bel  laughing  softly.  “Six  legs,
big teeth, loves to sing…”

“You’re the Aeyrie who was in the menagerie?”
“Yes, unfortunately. Is he well? I always wondered what became
of him.”
“He has a cave in a wood, with baskets of nuts and fruit for the
winter. He is lonely. He didn’t want me to leave him. I told him I
would try  to find a way  to get him home again. He saved my life.
Because you saved his once, he said.”
“Only after  he saved my sanity. You will have to show me on a
map where he lives.”
We  paused  at  a  bedroom  door.  I  began  to  protest  again,  but
Pehtal gently hushed me. A’bel opened the door and drew me in.
It was a comfortable, cluttered room, full of bright weavings and
books and mechanical drawings of  windmills.  It  contained  none  of
the bottles and vials and bowls and measurers that I  had  come  to
associate with sorcery.
“Well, no faerie has been here to clean up the mess.”
“Somebody changed the sheets for us.”
“Sh’man Lian, of course.”
The  two  of  them  moved  about  softly,  taking  off  their  vests  to
reveal  sweatstained  flightsuits,  hanging  their  knife  belts  from
hooks. I went to a square chunk of blue glass mounted on a stand.
Its sides seemed frosted over, but the top was smooth and polished.
Lamplight glimmered  on  its  surface.  Leaning  over  it,  I  seemed  to
see something moving within, like the swirling of clouds in storm. I
drew back hastily.
“Did you see something in the Glass?”
I turned to find Pehtal watching me. “I—thought I saw the Void.”
In  the  periphery  of  my  vision,  I  saw  A’bel  straighten  into  a
profound  stillness.  Pehtal  came  over  to  me  with  ids  garment  half
undone.
“I  imagined  it,”  I  said,  made  nervous  by  A’bel’s  tension  and
Pehtal’s overdone casualness.
“No, you probably saw something.” The magician put ids hand on
my shoulder. “Look again.”

Clouds swirled within the Element, as if caged there. I felt very
strange and light-headed. From a distance ehtal’s voice said quietly,
“You  are  sorely  troubled  by  a  question  for  which  you  have  no
answer. What is it?”
“How can I help Eia?”
“Now the clouds clear.” Even as id spoke, the swirling dispersed
into a whiteness and a shimmering of starlight. I was looking at a
spire  of  glass,  winter  bare  and  white  with  snow.  I  saw  a  rudely
walled cave. Was Och there? Scarcely had the thought come to me
before  I  was  within  the  cave.  He  lay  on  the  cold  floor,  listlessly
eating a handful of dried fruit. I heard the air in his lungs. I heard
his claws scrape the floor.
I said, “Brother Och.”
His head jerked up and his nostrils flared. “Where?”
“It’s Delan. I’m talking to you from far away. I miss you, Och.”
His staring eyes softened. What he did not understand, he could
nonetheless accept. “Brother? Find Other Delan?”
“Not yet, but I’m safe. I found your friend A’bel.”
He leapt to his feet. “A’bel! Miss you, brother.”
“A’bel wants to see you again, too.”
And then I looked at the Void again. Pehtal pressed against my
back between my wings, arms wrapped around me, warm and solid
against my dizziness. Id murmured, “So  the  Orchth  is  part  of  the
answer? Wish again, Del.”
I wished. As the swirling in the Glass cleared, I swallowed a cry
of panic. Teksan looked out of the Glass. But his expression did not
change:  he  was  unaware  of  me.  He  spoke  to  someone  I  could  not
see. My heart thundering, I held myself very still.
“Up Nest,” he said firmly.
I heard a vague murmur, someone protesting diffidently.
“No,”  Teksan  said.  “The  Black  is  native  to  Down  Nest.  I  have
other plans for Out Nest.”
The other spoke  again.  An  ugly,  awful  look  came  into  Teksan’s

face. He was laughing. “It cannot lie to me! It is mine.”
The Void wiped him away, like chalk from a slate.
Pehtal stood steady against my trembling. “So  it is to be t’Han!
That is useful news. Wish one last time.”
“No!” I knew, oh too well, what I would see this time.
“Three times, or you will not know the answer.”
The clouds swirled, faster and faster. From the center a point of
black  spread  until  I  looked  into  darkness.  It  was  a  heavy,  sticky
darkness. I could hear, somewhere within that darkness, the sound
of someone breathing.
I  could  not  see.  I  thought,  I  need  a  flame,  a  little  light.
Something  flared  within  me.  I  watched  its  glow  spread,  fighting
back the shadows.
Eia sprawled on the floor in chains, Id was still, awfully still. Ids
wings had a broken, crumpled look to them. Rib and hip bones stood
out under dull fur.  A painful breath heaved through ids chest, and
then id lay still again.
“Eia,” I whispered.
Id  lifted  a  hand,  and  clenched  it.  Chain  rattled  on  stone.  The
hand dropped to the floor again, open palmed.
“Eia, open your eyes.”
They  opened.  I  saw  my  light  flickering  in  the  black  depth  of
them,  like  a  lampflame.  A  long  time  id  looked  at  me,  face
expressionless. “What are you?” Ids sweet voice had hoarsened to a
whisper. I knew too well why.
“It’s Del.”
The voice remained joyless and flat. “Del?”
“I know you think this is one of Teksan’s dreams, but it’s not. I
got  away.  I’m  safe  from  him.  Ch’ta  is  safe,  and  so  is  your
manuscript. Can you tell me where you are?”
Id  stared  into  my  flame.  Finally  id  took  in  a  breath,  and  let  it
out.  “No,”  id  sighed.  “We  went  through  the  Void.  Are  you  certain
you’re safe?”

“Yes.”
“Good.” Eia’s hand clenched again, fisting around the shadows. “I
hoped you might find Triad. No, don’t tell me,  or I’ll tell him. Del,
you have to warn the Ulas about him.”
“I am doing that. But tell me how to help you.”
“You can’t. I am dead.”
“No!”
“I cannot fight him anymore.”  Ids worn voice neither rang  with
conviction nor grew husky with emotion. I heard only emptiness.
I looked at the furred skeleton of Eia, thinking of the inner flame
which Teksan loved to snuff out. I thought of it, and felt afraid. A
wish made me able to see it. Within Eia’s ravaged body it smoldered
with  a  red  that  was  nearly  black.  It  still  burned,  but  somehow  I
knew that when it was extinguished there would be no recovery.
“Give your Self into my safekeeping. He will think he has  won.
He will take care of you then, because you will be valuable to him.
He will not hurt you any more.”
The chains rattled. “Del—”  Tears  shone  faintly  on  ids  cheeks.  I
thought I could not bear it.
“Yes. I trust you. I give my Self. Into your care.”
I reached  out,  not  with  my  hand  but  with  some  other  part  of
myself,  to  take  the  smoldering  flame  out  of  Eia’s  heart.  Ids  voice
cried out, wild and despairing, raw  pain  dying  to  hollow  silence.  I
cried  out  in  response,  as  a  ravenous  burning  and  a  primitive
heaviness clutched as frantically as a found child within my shelter.
And then I saw only the Void.
“What did I do?” I cried. “Pehtal! Oh, what did I do?”
 
I jerked  awake  in  the  night  with  Eia’s  despairing,  deathly  cry
still echoing in my ears. I tried to hold myself very still, but Pehtal
shifted  beside  me  on  the  big  bed,  and  reached  a  hand  to  my
shoulder. “Delan?”
“I’m sorry.”

“Why do you think I made you stay with me? Bad dreams?”
I nodded. I had not wanted to awaken idre, but I was glad now
that id was awake, just as I had not wanted to stay the night with
them,  but  had  been  relieved  when  Pehtal  would  not  hear  of  me
going to my solitary bed.
Pehtal said, “Scrying is a thing that happens at the dream level,
which is why you need to tell someone about it right away, or write
down  what  you  see.  Otherwise  you  forget.  And  afterward,
sometimes, the nightmares.” The mage’s arm had pulled me  close.
At my other side A’bel stirred and sighed and then lay still again.
I said, “Then you must go through this all the time—”
“Too  often,  anyway.  My  partner  is  a  good  counterweight:  a
realist, a scientist. Sometimes the thing I fear most is that id will
grow sick and tired of coping with me, after all these years.”
When I had first met Pehtal that afternoon, I would never have
even  suspected  that  id  suffered  from  fear.  But  I  had  seen  much
more since then.
“Why did you want me to look in the Glass rather than yourself?”
“Because  your  personal  involvement  meant  you  could  see  more
than I. Because love made you able to do something that my respect
and affection would not be enough for.”
“Love!” There was a bitterness in finally saying the word. “Better
to have killed idre!”
“Maybe Eia will live to thank you for  it.  But  to  carry  another’s
soul is hard work. And it will grow harder.”
The heavy, smoldering fire in me was no burden. I cherished it,
even as I was bewildered by its presence. How had this happened? I
did  not  understand,  and  yet  I  did  understand,  as  if  in  a  dream,
where  logic  follows  its  own  strange  ways,  and  draws  its  own
incoherent, but sensible conclusions. I said, “It’s not what I have to
carry that makes me afraid.”
“It’s what you are that is frightening?”
I shivered. Now that I had said the word “love,” there was a new
word I did not want to say.

“To be a mage is not to be a sorcerer.  The gifts which are called
magic  are  just  ordinary  Aeyrie  talents  brought  to  their  logical
extreme. The ability to envision, to anticipate the future, to create,
to  tame  natural  laws.  Often  the  very  talented  Aeyries  seem  like
mages  to  me.  Often  my  gifts  of  planning  and  building  and
protecting  look  very  commonplace.  The  one  thing  which  clearly
distinguishes a mage is the ability to scry glass.”
“You helped,” I protested.
Pehtal’s  hand  touched  my  sensitive  wing.  I  lay  very  still,
babbling silently to myself, id is just being kind, you do not feel this
feeling, you do not.
Touching my rigid back, Pehtal  hesitated.  Ids  voice  was  soft  as
the  whispering  of  the  bedsheets,  warmed  by  kind  amusement.  “If
you are going to spend time with Aeyries you will have to learn to
say  ‘no’  outright.  We  are,  as  the  Walkers  say,  a  shockingly
promiscuous people.”
My voice wavered, thin as a child’s. “Teksan raped me.”
“Yes, I know. The gentle healer warned me earlier that if I hurt
you she would  have  me  for  a  fur  rug.  Expect  as  much  Walker  as
Aeyrie, she said. Expect you to be accustomed to being punished for
honesty. So how am I to know if I’m hurting you? Are you going to
be able to tell me?”
Ids fingers drew fire on my wing. I shuddered and reached out a
hand.  Age  lines  were  deep  creases  under  my  fingertips.  Pehtal’s
mouth touched one of my fingers, soft and warm and wet. “Del?”
“You’re not hurting me.”
“But you’re shaking.”
“I’m afraid. I’m always afraid. Teksan dug a canyon in me. It’s a
long way down.”
Pehtal pulled me into the curve of ids arm, against thick fur and
hard, bulging flight muscles. Ids wide wing curved over me.  I  had
witnessed Aeyrie children, held like this against warm fur, under a
spread wing. I seemed to remember, not that it had ever happended
to me,  but that this was safety,  this  was  what  safety  felt  like.  In
that safety, I discovered that I had it in me to cross the gulf.

After  a  while  A’bel’s  sleepy  voice  shocked  me  back  into
self-consciouness. “Pehtal, you nest robber.”
Pehtal murmured, half under me, “It’s all right, Del, don’t go.”
“Don’t go.”  A’bels lean body tucked, not so  much  between  us  as
beside us both.
Aeyries are uniquely adequate for such tangled arrangements, In
the end, I could not distinguish between them.
 
The Walker part of me was shocked speechless, of course. But, in
the morning, as the two  of them made haste to beat  the  crowd  to
the  bathhouse,  they  were  kindly  agreeable  to  pretending  that
nothing unusual had happened. I sought out Lian.
She  managed  to  refrain  from  laughing.  “Within  the  Aeyrie
culture, joining a threesome is just about as shocking and unusual
as eating breakfast in the morning. Aeyries often partner in threes
and raise children in threes. Even the Quai-du of war is fought  in
triad.  Established  couples  are  rarely  strictly  monogamous,  Pehtal
and  A’bel  have  taken  occasional  thirds  for  as  long  as  I’ve  known
them.  Remember  what  you  learned  from  your  H’ldat  dictionary?
The  Aeyries  have  no  word  for  ‘family.’  They  are  a  fundamentally
communal people.”
“Oh,” I said. In the course of Lian’s short lecture I had gone from
distressed  and  embarrassed  to  irritable.  I  hated  being  found
amusing.
Lian  said  delicately,  “I  have  heard  that  their  partners  do  not
usually  have  any  regrets.  That  the  two  of  them  have  a  gift  for
welcoming and setting at ease and making  their  open-heartedness
known.”
“You arranged it, didn’t you?”
Lian  raised  her  eyebrows.  “I?  Your  concerns  are  Pehtal’s
business.  When  I  realized  how  taken  with  you  id  was,  I  told  idre
what I thought would be to your benefit. Was I wrong?”
“No,” I said reluctantly. In truth, it had been a very sweet night.
She let me be, taking me by the arm and saying something about

how it was time for the stitches in my arm to be removed. Two days
it had been since I was last aware of pain, even though my wound
had been a deep one. “You Aeyries and your high metabolisms,” she
said in mock disgust.
She  did  her  work  quickly  as  I  watched  in  fascination.  I  kept
waiting  for  pain,  but  I  scarcely  even  felt  the  tug  of  the  thread
pulling out. As she finished, she said, “Now this business of scrying
the Glass, on the other hand—”
I answered too quickly, “Well, Pehtal is a mage after all.”
“Del, you know perfectly well that it was not Pehtal who scried
the Glass last night.”
“Pehtal helped,” I said desperately.
“Who  helped  you  to  guide  the  onfrit  to  where  you  were
imprisoned so you could be freed? Or to cut yourself free from  the
Rope called Despair? Who helped you to know in advance when he
was about to open a Door, or that a Follower had been set on your
trail? How  did  you  know  what  direction  to  turn  to  find  help?  Did
Pehtal help you with all of these things?”
I  startled  both  of  us  by  bursting  into  tears.  I  had  not  even
become accustomed yet to having wings. I still believed firmly that
I was ugly and stupid and clumsy I found it difficult to accept that I
might  be  the  offspring  of  a  taiseoch  and  an  inventive  genius.  To
have to admit that I was a mage as well was just too much.
 
At  breakfast  Pehtal  told  the  Triad-re  about  the  scrying.
Assuming  the  vision  had  been  Pehtal’s,  the  people  were  quick  to
agree  to  go  only  to  Ula  t’Han,  Up  Nest,  the  Nest  of  the  Wind.
However,  the  three  who  did  know  that  the  seer  had  been  I,  also
knew  without  question  what  I  had  seen.  I  was  the  only  one  who
asked  Pehtal  worriedly,  “But  what  if  the  Teksan-dre  go  to  Ula
t’Cwa?”
“They won’t.” And that was the entire discussion.
Many of the Walker females and half the Aeyries were pregnant.
Since  a  pregnant  Aeyrie  was  vulnerable,  being  too  heavy  to  fly,
none  of  them  were  to  make  the  journey,  even  though  few  bore

fertile eggs.  I had not even considered before now that I  might  be
fertile. I went to Lian in another panic.
“It’s too late in the season,” she said.  “L’shils  don’t  lay  anyway.
There are precautions you can take,  which you have  an  obligation
to  learn  before  next  autumn.  But  most  of  us,  Walker  and  Aeyrie
alike,  simply  abstain  from  intercourse  in  season.  It’s  only  one
month out of the year.”
We were to leave the next day. Only seven Aeyries were among
the  travelers,  besides  the  one  swift  and  enduring  flyer  who  had
already left the day before.  All but I  were  skilled  in  Quai-du.  Ten
Walkers,  Lian  among  them,  and  Pilgrim  present  in  awareness,
would  also  make  the  journey.  Most  also  carried  weapons,  though
there  were  far  too  few  of  us  to  stand  against  Teksan’s  numbers.
With the help of Pilgrim, we hoped to avoid him.
At  daybreak  I  walked  with  Pehtal  through  the  chaotic  yard,
where children ran loose and drafs milled. The Walkers, bundled in
winter wool, worked awkwardly beside the unencumbered, barefoot
Aeyries. Pehtal caught one of the shoulders in passing. “Feili.”
The  Gold  turned,  attentive  and  polite.  “Yes,  Sh’man.”  Id  was
dressed for flight, with ids blade tied down to ids thigh.
“You are the best teacher we have. Would you instruct Delan in
flight and Quai-du while we travel?”
Feili looked at me then, a swift, angry glance, as if to ask if this
stupid idea was mine. The silence stretched out awkwardly.
“Why  don’t  you  two  discuss  it.”  Pehtal’s  tone  was  mild,  but  I
knew an order  when  I  heard  one.  Id  walked  away  to  where  A’bel
was being dictator over the final organization of the supply wagon.
“It’s not as if there was something wrong with me,” Feili said.
I said stiffly, “I like you. I wish you would be my teacher. I hate
feeling so stupid.”
“That’s not what I mean.”
“I know.”
Feili sighed.
“It’s Eia—”

“Great  Winds,  Del,  every  l’shil  loves  ids  Companion!  Besides,  I
doubt you ever said that to Pehtal or A’bel these last two nights.”
Everybody knew about the affair, this being a small community,
and to my enormous relief actually seemed to approve of it. I said,
struggling  to  be  tactful,  “If  I  decided  to  go  somewhere  else,  they
would just wish me well.”
“Oh.”  Feili  half  turned  ids  back  to  me,  pale  wings  tense  and
hunched in their folds.
“Feili—” I said unhappily. But I was tired of feeling guilty about
something which really wasn’t my fault. Feili was the one offering
me hunger when what I needed was generosity.
The flyers were  starting for the Tower.  There was an uproar  of
leavetaking.
I finally said, “I’m sorry. I—I could have been nicer about it.”
“You could have.”  Id turned ids  face  back  to  me,  more  troubled
than angry. “But that’s no reason for me to be so offended. It’s not
as  if  I  haven’t  been  turned  down  before,  and  survived  it.  Do  you
have  a  flight  vest?  Why  don’t  you  climb  the  Tower  with  me,  and
show me what I have to work with.”
Chapter 14
« ^ » 
The wind blew us  inland.  The  swelling  sea  disappeared  into  haze.
Below, the gray  land  lay,  the  ponds  dull  as  unpolished  metal,  the
trees black tangles against the shimmering snow. The frigid air felt
firm  as  water  under  my  wings.  Like  a  boat  on  a  swift  current,  I
rode the wind. Below and behind me,  small  as  children’s  toys,  the
Walkers  plodded  on  drafback,  dragging  the  supply  wagon  behind
them.
I learned: wind and counter-wind, up-draft and down-draft, what
the clouds mean and how to fly against the current.  I  learned  the
names of the ever-changing layers of air, and how to identify them
by  the  way  they  feel:  firm  and  solid,  tingling,  unsteady,
unpredictable.  My  H’ldat  vocabulary  of  wind  words  suddenly

acquired a meaning for me.
Feili  tested  my  new  knowledge  repeatedly,  until  frustration
made  my  voice  shrill.  “Let’s  go  down  again,”  id  said,  for  what
seemed the hundredth time.
“How many times?” I shouted. It seemed very quiet there in that
high place, but the sneak-thief wind snatched the words out of our
mouths and carried them off.
“Until you know,” Feili said.
“I know!” I shrieked.
“No  you  don’t.”  Id  glided  earthward,  bumping  slightly  in  an
invisible disturbance.
I shouted the wind-names at Feili’s back as we sank downward.
Through  a  wisp  of  cloud,  a  layer  of  chill,  a  layer  of  warm,  many
other layers as well, each speaking its personality against my wide
wings.
“Better,” Feili said.
“I didn’t make one mistake.”
“That’s not the point.”
By  midmorning,  weariness  made  flight  no  longer  effortless.  I
flew  beyond  irritation  and  boredom,  into  an  internal  silence,  a
stillness  and  clarity  of  attention  which  was  altogether  empty  of
thought.  Only  two  things  existed:  my  wings  and  the  wind  which
related to them.
Feili startled me out of it. “Del. Del!”
I  turned  my  head.  Id  flew  directly  above  me,  synchronizing
wingstrokes  with  mine  so  that  we  would  not  knock  each  other
awry.  “What?”  I  said  stupidly,  feeling  as  if  I  had  been  awakened
from sleep.
“Now you know,” Feili said.
I stared blankly at the bright Gold, bewildered.  I  could  vaguely
remember  shouting  wind-names  at  Feili,  yet  again,  but  shouting
them  without  thinking,  letting  the  knowledge  of  my  wings  speak
directly to my teacher.

Feili handed me a flight bar out of ids thigh pouch. “We’ll land.”
The rush of energy overlaid my dull weariness like a last glow of
sunlight on a twilit sky.  Despite the flight bar I landed  badly:  My
wings simply did not  have  the  strength  to  sustain  the  stall.  After
scraping  through  a  tree  branch,  I  hugged  the  snow  at  last.  Cold
clawed into me.
Feili dragged me up, beating the snow out of my fur,  pulling me
roughly to ids chest, cupping me inside ids wings. I put my head on
ids shoulder, weary beyond surprise. “S’olel,” Feili said.
“What?”
“S’olel, the knowing which is feeling. The single most important
thing. The one thing I cannot teach. Trust it, Del. It can save your
life.”
We  stood  there  until  Pehtal  came  to  take  me  up  behind  on  ids
draf.
 
The Aeyries chose the place to stop for the night; a young wood
where the snow was not deep, with a good sized hill nearby for the
flyers  to  use  for  a  flight  tower.  The  evening’s  meal  of  bread  and
cheese and crunchy vegetables and foamy ale seemed a feast.
The  cold  day  became  a  raw  night.  All  of  us  slept  in  groups,  in
nests  banked  by  snow  and  sheltered  by  tarps,  with  the  chilled
Walkers complaining only half in jest when Pehtal and A’bel and I
slept with each other and there were not enough warm  Aeyries to
go around. Feili found idreself to be very popular that night.
It  seemed  a  passage  of  moments  from  the  time  that  Lian’s
liniment  first  began  to  burn  in  my  muscles  until  the  time  that  I
opened my eyes to see the drafs huddled together  and steaming in
the pale light of sunrise. I tried to move, and groaned.
Feili’s  taut,  bright  body  appeared  suddenly  around  the  edge  of
the tarp. I nestled closer into A’bel’s hot fur under Pehtal’s red wing
and hastily tried to pretend I was asleep.
“Get up, onfritling.”
“Can’t,” I mumbled.

“Fine.  I’ll  just  tell  Pehtal  you  don’t  have  the  discipline  for
Quai-du, and should have been left at home.”
Somehow  I  extricated  myself  from  the  embraces  and  blankets.
My bedfriends nestled closer together without awakening. Stiff as a
jointed puppet I straightened up, and stretched my wings one at a
time. All down my sides and up the center of my back, pain burned.
I groaned again.
Feili appeared unimpressed. “Bring your knife.”
I limped after idre to a place where the drafs had trampled down
the snow. Lian found us there later when breakfast was ready. Feili
had ruthlessly drilled me in motions that had appeared simple and
easy when id did them.  I did not even ride drafback that morning,
but  curled  up  and  slept  in  the  supply  wagon,  atop  boxes  of
hardbread, among cloth covered baskets of cheese and fruit.  In the
evening,  when  everyone  else  was  setting  up  camp  and  cooking
dinner,  Pehtal  took  me  out  to  an  open  space  where  we  drilled
together again, until the sun had fallen abruptly below the horizon
and I felt my sweat trying to turn to ice in my fur.
Two  more  days  passed  like  this.  My  endurance  and  patience
increased,  but  Feili  was  impossible  to  please.  Id  constantly
corrected the way I gripped my blade, the angle of my motion, the
degree of bend in one or another of my joints, and above all the way
I was using my wings. I hurt all the time,  not only in my muscles,
but  in  my  brain  as  well.  Having  realized  by  then  that  I  actually
enjoyed this grueling work, I doubted my sanity.
“Spar with me,” my teacher finally said one evening.
When I looked up at  Feili,  my  heart  stopped  dead  in  my  chest.
Ids face was expressionless with concentration. Ids body was utterly
still, yet the power and control in that stillness was terrifying.  The
friendly, importunate Gold  that  I  had  first  met  might  never  have
lived.  Reminded  of  Hana,  I  wondered  what  it  was  like  when  two
masters met in battle. Then Feili moved, and I thought no more.
Afterward,  we  joined  the  others  at  the  fire,  and  toweled  the
sweat  out  of  each  other’s  fur.  The  smell  of  bean  soup  made  my
mouth water and my belly hurt. “You did pretty good,” said Feili.
A  hard  earned  compliment  from  Feili  the  teacher  affected  me

more than all of ids earlier flattering. I could not even reply to it.
“You’re trembling. Aren’t you eating enough?”
“Still scared,” I said.
Id laughed, and hugged me. “Do you know what Lian would do to
me if I hurt you? Or Pehtal, for that matter?”
“A fur rug,” I guessed. “A very pretty one.”
“Why  thank  you.  But  I’ll  keep  it  attached  if  possible.  Think  of
how good it will feel, when you can replace that brashness of yours
with genuine confidence.”
“Confidence?” I dragged  my  fingers  absently  through  my  sticky
hair. “Whose idea was it for me to learn Quai-du?”
“Lian’s, I think.”
That  the  idea  for  the  fighting  lessons  had  originated  with  the
same Lian who fussed and fretted over me and my pains and little
injuries,  and  listened  to  me  talk,  hour  after  hour,  was  not  as
surprising  as  it  might  be.  She  coddled  me  shamefully  by  Walker
standards, but she pushed me forward with  one  hand  even  as  the
other embraced me.
I said to her that night, “I feel like I have four Companions, with
you in charge.”  As I sprawled on my stomach in my  bed  nest,  her
hands on my muscles made me gasp. “Do you have meetings about
me?”
“Of  course  we  talk  about  you,  wingling.  You  are  important  to
us.”
She had leaned most of the air out of my lungs, and for a while I
couldn’t speak. “I like it,” I finally said, utterly confused.
“Just remember that the role of Companion is to get you airborne
and then let you go to choose your own wind. Del, I can hardly feel
your bones anymore, you’ve got so much muscle on you, after  only
four days! Eia won’t recognize you.”
“Do you think so? I hope id gets the chance.” I  lay  quiet  a  long
time. The warm  heaviness of Eia’s soul throbbed in my awareness
like a heartbeat.
 

The mountains sprang up before us, a bank of knives pointing at
the  sky.  One  heavy,  sullen  day,  sunless  and  threatening  snow,  I
flung myself off a rock at first light, to begin my study of precision
flying. Before the morning was out I had nearly killed myself in a
bad  fall.  I  landed  in  snow  and  was  not  hurt  much,  but  I  lay
stunned, with the wind knocked out of me, staring in horror at the
blade-edged boulder that lay within arm’s reach of me. Feili shouted
from the air, “Del, are you hurt or what?”
I waved an arm weakily at id, got up, and climbed a hill  to  get
myself  airborne  again.  But  it  was  a  long  time  before  my  heart
ceased to thunder in my head.
We  ate  in  the  air,  ate  often,  and  I  could  watch  my  energy
burning  off  again,  floating  away  from  me  in  clouds  of  vaporized
sweat. This kind of flying needed no clothes to cut the cold, though,
as soon as I landed to rest, Lian handed me a blanket and I huddled
inside it, shivering crazily.  I mounted behind her on her draf.  She
handed me her supply bag without being asked. I had been eating
all morning, but I was ravenous.
“Having you behind me is like having my own private stove.”
“Mmm,” I mumbled around a mouthful of crumbs. I luxuriated in
the end of effort, and in the pride of having satisfied my demanding
instructor. Feili remained in the air, a bright spot in the  dull  sky,
swooping wildly and hovering incredibly  as  id  sparred  with  one  of
the other Aeyries.
Lian  winced  when  their  wings  collided  and  they  both  tumbled
earthward. Their recoveries were at once so  beautiful  and  terrible
that it made my throat hurt.
“It’s  amazing  they  don’t  get  hurt  more  often,”  Lian  said.
“Sometimes I can’t bear to watch them.”
By  afternoon,  we  were  in  the  mountains.  The  glass  was  blue
here,  cold  and  stripped  bare,  and  the  wind  poured  down  the  pass
like a bitterly cold torrent of water.  Feili  put  on  clothes  and  vest,
and took to the air again, with ids hands tucked into ids armpits to
keep ids fingers from  freezing.  The rest of us hung  our  heads  and
bundled our wings, and the Walkers put on all the clothes they had,
and still they shivered. I rode in front of  Lian  to  cut  the  wind  for

her. She huddled against me with her face between my wings and
her hands warm  between her chest and my back.  The  draf  sighed
and moaned beneath us, but walked on steadily enough.
I  looked  up  to  see  the  sun,  pale  behind  clouds,  sitting  atop  a
mountain  ridge.  Feili  was  out  of  sight,  scouting  ahead  for  a
campspot.  Even  as  I  looked,  a  flyer  appeared  over  the  edge  of  a
ridge.  And  then  another,  flying  behind  the  first.  Finally,  from  an
entirely different direction, a third.
“Pehtal!” I shouted over the shrieking wind, and pointed.
Id frowned at the sky.
As the three Aeyries drew closer to us and to each other I could
distinguish their colors in the fading light: the lone Gold, Feili, and
a Red, and a Black. They met in the air over our heads, where they
swooped and hovered on the back of the wild wind. Faintly I heard
the sound of them shouting.
The  Black  was  an  extraordinary  flyer.  Suddenly  shivering,  I
urged  my  draf  closer  to  Pehtal’s.  “I  know  who  they  are.  The
taseoch-dre t’Fon, Hana, Eia’s l’frer. And ids partner, Gein.”
“A  taiseoch-dre,  out  in  this  wind?  What  could  they  be  doing
here?”
“Hana is a Quai-du fighter, a good one,” I said nervously.
“So is Feili. But  Hana  would  be  foolish  to  attack  anyone  under
these circumstances. Id needs shelter and safety, just as we do.”
Feili  swooped  down  as  if  to  land,  but  instead  hovered
immediately  overhead,  tossed  about  like  a  leaf  by  the  wind,
recovering, over and over, without even losing track of ids shouted,
mixed language sentence. “I know them.  They are on their way  to
t’Han, representing the taiseoch t’Fon.”
“Have you found a place for us to camp?” Pehtal shouted.
“Just ahead.”
“Invite them to join us.”
“They seem nervous.”
“It would be good for them.”

“Give me some flight food. They’re out.”
Pehtal held out a satchel which Feili snatched up in passing.  Id
struggled upward with the satchel swinging.
“Those two won’t be glad to see me,” I said to Pehtal.
“They’ll be glad to see our food supply. It’s a long way from t’Fon
in this kind of weather.”
When we reached the campsite, the three of them were waiting
for  us,  huddled  together  in  a  place  out  of  the  wind.  Pehtal  went
over  to  them  with  an  armload  of  blankets,  but  only  to  greet  the
newcomers quickly and then turn away to supervise setting up the
camp.  I  unloaded  and  wiped  down  the  draf,  trying  to  keep  out  of
sight.  A  cookfire  flared  under  a  big  pot,  and  was  immediately  so
surrounded  by  people  holding  out  their  hands  to  its  warmth  that
the cooks had to shoo them off so they could do their work.
My draf wandered away, following an Aeyrie with an armload of
hay.  Lian  limped  up  to  me,  stiff  from  the  long  riding.  “Let’s  go
relieve Feili at host duty, you and I.”
“But—”
“You can’t hide from them all night.”
I sighed, and went with her, and then in an excess of bravado put
my wing around her. Shivering with cold, she hugged close to me.
“Will  you  share  my  bed  tonight,  wingling?  For  purely  chaste
purposes.”
I  was  still  giggling  nervously  when  we  drew  up  to  the  three
blanket-wrapped Aeyries leaning against the side of the mountain.
Hana nibbled a sweet bar, watching the camp warily. Id froze with
the bar at ids lips when we drew  near,  staring  at  me  in  disbelief.
Gein turned sharply, but at least retained ids self-posession, though
id forgot at first that I didn’t speak H’ldat. I had memorized a polite
phrase  explaining  my  language  deficiency,  and  said  it  with
reasonable facility.
Gein switched languages and said again, “Delan, is it really you?”
I said stiffly, “Yes. Is everyone at t’Fon all right?”
“Other than being frightened, yes, we are well enough.”

Lian’s  nudge  reminded  me  of  my  manners.  “I  am  pleased  to
present  the  healer  Lian  Merfriend  of  Triad.  Lian,  these  are  the
t’Fon  taiseoch-dre  Tefan  Malal  Hana,  and  the  healer  Vida  Orpha
Gein.”
Greeting them in what I had been assured  was  flawless  H’ldat,
Lian  put  out  her  hand.  Hana  managed  to  be  looking  the  other
direction, but Gein took her hand, exclaiming.
“Yes.” Lian said, “I am that Lian.”
“Eia wrote to me about you.”
“I hear you arranged your correspondence so ids parent wouldn’t
know about it.”
“The  taiseoch  is  a  person  of  very  strong  opinions,”  Gein  said
carefully. “But I missed Eia very much, and Hana missed idre even
more.”
“So do I,” Lian and I both said.
Hana  abruptly  turned  id’s  pointed  face  to  look  at  me  out  of
night-black eyes. “You know my l’frer? What else did you fail to tell
us?”
The Delan who had been facing  down  a  Quai-du  master  for  six
days  now  astonished  me  by  saying  quietly,  “I  did  not  tell  you  a
great deal, since I had Teksan’s Eye on me. I was trying to protect
Eia; I thought he didn’t know about idre.”
“Suppose you tell me why you didn’t simply destroy the Eye?”
I felt,  for a very  long moment,  as if I was  all  alone  in  this  cold
place, with the angry wind pulling at my wings and the sharp glass
all around me. “How? I didn’t know I could.”
Lian moved slightly against me.  “You expect  a  great  deal  of  an
uneducated l’shil. How was id to know that glass could be a weapon
against sorcery?”
Hana’s  face  turned  cold  as  the  wind,  but  Gein  said  “Of  course
Delan could not know! But there was too much blind prejudice and
too little wisdom in force that night.”
“You did not have to come,” Hana said shortly, shifting abruptly
into  some  other,  unfinished  argument.  But  Gein  did  not  respond,

not even to turn to look at Hana.
Their  shoulders  had  been  turned  to  each  other  even  before  we
walked up to them.  Gein’s face  was  sad  and  weary.  Had  id  taken
the opportunity to leave t’Fon, not intending to  return  there?  And
Hana  refused  still  to  accept  the  truth.  Yet  only  a  little  time  ago,
they had loved each other; they had delighted in each other!
Gein said, “Delan, I am sorry we locked you out of the Ula that
night. It was none of my doing. The taiseoch set a guard on my door
or  I  would  have  interfered  despite  the  consequences.  You  did  not
deserve to be treated so badly.”
Perhaps the guard on Gein’s door had been Hana idreself? I said
helplessly,  “I’m  sorry,  too.  I  kept  thinking  there  was  something  I
should be able to do, but—”
“It is as the sh’man Lian says: even if  there  was,  it  was  wrong
for  us  to  expect  you  to  do  it,  without  any  help  at  all  from  us.  At
least  you  managed  to  warn  us,  a  fact  which  only  I  seem  to
appreciate.  I  told  them  that  you  hoped  we  would  rescue  you
somehow. But they decided it was more convenient to believe that
you  were  in  collusion  with  the  Walkers,  and  therefore  they  were
merely giving you back to them.”
“The hostile Walkers,” Lian corrected.
Gein bowed neatly and said  sincerely,  “I  beg  your  pardon.”  But
Hana frowned into the distance, the muscles tight under the fur of
ids jawline, seeming to pretend that id was elsewhere.
“So what happened to you? I am glad to see you are with friends
now.”
I had only just begun to be able to talk with Lian about what it
had been like to be Teksan’s victim, and what it had done to me.  I
could  not  respond  to  Gein’s  question,  but  my  silence  seemed  to
speak for me.
“Hellwinds, it was bad, wasn’t it?”
Lian said softly, “You are an empath, Gein?”
They looked at each other, and I watched a little of the pain fade
from  Gein’s  face.  “Sh’man—”  Hana  jerked  angrily,  jealous,  it
seemed, even of a despised Walker.

Lian  said,  “Feili,  don’t  you  think  Hana  should  meet  Pehtal
properly?”
Feili who had seemed relaxed and even bored, said in a voice as
smooth as kipsbutter, “It does look as if our taiseoch is finally going
to sit down. Hana, you have heard of idre—”
Hana knew perfectly well that id was being  politely  sent  away.
But,  having  been  put  in  a  position  where  to  refuse  would  be  to
insult  ids  host,  id  gave  in  with  little  grace.  Lian  sagged  slightly
against me as the two Quai-du masters walked away. Gein shut ids
eyes, and there was a long silence. “That is an exhausting  anger,”
Lian finally said. “The t’Fon taiseoch-dre are a passionate people.”
Gein rubbed ids eyes wearily. “For good or for ill.”
I  abruptly  let  go  of  Lian  to  embrace  Gein.  Particles  of  ice
scattered  on  ids  clothes  burned  and  then  melted  in  my  heat.
Shivering in brief, controlled tremors, Gein hugged me tightly.
In  the  confusion  and  fear  of  my  visit  to  t’Fon,  I  had  been
unaware  of  my  growing  affection  for  this  gentle  one.  It  was
strange, to have lived my life in such solitude, and now suddenly to
feel bound to so many. It gave me a tight feeling in my chest, as if
my  inner  seams  were  straining  like  my  garment  was  over  my
expanding muscles.
Gein said against my neck, “You are much richer than you were
last  time  I  saw  you,  l’shil.  And  bigger,  too.  Have  you  found  a
Companion? I hope so.”
“Four  of  them.  A  healer,  a  mage,  a  crafter,  and  a  Quai-du
master.”
Behind me Lian said, “And Delan is wearing us all out.”
“And Eia?”
“Id winged me. I loved idre.”
“Then  you  are  indeed  fortunate.  But  where  is  id  now?  Hana
always listened to idre…”
Lian began to speak, but I interrupted her. “Lian, we should sit
down somewhere, by a fire maybe. And get some more blankets for
Gein, and food.”

Gein  shut  ids  eyes  again.  “If  Eia  is  dead,  don’t  tell  Hana.  Not
yet.”
“Not dead,” said Lian.
“All  right.  Let’s  sit  down,  and  you  can  tell  me  what  has
happended. Delan, don’t let go of me. You’re the only thing keeping
me on my feet. Sh’man—”
“Lian.”
“Would you whisper in Feili’s ear to be ready to catch Hana when
id collapses? I would hate for id to tear ids wings or fall into a fire.”
Lian turned a bemused face. “Why not just tell idre to sit down?”
Gein shook ids head. “Go ahead if you want to. I know better.”
Shortly after we had settled by a fire behind a wind bellied tarp,
Hana  fainted.  Gein  watched  with  an  expressionless  face  as  Feili
caught  the  Black  gracefully  and  eased  idre  softly  to  the  ground
where  id  lay,  small  and  crumpled  looking,  surrounded  by
exclaiming Triad-re. Feili shouted  at  us  in  exasperation,  and  Lian
got reluctantly from  under my wing.  During  all  the  time  she  was
gone tending Hana, neither Gein nor I said anything at all.
The three of  us  shared  a  nest  that  night,  and  the  next  day  we
arrived at t’Han.
Chapter 15
« ^ » 
Snow  fell  during  the  night.  When  we  dug  out  from  under  the
powder  in  the  morning,  it  was  still  falling.  The  fires  had  been
protected  with  tarps,  but  their  smoky  coals  did  little  to  ease  the
chill. We packed up and moved out quickly, lest the weather trap us
where we were.
I studied  no  lessons  that  day.  Even  Feili  would  not  fly  in  such
weather.  Id  walked  patiently  before  the  draf  which  carried  Hana
and Gein, neither of whom had ever ridden an animal before.  That
was a tense and discomforted group, and I  kept  my  distance  from
them.

T’Han  never  did  come  into  sight,  not  even  as  we  followed  the
twisting, snow-choked path to the base of the t’Han mountain. The
village over our heads remained hidden in snow and clouds. But the
lower door opened for us when we pounded it. Our scout, the flyer
we  had  sent  ahead,  stood  on  the  other  side.  Other  than  idre,  the
entryway was empty.
“They would let you in out of the snow, they said. But the upper
door is locked. They say they have no means of knowing friend from
foe in this weather. Bring in the drafs—there is hay for them.”
Hana, near the head  of  our  group,  said  in  outrage,  “Where  are
the people to greet us?”
The  Aeyrie  shrugged.  “No  one  is  ever  overjoyed  to  see  the
Triad-re.”
Having an angry and proud taiseoch-dre in our company had not
seemed  much  of  an  asset  until  then,  but  now  it  turned  to  our
advantage.  Id  climbed  the  spiraling  stairs  in  a  cold  fury,  and  the
sound of ids voice shouting and ids blade hilt thumping on the glass
echoed  to  the  bottom  of  the  well.  We  settled  our  drafs  in  near
darkness, giving them grain and hay and places to rest. Our supply
wagon  we  also  brought  into  shelter.  Well  before  we  were  done,
some Aeyries of the Ula came hastily down the stairs to light more
lamps  and  warily  help  us  with  the  work.  The  t’Han  taiseoch-dre
also arrived. Id politely greeted Pehtal and Lian in both languages,
and apologized for the cold welcome. “It is not always easy to walk
the  line  between  caution  and  cowardice,”  id  said.  “Please  do  not
take offense.”
Id  was  a  quiet-spoken,  self-possessed  person,  but  something
about idre drew my attention; a disruption beneath the quiet.
Feili came forward, hair glowing in the lamplight. “Hello, C’la.”
For  a  moment  the  taiseoch-dre’s  weariness  and  tension  were
revealed under ids control like bones under flesh. Then id spoke, in
H’ldat, softly but so slowly that  I  could  understand  it.  “Fire-fur,  I
am so glad to see you I might almost forgive  you for going away.”
Like  a  reflection  of  Feili’s  sudden  smile,  id  also  smiled.  “Welcome
home.”
“Tell me what happened to the taiseoch.”

“A  flight  accident  damaged  ids  spinal  cord  four  months  ago.  Id
nearly  died,  but  is  recovering,  other  than  being  unable  leave  ids
bed.”
“We had not heard of it yet. I’m sorry.”
The Bronze taiseoch-dre said nothing, but the rest of us, Aeyrie
and  Walker  alike,  relaxed  abruptly.  Perhaps  the  Aeyrie’s  muted
sorrow  reminded  us  that  we  were  not  figures  in  some  summer
drama,  but  real  people,  feeling  real  pain.  Then  Lian  stepped
forward to say, “I may be able to help the taiseoch. If you will trust
a Walker.”
 
Ula  t’Han  was  organized  more  self-consciously  than  t’Fon.
Instead  of  eccentric  disorder,  t’Han  had  elegant,  well  tended
beauty. Around its many windows, exotic plants clustered. In each
room, rug,  curtain, and  upholstery  blended  beautiful,  quiet  colors.
Even the work rooms were beautiful. On the looms rare cloths were
woven, with subtly dyed yarns hanging in bundles from the ceiling.
The seamsters  sat  by  their  bright  windows,  embroidering  for  rich
Walkers while one of them read out loud from  a book of poetry.  In
the small theater a trio of actors rehearsed a drama for the summer
festival.  My  explorations  finally  brought  me  to  four  huge
greenhouses, watched over by gregarious gardeners.
None  of  them  spoke  my  language.  I  followed  them  about,
learning from them the vocabulary with which to ask my questions.
They repeated themselves for me,  corrected my pronunciation, and
reassured me that I was not in the way.  “You are very  patient,”  I
said,  as  we  sipped  steaming  tea,  sitting  around  one  of  the
greenhouse  stoves.  The  windows  were  so  steamy  it  was  nearly
impossible to see out. Snow lay on the outside ledges, and, hanging
from the eaves, icicles shivered in the wind.
“Of course. How else could we garden?”
“A cold winter,” another said worriedly.
I saw very  little of any of  my  friends  or  Companions.  Feili  was
making peace with ids parents, from  whom id had parted in anger
three  years  ago.  Pehtal  and  A’bel  engaged  in  the  business  of
politics: lengthy, wearisome discussions with  the  two  taiseoch-dre.

Lian and Gein were both closeted with the injured taiseoch. It had
been agreed that Lian would be permitted to work with the taiseoch
if  always  accompanied  by  a  trusted  Aeyrie.  Gein,  native  to  that
town  and  a  healer  idreself,  had  volunteered,  not  so  much  out  of
duty as out of desire to remain in Lian’s presence. What they were
doing no one knew.  Even I, in  all  my  unschooled  ignorance,  knew
perfectly  well  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  done  for  a  damaged
spine.
I  encountered  two  other  l’shils,  and  was  more  than  a  little
startled to discover that I knew much more of the world than they.
Their booklearning was impressive enough, but neither one of them
had ever left the Ula except for some short flights before the winter
weather  set  in.  They  were  both  training  in  Quai-du.  Feili,  after
watching  them  at  practice,  refused  me  permission  to  train  with
them. They were not motivated the way I was. I was not advanced
enough to be able to keep from hurting them.
At night, I slept in the big room where all of  the  Triad-re  were
housed, and where the  Walkers,  despite  having  been  welcomed  to
the  Ula,  had  segregated  themselves  from  the  community.  But  I
spent  the  rest  of  my  time  elsewhere.  I  was  falling  in  love  with
t’Han.
Early  in  the  morning  of  our  third  day  there,  I  sat  alone  in  a
deserted, dark greenhouse, smelling rich, wet earth and listening to
the plants whisper their mysteries to each other. In an explosion of
light  the  sun  rose,  blazing  on  the  mountains,  glowing  on  the
inviolate snow.
I missed breakfast.  I wandered in a daze, vaguely  aware  of  the
tugging of guilt: no doubt someone was wondering what  happened
to me. I came eventually to a big, empty room on the outer edge of
the Ula. The door gaped open, so I went  in.  I  crossed  a  tiled  floor
crusted with random globs and streaks of paint. The skylights let in
a soft, pure light that made the standing easels and drawing tables,
and the clusters of supplies on the cabinet, stand out in  relief.  On
one  of  the  easels  an  uncovered  painting  stood,  a  dark,  pensive
portrait of an old Aeyrie looking out a window at a bright summer
land. There was sorrow in the somber colors, sharply contrasted to
the promise and warmth of the land beyond the window.

I went to the counter and picked up a paintbrush. Bottles of vivid
pigments  cluttered  the  shelves,  marked  in  the  beautiful  Aeyrie
script  which  I  could  not  read.  I  touched  them,  wondering  how
anyone could even dare to choose their colors, mix their paint, and
put it on canvas for everyone to see, to come out like the painting
on the easel, intimate, moving,  rich with meaning, laying bare the
hope and sadness of the painter.
I turned, hearing a soft sound at the door. A t’Han Aeyrie stood
there, studying me. I set down the paintbrush hastily, saying in my
imperfect H’ldat, “Pardon, I hope I have not done wrong.”  It was a
phrase I had used often during the last two days when my curiosity
had  repeatedly  led  me  to  places  I  had  no  permission  to  be.
Fortunately,  being  a  curiosity  myself,  the  t’Han-dre  were  usually
quick to figure out who I was. Like the gardeners, they seemed to
delight in answering my foolish questions.
The Aeyrie bowed slightly. “The h’ta h’shal belongs to everyone.”
“I  was  brought  up  a  Walker.  I  do  not  speak  H’ldat  very  well.
Please be patient.”
“You must be Delan.”
“Yes, sh’man.” I was acquiring, I do not know how, the ability to
distinguish the teachers and leaders and craftmasters  who were  to
be given the title of honor.
“I am the sh’man h’ta. My name is Sardon Ande Stotla.  Do you
want to paint?”
I swallowed, taken aback. “Me? I know nothing of art.”
“I have been watching you. I think you do.” The art master came
over and picked up the brush I had laid down so hastily, and put it
back in my hand.
I missed lunch. I missed my scheduled Quai-du practice session.
Feili appeared abruptly at my elbow and spoke to me. “Go away,” I
said.
“Id  should  not  forget  to  eat,”  Feili  said  to  Stotla,  who  was
working  on  the  pensive  Aeyrie  painting,  and  occasionally
supervising me.
“There is food in here somewhere.”

Feili found it and harassed me until I ate it, then id went away
again. The light had begun to fade when Gein appeared and firmly
took the paintbrush out of my hand. I stared blankly at idre, as if I
had  awakened  abruptly  from  an  intense  dream.  “Dinner,”  Gein
said. “The h’ta h’shal will still be here in the morning.”
Stotla  was  cleaning  ids  brushes.  Gein  bowed  to  idre.  “Sh’man,
Forvel has asked for you.”
We  were  halfway  to  the  common  room  before  I  realized  how
hungry I was, and that the bones of my body ached from  standing
so  long,  and  that  my  hand  was  cramped.  “Gein,  something
happened to me.”
“Something good?”
“I  don’t  know.”  I  wiggled  my  shoulders  and  shook  my  wings,
trying to wake up and organize myself.
“You don’t know?”
“Is it good to be gone so far away? You could all have died, and I
wouldn’t have cared.”
“Better answer that question for yourself.”
“How is the taiseoch?”
“Much  better.  And  so  am  I.  I  want  to  remain  with  Lian.  I  am
thinking of joining Triad.”
We walked the rest of the way arm-in-arm, but when we arrived
at  the  common  room,  Gein  left  me,  and  sat  with  Feili.  The
Triad-dre were still segregated at their own table, an arrangement
that, other than Gein, no one seemed able to violate. I sat down and
replied  absently  to  a  question  from  Lian,  and  then  sank  into  my
daze again. After a while someone sat down next to me, and I heard
the sound of a cane being laid on the floor. There was a stirring and
whispering  in  the  room.  I  came  to  myself  enough  to  swallow  a
mouthful  of  soup,  and  turned  my  head  to  discover  that  Stotla’s
painting had come to life beside me: an aging, pensive Aeyrie, with
lines  drawn  deep  in  ids  face,  fur  thinning  and  frosting  over.
Probably  feeling  me  jerk  with  surprise,  id  turned  his  head.  “So,
Delan, do you like t’Fon?”
I said sincerely, “Yes. Very much.”

“My  partner  is  excited  by  this  day  with  you.  Perhaps  you  will
consider staying with us.”
I had spent the entire day mixing colors and dabbing them on a
canvas  to  see  how  they  looked,  which  surely  was  not  an  exciting
business to anyone but myself. I could see some of the colors in my
bowl of soup now, bright highlights and swirling streaks of gold and
brown. The Aeyrie turned away to greet a t’Han-dre who had come
up  hesitantly  and  stood  with  ids  wings  in  tense  bundles.  The
t’Han-dre said, “Forvel, is it truly you?”
The old Aeyrie laughed, slow and deep, and held out a hand  for
the other to take. At my other side, Lian pretended interest only in
her dinner, but the  entire  side  of  her  face  crinkled  up  with  laugh
lines. I whispered, “Is this the taiseoch?” But I knew the answer.
Forvel would never walk without the cane, but the chances were
quite good that id could fly as if nothing had ever happened. Pilgrim
and Lian had done something to the channels in ids nervous system
so that ids organs could function normally again, and were able to
restore at least a portion of muscular control to ids lower body.
It  was,  as  Pehtal  put  it  cheerfully,  by  far  the  most  important
thing  that  happened  since  our  arrival.  Throughout  the  meal,  the
bewildered  t’Han-dre  kept  coming  up  to  the  Triad  table  and
touching  idre.  Some  of  them  actually  sat  at  the  table,  and  even
attempted  some  stiff  conversation  with  the  Walkers.  I  was
privileged  to  see  it  happen,  when  one  Aeyrie  smiled  for  the  first
time in ids life at a feared and distrusted Walker.
Eventually Forvel turned back to me. “They tell me that none of
the Walkers are making free of the Ula. They do not use the baths
or the practice rooms. They do not visit the gardens. They have not
gone to the library.”
“They are trying to be sensitive to the fears of the t’Han-dre.”
“Perhaps  if  they  went  accompanied  by  their  Aeyrie  l’frer,  that
would be sensitivity enough. And did not bear blades except in the
practice room, as is our custom.”
“Perhaps  they  might  do  this,  taiseoch.  But  why  are  you  telling
me? Lian, or Pehtal—”

“Everyone knows you are both Aeyrie and Walker. Who better to
act  as  interpreter  between  our  peoples?  Here  then,  look  not  so
frightened.  You  remind  me  of  C’la  the  first  time  I  asked  idre  to
represent me.” Ids hand patted my shoulder lightly, but I swallowed
painfully, unreassured.  Id  continued,  “I  have  sent  to  Ishta,  in  the
hope that the three Ulas might act in concert with each other. I told
idre that you are here.”
“I do not want to be a taiseoch-dre!”
Lian,  who  on  the  other  side  of  me  half  listened  to  three
conversations  at  once,  seemed  as  surprised  by  my  outburst  as  I
was.  But  she  said  calmly,  “Then  don’t  be  one,  child.  Haven’t  you
already  spent  too  long  trying  to  fit  yourself  into  the  wrong-size
clothing?”
“They tell me,” said Forvel, “that you are a mage.”
Lian said sharply, “Let the child grow accustomed to ids wings in
peace.”
“Sh’man,”  said  the  taiseoch  humbly,  “and  Delan.  I  beg  your
pardon.”
I  went  to  bed  with  Pehtal  alone  that  night,  but  it  was  not
lovemaking  I  wanted.  Pehtal  held  me  tightly,  and  did  not  speak,
and  did  not  request  anything  of  me.  Soon  the  sound  of  deep
breathing  filled  the  room,  and  yet  I  lay  awake  with  my  heart
pounding  in  my  chest,  and  Pehtal  also  lay  awake,  stroking  ids
fingers slowly through my fur. I finally said, “What is happening to
me?”
“All your life you thought you were nothing. And now you  have
reason  to  fear  yourself.  Maybe  you  wish  you  were  back  to  being
nothing again.”
“I spent all day in the art room—”
“Forvel came to me, seeking your Companion to tell id what had
happened.  It  was  something  important,  that  ability  to  be  so
engrossed.”
“I was just mixing colors.”
“What did it feel like?”

“Like it was too big for me. Like it was going to consume me.”
I stopped,  feeling  foolish,  but  Pehtal’s  head  nodded  against  my
shoulder.  “It  was  important.  I  recognize  that  you  are  afraid.  But
you have to find your own way to uncover your own answers; there
is no one else to do it for you.”
We lay still a long time, until Pehtal said, “Do you think it would
make  me  ashamed  of  you  if  you  cried?  I  am  proud  of  you,  Del.
Nothing will change that.”
I buried my face in ids fur.
The rest of my  life  I  would  be  struggling  for  balance,  trying  to
know  what  I  did  and  did  not  want,  weighing  my  choices  and
fighting to keep myself intact as the desires of others pulled at me,
the responsibility of power tied me down, and the compulsion of art
closed me in even as it opened me up. Too soon I was  no  longer  a
l’shil. My life would never be simple again.
 
When I awoke, it was late and I was as exhausted as if I had not
slept  at  all.  The  wind  wailed,  wild  and  lonely,  rattling  the
windowshutters.  A  plate  of  sweetbread  and  a  cup  of  milk  waited
beside  the  bed.  I  ate  and  drank,  and  then  went  out  shakily  in
search  of  Feili.  I  was  more  than  a  little  surprised  to  find  idre
talking  soberly  with  Gein  in  one  of  the  greenhouses.  Their  arms
around each other’s waist held each other very close.
“Well,” Feili began as I walked up to them, in a tone of voice that
told me id had been offended by my forgetfulness of yesterday.
“Feili, I don’t feel good. Just say you’ll come to the practice room
with me, or say you won’t.”
“Of course I’ll come.”
Gein turned ids gaze away from the stark view of the mountains
and  the  tumbling,  boiling  clouds.  “I  wish  you  used  fake  blades  in
training.”
Feili snorted in derision, but as they parted their  fingers  linked
and let go only reluctantly. I looked at Feili, wide-eyed, but id only
smiled.

The  practice  room  at  t’Han  was  almost  identical  to  the  one  in
t’Fon, except that the walls were decorated with a painted border.
Feili and I stripped off our garments and jumped off the platform to
practice precision flying. Only when I bumbled into the walls in my
tiredness  did  we  go  to  work  on  the  less  demanding  foot  fighting.
Morning slipped over into afternoon, and gradually I felt better.
“Enough!”  Rubbery  kneed,  I  rubbed  sweat  out  of  my  stinging
eyes.
Feili smiled at me.  “Why  don’t you take a break, and give me a
chance  to  work  with  my  peers  before  I  am  completely  worn  out,
too.”
I noticed Stotla in a  corner,  half  hidden  behind  a  sketchbook.  I
came  up  beside  idre,  to  watch  Feili  being  detailed  on  paper  as  id
talked to one of the other Quai-du-dre who had come in: the relaxed
stance belied the power in the bulging muscles, nipples pointed with
the  excitement  of  fighting,  wings  hovered  open  to  disperse  body
heat, blade dangled casually from one hand.
Stotla  turned  the  page.  A  ferocious  young  Aeyrie  hovered  in
mid-flight, wings wide and cupped around the still air, blade held in
attack,  mane  flying  out  wildly  around  ids  head.  I  blinked.  “Do  I
really look like that?”
“Sometimes.”
“Sh’man, I decided not to come to you in the art room today.”
Id  worked  again  on  the  drawing  of  Feili,  soft  pencil  moving
quickly across the coarse paper. Id did not speak, but  I  sensed  ids
attention.
“I was not so sure I want to love something that much.”
The  art  master  looked  up  at  me.  My  stomach  clenched  with
anxiety, but id only said mildly, “Come back when you are sure.”
“Tommorrow I’ll be there,”  I said. It was in that moment that I
first knew I would not be returning to Triad. Like Gein, I had found
the teacher I sought, at last.
The door crashed open. Hana  rushed  into  the  room,  like  a  wild
cloud riding a  tumult  of  wind.  For  a  moment  id  froze,  poised  and
tense,  with  the  shape  of  Eia  in  ids  bones,  wrenching  my  heart.

“Feili!” id shouted.
Feili turned  swiftly,  wings  bunching  up,  knees  bending,  fingers
tightening on the hilt of ids blade.
I started forward,  but too slowly. What happened was  beautiful
to see, beautiful and terrible. The jerk  and  tuck  of  the  wings,  the
soft, light touch of foot  on floor,  the awful,  brief, unbelievably fast
chiming encounter of blade on blade. They slipped past each other. I
watched Hana’s blade slide close to the fragile membrane of Feili’s
pale  wing.  I  watched  Feili  dance  aside,  counterattack,  and  be
parried away, the blade edges slashing a scarce finger’s width away
from the Black’s ribs.
Like me, others had started forward, and then had abruptly held
themselves  back.  I  clenched  my  arms  across  my  chest  over  my
pounding  heart,  and  watched.  Part  of  my  brain  babbled
appreciation  of  their  style:  How  neat  that  stroke  was.  How  good
Feili  was  at  following  up,  attacking  the  wings  when  Hana  was
using  them  for  momentum  or  balance.  How  impossibly  fast  they
both  moved,  and  how  softly.  Then  there  was  blood  in  golden  fur,
bright and red.
“No.”  I  shouted.  “No,  no,  no!”  I  rushed  between  them,
bare-handed  and  shouting.  The  stormcloud’s  blade  shone  clear  in
the  lamplight,  sky  blue  and  overlaid  with  light.  I  caught  Hana’s
wrist, and flung myself forward, using my weight to drop id to one
knee.  But  id  shook  me  off,  like  a  draf  would  a  biting  insect,
dumping me aside and getting afoot again in one powerful motion,
face slack with concentration, scarcely aware of me.
Feili’s blade hit the floor.  Where was Feili? I  struggled  up  from
my sprawl, only to feel a strong hand grip my shoulder. “No, don’t
move.  Stand  still,  Del.”  Feili  panted  heavily,  but  ids  voice  was
terribly quiet. “Someone go for a healer,” id said.
I looked around anxiously for Hana. The Black stood as if turned
to  glass.  Feili  had  dropped  ids  blade,  and  despite  ids  rage  Hana
would not attack someone who was unarmed.
“Stand still, Del! My blade slashed your wing.  Your  right  wing.
Hold it very still.”
I felt  the  pain  then,  like  a  flame  held  to  my  flesh.  Feili’s  arm

went  around  me.  I  leaned  on  idre.  Ids  hard  body  trembled  with
tension against me. “It didn’t go all the way through, I don’t think.
But don’t move, or you might tear it. Del, I’m sorry, I tried to stop.”
“Lian is going to—”
“Disembowel  me,”  said  Feili  faintly.  “Slowly.  Using  something
dull and rusty.”
“She wouldn’t spoil her fur rug like that. You’re hurt, too.  Your
blood is getting all over me.”
Feili laughed nervously. “It’ll wash off.”
By the time Lian arrived, Hana was  sitting  down,  head  resting
on one  hand,  looking  bleached  and  utterly  exhausted.  Over  Feili’s
shoulder I stared at idre rudely, hoping that by focusing on ids pain
I  would  become  less  aware  of  mine.  The  Aeyrie  healer  sewed
through my wing membrane with careful, awfully slow stitches. If
Feili had not been holding me up, I would long since have collapsed.
“What happened, Del?” Lian asked mildly.
I replied incoherently. She listened in silence.
“Gein must have told Hana that id is joining the Triad,” Feili said
when I was done.
“Id has decided so quickly? But why would Hana blame you when
it is I who…?”
“We spent the night with each other.”
“Oh,” Lian said. Then she looked sharply at Feili, as if struck by
something  surprising  and  unexpected.  “Oh,”  she  said  again,  very
gently this time.
I realized that the healer had finished ids work and was packing
ids  bag.  I  moved  my  wing  cautiously.  Feili  eased  ids  grip  on  me.
Blood had glued our chests together, but Feili had stopped bleeding
and  it  did  not  seem  a  dangerous  wound.  We  both  sat  down  on  a
bench before Lian, in a great deal of trepidation.
But she regarded us as remotely as a farmer assessing a draf. “A
lone  Aeyrie  has  been  spotted  on  the  western  path,”  she  said.  “A
Black.”

Chapter 16
« ^ » 
The injured Black limped slowly into the room. Aloof and upright, id
looked  at  the  taiseoch  out  of  empty,  dark-shadowed  eyes.  Forvel
said, “I am the taiseoch. Welcome to t’Han.”
“I am Matal Tefan Eia. Thank you for taking me in.”
“Please sit down, a healer is coming. Do you need to eat?”
“Thank you, I was given some food at the door.” This was a dead
person, speaking in a dead voice and looking out of dead eyes. Id sat
slowly and stiffly, as if id were a hundred years old. Ids face was a
mask,  skin  stretched  over  bones,  inset  with  dull  stones  in  the
eyeholes.
The satellite floating above ids head came into my view: An Eye,
dead white, turning slowly to scan the room. Pehtal had warned me
that it probably would not be invisible to me.
I shut  my  eyes  tightly.  I  had  promised  I  would  not  cry;  I  had
sworn I would keep perfectly still, if only they would let me in the
same room with Eia for a little while. Only it was not Eia. Pehtal’s
grip across my shoulders tightened as we lay on the floor behind a
pile of furniture which had been moved as if for waxing the floor.
My burden lay hot and weighty in my heart. But I did not know
what to do  with  it.  “You  have  to  trust  yourself,”  Pehtal  had  said.
“Remember that you knew how to take it away. Trust that you will
also know how to give it back.”
“You have some Walkers hibernating here?” Eia said.
“No,” said Forvel. “Why do you think that?”
“You have drafs in your stairwell.”
“Oh  yes,  they  belong  to  some  traders  who  wanted  to  start  the
spring  with  their  animals  in  good  condition.  They  paid  us  well  to
take  care  of  them.  Tell  me  what  happened,  Eia.  Why  are  you
traveling alone in the dead of winter?”
“I always travel alone, taiseoch, no matter what the season.”

“Shall we notify your parent that you are here?”
I  saw  life  then,  a  flash  of  rage  in  the  dull  eyes.  Anger  had
survived  when  all  else  was  gone,  anger  without  any  controls  set
upon it, as with Hana only much worse. Eia said softly, “My parent
does not care where I am, taiseoch.”
Brisk and quick moving, C’la entered the room. “Eia! It is good to
see you again!”
Eia moved as if to rise politely, but C’la held out ids hands to stop
idre from moving. Eia’s thigh was wrapped in strips of ragged cloth,
through which red blood seeped. “The healer?” C’la said to Forvel.
“Here id is now.”
It was the  same  healer  who  had  stitched  my  wing  only  a  little
while ago, now with an apprentice at ids side. “What happened?”
“I hurt myself in a fall,” Eia said. “It happened yesterday. I have
been walking all night.”
The wound was a bad one, deep and dirty and uncared for.  Eia’s
feet  were  frostbitten  also,  by  the  snow.  But,  for  the  skeletal
thinness and the emptiness of heart, no explanation was offered.  I
watched the healer’s face grow  tight and angry.  Id did not have to
be told that an evil had been working here, a thing which consumed
and destroyed and took great joy in watching hope die.
Eventually,  they  carried  Eia  away  on  a  stretcher,  the  healer
following behind, frowning with worry and anger.
“You’re sweating,” Pehtal said when the door was closed.
“You tried to warn me.”
“Yes. But it is good that you know.”
Eia  was  only  the  advance  scout:  we  knew  the  Walkers  were
coming.  Those  Aeyries  who  were  able  to  fly  were  readying
themselves for battle, checking their gear and snatching what sleep
they  could  in  expectation  of  a  long  night.  I  remembered  the  red
blood in Feili’s fur, and the rage that had come over me, rage at the
sheer  stupidity  of  bloodshed.  Now  there  would  be  more  stupid
violence,  perhaps  a  great  deal  of  it.  Many  people  would  say
afterward that the Walkers deserved pain and death, and that the

Aeyries who ambushed them had acted as they had a right to act. I
would not be among them.
“Keep out of it,” Pehtal had said to me. “The fight is the business
of the taiseoch. Concern yourself only  with  Eia,  just  as  I  mean  to
concentrate on Teksan and his acts of magic.”
“Are the people of the Triad going to join the fight?” I had asked.
“We have to talk about it, but I know we will not stand back and
watch.”
“Then the fight will be your business, too.”
“Yes, as much as I detest it.”  Pehtal abrubtly looked very  tired.
“But it is too late for anything else. Our races have gone too long,
blaming everything on the other. I mean to spend what it takes to
keep this from happening again. But it is too late to stop it.”
“Will  the  Triad  Walkers  kill  other  Walkers?  How  do  they  like
being part of this?”
“Del,” id reproved me gently, and I was silent.
I knew this feeling all too well, the haunting sensation that there
was something I ought to do, but that I did not know what it was,
or  how  to  do  it.  Pehtal  was  helping  me  up  from  the  floor  now.
Taiseoch Forvel  watched  us  soberly.  “I  have  never  met  Eia,  but  I
have heard enough about idre to know that this Teksan Lafall, he is
a destroyer, an obscenity. I am no longer uncertain about this.”
I could say nothing. It was I, not Teksan, who had committed the
final act of destruction on Eia. I could not regret it, and I could not
forgive myself for it. This was what it was to be a mage.
 
The healer told us that Eia was very  ill, utterly worn  out,  with
ids  bodily  needs  too  long  neglected,  running  a  fever  from  the
infected wound. Id had refused a sleeping potion, which seemed to
confirm  that  the  attack  would  be  happening  tonight.  Perhaps
Teksan  feared  that  his  puppet’s  strength  would  not  last  much
longer  than  that.  Asked  if  Eia  could  be  a  danger  to  the  Ula,  the
healer had laughed in disbelief at the idea. But everyone who knew
Eia had fiercely disagreed. A guard was set on ids door.

I did  not  even  try  to  sleep.  I  went  to  the  art  room  and  made
drawings  of  spheres  and  cubes.  I  drew  them  balancing  on  top  of
each other. I changed their shapes so that the spheres were flat on
one side or the cubes concave on one side, and they could fit into or
against  each  other.  I  could  not  come  up  with  any  way  to  do  it
without deforming the shapes. I was feeling very tired when I went
in to dinner, but I was not the only one.
Pehtal was not there. A’bel told me where id was, and I brought
a  plate  of  food  to  the  greenhouse.  The  mage  sat  quietly  in  the
darkness  beneath  vines  clinging  overhead.  The  windows  were
misted over, but id had wiped a spot clear, and through icy crystal
stars on the glass I saw blurry, distorted stars in the sky.
I gave Pehtal the plate and sat beside idre on the bench. “Won’t I
know, too, when the Door is open?”
“I  might  not  even  feel  it.  It  depends  on  how  close  they  make
entry.”
“How can you fly safely in the dark?”
“S’olel.  I  will  let  my  wings  do  my  seeing  for  me,  like  the  blind
Aeyries do.”
After id had eaten, Pehtal spread a wing for me to huddle under.
“I’m afraid, too,” id said.
A long time we sat, unspeaking. A blossom opened somewhere, to
haunt us with sweet perfume. The wind rushed like water  against
the stronghold. Within the greenhouse, it was spring. Out there,  it
was  a  bitter,  stormy  night,  the  kind  of  night  that  stripped  the
mountains and tattered the Ula’s bright flags.
Out there in the storm,  the Universe convoluted to a man’s will
and opened the rift in infinity.
“Well,” Pehtal said, “I guess you felt it.” I was on my feet. I could
hear my shocked voice still crying out in the echoing, chiming glass
windows. “They’re coming in pretty close. They don’t want to wear
themselves  out  fighting  the  storm,  I  would  guess.”  Pehtal  was
already wrapping the quilted vest between ids wings. I fastened it
for idre, and tested it to make certain it would not come unhooked
under stress. Pehtal stood up, saying, “Go  tell the  taiseoch,  it  will

save  me  time.  And  be  careful,  Del;  don’t  show  yourself  too  soon.
Remember that magic is like flying: all you have to do is jump off.”
I kissed id quickly, and fled, knowing that perhaps I would never
see idre again.
 
“The  Door  is  open.  The  Teksan-dre  are  coming,  Pehtal  has
already gone.”
Those Aeyries who were pregnant, or who were single parents of
young children, gathered to guard the entry.  Those  who  could  not
fight at all stayed with the children in a secure room,  armed with
weapons that it was hoped they would never have to try to use. The
rest of them, roused by messengers going softly from room to room,
put  on  their  flight  clothes  and  vests,  tied  their  weapons  by  long
tethers to their wrists, and strapped pouches full  of  c’duni  bars  to
one thigh. Each of them carried a roll of wide, sticky tape, like the
stuff which reinforced the stitching in my damaged wing. I watched
them gather in the common room.
Even  those  who  were  not  going  out  into  the  bitter  wind  were
carrying pouches of food. I took one up in passing and strapped it to
my  leg.  I  wandered  anxiously  through  the  crowd,  my  stomach
churning with anxiety.
“Delan,” someone said, “Surely you are not going to fight!”
It was a Triad-dre, a Walker. “No. I have something to do here at
the Ula. Are you?”
“Not to fight,”  he  said.  “We  have  been  with  Lian  all  afternoon,
Aeyrie and Walker alike, learning how to aid the wounded. It does
not matter who they are, we decided, Teksan-dre or t’Han-dre,  we
will help them.”
“How are the t’Han-dre to distinguish between you and Teksan’s
people?”
He  showed  me:  a  strip  of  pale  astil  tied  around  his  forehead,
another  around  his  arm,  and  a  mark  on  the  pack  of  medical
supplies he carried.
I felt somewhat better then. I found a quiet place by a window,
where  I  could  sit  and  wait.  The  sky  was  clouding  over,

extinguishing the stars one by one. I concentrated on my breathing,
making  it  be  slow  and  deep.  I  considered  the  sphere  and  cube
problem, and realized finally that with people it was not so simple.
We can compromise without ceasing to be ourselves. We can be one
thing and the other at the same time.
After a long wait,  dark shapes flew past the window, the scouts
returning,  buffeted  and  tossed  like  leaves  on  the  wind.  In  the
common  room  they  landed  on  the  platforms  outside  the  windows.
The voices of the gathered people swelled and subsided. There was
no laughter.
I heard a step, light and soft on the tile. Warm  hands rested on
my shoulders. “Feili,” I said. “Are you going to fight?”
“Only if  I  must,  Del,  to  protect  the  Triad  Walkers.  Are  you  all
right?”
“I think so.”
“The scouts say the Teksan-dre are very  close. We  are  about  to
fly out. The healers and the Walkers have already left. Isn’t it time
for you to go?”
“If Teksan knows about me too soon, he’ll just guess the trap and
escape. Pehtal hasn’t closed  the  Door  yet.”  But  even  as  I  spoke,  I
felt the terrible stress of the twisting abruptly release, like a sigh,
as  the  rent  Universe  was  mended.  The  enemy’s  escape  route  was
closed.  I  leapt  to  my  feet.  “Pehtal  succeeded.  Tell  the  taiseoch!”  I
ran.
Except for the common room, the Ula was dark and empty, with
only  a  few  lamps  lit  so  that  the  Teksan-dre  (never,  never  would
they get this far!) would be confused by darkness in a strange place.
I ran in a panic. Feili and Hana had both warned me not to try  to
fight  Eia.  Id  was  ruthless,  ruthless  and  deadly.  Perhaps  id  would
not  even  remember  who  I  was.  And  they  had  not  risked  taking
away ids blade, because of what that would tell Teksan.
The guard at Eia’s door still  sat  casually  on  a  bench,  reading  a
book  by  the  light  of  a  single  lampflame,  knife  hidden  behind  a
cushion, I whispered, “Please wait here and come if I call for you.”
Id gestured assent, and calmly turned a page of the book. I was

panting, my heart thundering  in  my  throat.  Pehtal  had  told  me  I
could  do  this.  Was  Pehtal  always  right?  I  turned  the  doorknob
gently and eased open the door.
A band of faint light from  the guard’s lamp flickered  across  the
floor.  My  shadow  obliterated  it.  I  closed  the  door  behind  me  and
stood very still, listening. The sound of my heart was the only thing
I heard.  I  groped  until  my  hand  encountered  the  spoke  of  an  air
lamp,  with  a  tinderstick  dangling  from  it  by  a  chain.  I  made  the
tinderstick  spark,  and  one  of  the  flame  sockets  sputtered  into
flame.
The Eye stared at me. It floated only an arm’s length away. Once
an Eye like that had made a traitor of me.
“Hello,  Teksan,”  I  said  softly.  “Remember  me?”  My  glass  blade
flared,  cold  and  bright  with  lampflame,  as  something  also  flared
within me, heady and powerful: rage.
Soft, soft, use those wings, Del! The Eye tried to move away, but
I was fast, shooting from the muscles of my own torso like an arrow
from  the  bowstring.  I  pierced  the  Eye  through.  The  brightness  of
my red blade was quenched in the black of old blood. Like a mist in
a  burning  sun,  the  Eye  dissolved  in  a  mere  moment.  The  room
stank of something foul and rotten. Bile came into my throat.
“That was stupid,” a voice said.
Id came out of the darkness, a dark, dangerous thing of  muscle
and bone and stretched astil wings, with lightless caves  where  ids
eyes were sunk in a skeletal face.
“Eia,” I said. The power drained out of me.  My bones seemed to
dissolve.
“That was very stupid,” id hissed.
“Do you remember,” I whispered. “Do you remember loving me?”
Id  laughed,  a  cold,  terrible  laugh.  “Yes.  So?”  Ids  blade  was
already drawn: black it was, rare black, a blade that could only be
won in battle, one of only ten like it in all the earth. I put my own
fouled  blade  into  its  sheath.  Do  not  try  to  fight  the  ruthless  and
deadly, the cornered and wounded. Do not try to fight the heartless.
“I  remember  it,  too.”  Soft  and  husky,  my  voice  vibrated  as  my

body  trembled.  “How  I  lay  down  under  you.  How  you  shouted.
Come here, Eia.”
Id stood like stone. I pressed my hand to my heart  and  felt  the
double life burning  there.  “Come  here,”  I  said  though  I  was  dizzy
with terror. “Let me touch you again, one more time.”
As  if  I  pulled  on  a  string,  Eia  stepped  forward,  and  again,
awkward on one leg. Then id stopped, and I saw ids body shaking.
“You have something—”
“It is something you want.”
“Yes…”
I saw it happen: the gathering up, the lift and the release. It was
beautiful,  beautiful!  There  was  nothing  I  could  do  against  the
beauty. I fell, fell beyond fear, sobbing as my wounded wing hit the
floor, gasping as the  black  blade  drove  at  my  throat,  twisting  my
head sideways, feeling the glass slash through my fur,  through my
flesh, then hearing it ring on the tile.
Before I even knew I was still alive  I  heard  my  voice  shouting,
“Kill me and you kill us both!”
“No!  I  will  not  do  it,  I  will  not!”  Eia  was  weeping,  in  dry  and
hollow  sobs  that  wrenched  out  of  idre  like  blood  from  an  artery.
Yet, ids arm raised again.
An alien, crystalline quiet came over me. Id will not miss twice. I
thought  calmly.  I  felt  Eia’s  enduring  iron  strength  holding  me  to
the floor. But I had a fire in me. I saw flames rising from my chest
to  Eia’s,  warming  cold  flesh  and  lightening  the  night’s  darkness,
slowly, so slowly.
Eia jerked  back  from  my  fire,  crying  out.  I  had  heard  that  cry
before; it wrenched like a blade in flesh. The weight lifted from my
chest, even as ids voice cried with hunger, desperate to remain, to
take idreself back, to live again. Eia leapt to ids feet  and fled  into
darkness.  The  window  catches  rang  and  clattered,  and  then  the
shutters  crashed  open.  The  wind  snuffed  the  lampflame.  Wide
wings spread like black clouds across the few  remaining stars, and
then Eia had leapt into the night, and was gone.
The guard fought open the door. “I heard a cry—”

But  I  was  already  halfway  across  the  room,  shouting,  “Tell
Pehtal, tell idre—” What was there to say, that I had failed, that I
had  leapt  in  obstinate  stupidity  into  the  bitter  wind,  flying  on  a
wounded  wing,  certain  to  perish?  What  was  there  worth  saying?
That I was out of my head with love? I ran to  the  window,  afraid
the guard would have  the  sense  to  stop  me,  and  I  jumped  off  the
mountain, onto the unbroken back of the wild wind.
 
Trust the knowing that is feeling.
I closed  my  eyes.  The  wind  tossed  me  back  at  the  walls  of  the
Ula.  The  mountain’s  bulky  presence  turned  the  wind  back  upon
itself  in  a  wild  turmoil.  My  wings  sensed  where  danger  was.  My
wings  knew  how  to  turn  me  away.  I  struggled,  stroke  by  stroke.
Suddenly I was free of the hellwind. The air merely bucked  under
me  like  an  untamed  draf.  I  rode  it,  as  I  had  been  born  to  do,
laughing briefly in surprise at my skill.
Night blinded me, yet I could see Eia before me, darker than the
darkness,  a  hollow,  cold  emptiness  which  joylessly  mastered  the
wind.  I  tucked  my  hands  into  my  armpits  and  followed  idre.  The
cold sucked away the warmth from within my fur.
Voices  shouted  below  me,  thin  and  harsh  in  the  wailing  of  the
wind. I opened my eyes. Far below me,  garishly lit by white light,
in  confusion  and  turmoil,  Aeyrie  battled  Walker.  The  sparkling
lightwands  in  the  hands  of  the  Aeyries  burned  with  terrible
brightness, so bright that I doubted the Walkers could look directly
at  their  attackers  without  being  blinded.  Working  in  groups  of
three, the Aeyries swooped and hovered, recovered, and prepared to
attack again.
I heard  someone  scream:  Walker  or  Aeyrie.  A  wing  membrane
tattered  as  an  iron  blade  jerked  through  it,  red  blood  spraying  in
the awful white light. Even as the Aeyrie fell, ids two partners and
two  other  threesomes  swooped  to  secure  their  save-lines  and  to
carry idre to safety. At the edge of the battle, in a secure spot, red
lightwands burned against a mountainside, marking the location of
the supply wagon where the healers waited with their Triad helpers
and  guards.  I  remembered  how  Lian  had  winced  as  she  watched

Aeyries  only  playing  at  battle.  I  could  imagine  her  now,  pressed
against Gein for shelter from the cold, face hidden. My eyes burned
with tears. I shut them tightly.
In time,  the rhythm of  flight  and  the  numbing  of  cold  loosened
the clenching of horror in my belly. With each stroke my right wing
gave a sharp pain where healer’s thread  and  wing  tape  reinforced
it. I flew out of sight or hearing of the battlefield. Eia gradually lost
altitude  ahead  of  me.  I  had  gained  on  idre.  Ids  feverish  strength
seemed to be burning itself out. I opened my eyes again. Overhead,
the cloud cover crawled  away  from  the  stars.  “Eat  before  you  are
hungry,” a memory  said in the voice of Feili. I  pulled  a  c’duni  bar
out of the pouch strapped to my thigh.
I  watched  Eia’s  black  shadow,  overlaid  by  starlight,  swoop
downward.  A  person  on  the  ground  turned  to  meet  idre,  pointing
upward  and  shouting.  A  hard,  sharp  lump  of  food  crawled  slowly
down  my  throat.  It  was  Teksan.  He  must  have  abandoned  his
followers as soon  as  the  battle  was  engaged.  “Coward,”  I  said  out
loud. “Teksan Lafall is a coward.” I forced myself to keep eating.
Shuddering  in  the  turmoil  of  the  ground  turbulence,  Eia
struggled upward again. I hovered above idre, tethering my weapon
to my wrist by a loop of spun astil. Perhaps this astil on which my
life  depended  had  been  gathered  by  my  own  hands  and  spun  by
Crila, long ago. It was a comforting thought, for despite our misery,
we had always done good work, Crila and I.
The blade in my hand was still black with the blood of the Eye. I
remembered that I was in  the  superior  tactical  position  above  my
challenger,  but  I  did  not  attack.  The  wind  shoved  me  up  and
sideways. I turned and recovered. Beneath the rushing sound of the
wind I heard the rhythmic, rattling sound of Eia’s breath. Specks of
light  lay  along  the  edge  of  ids  blade:  reflected  stars.  My  wings
tucked in; I dropped below ids powerful stroke. I dug into the wind
and climbed upward again, turning. I could almost hear Feili’s voice
shouting,  “Turn,  again,  faster;  you’ll  have  to  do  better  than  that
Del, or you’re for the scavenging.”
I had made my turn faster than Eia. I dove in on ids left,  away
from  the  blade  hand,  attacking  the  storm  darkness  of  ids  black
wing.  Id  jerked  the  membrane  out  of  my  reach,  spoiling  ids

unfinished turn but avoiding my weapon. I dropped, but not swiftly
enough,  and  felt  a  foot  slam  into  my  back.  The  wind  jerked  me
earthward.  Gasping  for  breath,  I  fought  the  wind,  stroke  after
stroke, locating by s’olel the firm rush of an updraft. My back felt
as if a falling boulder had hit it.
It seemed a long time before I was stable again. The earth was a
shadowed  mystery  below  me.  At  one  hand  glass  glittered  faintly
where a deadly  mountain  rose  skyward.  Wind  currents  tossed  me
softly. Eia? I looked up, almost too late, and dropped and turned as
id dove past me, knife hissing through a freakishly still moment of
air. I slashed out, and felt the terrible giving resistance of  contact
as  I  wrenched  my  blade  across  ids  backstroking  hand.  Glittering
and turning, something fell earthward: ids untethered black blade.
I took a breath of relief. And maybe I had not hurt idre too badly…
Eia tumbled after the falling blade.
“Eia!” I cried hoarsely. Ids wings struggled to spread  and  break
the dive. But they could not; id was exhausted and ill, id was falling
too fast… “Eia!” Like a dropped stone, id fell into  the  black  night,
toward  the  deadly  embrace  of  the  mountain.  The  wind  howled  in
my ears and I did not hear the impact. But Eia was gone.
Something  was  wrong  with  my  wings.  I  turned  my  head,  and
saw a long gash through which stars shone. I had  not  even  felt  it
when  Eia’s  black  blade  cut  me  open.  I  did  as  I  knew  Feili  would
instruct  me:  I  glided,  losing  altitude  slowly,  flying  conservatively
and keeping in control. Somewhere below and behind me, Eia lay. I
would not be able to find my way back to idre in this darkness. And
if id were  not  already  dead,  the  elements  would  finish  my  killer’s
work for me. Tears froze on my face, burning cold.
 
After I had landed, I huddled on my belly with my arms and legs
under me and my wings spread to cut the vicious wind. I lay there a
long  time,  stupid  with  the  fierce  shock  of  grief.  “Delan,”  someone
said. I was hearing voices, I thought. I was delirious.
“Delan.” Something small tugged on my fur.  I  turned  my  head.
An onfrit had huddled against my shoulder.
“Ch’ta? I left you at the Triad. I told you to stay there.”

“Bad onfrit,” Ch’ta said severely.
I laughed hysterically, hugging Ch’ta in my elbow. He was hot as
a coal in the fire.  I lay down with  the  roll  of  tape  in  my  hand,  to
hand  him  little  pieces  of  it  to  hold  the  edges  of  my  gashed  wing
together.  It  had  to  be  done  before  the  blood  was  dry,  or  I  might
never fly again. Ch’ta’s tiny clawed hands were gentle and careful. I
did not feel the pain very  much, perhaps because I  did  not  care.  I
felt not at all myself: cold and still inside, light-headed and empty.
When  he  was  done,  I  gave  him  a  piece  of  flight  bar.  He  ate
hungrily, looking around himself with an anxious, alert gaze. I ate,
too, unaware either of the taste or  of  the  satisfaction.  Ch’ta  lifted
his head sharply and began to chirrup, a shrill, clear sound. A reply
rumbled  on  the  wind.  I  turned  my  head  as  the  long,  tall  bulk  of
Brother Och treaded softly out of the darkness.
“Brother,” he said in satisfaction. “Och find you.”
“Great winds!”
He patted me with callused hands. “Brother call me, I find.”
I hugged  him.  He  steamed  and  panted  in  the  cold.  He  smelled
musty and sweet, like moldering leaves. He nuzzled me, like a draf
hoping for a treat.
“How did you find me?”
“Follow  smell.  Find  little  flying  brother.  Little  brother  know
where to go. Run, run, long way, many nights. I am Och, good nose,
find anything anywhere.”
My  astonishment  abruptly  turned  cold  inside  of  me.  I  said,
“There is a Walker near here, a bad Walker. Can you smell out his
trail and then come back to get me?”
“Yes,” said Och hesitantly. “Why find bad Walker?”
“He killed my friend.”
Och  hissed  fiercely.  “Och  will  find,”  he  said,  and  was  gone,
soft-walking,  setting  feet  down  securely,  seeing  clearly  in  the
darkness that blinded me.
“Delan,”  I  said  to  myself.  “What  are  you  doing?”  But  I  knew.
Pehtal  was  nowhere  nearby.  It  was  up  to  me  to  do  something  to

prevent  Teksan  from  escaping.  Given  a  chance  to  pause  and
concentrate, he would  open  a  Door  and  be  gone  completely  out  of
reach. He could hide at the far ends of the earth. Perhaps he could
even  go  to  another  planet.  And  someday  an  Ula  would  take  in  a
weary, wounded stranger and the whole cycle of hatred would begin
again. Or,  even worse,  the Ula would fail to  take  the  stranger  in,
out of fear.  Then Teksan would have  truly  won,  won  in  a  way  he
had probably never even imagined.
I stroked  Ch’ta’s  soft  head.  “Little  brother,  if  you  go  away  can
you come back to this place again?”
“Yes,” Ch’ta said with his mouth full.
“Then go to the Ula. Find Eia’s friends and bring them here. Tell
them  Eia  fell  out  of  the  sky  here.  Tell  them  to  look  over  by  the
mountain. Will you do that, Ch’ta?”
“My Eia?” the onfrit said. “Yes!”
Unhesitating,  he  braved  the  gale,  fluttering  on  the  wind  like  a
bit of paper tossed from hand to hand. I watched after him until my
eyes ached with peering into the starry sky.  A pale sliver of moon
hovered  on  the  horizon.  The  barren  glass  felt  like  ice  under  my
knees.
I huddled on the ground again and waited for Och to return.
He came in a cloud of steam, patting me with his  tough  hands.
“Found smell.”
“Show me the way. Go slow, brother. I cannot see in the dark.” I
got to my feet and followed him.
Sometimes  the  wind  brought  me  a  faint  sound:  voices  on  the
wind, Aeyries in flight. The wailing darkness pushed and shoved me
as I walked. My wing began to throb with dull and distant pain. I
walked  carefully  on  sharp  pebbles  until  the  way  became  smooth
under foot. Teksan was following a narrow, twisting path. With his
night vision, he would be able to move quickly. How could I hope to
catch  up  with  him?  Perhaps  he  had  already  paused  to  work  his
magic. Would I be able to follow him into the Void? But I sensed no
tremor  in  the  fabric  of  the  Universe.  I  walked  on,  unsuccessfully
trying to force myself to stop contemplating what it would be like to

be lost in the Void, suspended indefinitely in that timeless cold.
I  walked  into  Och.  He  had  paused  on  the  pathway,  the  front
third of his body raised as he peered ahead, arm-legs  crossed  over
his chest as a Walker would do. I patted him on  his  flank,  feeling
the fur standing out in tension. He turned to me. “Bad Walker, not
far. Smell danger, brother. Bad danger.”
“You stay here. He is my enemy, not yours.”
“Bad Walker hurt you. Smell hate.”
“He cannot hurt me,” I lied. “I am stronger than he is.”
Och stepped aside to make room for me to pass him. We were in
a  narrowing  ravine,  and  my  wings  brushed  one  steep  wall  as  I
edged past my guide. On the other side I thought there might be a
water  channel,  but  the  water  could  not  be  heard  over  the  shrill
wind. Och caught me by my clothing and snuffled against me, then
let  go,  saying,  as  if  my  smell  had  told  him  something  important,
“Yes.”
I  walked  on,  alone.  My  sensitive  feet  found  the  smooth  way,
recognizing  at  once  whenever  I  strayed  because  of  the  subtle
roughening  left  by  the  sucker  plants  on  the  glass.  Ahead  of  me  I
saw  a  glimmering,  water  in  starlight.  The  walls  of  the  ravine
brooded over a pooling spring. Something rustled in the darkness. I
held  my  breath,  listening.  There  was  nothing,  neither  sound  nor
motion, only the impenetrable dark and the howling wind.
I shut  my  eyes  and  spread  my  wings.  And  turned,  and  twisted
aside, and felt the sharp edge slip past me. My knife came into my
hand. I struck at the turbulence which was Teksan, and missed, but
not  by  much,  I  judged.  I  heard  his  breath  hiss  out  between  his
teeth.  I  backed  away  hovering  out  my  wings  again,  reminding
myself to breathe, keeping my eyes closed.
A slight extra pressure against my wings told me he was coming
at me again. Aiming for the torso, a slashing motion, I thought. My
wings pushed me forward. His right arm crashed against my left as
I blocked  his  blow.  Forward  again,  point  first,  softly,  softly,  push
with the wings—
“Aaah,” he said, jerking away. Cloth tore, and my blade skittered

across  bone.  He  pulled  out  of  my  range,  but  I  could  hear  him
breathing hoarsely. I am stronger than he is, I am stronger…
“Delan,” he said.
“No. No bargains.”
“But I can give you—”
“No.” I curled my wings around the wind. “You will come back to
the Ula with me. Or I will kill you.”
He gave a snort of laughter. I struck. Pain shocked through my
wing; the tape had given way. My attack went awry  and I missed.
A redness washed across my closed eyelids. For a time, a long time,
I  was  utterly  disoriented  and  could  not  even  locate  the  ground.
Breathe. I instructed myself. Breathe deeply.
I felt the blow. I felt the blade go in, a cold shock and then  the
fire.  Rage  and  pain  shook  me  through  like  a  hellwind.  I  slashed
down viciously, and felt horrible things happening under my blade.
Teksan  fell  away,  crying  out.  I  heard  his  weapon  ring  on  glass.  I
leapt forward, and paused.
I could not kill him. The man had tortured and raped me,  but I
could not kill him.
My  feet  slipped.  The  glass  surface  was  spattered  with  blood,  I
sought  more  solid  footing.  Teksan  groaned  and  muttered  in  the
darkness.  I  felt  something  happening,  something  terrible  and
twisted being created out of the hatred that empowered my enemy.
“No,” I protested wearily. “I can’t—”
Out of nothing it materialized, a huge, eldritch,  mewling  thing,
pale as carrion and dripping green shrouds of mucus.
Only the memory  of the innocent Och awaiting me on  the  path
kept  me  from  running.  I  would  not  bring  this  Thing  upon  him.
Screaming with panic, I ran and slammed my blade into the awful
stink  of  it.  My  weapon  passed  through  without  impact,  as  if
through  a  shred  of  mist.  The  Horror’s  laughter  rattled  inside  my
head. One of the green strands brushed my arm, and I smelled my
fur burning. And then, in an awful shudder of pain, my flesh.
“Breathe,” the voice said calmly in me. “Stand back and breathe.
You are stronger,  stronger,  stronger.”  Shaking  violently,  I  backed

up against the wall of glass, and took in  a  deep  breath,  and  let  it
out,  and  took  in  another  deep  breath,  and  let  it  out.  The  Thing
came at me.
A thing of thought could only be defeated by a thing of thought.
Aeyrie magic begins where Walker magic ends.
It came,  spreading  burning  tentacles  to  engulf  me.  I  raised  my
blade,  my  red  glass  shard  that  I  had  stumbled  across  one  lucky
winter  day,  long  ago  now,  when  I  was  only  a  child.  It  had  come
clean of blood as, unaware of what I was doing, I rubbed it on my
clothes.  Now  starlight  glittered  on  its  surface.  Light,  sunlight,
sunrise  in  the  mountain  peaks,  blazing  across  the  surface  of  the
glass! Many times had I seen it, delighted in it, and stored it away
in my memory to make myself rich, that glorious flash of brilliance,
the  light  tumbling  down  the  mountainside.  Sunrise!  The  ravine
flared with remembered daybreak, and my knife was the sun.
Then it was dark, even darker than before,  but the Horror  was
gone.  My  knees  gave  way  under  me.  The  mountains  clasped  me
close.  I  stared  at  the  stars.  Blood  trickled  down  my  side.  Pain
blossomed out from my charred arm.
Someone whimpered and stumbled across the ground. Crawling,
feeling with his hands. A knife in one hand. His hands touched me.
I cringed within, but I had nothing, no strength with which to move
away. He was sobbing. For a moment I saw his face: staring, blank,
burned eyes. His knife found my throat by feel. He rested the point
on  that  soft  place  where  during  lovemaking  the  heart  thunders.
Then he leaned his weight forward.
Chapter 17
« ^ » 
A monster  leapt  out  of  the  shadows.  The  metal  knife  flew  out  of
Teksan’s  hand  to  chime  and  rattle  on  the  bare  glass.  Teksan
tumbled  away  after  it,  tossed  lightly  aside  before  the  Orchth’s
massive  strength.  The  monster  leapt  after  him  into  the  gloom.
Teksan cried out once.
I stared  into  the  murky  darkness,  stunned.  The  scream  of  the

wind and the chaos of my fear abruptly gave way to silence. I lifted
my shaking hand to touch myself. My fingers on my throat brushed
the  crusted  wound  and  matted  fur  where  Eia’s  blade  had  gashed
me. But in that secret, soft place my heartbeat still vibrated wildly
to the uneven rhythm of stark terror.  I  did  not  understand  how  I
could still be alive.
“Brother,” rumbled Och.
“Brother.”  My  voice  came  out  hoarse  and  strange.  “You  are  a
better  monster  than  the  one  Teksan  dreamed  up.”  I  giggled
hysterically.
The  Orchth  drew  close  to  me.  His  rough  voice  said  unsteadily,
“Heard shout, heard—afraid. Bad Walker dead.”
“Thank you,” I whispered. “I’m sorry”
The great  bulk  of  him  blanked  out  the  stars.  His  hands  patted
my  legs.  He  snuffled  at  my  fur,  voice  rumbling  in  his  throat.  He
found the deep wound in my side, over  which  I  was  clutching  one
hand convulsively.
My  voice  said  calmly,  “Don’t  worry—Aeyries  heal  fast.  Get  the
tape out of the leg pouch, though. I want to fly again someday.”
For  the  second  time  that  night,  I  trusted  the  delicate  task  of
wing taping to a sentient beast. Despite being distressed and upset,
Och nonetheless was able to understand what I needed him to do. I
clenched my teeth and would not cry out, but I could not keep from
shuddering when he hurt me. Afterward he carried me in his arms
to the spring, so I could wash my burned arm in it. The frigid water
left me shivering violently. Teksan’s body lay beyond my sight, but
blood stank  in  my  nostrils.  Abruptly,  I  was  crying  in  Och’s  arms,
my voice raw and childish in my ears. But I remembered to eat.
 
I  opened  swollen,  aching  eyes  to  frosty  daybreak.  I  ached  and
throbbed and burned and hurt in such pain that I could feel nothing
else. My hand on my face came away wet  with sweat and tears. I
turned my eyes into the fur of my companion. He lay half on top of
me  to  keep  me  warm.  He  held  me,  close  and  careful,  concern
rumbling in his throat. Certainly, he had not slept.

I thought indifferently: I am going to die. I wish it would happen
faster.
Och’s tongue licking the raw burn on my arm awoke me again. I
clamped my jaw shut on a shout of pain, but my muscles quivered
wildly until he stopped. “Brother?” he said helplessly. His eyes were
squinted to narrow slits against the sunlight, despite the shadowing
of  the  overhang  under  which  we  had  sheltered.  I  blinked  at  his
blurry  image,  but  my  vision  would  not  clear.  I  was  desperately
thirsty.
Get up, Del, it’s not going to get any better.
I dug my hands into his fur. “Stand up, Och. Help me.”
His incredible strength pulled me halfway to my feet. I struggled
the rest of the way myself before I blacked out. When the darkness
cleared, Och was clutching me firmly to his chest. I pulled my feet
under myself, my knees trembling.
A frightening amount  of  blood  had  dried  in  my  ragged  clothing
and  clotted  in  my  fur.  But  the  dully  throbbing  cut  in  my  side
appeared to be closed, and what I could see of my wing showed no
gaps where the membrane edges had parted under the tape. There
the pain sang intermittently, sharp and sudden. Where the Horror
had  touched  me,  the  burn  had  become  an  ugly,  weeping  wound,
with the singed fur curled at its edges and the flesh swollen. It was
that pain which bent my mind to longing for death so that I might
escape it.
But  I  was  no  longer  Teksan’s  victim,  to  die  from  his  hatred.  I
could  endure  the  pain.  Lian  would  heal  me  and  make  it  stop
hurting, if I could only get to her.
Och shaded his eyes with one hand, blinking  and  squinting.  He
could not travel under the sun, but I could not afford to wait until
nightfall.  With  my  knife  I  cut  a  strip  of  astil  from  the  leg  of  my
garment and used it to blindfold Och.  He did not like it much, but
submitted. We took one step in tangent with each other, and then
another.  The  pool  near  which  Teksan’s  corpse  lay  was  already
behind us. I did not look back.
We both drank from the little spring that ran beside the path in
its carved channel. I passed out with my face in the water,  but the

cold brought me back. Choking, I got my feet using Och’s strength,
and he held me against his side again. We began to walk haltingly,
one step at a time. Eventually, he grew accustomed to trusting me
and our pace picked up to a crawl. When tears drew cold lines down
my face, Och began singing to me.
He sang, “Orchth arenuchmm oorghtchgrdmmm.”
I am the shadow-walker, the night is sweet and silent.
We walked that way all afternoon, me guiding him, him holding
me on my feet: with strength, with music, with gentle verbal prods.
Soon  the  way  was  slick  with  ice,  and  later  I  walked  in  snow.  I
fainted with monotonous regularity. Even when I was conscious,  I
was aware of little more than the massive effort  it took for  me  to
put one foot in front of the other. Sometimes I heard Och’s simple
poetry, though whether or how I understood it I did not know. How
I  kept  us  on  our  pathway  I  also  did  not  know.  The  fire  of  pain
burned me to ashes, and blew the ashes away.
Och stopped. “Delan?”
“What?”
“Dark now?”
The  sun  had  set,  but  I  had  gotten  so  stupid  I  didn’t  notice.
Through the blur of my vision and the mist  of  twilight,  I  saw  the
mountain  where  Eia  had  fallen.  I  fumbled  at  the  knot  of  Och’s
blindfold with numbed and strengthless fingers until it came off and
Och  blinked  at  me  in  the  fading  light.  He  touched  his  padded
fingers  to  my  damp  fur.  I  was  so  miserable  that  I  had  scarcely
noticed I was crying again. “Ride me home,” Och said.
My mouth formed the words with effort. “Can you find where to
go?”
“Yes.  Och  take  care  of  brother.”  He  lay  down  on  his  belly  so  I
could  crawl  onto  his  back.  He  burned  hot  under  my  chill.  His
muscles rippled, and he was up, moving stiffly at first, able to go on
all six limbs now that he did not need to hold me up. Soon we glided
like liquid between the darkening mountains.  With  my  hands  dug
into his thick fur, I shut my eyes.
Slivered moons moved with weird speed up the side of the sky as

I slipped in and out of the feverish sleep.
Och’s distressed hissing woke me once. Except for the moon and
the  stars  I  could  see  only  darkness.  “What  is  it?”  My  voice
whispered hoarsely. My hands ached with holding onto his fur.
“Blood.”  The  glimmering  snow  was  churned  and  stained.  He
sprang forward, eager to be away.
I shut  my  eyes,  and  tried  to  sleep  again.  But  Teksan’s  Horror
haunted me, and the memory of the feel under my blade as his flesh
parted. I jerked awake, sobbing. It was a frigid night, but I burned
hot  with  fever.  I  wondered  in  a  panic  what  had  happened  to  the
stars.
Somehow I knew that this journey would never be over. Och and
I would travel in unbroken darkness, and the sun would never rise.
We would travel until there was nothing left of me but bones, still
riding through the black night.
And  then,  suddenly,  there  was  light  and  startled  voices  crying
out  in  H’ldat.  Och  reared  up,  covering  his  eyes  with  his  hands,
nearly dislodging me. “Don’t hurt him!” I screamed hoarsely at the
winged people as their shining knives came into their hands. “Don’t
hurt him, he is my friend, don’t hurt him!”
“Orchth,” a soft, wondering voice said. A’bel.
“Brother?”
“It  is  I.  Stand  still,  we  are  your  friends.  Let  us  help  Delan.
Somebody get a blindfold, mute the light!”
A hand softly touched my shuddering back. “Del?”
I  looked  into  a  blaze  of  gold,  a  drawn,  weary  face,  red-lined
amber eyes. “You’re safe,” Feili said. “How are you hurt?”
“Wings,”  I  whispered.  “Deep  cut  in  side.  Arm  burned.  Cut  in
neck.”
“All right, I have you. We’ll take care of you. Let go, Del. Let go.”
My  hands  were  reluctant  to  loosen  their  cramped  deathhold  in
Och’s fur. I slid sideways until the waiting arms caught me.  Yet it
seemed  I  kept  falling,  deeper  and  deeper  into  a  softness  that
welcomed me, that called my name and took me in like the beloved

who has come home at last.
 
Lian, looking very old. “It is a bitter burn. It must have been the
l’shil and the Orchth who fought the sorcerer.”
“In all our seeking, how could we have missed them?” Feili, wind
tangled and sweat stained, sitting on a stool, weary head resting on
an open hand.
“The Orchth told A’bel that they sheltered most of the morning,
some way from the pool. Del was asleep or unconscious. You would
not have seen them from the air.”
Something  touched  the  burn  on  my  arm.  I  shuddered  and
moaned weakly.  Lian’s  familiar,  comforting  voice  said,  “I’m  sorry,
wingling.  I  have  to  hurt  you  a  little.  But  then  the  pain  will  be
gone.”
Cold,  cold,  extinguishing  the  fire  burning  in  my  arm.  Soft  bed,
soft blankets, soft light.
I whispered, “Lian, Pehtal—”
“Id took a bad fall, but will be all right. Id is sleeping now.”
“Did Ch’ta show you…”
“Yes. We found Eia.”
I knew, I heard it in her voice. Eia was dead.
Darkness embraced me again.
 
Someone was weeping. The sound was choked and muffled, as if
the  one  who  cried  did  not  want  to,  and  yet  could  not  help  it.  My
eyes  felt  glued  shut.  What  was  wrong  with  me?  Fragments  of
memory flittered nonsensically in my brain.
The person sobbed again. I wrestled my eyes open. A pair of air
lamp  flames  flickering  faintly  in  the  corner.  A  glimmering  bottle
half  full  of  clear  liquid  hung  suspended  over  me,  attached  to  my
arm by a slender tube. I stared at it in bewilderment.
I  turned  my  head.  At  the  sound  of  the  bedsheet  rustling,  the
weeping  person  stiffened,  and  dropped  ids  hands  hastily  from  ids

mouth.  Black,  black,  stormcloud  black,  exhaustion-ravaged  and
bent  under  the  weight  of  ids  wings,  Tefan  Malal  Hana  raised  ids
face. “Delan?” Ids voice cracked.
I could not summon up more than a whisper. “Hana.”
“They told me to leave you alone. They told me you are in danger
yourself, you are so worn out. They said you couldn’t do anything,
but I had to come here. I’m sorry.”
“What?” I said.
Hana hesitated. “Id is dying.”
“Who?”
“My l’frer. Eia.”
My  heart  turned  over  within  me.  “But—I  thought  id  was
already—I saw id fall onto the mountain!”
“Feili  and  I  brought  idre  in  at  daybreak,  alive.  They  connected
our veins together, but my blood was not enough. I would give my
l’frer more—” Hana stopped, breathing unevenly. “But Lian says it
would be no use. That Eia would live if only id could desire to live.
Pehtal  insisted  before  that  battle  that  only  you  could  help  idre.
Delan, is there anything you can do?”
I sat up, stiff with bandages. My head seemed to float above my
shoulders. “Wait,”  Hana said, and gently peeled the  tape  from  my
arm, and slid the needle out of my vein.
“Help me.”
Hana lifted me to my feet,  careful of my bandaged wounds, and
then  supported  most  of  my  weight  as  we  walked.  One  step  at  a
time, we crossed the room.  I seemed insubstantial to myself,  worn
thin as last year’s dishrag. Hana felt rock hard against me,  but id
swayed under my weight, and ids mouth was narrow with effort.  I
did not feel any pain. Lian had probably dosed me thoroughly out of
her  drug  box.  Where  my  thoughts  should  have  been  was  nothing
but  mist.  Even  my  passion  had  lost  its  intensity.  The  only  thing
which remained intact was my obstinacy. I would finish this thing.
“It is not far,” Hana said as we stepped into the hallway.
I sighed. “Good.”

The skylights let in gray dawn. Weariness and grief haunted the
hallway like ghosts. An Aeyrie sprawled on a bench, wings hanging
to the floor,  with a blanket tossed over idre. Farther  on,  a  pair  of
Triad Walkers sitting on the floor against the wall had fallen asleep
on each other’s shoulders. Blood spattered their clothes, and healing
supplies stuck out of their pockets. Hana and I stumbled past them,
and they slept on.
Hana laid a hand on a doorknob and  whispered  to  me,  “I  think
Gein  is  with  idre  now.  You  might  have  to  walk  a  little  on  your
own.”
Id opened the door. Gein perched on a stool, wings drooping like
Hana’s  in  utter  exhaustion.  Id  turned  ids  head  slowly  as  we
entered, but did not speak or look surprised.
Hana’s free hand rested on the hilt of ids blade. “Get out.”  Hana
suggested.
“Hana—” Gein sighed. “I’ll stay.”
“You won’t interfere.”
“Probably I won’t. We’ll see.”
“Get out then.”
“No. I am a healer, and Eia is my charge.”
The  tension  between  them  was  bowstring  tight,  but  I  was  not
much interested in it. On the bed, a body lay very still, with a tube
running to idre from a bottle, and a neat tray of supplies nearby. I
took a step forward,  unbalancing Hana, who had to walk with me
to  keep  from  falling  over.  I  wondered  vaguely  what  made  Hana
think idreself capable of violence when id was little stronger than I.
Eia lay curled on ids side.  On  the  pillow,  nestled  in  ids  tangled
mane, Ch’ta also slept, too deeply. Eia’s fur was dull. Ids dusky skin
had a waxy look to it, as if no blood flowed there. A stove warmed
the  room,  and  blankets  covered  Eia  well,  but  under  my  touch  ids
face was cold. My heart became very  still in my chest. And then I
saw the faint motion of a shallow, struggling breath.
I brushed  with  my  fingers  the  fine  bones  that  stood  out  in  the
inanimate face. “Eia? It’s Del.”

Eia  took  another  breath,  and  lay  still  again.  Id  was  so  cold;  id
needed to be warm.  Gein hissed anxiously behind me as I  crawled
onto  the  bed,  under  the  blankets,  curling  my  wing  around  Eia’s
bony shoulders, careful of bulky bandages. “Eia,” I said. I longed for
id to move,  to open ids eyes and look at me,  to smile. “Eia,” I said
more loudly, but id was too far away to hear me.
I lifted my head.
Hana said, “I am here.”
“I want your knife.”
“My knife?”
“Quickly, Hana, I am so tired!”
Id gave it into my hand. It shone in the lamplight. I looked into
the deadly sharp sliver, but there was nothing to see. I stared until
my  eyes  hurt;  wishing,  longing,  for  what  I  was  not  certain.  I
became vaguely aware of something happening in the room,  of the
door opening, of voices raised in surprise and shock. Hana argued in
a  fierce,  hushed  voice,  protectively  screening  the  bed  with  ids
spread wings. But I stared into the glass, until my eyes went out of
focus,  and  abrupt  despair  extinguished  my  urgency.  Was  it  even
possible to scry a mere shard? Of course it wasn’t.
Someone  touched  my  shoulder.  A  darkness  suddenly  swirled  in
the blade.
I dove  into  it  as  unthinkingly  as  I  had  dived  from  the  window
two  nights  ago.  The  Void  spun  me  like  a  whirlwind.  I  fought  my
spirit’s wings open, and rode the wind in, in to the lightless center.
Cold  it  was,  cold  beyond  imagining,  death  cold.  But  the  darkness
cracked open and a rift of blinding light sucked me through.
I entered Eia’s cave in the maze. It was a sunrise. An exuberance
of light poured across glass through the doorway. I thought: it is so
cold here,  too long since the hearthfire burned. I laid tinder  in  the
little stove, and took the tinderstick on its chain. The sparks would
not catch, so cold it was. I breathed on them:  burn, burn. Finally I
took a glowing coal out of my own breast and tucked it  under  the
tinder.
A little flame flickered and flared. I tended it, adding  fuel  piece

by  piece,  careful  not  to  smother  the  little  fire.  The  stovepipe
warmed under my hand. Flame crackled. I sat on the stool nearby
with  the  firebox  open,  watching  the  blaze  closely  so  it  should  not
burn down.
Heat flowed out of the little stove to meet the brilliant sunlight.
The cave warmed around me. I set a pot of water to boil. I found a
tin of spicy tea, and set the pot to steep.
The sunlight flowing like bright water through the cave opening
was blotted out. Eia folded ids wide wings, and sunlight poured  in
again, flowing around ids darkness. Ice glittered in ids fur,  edging
the black with silver.
I said: Sit down and rest. I have a hot fire burning.
I am awfully cold, id said.
Eia took my place on the stool, and hovered out ids wings to the
heat of the stove. Firelight flickered in glossy fur. I poured the tea,
and gave idre a cup. I stood close to idre, sipping the hot drink. It
was like no tea I had ever tasted, hot and soft as sunshine pooling
on a parlor floor.
Eia said, This is good. Del, where have I been so long?
I don’t know. Lost. But you are home now.
I put my hand on Eia’s shoulder. The ice was melting and ids fur
was beginning to steam. Ids face turned to me,  deep-eyed, smiling,
utterly unmasked. I saw respect, regret, and weariness. I saw pain,
and love.
After a long time I said, I have something for you.
You have? A present?
I put my  hand  into  the  firebox.  The  burning  coals  caressed  my
hand with their fierce flame. I took one of the coals into my hand. It
glowed  like  a  little  sun,  transparent  as  red  glass,  flames  floating
and trembling around it.
Eia said, Oh Del.
I put id’s heart into ids chest. Smoky eyed, Eia stood up, pulling
me wildly close to Ids hot fur: Del. Oh. Del.

A soft voice asked, “Are you still with us?”
I looked  up  at  Pehtal.  One  bandaged  arm  was  strapped  to  ids
chest. The other hand lay warm on my shoulder.
“Sh’man.” My voice came out thin and ragged.
“Sh’man,” Pehtal greeted me, softly.
In the edge of my vision, Hana turned swiftly, wings tucking and
folding.  I  held  up  the  knife,  my  hand  shaking.  Hana  took  the
weapon from  my hand. There were tears on  ids  face  again.  Id  did
not understand. I tried to speak, but how could I begin?
Under  my  wing  a  voice  whispered.  I  drew  my  wing  aside.  Eia
looked into my eyes. “Del,” id said.
Hana’s hand came out to touch Eia’s shoulder cautiously, as if id
were some breakable, precious thing.
Eia said, faint and weary, “L’frer? Why are you crying?”
I said, “Hana, you had better tell Lian.”
Hana looked confused. “Id—she—is…”
“Tell Lian what?” Lian came forward, grim and exasperated and
pale, with black smudges under her sea-green eyes. Eia turned ids
face  and  looked  at  her,  blankly,  and  then  with  a  sudden,  deep
gladness.
She dropped to her knees. “Eia?”
Under  the  blankets  Eia’s  good  hand  moved  to  touch  mine,  to
stroke  my  fingers  briefly  and  leave  behind  a  startling,  intense
burning:  Don’t  you  worry,  Del.  “Lian.  I  don’t  want  to  remember.
How badly did I hurt Delan?”
Lian blinked. Her exhaustion was such that her smile came slow
and did not linger, but her eyes stayed bright. “Not anything like as
badly as you could have.”
“Id will fly again?”
“Oh, yes.”
Eia sighed. Then, “And I?”
“You, too, will fly again, thanks to many healers, your l’frer not
the least among them.”

Eia’s head turned again. “Hana, why aren’t you in bed?”
Hana made an outraged choking sound, which would have been
laughter on some other day.
“There was a battle. Walker and Aeyrie. Did I dream it?”
Lian  looked  down  at  her  fingers  twisting  in  the  blanket.  “No.
Only a few dead, though. All the surviving Teksan-dre are—guests
of the Ula. Eia, you were right about a lot of things.”
I  realized  belatedly  that  the  room  was  very  full  of  people,  for
they  came  crowding  up  around  the  bed.  The  taiseoch  t’Han  was
there, and the taiseoch t’Fon as well, standing back a little as if not
certain  what  to  do  now  that  id  was  in  the  same  room  with  ids
estranged offspring, who seemed likely to live after all.
Gein hesitantly put a supporting arm around Hana, who swayed
on  ids  feet.  And  yet  another  stood  beyond  the  others,  a  beautiful
stranger,  quiet  in  body  but  with  dark,  restless  eyes  that  sought
mine  out  and  then  looked  away  as  if  it  were  an  accident,  only  to
determinedly turn back again.
I  might  have  been  looking  at  myself  through  a  mirror  which
scried the future. No wonder everyone was certain of my parentage.
The taiseoch t’Cwa stepped forward, with my own shyness, my own
hesitation which comes from seeing and knowing too much, my own
bravado.
Pehtal  turned  as  the  Silver  came  up  to  ids  side.  “Taiseoch,”
Pehtal  greeted  idre.  “Delan,  I  present  the  taiseoch  t’Cwa,  Gina
Theli Ishta. Ishta, this is Delan.”
“Ishta Meili Delan,” id said.
I whispered,“Yes.”
My parent smiled painfully. Ids hand came out to touch my fur,
dark and light as ids own. Softly, id spoke in H’ldat the traditional
words  for  greeting  an  infant  newly  hatched:  “Welcome.  Don’t  be
afraid. The world is a good place.”
Epilogue

« ^ » 
I am thirty years  old  now,  by  Aeyrie  standards  still  in  my  youth,
with my life not even a quarter  over.  Yet  I  awoke  one  morning  a
few months ago to the feeling that I had lived too long.
I  had  been  preoccupied  with  an  art  exhibition  in  the  Walker
capital city of Nemdor-By-The-Bay (where A’bel and I put Och onto
a ship one joyous, unhappy day), and had been deceiving myself into
believing that I was only tired. But when I took up my paintbrush
again that cold spring morning, I realized  that  I  had  ceased  to  be
able to paint. That was the day I began to write this chronicle.
Since then, I have become able to paint again.
I have already painted sunrise on the mountains, many times in
many forms. That we have hope in our barren, all too violent land
is  a  truth  that  needs  to  be  repeated.  But  this  time  I  painted  the
sunrise  within:  looking  from  inside  the  cave  at  the  stormcloud
Black landing on the edge, wing membranes smoky with  the  light
burning  on  the  glass  behind  and  before.  It  has  been  a  difficult
painting: to capture the translucence of the glass and of the Aeyrie’s
wings  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  putting  paint  on  canvas,  but  of
understanding light.
I know, and yet I do not know, what the painting means. Though
I am famous as a painter, I am also a seer. I scry  my  canvas  like
Glass, and sometimes I learn a secret about myself, and sometimes
I  learn  the  future.  Other  times  it  takes  someone  else  to  tell  me
what I have painted.
So my magic and my art cannot be disentangled from each other,
and  each  time  I  let  go  of  one  of  my  paintings  I  question  myself.
Why are Walkers buying my paintings? What is the message I am
sending out, and what will happen to those who study my work? Is
it a ridiculous  egotism  to  imagine  that  my  paintings  are  forces  of
change? But I have not forgotten that awful night I challenged the
Horror  with  the  brightness  of  the  sun.  And  I  know  that  in  every
painting I issue that challenge anew.
Here it is again, the brightness illuminating  the  dark  cave,  the
dark wings. In all the years of painting, this is the first time I have
painted Eia.

 
I had been painting all day  when  Eia  came  to  me  to  tell  me  id
was leaving. Id came into the art room where I was finally getting
around  to  cleaning  my  brushes,  since  the  light  was  gone.  Even
Stotla had not outlasted me.
I could always tell when Eia had come from the Quai-du floor, for
id rippled with power much as Och did. Three months we had been
together, healing, loving as soon as it was possible, but sharing far
more than just our room and bed. Winter had given way  to spring.
The  taiseochs  had  met,  and  met  again,  Pehtal  included  among
them.  Now  the  Walkers  of  the  land  were  out  of  hibernation.  The
eggs  had  been  laid  shortly  after  the  battle  of  t’Han,  and  had
incubated  on  their  parents’  hearths  since  then,  surrounded  by
stones  that  controlled  the  heat.  At  last  they  had  put  out  the
chemical  message  that  brings  the  parents  into  milk,  and  been
slitted open to release their wiggling prisoners.
Most  of  the  Triad-re  were  gone,  Gein,  Lian,  and  Feili  among
them.  At  least  Hana  and  Gein  had  parted  friends,  their  wounds
closed, their scars remaining.
Love  is  not  a  prisonkeeper.  I  swore  I  would  remember  that
lesson.
Three  months  Eia  had  been  unfolding  before  me,  bright  and
shadowed, angry and gentle, restless and driven. Therefore I knew
that id would leave Ula t’Han, just as id knew that I would not. My
first painting ached with too many good-byes, those that were said,
and those that would soon be said.
“Can  I  see  it?”  Eia  asked.  Id  stood  a  long  time  before  the
painting. I finished cleaning my  brushes,  and  put  my  arm  around
idre.
“You’re going to leave when Pehtal does,” I said.
Id nodded, and would not look at me.
“It is true what you said. We each need to fly our own winds.”
“I wish I could stay with you.”
“I would rather you didn’t stay in the wrong place just to be with
me.”

Eia turned to me, smiling slightly. “Sh’man l’shil,” id mocked me
gently. “You are supposed to beg me to change my mind.”
“Someday I might beg you to come back,” I said.
But I never did.
 
I  immersed  myself  in  art,  and  magic,  and  the  Aeyrie  culture.
Almost  a  year  later,  the  manuscript  that  I  had  saved,  valuing
mindlessly without even knowing its contents, had its first printing
on the Triad Press. Eia sent me a copy. The next printing was made
on  another  press;  the  one  at  the  Triad  just  wasn’t  big  and  fast
enough  to  keep  up  with  the  demand  for  copies.  L’shile  Caih:  The
Novices  of  Peace,  Eia  called  the  book,  which,  like  its  title,  was
written in both languages. But Pehtal calls it H’loa Prlea, after the
first warm  wind of spring,  on  whose  back  the  wintering  spores  of
the sucker plants ride in to their planting. Out of the mating of that
book with the Community of the Triad and the memory of Teksan’s
War hatched the Alliance Movement.
When Eia’s second book, Shadrale  Caih:  The  Partners  of  Peace,
was printed, the Aeyrie separatists and the Walker supremists both
attempted  to  assassinate  idre.  But  Quai-du  masters  do  not  kill
easily. The Aeyries created a new title for Eia, which the Walkers
translate  as  “Stormtamer.”  But  it  means  much  more  than  that,
having to do with flight dancing and riding close on the edge of the
wind so its force gives dangerous beauty to the dance. The Walkers,
not so accurately, address Eia as Ambassador.
I realized finally that my obstinate pursuit of Eia’s life and sanity
was not merely the madness of a l’shil in love. It had been the act of
a wingling mage, one who knew without knowing that Malal Tefan
Eia was the hinge on which the future turned.
 
I  thought  I  had  finished  this  chronicle,  for  it  had  served  its
purpose  in  giving  me  a  painting.  But  last  night  something
important happened, which uncovered that painting’s meaning.
I came down late from my work, to try to make a meal out of the
leftovers in the kitchen. The dark common room was empty except

for  one  person,  huddled  over  a  book  with  a  lamp  drawn  close  for
light. I went quietly, respecting ids concentration, wondering briefly
why id was not using the library.
“Del?”
I stopped, and turned. The solitary Aeyrie had lifted ids face out
of the shadows. “The Ula-dre told me you are painting again,” Eia
said. “That’s good; your letter worried me.”
“Eia,”  I  said  stupidly.  But  even  as  I  stared  in  wonder  I  was
thinking about how ids face had changed from  how  I  remembered
it.  There  were  lines  in  it,  and  shadows,  pain  and  weariness,  too
much work, too little rest. I could put these things in my painting. I
could  put  in  the  things  that  suggested  the  worn  out  traveler  was
coming  home  for  a  night’s  rest:  a  comfortable  stool,  a  hearthfire
burning.
“You have to stay until the painting is finished,” I said firmly as
Eia came up to me.  But it was meant as a joke;  Eia went ids own
ways, always.
Eia  paused,  looked  at  the  hand  id  had  extended  in  dignified
greeting, put out ids other hand as well, and embraced me. “Why?”
Id asked against my neck.
“Because it’s a portrait of you.”
“Will you give it to me?”
It  was  no  small  request.  To  my  embarrassment  my  paintings
generate  enough  Walker  money  to  support  a  small  Ula,  as  Eia
knew well. “Yes,” I said.
“I’ll stay, then.”
“You will?”
Eia  pressed  ids  face  to  my  shoulder,  laughing  at  my
astonishment. “This is much easier than the usual methods I have
to use to see one of your paintings.”
Laughter died, and I felt a slight quiver in ids flight muscles as I
stroked my hand down them. “My parent Tefan is dead,” Eia said.
“I know.”
“You did not come to the Burning.”

“It was a  bad  time  to  leave  my  work.  But  I  would  have,  had  I
known you wanted me there.”
“The people of t’Fon, my l’frer among them,  begged  me  to  stay.
Hana never wanted to be taiseoch,  and  thinks  id  is  not  suited  for
it.”
“What did you say?”
“I said no. I told Hana to make the best of it.
“Since  the  beginning  it  has  been  Tefan  preventing  the  Aeyries
from  all  flying  the  same  wind.  But  Hana  fought  in  the  war,  and
called a Walker ‘sh’man’ in the end. I flew to t’Cwa then, to talk to
Ishta.  And  your  taiseoch  t’Fon  also  seems  to  be  in  agreement  at
last. It might be years yet before the Walkers and the Aeyries have
a treaty, Del, but at last I believe it can happen.”
Id paused, and said in the amazed voice that people always used
when discussing this subject, “I met your child.”
“Ishta’s child,” I corrected.  The year L’shile Caih  was  printed,  I
had begotten Laril on a Silver cousin, who dutifully laid the egg on
the taiseoch’s hearth. It was the only thing Ishta ever asked me for,
that I, the child id never had, give idre an heir. By Aeyrie logic it is
the  obvious  solution,  but,  being  a  Walker  by  culture,  I  suppose  I
will never stop feeling a little strange about it.
“Great winds, what a little hellion. Are all your offspring going to
be like that?”
I said, “I certainly hope not. How could I paint?”
Eia  made  supper  for  me.  Perhaps  it  is  part  of  Teksan’s  legacy
that I hate cooking so much that I simply will not do it, even if that
means I do not eat properly. We sat together among Eia’s books and
papers, and Eia told me the news as I ate.
“Gein and Feili hatched their second. Lian is well, glad to be able
to  concentrate  on  the  sick  and  the  children,  and  leave  the
administration  of  the  hospital  to  Gein.  Pehtal  and  A’bel  are  well
also—the  three  of  them  are  writing  a  history  of  Triad.  Pilgrim
seems  to  have  some  kind  of  treaty  with  a  Mer  Gestalt,  and  as  a
result is giving birth  to  her  own  herd.  There  are  four  Triad  Mers
now.  One  of  them  apparently  is  bonded  already  with  Gein-Feili’s

eldest. Who knows what will come of it?”
I saw my next painting. “A new race.”
“What?”
I  suddenly  found  speech  impossible.  My  heart  pounded  within
me: terror, joy. When had I stopped growing? When had my beloved
Ula  become  too  small  for  me?  When  did  my  continuing  need  to
study and claim my heritage become mere lack of courage?
Eia looked at me, shielded and controlled, keeping some powerful
thing carefully in check.
“I think it is time for me to go back to Triad,” I said. “Past time,
even.”
“Del,  I  have  been  so  afraid—”  Eia’s  wild  hands  displaced  the
papers, shoving  the  book  dangerously  near  the  table  edge.  “Great
Winds, I was ready to plead with you, to  beg  you,  to  sit  with  you
day and night until you agreed to come with me!”
“Why?” But I looked into Eia’s face and knew.
 
The rising sun just spilled its rich light across this paper. Eia is
asleep in my bed, tangled and ruffled and smiling in ids dreams. I
have yet to sleep, but it was not pain that kept me awake.  I have
seen, this night, to the other side of loneliness.
On one level, each of my paintings  is  a  self  portrait.  I,  too,  am
finally coming home.
—«»—«»—«»—
Glossary
« ^ 
Aeyrie—a  sentient  species  of  winged  hermaphrodites  who  live  in
remote communities in the mountains. Although they are a creative
and ingenious people, their inability to grow  their own food makes
autonomy impossible.
Ahbi—the lucky moon.

Abki—the dark moon.
ast—a blooming sucker plant native to the Glass Mountains, the
stems of which are processed to make astil, a tough, silky fiber.
caricha—an edible sea coral.
c’duni—a sweet bar of food eaten in flight for quick energy.
ch’ta—charismatic, having a strong and energetic personality.
cleata—Giant  sea  lizards,  whose  shed  skin  is  a  tough,
water-resistant material often used to make shoes.
c’lol-fe—“The  wildness  which  comes  after  the  confinement  of
winter.”
crich—a  powdered,  dried  fungus,  the  smoke  of  which  is  a  mild
hallucinogen.
Derksai—one  of  three  lowland  areas  inhabited  by  Walkers,
where the land is arable.
Digan-lai—a primitive, cave-dwelling Walker people, who  make
their living primarily by gathering and processing astil.
draf—a six-legged, shaggy beast of burden.
-du—a suffix meaning “having to do with flight.”
em’an—an  empath,  one  who  has  the  gift  of  knowing  another’s
feelings.
Fon—The Sun.
forty-day—The Walkers divide the year into ten periods of forty
days each. (The Aeyries think in terms of four seasons, each lasting
one  hundred  days,  and  the  Mers  think  in  terms  of  winter  and
summer migrations.)
glass—a  hard,  durable  crystal  of  which  most  of  the  world  is
composed, which occurs in a wide range of colors.
H’ldat—the native language of the Aeyries.
H’loa Prlea—the first warm  wind of  spring,  the  bearer  of  plant
spores.
H’shal—any common room of an Aeyrie community.

hunter worm—a web-spinning worm which captures and devours
flying insects.
h’ta—art.
id, idre, ids—the H’ldat pronouns.
kip—a herd animal raised for wool and milk products.
l’—a prefix indicating that what follows describes a person.
l’din—a  gardner,  a  botanist.  Also  the  name  of  the  community
where Teksan lives.
l’frer—a sibling, a nestfellow.
l’per—a parent.
l’shil—a newly adult Aeyrie, a wingling.
lightwands—a reedlike plant, the stalks of  which  are  dried  and
burned from the end for light.
Lia—the tiny moon.
Magic—Unusual talents are considered normal among the Aeyrie
population.  Those  with  sufficient  intelligence,  creativity,  and
courage  may  find  themselves  “growing  into”  magic  (as  opposed  to
learning it). The talents of a particular mage develop as part of the
maturation process,  and  will  be  unique  to  them.  (However,  a  few
abilities,  such  as  scrying  glass,  are  relatively  common.)  See
“Sorcery.”
medog—a  large,  stupid,  grazing  animal,  with  prehensile  toes,
native to the Glass Mountains.
Mer—a sentient, air-breathing species which inhabits the ocean.
Mers live in Gestalts, or herds, in which their telepathic links with
each  other  result  in  a  highly  intelligent  group  consciousness.
However,  they  normally  have  little  concept  of  their  existence  as
individuals.
onfrit—sentient,  sociable,  winged  animals,  with  a  facility  for
languages, the traditional companions of the Aeyries.
panja—a sucker plant with sweet-smelling blossoms.
Quai-du—the traditional Aeyrie martial art.

-re—a suffix indicating association (i.e. a Triad-re is a member of
the Triad community.)
se’an—a person with the gift  for  knowing  another’s  thoughts,  a
telepath.
shadral—a partner in activity.
Sh’man—a title indicating great respect.
S’olel—“The knowing which is feeling,” kinesthetic knowledge.
Sorcery—the  Walker  art  of  spells  and  potions,  of  which  acts  of
sadism are an integral part, which is viewed by most Walkers with
superstition and awe. The Aeyries believe that the rituals of sorcery
access the sorcer’s inborn talent, but in such a way  that the magic
and the person are perverted by the process. See “Magic.”
t- — “Of” (prefix)
taiseoch—the hereditary chieftain of an Aeyrie community.
Ula—a  traditional  Aeyrie  community,  built  atop  a  hollow  glass
mountain.
waterwyth—an eel-like freshwater creature.
—«»—«»—«»—
[scanned anonymously in a galaxy far far away]
[A 3S Release— v1, html]
[December 21, 2007]

