 
 
Law Enforcement  
Safety Handbook  
 
Unusual Weapons, 
Concealment Methods for 
Contraband & Things that 
Make You Wonder Why 
You Ever Became a Cop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edition #5
March, 2006
 
 
Wendy Kierstead, CCA
wkierstd@brunswickpd.org
207-725-5521 x 143
Brunswick Police Department
28 Federal St.
Brunswick, Maine  04011

Index 
 
Firearms, Fakes & Accessories: 
1:    Color Coated Weapons 
2:    Survival Gun 
3:    Weapon that Defeats Body Armor 
4:    Maglight Shotgun 
5:    Key Ring Gun 
6:    Cigarette Pack Gun 
       12 Gauge Bobby Trap Alarm 
7:    Zip Gun 
8:    Flare Gun 
9:    Steel Pipe Shotgun 
       Bolt Pistol 
10:  Conversion Device 
       Coat hanger Holster 
11:  Garment Concealer 
       Under Desk Holster 
12:  Briefcase Gun 
       Radio Concealer 
13:  Weapon Wallet 
14:  Souvenir Weapon Lighters 
15:  Mini Pistol 
       Pocket Clip Handgun 
16:  Credit Card Shotgun 
17:  Bangstick 
       Cell Phone Gun 
18:  Hybred Knife/Gun 
19:  Fabulous Fakes & Replica Weapons 
 
Knives & Cutting Instruments: 
20:  Fighting Knife 
21:  Throwing Blades 
22:  Throwing Knife with Sheath 
23:  Throwing Cards 
24:  Belt Buckles 
25:  Keychain Knives 
26:  Kitty Keychain 
       Key Knife 
27:  Ceramic Knife 
       Motorcycle Dipstick Knife 
28:  Swords & Canes 
29:  Lipstick Knife 
       Cell Phone Knife 
30:  Baton Knife 
       Door Plate Knife 
31:  Plyer Knife 
       Thumper Knife 
 
Concealment Opportunities: 
32:  Vest Holsters 
33:  Hidden Pocket Jeans 
       Sneaker Hiding Spot 
34:  Bandando 
       Crotch Pocket Jeans 
35:  Pantleg Nails 
       Baseball Caps 
 
 
This book would not have been possible without  the 
assistance of police and public safety agencies.   
Information shared to promote the safety of officers 
often passes through many hands along the way and I 
apologize to any officer or agency  I may have failed to 
acknowledge.   All efforts in adding to this handbook 
are greatly appreciated. 
 
Contributing Agencies:   
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives 
Peel Regional Police (Canada) 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police  
LA CLEAR (Los Angeles, California) 
MTA Interagency Counter-terrorism Task Force (NYC) 
NYC HIDTA Gang Unit (New York) 
Chicago HIDTA (Illinois) 
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Vice and Narcotics Detectives 
(North Carolina) 
Baltimore County Fire Department (Maryland) 
Scarborough Police Department (Maine) 
South Portland  Police Department (Maine) 
Auburn Police Department (Maine) 
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department (Maine) 
Elko Combined Narcotics Unit (Nevada Department of 
Public Safety) 
Carrizo Gorge Railway Police (California) 
Port Dickinson Police Department (NY) 
Calibrepress.com  
 
With Special Thanks to: 
 
Lieutenant Daniel Fisch,  New York City Police 
Department, Intelligence Division 
Andre Desgreniers, Regional Intelligence Analyst 
Canada Border Service Agency 
Donald W. Reid, International Security Consultant 
Istanbul, Turkey 
Anthony Losada, Coastal International Security   

Concealment Opportunities – continued: 
36:  Sock Pockets 
       Fake Beer Belly 
37:  Stash Belt Buckles 
38:  Jogger’s Pepper Spray 
      Wrist Sweatband Hiding Place 
39:  Drugs on the Brain 
40:  Frame Stash 
41:  Drugs in the Ceiling 
42:  Walking Cane                                                  
       CD Case Scales 
43:  Meth Laced Paper 
       Sheet Cocaine 
44:  Cocaine Soaked Wicker 
45:  Heroin Beans 
       Tequila Cocaine 
46:  Tequila Meth 
       Drug Candy 
47:  Toiletry Cocaine 
       Cocaine Candles 
48:  Drugs in Figurines 
49:  Black Cocaine 
       Bath Gel Meth 
50:  Drugs in Trays 
       Dog Repellant 
51:  Safe Cans 
52:  Snack Food Hiding Spots 
53:  Dog Food Cocaine 
       Khat 
54:  Fake FedEx 
       Mercedes Hidden Compartment 
55:  Honda Odyssey Compartment 
       Dash Stash 
56:  Honda Ridgeline Compartment 
57:  Armrest Concealment 
       Fuel Tank Concealment 
58:  PU Truck Bed Concealment 
       Rocker Panel Hiding Spot 
59:  Speaker Trap 
       Axle Hiding Spot 
60:  Manifold Stash 
61:  Battery Hot Spot 
       Airbag Concealment 
62:  Booby Trapped Compartment 
63:  Engine Compartment Stash 
       Tire Concealment 
 
Miscellaneous Warnings and Goodies: 
64:  Raincoat Danger 
       Raid Jacket Warning 
65:  Hybrid Engine Danger 
66:  Handcuff Problems 
67:  Danger in Transport 
       Booby Trapped Door 
68:  Airless Tires 
69:  Running Vests 
70:  Flashlight Explosives 
       Baby Powder Bomb 
 

 
Miscellaneous Warnings and Goodies: 
71:  Claymore Bomb 
       Ring Key 
72:  Plastiken Key Chain 
       Brass Knuckle Handbag 
       Light Bulb Fumigator 
73:  Coffee Mate Flame Thrower 
       Mini Fire Lighter 
       Wrist Watch Lighter 
74:  Stealth Camera 
       Talking Mirror 
75:  Chemistry Project 
76:  Covert Stun Gun 
       The Stinger 
       Eyeball Camera        
77:  Stealth Pipes 
78:  Drug Paraphernalia 
79:  New Stronger Oxy 
       Fentanyl Patches 
80:  Vaporized Alcohol 
       Plastic Cocaine 
81:  Drug Flavored Candy 
       Puppy Mules 
82:  Cell phone Stun Guns 
       Pager OC Spray   
83:  Unusual Vehicle Setup 
84:  Traffic Stop at it’s Worst 
 
 
***Many of the weapons shown in this book have websites listed where the items can be 
purchased or viewed.   At the time this book was compiled all sites were active. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Firearms, 
Fakes 
&  
Accessories  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1) 
 
 
Color Coatings for Firearms: 
 
The CERAKOTE  FIREARMS COATING SYSTEM is available through numerous websites and 
allows for color finishes on handguns and rifles.    The system is marketed as a corrosion 
protection finish and is available for $200 to $400 per weapon.   Coloring of firearms makes it 
harder to identify real firearms from toys or pellet guns and red or blue finishes could easily be 
mistaken as training or simunition weapons in the field.     
Two of the websites featuring this service are:  www.larsontactical.com/id1.html, & 
http://glockmeister.com/catalog/product_info.php/cPath/14/products_id/376  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2) 
 
 
Survival Gun: 
 
In December of 2005 the RCMP in British Columbia located what appeared to be a plastic rifle stock in a 
backpack during a vehicle stop.     Investigation found the plastic cap to the rifle butt popped off to show 
all other working parts for the firearm were stored inside. 
 
This is an AR7 Explorer by Charter Arms.    It is a .22 caliber rifle and fires .22 short rounds.  Further 
research indicates police departments along the New England coast have run into this weapon many 
times over the last few years, often being carried on fishing and lobster boats by mariners.   The weapon 
is waterproof and floats.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
3) 
 
 
Able to Penetrate Most Body Armor & Ballistic Helmets: 
 
The FN Five-seveN® pistol is capable of defeating most soft body armor as well as ballistic helmets.  
This info is from the RCMP & the FIIU of Canada who advise organized crime members in Ontario & 
Quebec and local criminal elements are actively seeking possession of these firearms. 
This is the new generation of the WWII Browning Hi Power weapon.     The new model is a 20 round 
pistol made in Belgium that fires a 5.7 mm bullet that will defeat most body armor used by the military 
and law enforcement today.   It brings the type of performance that was previously confined to rifles or 
carbines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High magazine capacity:  The 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five-seveN® comes standard with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            20-round magazine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High stopping power:  The Five-seveN® 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fires the 5.7x28mm SS190 Ball round 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which reliably penetrates Kevlar helmets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            and vests as well as CRISAT protection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High hit probability:   The Five-seveN’s® 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extremely low recoil impulse results in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
virtually no muzzle climb, thereby  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitating fast and controllable follow-up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shots. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the Internet: 
 
The FN Five-seveN® is Light & Ergonomic:  It weighs 30% less than most 9 mm pistols. 
 
Fully Safe:  Due to it’s double-action firing mechanism, the Five-seveN® offers no inherent risk of 
accidental discharge during transportation. Furthermore, all of it’s safety devices are 
automatically reengaged following each firing cycle. 
 
The Five-seveN®  fires the SS190 5.7x28 mm ball round.  This projectile will perforate any 
individual protection on today’s battlefield including the PASGT Kevlar helmet & 48 layers of 
Kevlar body armor.    The SS190’s conventional design allows it to be manufactured on existing 
production lines and it’s lead-free composition eliminates range contamination. 
 
It can be purchased online at www.calssportingarmory.com for $854. 
 
 
 
 

 
4) 
 
 
Maglight Shotgun 
 
The ARES Defense Systems Company is currently selling a Mag-Light which is actually a .410 shotgun. 
The weapon is called the “Companion” and is a working flashlight capable of firing a .410 shotgun round.  
It works by removing a safety pin and can then be fired by a spring loaded firing pin. The projectile exits 
through the end cap.  
This weapon can be purchased on the Internet. It is also available in the Mini-Mag size which fires a .380 
round.  
 
ARES Mag-Light .410 Shotgun  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5) 
 
  
Key Ring Gun: 
 
This weapon appears to be a common key ring or MP3 
player and may be carried in a pocket or around a neck. 
It is extremely light weight and can be separated in two parts, 
the double barrel (silver section) and the firing pin mechanism 
(black section). 
 
The trigger mechanism is cocked by simply pulling the 
key ring section to the rear and raising the two trigger buttons 
which can be fired separately.  (This mechanism may be prone 
to unintentional discharges.) 
 
New South Wales, Australia seized over 900 of these guns 
recently in a raid.   All were ready for distribution.   A further 
2500 parts ready for assembly were also recovered, but 
unfortunately it is believed a large number had already made 
their way into circulation. 
 
The firearm uses .32 automatic rounds and has an accuracy 
range of about 2600 ft.  It costs in the area of $2000. 
 
This key gun does NOT show up in Airport screening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6) 
 
 
Cigarette Pack Gun: 
 
The Cigarette Pack Gun is usually a  
single-shot weapon of varying calibers.    
Although much heavier than a normal  
cigarette packet, this weapon is visually  
difficult to distinguish from the genuine  
article.  Real cigarettes will often be 
inserted next to the barrel and the firing  
button is concealed beneath the packet’s  
label. In addition the paper packaging can  
be kept closed concealing the barrel,  
but not hindering the operation of the  
weapon.     
Any brand of cigarette or cigar packaging  
could be used with this device. 
 
 
12-Gauge Booby Trap Alarm: 
This perimeter security device can be attached anywhere with only 2 screws.  When activated by a trip 
wire the firing pin is released, firing a 12 gauge blank cartridge. This is designed to scare away unwanted 
visitors or trespassers; however the cartridge can easily be replaced with a real 12-gauge round and 
would become deadly to anyone tripping the guide wire.   
This unit is made of steel and is reusable.   It is available at www.espionage-store.com for $59.99. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7) 
 
 
Zip Gun: 
 
While conducting routine cell searches at the Correctional Center of Canada in Kingston, Ontario 
officers discovered the Zip Gun shown below. 
 
The gun was constructed as follows: 
1) The barrel was constructed from aluminum pop cans rolled to form the barrel and then wrapped in 
string to add strength and stability to the barrel 
2) The grip was constructed from a deodorant container 
3)  The chamber was fabricated from melted plastic with a port opening to allow for the firing mechanism 
4) Match heads were used as a propellant 
4) The projectiles were made from metal shards of pop cans and the internal metal parts of lighters 
6) The inmate who made the gun had designed a unique electronic firing mechanism  
7) The mechanism was designed using an electronic stopwatch which was modified to expose electrical 
contacts.  An electrical current was produced when the watch button was pressed 
8) Electrical wires then were passed through a port opening in the barrel. When pressed an electrical 
spark is produced in the chamber which contains the match heads, wadding and projectiles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8) 
 
 
.38 Caliber Flare Gun 
 
The adapter shown here converts a plastic 12-gauge flare gun into a .38 Caliber pistol. It is available at  
www.CaptainForHire.com at a cost of $75.   
 
The website calls it a “must have tool for hunting, fishing or self-defense.” It also calls it a “no hassle way 
to carry a weapon onto an airplane or through security points.” 
 
This Flare gun is legal to possess as it does not quality as a firearm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9) 
 
 
Homemade Steel Pipe Shotgun: 
 
From the Bay St. Louis, Mississippi Police Department:    
A shooting occurred in Bay St. Louis on 3-9-05 where a 
known drug dealer was shot during an argument over a  
crack cocaine transaction.    
The weapon was a homemade  
STEEL PIPE SHOTGUN.     
It was made by wrapping a pipe 
in duct tape.  The shotgun shell  
was jammed into one end of the  
pipe with a BB held in place over 
the primer with duct tape.   The  
weapon was  
fired by hitting the BB with a  
metal hatchet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bolt Pistol: 
 
This unusual ‘pistol’ has been around for a long time, but  
similar ones keep turning up and it’s worth a reprint. 
This weapon is a homemade .22 caliber gun that fires  
a single .22 caliber stinger.    To use the firearm you only  
need to pull back on the spring-loaded hex-head of the  
bolt.    
The weapon is about 5/8 inches in diameter and 4 inches  
long.   The only way to distinguish it from  
a standard bolt is the barrel hole on the end of the  
threaded portion and the machined groove just under  
the hex-head where it rests on the bolt shaft. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
10) 
 
 
Select Fire Conversion Device: 
 
Conversion units can be found online at 
multiple sites, including www.sportshooter.com.  
 
The one shown here is offered as: “The first true  
drop in select fire device for Glock and Berettas 
92 Series handguns”.     They advertise that 
installation takes only 10 seconds and can turn  
any Glock or Beretta into a select fire “machine 
pistol”.   Some of the websites selling the conversion 
devices show video that appears to back this claim. 
The companies offer the device to any US Law  
Enforcement Officers as well as to any foreign  
countries who do not have laws banning it;  
however it appears compliance is voluntary.    
The cost is from $310 to $350. and they claim 
no tools or gunsmithing ability is needed to 
make the conversion. 
 
 
 
 
 
Coathanger Holster: 
 
Shown here is a device sometimes called the  
“Jamaican Holster”. It was recently found on  
a subject in NYC who has connections to the 
“Jamaican Posse”.   It is made with a simple  
wire coat hanger and makes for an easy  
and lightweight way to ‘holster’  
a gun on the inside 
of a waistband.      
 
(After this was highlighted in the  
Brunswick, Maine Crime Bulletin a call was  
received from a senior officer  in a neighboring 
town who advised the coat hanger 
holsters had been regularly used by  
undercover officers in major cities  in the  
60’s & 70’s to hide their duty weapons.) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11) 
 
 
Garment Concealer: 
 
The hanger shown here is designed solely for the purpose 
of concealing a handgun.   It is manufactured with a bronze 
brush extending from the center of the hanger which is  
inserted in the barrel of the weapon to hang it. 
It is designed solely for the purpose of concealing a  
handgun. 
According to the website, the design “allows you to  
conceal a firearm by covering it with a garment’.   
Please keep this in mind while executing search warrants 
or while searching luggage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Under the Desk Holster: 
 
The holster shown here can be purchased on EBAY.     
It is designed to be placed under a dashboard 
or desk.  
The pad has a glue surface that, when the protective  
paper is removed, will stick to glass, plastic, cloth,  
wood, metal, etc.     
The holster also has Velcro so you can remove it 
from the mounting pad and take it with you.   
It will carry any size handgun and allows for a left  
or right hand draw.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
12) 
 
 
The Ultimate Briefcase Gun: 
 
This is the ENIGMA “AOW” briefcase gun.   It is advertised as “The ultimate Executive 
Protection/Homeland Security/Self Defense device for today’s unpredictable world” and sells for $1695. 
The design features a fully functional six shot .22LR revolver incorporated in a handle designed around a 
professional appearing briefcase.   The roomy case provides plenty of space for paperwork and personal 
property.   The double action revolver with the briefcase handle trigger allows firing 6 shots as fast as the 
trigger can be pulled.   Because the firearm is carried like a regular briefcase, the barrel is always at a 
proper offensive height.    The briefcase is available to security services, law enforcement and any 
“qualified’ individuals through Armament Services International Inc.  at www.autoweapons.com.   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AM/FM Radio Gun Concealer:   
 
This photo of an AM/FM RADIO that clips  
to the belt and fully conceals a  weapon  
or contraband has been forwarded from 
the RCMP. 
 
It bears mentioning that this radio is fully  
functional even with the firearm inside.   
It comes with earphones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
13) 
 
 
Weapon Wallet: 
 
Shown here is a wallet/holster that carries a Beretta semi-automatic .25 cal. with a detachable magazine. 
Similar wallets can be found online to fit nearly any small firearm.  Note that the leather holster/wallet has 
a hole in it to allow the pistol to be fired while still enclosed in the wallet.    A holster similar to this was 
recently bought online by the father of a Brunswick, Maine police officer.   The wallet measures 4” x 5”.   
Similar ones can be bought online for as little as $21.99 (without the gun). 
 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives in Salt Lake City  advises possession of one of 
these wallets with a firearm in it is illegal.    Obviously there would be the concealed weapons charge; 
however possession of the wallet is an additional charge under the National Firearms Act 26USC 5861 
as “Any Other Weapon”.     
There have been convictions on this charge reference these wallets so there is precedent.  
If you have any questions reference firearms laws you can contact the NFA Information Branch at  
202-927-8330.   (This number is for use by law enforcement only, do not release it to the general public.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
14) 
 
 
Souvenirs from Iraq: 
 
On February 10, 2005 an officer in Tennessee stopped a vehicle for speeding.   When the driver opened 
the glove box a chrome finished pistol fell out.    The officer drew his weapon and called for backup; 
however the driver continued to reach for the firearm and stopped only when he realized the officer was 
about to shoot.  The ‘weapon’ that the driver almost lost his life over turned out to be a cigarette lighter 
that had ALL THE FEATURES & MARKINGS of the Beretta it appeared to be.    
The Tennessee town where the traffic stop took place is near a military base and interviews with base 
personnel found many of them had brought the gun lighters back from Iraq as souvenirs. 
 
After this info was posted in the Crime Analysis Bulletin in Brunswick, Maine – two police departments in 
Southern Maine advised they had also come across similar Beretta lighters that were being displayed by 
veterans who had recently returned from Iraq.      It appears thousands of these cigarette lighter weapons 
have been brought back to the states in the last two years and are most likely in many homes. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
15) 
 
 
The Mini: 
 
The  Liberator 9mm pistol  is the size of a credit                                 
card and is considered the smallest pistol available. 
 It is  2.25” high x 3.30” long.     
 
 
It can be purchased online without restriction 
for $325. at  http://stingerpengun.com/knifegun.htm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LIBERATOR 9MM  PISTOL 
 
 
 
Pocket Clip  .22 Cal. Handgun:  
 
In March of 2004 a South Carolina State Police (STAR) Unit stopped a pickup for an inspection sticker 
violation.   As he approached the passenger side of the truck he noticed that the driver and passenger 
were making suspicious movements and appeared to be attempting to conceal something.   Both were 
very nervous and would not make eye contact.    
After finishing the paperwork, the Trooper asked for a consent search.  Located in the driver’s side panel 
of the door was this .22 cal. North American Arms pistol that folds in half.   If clipped to your pocket it 
would look like a pager or cellphone. 
 
This weapon can be found online at www.naaminis.com.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16) 
 
 
Credit Card Shotgun: 
 
A Minneapolis, Minnesota gun shop debut a CREDIT CARD SIZED SHOTGUN in October of  2004.   It 
is a two-shot weapon made from a piece of metal the height and width of a standard credit card and 
about one half inch thick.   The gun retails at $100. and each barrel fires seven standard steel pellets. 
The owner of Koscielski’s Guns and Ammo in Minneapolis advertises it as “the ultimate self-defense 
weapon”.  It is being manufactured by AFT Incorporated in Minnesota.  
 
The makers state it as meant to be used for close range self defense.  It is very effective at 10’  but 
totally useless at 20’.    The shotgun is a muzzleloader and does not use shells.  The user has to 
measure out gunpowder,  pour it in each barrel, drop seven pellets into each barrel and tamp in a small 
wad of paper.    A knob at one end serves as a safety and 2 buttons set into a hole in the body are the 
electrical triggers.   Each barrel fires with a loud pop.   The manufacturer advertises that the weapon is 
no more deadly than a .22 cal., but you have multiple wounds, causing more pain and more blood loss. 
 
THE NEW GUN DOES NOT COUNT AS A FIREARM UNDER FEDERAL REGULATIONS BECAUSE 
IT IS MUZZLELOADED; however it is illegal to carry one without a permit for a concealed 
handgun. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17) 
 
 
Bangstick - Adapted for Pocket or Neck: 
 
In 2002 a deputy sheriff in Palm Beach County Florida arrested a man who was in possession of a 
“bangstick,” measuring 4-5/8” in length with a 1-¾” barrel and capable of firing either a single .38 cal. 
short, .38 special or .357 magnum cartridge.  This device is intended for use by fishermen and scuba 
divers to kill sharks and alligators.  When used in such a way it is attached to a threaded pole and then 
used as a prod to hit the target.  A very slight tap at the end of the barrel will cause the device to 
discharge.  
The “bangstick” is considered a firearm.  ATF has classified this device as an “any other weapon” that is 
prosecutable by 10 years in prison and up to $10,000 in fines under Title 26, Section 5871. These 
devices can be found at almost any scuba or diving accessories shop. 
Officers should be extremely cautious when handling these devices; they can discharge simply by being 
tapped on the barrel end.  In addition, its appearance is deceiving and can lead an officer to discount it  
as a dangerous weapon.  It is a triggerless device that can easily be mistaken for a tool or some other 
harmless article. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cell Phone Gun: 
 
At first sight this looks like a regular cell phone, same size, same shape,  
same overall appearance, but beneath the digital face lies a .22 caliber  
pistol.   The phone gun is capable of firing 4 rounds in quick succession  
with a touch of the otherwise standard keypad. 
The guns are loaded by twisting the phone in half.   The rounds fit into  
the top of the phone under the readout screen and the lower half, under  
the keyboard, holds the firing pins.    The bullets fire through the  
antenna by pressing the keypad from numbers 5 to 8. 
The phone guns are being manufactured in Croatia and Yugoslavia and  
are sophisticated machines constructed to fit inside gutted cell phones.     
The gun phones are significantly heavier then real cell phones and do not  
operate or have lighted screens.  The gun parts will also show up in an xray.  
 

 
18) 
 
 
Knife/Gun: 
 
These photos are of a knife that is also a .22 cal pistol. The weapon was taken from an ex-con 
being arrested for POSSESSION OF A FIREARM BY A FELON and this second weapon was 
discovered 
during the incident. Thanks to Crook CO Sheriff's Office in Prineville, Oregon for this info, along 
with Bill Schneider of the US AG’s Office.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
19) 
 
Fabulous Fakes – Can You Tell The Difference? 
 
These are gas & spring powered BB guns now available on line. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                SIG SAUER P228                          COLT 25 S                                 SNIPER RIFLE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          M-16                                                                                MP 5 
 
 
 
 
Incredibly Realistic Replica Weapons: 
 
During the months of October and November of 2002 
several incidents were covered by the police in Brunswick, Maine 
 where replica handguns were found either on a suspect or in their  
vehicles.  (In two of these cases the suspects involved were 
convicted felons.) 
This ‘replica’ phenomenon appears to be escalating and it bears  
mentioning that many of these weapons are made of metals  
that are EXTREMELY realistic.    A replica Glock seized in 
November had the same characteristics AND WEIGHT of a 
real weapon and the only way an untrained eye  
could tell the difference would be to look down the barrel. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Knives 
&  
Cutting 
Instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
20) 
 
 
Double Blade Fighting Knife: 
 
This is a brass knuckle style double blade fighting knife.    It was purchased at an Army/Navy Surplus 
Store in Scarborough, Maine in May of 2005 for $23.99.    This weapon is legal to carry as long as it is 
not concealed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
21) 
 
 
 
Throwing Blades: 
 
The three-bladed throwing knife shown here  
was confiscated in Union County, New Jersey  
in January, 2006  from a 15 year old girl who  
was walking down the street drinking from a  
bottle of brandy.   This knife is called the 
“Cylone Throwing Knife”  and is available 
online at www.throwingstar.net for $12.99.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some of the other throwing stars and  
knives available at this website  
are shown below and can be purchased 
starting at $3.99. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Typhoon Star - $12.99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moon Star - $5.49 
 
                      5 ½” Cross - $7.99 
 
 
 
 

 
22) 
 
 
Throwing Knife Sheath: 
 
Also available at www.throwingstar.net 
are the knives and sheath shown here. 
Amazingly, both the knives and the  
sheath are available for $3.99!  
 
The RCMP in Alberta, Canada reports 
they have ongoing problems with hundreds  
of  similar sheaths being sold to BOTH 
 juveniles and adults at sporting goods  
stores for about the same price as they  
are offered on the Internet.     The Velcro  
sleeve attaches to either the wrist or leg  
and holds one or more knives that are  
then easily concealed under clothing.      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
23) 
 
 
Throwing Cards:    
 
The cards (shown here) are made of metal 
and are the size of regular playing card. 
All four corners and sides are razor sharp. 
These too are available at  
www.throwingstar.net under the name  
ROYAL FLUSH THROWING KNIFE 
CARDS.   A five card pack can be purchased  
for $19.99.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shown below is another version of 
a throwing card with razor edges. 
It is available at www.pebbleco.com 
for $21.99.      
 
One of these cards was recently recovered  
by the Pierce County Sheriff’s Department  
in Washington State where an  officer  
found it on a student in a junior high  
school. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
24) 
 
 
Belt Buckles: 
 
Another interesting website  
is www.pebbleco.com. 
It has many interesting items 
including the throwing star belt  
buckle shown here which is 
available for $16.95 along with 
the knife buckle shown below 
for $8.95.   
 
Also available on this site are 
throwing knives, crossbows, 
blowguns, pinhole cameras, 
gasmasks, lock picks, 
scanners & can safes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
25) 
 
 
Keychain Knives: 
 
The number of websites selling key chain knives is extensive.    The Queens Intelligence Unit in New 
York compiled this photo array of examples.  Obviously it is not a complete list, but this gives you a better 
idea of what’s out there and what you need to be watching for. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
26) 
 
 
 
 
Killer Kitty Keychain: 
 
These cute dog & cat keychains are not toys, but  
are in fact a very serious defense weapon. The design  
has been around for years, but the technology has  
gotten better. They are now made of an ultra-tough  
plastic material that is very hard to break and does  
NOT show up on an Airport Scanner. 
 
This product is available at  
www.selfdefenseproducts.com 
for $5.50. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Knife/Cuff Key: 
 
The ASP Company, which is known for  
manufacturing the ASP Baton and other law 
enforcement equipment, is now producing 
a folding knife that appears to be an ordinary 
key.  The key also contains a hidden handcuff 
key. 
Although this item can be a useful tool for 
law enforcement, it can also be easily concealed 
by a subject who wishes to escape from confinement 
and/or cause injury to law enforcement officials. 
 
 

 
27) 
 
 
Ceramic Knife: 
 
This is the latest thing in gourmet cooking – CERAMIC KNIVES.    They are now being sold over the 
Internet as well as on TV via the Home Shopping Network and QVC.      They come in sizes ranging from 
2” paring to 8” butcher knives.      The good news for culinary experts  is that they are razorblade sharp 
and do not dull easily….the bad news for police officers is that they are readily available, inexpensive 
and do not show up with security wands and metal detectors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motorcycle Oil Tank Dipstick Knife: 
An officer in Cumru Township, Pennsylvania reported to the Calibrepress.Com Newsline (a valuable 
website serving police agencies with information on weapons, training, law updates, etc.)  the existence 
of this ‘oil tank knife’  that can be purchased to replace the dipstick on Harley Davidson motorcycles. The 
dipstick is located on the right side of the motorcycle just under the seat. 
The model shown below is available for most Harley bikes and can be purchased on the internet. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28) 
 
 
Sword Canes: 
 
The next time you see  
someone with a  
walking cane please  
keep these photos in  
mind.  The 2’ long 
sword is slightly 
serrated on one side 
and is completely  
undetectable inside the 
hard plastic or wood 
cane casings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These and dozens 
of other styles of 
sword canes are  
available at 
www.laguiole-southwest.com   for $80-$500. 
 
 
 

 
29) 
 
 
The Lipstick Knife: 
 
An Indianapolis, Indiana school teacher  
confiscated this "lipstick knife" from a  
9-year-old girl in her class. It seems the  
girl had brought it to school to "cut up"  
one of her friends. The lipstick knife is  
widely available through mail 
order catalogs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cell Phone Knife: 
 
This cell phone knife was 
highlighted in February of 
2006 by the MTA Police 
in New York City. 
 
There was no explanation 
of the circumstances 
around it’s use; however 
one look at the blade 
gives you an idea of 
how dangerous it could  
be.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
30) 
 
 
Baton Knife: 
 
A patrolman in Clarksville, Tenn. 
was conducting a recent DUI 
stop when he noticed a device 
resembling a small baton in the  
car. 
 
Once opened, the baton was  
found to be a container  
for 15” double edged sword  
blades.    
 
 
 
 
Door Plate Knife: 
 
The U.S. Penitentiary in Beaumont Texas located this knife that was made from a door striker plate 
following an altercation in December of 2005.    The weapon was sharpened to a point, nearly 8” long 
and could have been deadly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
31) 
 
 
Plyer Knife: 
 
The knife shown here is made to look like electrical pliers when in the sheath.   It has a heavy weight 
blade with a wide split handle coated with red PVC.   The knife is manufactured by CRKT and is 
available on the Internet at www.crkt.com as the “Crawford P.K.” for $39.99.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thumper Knife: 
 
A Nebraska State Trooper recently  
located this knife/sword disguised as a  
tire beater or thumper, under the driver’  
seat of a semi.    Most truck drivers carry  
tire thumpers to check for flat tires.    
These photos show the weapon placed  
next to a collapsible baton for a size  
reference.    The driver advises these  
“Sword/Thumpers” can be purchased at  
most truck stops across the country. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concealment 
 
 
Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
32) 
 
 
Vest with Gun Pocket: 
 
www.focminc.com appears to be a website  
that supplies goods oriented toward the  
Hell’s Angels.  The vest displayed here is  
advertised on the site and is identical to vests 
seen regularly on members of the various biker  
gangs.    Please note in this photo the wearer  
is pointing to the “gun pocket” where a full sized  
firearm can be easily accessed by the wearer  
without him obviously reaching for a weapon. 
 
 
 
This oilskin “HOLSTER VEST” is available at  
 
 
 
 
           
www.concealedcarryoutfitters.com.  It comes with                                                                                                
4 outside pockets and 4 inside pockets as well                                                                                               
as a holster on both sides to facilitate a cross                                                                                             
draw with either hand.   Cost:  $169. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33) 
 
 
Hidden Pocket in Jeans: 
 
The hidden pocket in these “BX Brooklyn Xpress” jeans is shielded by a removable manufacturer’s 
label.  A small strip of Velcro holds the flap in place.    This pocket is large enough to easily hold a 
handcuff key, razor blade or bag of drugs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basketball Shoe Hiding Spot: 
 
The ADIDAS TRACEY MCGRADY BASKETBALL SHOE does not have shoe laces, instead there is a 
special device that can be tightened to give a snug fit.   The snap on the back opens up a compartment 
that holds a special key to tighten and loosen the shoe.   As shown, a handcuff key can be easily 
concealed inside the compartment.   Removal of the special tightening key allows the space necessary 
to fit the cuff key.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
34) 
 
 
Bandando 
 
This is an over-sized bandana being sold on the market as  
a “BANDANDO”.   It is worn like a bandana, but is made  
with ‘stash pockets’ in two opposing corners where keys,  
a small weapon or contraband can be stored.   Not only  
should you be aware of this item because of the possible  
concealment possibilities that might pass a search, but the  
weighted ends can also make the bandando a weapon in 
itself. Much like a rock in a sock or the snapping of a  
towel with a weighted end, it can cause injury.    
The stash pockets are designed to close with Velcro and  
blend into the print of the fabric.   The Bandando could  
easily be overlooked as a weapon during a search.  
 
 
 
Crotch-Pocket Jeans: 
 
Members of the Offender Transport Unit in the Peel Region of Canada recently transported a young 
person who had been taken into custody.   While conducting a search, the O.T.U. Bailiff noticed a pocket 
on the juvenile’s inner left thigh with a Velcro closure (Photo A&B).   The subject told them he bought the 
pants with the pocket and it was factory manufactured.  He also told the authorities that an additional 
style of jean pant also had a pocket contained on the flap of the zipper.  
The jeans brand name is “XX-treme Demin” and are readily identified by a black tag with white XX’s on 
the outer lower edge of the right rear pocket (Photo C&E).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35) 
 
 
Nails in Pantlegs: 
 
While searching gang members after a recent shooting in Raleigh, North Carolina, Investigators 
discovered that the gang members were using 1½” nails to secure their baggie pant legs to their shoes.   
They claimed to be using the nails in order to keep the pants from dragging on the ground; however the 
nails could also be used as weapons or as a tool to unlock handcuffs.    Please keep this in mind while 
searching prisoners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HEROIN IN BASEBALL HATS: 
 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)  
Northeast Laboratory in New York City  
recently received 12 baseball cap type hats  
with various logos. Each hat had two long, flat,  
fabric tubes containing a beige powder,  
suspected heroin, sewn around the inside  
perimeter. The hats were seized in northern  
New Jersey by local Task Force Officers.  
Analysis of the total 40.8 grams of the powder  
confirmed it to be 91% heroin hydrochloride.  
 
Similar baseball caps can be bought online that 
have zip pockets on the side and also 
hidden under the bill.  These are 
meant for keeping keys or cash, but could  
easily hold contraband. 
  
 
 

 
36) 
 
 
Sock Pockets: 
 
These socks are marketed toward travelers and  
advertised as having “cleverly concealed 
zipper pockets”.    The pockets are  
intended to carry cash; however they are 
an ideal size to conceal contraband, 
handcuff keys or a small weapon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fake Beer Belly  
 
New on the market is something called “The Beerbelly”, a polyurethane bladder & tube with a neoprene 
sling.    The unit is designed to be concealed under clothing and looks like a beer belly.    It is intended to 
provide a discreet way for someone to carry liquor without being caught; however it could also easily be 
converted to conceal contraband.    This can be purchased at www.thebeerbelly.com.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37) 
 
 
Stash Belt Buckles: 
 
Officers should be aware that hidden compartment “stash” belt buckles are commonly utilized on the 
street and are readily available via numerous sources including the internet.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
38) 
 
 
Jogger’s OC Spray 
 
Non-Lethal Defence, a US based Internet Company,  
sells self-defense products for personal use.  One  
of their best sellers is the COUNTER STRIKE  
JOGGER & PEPPER SPRAY WEIGHT SET.   These  
are fully functional for weight training while jogging;  
however hidden inside each of the hand-held weights 
is one canister holding a one-half ounce container of  
pepper spray.    The canisters are removable and can  
be replaced.    Each canister can fire 8-10 one-half  
second bursts of spray that has a range of 10 feet.     
The pepper spray is based on an oleoresin capsicum  
formula.  
 
 
 
 
 
Wrist Sweatband: 
 
In Feburary of 2005 The Milliken Police Department in Colorado had contact with a runaway juvenile who 
had mental problems.  During the incident the girl would not let officers see her wrist sweatband and, 
because of her odd behavior, the officers confiscated it.    Sewn into the wristband was a utility knife 
razor blade that could be very deadly.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
39) 
 
 
Drugs on the Brain: 
 
On July 18, 2005 a 19 year old man (who was a US citizen) attempted to enter JFK Airport in New York 
City on Avianca Airlines out of Columbia.    The man was acting extremely nervous and Customs Officers 
conducted  a pat down search.   A check of his head found he was wearing a wig and beneath it had 40 
blocks of Heroin GLUED to his head.    The total amount of Heroin was 841.8 grams or 1.86 lbs. 
The last photo shows what his head looked like after Custom’s Officers pealed the blocks of Heroin off 
his scalp. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
40) 
 
 
 Frame Stash: 
 
Shown below are picture frames that could be used for gun and drug concealment – both frames are 
available at www.thesundeckonline.com.  
Simply lift the top of the “Gun Concealment Frame” in an upward direction to reveal your handgun or 
valuables which will be easily accessible but hidden in plain sight.    
Inside the “Stash Your Stuff” Frame is a place to secure 4 containers (included) and a slot to hang a 
pipe.   The goodies are easily accessible by lifting the top of the frame in an upward direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
41) 
 
 
Drugs in the Ceiling: 
 
On December 15th, 2005, members of the Regional Drug Trafficking Organization (DTO) Task Force 
in Illinois debriefed a subject who admitted to having a quantity of narcotics and monies at his residence. 
At the subject’s residence officers recovered 7000 grams of cocaine, 200 grams of heroin and 
$185,474.00 in U.S. currency. 
 
During the execution of the warrant, narcotic detecting canine units were unable to detect the contraband 
due to the hidden compartment’s ceiling location. The contraband was found hidden behind a motorized 
light fixture, mounted flush against the ceiling. The hidden compartment could be controlled remotely 
allowing the fixture to descend. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
42) 
 
 
Hollow Walking Cane: 
 
An Officer in Stayton, Oregon discovered this hollow walking cane during a recent vehicle search.  The 
handle of the cane unscrews from the shaft revealing a hollow space large enough to hold tubes or even 
a small weapon.    When the cane is unscrewed, a spring in the bottom pops the top tube out.    The 
cane contained several empty plastic tubes that appeared to have been used for transporting drugs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CD Case Scales: 
 
Police in Charlotte, North Carolina  recovered a firearm 
and cocaine during the search of an apartment.   Also 
recovered was the CD case shown here, complete with 
a cover art insert.  Inside the CD case was a working 
digital scale.  This and other concealed scales can 
be purchased at www.americanweigh.com. 
The CD scale costs $59.99. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
43) 
 
 
Methamphetamine laced paper: 
 
The Central Iowa Drug Task Force recently intercepted a letter laced with  
methamphetamine.   Meth was applied to the letter in some form of a  
dissolved solution.   The liquid evaporated leaving only the paper and  
the drug.  Lab results have not been completed and It is unclear how  
much meth was on the paper or the potency.   Methamphetamine is  
commonly snorted or injected; however in this case it would be eaten.    
The letter had no distinguishing characteristics or noticeable odor, but  
a narcotics dog hit on the package. 
 
Other cases of meth laced paper have been reported in Washington State.    
In that incident a woman was arrested after sending meth laced greeting  
cards to federal inmates.   The papers would sell for $150. to $200. per  
sheet according to documents from the US Attorney’s Office.      
 
 
 
 
 
Sheet Cocaine: 
 
The Jerusalem Police in Israel uncovered a sophisticated system of smuggling drugs that is serving to 
bring cocaine into their country.  Using a chemical process and other materials, the smuggling ring 
managed to turn the cocaine into elastic sheets that were then applied to the sides of suitcases used by 
the drug couriers.  According to the Jerusalem Police, after successfully entering the country they used a 
chemical process to convert the sheets of Cocaine back to it’s recognizable form.   This mode of 
smuggling the drugs was broken by a sting operation.  When in sheet form the Cocaine was not 
detectable by the usual processing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
44) 
 
 
Cocaine Soaked Wicker: 
 
Customs at the Zurich, Switzerland Airport seized wicker baskets made from cocaine soaked paper in a 
private EMS Shipment from Las Ceres, Brazil.   Cocaine soaked paper had been used to manufacture 
the wickerwork, which was later painted.  Drug testing with Minilab and Drugwipe reacted positively.  The 
quantity of cocaine is not yet known; however this is an MO showing up more and more in Europe. 
 
FYI:   The wicker was emitting a strong perfume smell and additional cocaine-soaked paper was found 
concealed in the side panels of the cardboard boxes containing the wicker.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
45) 
 
 
Heroin Disguised as Beans: 
 
The DEA Northeast Laboratory in New York City recently received a bag of red beans, some genuine 
and some false, with the false beans containing a brown powder, suspected to be heroin. The bag 
originated in Ecuador and was submitted by the Homeland Security (Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement) JFK Airport Office, after being seized from the unclaimed shipments warehouse at JFK 
Airport.  
 
 
Analysis of the powder  
from the fake beans  
(total net mass 480.5  
grams) confirmed it  
was 68 percent heroin  
hydrochloride.  
The Northeast Laboratory  
has previously  
encountered  
similar concealment  
techniques on several  
occasions.  
 
 
 
 
Cocaine Concealed In Tequila From Mexico: 
 
Agencies studying the distribution of Cocaine advise that a Mexican based organization is regularly 
sending cocaine couriers from Mexico City into Europe. The normal concealment method used has been 
either in the lining of clothing or hidden in suitcase compartments. 
 
Further intelligence indicates that other favored concealments are in bottles  
of wine or tequila. 
This intelligence is supported by the seizure of five kilos of cocaine at London’s  
Waterloo International Rail Terminal on January 23rd, 2005. 
The courier, a 20 year-old Mexican male, had flown from Mexico City to Frankfurt  
and then onto Brussels where he had purchased his train ticket. 
When intercepted he was carrying a black trolley bag containing two bottles of  
tequila and two tins of salsa syrup amongst other items. Four kilos of cocaine  
were in suspension in the tequila with a further kilo in the tins of salsa syrup. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
46) 
 
 
More Crystal Meth Concealment: 
 
The following info is supplied by US Customs in Washington DC:    Crystal Meth has been entering the 
country in liquid form, concealed in liquor bottles.    The bottles shown below came into the US around 
Laredo, TX and, so far, have shown up throughout Texas and Florida as well as Tennessee and 
Kentucky. 
When each bottle is boiled down it will produce 1 lb. of crystal meth.   The bottles are usually hidden in 
suitcases with miscellaneous clothing.  It is slightly thicker than normal alcohol and, when shaken, 
produces microscopic bubbles that float to the top.     In some of the bottles the seals were cut and 
glued, but some did not appear to be broken at all.    The substance tests strongly by NIK or similar field 
tests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drug  Candy: 
 
The substance shown here was discovered recently during 
a traffic stop in Colorado after the driver had been arrested 
for OUI – DRUGS. 
During a search incident to the arrest the officers found a 
jeweler’s bag with this red candy-like substance in it.  The 
candy resembled “Jolly Ranchers”  except that it had a white 
powder mixed into it. 
Under questioning the driver admitted the candy had THC 
mixed in.   The effects of eating it would be similar to  
“smoking a bowl” of Marijuana. 
According to the arrestee the candy is sold by the gram and 
is available in different colors and flavors. 
 

 
 47) 
 
 
Personal Products Laced with Cocaine: 
 
Canada Customs reports increasing problems recently with “liquid Cocaine” making it’s way into the 
country, usually in bags of personal toiletries.      In most cases (where the suspects were caught) the 
people trying to smuggle the drugs started their journey in Mexico.  The bottles of Cocaine were only 
noticed because the perpetrators were carrying an excess amount of bottles or had unrealistic stories as 
to why they were entering Canada.    It is unknown how much Liquid Cocaine is on the street in the 
Northern US & Canada at this time; however the amounts appear to be increasing dramatically.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cocaine Candles: 
 
The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Vice and Narcotics Detectives (North Carolina) recently impounded kilogram 
quantities of Cocaine disguised as candles.   The wax more than doubled the weight of the kilos and 
scent as well as appearances indicated the candles were real.    They are believed to have been 
constructed at a North Carolina restaurant and grooves on the sides were consistent with being formed 
in cooking pans.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48) 
 
 
Drugs Hidden in figurines: 
 
On December 7, 2005 an officer in Longmont, Colorado made a traffic stop which resulted in an arrest.   
In the vehicle the officer located a cardboard box containing a baggy of psilocybin mushrooms and 4 
small ceramic figurines.    Also in the box was a latex mold to make skull figurines.     
 
The figures (2 skulls & 2 eagle heads) appeared to be made of either plaster or an epoxy type 
substance.    They had writing on the bottom that said (“1/4”, “an 8-Ball”, “T” and “1.50 of 200”.    The 
officer noticed the figurines had a chemical odor that he described as similar to “ether”.    They had a 
depression or void on the bottom and, when broken open, were found to contain methamphetamine.     
 
The molds were filled with either the resin or plaster and the meth was placed in the mold while the 
material was wet,  allowing it to sink into the resin and be hidden inside the figurine when dry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
49) 
 
 
Black Cocaine: 
 
The Northeast Florida Investigative Support Center reports the appearance of “COCA NEGRA” or 
BLACK COCAINE coming into the U.S. from Jamaica.   It has also been seen in the New England area 
and is evidence that some drug traffickers are sharing the same methods to move Heroin into the U.S. 
This product is made by mixing pure cocaine with Ferrorhodanide products, this turns the cocaine into a 
dark brittle substance that can be dark red, blue-violet or black in color.   In that form it can evade 
detection in field drug tests and with drug sniffing canines since the presence of Iron Thiocyanate masks 
a positive reading.    Traffickers have been shipping the powder in IBM brand toner cartridges.   It is not 
sold on the street in the dark or black form but has to be mixed with a solvent such as acetone or ether to 
extract the Ferrorhodanide.    Securtec Drug Wipes have been one of the few tests that have worked in 
detecting the mixture.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bath Gel “Ice”: 
 
The Chicago Police Department has recently received info which indicate a new popular method being 
used to conceal and transport Crystal Methamphetamine (Ice).    Small portions of Crystal Meth are 
being loaded inside small bath get capsules or beads and then resealed.   Chicago advises couriers 
carrying drugs in this manner are rarely discovered during traffic stops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
50) 
 
 
Drug Concealment in Aluminum Trays:  
 
On December 9, 2004 the Ramsey and Anoka County Sheriff’s Departments in Minnesota executed 
search warrants that yielded over 200 lbs. of BC Bud Marijuana valued at approximately $640,000. 
The Marijuana was being shipped in five pound increments inside boxes containing stacks of aluminum 
trays.    The top six trays were intact; however the bottoms of lower trays had been cut out to create a 
hiding place for the drugs.    The boxes were then sealed with professional packing tape and shipped. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dog Repellant: 
 
The Chicago Police Department covered an incident in October of 2004 where 5000 lbs. of 
marijuana was confiscated.   It had been sprinkled with a powder that had a chlorine odor in an 
effort to block police canine checks of the truck.     The seizure turned into a serious HazMat 
incident after several officers became ill from the fumes and required medical attention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
51) 
 
 
Safe Cans: 
 
The following items were found at a gift shop in Brunswick Maine with prices ranging from $5. to $50.     
All are hollow with plastic liners to prevent any rattles from goodies hidden inside.    The larger cans 
could conceal knives and firearms while the smaller ones can still hide a significant amount of drugs and 
other contraband. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
52) 
 
 
More Creative Hiding Spots: 
 
In February of 2006 a police officer in Auburn, Maine arrested a teenager for AGGRAVATED 
TRAFFICKING IN DRUGS after finding two 2 ounce bags of cocaine concealed in snack food.   The first 
bag of cocaine was hidden in the bottom of a “Pringles” can with the Pringles chips piled on top of it. 
The second bag was found during a vehicle search in a box of “Crunch N Munch” that was completely 
sealed shut.   The inner foil bag containing the snacks had been resealed with glue with the bag of 
cocaine inside.  Due to the smell of the snackfood, along with the complete resealing of  the bag - the 
police K-9 was not able to detect drugs in the box.   The total drug weight found in the snack boxes was 
115.2 grams.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
53) 
 
 
Hidden Cocaine: 
 
In August 2005 a Louisiana State Trooper stopped a Ford pickup for a traffic infraction.   The driver 
claimed to be en route to Florida from Texas to work on an oil rig with his brother.  In the cab of the 
vehicle were 3 cell phones, a GPS unit on the dash, hanging clothes and a small duffle bag.   In the bed 
of the pickup was a bail of hay and eight 50 lb. bags of horse feed.   The driver had minimal knowledge 
of horses and did not have a good reason for transporting the feed.    A consent search was obtained 
and revealed 82 lbs of cocaine individually wrapped in 34 kilo sized bags.   The cocaine was hidden 
inside two 50 lb. bags of dog food that was under the horse feed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Info from the Louisiana Criminal Interdiction Bulletin. 
 
 
 
 Khat  
 
“KHAT” is a naturally occurring stimulant derived from a shrub that is primarily cultivated in East Africa 
and the Arabian Peninsula.   In the US Khat use is most prevalent among immigrants from Somalia, 
Ethiopia & Yemen.   These individuals use the drug in casual settings or as part of religious ceremonies.   
Abuse levels are highest in cities with sizable populations of such immigrants. 
Khat is usually packaged in plastic bags or wrapped in banana leaves to retain its moistness and 
freshness; however it can also be sold as dried or crushed leaves or in powdered form.   Because Khat 
in leaf form starts to lose its potency after 48 hrs. it is generally shipped to the US on Thursday’s or 
Fridays for weekend use.   The US Customs Service has seized over 3000 pounds in the last year at 
JFK Airport in NYC.   
 
FYI:  Any police officer who confiscates items believed to be  
Khat should be aware of the rapid decomposition rate which  
will quickly change the drug from a Schedule 1 controlled  
substance to a Schedule IV controlled substance.   Officers  
should expedite delivery of any seized Khat to the nearest lab 
in an effort to ensure the tests will show it as a Schedule 1 
controlled substance.    If delivery to a lab can not be arranged  
in a timely manner, be sure to keep the plant cool or frozen  
until transport can be arranged.    Shown here is the Khat Bush 
& Khat Bundles. 
 
 

 
54) 
 
 
Fake FedEx: 
 
On February 25, 2005 a Missouri Trooper  
stopped a rented 2005 Chrysler Pacifica out  
of Texas for a traffic violation.   As he  
conducted the stop he noted a FedEx van,  
also with a Texas registration, appeared to be 
circling and waiting for the Trooper to finish.     
After completing the stop the trooper followed 
the Chrysler and noticed it met up with the  
FedEx van.  A secondary  traffic stop was then  
conducted on the van and a closer examination  
found the FedEx decals and logos were all  
counterfeit.   
Inside the van was found 1300 POUNDS OF  
MARIJUANA all packed in UHaul boxes.      
The marijuana and both vehicles were  
seized and, following an investigation, several  
arrests were made in Missouri and in Chicago.  
 
 
 
Factory Installed - Mercedes Hidden Compartments: 
 
The Mercedes G55 & G500 SUV’s both have factory installed hidden compartments in the  
second row seat under the floor.  The NYPD HIDTA Gang Unit advises they have had several problems 
where these compartments were used to conceal weapons & narcotics.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
55) 
 
 
Factory Installed - Honda  
Odyssey Minivans: 
 
There is a hidden compartment 
 in the second row passenger  
area – under the floor in the 2005  
& 2006 Honda Odyssey minivans.     
This is a factory standard compartment 
“Lazy Susan” which could also be  
utilized to conceal narcotics and/or  
weapons.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dash Stash: 
 
In September of 2005  New York PD recovered 2 handguns from a hidden compartment or ‘trap’ located 
in the center dashboard just above the center console vents of a 2004 Honda Accord.   This is a factory 
compartment that is commonly utilized for electronics and is usually held in place by tabs that snap into 
the dashboard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
56) 
 
 
Factory Installed - Hidden Compartment in 2006 Honda Ridgeline: 
 
The 2006 Honda Ridgeline Truck has a unique feature called the “In-Bed Trunk”.   This factory 
compartment comes as standard equipment.   A button in the glove compartment is pushed to unlock the 
trunk which features an 8.5 cubic feet of secure lockable storage.    The compact spare tire is securely 
housed in the forward part of the trunk and is easily accessed via a sliding tray.   
The compartment would not be noticeable to anyone who is not familiar with this new feature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
57) 
 
 
Armrest Hiding Spot: 
 
On December 7, 2005, a NYC Anti-Crime Unit recovered one 
loaded Browning 9mm handgun, three ounces of crack  
cocaine, three ounces of cocaine, and $3,250 in US currency 
from a trap in a 1994 Toyota Camry 2 door sedan. The trap  
was located in the rear passenger side armrest and was  
operated via a hydraulic piston. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concealment in Fuel Tank: 
 
On November 11, 2005, at the  
United States Border Patrol Checkpoint  
in Las Cruces, New Mexico United  
States Border Patrol agents seized a  
1994 Mazda pick up.  Agents discovered  
three metal containers that were  
welded and placed inside the fuel tank.  
A total of 105 pounds of marijuana was  
concealed in the containers.   For  
more info contact the New Mexico  
Investigative Support Center’s Strategic 
Section at 505-647-6900 x6953 or 6955. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
58) 
 
 
Drugs Hidden in Bed of Pickup Truck: 
 
On December 13, 2005,  
at the United States Border 
Patrol Checkpoint in Las  
Cruces, New Mexico United  
States Border Patrol agents  
seized a 1998 Dodge Ram.  
Agents discovered a false  
compartment in the tool box  
located in the bed of the truck.  
One arrest was made and  
464.5 pounds of marijuana  
was seized. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drugs in Rocker Panels: 
 
On November 17, 2005 at the  
US Border Patrol Checkpoint  
in Lordsburg, New Mexico,  
US Border Patrol agents  
seized a 1998 Dodge Intrepid.  
Agents discovered 66.68  
pounds of marijuana concealed 
in PVC pipe located in the rocker  
panels of the vehicle. 
  
 
 
 
 

 
59) 
 
 
Front Speaker Trap: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In October of 2005 members of the New York City Police Department Document Fraud Squad recovered 
cocaine along with a thousand dollars from a trap in a 1991 Toyota Camry station wagon.   The trap was 
located to the right of the glove box behind the speaker and was operated via hydraulic pistons. 
 
 
 
Rear Axle Hiding Spot: 
 
The FBI reports a large number of drug traffickers have been using 1999 Ford Windstar vans as load 
vehicles.    The 1999 Windstar’s rear axle is designed so that a space exists which can be accessed by 
removing the rear hub assembly.   Drug traffickers are able to conceal cash and narcotics in the 
manufactured space.    Drugs are stuffed into the axle through an opening that exists behind the wheel 
hub. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
60) 
 
 
Manifold Stash: 
 
On January 21, 2005 Sheriff’s Deputies in Douglas County, Georgia stopped two subjects from Texas 
reference a traffic violation.  They were driving a 2003 Dodge pickup.  Subsequent to the traffic stop a 
narcotics detector canine was brought to the truck and alerted on the engine.   Inside the manifold intake 
the Deputies found 15.4 pounds of Cocaine.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
61) 
 
 
Battery Hot Spot: 
 
The Polk County, Florida Sheriff’s Office HIDTA Task Force executed a search warrant looking for 
Methamphetamines.    During the course of the search deputies discovered a car battery that had been 
altered to conceal 5 pounds of Methamphetamine.   the top of the battery had been cut off and the cells 
inside removed.    Detectives became aware of the hiding place when they observed the top of the 
battery askew. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Airbag Hiding Spot: 
 
On January 27, 2005 members of the Gang Division on Staten Island in New York  recovered a loaded 
.357 Ruger handgun along with 6 ounces of Cocaine during the search of a 1999 Nissan Maxima.   The 
contraband was found in a hollowed out area that had previously held the passenger side air bag.   In 
this incident the airbag compartment had been altered so it could be operated via a hydraulic piston. 
 
This appears to be a common means of concealment lately.    Numerous reports have been 
received from all over the country of passenger side airbags being removed and the compartments 
converted to hiding spots for contraband.     If you’re involved in a traffic stop where you believe drugs or 
weapons may be involved please keep this in mind.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
6622))  
  
  
BBoooobbyy  ––  ttrraappppeedd  CCoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt::  
  
IInn  22000000,,  m
meem
mbbeerrss  ooff  tthhee  DDEEAA  aanndd  tthhee  SScchheenneeccttaaddyy  aanndd  RRootttteerrddaam
m  PPoolliiccee  DDeeppaarrttm
meennttss  ((NNeeww  YYoorrkk))  
ccoonndduucctteedd  aa  jjooiinntt  ooppeerraattiioonn  iinn  wwhhiicchh  ttwwoo  oouunncceess  ooff  ccrraacckk  ccooccaaiinnee  wweerree  sseeiizzeedd  ffrroom
m  aa  11999977  FFoorrdd  TTaauurruuss..    
AAnn  iinniittiiaall  sseeaarrcchh  ooff  tthhee  vveehhiiccllee  wwaass  nneeggaattiivvee  aanndd  aa  KK--99  wwaass  ssuubbsseeqquueennttllyy  ccaalllleedd  iinn  aanndd  aalleerrtteedd  ttoo  tthhee  
ppaasssseennggeerr  ssiiddee  ooff  tthhee  vveehhiiccllee..    AA  sseeaarrcchh  ooff  tthhee  aarreeaa  iinn  qquueessttiioonn  ffoouunndd  wwiirriinngg,,  aanndd  tthhee  iinnddiiccaattiioonnss  ooff  aa  
hhiiddddeenn  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt..    AAnn  aatttteem
mpptt  wwaass  m
maaddee  ttoo  sshhoorrtt--cciirrccuuiitt  tthhee  wwiirreess  ttoo  aaccttiivvaattee  tthhee  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt,,  
rreessuullttiinngg  iinn  tthhee  eexxpplloossiioonn  ooff  aa  bboooobbyy  ttrraapp  wwhhiicchh  ttoorree  ooffff  tthhee  iinntteerriioorr  ppaanneell  ooff  tthhee  ffrroonntt  ppaasssseennggeerr  ssiiddee  
ddoooorr..      
  
AAnn  EExxpplloossiivveess  UUnniitt  ffrroom
m  tthhee  NNeeww  YYoorrkk  SSttaattee  PPoolliiccee  wwaass  ccoonnttaacctteedd  aanndd  rreessppoonnddeedd  ttoo  tthhee  sscceennee..    TThhiiss  uunniitt  
wwaass  aabbllee  ttoo  aaccttiivvaattee  tthhee  hhiiddddeenn  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt  wwhhiicchh  wwaass  llooccaatteedd  iinnssiiddee  tthhee  ppaasssseennggeerr  aaiirrbbaagg  aarreeaa..    
FFuurrtthheerr  eexxaam
miinnaattiioonn  iinnddiiccaatteedd  tthhee  ppaasssseennggeerr  aaiirrbbaagg  hhaadd  bbeeeenn  rreem
moovveedd  aanndd  tthhee  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt  m
mooddiiffiieedd..    
IInn  aaddddiittiioonn,,  tthhee  ccaanniisstteerr  tthhaatt  iiss  uussuuaallllyy  aassssoocciiaatteedd  wwiitthh  tthheessee  aaiirrbbaaggss  wwaass  aallssoo  m
mooddiiffiieedd  aanndd  rreewwiirreedd  ttoo  
tthhee  iinnssiiddee  ooff  tthhee  ppaasssseennggeerr  ssiiddee  ddoooorr..    IItt  wwaass  llaatteerr  lleeaarrnneedd  UUSS  CCuussttoom
mss  hhaass  oobbttaaiinneedd  iinnffoorrm
maattiioonn  
iinnddiiccaattiinngg  aa  ddrruugg  ssm
muugggglliinngg  oorrggaanniizzaattiioonn  iiss  rreem
moovviinngg  aaiirrbbaaggss  aanndd  rreeppllaacciinngg  tthheem
m  wwiitthh  ppoouucchheess  ffiilllleedd  wwiitthh  
nnaaiillss,,  bboollttss  aanndd  ootthheerr  ssm
maallll  m
meettaall  oobbjjeeccttss..    BBuunnddlleess  ooff  ddrruuggss  aarree  rreeppoorrtteeddllyy  ppllaacceedd  iinnttoo  aa  hhiiddddeenn  
ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt  llooccaatteedd  iinn  aannootthheerr  aarreeaa  ooff  tthhee  ddaasshhbbooaarrdd..    TThheessee  bbuunnddlleess  aarree  tthheenn  ccoonnnneecctteedd  ttoo  tthhee  
ttrriiggggeerriinngg  ddeevviiccee  ooff  tthhee  aaiirrbbaagg  m
meecchhaanniissm
m  vviiaa  aa  ttrriipp  wwiirree..    UUppoonn  rreem
moovvaall  ooff  tthhee  ddrruugg  bbuunnddllee  ((ffrroom
m  tthhee  
ccoonncceeaalleedd  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt))  tthhee  aaiirrbbaagg  m
meecchhaanniissm
m  ddeevviiccee  iiss  aaccttiivvaatteedd  rreessuullttiinngg  iinn  aann  eexxpplloossiivvee  rreelleeaassee  ooff  
tthhee  nnaaiillss  aanndd  bboollttss..    O
Offffiicceerrss  sshhoouulldd  eexxeerrcciissee  eexxttrreem
mee  ccaauuttiioonn  wwhheenn  eexxaam
miinniinngg  ppaasssseennggeerr  aaiirrbbaaggss  ttoo  
ddeetteerrm
miinnee  iiff  aa  ccoonncceeaalleedd  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt  iiss  pprreesseenntt..  IInn  aaddddiittiioonn,,  ooffffiicceerrss  sshhoouulldd  ttaakkee  pprreeccaauuttiioonnss  ssoo  aass  nnoott  
ttoo  ppoossiittiioonn  tthheem
msseellvveess  ddiirreeccttllyy  iinn  ffrroonntt  ooff  tthhee  aaiirrbbaagg  ccoom
mppaarrttm
meenntt.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
63) 
 
 
Drugs in the engine compartment: 
 
In January 2005 a Georgia Sheriff’s Deputy stopped a 2004 Ford F-150 Pickup truck for a traffic 
violation.    A K-9 search found 21 lbs of Methamphetamine wrapped in black electrical tape hidden 
between the radiator and the air conditioner condenser in the engine compartment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tire Hiding Spot: 
 
On January 6, 2006 a Utah State Trooper stopped a 1997 Ford Explorer with Arizona license plates.  
The trooper approached the vehicle and found all 4 windows down and a strong odor of air freshener. He 
could also see several air fresheners hanging throughout the vehicle.   The driver appeared nervous and 
his hands were visibly he shaking.  A consent search was obtained; however few items were found in the 
SUV.   Looking at the undercarriage of the vehicle the trooper noticed the spare tire appeared to have 
been recently mounted on it’s rim.    The spot where the tool goes in to lower the spare tire had been 
recently used and the tire itself had a bubble in the sidewall.    An echo test was conducted and indicated 
there was something in the tire.  Once the tire was taken off, it was found to be heavier than other spare 
tires and did not bounce.  7 packages of crystal methamphetamine were found wrapped in t-shirts inside 
the tire when the rim was removed.          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal  
Safety  
& 
Miscellaneous 
items of 
Interest to 
Police Officers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
64) 
 
 
Raincoat Dangers: 
 
On February 23, 2005 a Rialto, California police officer was wearing his department issued, reversible 
rain jacket over his gunbelt.      The ‘Lacrosse Rainfair’ jacket  extends slightly below the waist area and 
has zippered spits that allow the officer easy access to his weapon without having to lift up the jacket.    
Attached to the metal zipper pulls are 2¼” cords that are connected at the end by a plastic snap cover.    
The Rialto officer had been on a call earlier in the day that required him to draw the weapon and re-
holster it, possibly inadvertently allowing the cord to lodge between the weapon and the holster. 
The pulley cord worked it’s way through the trigger guard as the officer moved around and became 
jammed.  When the officer pulled at the zippered opening to free his raincoat, the weapon discharged.     
This is obviously an unusual situation; however this is not the first report of problems with zippered 
pockets that provide access to firearms.   If you wear one of these jackets, either in the short or long 
version, please make sure the closing cords have either been removed or shortened so there is no 
chance they can reach the trigger of your weapon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Raid Jacket Warning: 
 
In February 2006 a Sheriff’s Deputy in Louisiana  
(Ascension County Sheriff’s Office) was  
shot following a training session.   He was  
shooting in a raid jacket with a draw string  
closure around the bottom and using a  
paddle holster to carry his duty weapon. 
He completed the qualification, reloaded the 
weapon for duty carry and holstered it at  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Å PIECE 
the range.     When he holstered the weapon  
 
 
 
 
                        FROM 
apparently the draw string attachment became         
 
 
 
           DRAWSTRING              
lodged in the trigger guard.   The deputy then  
went home and removed the holster.    When  
he did so the draw string pulled tight and  
caused the weapon to discharge in the holster.     
The deputy was shot in the outer thigh and  
buttocks; however he is expected to recover completely.      

 
65) 
 
 
Dangers of Hybrid Engines: 
 
The Maryland State Police Automotive Safety Enforcement Division advises there is the potential for 
serious injury or death from electrical shock to officers responding to traffic accidents and vehicle fires 
involving hybrid vehicles.   Hybrid vehicles are powered through a combination of gasoline engine and 
high voltage batteries.   the presence of high voltage components in these cars creates a potential 
hazard from electrical shock for officers responding to traffic accidents and vehicle fires.   Since most of 
the hybrid vehicles are also offered in traditional gasoline engine, distinguishing a hybrid presents yet 
another challenge to first responders. 
 
As vehicle manufacturers continue to introduce new technology, the system in different vehicles operate 
and function differently.  Some factors that appear to be standard in all hybrid vehicles are: 
The high voltage battery pack which stores electricity is located in the rear of the vehicle. 
High voltage cables are orange in color 
High voltage components are clearly identified and encased in orange plastic shields bearing warning 
decals. 
It is suggested by manufacturers that first responders should shut down a hybrid vehicle by putting it in 
park, turning the key to off and removing it.   (Suggestions as to how to physically disable the electrical 
system on a hybrid vehicle should be left in the hands of the fire department personnel who have 
received training.) 
 
The following recommendations are from MEMA: 
1) Always assume the vehicle is powered up. 
2) To disable a high voltage system, put the vehicle in park, turn off and extract the key. 
3) If urgent circumstances do not exist, wait for the fire department to disable the high voltage system. 
4) Never touch, cut or open any orange high power cable or high voltage component. In the event of a 
fire the high voltage battery pack with rapidly burn itself out. 
5) If the installation on the orange power cable is compromised due to a severe impact, the electrical 
current could present an electrocution hazard upon contact with the vehicle.  (Note: these vehicles can 
produce between 300 and 500 volts of electricity. 
6)  On Toyota Prius hybids the electrical systems are still powered for a full 5 minutes after the ignition is 
turned off.    This means that even if the system is off – it does not mean the vehicle is safe. 
 
The purpose of this message is to ensure  
law enforcement personnel are aware of  
the potential threat posed by hybrid vehicles.     
A Power Point presentation on the dangers  
of Hybrid systems has been developed by  
the Baltimore County Fire department and  
is available at (410) 290-0780. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
66) 
 
 
Problems with Handcuffs: 
 
The Wells, Maine Police Department reported problems in January, 2006 with Peerless Handcuffs Model 
801.   The cuffs were purchased in the fall of 2005.   They appear to have broken double-lock 
mechanisms that activate without a key, and have demonstrated that gravity alone can active the double-
lock, making the cuffs unusable while on an officer’s belt.   Deployment becomes impossible without 
unlocking the double lock mechanism, which may be a safety issue when deployed under less than calm 
circumstances. 
 
Wells PD contacted Peerless and found there may have been a bad batch issued; however Peerless did 
not indicate any plan for recall or notification.    WPD suggests any officers having cuffs with serial 
numbers  in the 78800 to 78900 range may want to check the mechanism carefully. 
 
 
 
 
Security Threat involving Handcuffs: 
 
Recently the Kern County Sheriff’s Department in Bakersfield, CA experienced a security threat.  While 
inmates were being held in a local court holding facility they were able to escape from their handcuffs.  
To facilitate their escape they used the round lip that is located on or around the spout of the drinking 
fountain section of the jail sink.    With this they managed to pry open the handcuffs and pop out the pin 
that holds the handcuffs together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
67) 
 
 
Danger in Transporting Weapons: 
 
The Ohio State Police  has issued a warning reference an incident that occurred in one of their patrol 
cars on July 3, 2005.      An officer was driving the cruiser when he heard a loud ‘pop’ in the back of the 
car and believed he had driven over something and punctured his tire.   The tire proved to be intact; 
however he could smell something burning and found smoke coming from under his rear seat.     Further 
inspection found a 30 caliber round had exploded causing a fire in the padding to the seat.   It appeared 
the round rolled under the seat following a transport of weapons and became wedged against the metal 
fittings under the seat.  These fittings become extremely hot after the vehicle runs for even a short time 
and it looks like the repeated heating and cooling had corroded the nickel casing of the round.    
Please keep this in mind if you transport weapons and ammo on the rear seat or the rear floorboards.  
This is obviously an unlikely scenario; however, as shown in the OSP incident, it can happen. 
 
 
 
Booby Trapped Door: 
 
A mechanic doing a morning fleet check on cruisers in South Portland, Maine found a single edge razor 
blade tucked into the top of the door weather stripping (cutting edge up) in one of the cruisers.  It 
appears a subject placed the blade there so an officer placing his hand over the door to assist a prisoner 
in or out of the vehicle would slice his hand.    Also a sweeping motion to clear snow from the door area 
would have resulted in a severe laceration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
68) 
 
 
Don’t Try Spike Strips on These Tires: 
 
Reportedly Michelin will be introducing a new line of AIRLESS TIRES AND RIMS in the next few 
months. This supplements their “Pax System” that allows a vehicle to be driven up to 125 miles at 55 
mph and Zero Pressure radial tires that allows the vehicle to keep on driving up to 50 miles at 55 mph 
with a golf ball size hole in the tire.    The appearance of the tires are very distinctive and easily 
recognized.  Be advised SPIKE STRIPS WILL NOT WORK ON THESE TIRES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
69) 
 
 
Weighted Running Vests: 
 
These are photos of weighted running vests that are becoming popular among serious joggers.  It is 
likely they will be showing up more often and, unfortunately,  it is difficult to differentiate between the 
running vest and a suicide bomber’s vest.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
JOGGING VEST  ->  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUICIDE BOMBER’S 
VEST  ->  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
70) 
 
 
Flashlight Explosives: 
 
On November 21, 2005, during the execution of a search warrant on a vehicle, the Elko Combined 
Narcotics Unit (Elko County, Nevada) located what appeared to be an ordinary three-cell magnum 
flashlight. Detectives tested the flashlight to see if it operated, which it did. Upon further examination, 
Detectives found the insides of the flashlight rearranged to serve as a possible incendiary device. 
 
The set-up had been rearranged so two D-cell batteries could power the flashlight. An orange 
prescription pill bottle was shortened and, with the use of electrical tape, wires were coiled on one side 
and soldered to a bottle cap on the other. In this way, a current could run from one battery to the other, 
with the pill bottle in the middle. The bottle was empty when found. 
 
When checking a device, it typically is not dismantled when proven to work. In this case, had the bottle 
been filled with an explosive substance and wired to the power button, it could have easily been turned 
into an incendiary device. The pill bottle located inside the flashlight could also be used to hide illegal 
substances from detection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baby Powder Bomb: 
 
In December of 2005 a Deputy on the  
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office in  
Maine conducted a traffic stop and noticed 
the device shown here in the back seat. 
Investigation found the teenager who was 
operating the vehicle and several of his 
friends used the makeshift bomb, powered  
with a CO canister and filled 
with Baby powder in a ‘game’  similar to  
paintball.    They use a remote control 
to blow up the fake bomb and the target 
gets covered with baby powder…instead  
of killed by shrapnel. 
Further questioning found that use of  
fake bombs by teenagers in similar games 
is becoming more common. 
 
 

 
71) 
 
 
"Toy" Claymore That Fires Airsoft BB's & Baby Powder With A Spring: 
 
Supercell Development Corporation  (www.supercelldev.com) has recently placed on their web page a 
Claymore Mine Simulator which fires airsoft BBs and baby powder. This simulator resembles the actual 
military version. The airsoft version is intended to be used for applications in paintball competitions and 
other “game type scenarios”. This device is activated through a remote system or trip wire. Caution 
should be exercised in dealing with this item due to it resembling the actual device.  It is not known if this 
mine could be converted to employ shrapnel to cause injury or death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pricing is from $100.00 to $240.00 with remote   Range: Over 100 feet  Transmits: 433.9 MHz 
Transmitter Power: Includes Battery  Receiver Power: 9 Volt Battery (Battery not included) ASC7 
Power:  9 Volt Battery (Battery not included) 
 
 
 
Cuff Key Ring: 
 
Shown here is a handcuff ring that appears to be a regular wedding band as long as the “key” portion is 
concealed in the palm.   Another design is to attach the key to a coin with rivets.   The key can be rotated 
and used if necessary.    Both keys are commercially available at “Magic” stores and on the internet at 
websites offering equipment for magicians. 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
72) 
 
 
Plastiken Key chain: 
 
This “Knuckle Key Chain” fits like brass knuckles  
but is actually classified as a key chain.   It is an  
oval shaped ornamental construction of high  
impact resistance nylon resin which is several  
times tougher than aluminum.   These key chains  
are practically indestructible and weigh only  
34 grams.   Since it is made of nylon  
resin – it will easily pass through a metal  
detector.  The key chain can be purchased at  
hhttttpp::////w
ww
ww
w..sseellffddeeffeennsseepprroodduuccttss..ccoom
m  for $9.95. 
 
 
 
Brass Knuckle Handbag: 
 
The handbags shown here doubles as a self-defense weapon.    
Note the handle is shaped like brass knuckles.   They are made of  
aluminum, making them light-weight but effective weapons that detach  
easily from the bag. 
The “fighting purse” is available in white and black leather and costs  
$75. at http://www.jamespiatt.com/sundaebesthandbag.html 
 
 
 
 
Light Bulb Fumigator:  
 
The light bulb shown below was confiscated at a college party in Alabama in February of 2005.  The 
base of the light bulb had been removed and drugs dropped in to be heated, then the fumes ingested.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
73) 
 
 
Coffee Mate Flame Thrower: 
 
When ignited with a match or lighter, COFFEE MATE Creamer (the standard, non-flavored version)  
ignites in a flash and is highly combustible.    Suggestion:  Don’t try this in the break room. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mini-Fire Extinguisher Lighter: 
 
This mini fire extinguisher measures about 3” long and looks like a toy; 
however when the top trigger is pulled it throws a hearty 6” to 8” 
flame and definitely resembles a mini flame thrower.   
It was purchased at a convenience store in Brunswick, Maine in June  
of 2005 for $4.50.    It is fueled by butane and is refillable.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrist Watch Lighter: 
 
The fully functioning wrist watch shown  
here is being sold at convenience stores  
around the country for about $6.00.    It  
is also a refillable butane lighter that can  
be activated by pressing the large black  
button on the side of the watch face.    
The flame comes out a nozzle located  
above the face.    It is sold in a variety of  
colors and could easily be mistaken for a  
child’s watch  
 
 

 
74) 
 
 
Stealth Camera: 
 
This inconspicuous Zippo look-alike actually contains a digital camera capable of holding over 300 
images.   It also has a voice recording function and records up to 12 minutes of crystal clear audio.    
This can be purchased on the internet for $79.99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talking Mirrors: 
 
This is yet another product officers  
should be aware of.    “TALKING  
MIRROR’s” are now being sold  
on the Internet.   They are  
designed to work wirelessly with  
a cell phone and have the ability  
to digitally record images  
and conversations inside or  
outside a vehicle.     
The mirrors serve as a reminder to  
officers to be professional when  
dealing with the public and not say  
anything you wouldn’t want to  
hear on the 6 O’clock news!     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
75) 
 
 
Chemistry Class Gone Wrong: 
 
On July 10, 2005 a bus driver with a charter bus service in Irving, Texas found 3 chemistry textbooks in 
the storage bays on the bus.   Further inspection showed the books had been altered by cutting out the 
pages and inserting a metal container with a switch and wiring. 
 
Upon further checking it was determined the books belonged to several chemistry teachers who had 
recently attended a conference.   Interviews with the teachers revealed one of their instructors at the 
conference was a professor from A&M University who had demonstrated his “burning book” at the 
conference.  This was followed by about 90 teachers making their own books as part of the activities.    
The “burning book” is a novelty item used by magicians; however, when used inappropriately, it can also 
serve to trigger a fire or explosives. 
 
Officers should be aware of these books and, as the teachers in the conference came from various areas 
of the country, be aware they could turn up as projects in high school classrooms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
76) 
 
 
Covert Stun Gun 
 
In addition to high-powered halogen illumination and a personal alarm, this  
flashlight packs a 600K-volt stun gun wallop. Although great for personal  
protection in the right hands, in the wrong hands  it could be a danger to  
law enforcement. Keep this in mind if you approach a subject holding  
what appears to be a seemingly harmless flashlight.   
 
 
 
The Stinger: 
 
The Stinger and it’s cousin the Punchlight, with an integrated LED, 
are some of the many personal defense Martial Arts weapons  
available on the Internet for less than $10.   Personal stingers 
are designed to be small and lightweight and inconspicuous  
enough to fit on a key chain.   This self defense tool is used 
to enhance power and damage with a closed fist.   The weapon 
is held between the middle and ring finger with the protruding 
tip projecting from the closed fist.   It is a variation of a punch 
knife, but without a blade and the end is rounded so it doesn’t 
draw attention.   Because these items are brightly colored 
and non-threatening in appearance, they may elude detection  
by school resource officers as well as street patrols.    
 
 
 
Eyeball Camera: 
 
Police in hostage situations now have a new tool to toss into the situation.  It is a baseball-sized camera 
that can be hurled into any situation.    It has a rubber and polyurethane housing and will withstand 
almost any abuse.   The camera rights itself after coming to a rest and wirelessly relays 360 degree 
video as well as audio back to base for three full hours.    
The “Eyeball Camera”  weighs less than a  
pound and can be thrown through windows,  
bounced off walls or simply rolled through a 
doorway.   The sound and pictures will  
transmit up to 200 yards to the base unit. 
It was originally created for the  
Israeli Military; however Remington  
Arms has now won FCC  
approval to sell them in the US  
(www.remingtontd.com).    The  
Eyeballs sell for $4800. for 2  
eyeballs and the base  
unit.  Replacement Eyeballs  
will run about $1700.    
 

 
77) 
 
 
Stealth Pipes: 
 
Shown here are stealth pipes that are commonly utilized on the street to smoke Marijuana.   They are 
readily available via numerous sources including the internet for $11.99 . 
These fake mini-maglites have a false reflector cap to cover the bowl and the metal pocket clip turns to 
expose a threaded hole.   This is where the large reflector piece that is used as the bowl is attached.   
There is a hole in the bottom of the tail cap that is used as a mouthpiece.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are literally hundreds of different and interesting pot pipes available at www.superpiece.com.   
Here are a sample, some costing as little as $5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
78) 
 
 
Assorted Drug Paraphernalia:  
 
Most of us know what marijuana pipes look like, 
but here are some decorative varieties that  
might not be noticed.   Also shown is 
a Herb Grinder, a Sifter,  Digital Scales, 
a Stash Container and a vaporizer.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
79) 
 
 
The New Stronger Oxycontin: 
 
This is PALLADONE, a new drug on the market as of 2005 that is reported  
to be 4 times stronger than Oxycontin.   It has a high chance of addiction  
and the law enforcement community can expect the same problems they  
have seen with Oxycontin and Oxycodine.  This advisory was provided by  
the Michigan State Police Intel Briefing in January of 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fentanyl Patches: 
 
Fentanyl abuse-related trends have been reported throughout the nation.  It is classified as a synthetic 
opiate analgesic and is prescribed for treatment of chronic pain.   Fentanyl is about 80 times more 
powerful than morphine!!!!  According to the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN), FENTANYL 
related emergency room mentions increased from 576 in 2000 to 1506 in 2002.   There have been 
reported deaths associated with Fentanyl use. 
 
There are different analgesic analogues of fentanyl.   Duragesic®  for example, is a fentanyl transdermal 
patch used in chronic pain management.  Since the patch disseminates the drug through body heat, 
abusers will apply heat to the patch to accelerate the drug, often with hair dryers.  In one case the 
subject even used a clothes iron on his chest, causing irregular burn marks.   Abusers commonly slit the 
patch open and put the gel under the tongue.  They also may chew or swallow the entire patch or insert 
them as a suppository.   In another case (documented in California) a subject placed 18 patches on his 
body and died of an overdose.    Three addicts in  
southeast Ohio removed the gel and injected the  
fentanyl directly into their bodies.   All three died,  
two with the needles still in their arms. 
Fentanyl has been diverted numerous ways,  
running the gamut of pharmacy theft, fraudulent 
prescriptions, illicit distributions by patients, physicians  
and pharmacists.    Theft has also been identified  at  
nursing homes and long term care facilities.    
According to the Los Angeles HIDTA, Duragesic®  
sells for between $25. and $100. per patch! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
80) 
 
 
Vaporized Alcohol: 
 
A new problem that has been popular in Europe is now  
showing up in the US.  It is AWOL (Alcohol With Out Liquid).     
AWOL consists of 2 components, an oxygen generator and  
a hand held vaporizer.   Tubes from the generator attach to 
the vaporizer and 80-proof spirits are poured into the  
vaporizer.  Oxygen mixes with the alcohol producing a mist  
which is inhaled through the mouth. 
The alcohol enters the blood steam through the lungs rather 
than the stomach making AWOL a low calorie and low  
carbohydrate way to consume alcohol.  Once the alcohol  
enters the bloodstream it affects the body the same way as  
drinking it.  Inhaled alcohol WILL register in a breathalyzer test.    
FYI:  Check your state laws,  many states have made the use, sale or furnishing of inhaled alcohol 
illegal. 
 
 
 
Clear Cocaine Folders: 
 
Interpol advises Swiss Customs has seized “plasticized cocaine” at the Zurich Airport.   The cocaine was 
found inside 2 air mailed envelopes posted from Columbia and addressed to a private residence in 
Spain.   The drug was produced in the form of yellow see-through document folders (covers) which gave 
a positive reading when Customs Officers applied a drug wipe test. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
81) 
 
 
Drug Flavored Candy: 
 
A TV station in Raleigh, North Carolina recently highlighted a new line of  candy that glorifies pot and is 
becoming a hot seller all across the country.    It’s a multimillion dollar business promoting drugs and one 
that many parents and police departments don’t know about.    The candy tastes like Marijuana and, 
according to stores that carry it, is flying off the shelf.    The web site www.chroniccandy.com advertises 
that “Every lick is like taking a hit”.   Shoppers can buy an ounce or a nickle bag online with no age limit 
on purchasing it.   The candy is not only available as lollipops, but other companies offer hemp-flavored 
gum drops and gummy bears.    The candy does not containe THC, the ingredient that gives pot users a 
high – consequently the candy is legal.    An employee at Spencer Gifts was interviewed and told the TV 
show the “Pot Suckers” are among the chain’s hottest selling items, with more than 90,000 sold in just a 
few months.   Different kinds of this mock-Marijuana candy can be purchased at www.thehempjoint.com 
& www.maryjanecandyco.com.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Puppy Mules: 
 
Columbian traffickers stitched heroin packets into the  
stomachs of 6 puppies recently in an apparent bid to  
smuggle the drugs into the US.    Each of the puppies  
was found holding one or more plastic packets containing  
some 400 liquid grams of heroin.   The puppies were  
found by police in Medillin, Columbia, a city south of  
Bogota.     
The Labrador and Rottweiler puppies were found in an  
abandoned house.   They had obvious scars on their  
stomachs; however X-rays failed to show the drugs.    
This was followed up with an ultrasound scan that enabled 
the police to find the drug packets.    More packets, as well  
as the surgical instruments to implant the drugs were  
found nearby.   
It is unknown how many puppies made it into the US before  
this mode of transporting drugs was discovered.  
 

 
82) 
 
 
Cell Phone Stun Guns: 
 
Cell phone stun guns are now widely available on the Internet.   
Even reputable establishments such as  Cabela’s Sporting Goods  
are now selling Cell Phone Stun Guns through their online stores.      
The ad states “Would be attackers won’t be able  
to tell the difference between your cell phone and  
this powerful stun gun. The high-voltage shot  
disrupts the signal from the brain to  
muscles….and full recovery can take  
5-10 minutes.”  Cabela’s is selling it for $69.99. 
 
The Cell phone shown here is available  
at www.watkinsselfdefense.com  & 
http://www.selfdefenseproducts.com 
for $75.  This realistic looking stun gun phone 
shoots 180,000 volts and has a siren alarm up 
to 130 db.  It is Powered by one 9 V battery. 
 
  
 
 
Pepper Spray “Pager”   
 
 
 
This small, compact, attachable unit is the size of a pager, but contains dual canisters that unload twice 
the fire power of any 1/2 ounce spray on the market. 
 Hardly noticeable, this device has "quick draw" action that can disable an attacker up to 12 feet away. 
The “Pepper Pager” emits 10 to 12 one second bursts of crippling spray. More than enough to render 
multiple people  helpless.  the Pager contains dual canisters of 10% pepper spray with a 2 Million SHU 
rating. 
It is available on Ebay for $12.00! 
 
 

83) 
 
 
Unusual Encounter: 
 
On December 19, 2005, North Carolina officers reported an encounter with a 1993 Infiniti J30 sedan. The 
stop was for an expired registration plate and expired state inspection sticker.   There were a few 
unusual things about this vehicle.   Please note the photos below.  If you happen to notice the lack of 
door handles, congratulations, there were none on this vehicle. Entry into the vehicle was gained by 
waving a magnet over one of three contacts located in the shadows of the front and rear windshields. 
 
Look closely at the rear of the vehicle.  The black spot that appears to be the keyway for the trunk is 
actually a camera lens which affords a view on the fold down viewing screen of the VD/CD/Radio 
combination unit installed in the center of the dashboard, in easy view of the driver and passengers. 
 
In addition to the center monitor, the vehicle was also equipped with a combination rear-view mirror and 
monitor screen as well as with monitors built into the headrests. Records indicate at least 12 documented 
encounters with this vehicle in North Carolina since 2003.  
 
The driver is permanently suspended and there has not been insurance in effect on the vehicle since 
June, 2004. The last two documented encounters (August, 2005 and December, 2005) resulted in the 
driver/owner’s arrest for possession of cocaine with intent to sell and deliver, among other charges. In 
the most recent incident, officers discovered more that 100 dosage units (“rocks”) of crack cocaine 
concealed in the rear seat center fold up armrest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84) 
 
 
Not a Good Day: 
 
Please keep in mind that a simple traffic stop can result in disaster.    The following are photos of a 
cruiser in Schertz, Texas.    On March 3, 2005 the officer stopped a car for speeding and saw the driver 
pull out a 9mm handgun as he approached the driver’s door.   The officer took cover BEHIND his cruiser 
and traded fire with the suspect who used both the 9mm and an AK-47.   When everything was over the 
cruiser had been hit 30 times; however the officer was unhurt.    The suspect was shot 2 times by the 
officer, but survived.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        (Rods were inserted in the holes to show the trajectory of the bullets.) 

