Course Guidebook
Law School
for Everyone
Contracts
Law
Subtopic
Professional
Topic
Professor David Horton
University of California, Davis,  
School of Law

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2019
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise), without the prior written permission of The Teaching Company.
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westfields Boulevard Suite 500 
Chantilly, Virginia 20151‑2299
Phone 1.800.832.2412 | Fax 703.378.3819
www.thegreatcourses.com

Professor Biography
I
David Horton, JD
Professor of Law
University of California, 
Davis, School of Law
D
avid Horton is a Professor of Law 
at the University of California, 
Davis, School of Law. He earned 
his BA cum laude from Carleton College 
and his JD from the University of 
California, Los Angeles, School of Law, where he was elected to the Order of 
the Coif and served as chief articles editor of the UCLA Law Review. After 
graduating, Professor Horton clerked for the Honorable Ronald M. Whyte 
of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California.
Professor Horton is the coauthor of two casebooks: the eighth edition of Cases, 
Problems, and Materials on Contracts (with Douglas Whaley) and Wills, Trusts, 
and Estates: The Essentials (with Reid Weisbord and Stephen Urice). He has 
also published more than 30 law review articles in venues such as The Yale 
Law Journal, Stanford Law Review, New York University Law Review, California 
Law Review, Duke Law Journal, Northwestern University Law Review, and The 
Georgetown Law Journal. 
Professor Horton’s academic writing has won The Association of American 
Law Schools’ Scholarly Papers Competition and the Mangano Dispute 
Resolution Advancement Award. In 2017, he was selected as a UC Davis 
Chancellor’s Fellow. 

Law School for Everyone: Contracts
II
Professor Horton teaches the courses Contracts, Introduction to Law, and 
Trusts, Wills, and Estates. Additionally, he teaches a seminar on the Federal 
Arbitration Act. In 2015, he won the UC Davis School of Law’s Distinguished 
Teaching Award. ■ 

Table of Contents 
III
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Professor Biography .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  I
Course Scope .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Lecture Guides
1• 	
Contract Formation in the Internet Age .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4
2• 	
Understanding Offer and Acceptance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
3• 	
The Mysterious Consideration Doctrine .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20
4• 	 Contract Offers You Can’t Revoke . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  28
5• 	
Liability without a Binding Contract .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  36
6• 	 Defenses to Contract: Fraud and Duress .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  44
7• 	
Mistake and Other Contract Defenses  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  49
8• 	 Third Parties in Contract Law .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  58
9• 	 When a Contract Needs to Be in Writing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  66
10• 	 Contract Interpretation and Implied Terms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  72
11• 	 Building Contracts and Breaching Them .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  79
12• 	 Remedies for Breach of Contract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  87
Supplementary Material
Bibliography . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  94
Image Credits .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  98

Law School for Everyone: Contracts
IV
DISCLAIMER
The legal information provided in these lectures is for informational purposes 
only and not for the purpose of providing legal advice. These lectures may 
not reflect the most current legal developments in any particular applicable 
jurisdictions and cannot substitute for the advice of a licensed professional 
with specialized knowledge who can apply it to the particular circumstances 
of your situation. Use of and access to these lectures do not create an attorney-
client relationship with The Teaching Company or its lecturers, and neither 
The Teaching Company nor the lecturer is responsible for your use of this 
educational material or its consequences. You should contact an attorney 
to obtain advice with respect to any particular legal issue or problem. The 
opinions and positions provided in these lectures reflect the opinions and 
positions of the relevant lecturer and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or 
positions of The Teaching Company or its affiliates. Pursuant to IRS Circular 
230, any tax advice provided in these lectures may not be used to avoid tax 
penalties or to promote, market, or recommend any matter therein.
The Teaching Company expressly DISCLAIMS LIABILITY for any DIRECT, 
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES 
OR LOST PROFITS that result directly or indirectly from the use of these 
lectures. In states that do not allow some or all of the above limitations of 
liability, liability shall be limited to the greatest extent allowed by law.

Course Scope
1
LAW SCHOOL FOR EVERYONE
CONTRACTS
C
ontracts are perhaps the world’s most pervasive legal institution. From 
ordering goods on the internet to swiping a credit card at the grocery 
store, most people enter into several binding agreements each day. 
Contracts also undergird some of the biggest decisions we make in our lives, 
from purchasing a house to accepting a job. 
This course provides a primer in contracts that mirrors the coverage of the first-
year law school class. It starts by examining the issue of contract formation. 
We’ll see that courts and scholars have struggled to square contract’s bedrock 
requirement of mutual assent with the reality that people are constantly 
bombarded with fine print that they don’t read. Then, we’ll pivot to the second 
black-letter requirement for consummating a binding deal: the consideration 
doctrine. This notoriously amorphous principle is more a historical accident 
than a measured policy choice. Nevertheless, we’ll do our best to get a handle 
on this elusive rule. 
The next stop on our tour is the doctrines of promissory estoppel and 
restitution. These are alternatives to breach of contract claims. They’re 
important arrows to have in the litigator’s quiver because they often permit 
plaintiffs to recover in situations where traditional contract law wouldn’t. 
From there, we’ll take a close look at defenses to contract enforcement. 
This two-lecture survey kicks off with the statute of frauds, which requires 
that certain agreements be reduced to a signed writing. We’ll move on to 

Law School for Everyone: Contracts
2
defenses that operate from the premise that a party’s apparent assent was not 
authentic (such as fraud, duress, and unconscionability), or disable vulnerable 
parties from contracting (such as infancy and mental incapacity), or invalidate 
socially damaging deals even if both parties are informed and competent 
(as in a violation of public policy).
Next on the agenda is one of the most challenging areas in the field: the role 
of third parties. When should strangers be able to enforce a deal that two 
other people or companies have made? On the one hand, parties often enter 
into transactions for the purpose of benefitting someone else. It makes sense 
to permit these intended third-party beneficiaries to have the right to sue if 
the other party to the contract breaches their duties. However, on the other 
hand, in our interconnected economy, almost every transaction affects scores 
of third parties in some fashion. Thus, the line between intended third-party 
beneficiaries and mere bystanders is blurry.
The last cluster of lectures focuses on determining what contracts mean, how to 
tell whether they have been breached, and the process for calculating damages. 
We’ll consider the parol evidence rule, principles of contract interpretation, 
implied terms, conditions, and promises. These are the tenets that govern 
what the parties must do and when they must do it.
Finally, we’ll learn that prevailing contracts plaintiffs can receive the following:
z
z Specific performance (where the court orders the defendant to do 
the very thing he or she promised to do).
z
z Expectation damages (an amount of money designed to put the 
plaintiff in the financial position she would’ve been in if the defendant 
had fully performed).
z
z Reliance damages (compensation for out-of-pocket expenses). 
z
z Restitution damages (the value of a benefit the plaintiff conferred 
on the defendant). 

Course Scope
3
Throughout these lectures, we’ll encounter some of the great debates that 
make contracts so compelling. Should the law be sensitive to disparities in 
bargaining power between corporations, consumers, and employees? Should 
it favor fairness or economic efficiency? Should it consist of bright-line rules 
that generate predictable outcomes or flexible standards that can bend to 
the facts of each case? We’ll see why these discussions have been raging for 
centuries and will not end soon. ■

Lecture 1
CONTRACT FORMATION 
IN THE INTERNET AGE
P
rofessors often introduce first-year students to the law by describing it 
as a “seamless web.” This expression captures the fact that legal rules 
are surprisingly intertwined. Perhaps no area of the law exemplifies 
this phenomenon more than contracts. With the advent of the other seamless 
web in our lives—the internet—people enter into multiple contracts every 
day with the click of a button or a tap on a screen. By doing so, they often 
surrender rights from other threads of law—such as torts, property, and civil 
procedure—and give up the power to recover for injuries or damaged property 
or even the ability to go to court in the first place. With that background, this 
lecture explores how agreements have evolved over time.
 Consumers spend more than 
$450 billion through internet 
retailers every year, yet studies 
show that only about 0.1 percent 
of them actually scroll through 
contractual popup boxes.

5
Lecture 1–Contract Formation in the Internet Age
THE OBJECTIVE THEORY OF CONTRACTS
The first principle in contract law is that contracts arise from a mutual 
manifestation of assent. That word manifestation is crucial. It means that courts 
do not plumb the depths of the parties’ psyches to ask whether they actually 
agreed to a deal. Instead, courts focus on whether the parties acted as though 
they agreed. This is known as the objective theory of contracts. 
A classic case from 1954 called Lucy v. Zehmer shows how easily a contract 
dispute can arise, and it also illustrates the objective theory of contracts in 
action. Zehmer owned a piece of land called the Ferguson Farm. Lucy had 
previously tried to buy it from Zehmer. One night just before Christmas, Lucy 
and Zehmer were drinking whisky at a table in a restaurant. They started 
discussing the Ferguson Farm again. 
Eventually, Zehmer wrote on a piece of scratch paper that he agreed to sell the 
farm to Lucy for $50,000. Lucy suggested some minor changes to the language, 
and Zehmer tore up the paper, rewrote it, and signed his name. 
Later, Zehmer refused to sell the farm to Lucy, arguing that he had thought the 
whole exchange was a joke. The Virginia Supreme Court held that Zehmer’s 
private belief was irrelevant. The important thing was that Zehmer had acted 
as though he was serious by creating multiple drafts of the writing, signing it, 
and talking about the transaction for a long time. No matter whether Zehmer 
subjectively agreed, he had manifested assent, and that was enough to create 
a binding contract for the farm. 
THE PURPOSES OF THE OBJECTIVE THEORY
The objective theory of contracts serves several purposes. It allows parties to 
rely on each other. It also makes life easier for the legal system: It is difficult 
for courts or juries to assess a party’s mental state at a given point in time. 
In addition, a legal standard that is subjective would require a plaintiff or 
defendant to take the witness stand and talk about his or her thoughts and 
impressions. That would be tremendously time consuming. Additionally, 
fact finders might believe it to be fabricated, self-serving testimony. 

6
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
By ignoring this evidence, and focusing instead on the party’s conduct, the 
law takes a kind of shortcut, allowing the party’s words and actions to be 
a proxy for his or her thoughts. 
THE FINE PRINT
Like many venerable doctrines, the objective theory of contracts is based on the 
norms and assumptions of a different era. Five hundred years ago, contracts 
were often negotiated, face-to-face, between merchants or other parties who 
stood on relatively equal economic footing. 
Gradually, industrialization and new methods of communication altered the 
way contracts were consummated. In the early 20th century, a different kind 
of contract emerged: the preprinted standardized form. 
These contracts are not the product of bargaining. Instead, they are 
written by one party and offered to the other party on a take-it-or-leave-it 
basis. They are known as contracts of adhesion because the non-drafting 
party must adhere to the drafter’s terms. They are also known as boilerplate 
contracts. 
Adhesion contracts have tremendous social value. After all, if companies had 
to negotiate with every customer over every aspect of every deal, the wheels 
of commerce would grind to a halt.
However, adhesion contracts also have a troubling 
dimension. Toward the middle of the 20th century, 
businesses recognized that they could use fine 
print to alter the legal landscape around them. For 
example, carmakers used fine print to disclaim 
their responsibility for manufacturing defects. 
Because fine print was such a potent weapon, 
adhesion contracts soon constituted an estimated 
99 percent of ALL contracts. 
Bank loans sometimes 
define a year for the 
purposes of calculating 
interest rates as “360 
days.” This subtle 
change permits them 
to reap millions of 
dollars more in annual 
interest payments. 

7
Lecture 1–Contract Formation in the Internet Age
This trend plunged the field of contract law into crisis. Two things seemed 
clear. First, people agree to adhesion contracts blindly—almost nobody looks 
at the tiny text. Second, under traditional contract law, this is irrelevant. Under 
the objective theory of contracts, the key is whether a person manifests assent 
to a transaction. 
It does not matter whether they scrutinize every word in a document or ignore 
it completely; instead, the important thing is that they behave as though they 
agree by signing on the dotted line. In fact, courts routinely enforced contracts 
even if the person who signed it was illiterate or did not speak the language 
in which the document was printed. 
CHANGING TIMES
Some courts saw the need for change. Rather than saying that adhesion 
contracts lack agreement and are not contracts at all, courts began to strike 
down unfair adhesive terms through a doctrine known as unconscionability—
that is, the idea that a contract might be too harsh to enforce. 

8
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Procedural unconscionability applies to adhesive terms that are difficult to 
see or understand. Substantive unconscionability is present when a particular 
term is incredibly unfair. If a provision is both procedurally and substantively 
unconscionable, it is invalid (although the rest of the contract continues to 
stand). In 1965, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
decided a case called Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture Company that 
helped unconscionability gain mainstream acceptance. 
However, in the 1970s, the pendulum 
swung in the other direction. One of the 
hallmarks of this era was the emergence 
of economic reasoning in legal opinions 
and articles. Judges and scholars who were 
versed in law and economics challenged 
the idea that there is such a thing as a harsh 
contract term. 
They argued that a company’s use of a self-
serving provision also lowers the company’s 
cost of doing business. In competitive 
markets, anything that reduces a firm’s 
bottom line also drives down prices. As 
a result, to say that a term is unfair only 
captures one side of the equation. 
These arguments found a receptive ear in the US Supreme Court. By the 
middle of the 1970s, concern was mounting that the country was experiencing 
a litigation explosion. Some members of the Supreme Court began to see fine 
print as a way to alleviate the pressure on the judiciary. 
Citing the law and economics view of adhesion contracts, they validated fine 
print that attempted to discourage claims or funnel claims outside of the court 
system. For example, in a 1991 decision called Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. 
Shute, the court enforced a clause printed in microscopic font on the back of 
a ship ticket that required residents of Washington state to travel all the way 
to Florida to pursue a personal injury lawsuit against the cruise company. 

9
Lecture 1–Contract Formation in the Internet Age
ELECTRONIC CONTRACTS
This adherence to contracts was the backdrop in the late 1990s and early 
2000s, when the internet started to become the juggernaut it is today. Web-
based businesses had seen the value to their brick-and-mortar counterparts 
of binding their patrons to adhesive clauses. However, at first, it was not clear 
how tech companies could replicate this model in cyberspace. 
In June 2000, Congress solved part of this problem by passing a statute known 
as the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, or the 
E-Sign Act. This law requires courts to treat electronic signatures precisely the 
same way they treat paper signatures. In addition, it defines the term electronic 
signature broadly, as “an electronic sound, symbol, or process … executed 
or adopted by a person with the intent to sign the record.” This means that 
typing “OK” or even “X” in an email can, in the right circumstances, count 
as a full-fledged signature. 
CONTROVERSIAL METHODS
Companies began to invent novel methods of getting consumers to accept 
terms online. The most controversial such method is known as browsewrap. 
Browsewraps lurk in inconspicuous places on websites. They are usually 
accessible through a hyperlink near the bottom of the first screen you visit 
on any particular site. Browsewraps say that you consent to their terms by 
using the site. 
Another common species of online agreement is the clickwrap. Clickwraps 
are ubiquitous boxes of text that pop up and force the user to click “I agree.”
There are several species of clickwrap. One is the scrollwrap. A scrollwrap 
is a pop-up box full of text that actually forces the user to scroll through 
the terms before the user can click “I agree.” Because scrollwraps place the 
contract terms front and center and then require the user to signal his or her 
acceptance of the terms, courts have unanimously found that users manifest 
assent to scrollwraps by clicking “I agree.”

10
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
A slightly more fraught form of clickwrap 
is the modified clickwrap. Unlike 
scrollwraps, modified clickwraps do 
not show the user a pop up box full of 
terms. Instead, the website makes the 
terms accessible through a hyperlink 
near the “I agree” button. 
Cases featuring modified clickwraps 
have involved the Hotwire travel website 
and video game company Zynga. Most 
courts have held that clicking an “I agree” 
button after being presented with a modified clickwrap is a manifestation of 
assent. However, in a 2014 decision involving Barnes and Noble, the Ninth 
Circuit disagreed.
A third and final kind of clickwrap is the sign-in-wrap contract. Sign-in-wrap 
contracts might be formed when registering with a website (rather than when 
ordering a product, as with modified clickwraps). 
There have been several high-profile opinions involving sign-in-wrap contracts. 
One involved Gogo, the company that allows people to connect to Wi-Fi 
on airplanes. The other involved popular ride-sharing service Uber. Two 
federal judges in New York held that these firms’ sign-in-wrap terms were 
not binding. These courts explained that the sign-in-wrap measures usually 
do not let users see the contract until they have nearly finished the process of 
registering their accounts. 
THE DECISIONS’ MEANING
The courts’ decisions in these cases only govern the threshold question of 
whether customers manifest assent to electronic contracts. If the answer is 
no, then any so-called electronic contract is not a contract at all; instead, it is 
just words on a computer screen. 

11
Lecture 1–Contract Formation in the Internet Age
Even if the answer is yes—customers do manifest assent—it does not necessarily 
mean that any particular piece of electronic boilerplate is valid. Courts can 
always strike down one-sided electronic terms as unconscionable. However, 
they do not always do so. Because unconscionability revolves around the vague 
concept of fairness, it generates wildly unpredictable results. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Ben-Shahar and Schneider, More Than You 
Wanted to Know.
<
< Radin, Boilerplate. 
<
< Silver-Greenberg and Gebeloff, “Arbitration 
Everywhere, Stacking the Decks of Justice.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Have you entered into a contract today?
Þ
Þ What exactly does it mean to assent? Is it some kind of 
internal transformation or insight? Do you even know 
when you’ve assented to something? Can a third party tell 
if you’ve assented to something? 

Lecture 2
UNDERSTANDING OFFER 
AND ACCEPTANCE
C
ontracts stem from mutual manifestations of assent. That raises 
a question: How can we tell when the parties have forged such an 
agreement? As this lecture shows, an agreement often is the product 
of a process known as offer and acceptance. This lecture also covers two sets 
of rules that control contract law.
OFFERS
This lecture begins with the concept of offer. This lecture’s definition of the 
term offer comes from the Restatement (Second) of Contracts. The Restatement 
(Second) of Contracts is an authoritative collection of common-law contracts 
rules, published in the 1980s, 50 years after the first version. Its originator is 
the American Law Institute, an organization that consists of leading lawyers, 
judges, and professors. The Restatement (Second) of Contracts is not final in the 
way a decision of a state supreme court is to lower courts in that jurisdiction, 
but it is highly influential, and it is very common 
for judges and litigants to cite it as though it 
were controlling law. 
The Restatement (Second) of Contracts defines 
an offer as “the manifestation of willingness 
to enter into a bargain, so made as to justify 
another person in understanding that his assent 
to that bargain is invited and will conclude it.” 
In other words, for a communication to be an 
offer, it must do two things. 
Contract law once 
consisted entirely of 
common law. The 
common law is judge-
made law—that is, the 
product of decades of 
courts announcing 
rules and applying 
them to new scenarios. 

13
Lecture 2–Understanding Offer and Acceptance
First, it needs to set forth the material terms of the deal. The person who makes 
it—the offeror—must describe the proposed contract with enough specificity 
that the person who received the offer—the offeree—can consummate the 
transaction simply by replying, “yes,” or “I accept.” The second aspect of the 
test for offer is that a proposal must be unequivocal. The offeror has to indicate 
that he or she is willing to be bound. 
ACCEPTANCES, REVOCATIONS, AND COUNTEROFFERS
If a communication is indeed an offer, several things can happen. It might be 
accepted. The Restatement (Second) of Contracts explains that an acceptance 
is “a manifestation of assent to the terms” set forth in the offer “made by the 
offeree in a manner invited or required by the offer.” 
The offeror is the master of the offer. That means that the offeror can revoke 
an offer any time before the offeree accepts it. In addition, the offeror can 
specify exactly how acceptance must take place. 

14
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Offers can also be revoked by indirect means. 
For example, an offer can be implicitly revoked 
by lapse of time. Every offer has an expiration 
date—a time when it simply isn’t reasonable 
to consider it still to be open. Offers can also 
be implicitly revoked when the offeree learns 
from some reliable source that the offeror has 
done something inconsistent with honoring 
the offer. 
Offers and revocations kick in once the offeree learns about them. If an 
offeror wants to suggest a deal or take one off the table, it is the offeror’s duty 
to communicate that to the offeree. 
Acceptances are treated differently. Under what is known as the mailbox rule, 
an acceptance is operational the very moment it leaves the offeree’s possession. 
This doctrine gets its name from cases where the offeror makes an offer, the 
offeree writes a letter accepting the offer, the offeree places the letter in the 
mail, and then returns home only to find a letter waiting from the offeror 
revoking the offer. The parties still have a contract. As soon as the offeree 
placed the letter in the mailbox, the acceptance was complete. 
One oft-litigated issue is 
whether advertisements 
are offers. In general, 
advertisements are not 
offers, but rather invitations 
to make offers.

15
Lecture 2–Understanding Offer and Acceptance
Counteroffers are one more variable to consider. The common law of contracts 
followed what is known as the mirror-image rule. This doctrine says that the 
only way to accept an offer is to accept it wholesale. The offeree’s response must 
be “yes” or “I accept.” It cannot add or amend any terms. If the offeree’s reply to 
an offer is not the mirror image of the offer, then it is not an acceptance. 
Instead, it is a counteroffer. In turn, a counteroffer revokes the original offer 
and functions as its own, independent offer that can be revoked, accepted, 
or counteroffered. 
THE UCC
Doctrines like the mirror-image rule are a product of the common law of 
contracts. Until the second half of the 20th century, the common law was 
contract law. There was no other game in town. 
Then, in 1952, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State 
Laws released a model statute called the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC). 
Article 2 of the UCC governs the sale of goods—that is, things that are tangible 
and moveable, such as pens, carrots, and televisions. Conversely, the sale of 
real estate, contracts for services, and employment agreements fall under the 
common law.
Article 2 of the UCC has been adopted in 49 states and the District of 
Columbia. (The one exception is Louisiana, which continues its French-infused 
civil law tradition). 
Sometimes, the UCC follows the common law on a particular issue. However, 
the UCC sometimes adopts special rules that diverge from the common 
law. Therefore, contract law is actually not one body of law. It is two bodies 
of law: the common law and the UCC. 
It is wise to attack a contracts problem by asking which regime applies. Often 
the answer to this question is clear. For instance, if you work at Starbucks, your 
relationship with your employer is a matter of common law. However, the UCC 
governs a contract for the sale of coffee beans, coffee makers, or coffee mugs. 

16
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Occasionally, though, the border between the common law and the UCC 
is blurry because a transaction involves both goods and services. Consider 
a contract with a professional photographer to take a family portrait: It 
involves paying for the professional’s time and skill as well as a physical item 
(the photograph). 
To choose between the UCC or the common law for one of these mixed 
transactions, courts apply the predominant purpose test. They consider the 
nature of the companies, the language of the contract, and the comparative 
value of the goods and services. If these factors suggest that the exchange is 
primarily for tangible and moveable items, they use the UCC. Alternatively, 
if the gravamen of the deal is labor or intangible rights, the common 
law controls. 
UCC SECTION 2-207
The dichotomy between the common law and the UCC is important because 
the UCC has its own view on how to handle a reply to an offer that differs 
from the offer. This doctrine is known as UCC Section 2-207. 

17
Lecture 2–Understanding Offer and Acceptance
With Section 2-207, the primary goal of the UCC’s drafters was to change 
the common-law mirror-image rule. They did not like the way the doctrine 
operated in practice. A situation called the battle of the forms often arose.
This is an example of the battle of the forms: Two parties had been negotiating 
and were on the cusp of a deal. Imagine, for this example, that the seller sells 
beige widgets, and the buyer needs beige widgets for its cardboard factory. 
The buyer sends an order to the seller. The order is a long, dense, preprinted 
form. Some of the terms are unique to the transaction, covering the price 
and quantity of the goods, but many of the other clauses are boilerplate with 
provisions that favor the buyer. 
If the seller signs the buyer’s form, the result is a contract on the buyer’s 
terms. However, instead of signing, the seller sends a form back to the buyer: 
a purchase confirmation. It probably matches buyer’s form on the big-ticket 
issues, such as purchase quantity, but contains its own boilerplate that favors 
the seller.
The buyer ignores this form, doing to the seller’s form exactly what the seller 
did to buyer’s form. Then, the parties behave as though they have a contract. 
The seller ships the widgets and the buyer accepts them. Under the common 
law, the buyer’s order form was an offer, but thanks to the mirror-image rule, 
the seller’s reply was a counteroffer. 
In paying for the seller’s widgets, the buyer accepted the seller’s counteroffer. 
Thus, the contract consists entirely of the seller’s form. The drafters of the UCC 
thought that this was perverse. The parties did not know what was on each 
other’s forms: Most people do not read boilerplate. In fact, parties sometimes 
do not know what is on their own forms. 
Moreover, it seemed completely arbitrary that one party—usually the seller—
would gain the upper hand simply because it had the good fortune of firing 
the last shot before shipment and payment. The UCC brain trust set out to 
try to change the common-law mirror-image rule. Section 2-207 is the fruit of 
their labor. At the highest level of generality, Section 2-207 tries to harmonize 
non-identical forms into one, overarching, neutral contract. 

18
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
THE UCC’S APPROACH
Unlike the common law, the UCC says that a response to an offer that deviates 
from the offer can nevertheless be an acceptance, rather than a counteroffer. 
In order to be an acceptance, the reply to the offer needs to be "a definite and 
seasonable expression of acceptance." 
The next step is to figure out what happens to the divergent terms. The text 
of 2-207 says that it is possible for additional terms in a reply to an offer to 
become part of the contract. This occurs if several criteria are met. 
First, both parties need to be merchants. In this case, a merchant is a party 
who regularly deals with the goods involved in the contract. If both parties 
are merchants, the next question is whether either “the offer expressly limits 
acceptance to the terms of the offer” or the additional terms “materially alter” 
the offer. 
An additional term covers terrain that the offer is silent on. However, different 
terms in a reply are another matter. Unfortunately, 2-207 does not tell us what 
to do with acceptances that contain different terms. Jurisdictions follow one 
of three views. 
First, some courts believe that the omission of different terms from 2-207 was 
a drafting error. Therefore, they subject different terms to the same analysis 
as additional terms, asking if both parties are merchants, if the offer expressly 
limits acceptance to its terms, or whether the different terms materially alter 
the offer. 
Second, other judges hold that because 2-207 never says that different terms 
can become part of the contract, the terms in the offer control. Finally, still 
other states follow the so-called knockout rule: The original term in the offer 
and the different term in the acceptance just cancel each other out. 

19
Lecture 2–Understanding Offer and Acceptance
Suggested Reading
<
< Baird and Weisberg, “Rules, Standards, and the 
Battle of the Forms.” 
<
< Burnham, “Why Do Law Students Insist That 
Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code 
Applies Only to Merchants and What Can We 
Do About It?” 
<
< Cunningham, Contracts in the Real World.
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Why do you think the Uniform Commercial Code creates 
special rules for the sale of goods and not for transactions 
involving land or services?
Þ
Þ When you hear, see, or read advertisements, do you 
consider them to be offers? What would you do if you 
tried to redeem a coupon and were told that seller didn’t 
intend to honor the advertised price? 

Lecture 3
THE MYSTERIOUS 
CONSIDERATION 
DOCTRINE
O
ne of contract law’s great mysteries is the doctrine known as 
consideration. In Anglo-American law, an agreement, standing 
alone, is not necessarily binding. Instead, to ripen into a full-fledged 
contract—an agreement that the law will enforce—a transaction also needs 
to have consideration.
DEFINING CONSIDERATION
Lawyers usually use the word consideration 
as shorthand for the benefit that each party 
obtains from a contract. For instance, if 
Lisa agrees to buy Bob’s bicycle for $50, the 
consideration that Lisa receives is the bike, and 
the consideration that Bob collects is the money. 

21
Lecture 3–The Mysterious Consideration Doctrine
The consideration doctrine requires a contract to be supported by consideration 
in the sense that both parties agree to an exchange. Each contractual partner 
must give up a right or thing in order to get a right or thing. Lisa surrenders 
cash but acquires a method of transportation. Bob swaps his bicycle for cash. 
There is an agreement, and there is a consideration, so there is a contract. 
Conversely, the consideration doctrine is not satisfied when there is no 
exchange. Most often, this occurs when one party merely promises to make 
a gift to the other party. 
HISTORY OF THE CONSIDERATION DOCTRINE
The consideration doctrine is a combination of several discrete strands of law 
from all over the map. One of the first glimmers of the principle can be found 
in Justinian Rome. In that era, the central premise of the law of obligations 
was the polar opposite of what it is today.  
In the case of Roman courts, the state would only throw its weight behind 
transactions that fell within certain rigid parameters. For example, an 
agreement was enforceable if the parties performed a verbal ritual called 
the stipulatio. 
Similarly, in 13th-century England, the law generally did not compel parties 
to fulfill their promises. There were two exceptions. The first was an action 
called covenant. This claim allowed the plaintiff to recover when the defendant 
breached a promise that was memorialized in a written instrument that had 
been impressed with a seal (a kind of special insignia). This highly formal 
document was known as a specialty.
The second way that 13th-century British courts recognized a breach-of-
contract-like legal theory was the action of debt. This claim required the 
plaintiff to allege two things: that the defendant owed the plaintiff a specific 
sum of money and that the defendant had received something from the 
plaintiff. That second element—which courts referred to as a quid pro quo, 
or “this for that”—would one day blossom into the modern doctrine of 
consideration. 

22
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Eventually, covenant and debt were absorbed 
into a new claim, called assumpsit. Plaintiffs 
who invoked this theory often needed to prove 
that they actually had reached an agreement 
with the defendant. One way to clear this 
hurdle was to produce a specialty: a writing 
with a seal that set forth the terms of the deal. 
Alternatively, when no such document was 
available, plaintiffs would mention the factors 
that had compelled the defendant to enter 
into the transaction. These remnants of covenant and debt prompted courts 
to declare that mere mutual assent wasn’t enough to forge a contract; rather, 
there also needed to be a consideration.
Then, in the 1800s, the consideration doctrine narrowed slightly. The 
popularity of the commercial printing press diminished the usefulness of the 
seal. Thus, the fact that a document was emblazoned with a seal no longer 
indicated that the parties had reflected before binding themselves. For this 
reason, most American legislatures abolished the rule that a seal automatically 
gave a writing consideration. In turn, this left courts with a vague notion 
of consideration. 

23
Lecture 3–The Mysterious Consideration Doctrine
THE EVOLUTION CONTINUES
In the late 19th century, a movement known as legal formalism helped 
sharpen the rule’s contours. The intelligentsia of this era, including Judge 
Oliver Wendell Holmes and Harvard Law School dean Christopher Columbus 
Langdell, believed that law was a science and that judges should be able to 
derive correct answers from fact patterns.
To them, the ill-defined consideration doctrine was anathema. They attempted 
to impose order on this unwieldy concept by boiling it down to two elements. 
The fruit of their labor, which is called the bargain theory of consideration, 
remains the dominant way of thinking about the doctrine. 
First, the bargain theory of the consideration doctrine requires that each party 
needs to incur (or promise to incur) a detriment. A detriment is not necessarily 
a loss. Instead, it means to change one’s position or surrender a right. 
Second, both detriments need to be bargained for—that is, each party must 
be doing what they are doing because of what they are getting. The lynchpin 
of the bargain theory is an exchange. 
The bargain theory of consideration has several tricky nuances. First, some 
agreements never clear its first hurdle: the necessity that both parties have 
detriments. Another sticking point is if a person promises to do something 
they were already bound to do.
Likewise, because of the peculiar way the law defines a detriment, the idea 
of past consideration is an oxymoron. Consideration is forward looking and 
prospective; it cannot be grounded in something that has already happened. 
Another fact to emphasize about the bargain theory is that, despite its name, 
it does not care whether the parties actually bargain over the terms of the 
contract. Instead, it simply insists that a contract have the proper structure: 
Each party gives and takes. 

24
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Additionally, the bargain theory does not require that the parties trade things 
of equal or even similar value. Indeed, courts have often announced that mere 
inadequacy of consideration—the fact that a deal is much better for one party 
than another—does not invalidate a contract. 
The line between an enforceable contract and an unenforceable promise to 
make a conditional gift can be razor-thin. The key is the second element of 
the bargain theory: the requirement that each party does what they are doing 
because of what they are getting. 
MILLS V. WYMAN
Another important consideration is that someone who believes that the law 
should track our moral intuitions should object to the consideration doctrine. 
Under the rule, parties can sometimes make promises and then decide not to 
keep them. Arguably, this is different from everyday life, where repudiating 
your word usually triggers some kind of sanction or stigma. 
This divergence between contract and promise is front and center in Mills v. 
Wyman, an 1825 opinion from the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts. 
A young man named Levi Wyman was traveling and became gravely ill. 
Daniel Mills, a stranger, nursed Levi back to health. Levi’s father, Seth, learned 
of Daniel’s kindness and wrote a letter promising to reimburse Daniel for 
his expenses. 
Then, Seth changed his mind about compensating Daniel. Daniel sued, and 
the state high court reluctantly held that Seth’s offer was not supported by 
consideration. After all, Daniel had already taken care of Levi. Seth’s promise 
was inspired by feelings of gratitude, not by some corresponding guarantee 
that Daniel made. As a matter of black-letter law, this is the right result. 
Nevertheless, the court certainly seemed troubled, calling Seth’s about-face 
“disgraceful” and explaining that Seth had violated a “moral duty” if not 
the law. 

25
Lecture 3–The Mysterious Consideration Doctrine
THE PURPOSE OF THE CONSIDERATION DOCTRINE
If the consideration doctrine is hard to define and apply, and also generates 
harsh results, why does it exist? This question has bedeviled generations of 
law students, lawyers, judges, and academics. 
One idea is that an exchange is more socially valuable than a gift. Parties trade 
objects or entitlements when doing so will make them both better off. Perhaps 
the same logic does not apply to promises to make a gift, though there are 
counterarguments to this line of thought. 
Other attempts to explain the consideration doctrine have focused on the value 
of legal formalities. In a famous article written in 1941, Lon Fuller argued 
that the consideration doctrine achieves several goals. First, Fuller asserted, 
consideration serves an “evidentiary” function by generating reliable proof 
of a party’s intent to consummate a contract. 
Fuller claimed that, in a legal system where oral promises are often enforceable, 
it is too easy for plaintiffs to falsely allege that a defendant offered to give them 
something. Thus, the consideration doctrine demands more than this bare 
allegation. After all, exchanges can often be verified by conduct. 

26
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Not everyone agrees with this attempt to justify the consideration doctrine. 
For example, the consideration doctrine invalidates promises even when there 
is no doubt that they were actually made. As a corroborative tool, consideration 
is blunt and blundering. 
In his article, Fuller also contended that the consideration doctrine has 
a “cautionary” effect. Here, Fuller drew heavily on the former practice 
of using a seal to infuse writing with consideration. He argued that this 
ritual gave the parties a metaphysical jolt. It reinforced that they were 
engaged in serious business and thus prevented rash action. Then again, 
consideration does not always do a great job of ensuring that people think 
things through before they contract. 
EROSION AND PERSISTENCE
One of the hallmarks of contract law in the last half-century has been the 
erosion of consideration’s importance. Starting around the 1930s, courts 
began to enforce promises that lacked consideration under a doctrine known 
as promissory estoppel. 
Very roughly, this rule allows a disappointed party to recover if he changes 
his position in justifiable reliance on another party’s promise. Likewise, 
the Uniform Commercial Code has taken several bold steps toward 
eliminating the requirement of consideration in mercantile transactions, 
such as allowing parties to make offers irrevocable for a set time period and 
modify existing contracts without having to navigate the maze of the bargain 
theory. 
Yet even those innovations have not completely banished the consideration 
doctrine from contract law. This unusual rule continues to cast its shadow 
across the field.

27
Lecture 3–The Mysterious Consideration Doctrine
Suggested Reading
<
< Eisenberg, “The Principles of Consideration.”
<
< Fried, Contract as Promise.
<
< Fuller, “Consideration and Form.”  
<
< Kull, “Reconsidering Gratuitous Promises.”
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Should all promises be enforceable in a  court? What 
would the benefits and drawbacks be?
Þ
Þ Should the law treat transactions between family 
members different than deals between commercial 
parties? 

Lecture 4
CONTRACT OFFERS 
YOU CAN’T REVOKE
A
n offeror is the master of the offer. One corollary of this principle 
is that the offeror can retract an offer at any time before the offeree 
accepts it. However, some situations buck this general rule. In these 
situations, courts, legislators, or even the parties themselves have decided to 
make an offer irrevocable. 
UNILATERAL AND BILATERAL CONTRACTS
The first exception to revocability arises from an offer to enter into a unilateral 
contract. The distinction between bilateral contracts and unilateral 
contracts is slippery, and the law governing this area has changed in the last 
half-century. 

29
Lecture 4–Contract Offers You Can’t Revoke
In general, the difference between bilateral and unilateral contracts hinges on 
the number of promises that a contract contains. When both parties promise 
to do something in the future, the result is a bilateral contract. Conversely, 
in a unilateral contact, one party promises to do something contingent upon 
the other party’s performance. 
PETTERSON V. PATTBERG
Under centuries of contract law, unilateral contract offers were troublesome. 
A good illustration of why offers to enter into unilateral contracts were so 
troublesome under orthodox contract law can be found in a case called 
Petterson v. Pattberg. 
Petterson owned a parcel of land in Brooklyn. He had taken out a mortgage 
from Pattberg and still owed $5,450. In April 1924, Pattberg wrote a letter to 
Petterson in which Pattberg stated that he would grant Petterson a discount 
of $780 if Petterson paid off the mortgage in full by end of the next month. 
Petterson scraped together the money, but when he tried to pay Pattberg in 
May, Pattberg revealed he had sold the mortgage to a third party and refused 
to take the payment. 
This sequence of events divided the New York Court of Appeals. Both the 
majority and the dissent agreed that Pattberg’s April letter contained an offer to 
Petterson to enter into a unilateral contract because it made a promise (to give 
him a $780 discount) if he performed an act (paying off the mortgage in full 
by May 31). Likewise, both the majority and dissent agreed that Pattberg, 
as master of the offer, could have freely revoked any time before Petterson 
accepted it by performing the act.
The question remained: Did Petterson accept before revocation? The majority 
said no. These justices reasoned that the only way that Petterson could 
have accepted the offer was to pay Pattberg. Pattberg’s sale of the mortgage 
to a third party had implicitly revoked his offer. The dissent saw more 
nuance: Pattberg had raised the funds and brought the money to Pattberg’s 
house by the deadline. 

30
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
A CONFUSING DISTINCTION
The distinction between an offer to enter into a unilateral contract and 
an offer to enter into a bilateral contract can be very confusing. Every 
contracting party ultimately wants the other party to perform. This line 
of thought suggests that every offer demands performance and thus is 
an offer to enter into a unilateral contract.
Pattberg’s offer did not contain strong language insisting on acceptance by 
performance. Arguably, Pattberg’s offer could just as easily be seen as an offer 
to enter into a bilateral contract. 
EVOLVING RULES
The drafters of the Restatement of Contracts tackled the issue of unilateral 
contracts. In the first half of the 20th century, scholars began to condemn 
cases like Petterson v. Pattberg, which managed to be both confusing and 
harsh. The Restatement drafters transformed the traditional rules governing 
unilateral contracts. They provided a blueprint for assessing the topic that 
still applies today. 

31
Lecture 4–Contract Offers You Can’t Revoke
Section 32 of the Restatement helps classify an offer as either unilateral or 
bilateral. It does so by giving flexibility. It proposes that if there is any doubt 
about whether an offer is to enter into a unilateral or bilateral contract, one 
must resolve the doubt by presuming that the offeree can accept by promising 
(if that is what the offeree chooses to do). Absent unusual circumstances, 
offers are offers to enter into bilateral contracts in the sense that the offeree 
can simply say, “I accept” and consummate a contract. 
Even under Section 32, some offers are still unilateral. We can invoke Section 
32 and give the offeree the power to accept by promising only in a “case 
of doubt.” Sometimes there is no doubt that only performance qualifies 
as acceptance. 
This can happen in one of two ways. First, the offeror can expressly state that 
a promise is not a viable form of acceptance. Second, offers to pay rewards or 
bonuses are contexts in which an offeror does not want a promise, but instead 
is asking for performance. 
Recognizing that these two situations can be problematic, the authors 
of the Restatement of Contracts intervened with another provision. The 
Restatement carves out an exception to the conventional rule that the 
offeror can revoke before acceptance in the context of an offer to enter into 
a unilateral contract. 
Section 45 says that when a party makes an offer to enter into a unilateral 
contract, the party loses the power to revoke once the offeree starts to try 
to perform. If the offeree is able to perform, a contract springs into being. 
If the offeree is unable to perform, there is simply no contract. Either way, this 
blocks situations in which the offeror revokes an offer at the very last second 
before the offeree finishes doing the requested act. 
OPTION CONTRACTS
Section 45 is not the only way an offeror can surrender freedom to revoke 
at any time. Sometimes parties enter into an option contract. Options are 
common in professional sports, finance, and real estate. 

32
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Options involve two potential contracts. One can be thought of as the big 
contract—that is, some possible deal between the parties. The big contract 
is something that the parties are contemplating, but the offeree is not sure 
that she wants to go ahead with it. To sweeten the pot, the offeror gives the 
offeree an option: a prescribed period in which the offeror cannot revoke the 
offer. This allows the offeree to conduct due diligence and decide whether to 
pull the trigger. 
The parties accomplish this goal by forming a contract in which the offeror 
promises not to revoke her offer to enter into some other contract. For example, 
on February 1, Tabitha might make an offer to sell her house to Lynn for 
$500,000. In addition, in return for Lynn paying Tabitha $10, Tabitha might 
agree not to revoke her offer until February 15. 
This example contains the big contract (the sale of Tabitha’s house) and a mini-
contract (the option). In the option, Tabitha promises not to revoke her offer 
to sell the house for two weeks, and Lynn pays Tabitha $10. 
The Restatement of Contracts states that an offer becomes an option if it 
meets three elements: It is in a writing that the offeror signs, it proposes a fair 
exchange within a reasonable time, and it recites a purported consideration. 
Thus, under the Restatement approach, an option is binding even if the offeree 
never actually provides consideration to the offeror. The important part is that 
the option states that the offeree has given the offeror something (even if this 
statement is false). The logic here is that if the parties take the time and effort 
to structure their option agreement the right way—to cast it into the proper 
shape, where each party gives and takes—they intended it to be valid.
FIRM OFFERS
The Uniform Commercial Code goes even further than the Restatement for 
options involving the sale of goods. It has a special device, called a firm offer, 
which allows the parties to form options without even pretending that the 
offeree has given something of value to the offeror. The firm offer rule, UCC 
2-205, dictates than an offer by a merchant in a signed writing that says that 
it is not revocable is, in fact, not revocable. 

33
Lecture 4–Contract Offers You Can’t Revoke
There are a few limits on firm offers. For one, firm offers can’t make offers 
irrevocable for longer than three months. In addition, if the firm offer language 
appears on a form supplied by the offeree, the offeror needs to separately sign, 
initial, or otherwise authenticate the part of the contract that makes the offer 
irrevocable. 
Firm offers aren’t the only way parties can enter into options under the UCC. 
Parties can also make options under the traditional common-law rules.
LEONARD V. PEPSICO, INC
This lecture closes with a case that can be described as an instant classic: 
Leonard v. Pepsico, Inc. In the mid-1990s—the height of the cola wars—Pepsi 
conducted a promotion called Pepsi Stuff. The gist was that customers who 
bought Pepsi could clip and save coupons that were known as Pepsi points. 
In turn, they could redeem Pepsi points for Pepsi-branded merchandise that 
was featured in a catalogue.
To publicize its Pepsi Stuff campaign, the company ran a commercial. It begins 
inside a suburban house on a beautiful morning. A boy of about 16 appears 
wearing a Pepsi T-shirt. A subtitle splashes across the screen advertising 
that a T-shirt could be had for 75 Pepsi Points. 
Subtitles heighten the stakes until a Harrier jet 
is advertised for 75,000,000 Pepsi Points.
John Leonard, who was 20 years old, saw the 
commercial. He read the fine print in the 
catalogue and saw that as long as you earned 
at least 15 Pepsi points from drinking Pepsi, 
you could buy any remaining points that 
you needed to purchase an item for ¢10 each. 
He determined that the $699,999 it would 
take to buy 6,999,985 Pepsi points was substantially 
less than the $23 million fair market value of a Harrier jet. He 
found investors, raised the funds, hired lawyers, and tried to accept the offer 
he contended Pepsi had made via the advertisement.

34
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Pepsi filed a request for declaratory relief in federal court, asking the judge to 
hold that there was no contract between itself and Leonard. Pepsi also came 
up with several independent arguments for why Pepsi and Leonard hadn’t 
met the black-letter elements for contract formation.
First, one question that sometimes pops up is whether a reasonable person 
would think that an offer is serious. Pepsi argued that nobody could actually 
believe that it had promised to provide a sophisticated killing machine to 
a member of the public (no matter how devoted that member of the public 
was to Pepsi). The court agreed.
Pepsi also argued that the commercial was not an offer because of the general 
rule that advertisements aren’t offers. Advertisements are only offers when 
they are highly specific and where they limit the class of people who are 
capable of accepting. 
A TWIST ON THE CASE
To imagine a twist on the case, assume that Pepsi’s ad actually was an offer. 
Suppose also that after the commercial ran, Pepsi got wind of the fact that 
Leonard was trying to earn 7,000,000 Pepsi Points. Could Pepsi revoke its offer? 
The answer depends on whether Pepsi’s ad would have been an offer to enter 
into a unilateral or a bilateral contract. If the offer were unilateral, then once 
Leonard started trying to collect the 7,000,000 Pepsi points, Restatement 
Section 45 would have kicked in, and Pepsi would have lost the power to 
revoke. If the offer were bilateral, Pepsi could have revoked it any time before 
Leonard accepted it. 
This is a question of whether the offer was unilateral or bilateral. On the one 
hand, the promise to sell the jet to someone who raises 7,000,000 Pepsi points 
sounds like a reward or bonus, which are the hallmarks of an offer to enter 
into a unilateral contract. On the other hand, because anyone could just buy 
Pepsi points, this is not exactly the type of situation where the offeree does 
not know whether she can perform even if she wants to. It is unclear how the 
court would have ruled.

35
Lecture 4–Contract Offers You Can’t Revoke
As this example demonstrates, the distinction between unilateral and bilateral 
contracts continues to haunt us. Even today, it is one of the most confusing 
topics in contract law. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Corbin, “Option Contracts.”
<
< Wormser, “The True Conception of Unilateral 
Contracts.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Both the Restatement of Contracts and the UCC have 
weakened or abolished the consideration requirement for 
option contracts. Why do you think they did so?  
Þ
Þ You can watch the Pepsi Harrier jet commercial by 
Googling “Pepsi Harrier jet.” Do you think the court is 
right that no reasonable person would think that the offer 
of the plane is serious?

Lecture 5
LIABILITY WITHOUT 
A BINDING CONTRACT
S
ome promises do not blossom into contracts, but nevertheless inspire 
the promisee to rely on the promise. Additionally, principles of 
fairness sometimes dictate that one party should pay for a benefit that 
it has received from another party even if there’s no contractual obligation 
to do so. To address these situations, courts have developed two contract-
like doctrines: promissory estoppel and restitution. Promissory estoppel 
allows plaintiffs to recover for misleading promises. Restitution mandates 
that the recipient of a benefit pay its fair market value. These theories allow 
parties to recover even in the absence of a binding contract. Even though 
they do not involve actual contracts, they do feature similarity to breach-of-
contract actions. 

37
Lecture 5–Liability without a Binding Contract
BACKGROUND ON PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL
The story of promissory estoppel begins 
in the late 19th century, when courts 
began to apply the consideration doctrine 
with vigor. Recall that the bargain theory 
of consideration insists that each party 
promise to do something that it did not 
have to do or refrain from doing something 
that it could have done. In addition, these promises must be bargained for, 
meaning that each party is doing what it is doing because of what it is getting. 
Ironhanded application of the bargain theory can lead to harsh results. For 
example, in the 1845 case of Kirksey v. Kirksey, a man named Isaac Kirskey 
wrote a letter offering to house his recently widowed sister-in-law, Angelico, 
and her family in his home. They moved in.
Two years later, for some reason, Isaac evicted Angelico and her family. 
Angelico sued, arguing that Isaac had breached the promise he had made in 
his letter to give her a place to settle. In response, Isaac argued that his pledge 
was unenforceable because it lacked consideration. The Alabama Supreme 
Court sided with Isaac. 
PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL EMERGES
At the time of the trial, it was not clear whether Isaac’s commitment was part 
of a bargain or simply an offer of a gift. Arguably, then, the outcome—no 
consideration, no contract, and no legal redress for poor Angelico—was 
correct. In the early 20th century, Harvard professor Samuel Williston began 
to cite Kirskey as an example of a doctrinal gap that needed to be plugged. 
Williston claimed that courts should grant relief to people like Angelico 
who suffered a loss because they reasonably relied on a promise that was 
subsequently broken. Williston grounded this novel proposition on an idea 
that appears throughout the law: estoppel. In many contexts, a party can be 
estopped—that is, stopped—from suddenly switching positions. 
Under an odd custom that 
has since been abandoned, 
a dissenting justice wrote the 
opinion in Kirksey v. Kirksey.

38
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
For example, the doctrine of judicial estoppel bars a litigant from arguing 
one thing and then later turning around and arguing something inconsistent. 
Similarly, equitable estoppel prevents a person from lulling another into 
a false belief. 
Along those lines, Williston suggested that judges should recognize a doctrine 
of promissory estoppel. In the early 1920s, Williston was spearheading 
the American Law Institute’s efforts to draft the first Restatement of 
Contracts, and he brought his influence to bear on that project. Section 90 of 
the Restatement declares that 
[A] promise which the promisor should reasonably expect to induce 
action or forbearance of a definite and substantial character on the part 
of the promisee and which does induce such action or forbearance is 
binding if injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the promise. 
The gist of promissory estoppel is simple. If you make a promise with the 
knowledge that it might inspire someone else to spend time or money or 
forfeit an opportunity, you can be liable if you break your word. For example, 
if promissory estoppel had been invented before Kirksey v. Kirksey was decided, 
Angelico might’ve been able to recover from Isaac. 
A CHANGING IDENTITY
However, in the middle of the 20th century, promissory estoppel began 
to experience an identity crisis. The doctrine was originally intended 
as a consideration substitute: a way of using the promisee’s reliance to 
make a promise binding even when it wasn’t part of an exchange. However, 
some courts put a different spin on the rule. 
For example, in 1965, the Wisconsin Supreme Court decided Hoffman 
v. Red Owl Stores, Inc. In its ruling, the court seemed to say that promissory 
estoppel was its own sovereign theory of recovery and not part of contract law. 
As commentators soon noted, the version of promissory estoppel that Hoffman 
applied seemed to be a kind of tort. Cases like Hoffman prompted scholar 

39
Lecture 5–Liability without a Binding Contract
Grant Gilmore to predict in a 1974 book called The Death of Contract that 
promissory estoppel would “swallow up” contract law by eradicating the 
conventional black-letter requirements for making a binding deal. 
In addition to its half-contract/half-tort nature, promissory estoppel is slippery 
for a second reason. The doctrine has two separate purposes: to penalize 
a promisor’s hollow promises and to protect the promisee’s reasonable reliance. 
If a court adopts a promise-based understanding of promissory estoppel, 
a plaintiff can recover even when she might not have suffered much of a loss 
from her reliance. On the other hand, there are reasons to see promissory 
estoppel as rooted in reliance. To understand this perspective, it is necessary 
to consider the remedies that are available for promissory estoppel. 
One remedy that a court will occasionally award to a prevailing breach of 
contract plaintiff is specific performance. However, specific performance 
is usually limited to situations where the thing being bought and sold is 
truly unique. 
Most of the time, courts award successful plaintiffs money for breach of 
contract. More specifically, courts award expectation damages. As the name 
implies, expectation damages protect what the plaintiff expected to gain from 
the transaction. 

40
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Sometimes, however, a plaintiff does not lose money on a transaction, or her 
expectation interest is hard to calculate with precision. In these situations, 
plaintiffs can fall back on a different type of damage: reliance damages. These 
seek to compensate a plaintiff for any loss that she suffered because of her 
belief that the defendant would perform. 
DIFFERENT VIEWS
Samuel Williston, the architect of promissory estoppel, took the position that 
courts should simply import breach of contact remedies into this uncharted 
terrain. In Williston’s eyes, judges should be able to award specific performance 
and expectation damages when a promisee reasonably relied on a promise 
to her detriment. Seen this way, promissory estoppel really is an alternative 
basis for contractual liability: It transforms bare promises into things that are 
functionally indistinguishable from bargained-for agreements. 
Over time, though, commentators began to challenge Williston’s view. They 
argued that promissory estoppel plaintiffs should be limited to reliance 
damages. Many courts have limited prevailing promissory estoppel plaintiffs 
to their reliance damages, which is inconsistent with a promise-based 
understanding of the rule. 
All of these issues—whether promissory estoppel belongs to the field of 
contracts or torts, and whether promissory estoppel is based in promise 
or reliance—remain unsettled today. The main point to take away is that 
promissory estoppel exists, and that sometimes plaintiffs can use it—rather 
than a conventional breach-of-contract cause of action—to recover against 
a defendant who made a promise and failed to keep it.
RESTITUTION
Like promissory estoppel, the doctrine of restitution also allows a plaintiff 
to recover without proving that she and the defendant formed a binding 
contract. It operates according to the following logic: Sometimes, if Party 
A confers a benefit upon Party B, Party B should pay Party A the reasonable 
value of the benefit. 

41
Lecture 5–Liability without a Binding Contract
Restitution generally applies only when the recipient of the benefit accepted 
it after a meaningful chance to refuse it. A person who aggressively foists 
a benefit upon another is not entitled to restitution. In such cases, the person 
foisting the benefit is known as an officious intermeddler. 
The fact that restitution requires the recipient to accept the benefit after 
a chance to refuse it sows tremendous confusion. It means that a set of facts 
can give rise to a contract implied in fact—that is, an actual contract in which 
we infer an agreement from the parties’ conduct. However, that same set of 
facts can also give rise to restitution, which is a real contract, yet is sometimes 
described by the unfortunately similar phrase “contract implied in law.” 
COMMERCE PARTNERSHIP V. EQUITY CONSTRUCTION
Restitution was at issue in a case called Commerce Partnership v. Equity 
Construction. Commerce Partnership owned an office building and hired 
a general contractor, World Properties, to spruce it up. In turn, World 
Properties hired Equity, a subcontractor, to do the stucco and surfacing. 
Commerce Partnership (the owner) paid a large amount of money to World 
Properties (the general contractor), but World Properties did not pay Equity 
(the subcontractor) a single penny. World Properties then declared bankruptcy. 
Equity sued the only party standing: Commerce.
Equity presented its case in a mere 30 minutes. Essentially, Equity’s president 
took the witness stand and said that Equity did the work but received no 
payment. Commerce then devoted its defense case to proving that there was 
no contract implied in fact between it and Equity. 
Eventually, the case arrived on the docket of a Florida court of appeals, which 
called it “a paradigm for the confusion that often surrounds the litigation 
of implied contracts” and restitution. The court observed that Equity was 
seeking restitution. 
Indeed, Equity could not enforce an actual contract because there was not 
evidence of any agreement, actual or implicit, between the company and 
Commerce Partnership, the owner of the building. In addition, the court held 
that Equity might be able to prevail. 

42
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
After all, Equity had done the one action that triggers restitution: It had 
conferred a benefit upon another party, who had accepted it. Nevertheless, 
the court qualified this conclusion by explaining that Equity needed to 
demonstrate one more factor: It needed to show that Commerce Partnership 
had not paid World Properties (the general contractor) for work that Equity 
had done. After all, if Commerce Partnership had paid World Properties for 
Equity’s work already, then it would be unjust to force Commerce Partnership 
to pay Equity directly for Equity’s work as well. 
THE EMERGENCY EXCEPTION
The rule that a party can only obtain restitution when the other party has 
had a chance to reject the benefit is subject to an exception for emergencies. 
This emergency exception was front and center in an Iowa Supreme Court 
case called Credit Bureau Enterprises, Inc. v. Pelo. 
A man named Russell Pelo was having a horrible bipolar swing. He had 
purchased a shotgun and threatened to kill himself. Pelo’s wife called the 
police, who confronted Pelo and then took him to a local hospital. A magistrate 
ordered that Pelo be held and treated until he could undergo a psychological 
assessment. 
Pelo was given a form to sign that would make him or his insurance company 
responsible for his medical expenses. Pelo, who did not believe that he 
needed treatment, refused, but the hospital allowed him to spend the night 
there anyway. Early in the morning, a nurse woke Pelo and told him that if 
he did not sign the document, the hospital could not ensure the safety or 
return of personal items that the hospital had confiscated from him. Pelo 
reluctantly signed. 
After Pelo was released, he refused to pay the hospital bill. From 
the hospital’s perspective, this created a dilemma. Although Pelo had 
signed the form promising to compensate the hospital, he had arguments 
that this document was not an enforceable contract. Contracts are not 
valid when they are obtained by an improper threat, like waking 
up a disoriented person before dawn and giving him an ultimatum. 

43
Lecture 5–Liability without a Binding Contract
Likewise, Pelo was mentally unstable, and people who lack capacity cannot 
enter into binding agreements. The hospital had to find a non-contractual 
way to recover from Pelo.
Restitution was the way. The hospital convinced the court that it had conferred 
a benefit upon Pelo, and that it was only fair to make him pay for it. Pelo 
objected that he had not accepted the benefit. In fact, during the throes of his 
manic swing, he had made it very clear that he was being institutionalized 
against his will. Nevertheless, the court applied the emergency exception. It 
explained that Pelo’s resistance was irrelevant because he simply was not in 
his right mind. Pelo needed to pay. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Gilmer, The Death of Contract.
<
< Knapp, “Rescuing Reliance.”
<
< Kull, “Rationalizing Restitution.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Should you be able to bring a promissory estoppel claim 
against a  politician for whom you voted for failing to 
do something that he or she pledged to do during the 
campaign? 
Þ
Þ Sometimes charities include small gifts in mass mailings 
that request a donation. If you don’t return the gift, do 
you owe restitution?

Lecture 6
DEFENSES TO CONTRACT: 
FRAUD AND DURESS
T
he fact that a party agreed to something does not necessarily mean that 
a court should treat that agreement as legitimate. Indeed, contract law 
recognizes several defenses to enforcement, which can invalidate what 
appears to be a binding arrangement. Some of these rules, discussed in this 
lecture, revolve around the basic idea that parties do not agree when they are 
coerced or tricked. 

45
Lecture 6–Defenses to Contract: Fraud and Duress
DURESS
Duress is one condition that can invalidate a contract. For example, if a person 
prepares a contract, grabs another person’s hand, and forces them to sign it, the 
doctrine of physical compulsion applies and nullifies the purported agreement. 
Another species of duress is subtler. It occurs when the wrongdoer makes 
an improper threat, which forces the victim to enter into the contract. To be 
improper, the threat has to be somewhat extreme, such as a threat to commit 
a crime or tort, to initiate a criminal prosecution, or to breach a contract in 
bad faith. 
Physical compulsion and duress by threat differ in one important way. Physical 
compulsion makes a contract void—that is, when it applies, it generates the 
conclusion that no contract ever came into existence. Conversely, duress by 
threat merely makes a contract voidable. The victim has the right to rescind, 
but until the victim does, the deal is treated as intact. In addition, unlike 
a void contract, which never was binding and never can be binding, a victim 
can forfeit the right to back out of a voidable contract. 
FRAUD: MISREPRESENTATION
In addition to duress, another commonly asserted defense is fraud. Fraud is 
complicated because it is both a tort and a way to invalidate a contract. The 
tort of fraud requires a plaintiff to prove that the defendant intentionally 
lied and that the plaintiff reasonably relied on the lie. Like any tort plaintiff, 
a fraud plaintiff can recover damages. 
The contract version of fraud is different. It is merely a ground for rescission, 
not an affirmative claim for money. It does not require that the defendant 
intended to lie.
In contract law, fraud comes in two varieties. The first is misrepresentation. 
Under this rule, a party can annul a deal if their manifestation of assent is 
induced by either a fraudulent or material false statement of fact on which 
the party is justified in relying. 

46
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
The misrepresentation defense only applies to false statements of fact. As 
a result, statements of opinions usually cannot be misrepresentations. However, 
for the purposes of the misrepresentation 
doctrine, courts will treat statements of 
opinions as though they are statements 
of facts if a speaker misrepresents her state of 
mind. For example, if a speaker says, “I think 
a revocable trust is a suitable estate planning 
device for you” and is lying, it doesn’t matter 
that she prefaced her advice with “I think.” She 
falsely claimed that she held a certain belief. 
That is the functional equivalent of making an 
incorrect factual assertion, and she may have 
committed fraud. 
FRAUD: NONDISCLOSURE
Another species of fraud is nondisclosure. That occurs when someone who 
should say something about an important aspect of a transaction does not 
speak up. Nondisclosure only applies when a party has a duty to disclose. 
This usually requires there either to be a relationship of trust and confidence 
between the parties—as with a lawyer and a client, a doctor and a patient, 
or a parent and a child—or for one party to know that the other is mistaken 
about some basic assumption that underlies the exchange. 
Like duress, which can result in a contract being either voidable (when it was 
the result of a threat) or void (when it was obtained by physical compulsion), 
fraud comes in both a strong and a weak form. Fraud in the inducement 
features a party who knew that she was entering into a contract, but—because 
of the wrongdoer’s misstatements or omissions—did not have a firm grasp on 
all the facts. Fraud in the inducement merely makes an agreement voidable.
There is also fraud in the execution, which goes further and makes a purported 
contract void. Fraud in the execution applies when one party misleads another 
about the actual contents of a writing, and the victim justifiably relies on the 
wrongdoer’s statement. 
Both fraudulent and 
material are terms with 
a specific legal meaning. 
The term fraudulent refers 
to either a bold-faced lie or 
a statement made without 
knowledge of the truth. 
The term material means 
the statement is important.

47
Lecture 6–Defenses to Contract: Fraud and Duress
For example, in Doe v. Gangland Productions, Inc., the plaintiff, who is 
identified only as John Doe, accused the A&E television network of fraud in 
the execution. A&E produces a show called Gangland. As its name implies, 
it focuses on the tug of war between street gangs and law enforcement. John 
Doe was a police informant and a close childhood friend of the former leader 
of a gang called Public Enemy Number 1. He agreed to be interviewed on 
Gangland in return for $300. He also claimed that he was led to believe that 
his face would be electronically pixilated during the production process, 
preserving his anonymity. 
According to John Doe, when he arrived for the interview, a producer handed 
him a one-page piece of paper. John Doe explained that he is “dyslexic … 
illiterate, and … has ‘extreme difficulty reading.’” The producer reassured him 
that it was simply a receipt for the $300 payment, and so John Doe signed it. 
In fact, the document was not a receipt. Instead, it was a form that declared 
that John Doe, known as the Participant on the form, agreed to grant Gangland 
the right to film, record, and use “[his] name, likeness, image, voice, interview 
and performance.” 
The release also stated that “The Participant agrees that Participant has allowed 
Participant’s real name and identity to be used in the Program and, further, 
understands and acknowledges that revealing Participant’s real name and 
identity in the Program may be dangerous for Participant and may result in 
bodily harm or death to Participant.” Finally, the release waived all claims 
that John Doe might have against the show for almost any reason. 
When the Gangland episode aired, it depicted John Doe without obscuring his 
face. According to John Doe, being revealed both as a police informant and 
a person with gang ties made him unpopular among a vast swath of different 
people. He sued the show’s producers and the network. These defendants 
responded by arguing that the form he had signed barred his complaint. John 
Doe fired back by arguing that this ostensible contract was void under the 
doctrine of fraud in the execution.

48
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that John Doe’s 
allegations, if proven at trial, would establish fraud in the execution, invalidate 
the release, and allow his lawsuit to proceed. As the appellate panel pointed 
out, fraud in the execution is controversial. In general, contract law imposes 
a duty to read. Courts are generally not very forgiving when someone signs 
something and then objects that he did not know what he signed. 
Nevertheless, the court explained that John Doe’s allegations were different 
because he had sworn under oath that he could not read or understand the 
form. In addition, the court cited the fact that the producers had reportedly 
lied about what the form actually was, lulling John Doe into a false sense of 
complacency.
Suggested Reading
<
< Dawson, “Economic Duress.”
<
< Eddy, “This New York Mansion Is Legally 
Haunted.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ People in low-income brackets often have no choice but 
to enter into unfavorable contracts, such as loans with 
high interest rates or employment agreements with 
unfavorable terms. Are these agreements the product of 
duress? 
Þ
Þ Why should an innocent but material misrepresentation 
invalidate a  contract? Why doesn’t it matter that the 
speaker didn’t intend to lie? 

Lecture 7
MISTAKE AND OTHER 
CONTRACT DEFENSES
A
n agreement can be marred by a mistake: a belief that’s not in accord 
with the facts. This lecture describes what happens in situations in 
which one or both parties are wrong about some basic assumption 
that animates their exchange. The lecture also discusses other rules that can 
make deals void or voidable, such as infancy, mental incapacity, and violation 
of public policy.
MUTUAL MISTAKES
In contract law, mistakes come in two varieties. In a mutual mistake, both 
parties share a common misapprehension. In a unilateral mistake, one party 
is incorrect. In general, courts 
are more likely to grant relief for 
mutual mistakes than they are for 
unilateral mistakes. 
However, the black-letter test for a 
mutual mistake is a moving target. 
Most law students encounter 
the doctrine in the classic 1887 
Michigan Supreme Court case 
of Sherwood v. Walker. That case 
involved the distinction between 
mistakes that relate to the 
substance or essence of a contract 
and those that pertain to the 
quality or value of a contract. 

50
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
As Sherwood illustrates, the distinction can be difficult to pin down: A mistake 
that affects the very nature of the deal almost always also affects its value. 
As a result, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts tried to refine the mutual 
mistake doctrine. 
Section 152 states that a mutual mistake about a basic assumption on which 
a contract is made that has a material impact on the transaction can justify 
rescission unless the party asserting the mistake bore the risk of the mistake. 
Section 154 then explains that a party generally bears the risk of mistake either 
when the contract allocates the risk to her or when she acts in “conscious 
ignorance,” meaning that she was aware that she had limited knowledge 
about the mistaken facts. 
Another Michigan Supreme Court decision, Lenawee County Board of Health 
v. Messerly, which was decided nearly a century after Sherwood v. Walker, 
later exemplified the Restatement’s approach. In that case, Carl and Nancy 
Pickles tried to invoke the doctrine of mutual mistake to get out of a contract 
involving a property they bought that later had sewage problems. 
Ultimately, the Michigan Supreme Court held that the Pickles had assumed 
the risk of the mistake because of paragraph 17 in the contract. That paragraph 
stated that they had “examined this property” and accepted it “as is.” For that 
reason, the Pickles’ mistake claim ultimately failed. 
UNILATERAL MISTAKES
When just one party is mistaken, the go-to rule is unilateral mistake. This 
defense requires the party asserting mistake to show that he was wrong about 
something fundamental to the exchange, that the mistake was not his fault, 
and that the other party knew about the mistake or that enforcing the contract 
would be unconscionable (meaning grossly unfair). 
This is a tougher standard to meet that mutual mistake because courts are 
not sympathetic to litigants who ask to be relieved from the consequences 
of their own blunders. Unilateral mistake applies most often in so-called 
snapping-up cases, where one party takes advantage of another’s error to 
snap up an unfair deal. 

51
Lecture 7–Mistake and Other Contract Defenses
IMPOSSIBILITY
Mistake applies when someone is wrong about crucial facts that exist at the 
time they enter into the contract. In addition, contract law recognizes a cluster 
of related rules that deal with unexpected events that occur after the agreement. 
One of these doctrines is called impossibility. 
In some circumstances, a party’s duty of performance is excused if she literally 
cannot fulfill her duties. Impossibility has both a subjective and an objective 
component. The party who wants to use the rule needs to show both that she 
cannot perform and that nobody else can perform. 
The leading case on impossibility is Taylor v. Caldwell, a British opinion from 
1863. Caldwell owned a concert hall, and he rented it out to Taylor for an event. 
However, just before the concert, the venue burned to the ground. Taylor sued 
for breach of contract, but the court held that Caldwell was not liable. 
The court concluded that the continued existence of the music hall was 
an implied condition of the contract. According to the court, the parties 
had implicitly agreed that their bargain should dissolve if the hall was 
destroyed. 
FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE
Another changed-circumstances doctrine is known as frustration of purpose. 
Like impossibility, this rule originated more than a century ago in England. 
In 1901, Queen Victoria died, and Edward VII became king. His coronation 
was scheduled for June 26, 1902. The coronation parade was the hottest ticket 
in town. 
A man named Krell owned a flat along the Pall Mall in London that provided 
an excellent view of the procession. Henry agreed to rent the apartment from 
Krell to watch the pageantry. However, on June 24, 1902, two days before the 
event, Edward VII came down with appendicitis, and the coronation was 
cancelled. Henry refused to pay Krell. 

52
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
The court held that Henry’s obligation was excused because “the object of the 
contract was frustrated.” Technically, performance was not impossible: Henry 
could have paid the money and sat in the room and looked out at the quiet, 
lonely street. However, performance was beside the point. 
IMPRACTICABILITY
Over the years, courts also recognized a cousin to the impossibility and 
frustration rules known as impracticability. Impracticability applies when 
a post-contracting change of circumstances makes a party’s performance 
much more burdensome. 
For example, in Mineral Park Land Co. v. Howard, the defendant company had 
agreed to extract all the gravel it needed to build a bridge from the plaintiff’s 
land. It began the work, but the land then flooded unexpectedly through no 
fault of the defendant’s, submerging much of the property. 

53
Lecture 7–Mistake and Other Contract Defenses
Although the defendant could have continued to extract the underwater gravel 
by using a steam dredger, it would’ve been about 10 times more expensive. 
The California Supreme Court held that this dramatic increase in cost was 
so different than what the parties had contemplated that the defendant could 
back out of the contract and find gravel elsewhere. 
Showing that a changed circumstance has made your 
performance impossible, impracticable, or pointless 
is not enough to win on its own. In general, you also 
need to prove that you did not foresee or cause the 
deal-altering event and that you did not assume the 
risk that it would occur. These are difficult elements 
to meet. As a result, impossibility, impracticability, 
and frustration are desperate, last-ditch efforts to 
excuse non-performance. 
THE MINORITY DOCTRINE 
Contract law also recognizes two defenses that protect certain categories of 
people from binding themselves. One such rule is called the minority doctrine, 
and it makes contracts with individuals under the age of 18 voidable. The idea 
is to protect vulnerable children from conniving adults. 
Because not all minors are innocent and culpable, the minority doctrine 
is riddled with exceptions. For one, a minor loses the right to disaffirm 
a transaction if she misrepresents her age. In addition, after a minor turns 
18, she loses the right to disaffirm a previous agreement if she either does not 
do so within a reasonable time or ratifies the exchange. 
MENTAL INCAPACITY
The defense of mental incapacity is often associated with the minority doctrine 
because both are concerned with protecting the vulnerable. In the 19th century 
and for most of the 20th century, when norms surrounding disability were 
very different, the incapacity doctrine was straightforward. 

54
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Courts in these jurisdictions reasoned that a contract requires a meeting of 
two minds, and a mentally incapacitated person “has nothing which the law 
recognizes as a mind.” In addition, because mental disability was seen as 
permanent, incapacity rendered agreements absolutely void. 
Gradually, our understanding of mental infirmity became more nuanced. 
Doctors realized that capacity can wax and wane, and that individuals can 
be mentally compromised in some ways and perfectly competent in others. 
The law evolved as well. Now, in most states, mental incapacity only makes 
a contract voidable. 
THE UNCONSCIONABILITY DOCTRINE
Courts have the power to deem all or part of a contract to be unconscionable—
too unfair to enforce. Unconscionability polices standardized form contracts. 
If a term is both procedurally unconscionable (for example, drafted by 
a powerful party and full of fine print) and substantively unconscionable 
(meaning grossly one-sided), it is not valid. 
Provisions that are routinely challenged as unconscionable include arbitration 
clauses, forum selection clauses, liability waivers, and warranty disclaimers. 
However, unconscionability is such an amorphous concept that, in many 
contexts, it is all but impossible to predict how a court might rule. 
ILLEGALITY
The final defense this lecture covers is illegality, which is also sometimes called 
violation of public policy. Essentially, courts will strike down a purported 
contract that is inconsistent with some well-settled public policy as articulated 
by constitutions, statutes, or decisions of a state’s highest court. The illegality 
rule differs from all other avoidance doctrines because it does not revolve 
around a flaw in the contract-formation process. 
Sometimes, courts refuse to honor these transactions in order to avoid 
a negative externality. A negative externality is a cost inflicted on a third 
party. Striking down agreements with criminal consideration or agreements 
that violate zoning laws constrain negative externalities. 

55
Lecture 7–Mistake and Other Contract Defenses
MARKET INALIENABILITY
The most interesting application of illegality involves a phenomenon called 
market inalienability. In a notable law-review article, a professor named 
Margaret Jane Radin made a startling observation: Some things can be given 
away, but are not supposed to be sold. 
Consider body parts: As strange as it may sound, the human body is reportedly 
worth an average of $220,000 to companies and tissue banks that make use 
of cadavers and their components. However, in 1984, Congress passed the 
National Organ Transplant Act, or NOTA, which at least theoretically prohibits 
the transfer of “any human organ for valuable consideration.” 
Likewise, every state and the District of Columbia has passed some version 
of the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, which criminalizes the sale of human 
eyes, organs, and tissue and establishes an elaborate regime to encourage 
organ donation.

56
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Babies are also supposed to be market inalienable: Human infants are 
not supposed to be exchanged for cash, goods, or services. In fact, the 
market inalienability of babies casts 
a shadow over surrogacy contracts 
in several states. 
In this practice, surrogates 
agree to become impregnated 
for other people who are usually 
incapable of bearing children 
themselves. The  surrogate 
carries the baby during the 
pregnancy but surrenders 
it after the birth. In  some 
states, surrogates cannot be 
compensated because lawmakers see such an arrangement as bearing too 
strong a resemblance to selling babies. Elsewhere, however, surrogates are 
paid for their services. 
Market inalienability can be controversial. For example, there is a dire shortage 
of transplantable organs. In particular, there is a waitlist of more than 100,000 
patients with serious kidney disease in the United States alone, and someone 
dies for lack of a transplant every two hours. To satisfy the demand, criminal 
operations have formed that do just what the authors of the NOTA probably 
feared: They reportedly kidnap people, remove their organs against their will, 
and sell them on the black market, where the organs are sometimes acquired 
and used by legitimate medical institutions. 
Relaxing the rule against selling organs voluntarily could help. Likewise, 
surrogacy has tremendous social benefits, and outlawing surrogacy contracts 
may make it harder for infertile couples to fulfill their dream of having 
a family. Accordingly, many commentators have argued that the risks of 
commodification are a small price to pay for allowing the market to ameliorate 
these problems.

57
Lecture 7–Mistake and Other Contract Defenses
 
Suggested Reading
<
< Currie, “Rose of Aberlone.”
<
< Lobel, Talent Wants to be Free.
<
< Price Mueller, “Bamboozled.”
<
< Radin, “Market-Inalienability.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Why should the law allow parties to obtain relief due to 
a mistake or changed circumstances? Don’t parties enter 
into contracts because they hope that the other party 
has mistakenly paid more than market value or sold 
something for less than it’s worth?
Þ
Þ Suppose someone is 17 years and 364 days old. Why 
should he or she be able to use the minority doctrine to 
invalidate a contract on that day but not on the next day? 

Lecture 8
THIRD PARTIES 
IN CONTRACT LAW
C
ourts sometimes allow strangers to the contract—parties who were 
not involved in the negotiation or agreement—to enforce one of the 
contracting party’s duties. However, this principle has limits. Contracts 
can affect dozens or even thousands of third parties, and the law has long 
struggled with when these outsiders can intervene in someone else’s affairs. 
This lecture traces the history of third-party beneficiaries and examines the 
related issue of assignment and delegation: when a party to a contract can 
transfer her rights or duties to someone else. 

59
Lecture 8–Third Parties in Contract Law
BACKGROUND ON THIRD PARTIES
Traditionally, third parties had no rights in other people’s contracts. If Party 
A entered into a binding agreement with Party B, Party C could not compel 
either of the other two parties to keep word. 
However, in 1859, a decision from New 
York’s highest court called Lawrence 
v. Fox revolutionized the law of third-
party rights. The decision acknowledged 
that some third parties—called creditor 
beneficiaries—could enforce contracts 
to which they were not a party. This is 
an example of how it works:
z
z A creditor beneficiary (for this example, called Party C) provides 
value to Party A. This is Contract 1. The value is $300 in this instance.
z
z Then, Party A provides $300 to Party B, repayable to Party C. This is 
Contract 2, and this is the contract with a third-party beneficiary 
issue. The third-party beneficiary—more specifically, the creditor 
beneficiary—is Party C.
z
z Party B is called the promisor because Party B is promising to 
perform in a way that benefits the third-party beneficiary. Party A is 
the promisee because it is Party A’s intent to make a promise that 
ends up benefitting the third party by generating a return promise 
from Party B. 
z
z Party C, the creditor beneficiary, has two choices. Party C can assert 
her conventional rights as a contracting party to recover $300 from 
Party A on Contract 1. Alternatively, Party C can assert her right as 
a creditor beneficiary of Contract 2 to recover $300 from Party B.
z
z However, because the same consideration has essentially been passed 
like a baton from Party A to Party B, Party C cannot obtain $300 
from A on Contract 1 and an additional $300 from B on Contract 2. 
When Lawrence v. Fox was 
decided in 1859, there was no 
rule like it elsewhere in the world. 
By way of comparison, England 
didn’t recognize third-party 
beneficiary status until 1999. 

60
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
HARD QUESTIONS AND COMPLICATIONS
As with any pioneering legal opinion, Lawrence v. Fox raised a host of hard 
questions. For example, if Party A and Party B entered into a contract to benefit 
Party C, could Parties A and B then modify or rescind that contract? Would 
it matter if Party C knew about the deal, or gave it her blessing, or took some 
action in reliance on it?
Adding to this uncertainty, in 1918, the New York Court of Appeals extended 
Lawrence v. Fox in a case called Seaver v. Ransom. This decision expanded 
the class of third parties with enforcement rights from creditor beneficiaries 
to what the court called donee beneficiaries. 
Unlike Lawrence v. Fox, Seaver did not involve a debt that bounced from one 
party to others. Instead, Seaver involved a contract that was a roundabout 
method of making a gift (hence the term donee, as in a donative transfer). 
In 1932, the third-party beneficiary concept gained a foothold with the 
publication of the first Restatement of Contracts. Its sixth chapter dealt with 
third-party beneficiaries, and it recognized both creditor beneficiaries and 
done beneficiaries.
Notably, the Restatement’s definition of donee beneficiaries did not stop with 
cases like Seaver. Instead, it swept broadly by stating that any third party who 
enjoyed enforcement rights and was not a creditor beneficiary was a donee 
beneficiary. In other words, the classification of donee beneficiary became 
a catchall classification for situations that did not neatly follow in the footsteps 
of either Lawrence or Seaver. 
THE EVOLUTION CONTINUES
An intent-driven approach to third parties appears in the Restatement (Second) 
of Contracts. Section 302 overhauls the first Restatement’s views by abandoning 
the terms creditor and donee beneficiary. Instead, Section 302 specifies that 
third parties with a stake in other people’s contracts are either intended third-
party beneficiaries (who can sue to enforce the promisor’s duties) or incidental 
third-party beneficiaries (who cannot). 

61
Lecture 8–Third Parties in Contract Law
In addition, under Section 302, the touchstone for this inquiry is the desires 
of the original contract parties. As the second Restatement puts it, a party 
should be an intended third-party beneficiary when “the circumstances 
indicate that the promisee intends to give the beneficiary the benefit of the 
promised performance.”
PATTERNS AND HAZE
The second Restatement helped clarify the law, but it hardly dispelled all 
the haze. To this day, whether a third party is an intended or an incidental 
beneficiary continues to be a source of tremendous confusion. 
However, there are a few rough patterns that emerge from the case law. First, 
for pragmatic reasons, there is a pretty strong presumption that citizens are 
incidental beneficiaries of government contracts. 
Second, there are a few recurring situations in which the third-party issue is 
relatively straightforward. Suppose a client hires a lawyer to write a will. The 
lawyer accidentally omits a legatee or leaves that person less than the client 
intended. Most courts have determined that the aggrieved legatee can sue the 
lawyer for breaching the legal services contract with the client. 

62
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
At the opposite extreme, some claims brought by third parties are imaginative. 
For example, in Bain v. Gillispie, James Bain, a college basketball referee, 
called a controversial foul in the waning seconds of a game between the Iowa 
Hawkeyes and the Purdue Boilermakers. The foul sent a Purdue player to the 
free-throw line, where he sank the winning shot, eliminating Iowa from the 
Big Ten tournament. 
John and Karen Gillispie, who ran a novelty store in Iowa City, alleged that Bain 
owed them damages stemming from his poor officiating. The Gillispies argued 
that they were intended third-party beneficiaries of the employment contract 
between the Big Ten Athletic Conference and Bain, that he had breached his 
contract by calling the foul incorrectly, and that they were harmed by his 
breach because they were unable to sell as much Iowa-branded memorabilia 
as they had anticipated. 
An Iowa appellate court rejected the Gillispies’ legal theory. As the court 
pointed out, no one could plausibly contend that either Bain or the Big 10 
entered into a contract to benefit the store that the Gillispies ran. Other than 
these rare clear-cut cases, however, results are all over the map. 
STABILIZATION
A few other points about third-party beneficiary law have stabilized over 
the years. First, agreements featuring intended third-party beneficiaries 
are still subject to black-letter contract doctrine. Thus, the deal between 
Party A and Party B to benefit Party C needs to stem from mutual assent, 
possess consideration, and not violate any avoidance doctrine. (Party C, the 
third-party beneficiary, does not need to provide consideration; instead, 
A and B do.) 
Likewise, a third-party beneficiary’s rights are derivative of the promisee’s 
rights in the original contract. That means that if Party B, the promisor, can 
invoke any defense against Party A, the promisee, B, can also invoke the 
defense against C, the beneficiary. 

63
Lecture 8–Third Parties in Contract Law
Another topic that has come into focus over the years is vesting. Suppose 
Party C loans $300 to Party A, who then loans $300 to Party B, repayable 
to Party C. Later, though, Party A and Party B modify their agreement to 
have Party B repay Party A, rather than have Party B expunge Party A’s debt 
to Party C. This is permissible unless Party C’s rights as an intended third-
party beneficiary are vested. 
Vesting occurs when the beneficiary either assents to the deal, sues to enforce 
it, or justifiably relies on it. Once the beneficiary’s rights have vested, the 
exchange between Party A and Party B is set in stone—they cannot change 
its terms without Party C’s consent.
ASSIGNMENTS 
Being an intended third-party beneficiary isn’t the only way an outsider can 
become involved in someone else’s transaction. Parties can also assign their 
rights and delegate their duties. An assignment of rights is the voluntary 
transfer of the benefits of a contract from one of the original parties to 
another person or entity. A delegation is the flipside: when one of the original 
contracting parties tasks 
a third party with performing 
the original contracting 
party’s obligations. 
Assignments of rights are 
common in several niches, 
including mortgages. For 
example, with a mortgage, 
the lender will sell its right 
to receive monthly payments 
from the homebuyer for the 
next 30 years to another 
financial institution, perhaps 
for a lump sum. 

64
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Like third-party beneficiaries, assignments of rights have their own technical 
vocabulary. The party who assigns rights (the original lender in the mortgage 
example) is the assignor. The party who acquires the rights (the new lender) is 
the assignee. The party whose duty of performance has changed is the obligor. 
As a matter of law, obligors must comply with an assignment of rights as soon 
as they have notice of it. 
Assignments of rights are generally valid unless specifically prohibited. 
One exception occurs in the exceedingly rare circumstances when an 
assignment of rights makes the obligor’s performance much more burdensome 
or harmful. 
DELEGATIONS
A delegation of duties occurs when a party transfers their obligations under 
a contract. Suppose Bob agrees to mow Alfred’s lawn for $100. Then, Bob 
hires Charles to mow Alfred’s lawn for $90. Bob has just delegated his duties 
under the contract with Alfred to Charles. Bob is the delegator, Charles is the 
delegatee, and Alfred is the obligee—that is, the one who will benefit from 
the obligation. 
The rules that govern delegations differ from those that apply to assignments of 
rights in three major ways. First, delegations are more likely to be impermissible 
than assignments of rights. Specifically, a delegation fails if the obligee (one 
of the original contracting parties) has a particular interest in the delegator 
(the other original contracting party) performing, rather than having the 
delegatee (the new party) perform. 
A second way in which delegations are unique is that an unauthorized delegation 
has a much more dramatic impact than an unauthorized assignment of rights. 
When a party tries to assign her rights and fails, nothing changes: The obligor 
can disregard the purported assignment and the parties remain in the status quo. 
But when one party unsuccessfully attempts to delegate her duties, it can be 
an anticipatory breach of contract, allowing the other party to walk away from 
the deal and potentially collect damages. Thus, whenever possible, it is best to 
obtain the obligee’s consent before trying involve a third party. 

65
Lecture 8–Third Parties in Contract Law
Third, assignments of rights aren’t revocable, and so for the purposes of 
receiving a return performance from the obligor, the assignor is out of the 
loop. Conversely, a delegation of duties doesn’t remove the delegator from the 
equation. If the delegatee doesn’t perform or does a bad job, the obligee can 
sue the delegator for breach of contract.
Suggested Reading
<
< Eisenberg, “Third Party Beneficiaries.”
<
< Waters, “The Property in the Promise: A Study 
of the Third Party Beneficiary Rule.” 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Are you an intended third-party beneficiary in the 
following situations?

 You work at a  hospital, which enters into a  contract 
with a private security company to provide guards.

 Your spouse enters into a life insurance contract with 
an insurance company and names you as the primary 
beneficiary.

 You commute on a subway, and the transit authority 
enters into a contract with a vendor to keep the brakes 
on the trains in working order.  
Þ
Þ Why are assignments and delegations governed by 
different rules?

Lecture 9
WHEN A CONTRACT 
NEEDS TO BE IN WRITING
T
he relationship between contracts and writing is much more complex 
than commonly believed. This lecture begins by looking at the statute 
of frauds: an ancient rule that nullifies certain kinds of agreements 
unless they take the form of a signed writing. Then, the lecture examines the 
parol evidence rule: a powerful doctrine that privileges the contractual text 
over other indications of what the parties intended.

67
Lecture 9–When a Contract Needs to Be in Writing
THE STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Every American state (with the exception of civil law–based Louisiana) 
recognizes the statute of frauds. It has changed little over the past four centuries 
since it spawned in England. 
The statute of frauds forces us to ask three questions. The first is whether 
an agreement falls within the statute—that is, is this the type of agreement 
to which the statute of frauds applies? The second is whether the statute is 
satisfied. To satisfy the statute, the key terms of an arrangement need to be 
reduced to a writing that is subscribed by “the party to be charged.” Third, if 
an agreement does fall within the statute and the statute isn’t satisfied, we need 
to consider whether one of the many exceptions to the statute of frauds applies. 
To cover the first question, this lecture highlights three varieties of agreements 
that trigger the statute. First, there are agreements for the sale of an interest 
in land. Second, the statute of frauds applies to agreements for the sale of 
a certain amount of goods; these days, the amount is $500 or more. Third, the 
statute of frauds applies to agreements that can’t be fully performed within 
a year of their making. 
As for the second question, if a contract falls within the statute of frauds, the 
statute requires a writing that sets forth the terms of the deal with sufficient 
detail. The UCC is looser than the common law on this point: It permits 
a writing to satisfy the statute if it simply refers to the transaction and states 
the quantity of any goods bought and sold. In addition, this writing needs to 
be “subscribed” by the “party to be charged.” Subscribing means the writing 
is signed, initialed, or otherwise authenticated. 
The third question is whether an exception applies. The common law 
only recognizes two exceptions to the statute of frauds. The first, the part-
performance exception, is exceedingly narrow. It only covers plaintiffs who 
seek specific performance of a defendant’s promise to sell them land. 

68
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
The second exception to the statute of frauds under the common law is 
promissory estoppel. This is also quite limited. For one, only a few jurisdictions 
permit promissory estoppel to overcome the statute of frauds. 
The UCC’s stance on exceptions to the statute of frauds is the polar opposite 
of the common law’s. There are so many exceptions under the UCC that 
they practically swallow the rule. The two most important exceptions are 
the merchant-confirmation exception and the part-performance exception. 
The merchant-confirmation exception uses the fact that a party doesn’t object 
for ten days after receiving a confirmation of an oral deal to infer that the 
parties really did agree. For example, assume Merchant 1 and Merchant 2 reach 
an oral agreement for the sale of $500 or more in goods, and then Merchant 
1 sends a written confirmation of the agreement within a reasonable time. 
If Merchant 2 does not object in writing within 10 days, Merchant 2 has lost 
the right to use the statute of frauds to get out of the deal.
The UCC’s part-performance exception is quite different from the common-
law’s version. The UCC’s version applies if either the seller ships the goods 
and the buyer accepts them or the buyer pays for the goods and the seller 
accepts the payment.
THE PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
A doctrine called the parol evidence rule helps courts interpret parties’ 
agreement. Parol is a French word that means “informal,” and parol evidence 
is anything that the parties talked about or wrote to each other that does not 
appear in the written contract. 
Very roughly, the parol evidence rule prohibits parties from introducing 
evidence of communications from the period before they signed a formal 
written contract to change the meaning of the contract. The logic of the rule is 
that the writing is the best evidence of the parties’ intent. If they truly agreed 
to something, they would’ve mentioned it in the text. 

69
Lecture 9–When a Contract Needs to Be in Writing
For example, consider an old Minnesota Supreme Court opinion called 
Thompson v. Libby. The plaintiff owned some logs that were lying near the 
Mississippi River. He entered into a signed, written contract with the defendant, 
which stated that the plaintiff had sold logs to the defendant.
The defendant didn’t pay for the logs, so the plaintiff sued for breach of 
contract. In response, the defendant argued that it was the plaintiff who had 
breached the contract. According to the defendant, the plaintiff had made an 
oral warranty about the logs: some factual statement about them that turned 
out to be false. 
The Minnesota Supreme Court refused to let the defendant introduce this 
evidence about the oral warranty. As the court explained, the parol evidence 
rule bars parties from even trying to show that a formal, written contract 
omits some key phrase or shared understanding. 
COMPLEXITIES OF THE PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
The parol evidence rule is quite complex. Specifically, the rule prohibits a party 
from using parol evidence either to supplement a fully integrated contract, or 
to contradict either a fully or partially integrated contract. The parol evidence 
rule hinges on whether a writing is: 
z
z Fully integrated (intended to be final and complete). 
z
z Partially integrated (intended to be final and complete with respect 
to some issues but not others). 
z
z Unintegrated (oral and therefore not subject to the parol 
evidence rule). 
There are different ways that courts determine the integration of a contract. 
Traditionally, courts would look at how official looking and complete a contract 
is. This is known as the four-corners approach. Its test for full integration 
focuses on the physical appearance of the writing. A 30-page document with 
dozens of clauses is fully integrated. Likewise, a contract is probably fully 
integrated if it contains a merger clause. 

70
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Over time, however, some courts have expanded the analysis to include 
circumstances such as the situation of the parties, the subject matter, and 
purposes of the transaction. For example, these courts have reasoned that 
parties who are old friends or longtime business partners may not reduce their 
entire agreement to writing because they trust each other to honor handshake 
deals. This is known as the Restatement or Corbin perspective because it 
appears in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts and was championed by 
Arthur Corbin.
The parol evidence rule is subject to an important caveat known as the 
collateral agreement exception. The collateral agreement exception allows 
parties to supplement a fully integrated contract with parol evidence that 
relates to different subject matter. 
Some courts merge the collateral agreement exception with the threshold issue 
of whether a writing is fully integrated. These judges conclude that writings 
can be fully integrated on some topics but not others. 

71
Lecture 9–When a Contract Needs to Be in Writing
In addition to preventing parties from using parol evidence to supplement 
a fully integrated writing, the parol evidence rule also prevents parties from 
using parol evidence to contradict any writing. That applies even to partially 
integrated writing. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Posner, “The Parol Evidence Rule, the Plain 
Meaning Rule, and the Principles of Contractual 
Interpretation.”
<
< Robertson, “Electronic Commerce on the Internet 
and the Statute of Frauds.”
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ The coverage of the statute of frauds is counterintuitive. 
Would it be better if the statute simply applied to all 
transactions for more than a specified dollar value? If so, 
what should the amount be? 
Þ
Þ Some areas of law require more than a  signed writing 
in order to validate certain transactions. For example, 
in many states, wills need to be signed in the presence 
of two witnesses. Should contract law impose that kind 
of heightened formality for certain transactions? If so, 
which ones?

Lecture 10
CONTRACT 
INTERPRETATION 
AND IMPLIED TERMS
T
his lecture looks at the process of extracting legal significance from 
contractual text, which can be quite challenging. Part of the difficulty is 
that the rules of interpretation present special problems about whether 
contract law should be an entirely objective enterprise or one that is partially 
subjective. Another issue is the malleability of language itself. 

73
Lecture 10–Contract Interpretation and Implied Terms
SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE VIEWS
For most of the 19th century, courts adhered to a subjective view of contract 
interpretation. Essentially, words in a contract meant what the parties thought 
they meant. Gradually, though, the subjective view fell from favor. 
Courts and scholars swung around to an objective approach, in which 
ordinary meaning—how most people would interpret certain words—trumped 
the parties’ actual intentions. Yet this wholly objective theory of contract 
interpretation could have perverse results, leading to interpretations neither 
party intended. 
Eventually, the law settled on a hybrid approach to interpretation: one 
that is part subjective and part objective. Section 201 of the Restatement 
(Second) of Contracts summarizes the prevailing law. In a nod to the original 
subjective view of contract interpretation, it begins by stating that if the 
parties intended that a particular word or phrase have an unusual meaning, 
that meaning governs. 
The second part of Section 201 deals with the more common situation in 
which the parties interpreted language differently. When the parties have 
a genuine misunderstanding about the meaning of an important term, there 
is no contract. There is simply too great a chasm between what each party 
intended and the bedrock requirement that they have agreed.
A final consideration is this: What if both parties knew or should have 
known of the other party’s interpretation? Section 201 does not speak to this 
issue directly. However, courts have several tools at their disposal to pick the 
best meaning. 
Judges can pass on contested factual issues, such as witness credibility, to 
the jury. Judges can also invoke canons of construction, which serve as 
interpretative guides. 

74
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
IMPLIED TERMS 
Some contracts also contain implied terms. One example is the implied 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The implied covenant prohibits parties 
from abusing their power under a contract. It applies to agreements that seem 
to grant one party unbridled discretion. 
The implied covenant achieves several goals. First, it facilitates the parties’ 
likely intent. Second, the implied covenant helps maintain fairness in 
contractual relations. The party with discretion is invariably the more 
sophisticated and wealthier party. By imposing restrictions on this party’s 
performance, the implied covenant keeps the party in check. 
INSURANCE AGREEMENTS
One of the most controversial 
interpretive issues hinges on how 
judges should read insurance policy 
provisions. Insurance agreements 
are troublesome for several reasons. 
For example, customers rarely have 
access to the policy until after they 
have bought it. 

75
Lecture 10–Contract Interpretation and Implied Terms
Third, the implied covenant solves a recurring problem with contracts 
that purport to give one party tremendous leeway. Arguably, these 
agreements lack consideration. An illusory promise—for example, when 
Party A declares, “I’ll perform if I feel like it”—doesn’t involve a detriment 
within the meaning of the consideration doctrine. Party A isn’t truly 
committing herself to doing anything in the future. The implied covenant 
cures this defect by circumscribing the ways in which a party can exercise its 
contractual freedom. 
A similar issue involves so-called satisfaction clauses. Parties sometimes grant 
themselves the power to terminate a contract if they are not satisfied with some 
aspect of the other party’s performance. Arguably, just those arrangements 
also lack consideration. The person who has the liberty to be dissatisfied can 
cancel the deal for any reason. 
Implied terms close this loophole. Courts limit the discretion of the party 
who has the right to be dissatisfied. They do so by, in essence, rewriting the 
satisfaction clause. If the subject matter of the contract involves commercial 
quality, operative fitness, or mechanical utility, the party can only be 
dissatisfied if a reasonable person would have been dissatisfied. 
APPLYING THE OBJECTIVE TEST
The objective and subjective tests are mere default rules, which the parties 
can draft around. Nevertheless, courts always try to apply the objective test, 
if possible. The logic behind this preference is that the subjective standard 
places the vulnerable party in a precarious position. 
A good example of the primacy of the objective test appears in Morin Bldg. 
Prods. Co. v. Baystone Constr., Inc. General Motors hired Baystone to build 
aluminum walls around a Chevrolet plant in Muncie, Indiana. The contract 
provided that Baystone’s work “shall be done subject to the final approval [of 
GM’s] authorized agent, and his decision in matters relating to artistic effect 
shall be final.” 

76
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Baystone hired Morin to erect the walls. But, according to the opinion, “viewed 
in bright sunlight from an acute angle,” the aluminum finish on the completed 
walls seemed striped, not uniform. GM’s representative rejected Morin’s work. 
Morin sued, arguing that Baystone had breached the contact by claiming to 
be dissatisfied when a reasonable person would’ve been satisfied. 
The Seventh Circuit agreed with Morin. The appellate court admitted that the 
document seemed to adopt a subjective standard by saying that GM had the 
right to be dissatisfied with the walls’ “artistic effect.” Nevertheless, the court 
reasoned that this reference was buried in fine print in a long contract, and 
thus it did not override the presumption that the objective standard applied. 
In addition, because the evidence suggested that Morin’s work was generally 
acceptable, GM had no right to be dissatisfied with it.
WARRANTIES
Warranties are another species of implied terms. Although contract law 
recognizes several warranties—including warranties of title and the implied 
warranty of habitability—this lecture focuses on warranties that arise under 
the UCC. 
Warranties are particular standards to which goods must conform. To begin 
with, there are express warranties. A seller makes an express warranty when 
she makes some factual representation about the goods, such as “this car gets 
30 miles per gallon.” If the goods deviate from the express warranty—even if 
they function fine and are otherwise totally serviceable—the seller has breached 
the contract. Express warranties thus help achieve truth in advertising.
The UCC also imposes two implied warranties. The first is the implied 
warranty of merchantability. A seller who is a merchant—one who regularly 
deals with the goods in question—must provide merchandise that is 
merchantable—that is, fit for its ordinary purpose. For instance, if a sports 
equipment manufacturer sells sneakers that cause terrible blisters, the company 
has breached the implied warranty of merchantability. 

77
Lecture 10–Contract Interpretation and Implied Terms
The second implied warranty is a warranty of fitness for a particular purpose. 
This requires sellers who know that a buyer needs goods for some specific 
reason to select goods that are appropriate. If a shoe store’s owner knows that 
a customer need boots to visit the North Pole, she must pick out a pair that 
can withstand Arctic temperatures. 
However, sellers can also limit or even eliminate warranties. One way is by 
employing express warranties because express warranties need to satisfy the 
parol evidence rule. This is a way in which express warranties are unique, 
because most implied terms are immune from the parol evidence rule. 
For example, the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, the implied 
duty to use reasonable efforts, and implied warranties under the UCC are 
written in a kind of invisible ink on the contract. 
Thus, although the parol evidence rule prohibits a litigant from supplementing 
a fully integrated writing with proof of an allegedly omitted term, implied 
terms aren’t omitted at all. They’ve always been part of the contract because 
they are inherent in certain kinds of transactions. 
Conversely, express warranties are different. To establish an express warranty, 
a buyer needs to prove what the seller said or did when the buyer was 
considering making the purchase. Any such evidence might be inadmissible 
if the parties then sign a detailed and formal written sales contract.
Sellers can also disclaim implied warranties. However, the UCC provision 
that governs warranty disclaimers is slippery. This is what it says: 
To exclude or modify the implied warranty of merchantability … the 
language must mention merchantability and in case of a writing must be 
conspicuous, and to exclude or modify any implied warranty of fitness 
the exclusion must be by a writing and conspicuous.
A seller who wants to disclaim the merchantability warranty must use the term 
merchantability, and if the seller wants to disclaim it in writing (as opposed to 
orally), they must make the disclaimer conspicuous. However, a seller who wants 
to disclaim the implied warranty of fitness needs to use a conspicuous writing. 

78
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
As a result, if a seller tells a buyer, “I hereby disclaim the implied warranty that 
the goods function properly and the implied warranty of fitness for a particular 
purpose,” the seller has disclaimed nothing. Although merchantability 
disclaimers can be oral, they need to recite the word merchantability; likewise, 
fitness disclaimers cannot be oral.
Suggested Reading
<
< Baird, Reconstructing Contracts.
<
< Burton, Elements of Contract Interpretation.
<
< Keeton, “Insurance Law Rights at Variance With 
Policy Provisions.”
<
< Zamir, “The Inverted Hierarchy of Contract 
Interpretation and Supplementation.”
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Why single out insurance contracts for special rules of 
interpretation? Have you read your homeowner’s or car 
insurance policies? If you have, did you understand them?
Þ
Þ Subject to the implied covenant of good faith and fair 
dealing, many companies put clauses in their consumer 
and employment contracts that permit them to change the 
terms of these contracts at any time. Do you assent to 
these new terms? Can you assent to the unknown? What 
kind of newly added terms should violate the implied 
covenant? 

Lecture 11
BUILDING CONTRACTS 
AND BREACHING THEM
T
his lecture is about the basic building blocks of contracts and the rules 
for assessing breach of contract. Drafters of contracts work with care, 
but when one is broken, resulting breach-of-contract battles can be 
high-stakes contests of will and wits. They can sometimes make parties act 
hastily, out of anger or frustration, but they do so at their peril. 

80
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
EXPRESS CONDITIONS
The express condition is of the handiest tools in the contract drafter’s utility 
belt. Express conditions say that one or both parties don’t have to perform 
if certain events occur or don’t occur. One example is a force majeure clause, 
which excuses one party from its contractual obligations if unexpected 
events—a flood or an exploding volcano—thwart their ability to perform. 
Express conditions appear on the face of the contract. For example, when 
the parties state that Party A will sell her business to Party B “if the price 
of crude oil is under $60 per barrel,” they have used an express condition to 
insulate one or both of them from having to perform unless the state of the 
world is as they want it.
Courts usually require express conditions to be strictly satisfied. When 
something needs to happen to fulfill a condition, it either happens or it doesn’t. 
There is no room for “close enough.” 
Even though courts are unforgiving when it comes to deciding whether 
conditional events have occurred, they can sometimes overlook the non-
satisfaction of an express condition. For example, the forfeiture doctrine 
allows judges to treat a condition as though it was fulfilled if one of the parties 
will suffer a loss that is disproportionate to the importance of the condition. 
A second doctrine that can nullify the failure of an express condition is waiver. 
For example, suppose you are looking for a place to build a factory. You want 
to buy a particular lot, but it isn’t zoned for industrial development. You enter 
into a deal to purchase the land on the express condition that the zoning 
board approves your application to change the neighborhood’s designation. 
You submit your request, and the board denies it. However, you learn that the 
composition of the board is about to change, and that the new board is likely 
to be much more flexible. Because the purpose of the express condition was 
to protect your interest, you can waive it—that is, voluntarily surrender your 
right to use the non-satisfaction of the condition as an escape hatch. 

81
Lecture 11–Building Contracts and Breaching Them
Yet another doctrine that can excuse the non-fulfillment of an express 
condition is called prevention. When a party doesn’t try to jump through 
the hoops set by the express condition, it can lose its right to insist that the 
condition be fulfilled, because it is effectively preventing the fulfillment. 
PROMISES
In addition to express conditions, another basic building block of contracts is 
the promise. A promise is a commitment. It’s a party’s core obligation under the 
contract. For example, “I agree to sell you 100 bushels of grain” is a promise.
Any breach of promise is a breach of contract. It entitles the non-breaching 
party to sue for damages. This is different than express conditions, which 
are not breached; rather, they are either satisfied or not satisfied. Likewise, 
the non-satisfaction of an express condition only means that one or both 
parties don’t have to perform—not that anyone is liable. 
CONSTRUCTIVE CONDITIONS
Promises are more complicated because of a legal fiction that has persisted 
through the centuries. Judges often say that every promise has a constructive 
condition attached to it. A constructive condition diverges from an express 
condition because it’s implied—this is, not on the face of the agreement. 
Promises are connected to each other through constructive conditions in the 
following sense. When each party makes a promise, it is as if it says to the 
other party: “I promise to perform, but only on the implied condition that 
you also perform. If you don’t perform, then I won’t perform.” 
This is all a confusing way of reaching an intuitive result. When Party 
A flagrantly breaches a contract, Party B can do two things. First, Party B can 
sue Party A for breach of promise. Second, because the constructive condition 
that tacitly connects Party B’s duties to Party A’s duties has not been satisfied, 
Party B can refuse to perform any remaining obligations. Party B can walk 
away from the contract. 

82
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
When a breach is not so bad, the outcome is different. Unlike express 
conditions, which need to be fulfilled exactly as written, constructive 
conditions can be substantially performed, meaning almost fully performed. 
It’s possible to breach a promise in such an insignificant way that it actually 
satisfies the constructive condition that links the parties’ promises. Although 
the non-breaching party can still sue the breacher for damages, the non-
breaching party can’t stop performing. 
JACOB & YOUNGS, INC. V. KENT
Law students almost always encounter constructive conditions in a case called 
Jacob & Youngs, Inc. v. Kent. In 1913, a New York lawyer named George Kent 
decided to build a country house on Long Island. Kent hired the construction 
firm Jacob & Youngs for $77,000. Like most construction contracts, this one 
contained a series of specifications.
One specification stated that all pipe had to be made by a specific manufacturer, 
Reading. Jacob & Youngs examined the first 1,000 feet of pipe that was 
delivered to the building site, and found that it was, indeed, made by Reading. 
Then, it stopped inspecting the pipe deliveries. The rest of the pipe was exactly 
as good as Reading, but it was made by different firms. 
Unfortunately, the project was plagued by delays and cost overruns. In fact, 
it took nearly twice as long as anticipated. Kent, who was disenchanted with 
Jacob & Youngs, moved into the house in June 1914. At that point, he still 
owed the company about $3,500, but Kent didn’t pay. In March 1915, he sent 
a letter to Jacob & Youngs asserting that not all of the pipe had been made by 
Reading and demanding that they replace it. 
Eventually, the parties ended up in court. Kent’s primary argument was that 
Jacob & Youngs had breached its promise to use Reading pipe exclusively and 
thus hadn’t satisfied the constructive condition that was necessary for him to 
finish his own performance. 

83
Lecture 11–Building Contracts and Breaching Them
The New York Court of Appeals, speaking through Justice Cardozo, disagreed. 
The court noted that Jacob & Young’s breach was trivial. For starters, it was 
a violation of an obscure and relatively unimportant portion of a massive 
project. In addition, it was inadvertent. Kent couldn’t withhold the final 
$3,500 payment. 
NON-MATERIAL AND MATERIAL BREACHES
Over the years, courts have refined the rule from Jacob & Youngs and exported 
it to other contexts. When they analyze breached promises, they use the terms 
non-material breach and material breach. A non-material breach has the 
same effect as substantial performance: It’s still a breach of a promise, but it 
satisfies the constructive condition that links the parties’ promises and does 
not authorize the non-breaching party to stop performing. 
In addition, even if a breach is material, it doesn’t necessary entitle the non-
breaching party to disavow the contract. Instead, because it’s sometimes 
possible for the breaching party to cure the breach, courts distinguish between 
a material but partial breach (which may still be cured) and a material and total 
breach (which is so severe that it can’t be cured). A partial breach only allows 
the non-breaching party to suspend performance; a total breach permits the 
non-breaching party to walk away from the contract. 

84
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
ANTICIPATORY REPUDIATION
One way a party can materially and totally breach a contract is to do a terrible 
job performing and then provide no reassurance that they are going to 
correct the problem. Another way to breach final performance is due is by 
anticipatorily repudiating. 
One type of anticipatory repudiation is express. An express anticipatory 
repudiation occurs when a party clearly and unequivocally threatens to do 
something that would be a material and total breach. 
Express anticipatory repudiations can also be retracted. A party can declare 
that it is not going to perform, but then take it back. However, the repudiator 
loses the right to retract when the other party either notifies the repudiator 
that the contract is off or takes some action in reliance on the repudiation. 
A second variety of anticipatory repudiation is implied. An implied repudiation 
occurs when a party makes its own performance impossible. For example, 
suppose a lawyer agrees work for a law firm for one year, beginning on April 
10. On April 9, the lawyer climbs into a sailboat and starts to sail around the 
world. That is an implied anticipatory repudiation.
TAYLOR V. JOHNSTON 
A 1975 California Supreme Court opinion called Taylor v. Johnston involved 
an express repudiation, a retraction, and an implied repudiation. The plaintiff 
and the defendants were in the horseracing business. The plaintiff had two 
mares, Sunday Slippers and Sandy Fork. He wanted to mate them with the 
defendants’ stallion, Fleet Nasrullah. The parties signed a contract for stud 
services to occur in 1966. 
However, in the fall of 1965, the defendants sold Fleet Nasrullah to a third 
party in Kentucky. The defendants wrote to the plaintiff and said, “You’re 
released from your reservations.” 

85
Lecture 11–Building Contracts and Breaching Them
The plaintiff threatened to sue, and so the defendants arranged for the breeding 
to take place in Kentucky. The plaintiff shipped both Sunday Slippers and 
Sandy Fork to Kentucky in January 1966, but both of them were already 
pregnant. They gave birth in the spring and summer of 1966, respectively. 
At this point, they were considered ready for breeding again. The plaintiffs 
made several attempts to book a new session with Fleet Nasrullah, but after 
a few unsuccessful attempts to set a breeding date, the plaintiff bred both 
horses with a different stallion and then sued for breach. 
The California Supreme Court broke down the events this way. First, the 
defendants expressly anticipatorily repudiated when they informed the plaintiff 
in the fall of 1965 that “you’re released from your reservations.” This clearly 
and unequivocally expressed an intent not to honor the contract. 
The state high court noted that, at this point, the plaintiffs could have 
refused to pay the stud fee and sued for damages. Instead, though, the 
plaintiffs insisted on performance. Accordingly, the defendant retracted its 
repudiation by arranging for breeding to take place in Kentucky. This wiped 
the slate clean. 
The court then considered what happened after the pregnant mares arrived 
in Kentucky. The court explained that after the mares gave birth, there was 
a several-month period in which the contract could have been performed. 
The court faulted the defendants for making it difficult for the plaintiff’s mares 
to gain access to Fleet Nasrullah. Nevertheless, the defendants never stated 
that they did not intend to perform, so they had not expressly repudiated. 
Additionally, because performance was technically still possible, they had 
not impliedly repudiated either.

86
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
However, the court observed that matters changed when the plaintiff bred 
both Sunday Slippers and Sandy Fork to other stallions. The mares were 
impregnated, which meant that they could not breed with Fleet Nasrullah 
for the rest of the calendar year. Ironically, it was the plaintiff who had made 
performance impossible. By jumping the gun, he had impliedly repudiated, 
materially and totally breaching the contract, and absolving the defendants 
from liability. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Danzig, The Capability Problem in Contract Law.
<
< Stark, Drafting Contracts. 
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ Why must express conditions be strictly satisfied, while 
promises can only be substantially performed? 
Þ
Þ What are the downsides to the doctrine of substantial 
performance? 

Lecture 12
REMEDIES FOR 
BREACH OF CONTRACT
A 
contract is a promise that a court will enforce in some fashion, so 
remedies for breach of contract are extremely important. They are 
the subject of this lecture. 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE VERSUS MONEY DAMAGES
Many people feel that when a contract is breached, the judge should force the 
defendant to do the very thing that she promised to do. This is a remedy known 
as specific performance. However, courts rarely turn to specific performance 
as a remedy. Instead, the default remedy for breach of contract is money 
damages. Courts only grant specific performance when the defendant has 
breached a contract to sell something truly unique, like land or a rare object.

88
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Specific performance is disfavored because it can be messy. The plaintiff 
and defendant have experienced something akin to a divorce. They were 
once united as contractual partners, but their relationship deteriorated to 
the point where they became litigation adversaries. Specific performance 
requires them to cooperate again. Even worse, it gives the court the thankless 
duty of monitoring their performances. In sum, prevailing breach of contract 
plaintiffs usually receive money.
When it comes to how courts conceptualize and calculate damages for breach 
of contract, the touchstone is a monumental 1936 law-review article called “The 
Reliance Interest in Contract Damages” by Lon Fuller and William Perdue. 
Fuller and Purdue began by arguing that parties who enter into contracts have 
three interests that are worth protecting: the expectation interest, the reliance 
interest, and the restitution interest. 
THE EXPECTATION INTEREST
A plaintiff can ask for what she was going to receive under the contract by 
suing for expectation damages. Expectation damages give the plaintiff the 
benefit of her bargain. They put her in the financial position that she would 
have occupied if the defendant had fully performed. 
Suppose a construction company agrees to build a wall on an owner’s 
property. Before the company orders the materials and begins its work, the 
owner repudiates. The contract price was $100,000, and the construction 
company proves that it would have spent $80,000 in labor and materials 
completing the task—indicating that the remainder was to be its profit. 
To make the construction company whole, a court can order the owner 
to pay the company its lost profit of $20,000. That sum is the amount of 
expectation damages. 
Sometimes, calculating expectation damages is relatively simple. For 
instance, in contracts for the sale of real estate, there are two relevant 
variables: the contract price and the market price of the property at the time 
of the breach. 

89
Lecture 12–Remedies for Breach of Contract
However, the calculation of expectation damages can be more complicated, as 
in the case of Hawkins v. McGee. The plaintiff had a nasty scar on his right palm 
from touching a live electrical wire. The defendant, a surgeon, guaranteed that 
performing a skin graft would give the plaintiff a great hand. Unfortunately, 
the defendant transplanted skin from the plaintiff’s chest, which caused the 
plaintiff’s hand to grow thick hair. 
The trial court instructed the jury to set compensation for the plaintiff, in part, 
for the discomfort he experienced during the surgery. On review, however, the 
New Hampshire Supreme Court held that this was not consistent with the goal 
of expectation damages: putting the plaintiff in the position he would have 
occupied without the breach. The breached promise was to fix the plaintiff’s 
hand, and even a successful operation would have been painful. Instead, the 
court held that the proper measure of damages was the difference in value 
between a “perfect or good hand” and the value of the hairy hand. 
The original trial verdict—which, from the point of view of the court, 
overcompensated the plaintiff—set the value at $3,000. The matter eventually 
settled for $1,400 and the plaintiff’s attorneys’ fees. However, those numbers 
were largely conjured out of thin air. 

90
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Likewise, there can be more than one way to give the plaintiff the benefit 
of her bargain. For example, the case of Jacob & Youngs v. Kent involved 
a construction company accidentally using pipe from a manufacturer that 
was not in the contract, breaching it. Kent could have been awarded the cost 
of completion—the cost of demolition and replacement work—or the cost 
of diminution in value, which is the damage to the structure’s value. In this 
case, the diminution in value was $0, as the pipes installed were functionally 
identical to the pipes specified in the contract. Kent was denied the cost of 
completion.
Another variable that can be crucial in expectation-damages calculations 
is the issue of whether the plaintiff reasonably covers. Imagine that a buyer 
breaches a contract to purchase a car, and the seller finds another buyer for 
the car. The seller has covered—that is, entered into a substitute contract.
The UCC would apply to the hypothetical car-sale contract, since cars are 
tangible and moveable and therefore goods. It allows seller plaintiffs to receive 
expectation damages in the amount of the difference between the contract price 
and the cover price. If the original contract was for $1,000 and the substitute 
contract was for $900, the seller’s expectancy would be $100.
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
Consequential damages are a form of expectation damages that compensate 
the plaintiff for losses stemming from collateral transactions with third parties. 
Plaintiffs are not always entitled to consequential damages. Liberally awarding 
consequential damages could lead to the same kind of endless domino effect, 
exposing defendants to crippling liability.
In 1854, a British decision called Hadley v. Baxendale helped define the limits 
on consequential damages. The plaintiffs owned a mill that was powered by 
a steam engine. One day, the crankshaft—a critical piece of equipment—broke. 
The plaintiffs needed to send the broken shaft to the company that made 
their steam engine in order to repair it. They hired the defendant, a courier, 
to deliver it. 

91
Lecture 12–Remedies for Breach of Contract
However, the courier took several days more to transport the shaft than anyone 
was expecting. During this time, the mill stood idle. The plaintiffs sued the 
defendant for breach of contract. They sought consequential damages: not the 
lost value of decent courier services, whatever that would be, but rather the 
profits they lost because they weren’t able to fire up the mill. 
In a holding that courts continue to cite today, the court held that consequential 
damages can only be recovered in special circumstances. According to the 
court, the test is whether the damages were “in the contemplation of both 
parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of breach.” 
Because there was no evidence that the defendant knew that the plaintiff’s 
mill would be stopped, it was not liable for the plaintiff’s lost profits. 
RELIANCE DAMAGES
Sometimes, plaintiffs do not have expectation damages. That means they will 
fall back on one of the other measures that Lon Fuller and William Purdue 
identified in their canonical 1936 law-review article. One such alternative path 
to recover is known as reliance damages. Reliance damages reimburse plaintiffs 
for out-of-pocket expenses that the defendant’s breach renders worthless. 
Reliance damages come in two forms. One version is essential reliance 
damages. These are costs incurred while performing the plaintiff’s obligations 
under the contract with the defendant. 
For example, suppose a construction company agrees to build a deck for 
a homeowner for $50,000, payable upon completion. After the construction 
company has racked up $5,000 in charges for labor and materials, the 
owner breaches. However, it is unclear how much completing the project 
would have cost, as opposed to what the homeowner had agreed to pay 
the construction company. We cannot calculate expectation damages. 
A builder’s damages are its lost profit, or the contract price minus the total 
cost of construction. 
Here, we know one of the relevant variables—the $50,000 that the 
company was going to get paid—but we do not know the cost of 
completion, so we do not know how much to subtract from that sum. 

92
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Nevertheless, the builder can elect to recover its $5,000 in out-of-pocket 
expenses from the owner. These are essential reliance damages: expenditures 
that flow from the plaintiff’s performance under the contract with 
the defendant. 
The second species of reliance damages is known as incidental reliance. These 
are out-of-pocket amounts that the plaintiff pays to third parties. Imagine that 
Party A agrees to buy a restaurant from Party B for $100,000 on January 15. 
When the big day comes, Party A tells Party B that they have found another 
restaurant they like more and are not going to pay. At that time, the market 
price of the restaurant was $100,000. Party B has no damages stemming from 
the sales price. 
However, suppose Party B does not find another buyer until February 15. 
During the extra month, Party B pays the property’s mortgage, property 
taxes, and utilities. Party B would not have been responsible for those outlays 
if Party A had honored the initial deal and thus recover these incidental 
reliance damages.
RESTITUTION DAMAGES
The final component in Fuller and Perdue’s damages trio is restitution 
damages. Restitution is a cause of action that forces the defendant to pay the 
reasonable value of a benefit that she received from the plaintiff. Restitution 
is also a remedy for breach of contract. 
If a plaintiff wishes, she can decide to sue off the contract and essentially 
pretend that the parties never entered into a binding arrangement. When 
a plaintiff does so, she chooses to abandon expectation and reliance damages. 
Instead, she seeks compensation for the value of the benefit she conferred on 
the defendant. 
For example, consider the construction company that agrees to build a deck 
for the homeowner for $50,000. Suppose the company works for one week, 
incurring $10,000 in costs, when the owner repudiates. Suppose also that the 
company underestimated the project’s difficulty, and so performing would 
cost the full $50,000. 

93
Lecture 12–Remedies for Breach of Contract
The company has no expectation damages, because it would have only broken 
even if it had performed in full. It has $10,000 in essential reliance damages 
because that is how much it has spent building the deck. However, it is entirely 
possible that the fair market value of the work the company has done is higher, 
for instance, $15,000. In that case, the company can disavow the contract and 
simply seek $15,000 to compensate it for the benefit it conferred on the owner. 
Suggested Reading
<
< Fuller and Purdue, “The Reliance Interest in 
Contract Damages.”
<
< Maute, “Peevyhouse v. Garland Coal & Mining 
Co. Revisited.”
<
< Posner, Economic Analysis of Law.
Questions to Consider 
Þ
Þ The default remedy for breach of contract is money 
damages. But do we always enter into contracts because we 
expect a financial benefit? Can you think of agreements 
you’ve formed where it’d be impossible to compensate you 
for what you anticipated to gain? 
Þ
Þ In the United States, each party in a lawsuit is responsible 
for paying his or her own attorneys’ fees. This is known 
as the American rule because other legal systems allow 
the winner to recover the costs of litigating in addition 
to any damages. Does the American rule change your 
opinion about how courts should compensate prevailing 
plaintiffs in breach of contract cases?

94
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baird, Douglas G. Reconstructing Contracts. Cambridge MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2013. 
Baird, Douglas G., and Robert Weisberg. “Rules, Standards, and the Battle of 
the Forms: A Reassessment of § 2-207.” Virginia Law Review 68 (1982): 1217. 
https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles/1035/. 
Ben-Shahar, Omri, and Carl E. Schneider.  More Than You Wanted to Know: 
The Failure of Mandated Disclosure. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
2014.  
Burnham, Scott J. “Why Do Law Students Insist That Article 2 of the Uniform 
Commercial Code Applies Only to Merchants and What Can We Do About 
It?” Brooklyn Law Review 63 (1997): 1271. 
Burton, Stephen J. Elements of Contract Interpretation. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2009. 
Corbin, Arthur L. “Option Contracts.” Yale Law Journal 23 (1914): 641. http://
digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/fss_papers/2902/. 
Cunningham, Lawrence A. Contracts in the Real World: Stories of Popular 
Contracts and Why They Matter. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Currie, Brainerd. “Rose of Aberlone.” Student Law Journal (1965). https://
scholarship.law.duke.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5665&context=facul
ty_scholarship. 
Danzig, Richard. The Capability Problem in Contract Law. New York: 
Foundation Press, 1978.

95
Bibliography
Dawson, John P. “Economic Duress—An Essay in Perspective.” Michigan Law 
Review 45 (1947): 253. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1283644?seq=1#page_
scan_tab_contents. 
Eddy, Cheryl. “This New York Mansion is Legally Haunted.” Io9, Oct. 
31, 2016. https://io9.gizmodo.com/this-new-york-mansion-is-legally-
haunted-1788327098. 
Eisenberg, Melvin Aron. “The Principles of Consideration.” Cornell Law 
Review 67 (1992): 640. https://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=4281&context=clr. 
———. “Third Party Beneficiaries.” Columbia Law Review 92 (1992): 1358. 
https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/facpubs/2014/. 
Fried, Charles. Contract as Promise: A Theory of Contractual Obligation. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2015. 
Fuller, L.L. “Consideration and Form.” Columbia Law Review 41 (1941): 799. 
https://www.scribd.com/doc/138340391/Fuller-Consideration-and-Form. 
Fuller, L.L., and William R. Perdue Jr. “The Reliance Interest in Contract 
Damages.” Yale Law Journal 52 (1936): 52. http://digitalcommons.law.yale.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3841&context=ylj. 
Gilmore, Grant. The Death of Contract. Columbus: The Ohio State University 
Press, 1974. 
Keeton, Robert E. “Keeton, Insurance Law Rights at Variance With Policy 
Provisions.” Harvard Law Review 83 (1970): 961. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/1339729. 
Knapp, Charles L. “Rescuing Reliance: The Perils of Promissory Estoppel.” 
Hastings Law Journal 49 (1998): 1191. https://repository.uchastings.edu/
faculty_scholarship/341/. 

96
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
Kull, Andrew. “Reconsidering Gratuitous Promises.” The Journal 
of Legal Studies 21 (1992): 39. https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/
abs/10.1086/467899. 
———. “Rationalizing Restitution.” California Law Review 83 (1995): 1191. 
https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.
google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=1665&context=californialawreview.  
Lobel, Orly. Talent Wants to Be Free: Why We Should Learn to Love Leaks, 
Raids, and Free Riding. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013. 
Maute, Judith L. “Peevyhouse v. Garland Coal & Mining Co. Revisited: The 
Ballad of Willie and Lucille.” Northwestern University Law Review 89 (1995): 
1341. https://works.bepress.com/judith_maute/27/. 
Posner, Eric A. “The Parol Evidence Rule, the Plain Meaning Rule, and the 
Principles of Contractual Interpretation.” University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 146 (1998): 533. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=3432&context=penn_law_review. 
Posner, Richard A. Economic Analysis of Law. New York: Wolters Kluwer Law 
& Business, 2014. 
Price Mueller, Karin, “Bamboozled: What Happens When a ‘Thirty-Seven-
Fifty’ Bottle of Wine Really Costs $3,750.” NJ.com, Nov. 3, 2014. http://
www.nj.com/business/index.ssf/2014/11/bamboozled_what_happens_
when_a_3750_bottle_of_wine_really_costs_3750.html. 
Radin, Margaret Jane. Boilerplate: The Fine Print, Vanishing Rights, and the 
Rule of Law. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012. 
———. “Market-Inalienability.” Harvard Law Review 100 (1987): 1849. https://
www.jstor.org/stable/1341192?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents. 
Robertson, R. J., Jr. “Electronic Commerce on the Internet and the Statute of 
Frauds.” South Carolina Law Review 49 (1998): 787. https://heinonline.org/
HOL/LandingPage?handle=hein.journals/sclr49&div=39&id=&page=.  

97
Bibliography
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica, and Robert Gebeloff. “Arbitration Everywhere, 
Stacking the Decks of Justice.” The New York Times, Oct. 31, 2015. https://
www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/business/dealbook/arbitration-everywhere-
stacking-the-deck-of-justice.html.
Stark, Tina L. Drafting Contracts: How and Why Lawyers Do What they Do. 
New York: Wolters Kluwer Law & Business, 2014.
Waters, Anthony Jon. “The Property in the Promise: A Study of the Third 
Party Beneficiary Rule.” Harvard Law Review 98 (1985): 1109. https://www.
jstor.org/stable/1340942?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents. 
Wormser, Maurice I. “The True Concepcion of Unilateral Contracts.” Yale Law 
Journal 26 (1916): 133. http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=2523&context=ylj. 
Zamir, Eyal. “The Inverted Hierarchy of Contract Interpretation and 
Supplementation.” Columbia Law Review 97 (1992): 1710. https://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1097642.

98
Law School for Everyone: Contracts
IMAGE CREDITS
Page	
Credit
4	
Anyaberkut/iStock/Getty Images.
7	
gemphotography/iStock/Getty Images.
8	
Dynamic Graphics/Getty Images.
10	
z_wei/iStock/Getty Images.
13	
SPDuffy527/Wikimedia Commons/CC BY-SA 3.0.
14	
Mike Watson Images/Getty Images.
16	
focalmatter/iStock/Getty Images
20	
Industryview/iStock/Getty Images.
22	
Digital image courtesy of the Getty’s Open Content Program.
22	
Wellcome Library, London/CC BY 4.0.
25	
Fizkes/iStock/Getty Images.
28	
Rawpixel/iStock/Getty Images.
30	
Tetmc/Getty Images.
33	
Alashi/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images.
36	
Library of Congress/LC-USZ62-136556/Public domain.
39	
Aslan Alphan/Getty Images.
44	
Skynesher/iStock/Getty Images.
49	
Library of Congress/LC-DIG-pga-04597/Public domain.
52	
Digital image courtesy of the Getty’s Open Content Program.
53	
Karolina Madej/iStock/Getty Images.
53	
Karolina Madej/iStock/Getty Images.
55	
Sturti/Getty Images.
56	
Lostinbids/Getty Images.
58	
Tom Merton/Getty Images.
61	
Hero Images/Getty Images.
63	
Fizkes/iStock/Getty Images.
66	
Bernie_photo/iStock/Getty Images.
70	
Maskot/Getty Images.
72	
Cecilie_Arcurs/Getty Images.
74	
nd3000/iStock/Getty Images.
79	
PeopleImages/Getty Images.
83	
Andriano_cz/iStock/Getty Images.
87	
Pattanaphong Khuankaew/iStock/Getty Images.
89	
Chris Ryan/Getty Images.
Icons 	
ihorzigor/iStock/Getty Images.

