Paving Stones 
 
 
In this tutorial we explain how to lay a paving block path. For added style and ease 
we have replaced traditional paving stone concrete edging with 125x125 senton 
posts. This method of edging not only creates a great look, but also makes the 
project easier for those attempting it. We are using common solid concrete 
cobblestone paving blocks 230mm long x 190mm wide x 60mm thick. These pavers 
come in a variety of colours for individual tastes. Other materials required include 
basecourse metal (gap 20) and sand. All materials are ready avaliable in the 
Auckland area. This project is suitable for moderate to firm ground. If your ground is 
soft, you will need to excavate deeper and replace with basecourse metal.  
 
 
 
Step 1: 
    
Excavations    Dig out the proposed pathway to a depth of 150mm 
below finished path height (usually existing ground level) and the 
required path width. Try to plan the width of the path so that full pavers 
can be placed without the need for cutting. When working out the overall 
path width, allow an extra 3mm between each paver (spacings that allow 
sand to penetrate around the pavers). Some pavers have space nibs 
(packers) already on them.  
Step 2: 
    
Putting down the edging.    Lay a bed of sand along each side of the 
path excavation approximately 40mm thick and about 200mm wide.  
Lay the edge boards (125x125 senton posts) on top of the sand and 
tamp down into place until the top of the edge boards are at the required 
path finished height. Retain them in place with stakes nailed to the 
outside and trim the stakes off 20mm below the top of the edging board. 
(see drawing below)  

 
 
Step 3: 
    
Base course     Add a layer of GAP 20 base course in between the 
edging boards. (GAP 20 is a mixture of rock. The abbreviation, GAP 20, 
General All Passing, means the metal is graded to one certain size, 
20mm in this case, and everything below this size is included in the 
product).  
Add and compact the base course with a mechanical plate vibrator until 
the finished height is 85mm down from the top of the edge boards. At the 
same time compact the soil against the outside of the edge boards thus 
ensuring they stay in place parellel.  
You can hire a plate vibrator from your local hire centre.  
Step 4: 
    
Bedding sand     Add a layer of bedding or paving sand (approximately 
35mm) and level with a screeding board so the finished height is 50mm 
down from the top of the edge boards.  
Step 5: 
    
Laying the paving stones     Commence laying the pavers from one 
end of the path. (work uphill). Space the pavers approx 3 mm to allow 
filling sand to penetrate around the pavers. Kneel on a board across the 
area you have already laid. Use full pavers only, go back later and fill in 
with the cut ones.  
Step 6: 
    
Compacting and putting in joint sand The pavers should now be, prior 
to compacting, 10mm above required finished height. Compact the 
pavers consistantly with the plate vibrator. The final step is to brush 
jointing or filling sand over the surface. This fills the joints and binds the 
pavers together. Vibrate again.  
 
 
note 1:  Purchase all the pavers from the same place and batch to ensure 
consistancy of colour.  
note 2:  Any paving against buildings should be at least 150mm below concrete 
floor level or below ground level under timber floors. The paving should slope away 
from the building.  
 
Materials 
MATERIALS 
INFORMATION 
125x125 senton 
posts, h5 treated 
comes in various lengths. Sold at most timber 
merchants. 

Cobblestone paving 
blocks. 230mm x 
190mm x 60mm thick 
A common paver. Comes in a variety of colors. 
Requires 23 pavers per sq meter. 
Paving / filling sand 
Sold loose in increments of quater cubic metre. 
or in handy bags (more expensive). One cubic 
metre would be enough to do a path 1m wide x 
30m long or 30 sq metres  
GAP 20 Base course 
GAP 20, General All Passing, is a mixture of 
crushed rock graded to 20mm and everything 
below. One cubic metre would be enough to do 
a path 1m wide x 12m long or 12 sq metres  
 
 
 

