Pebble Path 
 
In this project we are going to show you how to make a pebble path. We are going 
to use 100x75 h4 treated tanalised posts for the edgings, gap 20 basecourse and a 
choice of a number of topings (pebbles, bark, shell, chip etc.) A pebble path is 
easier and cheaper to construct than a paving stone path and irregular and curved 
shapes offer no problem although weeds can be a nuisance and regular raking can 
sometimes be necessary. For this project we are assuming the ground is moderate 
to firm, if not, soft ground will need to be excavated deeper and replaced by 
basecourse metal.  
Read at bottom of page for material list and other notes.  
 
 
 
Step 1: 
    
Excavations     Dig out the proposed pathway to a depth of 75mm below 
finished path height (usually existing ground level) and the required path 
width.  
Step 2: 
    
Putting down the edging.     Lay the edge boards (100x75 sawn h4 
treared posts) into place so the top of the edge boards are at the 
required path finished height. Retain them in place with stakes nailed to 
the outside and trim the stakes off 20mm below the top of the edging 
board. (see drawing below)  

 
 
Step 3: 
    
Base course     Add a layer of GAP 20 base course in between the 
edging boards. (GAP 20 is a mixture of rock. The abbreviation, GAP 20, 
General All Passing, means the metal is graded to one certain size, 
20mm in this case, and everything below this size is included in the 
product). Add and compact the base course with a mechanical plate 
vibrator until the finished height is 30mm down from the top of the edge 
boards. At the same time compact the soil against the outside of the 
edge boards thus ensuring they stay in place parellel. You can hire a 
plate vibrator from your local hire centre.  
Step 4: 
    
Lay pebbles Lay pebbles on top of the base course and flush with the 
top of the edge boards. Other preferences to pebbles might be garden 
bark, gravel, shells, white chip etc.  
 
 
Material List 
MATERIALS 
INFORMATION 
100x75 sawn 
h4 treated 
Normally used as standard fence posts. Come in lengths of 
2400mm 
GAP 20 Base 
course 
GAP 20, General All Passing, is a mixture of crushed rock 
graded to 20mm and everything below. One cubic metre would 
be enough to do a path 1m wide x 20m long or 20 sq metres  
river pebbles 
Different sizes. One cubic metre would be enough to do a path 
1m wide x 30m long or 30 sq metres  
garden bark 
An alternative to pebbles. One cubic metre would be enough to 
do a path 1m wide x 30m long or 30 sq metres  
Shells 
An alternative to pebbles. Different sizes. One cubic metre 
would be enough to do a path 1m wide x 30m long or 30 sq 
metres  
McCallum chip 
An alternative to pebbles. One cubic metre would be enough to 
do a path 1m wide x 30m long or 30 sq metres  
White chip 
(limestone) 
An alternative to pebbles. One cubic metre would be enough to 
do a path 1m wide x 30m long or 30 sq metres  
 
 
 

