Lay a Laminate Floor 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
To complete this project, you'll need accurate measuring and
cutting skills. 
  
Floormaster laminate floors are precision-made, making 
them easy to work with. 
  
 
 
Always wear a face mask and goggles when cutting laminate 
flooring. Ensure children and animals are out of the way. 
  
 
 
Laminate flooring can transform any room with its warmth 
and beauty. Simply choose from our range of LOC or Tongue 
and Groove laminate flooring and give your room a facelift 
by following these step by step instructions 
 
2  - How Much Will I Need? 
 
How much underlay will I need?  
 
To work out the amount of underlay needed for your floor, 
measure the length and width of the room. Multiply the two 
numbers together - this figure will tell you how many square 
metres the underlay needs to cover. 
 
 
For example: if your room is 4 metres long and 3 
metres wide, 4 x 3 =12 square metres. You will need 
to buy underlay to cover 12 square metres of flooring. 
 
 
Never be tempted to buy less than you really need and allow
an extra 5% for cutting. 
 
 
 
How much laminate flooring will I need?  
 
Remembering the length and width of your room, use the 
tables below to calculate the number of packs of laminate 
flooring you will need.  
 
 
For example, if your room is 6 metres long and 5 
metres wide and you have chosen to use Floormaster 
900 LOC laminate flooring, you will need to buy 15 
packs of flooring to cover the floor. 

 
 
Floormaster 900 LOC  
LOC laminate flooring 
requiring no adhesive. 
 
 
 
• 
Can be fitted anywhere except bathrooms and 
humid areas  
• 
Resistant against cigarette burns, fading, stains, 
impact and scratching  
• 
Available in wood effects and coloured  
 
 
Floormaster 1600 LOC  
LOC laminate flooring 
requiring no adhesive. 
 
 
 
• 
Water resistant, so can be fitted anywhere 
including bathrooms  
• 
Resistant against cigarette burns, fading, stains, 
impact and scratching  
• 
Available in wood effects and coloured  
 
 
Floormaster Tile LOC  
LOC laminate flooring 
requiring no adhesive. 
 
 
 
• 
Water resistant, so can be fitted anywhere 

including bathrooms  
• 
Resistant against cigarette burns, fading, stains, 
impact and scratching  
• 
Ceramic tile effect, available in a range of colours  
 
 
 
Extras  
 
You should not fit your laminate floor right to the edge of the
room. You will need to allow a 10mm gap for it to contract 
and expand with the room temperature. Use fitting wedges 
(shaped pieces of plastic), included in the fitting kits, to 
create this 10mm expansion gap. When the floor has been 
laid, the wedges are removed and the gaps can be covered 
with skirting or laminate flooring edging trim for a 
professional looking finish.  
 
 
Measure round the perimeter of the room (or add the length 
and width measurements of your room together and multiply
by two) to find the length of beading needed to cover the 
extension gap. 
 
3  - Laminate Flooring Basics 
Laminate flooring is laid as a loose, 'floating' floor. The 
boards are not nailed to the floor but simply joined to each 
other without the need for nails or screws. This means 
laminate flooring can be laid on top of most surfaces, 
including timber or concrete, as long as it's dry, clean, and 
level. 
 
 
 
Choose carefully  
 
In bathrooms or other areas of high humidity, ensure you 
select a suitable grade of flooring. The Floormaster 1600 
LOC and Floormaster Tile LOC ranges are water resistant 
and suitable for bathrooms where the flooring may get wet.  
 
 
And remember, inappropriate floor covering is always a false 
economy, especially where there is a lot of foot traffic or 
other wear and tear. 
 
 
 
Condition the laminate flooring  
 
Before you lay your laminate flooring, it must be conditioned 
to the room's atmosphere. If this is not done it could warp 
(become twisted and bent out of shape).  
 
To condition the flooring:  
• 
Make sure it's kept in its original packaging  

• 
Put it in the room where the floor will be laid (ideal 
temperature of 18oC to 20oC)  
• 
Lie the pack horizontally  
• 
Leave the flooring in this position for at least 48 
hours  
 
4  - Sub-Floor Preparation 
The floor you intend to lay the laminate flooring on top of 
must be dry, firm and level. A floor is considered level if the 
deviation in height is less than 1mm over a distance of 1 
linear metre. Sheets of fibre-board can be used to level 
minor deviations and they have additional acoustic and 
thermal properties. Deviations above this must be levelled 
out before laying the new floor. The following sections advise
how this should be done, depending on the type of sub-floor 
you have. 
 
 
 
Wooden sub-floor preparation  
 
• 
Remove any protruding nails or tacks to ensure you 
have a smooth surface.  
• 
If you are laying your laminate flooring on an upper 
floor, re-fix any loose boards using screws rather 
than nails as hammering might damage the ceiling 
plaster below.  
• 
Use a detector to identify if there is any underlying 
pipework or electricity cables so that you can avoid 
these areas when driving in nails or screws.  
• 
Smooth any high spots in the floor using a plane, 
and fill hollow patches with levelling compound 
(sometimes called screed) to make the floor level.  
 
 
 
Concrete sub-floor preparation  
 
Some concrete sub-floors have raised 'high' spots of 
concrete that can be chipped away with a bolster, but the 
easiest way to achieve a smooth surface is with levelling 
compound (screed). Simply mix this in a bucket with water, 
then pour and spread with a trowel. It will then set to a level 
finish.  
 
We recommend that newly laid concrete or screed be 
allowed to dry at a rate of 1mm per day prior to fitting 
laminate flooring, i.e. 50mm screed = 50 days. 
 
 
 
Damp-proof membrane  
 

A damp-proof membrane should be fitted to stop any 
moisture from damaging the new boards. This is in addition 
to a damp course which may already be present in the sub-
floor. The following sub-floors require a damp proof 
membrane of 0.2mm thick:  
• 
concrete  
• 
vinyl tiles  
• 
asphalt  
• 
quarry tiles  
 
 
 
Underlay  
 
Once you are sure the sub-floor is 
clean, dry and level, you will need to 
install underlay prior to laying your 
laminate flooring. There are three 
types of underlay available:  
 
 
• 
Floormaster Laminate Flooring Underlay - can be 
used with all laminate floors  
• 
Wood Fibre Underlay - has extra acoustic and 
thermal properties  
• 
Combilay - laminate floor underlay and damp 
proofing all in one  
 
 
 
Doors  
 
Check that your doors will clear the new floor. Place a board 
of the laminate flooring you have chosen to lay, together 
with any underlay you are using, on top of your sub-floor 
and mark off how much of the door (if any) needs to be 
planed away. 
 
 
While you have easy access to your sub-floor, carry 
out any plumbing tasks or electrical installations you 
have planned. 
 
 
 
Cutting laminate flooring  
 
You will need to cut your laminate flooring to fit the shape of 
your room, remembering to leave space for items such as 
pipework.  

 
 
Use a power circular saw with a carbide toothed blade and 
cut from the non-decorative underside of the boards to avoid
chipping. Alternatively, use a hand saw and cut from the top 
of the boards. Ensure you cut the planks carefully - they are 
strong and durable but may chip during cutting if care is not 
taken.  
 
5  - Laying a LOC laminate floor 
LOC laminate flooring simply 'locs' together, so no adhesive 
is required. It is quick and easy to install and can be re-laid 
up to six times - but remember that care should always be 
taken when doing this. 
 
 
 
Choose the direction  
 
Most manufacturers recommend 
flooring is laid lengthways, along the 
room, running the boards towards the 
window if there is one. If you're laying
over floorboards, lay the laminate
boards at 90
 
o (right angles) across 
them to reinforce the joints (1). 
 
 
 
Laying the first row  
 
Lay the first board with the Groove o
small tongue against the wall. Two 
spacers should be used to allow for 
the 10mm expansion gap between t
boards and the wall (2).  
Check alignment and squaring.  
Lay the next board against the short 
side and fix into place. Once fixed be 
very careful if separating the joints a
this may result in damage. 
r 
he 
s 
 
 
 
The end of the row  
 
To measure the correct length of 
board to use at the end of a row 
(allowing for the 10mm gap), place 
the final board next to the existing 
flooring with the tongues facing each 
other. The groove end should be 
pushed up to the spacers against the 
wall (3).  
Cut the required length and turn the 
board so that the groove and tongue are together. 
 
 

 
Fitting the boards
Fitting the boards  
 
Check that the first row is positioned 
correctly and the spacers are in the 
right place.  
Insert the tongue of the first board at 
an angle to 'loc' the boards firmly 
together (4). 
 
 
 
Starting a new row  
 
When starting to lay a new row of 
flooring, make sure that the first 
piece you are going to lay is at least 
30cm in length.  
Remember to stagger the joints 
(creating a 'brick wall' effect) when 
laying the boards (5) and tap them 
together using a tapping block - the 
long side first, followed by the short 
side. 
 
 
 
The final row  
 
When you come to lay the last row, 
place a loose board on top of the 
previously laid row, then place 
another board on top of this with the 
tongue touching the wall.  
Mark the board underneath so that it 
shows the required width (6) and cut 
along this line before fitting it.  
 
 
 
Pipes  
 
If you need to fit your flooring a
pipes, start by measuring the 
diameter of the pipe then drill a hole, 
20mm larger than the pipe diameter, 
in the laminate board. Saw a section 
out of the board which goes through 
the hole (7) so that it can be laid 
around the pipe and replace the sawn 
out section and glue in to place. 
round 
 
 
 
Mouldings and skirtings  
 

You may need to make minor 
adjustments to door mouldings and 
skirtings to ensure your new flooring 
fits comfortably.  
Place a piece of the flooring face d
on to any underlay you are using a
saw the moulding above this board a
the base (8). 
Fit the floorboard under the m
remembering to leave a 10mm expansion gap. 
own 
nd 
t 
oulding, 
 
 
 
Finishing  
 
When you have laid your floor, remove the fitting wedges. If 
you are using floor edging to hide the expansion gaps, pin or
glue it to the wall or skirting board (not the floor). Use a nail 
punch to drive the pin heads below the surface. Cover holes 
made for pipes with pipe covers and glue into place. 
 
 
To restore your floor's shine, go over the surface with a 
broom or vacuum cleaner (with the brushes down). To add 
extra shine to your newly installed floor, use a laminate floor
cleaner. 
 
 
Laminate flooring repair kits are available should your new 
floor suffer any damage. Please refer to the product 
instructions for advice on ongoing care and maintenance. 
 
 
If you require additional advice on fitting a laminate floor, 
please contact the Floormaster Helpdesk on 01276 410200. 
 

