Laying a Deck Straight 
A method of laying decking straight 
 
 
Assuming the joists are fixed in place. If not go to How to Build a Deck  
 
This is an ideal method of how to lay decking straight and is most suitable for extra long 
decks. It involves 'pinging' a chalkline where every third decking board is to go, giving a 
perfectly straight line of where to fix that decking board to.  
 
Step (1) Along the two end joists, mark the outside edge of every third decking board. Start 
out from the building the deck is attatched to. eg: If a decking board is 90mm wide (a 
standard deck board usually is) plus a gap of 5mm, then three decking boards 
including the gap would equal 285mm. Therefore mark along the two end joists, out 
from the building, increments of 285mm. See fig.1  
 
 
 
Step (2) Mark a straight line, using a chalkline, from one end joist to the other end joist, from 
A to A, B to B, C to C etc. See fig 2  
 
 
 
Step (3) Lay and nail every third row of decking board on the building side of the chalklines. 
See fig.3. Make sure any necessary joins are made on joists. Let the decking 
overhang the end joists.  
 

What's a chalkline?  
A chalkline is a builders stringline (a piece of string) saturated with powdered chalk, 
usually coloured. The line is held taut at two points and then 'pinged' (in a bow and 
arrow type motion). The chalk flicks on to the timber or material that the chalkline is 
'pinged' against and leaves a perfectly straight line. Chalklines can be purchased 
from any building supplier and are relatively inexpensive.  
 
Step (4) Lay the intermediate deck boards inbetween the fixed deck boards and make the 
gaps even, using wedges to adjust where needed. This is done by eye. Nail the 
deck boards to the joists. Use 60mm galvanised jolts for kwila and 75mm galvanised 
jolts for 35mm thick pine. The kwila should be drilled before nailing to avoid splitting. 
Ensure any joins are staggereg between rows (no two joins should be next to each 
other). see fig.4  
Let the decking overhang both end joists while laying, and then trim them flush with 
the outside of the end joists.  
 
 
Step (5) Cut the joist ends vertical and flush with the outside edge of the last decking board. 
Nail the boundary joist around the perimeter of the deck making sure the top of the 
boundary joist is is flush with the top of the decking. See diagram below.  
 
 

