L aying Stepping Stones  
 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
  
Introduction 
Do you need a simple, yet attractive way to move about your yard or garden? Stepping stones create a very 
natural looking walkway through a garden or to the front door of your home. There are a multitude of materials 
that can be used as stepping stones, everything from large flat field stones that you have unearthed from your 
gardens to flag stone or the manufactured stepping stones found at the local garden shop. These represent 
only a few of the choices that you have available. 
  
 
  
 
  • Beginner - 4 to 6 hours 
  • Intermediate - 3 to 5 hours 
  • Advanced - 3 to 4 hours 
  
Make sure to wear safety goggles and gloves when cutting stones for this project. 
  
Your stones should be at least 2 inches thick, as thinner stones may crack. 
  
  
 
 
STEPS 
 
1.  
Begin by marking your path using 2 lengths of rope or 2 garden hoses. 
You should consider the path that you would like to take and consider 
laying the hoses out straight or in a curved fashion.  

2.  
Position the stones on the ground so that you can adjust the pattern and 
distance between stones before digging the holes. Keep in mind that a 
natural stride is about 18 inches so you will want to place the stones so 
that each stone is 18 inches from the center of the next.  
3.  
Leave the stones in place and dig straight down with the trowel or flat 
spaded shovel to outline each stone in the earth below each. 
4.  
Then remove the stone and dig out the sod and earth within the outline so
that the stone will sit about an inch above the ground once you have 
poured an inch of sand into the hole. You will need to consider the 
thickness of each stone in this step. 
5.  
Pour about an inch of sand into the hole and level the bottom of the hole, 
so that the stone will lay flat.  
6.  
Place the stone into the hole.  

7.  
Use the level to make sure the stone is relatively level. Push on the stone 
to make sure it does not rock. You can add or remove sand to 
accommodate for oddly shaped stones at this point.  
8.  
Once the stone is level, fill in the area around the stone with soil and 
tamp it firmly. 
9.  
Make sure that the stones are about the same height by laying a board 
across a few stones and using the level. 
10.  Once you have completed the walk sweep each stone so that each is 
clean. 
11.  Over time you will find that the stones will settle. You can adjust the 
height or the level of the stones by simply lifting the stone and filling in 
the hole with some sand or soil.  
  
 
 
SHOP LIST 
 
 

Materials List  
Your choice of stepping stones  
Sand  
   
Tools List  
Tape measure 
2 lengths of rope or garden hose 
Trowel or narrow flat spaded shovel 
Level 
5  foot 2x4  
   
 

