
Praise for Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
“UPSers believe in the principle that your mission throughout your career is to 
leave the company in a better state than when you arrived. Ron Wallace did 
that at UPS. If you follow Ron’s leadership insights in this book, you too will 
leave your company in a better state.”
—Scott Davis, retired Chairman and CEO, United Parcel Service, 2008–2014
“Ron Wallace writes about the values and leadership that helped establish a 
culture so that UPSers around the world understand that we are all part of 
something bigger than ourselves.”
—Mike Eskew, retired Chairman and CEO, United Parcel Service, 2002–2007
“Terriﬁ c job by Ron Wallace in capturing the leadership characteristics and bed-
rock principles of UPS and the people of UPS. Many of us can relate to Ron’s 
examples because we have been there ourselves.”
—Jim Kelly, retired Chairman and CEO, United Parcel Service, 1997–2001
“Early in your career, in midcareer, or sitting on top, read this book if you want 
to be a more effective leader. It draws on the thoughts and principles of past 
UPS leaders as well as the experience of author Ron Wallace, whose strong 
business credentials cannot be denied.”
—Kent C. “Oz” Nelson, retired Chairman and CEO, United Parcel Service, 
1989–1996
“Ron Wallace has been there, done that, and now we have the book to prove 
it. Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver has more practical wisdom than a 
Harvard MBA or an entire library of business texts. Wallace has produced a 
paint-by-numbers set for the aspiring executive. As a bonus, it is a practical 
bible on how to live a more fulﬁ lling life.”
—The Honorable Frank McKenna, former Canadian ambassador to the United 
States and former Premier of New Brunswick
“You can never read enough about inspirational life stories, just as you can 
never read enough about great leadership. This book has both!”
—Herman Cain, President and CEO, THE New Voice, Inc., and former Republican 
presidential candidate
“No matter what industry or ﬁ eld you work in, Leadership Lessons from a UPS 
Driver will change your approach to leadership in a most signiﬁ cant way. Ron’s 
pragmatic and highly effective leadership skills will help you take your game to 
a completely new level. You’ll achieve remarkable results if you use the easy-
to-follow steps outlined in this book. I guarantee it.”
—Kent G. Callahan, President and CEO, Investments & Retirement Division, 
Transamerica

“The powerful way Ron’s personal experiences have been interwoven with inspir-
ing and profound leadership truths is brilliant. I’m a better author and consultant 
from reading this book—I guarantee you will be a better leader! Saddle up and 
get ready for a great ride!”
—Chip R. Bell, author of The 9½ Principles of Innovative Service
“When someone has been a key leader for one of the world’s most respected 
organizations, and it has over 400,000 employees, and he writes a book about 
the lessons he learned, it should be a must-read. UPS is the company, Ron 
Wallace is the man, and Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver is the book. 
Thanks, Ron, for sharing your wisdom with the world!”
—Mark Miller, Vice President, Leadership Development, Chick-ﬁ l-A, Inc., and 
coauthor of the international bestseller The Secret
“Reading a book by a man who started at the bottom and worked his way up, as 
Ron did, interests me. A workhorse myself, I feel a strong kinship with him. He 
makes it clear that his book is for us workhorses. If you aspire to be effective, this 
book is for you. It is not for show horses. No matter your level of responsibility 
within your organization, his advice is applicable. If you are prepared to learn, 
you have found a good teacher.”
—Jimmy Collins, retired President and COO, Chick-ﬁ l-A, Inc., and author of 
Creative Followership
“For decades, Ron Wallace displayed unique leadership abilities at UPS. This 
would ultimately lead him to being responsible for thousands of employees 
who had to get things done in complex situations every day. Whether you’re 
a beginning or an experienced leader, Ron’s book, Leadership Lessons from a 
UPS Driver, can change your life as well as the life of your organization. It’s a 
leadership must-read.”
—Mark Levy, author of Accidental Genius
“Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver is a must-read for leaders at all levels 
as well as those who aspire to be leaders. The proven principles that worked 
for Ron Wallace in his exemplary career are detailed in a very practical manner. 
Ron’s stories bring his leadership principles to life. Don’t miss this opportunity 
to learn from an outstanding leader as you pursue a career of excellence.”
—John R. Patterson, innovative service consultant and speaker and coauthor of 
Wired and Dangerous
“Finally, a book that hits the heart of doing what’s right. A straightforward, no-
holds-barred approach to leadership principles. A refreshing wake-up call for 
anyone leading others.”
—Emily Thomas Kendrick, President and CEO, Arrow Exterminators, Inc.

Leadership Lessons
from a UPS Driver

This page intentionally left blank 

LEADERSHIP
LESSONS
— from a — 
UPS DRIVER
delivering a culture of we, not me
RON WALLACE
former delivery driver and president, 
ups international

Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Copyright © 2016 by Number One Group, LLC
UPS, the UPS brand mark, and the color brown are trademarks of United Parcel
Service of America, Inc., and are used with the permission of the owner.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other elec-
tronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other
noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the
publisher, addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
1333 Broadway, Suite 1000
Oakland, CA 94612-1921
Tel: (510) 817-2277, Fax: (510) 817-2278
www.bkconnection.com
Ordering information for print editions
Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by corporations,
associations, and others. For details, contact the “Special Sales Department” at the
Berrett-Koehler address above.
Individual sales. Berrett-Koehler publications are available through most bookstores.
They can also be ordered directly from Berrett-Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax:
(802) 864-7626; www.bkconnection.com
Orders for college textbook/course adoption use. Please contact Berrett-Koehler:
Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626.
Orders by U.S. trade bookstores and wholesalers. Please contact Ingram Publisher
Services, Tel: (800) 509-4887; Fax: (800) 838-1149; E-mail:  customer
.service@ingram publisher services .com; or visit  www .ingram publisher services .com/
Ordering for details about electronic ordering.
Berrett-Koehler and the BK logo are registered trademarks of Berrett-Koehler
Publishers, Inc.
First Edition
Hardcover print edition ISBN 978-1-62656-688-0
PDF e-book ISBN 978-1-62656-689-7
IDPF e-book ISBN 978-1-62656-690-3
2016-1
Cover/Jacket designer: Radosław Krawczyk

Dedicated to UPS  people around the world.
Words could never express what I feel for my many 
colleagues, mentors, and friends from UPS with whom 
I’ve had the privilege to serve over the years, and which 
ultimately led to the writing of this book.

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
Contents
 
Introduction 
1
chapter 1 
Delivering a Culture 
5
chapter 2 
Building a Successful Team 
16
chapter 3 
Divine Intervention 
27
chapter 4 
Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents 
36
chapter 5 
Targeting the Most Critical Information 
44
chapter 6 
Cultivating the X  Factor 
55
chapter 7 
Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
67
chapter 8 
Fostering Positive Interactions 
78
chapter 9 
Moving Forward 
91
chapter 10 Prepare for Places Unexpected 
105
chapter 11 Signed, Sealed, and Delivered 
118
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams 
125
Endnotes 
133
The “We” (It’s Not Just Me!) 
135
Acknowl edgments 
137
Index 
139
About the Author 
145

This page intentionally left blank 

Leadership Lessons
from a UPS Driver

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Introduction
T
his book is about delivering. It’s what UPS does  every day of 
the week around the world.1 Our friendly  drivers in their 
sharp brown uniforms are the front line of our business. I  can’t 
tell you how many times I’ve heard  people say that they love their 
UPS  drivers and how much they look forward to receiving the 
packages the  drivers deliver each day. The entire com pany— from 
the part- time employees to the chairman of the board— dedicates 
a tremendous amount of time and eff ort to support the endgame: 
the driver delivering the package.
Founded in 1907 and thriving more than ever, UPS is a very 
large  family with a unique business culture. I am certain this dis-
tinctive culture is the reason for the com pany’s remarkable suc-
cess and is what keeps us in the number one spot for our industry 
even  today.
I am proud to say that I was a UPS driver. Over the years, I 
worked my way up the ladder and eventually became president 
of UPS International, where I was responsible for UPS’s opera-
tions in more than 220 countries and territories— directing thou-
sands of managers at all levels. At diff  er ent times, I served as 
chairperson or cochairperson of 33 boards of directors of highly 
successful companies across the globe. I was also one of a hand-
ful of  people on the corporate management committee, respon-
sible for the day- to- day operations of UPS and our more than 
435,000 employees.

2 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Leadership Matters
If I’ve learned anything during the long course of my life in busi-
ness, it’s this: leadership and a values- based culture  matter. 
They are the key components that set  great organizations apart 
from the pack. As the president of UPS International, I worked 
alongside many types of leaders from around the world, and I 
learned impor tant lessons in leadership from each of them. The 
 great ones, the less successful ones, and  those who failed all 
taught me something.  Whether they  were in charge of small com-
panies or international conglomerates, I witnessed ﬁ rsthand 
what they did right and what they did wrong. I took to heart what 
 those experiences taught me.
Reading a lot of theory is not why I buy books. I want facts, true sto-
ries, and sharp insights on leadership. To me, the most encouraging 
moments in life do not  involve overly complicated, untested 
ideas. Rather, they are 
natu ral, timeless, and 
orderly 
progressions 
marked by accountabil-
ity. Leadership is not 
rocket science. To build 
a high- performance team, use  simple principles within a basic 
structure that every one can easily understand. 
I have certainly made more than my share of mistakes through 
the years, and I’d like you to be the beneﬁ ciary of what I’ve learned 
from them. I hope that the lessons in this book  will keep you 
from stepping on some of  those same land mines and help propel 
you further and faster  toward the attainment of your goals. 
If  you’ve committed to venturing into the realm of leadership, 
you should know up front that your journey  will take you down 
a winding road of small advances, painful setbacks, and even 
bigger victories.
To build a high- performance team, 
use  simple principles within a 
basic structure that every one can 
easily understand.

Introduction 
3
The fact of the  matter is that I learned the most impor tant 
leadership lessons from  people within my own com pany, UPS. 
As I discovered, a  great  recipe always means that certain ingre-
dients simply cannot be substituted or left out.
What Brown Did for Me
One of the biggest things Brown did for me (UPS is aff ection-
ately known as “Brown,”  after the Pullman-brown paint color of 
the com pany’s vehicles) was to give me a PhD in teamwork. The 
values- driven culture at UPS provided me with both a platform 
and a regimen for personal growth. It consistently stretched and 
strengthened my development as a leader. I knew that I’d arrived 
at UPS whenever I’d hear someone say, “You bleed Brown.” Be-
lieve me, that’s high praise.
It is the dedicated  people who made the com pany successful, 
day in and day out, in the trenches, and often  under some of the 
most adverse business and po liti cal conditions in the world. 
 These hardworking men and  women deserve the credit for the 
success we achieved.
UPS is a no- nonsense, no- frills com pany. Our objective  today is 
the same as it was when the com pany was started: to provide the 
best pos si ble ser vice at the lowest pos si ble rates. The UPS men-
tality is to be thrifty and keep an eye on the bottom line. We 
know it’s the  little things that make a big diff erence— like turn-
ing off  the lights when we leave a room to reduce energy costs.
The UPS culture of treating one another as  family has served 
us very well over the years. When leaders look at their team 
members in this light, the importance of using their inﬂ uence 
to serve  those with whom they work comes into sharp focus. 
Priorities turn into sincere concern for the well- being of  others 
and foster the desire to motivate every one to bring his or her 

4 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
very best to work each day, helping the organ ization to reach its 
full potential.
Unfortunately, many  people promoted to leadership positions 
 don’t know where to begin, how to ﬁ ght through the  middle, or 
how to ﬁ nish strong. Novices, and even some veterans, often lack 
an understanding of what it takes to be a leader. Perhaps you fall 
into this group and ﬁ rmly believe you are capable of leading 
 others, but  you’re not quite sure how to go about it. You begin to 
ask yourself questions like: How do I inﬂ uence  others? Why do some 
leaders seem to soar, while  others barely get off  the ground? How do I get 
started and maintain an upward trajectory that  will lead to professional 
and personal growth?
This book has the answers. The leadership style described in 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver is  simple, it’s direct, and it 
works. It’s from the front line and reﬂ ects the values  those of us 
in the UPS  family hold dear. The straightforward and easy- to- 
understand lessons I present  will enable you to get on your feet 
and then  ride out the inevitable storms.
Just as the laws of physics describe the universe around us, 
 there are core principles that give shape to the leadership world. 
If you adhere to them, they  will lead you to the success you de-
sire. And although the core values that guide you should remain 
true and unchanging— your North Star— there are always new 
things to be learned.
At the end of this book, you  will ﬁ nd a study guide that you 
and your team can use to dive deeper into the key points pre-
sented in each chapter. Together, you  will discover ways to get 
better at “delivering” what you do.

5
chapter 1
Delivering a Culture
From $100 Startup to Global Com pany
I began my UPS  career as a package delivery driver in northern 
Idaho and served in that position for six years before being 
promoted to supervisor. Each time I assumed a higher level of 
responsibility, my view of leadership changed. What never 
changed, however, was the imperative to deliver. That was always 
at the center of every thing we did at UPS.
Before we examine the unique culture at UPS, let me tell you 
a  little bit about the com pany itself. I  don’t believe it’s pos si ble 
to truly understand how a culture like this exists and thrives 
 unless you know something about its origins. UPS began as the 
American Messenger Company on August 28, 1907 by two teen-
age boys named Jim Casey and Claude Ryan. They started with 
one bicycle and $100.00 they borrowed from a friend. Their six-
by-seven-foot offi  ce was rented for $15.00 per month and was lo-
cated in the basement of a saloon in Seattle, Washington. In 1919 
the ﬁ rm adopted its present name, United Parcel Service (UPS).
The group’s initial vision was to build a small messenger ser-
vice with just a few  people delivering messages on foot, by street-
car, and by bicycle. Times  were tough—so bad, in fact, that legend 
has it  there  were intense discussions about how to justify the pur-
chase of a one- cent stamp.
Fast-forward to the present, and the stark diff erence in the 
business scale and sheer size of our far- ﬂ ung operations is almost 
beyond comprehension.  Today, UPS is a worldwide com pany 

6 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
serving more than 220 countries and territories with approxi-
mately 435,000 employees. It has more than 100,000 vehicles, 
540 airplanes, and nearly 28,000 facilities. UPS delivers on aver-
age more than 18 million packages and envelopes a day, which 
translates into a rate of about 37,500 per minute or 625 per second. 
In addition to the package side of the operations, UPS has a 
growing supply-chain management solutions business that fea-
tures ser vices like logistics and distribution, transportation and 
freight (i.e., air, sea, ground, and rail), forwarding to and from 195 
countries, international trade management, and customs bro-
kerage. In the United States, UPS is the leading provider of less- 
than- truckload ser vices coast- to- coast, using 5,800 vehicles and 
20,000 trailers.
The UPS package car (never called a truck at UPS) and  those 
heroes in brown uniforms (and socks) who deliver the packages 
each day are the ﬁ rst images that come to mind for most  people 
when they think about our com pany. Although the uniforms 
worn by UPS  drivers are similar around the world, the vehicles 
are not. For example, we use airboats in Vietnam, in some  remote 
areas of Alaska packages reach their destination by dogsled. 
As you might imagine, gondolas are loaded with UPS packages 
in Venice; in Taiwan and Bangkok, tuk- tuks ﬁ lled with UPS 
packages are a common sight throughout the crowded city 
streets.
A “Culture of We”
The UPS culture that we know  today comes from a well- 
established, values- based environment formed in the com pany’s 
early years. It was built on discipline, accountability, and the ut-
most re spect for  others at the outset. In 1929, our founder, Jim 
Casey, added to the com pany’s policy book that UPS  people 
would always be addressed by their ﬁ rst name. Jim was never too 

Chapter 1 • Delivering a Culture 
7
busy to talk to fellow employees at any level of the organ ization, 
and that practice quickly ﬁ ltered down to the department man-
agers and into their daily routines.
Greeting  people, looking them in the eye, and listening to their 
concerns  were things Jim loved to do, and he went out of his way 
to do them regularly. In Jim’s view, the porter or car washer was 
just as impor tant as the com pany’s top- level executives. He 
had a genuine interest in  people; whenever he met someone, he 
wanted to hear their stories and ideas for making the com pany 
better. He would never rush a conversation and would give the 
person his full and undivided attention. He openly described 
how he loved to learn from  others and often incorporated their 
ideas into the business. Servant leadership is a popu lar term 
 today. Serving  others came naturally to Jim more than a hun-
dred years ago, and he made it the cornerstone of our culture. 
He was all about “we” when it came to his UPS  family.
My ﬁ rst encounter with Jim was in our UPS building in Se-
attle. It was late in the day, and I was the only person around. I 
was focused on hooking up a charger to a dead battery in one of 
our package cars when I suddenly felt someone standing next 
to me. I turned, and  there he was, Jim Casey himself. I  couldn’t 
believe my eyes, and I’m sure he saw the look of shock on my 
face.
He stuck out his hand and said, “Hello, my name’s Jim. What’s 
yours?” Fortunately, I could remember it.
Then he said, “ Here, let me help you. I’ll hold the cables if you 
want to try to start it.”
For a few seconds, I thought I was dreaming.  Here was Jim 
Casey, our founder, a legend, and a man I idolized, getting his 
hands dirty while working alongside me at the very end of the day.
 After the car started, Jim asked if I could take a few minutes 
to talk with him. He motioned  toward a bench, where we sat and 
talked for about thirty minutes. During this conversation, he 

8 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
asked me what I thought about “our” com pany and what ideas 
I might have to help us better serve our customers and become 
more effi  cient in our operations. Jim treated me as if I was his 
mentor, instead of the other way around. It was a day that I’ll 
never forget and an experience that  shaped my approach to lead-
ership for the rest of my  career.
 Those who knew Jim best often observed that he was a walk-
ing contradiction. He was a dreamer, but he was also a doer. He 
was magnetic, but he avoided attention. He was conﬁ dent, yet 
 humble. He respected tradition, but change excited him. He 
was urgent and sometimes intense, but he always seemed calm 
and at peace. He was a visionary who could see the big picture 
but also a perfectionist who could zoom in on a misplaced 
comma.
The contradictions  were vintage Jim Casey. However, he was, 
ﬁ rst and foremost, an avid learner and a devoted teacher. He 
wanted to better understand and be able to explain things for 
the sake of improvement.
Former UPS CEO George Smith said Jim taught him that the 
essence of leadership is just four basic things: to teach, to coach, 
to be taught, and to learn. Honestly, can it get any simpler than 
that?
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Walk the Talk
Funny,  isn’t it, how the most memorable moment of my profes-
sional life came down to a thirty- minute conversation on a bench 
in a maintenance shop. The vivid memory of the main man and 
 little ol’ me, just sitting around talking like members of one big, 
happy  family, is forever burned in my brain. And, as it turned out, 
we  were  family.

Chapter 1 • Delivering a Culture 
9
Founding Principles That Have Endured
As unbelievable as it may seem, Jim Casey and his partners cre-
ated policies, principles, and values in the early 1900s that con-
tinue to guide the com pany well over a hundred years  later. As a 
constant reminder of this living heritage, the UPS policy book 
is referenced often  today. In fact, it’s still read at the start of staff  
meetings in UPS offi  ces around the world. Our culture and 
founding principles are also frequently discussed in daily pre- 
work communication meetings with employees.
To be truly eff ective, a com pany’s culture has to dwell in the 
hearts and minds of the  people charged with delivering its mission. 
They have to live and breathe their culture  every day. It  can’t be 
reduced to some slogans plastered on a wall or a mission state-
ment mounted in a nice picture frame. Rather, it must embody the 
soul of teamwork. It is up to the leaders to not only talk with their 
team members about  those principles but also to live by them. To 
sustain a unique culture, all the components need to be present in 
the right proportions.
Creating an environment like this requires consistency and 
discipline. To succeed  today and long into the  future, you 
need to establish a culture based upon sound principles and 
policies that align with the 
values of your organ iza-
tion. At UPS, that strategic 
alignment is demonstrated 
in the following bedrock 
principles.
 People: Treat Every one Equally
At UPS, we take a sincere interest in the well- being of our team 
members and treat every one equally. In the words of Jim Casey:
Establish a culture based upon 
sound principles and policies 
that align with the values of 
your organ ization.

10 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
The policy of impartiality means that every body is treated 
equally; every body has an equal opportunity; one person 
is on a par with all  others; one can advance only  because 
of more capability than  others.2
A major  factor in providing every one with an equal opportu-
nity to grow and rise in the ranks is the practice of not hiring 
relatives or friends, avoiding the potential for favoritism. In 
 addition, our culture is built upon the belief that our  people 
come ﬁ rst. For example,  there is an open- door policy that gives 
all workers access to their managers.
UPS does not believe in titles per se and, as I mentioned, en-
courages every one to be on a ﬁ rst- name basis. That is the expecta-
tion for our managers, although  there are some other exceptions 
due to cultural considerations in countries outside the United 
States. We try to be as informal as pos si ble whenever it’s appropri-
ate. Accordingly, as I alluded to earlier, it is not unusual for a car 
washer to call the CEO by their ﬁ rst name and vice versa. It’s 
the  family culture upbringing. Although UPSers have diff er ent 
 responsibilities, we are still all in it together, working  toward the 
same goals.
Once the  people you deal with recognize what you do springs 
from an honest heart, they  will be surprisingly strong in their 
support of you.
• They  will believe what you say.
• They  will do what you want.
• They  will give you their loyalty.
• They  will trust and follow you.3
Pride: Show Pride in the Com pany and Pride in the Work
Someone once asked me to pick one word that best describes why 
UPS is so special. The answer was easy. I had lived it  every day as 

Chapter 1 • Delivering a Culture 
11
an employee, and I still live it  today. That word is pride. We show 
pride in the com pany and pride in the work that we do.
Of course, pride can be instilled in many diff er ent ways. At 
UPS, it comes from professionalism, quality ser vice, and the 
quest for perfection in every thing 
we do. For instance, our appearance 
standards help us present an image 
that UPSers are proud of and yield 
something tangible and continu-
ous that the public depends on. It’s hard to quantify exactly 
why something so  simple is so inspiring in its own under-
stated way, but the results conﬁ rm that professional appearance 
matters.
Our customers often say that they know they can trust UPS 
 because of our reputation. A big part of that comes from the 
pride within our ranks and the way we consistently perform so 
well in all the small things.
Appearance: Make a Positive Visual Impression
Quality is largely a  matter of appearance.  People judge us 
by the visual and  mental impression they get. If  those 
impressions are to be favorable, we must have the appear-
ance of  doing a good job.4
From the beginning, UPS deci ded it would be a com pany that 
would send customers a strong message of assurance and quality 
by making a positive visual impression on the public. This be-
lief, and the resulting emphasis on making positive impressions, 
extends not only to uniforms for  drivers but also to sparkling- 
clean package cars, offi  ces, and buildings. Just as they did more 
than one hundred years ago,  today’s  drivers must meet  these 
strict appearance standards, including good personal hygiene, 
cleaned and pressed uniforms, and shined shoes.
We show pride in the 
com pany and pride in 
the work that we do.

12 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
When a store executive sees one of our cars with dented 
fenders, or a scratched body, or a car in need of paint, 
what kind of impression does that create? And whose 
fault is it? The driver’s? No. It’s the fault of someone 
higher up for failing to have an inspection system that 
 will detect such defects immediately and have them 
corrected before the car goes out on the road.5
Simply said, it is the leaders’ job to “see it— own it— solve it—do 
it” when they encounter a prob lem or an opportunity to improve 
something.
Communication: Build a “Culture of We”
UPS employees gather for a daily meeting (known as a pre- work 
communication meeting, or PCM) with their supervisor prior to 
starting work, where they hear current com pany news and other 
topics of interest that may relate to their par tic u lar group.
During the PCM in the operating centers, managers have an 
opportunity to inspect their  drivers to ensure they meet the com-
pany’s appearance standards. Although  these meetings usually 
last about three minutes, they keep employees informed about 
signiﬁ cant com pany 
news.
Open communica-
tion helps to avoid un-
pleasant surprises and workplace rumors. Keeping employees 
informed and engaged in  these quick pre- work meetings is an 
excellent way to start the day.
Owned by the Managers, Managed by the  Owners
UPS’s managers (and many of the com pany’s employees) own 
UPS stock. This owner ship structure has produced a tremen-
Keep employees informed about 
signiﬁ cant com pany news.

Chapter 1 • Delivering a Culture 
13
dously positive eff ect on the day- to- day operations as well as on 
the com pany’s long- term goals of growth and ﬁ nancial stability.
Promotion from Within
UPS believes that managers who start with the organ ization and 
rise through its ranks are likely to be more committed, aligned, and 
knowledgeable than  those brought in laterally from the outside. We 
promote from within to ensure that the com pany can pass on our 
legacy and culture seamlessly from one generation to the next.
When we invest in  people,  we’re looking at it as a lifetime de-
cision. This is why the hiring pro cess is so impor tant and should 
never be rushed. We look for  people who want a  career with us, 
not just a job for a limited time. This is a huge part of the suc-
cess formula at UPS.
The part- time loader in a hub could well be the  future CEO, and 
UPS’s strategy is to hold on to  people who show potential through-
out their careers. Most new hires start as part- time employees and 
work their way up through the ranks.
Following our tradition, the management team at UPS, 
 including the CEO and management committee, started as 
 drivers, part- time loaders, car washers, and clerks. As part of the 
promotion pro cess, all must spend time as package car  drivers 
or as driver helpers to understand the heart of our business. With 
an active succession plan, we always know where  we’ll draw the 
next level of leadership from within the com pany.
Constructive Dissatisfaction
No  matter how successful a com pany is, its employees should never 
be satisﬁ ed. Once we do something well, we should start over and 

14 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
ﬁ gure out how to do it better. Good companies adapt to changing 
conditions;  great ones stay ahead of them. They  don’t deny that 
perplexing conditions exist, nor do they pretend that markets 
 will never be uncertain or unkind. In fact, they embrace  those 
realities and the potential for a storm by staying nimble and 
 agile. They are “constructively dissatisﬁ ed.” Leaders make condi-
tions; they  don’t become victims of them.
It is always the  little things in business that  matter most, and 
one of  those “ little” things that Jim Casey noticed and remarked 
on remains true for most organizations  today. It went like this:
I think we should test and check many of our present 
practices. Some of the things can be eliminated, and some 
can be improved. Among other things, I think we are using 
many useless reports. I think we are ﬁ lling out forms that 
 don’t need to be ﬁ lled out. I think we are  doing a lot of 
work that accomplishes nothing, and we  ought to study 
that and dispense with it as quickly as we can.6
Managers should not be reporters of problems; they need to 
be ﬁ xers of problems and take corrective action on the spot. If 
they need help, they should sound the alarm. No one should 
turn his or her back on anything that is not up to strict com-
pany standards.
Although UPS  isn’t perfect, it may be worth noting that 
88  percent of the companies on the Fortune 500 list in 1955 are 
now dead and buried. So how can a com pany that traces its roots 
back to 1907 still be  going strong  today? How has UPS managed 
to place at the top of almost  every list for best places to work, 
strong management, and quality of investment, year  after year?
The answer is a combination of factors, but recognizing our 
shortcomings and being “constructively dissatisﬁ ed” would have 
to be towards the top of that list.

Chapter 1 • Delivering a Culture 
15
How You Can Deliver
• Develop an atmosphere of mutual re spect and trust. 
When appropriate, call  people by their ﬁ rst names.
• Do more than talk com pany culture; live it and make it 
come alive within your team.
• Make sure that your employees hear com pany news and 
anything that directly aff ects them from you ﬁ rst.
• Remember that high standards of appearance represent 
you and your com pany. Be strict; do not compromise.
• When pos si ble, provide a platform that allows everyone 
to be  owners, not just employees.

16
chapter 2
Building a Successful Team
Play Your “Best Five,” Not Your Five Best
 Great teams  don’t just show up fully prepared and ready to ac-
complish the mission. The best team builders create a seamless 
alignment among the team members that becomes the glue keep-
ing all of them working together.
The most successful team builders are masters at establishing 
trust and re spect among teammates. At the end of the day, they 
are the ﬁ rst to acknowledge and celebrate the combined eff orts 
that brought success to the entire group. They are also the ﬁ rst 
ones to take the blame when things  don’t go well.
Make no  mistake about it: ability matters, and you should do 
every thing you can to attract, develop, and retain  great talent. 
But if you have to choose between talent and chemistry, choose 
chemistry. In most cases where it takes a group of  people to get 
the job done correctly, I believe chemistry is as impor tant as ed-
ucation, experience, or skills.
In sports, as in business, teamwork trumps talent nine times 
out of ten. Legendary UCLA basketball coach John Wooden used 
to say, “I  don’t play my ﬁ ve best, I play my best ﬁ ve.” The “best 
ﬁ ve” is shorthand for the ones who work best together and 
achieve synergy and chemistry.
When  people combine their eff orts and create results that are 
greater than the sum of their individual contributions, some-
thing magical occurs. The entire team beneﬁ ts and so does the 
organ ization.  Those  people who are committed to the end goal 

Chapter 2 • Building a Successful Team 
17
are far more concerned about the team winning than they are 
about embellishing their individual statistics.
 Every person in a leadership 
role  faces the same challenge: 
which “ﬁ ve” to assign to their 
organ ization’s most impor tant 
projects. Eff ective leaders know 
that playing your ﬁ ve best (i.e., most talented) employees can be 
a  mistake if they  don’t work well together. To accomplish your 
goals, identify your “best ﬁ ve” and play them.
Promote Teamwork, Not Superstars
In the summer of 2015, the largest U.S. tele vi sion audience ever 
for any soccer game—30.9 million at its peak— watched as the U.S. 
 women’s team celebrated a well- deserved victory in the seventh 
FIFA  Women’s World Cup.7
 After the team lifted the gold trophy in what might very well 
be the greatest win in the history of  women’s soccer, the media 
swarmed the coaching staff  and players with questions that 
consistently sought the same insights: “What makes your team 
so good?” “What is the reason for your success?”
As the rapid- ﬁ re questions poured in, the responses from 
coaches and players began to repeat a similar theme and tone as 
well. “We are a team—no heroes, no superstars.” “We depend on 
each other, and we win as a team.” “We never give up; we believe in 
each other.”
Indeed, it is the same story and the same lessons, learned re-
peatedly, regardless of the sport or the country. Even in the world 
of individual sports competition, the winners, from boxers to 
golfers to race car  drivers, are quick to give credit to their coaches, 
trainers, managers, and the team of  people tirelessly working 
 behind the scenes to help them be successful.
To accomplish your goals, 
identify your “best ﬁ ve” 
and play them.

18 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Mentor Your Team for Success
When positive things happen,  those moments require a readi-
ness that is more than just eff ort and determination.  There is 
also an unmistakable ele ment of being ready for what ever life 
lobs at you. To prepare yourself for additional responsibility, you 
need a mentor. Whom do you know who can help you learn the 
ropes? Can you enlist the support of someone who has walked 
in your shoes and has experience in the same or a similar job?
For example, a new medical intern would be wise to ask for 
help from a veteran nurse who has worked in a hospital for years. 
If the intern is fortunate, that nurse may become his or her men-
tor and likely  will teach things that go well beyond what’s in 
books or taught in school. And being street smart is just as impor-
tant as being book smart.  Those  people who served for de cades 
on the front lines know best what upper- level managers may have 
long forgotten.
 Because  there are many types of business, from startups with 
only a few employees to multibillion- dollar companies employ-
ing thousands of  people around the globe, one leadership style 
does not ﬁ t all circumstances. Would the same approach work 
for a small group of accountants as it would for a professional 
football team? No, prob ably not.
In real ity, though, the principles  these organizations employ 
may not be all that diff  er ent. They each are charged with lead-
ing  human beings— people who have real lives away from the job, 
personal and professional ambitions, unique talents, and 
insecurities— toward a stated purpose and vision.
Do What ever Is Necessary 
in Extraordinary Circumstances
Organizations are successful  because  people work together as a 
team: no heroes, no superstars. They trust and depend upon each 

Chapter 2 • Building a Successful Team 
19
other to do the right  thing  because teammates  don’t let one an-
other down when it counts the most. The discipline and the  will 
to push through challenges begin with the proper mindset. If you 
believe you can do it and put your heart and soul into it, you can 
reach any goal and overcome almost any obstacle.
North to Alaska
Although UPS has been around since 1907, we did not deliver to all 
states  until 1975. I was a division man ag er in Seattle when Jack Casey 
(no relation to Jim Casey), the district man ag er, called me into his 
offi  ce one day and asked me to head up a team that would open 
the state of Alaska for UPS. He said to take plenty of warm clothes 
and to be prepared to stay  there for at least a year. A year in freezing 
Alaska, thousands of miles from home? That certainly made my day.
Setting Up the New Operation
I quickly put together a diverse team with members who each had 
a diff er ent skill set and, with the help of several staff  departments, 
began making plans for the opening. We prepared the normal 
operating plans necessary to open a new business, including a 
detailed market analy sis showing volume estimates. All the expected 
necessities,  people, delivery vehicles, and facilities were based on 
the planned volume; leaving nothing to chance, we forecasted 
around 50 packages per day for the ﬁ rst month, with a gradual but 
steady increase thereafter.
A few weeks  later, our team arrived in Anchorage and began to 
set up the new operation. We rented a small portion of a building 
at the airport, hired employees, leased a few small vans, and 
signed up as many new customers as we could.
Opening Day!  Great! . . .  Uh Oh
Opening day came upon us fast, and we  were conﬁ dent that we 
 were ready to launch our new business in the  great state of Alaska. 
 After the ribbon- cutting ceremony with employees, local VIPs, and 
the media present, we proudly watched the ﬁ rst UPS aircraft land 
and taxi to just a few hundred feet from our building. The cargo 
doors opened, and the crew unloaded one air container from the 

20 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
plane onto a dolly, followed by another, and then another, and 
then another. I began to lose count and started to feel sick to my 
stomach.
My mind ﬂ ashed back to that market study that indicated we 
would get around 50 packages per day for the ﬁ rst month. We 
 were staring at far more than 1,500 packages on the ﬁ rst day 
alone, a full year ahead of the original estimate.
We Urgently Needed Our “Best Five” Team
In an instant, we realized just how bad our projections  were. I say 
our, but I was the one in charge and I  really blew it. We  were 
caught off  guard and unprepared and had to make some things 
happen fast. Our small team of  drivers and trainers did the best 
they could and worked late into the night.
Knowing that the initial ﬂ ood of packages would only increase 
in number as the days went on, and realizing we had vastly under-
estimated the need for our ser vices in the area, I called Jack and 
pleaded for help.  After a few minutes of silence, followed by a few 
groans, he said he would call me back.
An hour  later, he called and said the cavalry was on its way. Six 
large UPS package cars  were being loaded with bedding and supplies, 
including food and  water, extra tires, and plenty of tools and spare 
parts. He told me  there would be two  drivers per vehicle and they 
would drive straight through from Seattle to Anchorage, stopping 
only for fuel. One driver would sleep while the other one drove.
A few days  later, at 3:00 a.m.,  there was a knock on my door. 
When I opened it,  there stood a dozen tired and ragged UPSers 
who had just driven more than 2,000 miles almost nonstop, 
including 1,400 miles on the rugged dirt and gravel road called 
the ALCAN Highway.  After sending them off  for some badly 
needed showers and sleep, I got dressed as fast as I could and 
headed to the parking lot, anxious to check out the newly arrived 
package cars.
As I neared the parking lot, I could not believe what I saw. 
 Those six package cars  were mostly gray primer with just a  little bit 
of brown paint  here and  there at the rooﬂ ine. They  were badly 

Chapter 2 • Building a Successful Team 
21
dented, and most of them had shattered windshields. The brutal 
beating they had endured during their long, grueling trip was 
obvious. I was tempted to call Jack and tell him “thanks a lot”; but 
at that moment, I  wasn’t sure how secure my job was, so I left well 
enough alone.
A few hours  later, we dragged our weary new arrivals out of 
bed and welcomed them to Amer i ca’s last frontier by putting them 
to work.  After a quick brieﬁ ng, I sent a few of them to take the 
beat-up cars to local body shops, with instructions to pay what-
ever was necessary to make the cars roadworthy and looking like 
new. Of course, we needed the work done yesterday. I assigned the 
HR man ag er and one of the local supervisors the task of hiring 
additional, permanent  drivers from the local area as fast as 
they could.
We sent the  others to rent as many vans as they could and meet 
back at the UPS building, where they became our delivery  drivers 
and trainers for the immediate  future. It was a ﬁ re drill for sure, but 
I knew we could pull it off   because that is what Brown- blooded 
 people do.
Within a few weeks, we  were back on our feet with a fully 
trained workforce driving newly painted UPS package cars. Al-
though we  really missed the mark on the initial volume projections, 
we learned some valuable lessons. In the end, our dedicated 
Alaska team, with the help of our partners from Seattle, proved 
that determined  people working together can accomplish any-
thing. We  hadn’t ﬁ elded our “best ﬁ ve”; we had ﬁ elded our “best 
ﬁ fteen.”
We Did What Was Necessary in Extraordinary Circumstances
We had begun laying the foundation for our success in Alaska 
years before our ﬁ rst shipment arrived  there. Our commitment to 
the UPS values I’ve already discussed is the reason we overcame 
the challenges we faced.
We opened Alaska, not with  great projections, but with  great 
attitude and drive in the face of staggering obstacles. We believed 
we could do it; we put our heart and soul into it; and we proved 

22 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Jack Casey had served as a  great mentor for me. When crises 
hit, he did not panic nor did he look up “what to do when pack-
age volume exceeds projections” in the training manuals. With 
no time to spare, he just did 
what had to be done and 
made things happen. That is 
what leaders do. They have the 
courage to do what ever is nec-
essary in extraordinary situations, a lesson I would have ample 
opportunity to apply throughout my  career.
Have the courage to do 
what ever is necessary in 
extraordinary situations.
that we could reach any goal, overcome almost any obstacle— even 
the ALCAN Highway. If we  hadn’t believed that we could do it, 
then we would have been destined to fail, our path a self- fulﬁ lling 
prophecy.
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Lead Lives
As a driver, my thinking typically focused on the task and on the 
day- to- day list of what I had to accomplish to do a good job. As I 
moved up in the ranks, my thinking had to adjust as my scope of 
responsibility widened. I not only had to do a good job myself, 
but I now had to ensure that the other team members assigned 
to me performed well too.
Being a leader is a position of  great trust; you have proven you 
are worthy of being given a chance to serve  others in a power ful 
role. But leading is a sacred responsibility for the lives of the 
 people who are  under your supervision. I sought to make the 
most of the opportunity. I adjusted my view of leadership, mak-
ing sure it took in the  people whose lives  were now my responsi-
bility.

Chapter 2 • Building a Successful Team 
23
Be a Leader, Not a Boss
One of the greatest lessons I learned at UPS is that a boss is not a 
leader. Sure, you might have the title or rank, and you may even 
believe you have earned the right to 
order  others around to get things 
done. But  don’t be fooled for one 
minute. Making  people bosses does 
not magically transform them into 
leaders. Most failed leaders did not know the diff erence between 
bossing and leading.
Leaders take charge and inspire  others to do the right  thing 
regardless of circumstances. While maintaining high energy and 
focus, they lead by quiet example and unassuming acts of ser-
vice, reaching beyond themselves to ensure their teams have their 
full support. They make sure that all members have exactly what 
they need to do the job correctly. They do every thing pos si ble to 
make the job in ter est ing and fun. They keep their  people engaged 
and challenged. Along with improving their teams, they work on 
continued self- improvement: self- study, mentorship, learning 
from their own and  others’ mistakes. They have a clear vision and 
are calculated risk takers who accept responsibility and are will-
ing to be judged by their successes or failures in reaching spe-
ciﬁ c objectives.
Know the difference 
between bossing and 
leading.
The Characteristics of Eff ective Leaders
Eff ective leader behaviors include:
• Strong character, integrity, high energy, competence.
• A servant leader mentality.
• A balanced approach led by fairness in all interpersonal 
dealings.

24 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Leaders can be trusted to live and succeed—as well as perish 
or fail— without losing their integrity along the way. They under-
stand the importance of building and maintaining positive 
 relationships with their team members. They know they can cre-
ate value in the world by creating value in  others.
Bosses, on the other hand, take shortcuts and are consistently 
self- centered in their approach, with  little regard for the needs 
of  others. They wield their power to coerce and intimidate in 
order to get things done. They do not get the most out of their 
 people  because  people who fear for their jobs cannot be si mul ta-
neously energetic and solution- minded partners.
Bosses are not team builders, and they seldom enjoy genuine 
and lasting loyalty from their followers. Their careers are nor-
mally short- lived, and the damage left in their wake often  causes 
orga nizational distrust. They typically blame  others for their 
own shortcomings, take the credit for successes generated by 
their team’s hard work, and create an atmosphere devoid of what 
all  great teams need for fuel: unselﬁ shness.
Bosses and in eff ec tive managers often have one or more of the 
following characteristics:
• An unhealthy and overwhelming desire to be popu lar 
and in control.
• Willingness to take risks and be accountable for their 
actions.
• Ability to work well with  people, welcoming and encouraging 
input.
• Modesty and desire to give credit to  others.
• Initiative and ac cep tance of change.
• Vision and focus.

Chapter 2 • Building a Successful Team 
25
• Willingness to sacriﬁ ce their integrity to accomplish 
their goals.
• Inability to work well with  others.
• Hesitation about listening to and accepting the views of 
 others.
• Avoidance of risk and responsibility (ﬂ ying  under the 
radar).
• Consideration of their own interests ﬁ rst, team members 
second.
• Lack of initiative and inability to accept change easily.
• Limited vision and focus.
Imagine if we had to open Alaska  under a boss. Our eff orts could 
have failed if  either Jack Casey or I had acted like a boss, or if we 
had “bossed” the team members we  were asking to give so much. 
Our team could not have pulled off  the extraordinary feats with-
out a shared, deeply held vision and the  whole team’s faith in 
its other members and leaders.
It’s okay to enjoy your accom-
plishments, but  don’t ever think 
that your achievements make you 
better than  those around you. 
Nor should you ever think that it 
was you alone who got you  there.
It’s obvious many things go 
into producing the kind of leader 
 people are willing and  eager to 
 follow. Maybe the key is realizing 
 there is more power in we than in me. Maybe the cornerstone is 
being a better listener than a talker. Maybe the one essential 
ingredient is being willing to get out on the front line with 
your  people. Maybe it’s as  simple as being a person of integrity. 
 Don’t ever think that 
your achievements make 
you better than  those 
around you. Nor should 
you ever think that it 
was you alone who got 
you  there.

26 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
What ever it is, as a leader you set the pace, and your  people  will 
follow what ever example you set— good or bad.
If you hope to accomplish something  great, you are  going to 
need some help. You  will need to become an expert at building a 
team so strong that its members can get the job done even when 
 you’re not around. Good leaders believe in themselves;  great lead-
ers believe in the potential of  others and convince them to be-
lieve in themselves.
You are ultimately responsible for creating the foundation and 
framework for your organ ization’s success. That means selecting, 
training, and nurturing all members of your team so they  will 
not only exceed your expectations but their own as well.
In the next chapter, you’ll discover why I knew when I landed 
in the UPS culture that I was very blessed.
How You Can Deliver
• Play your “best ﬁ ve,” not your ﬁ ve best. Promote team-
work to accomplish the shared goal.  Don’t  settle for a 
splintered group of superstars.
• Bring heart and passion to the game.
• Ensure that all members of your team are aligned with 
one another— and with the objectives.
• Manage your team so that all members trust one 
another and are held accountable, both individually 
and as a group.
• Take charge and do what is right.
• Seek out a mentor at  every stage in your  career. Their 
support can be invaluable.
• Give  others credit for successes and create a culture of 
we, not me.

27
chapter 3
Divine Intervention
D
oing the right  thing is something I learned at a very young 
age growing up in the small town of Lewiston, Idaho. Life 
was good back then, but for my  mother and me, it  wasn’t always 
easy. When I was six years old, my  father left us; and, at times, it 
was diffi  cult to get by on  mother’s meager wages. It was no fun 
at the time, but as I look back, I can appreciate the things I 
learned from  those early days of my childhood.
 Because of the need to help make ends meet, when I was about 
ten years old, I started working odd jobs on weekends and dur-
ing the summers.
A few years  later, I landed a job working as a ranch hand for 
the summer. I worked alongside cowboys from the crack of dawn 
 until well  after the sun had set. Part of that job gave me the op-
portunity to be involved in several  cattle drives. Yep, that meant 
 horses, chaps, boots, spurs— the  whole bit. The long days I spent 
out on the range caused me to grow up fast and helped me to 
understand not only the value of a dollar but also of a strong 
work ethic and the importance of teamwork.
 After leaving my summer job on the ranch, I returned to school 
and found a part- time job working nights at a local ser vice sta-
tion. I was paid 50 cents an hour but enjoyed all sorts of ﬁ nan-
cial incentives, such as earning a dime for an oil change or for 
ﬁ xing a ﬂ at tire.
While most of my friends  were off   doing the fun things teen-
agers typically do  after school, I continued to work a variety of 

28 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
jobs. I was always looking for ways to make more money, and I 
readily jumped from one job to the next.
Then high school graduation arrived, and with few jobs avail-
able in my hometown, I wandered off  to ﬁ nd decent full- time 
 employment. I soon found myself living with my  father hun-
dreds of miles away in Washington. I  couldn’t believe I got the 
ﬁ rst job I applied for, as it was full time and paid very well. I 
thought it was  because of my résumé; I  later found out no one 
 else in town wanted it  because it involved driving a tanker truck 
loaded with highly toxic chemicals. To add to my newfound 
wealth, at night I worked in my  father’s restaurant. Not content 
with my income from just two jobs, on weekends I had a third 
job installing insulation in new homes. I guess the locals  didn’t 
want that job  either.  These  were the blisters- on- my- hands, 
working- from- sunup- to- sundown kind of jobs. I learned to be re-
sourceful and to do the work that  others thought was below 
their status.
This approach served me well for a while, but I  didn’t see much 
 future for myself with  these employers, so I packed up and headed 
back to Idaho. Instead of moving back in with my  mother, I deci-
ded it was time to be on my own, so a friend and I took up resi-
dency in the storeroom of a local dive bar. Sleeping bags  were our 
beds, candles provided our light, and the hose for cleaning mops 
was our shower. In return for such ﬁ ne accommodations— 
including rats for pets, and barroom brawls for a nightly 
soundtrack—we had the privilege of cleaning up the messy bar 
 after closing time. That was ﬁ ne with us—we  were young, single, 
and not all that bright; but we  were grateful we  didn’t have to 
pay any rent.
Eventually, the excitement of the in de pen dent life began to 
lose its luster, so I moved back in with my  mother. As it turned 
out, that was one of the best things I ever did. I was not that  great 

Chapter 3 • Divine Intervention 
29
at being on my own at the time, but that  didn’t keep me from 
working  every pos si ble minute. I worked the night shift— ﬁ rst in a 
food- processing plant and then in a sawmill— and I always worked 
double shifts on the weekends, as they paid time and a half for 
the second eight hours.
But it  didn’t last.
My job was eliminated, and me along with it. Soon afterward, 
I was dead broke. As if that  wasn’t enough, I was engaged to be 
married.
Marry Me— I’m Unemployed
With no job, no money, and no plan, I had no idea what I was 
 going to do. I had fallen to a new low.
Then a miracle occurred, and I am convinced to this day it 
was divine intervention. What ever the source was, UPS came to 
my rescue.
On the night before my wedding, the phone rang. It was a 
gentleman from UPS asking me if I was still interested in work-
ing for them. I had forgotten about having applied for a job with 
this com pany a few months earlier.
Though I had no idea what UPS was or even what they did, I 
 couldn’t say “Yes!” fast enough. I  didn’t care how much they paid, 
what my job would be, or the hours I would work. I was desper-
ate. I needed work, any work, and I needed it fast.
The man on the phone told me to report to work ﬁ rst  thing 
Monday morning. It was perfect timing. I was getting married 
on Saturday and starting a new job on Monday morning. My 
prayers  were answered. The honeymoon would have to wait. We 
had rent to pay.

30 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Ron, Meet UPS
When I arrived at UPS early Monday morning, I was promptly 
greeted by a neatly groomed man in a well- pressed suit and tie. 
He had an infectiously positive attitude and seemed genuinely 
excited to meet me.
He shook my hand and said, “Just call me Fred.” For the next 
thirty minutes, Fred asked me about my  family, my hobbies, my 
favorite sports, and all of the things he thought might be impor-
tant to me.
What  were my ﬁ rst impressions of Fred? He treated me more like 
a friend and less like a new employee on his ﬁ rst day on the job. He 
related to me on a real and personal level, the furthest  thing from 
being a “boss.” I’d never worked for anyone like him before.
 Later on, while describing his role at UPS, Fred told me: “Al-
though I am your trainer, we are more like partners and we  will 
learn together. I know the package business, and you know the 
town and the  people. I am  going to teach you all the proper meth-
ods that  will make you a successful package car driver. No pres-
sure—in fact we are  going to have fun— and when I feel you are 
ready to go out on your own, I  will get out of your way.”
Soon the other new employees arrived. Fred gathered us and 
told us inspiring stories about the com pany’s founder, Jim Casey, 
and the early days of the com pany as well as the vision of the 
ﬁ rm. He explained that UPS considers the  people working for 
them to be  family, not hired hands.
I had an immediate sense of belonging. I knew this was  going 
to be more than just another job to hold me over  until a better 
one came along. This was a  people com pany with a rich heritage. 
Fred made it clear that we must work together as a team and 
learn to trust and depend on one another.
 After explaining the high expectations he had for each of us, 
Fred showed us the UPS package car. I’ll never forget seeing that 

Chapter 3 • Divine Intervention 
31
shiny brown package car for the ﬁ rst time. I was so impressed 
that I could only stand  there and admire it, wondering if I might 
get a chance to drive it someday.
From  there, things only got better as the day went on. I was 
issued my brown uniform with the same UPS shield I had just 
seen moments earlier on the side of that car. I felt a huge sense 
of pride well up inside of me to know I was  going to be part of a 
 great com pany.
Fred explained that UPS was committed to making a diff er-
ence in the lives of their employees. I knew then and  there that 
this com pany was special, but what I  didn’t know was that my 
life was about to be changed forever.
Early Leadership Lessons
Several years  later, as I started to rise in the organ ization, I 
learned that Fred was not an aberration: he was very much like 
the other UPS leaders I met along the way. He was modest, pro-
fessional, showed strong character, and was passionate about 
his job. Fred was very insistent on “ doing things by the book,” 
which in UPS language means  doing it the one and only best 
way. This is how UPS operates, and it translates into maximum 
effi  ciency.
Determined  People Look for Solutions
In princi ple, the UPS environment is very structured and disci-
plined.  Every aspect of each job has one speciﬁ c, best way it’s 
done, and each part of the method demands precision. At the 
same time,  people are encouraged to search for better ways to do 
things. I discovered that in most cases, UPS  people typically ﬁ nd 
common sense solutions to complex problems.
As  you’ve prob ably guessed by now, UPS founder Jim Casey 
was the consummate leader. When it came to business, hard work 

32 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
and long hours  were part of his daily routine. He did not want 
to hear that problems could not be ﬁ xed, and his managers 
learned to look for solutions instead of excuses.
Jim ﬁ rmly believed and told  others, “Determined  people make 
conditions— they do not allow themselves to become victims of 
them.”8 He wanted the leadership team to make decisions and 
be responsible for their actions. In other words, he wanted them 
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Base Relationships on Trust and Mutual Res pect
 After barely three months with the com pany, I was appointed lead 
driver and placed in charge of our  little enterprise. Our small group 
of eight was on its own, with the closest man ag er several hundred 
miles away. Suddenly I had more to manage than just me.
As my time  there passed and my opportunities increased, I be-
gan to learn every thing I could about UPS and the com pany’s 
leadership philosophy. With no experience in supervising  others, I 
soon realized that no  matter where you work,  whether it’s in a 
small town in Idaho or the corporate headquarters in Atlanta, 
leadership  isn’t  really all that complicated. In fact, most of it is 
common sense.
To the extent that I’ve been successful as a leader, it is directly 
attributed to  those early lessons and the fact that I learned the 
UPS way of  doing things right from the start. UPS taught me both 
how to lead and how to 
follow. But the most im-
por tant les sons I learned 
 were about hu man be-
hav ior and how to inspire and encourage  others to give their best 
pos si ble eff ort. To this day, I believe that the single most impor-
tant  thing that  every leader does is to establish relationships based 
on trust and mutual re spect.
Establish relationships based on trust 
and mutual re spect.

Chapter 3 • Divine Intervention 
33
to step out and lead. He trusted  people to do the right  thing, the 
right way.
Leaders Have Integrity
Leaders have integrity and do the right  thing. This is the es-
sence of leadership.  Whether it’s called honesty, ethics, charac-
ter, or  doing what’s right, integrity consistently ranks at the top 
of the list of what  people look for in a leader. In a study con-
ducted by U.S. News & World 
Report and Harvard Universi-
ty’s Center for Public Leader-
ship, 95  percent of respondents 
said that integrity is  either an 
extremely impor tant or a very impor tant characteristic of a 
good leader.
Character Comes First
 There are numerous pieces to the leadership puzzle, but  great 
leaders recognize that character  will always be their most valu-
able asset.
Regardless of what anyone  else does,  great leaders stay true to 
fostering an environment where character is king. One of the big-
gest ironies in business is how so many  people fail to see that 
when you put character ﬁ rst, the rest  will follow.
Contemporary wisdom seems to suggest that character must 
be sacriﬁ ced sometimes and corners cut to enhance the bottom 
line. This ends- justiﬁ es- the- means mentality is a slow-motion 
culture killer.
Part of having good character as a leader is honoring your 
team members when they achieve successful outcomes. The best 
leaders understand that more gets done when you  don’t care who 
gets the credit.
Have integrity and do the 
right  thing. This is the es-
sence of leadership.

34 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
By nature, UPSers go out of their way to recognize the accom-
plishments of  others and shy away from taking any credit for 
themselves. Modesty at UPS is an understatement, and the “we, 
not me” mantra is a fundamental piece of the culture.
Successes Are “Ours,” Not “Mine”
In the course of being led eff ectively, and while leading the 
members of my team, I found that the best leaders make a real 
diff erence in the lives of their  people  because they genuinely 
care about them.
Eff ective leaders understand that  every single person makes 
the com pany what it is. True leaders refer to their organizations’ 
successes as “ours,” not “mine.” They have a unique ability to show 
team members that they are 
the com pany and not merely 
employees of it.
As I mentioned, the best 
leaders  don’t draw attention 
to themselves but instead focus on getting things done through 
 others. To complement their own unique experience and talents, 
they make a point of recruiting passionate  people who bring 
diverse knowledge and skills to the  table. They build teams that 
achieve exceptional synergy and results by capitalizing on each 
member’s strengths, giving them the authority they need to make 
decisions and then trusting them to carry out the organ ization’s 
mission.
Your Success Is Bigger Than You
At UPS, as in any successful organ ization, results trump be hav-
ior and eff ort. By surrounding yourself with  others who have the 
skills and talents you lack, you form a partnership of excellence 
with each member of your team.
Show team members that 
they are the com pany and not 
merely employees of it.

Chapter 3 • Divine Intervention 
35
One note of caution, however. To succeed, you need  people who 
 will take command, take action, and then be willing to operate 
in the take- calculated- risks zone. They are your “A” team and need 
 little to no supervision. You’ll see several UPS  people operating 
in the take- calculated- risks zone as this book unfolds.
 These  people make things happen. Surrounding yourself with 
 people like them is one of the most impor tant keys to long- term 
success no  matter where you work.
Your success is bigger than you are. Ultimately, your team  will 
make or break you. Your team makes a diff erence, and building a 
strong team matters more than almost anything  else you  will do.
How You Can Deliver
• Be welcoming and supportive to new employees— your 
ﬁ rst impression on them  will last forever.
• Be a person of integrity, the number- one trait employ-
ees want in their leaders.
• Look for solutions, not excuses.
• Remember that determined  people make conditions; 
they do not become victims of them.
• Build a strong team, which 
 will  matter more than 
almost anything  else you 
do. Your team  will make or 
break you.
Build a strong team, 
which  will  matter more 
than almost anything 
else you do.

36
chapter 4
Developing Your Team’s 
Unique Talents
Find Your It
To manage yourself, you ﬁ rst have to understand what unique 
talents you bring to your business, your community, and the 
world. This means ﬁ guring out your It, the  thing you  were born 
to do.
One key lesson I’ve learned is that 
when you try to do things outside of 
your skill set, you’ll end up frustrating 
not only yourself but your coworkers as 
well. No  matter how tempting it may be to imitate the style of 
another leader,  don’t be someone  you’re not.
Coming to grips with this truth, though, demands that you 
ﬁ rst answer some tough questions about yourself before moving 
on in your  career.
Don’t be someone 
 you’re not.
What is the one  thing you have the greatest potential to master? 
Where within you is the greatness waiting to happen? What wakes 
you up early and keeps you up late? What stirs your passion?
Honest answers to  these questions  will lead you to your “It.” If 
you hope to move from good to  great in your life, you must zero in 
on this one  thing. Even if this means switching careers to do 
something that truly gets you excited to go to work each day, do it. 
You  will be amazed at how your life changes for the better.

Chapter 4 • Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents  
37
A deeper self- inventory requires that you ask yourself  these 
questions:
• Is It fulﬁ lling? If your It results in a sense of satisfaction 
and accomplishment, you  will stay motivated even 
during the tough times.
• Is It fruitful? If what drives you makes a positive diff er-
ence in the lives of  others, you have discovered why 
you are  here.
• Is It fun? You  will be  great only at something you enjoy 
 doing.
• Is It bringing you affi  rmation? If  others notice or beneﬁ t 
from it, it is your strength and a positive reinforcement 
of your leadership.
Help Team Members Identify What Drives Them
When you help  people ﬁ nd and fulﬁ ll their “It,” that one  thing 
that drives them, you build up an energy and level of commit-
ment that  will give a tremendous boost to the power of the team. 
Focus on fostering an environment where each individual can 
readily see how their own talents ﬁ t within the context of the 
 entire team’s objectives. Encourage, even challenge, your team to 
identify what they are passionate about; then get out of their way 
and let them do it.
During my six- year stint with UPS in Germany, I had a divi-
sion man ag er in my district named Danny. He was usually the 
ﬁ rst person at work in the morning and the last to leave at night, 
but he was far from an offi  ce dweller. He was street-smart and 
knew how to get amazing results by inspiring his  people.
Danny was an expert team builder and could always be 
found with his sleeves rolled up, working side by side with his 
team. He made a point of regularly connecting with his 50 

38 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
managers and the more than 1,500 employees  under his su-
pervision.
Danny had his hands in every thing, and  every part of his 
operation from top to bottom had to meet his high expecta-
tions. His enthusiasm was contagious, as  were his work ethic 
and principles, and he never wavered on them. He knew what it 
took to get the job done and get it done right.
 Because of Danny’s passion for the business and his  people, 
he had fun at work.  People who have fun on the job tend to 
be very productive. He set the tone and led the charge, and his 
 people followed him as if he  were the Pied  Piper.
Danny’s operation consistently had the best results in the 
country by a wide margin: best ser vice, lowest cost, lowest turn-
over, best safety rec ord, and a long list of every thing  else that we 
mea sured. You could sense  great 
pride and high morale in  every 
facet of Danny’s operation.
When my other managers 
asked me how they could im-
prove, I would just say, “Do what Danny does. Go watch and 
copy him.” And what did Danny do? He did the same things 
most eff ective leaders do. He motivated  others. He supported 
his  people. He had high standards, and he held  people account-
able for meeting them. In simpler terms, he outworked every-
one  else.
We often hear “Work smarter, not harder.” This is clever ad-
vice, and the right  thing to do if you can, but clever words are 
not always completely true. It takes hard work and many long 
hours to accomplish your goals, no  matter how smart you are 
working. When I think of Danny, I know that the right answer 
is to “Work smarter and harder.”
I remember one man ag er telling me about the night the car 
washer did not show up for work. Danny happened to be in the 
 People who have fun on 
the job tend to be very 
productive.

Chapter 4 • Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents  
39
building. Without hesitating, he changed his clothes and spent 
the night washing cars. That was Danny. He did what ever it took. 
Titles and position meant very  little to him.
However, working harder makes a diff erence only when, like 
Danny, you are passionate about what you do. If you are, you  will 
exude enthusiasm for your work, and your employees  will take 
notice and follow suit.
Danny obviously had mastered self- management. He could 
manage  others artfully  because he knew his own values and the 
UPS principles and had internalized them all to become a cheer-
ful, inspiring man ag er to his  people.
It All Begins with Self- Leadership
Without question, the most diffi  cult person I ever had to lead 
during my many years at UPS was someone I knew very well— me. 
Some hard lessons early in my 
 career showed me that I clearly had 
a lot to learn. You have to know how 
to manage yourself before you begin 
managing  others.
You have to know how 
to manage yourself be-
fore you begin manag-
ing  others.
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Spread Their Enthusiasm
Attitude is the one area where you have total control. When you 
show up  every day with your best self fully engaged, you are 
bound to spread enthusiasm and a can-do attitude to the rest of 
your team.
Enthusiasm is wind in a sail—it keeps the ship moving forward. 
 People need to see that you are both committed to and excited 
about the work your team does. They  will take their cues from you. 
When you believe in your  people, they  will believe in you.

40 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
I vividly recall one par tic u lar after noon about six months  after 
I’d transitioned to the role of operations supervisor. The center 
clerk came into my offi  ce and announced she was resigning. It 
took me completely by surprise.
I asked her, “Why are you  doing this?”
Her answer was something I never forgot: “ Because  you’re 
working almost around the clock— killing yourself over deliver-
ing a box— and I  don’t want to be buried with you!”
I was stunned.
 After I collected my thoughts, I asked the clerk to explain. She 
said I’d been driving myself and every one  else around me to the 
breaking point  because I had gotten far too demanding and 
much too short in my responses to my team. I was not much fun 
to be around anymore. I was creating an atmosphere of stress, 
and it seemed like I cared more about packages than  people.
I thought about it, and she was absolutely right. I apologized 
and asked her to reconsider her resignation. Thankfully, she ac-
cepted my apology and deci ded to stay. In fact, she advanced into 
other roles in the years that followed and eventually completed 
a tremendous  career with UPS.
I needed to get my priorities back on track, which meant tak-
ing better care of myself. I knew I was  doing a terrible job in that 
department, and it was undermining my ability to lead. From 
that day on, self- leadership became my top priority.
Consider how you manage your own time and how you  handle 
the inevitable changes that bring challenges, excitement— and yes, 
even grief and anguish— into your life. Are you always two steps 
 behind instead of one step ahead? What about advances in your ﬁ eld and 
all the innovations that seem to come along almost daily? Are you up- to- 
date with the latest technology and best business practices? How are you 
 doing with your health?

Chapter 4 • Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents  
41
Make Deadlines a Key Part 
of Your Planning Pro cess
Students study harder and are better at blocking out distractions 
when a ﬁ nal exam is looming. Moms- to-be decorate nurseries to 
beat the due date of a coming baby. Details for a wedding begin 
to look like an oncoming freight train for  those preparing for the 
big day.
Business is no diff  er ent from  these other areas of life. Make 
deadlines a key part of your planning pro cess. Projects that have 
deadlines get done.
When you take the time it takes, it takes less time. The fewer 
things you do, the more things you accomplish.  There are numer-
ous time- management systems available. Use one that works for 
you. Mine is just one of many:
Step 1: Determine Priorities  Every Day
You already know what your priorities should be. Chances are, 
however, you might have trou ble concentrating your time and en-
ergy on the right activities each day.
Avoid engaging in a  battle of the trivial many against the vital few. 
Instead, set aside a few minutes each day to decide what projects 
and tasks are a priority, and, more impor tant, which ones are not. 
Prioritize  those tasks based upon your goals, and then attack 
them one by one, in order. As impor tant things pop up, add 
them to your daily list. Check off  items as they are completed. 
 Don’t try to keep all of the items on your to-do list in your head; 
write them down.
Step 2: Take Time  Every Week to Chart a Schedule
Withdraw from your normal routine for a  couple of hours and 
plan the upcoming week. Try some diff  er ent days and times  until 
you ﬁ nd the one that works best for you. A disciplined approach 

42 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
to managing time  will keep you focused and build momentum 
in your  favor. When you take the time to set clear targets and 
chart a well- deﬁ ned schedule, you  will become much more con-
sistent.  Don’t make it up as you go along.
Step 3: Monitor Your Plan Monthly
Decide daily (Step 1) and take time weekly (Step 2), but make sure 
you also monitor monthly. A good rule of thumb is that 10  percent 
of your time at work should be dedicated to planning and the 
other 90  percent to working the plan.
If you invest a percentage of your time in planning, you  will 
accomplish far more than  people who spend  little or no time 
planning and who instead ﬂ y by the seat of their pants.
You may be thinking, “ There is no way I have that much time 
to sit around planning.” Maybe  there is a reason you  don’t have 
the time. Could it be that you have no time  because you have no plan? 
Planning is not “sitting around.” The truth is, planning is pos-
sibly the hardest work you  will do. It is surely among the most 
impor tant.
Step 4: Meet Yearly with Staff  outside the Offi  ce
Consider  going on a retreat with your staff  at least once  a year 
with a set agenda that includes but is not limited to planning 
and goal setting. For years, I used to think pulling away like this 
was a waste of time and money. That was before I did it.
Once I tried this approach, I realized my management team 
became more closely aligned and a lot more focused when they 
 were away from their routine work environment and all of the 
distractions that go with it. One rule: No interruptions,  human 
or electronic.

Chapter 4 • Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents  
43
How You Can Deliver
• Figure out your It— the one  thing you  were born to do.
• Learn to manage yourself before you begin managing 
 others.
• Be only and exactly who you are.  Don’t try to be some-
one  else.
• Set an example with a positive attitude and  people  will 
follow your lead.
• Manage your time and become an expert at planning.
• Remember that when you take the time it takes, it takes 
less time.

44
chapter 5
Targeting the Most 
Critical Information
W
hen I was in the fourth grade, my teacher, Mrs. Cesped, 
taught us that by asking What? Who? How? Why? we could 
discover just about anything we wanted to know. Although I 
 didn’t know it at the time, Mrs. Cesped was teaching us to think 
like leaders and to grasp the importance of focusing on the crit-
ical information we needed to make the best pos si ble decisions.
When you make it a habit to ask your management team about 
the things that  really  matter— questions that get to the heart of 
the work they do— something very in ter est ing starts to occur. It 
makes them dig deeper into the details of their jobs and discover 
things that need attention. Asking questions that target critical 
information sends a signal to them that they are personally re-
sponsible to know  every minute detail of their job and they  will 
be accountable for their per for mance.
Ask Questions That Are Provocative Probes
Steve Gordon, a division man ag er for UPS, had an 
 opening for a man ag er’s position in his hub. As it turned 
out, two supervisors on his team  were qualiﬁ ed for the 
position and had roughly equal experience. However, one 
had a few more years with the com pany than the other.

Chapter 5 • Targeting the Most Critical Information  
45
 After an extensive interview pro cess, Steve deci ded to 
off er the position to the person who had fewer years. She 
accepted. The other supervisor  wasn’t too happy about the 
decision and asked Steve for a meeting to ask why he was 
passed over in  favor of a supervisor with less time in the 
com pany.
Steve deci ded the best way to answer this question was to 
ask a few questions of his own. Therefore, he asked about 
the volume that had been pro cessed in the hub the previ-
ous night. The supervisor said he would check, and a few 
minutes  later returned and reported that the volume was 
about normal and  there  were no known problems.
Steve then asked how many packages  there  were and 
 whether they  were dispatched on time. The supervisor left 
once again; and when he returned, he told Steve “Approxi-
mately 120,000, and they  were dispatched on time.”
Steve continued to ask questions, and the employee 
continued to excuse himself and  later return with the 
answer.
Fi nally, Steve completed his round of questioning and 
asked the supervisor to sit in the offi  ce next to his, door 
ajar, and to listen to the conversation he was about to 
have with the newly promoted man ag er.
When the newly promoted man ag er arrived in his offi  ce, 
Steve asked her to tell him about the volume that had 
been pro cessed in the hub the previous night. She said, 
“122,479 packages  were pro cessed with no problems, 

46 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
and the operation closed at 3:22 a.m. Of that total, 
121,368  were ground packages and 1,111  were air. All 
outbound volume departed on time, and the pre- load was 
completed at 6:45 a.m. The delivery  drivers  were dis-
patched on schedule, with one package car taken out of 
ser vice at 9:00 a.m. due to a ﬂ at tire. The tire was replaced, 
and the car was back on the road by 9:30 a.m.”
Steve thanked her and she left his offi  ce. He then asked 
the supervisor who was passed over for the promotion to 
come back into his offi  ce. Without any prompting from 
Steve, he said he had heard the  whole conversation and 
understood why she had received the promotion and he 
had not.
Whenever you ask your managers questions about their op-
erations, they  will in turn ask their  people the same questions. 
Once this leadership trait becomes a habit, dominoes  will fall 
and this virtual circle of accountability  will raise every one’s 
game, along with the bottom line.
Leaders need to know what is  going on inside their opera-
tions, and the best ones know the key facts off  the top of their 
heads.  They’ve got the answers when asked.
Let’s look closely at how you can leverage the power of Mrs. 
Cesped’s four questions— the What, the Who, the How, and the Why.
The What
It is impossible to hit a target if you  don’t know what it is. A team 
that has not identiﬁ ed what they are trying to do  will fail. There-
fore, determining the what must be one of your top responsibilities.
Each member of your team has diff  er ent strengths and unique 
abilities. Getting them to operate as a coordinated unit— all mov-
ing in the same direction and  toward the same goal—is the job 

Chapter 5 • Targeting the Most Critical Information  
47
of the leader. If they are not crystal clear about what they are sup-
posed to be  doing, it is  going to be diffi  cult and most likely im-
possible to achieve your organ ization’s objectives.
An old term used by motorcyclists, target ﬁ xation, means that 
wherever you look while riding a motorcycle, the bike  will follow. 
In other words, you  shouldn’t look at the guardrail when you go 
into a curve or that’s where you’ll end up.
This type of misdirected focus can get you into real trou ble, 
both on the road and in your life.
What Target Fixation Looks Like
When Monica was ﬁ ve years old, her  uncle took her to a large 
empty parking lot to teach her how to  ride her new bicycle. The lot 
had plenty of room and no obstacles except for one gigantic light 
pole on the far side of the lot.
As her  uncle steadied the bike and Monica began pedaling, she 
gained her balance and he knew it was safe to let go. All of a 
sudden, though, she looked up at the light pole on the far side of 
the parking lot and began screaming, “I’m gonna hit the pole! I’m 
gonna hit the pole!” Her  uncle shouted, “No,  you’re not! Just turn 
the  handle bars.” But Monica kept her focus locked onto the light 
pole and kept pedaling.
Guess what? She hit the pole.
Instead of focusing on the fact that she was actually riding her 
bike and had total control of the situation, Monica  couldn’t stop 
looking at the pole. If she had switched her target ﬁ xation from the 
pole to where she wanted to go, she  wouldn’t have ended up ﬂ at 
on the pavement.
Keep yourself and your  people focused on the right things. 
Your answer to the what is your vision for the team. When you 
clearly communicate your vision, your  people  will be inspired to 
concentrate on the right things and you and your com pany  won’t 
end up in the ditch. Yielding to the natu ral temptation to focus 

48 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
on the “poles” that are in your way— the wrong whats—is a big 
 mistake. If you concentrate on the wrong issues, or simply ﬁ xate 
on your problems, they  will consume you.
Have the vision to see beyond your circumstances, problems, 
and emotions, and focus on the right targets. When you have the 
right who, the what is  going to get done.
The Who
Being a successful leader also demands that you ﬁ gure out 
the who. The  people who work for you are the ones who  will make 
the what happen.
To learn about your  people, you must get to know them per-
sonally, not just their names and job responsibilities. Ask them 
to share their viewpoints, concerns, personal goals, and dreams, 
as my trainer Fred did with me on my ﬁ rst day with UPS.
When the  people on your team believe that you value them as 
individuals, that you care about what they think, they  will be ex-
cited to be part of your team.  People who know that they  matter 
and are convinced they are appreciated  will work harder and add 
more value to the team.
By asking questions about your team’s goals (the what) and 
discovering the details about each person on the team (the who), 
you  will have laid the foundation for deciding the correct course 
of action (the how).
The How
We live in a cut- and- paste world of ideas. A tried- and- true busi-
ness strategy with proven results in other companies can be very 
tempting to copy. Remember, though,  there is no guarantee that 
what works well for another com pany  will work for you.
 There are endless options for answering the how, but the best 
answer is usually the one that is doable. Focus on how to become 

Chapter 5 • Targeting the Most Critical Information  
49
better at what you already do and then be ready to make the in-
evitable necessary changes along the way.
Once when his staff  was debating the best way to fend off  the 
competition, Chick- ﬁ l- A’s found er S. Truett Cathy pounded his 
ﬁ st on a conference room  table and ﬂ atly told his staff , “If we get 
better, our customers  will demand we get bigger!”
Mr. Cathy was right. It is a basic truth and operating princi ple 
in business: change is inevitable; growth is optional.
The most eff ective leaders know  every aspect of their business 
and pursue the ever- changing demands of their customers. Get 
your team to understand this unavoidable real ity well and 
watch all  those  little details like a hawk. Constantly study your 
industry while keeping a close eye on  every part of your business.
You  don’t want surprises, and you need to have practical op-
tions for almost  every pos si ble scenario. Surround yourself with 
experienced and motivated  people who stay ahead of the game. 
That  will be your how.
The Why
What, who, and how are natu ral questions for anyone who is try-
ing to set the direction for an organ ization. However, the most 
impor tant question might be the why.
Think about how leaders inspire  people to action. They start 
by telling them why they do what they do and lay out a compel-
ling vision for the  future. When  people are moved to follow a 
vision, they are not so much buying into what you want to accom-
plish as they are agreeing with why you want to do it. Leaders need 
to inspire their teams to see opportunities that  others  don’t and 
to eff ectively communicate how they are  going to reach the sum-
mit together.

50 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
To enhance ser vice off erings and grow market share in a short 
time, at one point UPS acquired twenty- six diff er ent companies. 
All  were good organizations with their own histories and cul-
tures. However, they  were set in their ways of  doing business.
Their inﬂ exibility became a challenge for our leadership team, 
as we tried to integrate them into the UPS culture and the way we 
did business. During the early stages of this pro cess, some trou-
bling internal attitudes and external friction surfaced, including 
a fracturing brand identity. We began to look like several diff er-
ent companies— confusing both employees and customers.
The leadership or  owners of the companies we purchased  were 
happy to remain separate and distinct from one another, but 
we needed to meld the pieces together with  great skill and 
care.  There was a lot at stake. Our CEO at the time, Mike Eskew, 
took the reins and communicated with our new partners exactly 
why we needed to have just one UPS. The message was clear: 
UPS— one com pany, one vision, one brand.
We formed teams that  were driven solely by careful attention 
to our shared goal: to relaunch the UPS brand, along with a 
new corporate logo, better setting the course for the  future. 
 After a lot of hard work by  people from UPS and representatives 
from the acquired companies, eventually every one got on the 
same page and moved forward together.
The mission was accomplished: one com pany, one vision, one 
brand. That happened  because every one knew why they  were 
 doing what they did: to create one UPS.
Ready, Aim, Fire
Let’s put all four questions together into steps that you can apply 
in your own business.
1. Identify what you are supposed to accomplish ( your mission 
and goals).

Chapter 5 • Targeting the Most Critical Information  
51
Take a Ready,  Aim,  Fire Approach
The best way to consistently hit the target is to take a Ready- Aim- 
Fire approach and assess what happens by gathering relevant 
information and analyzing results.
Step 1: Identify Your Target
Before you start ﬁ ring at your target, do your homework. Iden-
tify the speciﬁ c target and then choose the appropriate “weapon.” 
Identify your target—hone  your vision—by asking, “What am I 
trying to accomplish and why?” Your weapon and ammunition 
are your resources. Assess readiness by asking  whether you have 
the right team with the right skills and all the means necessary 
to accomplish the vision you have spelled out.
Step 2: Aim Your Resources
Verify your goals (your what), deﬁ ne a strategy (your how), and 
then point your weapon at the target.
Step 3: Fire
It is time to pull the trigger.
Firearms instructors say, “You  can’t miss fast enough to win,” 
which means accuracy is more impor tant than speed in shoot-
ing. The same princi ple is true for designing the right strategy. 
If you take the time to prepare properly at the outset, the odds 
of hitting your target go way up.
2. Then determine how you are  going to do it (your strategy).
3. Know who is  going to do it (your team).
4. Understand why you are  doing what you are  doing (your 
vision).
When the answers to  these questions are all working together in 
harmony, your organ ization  will be in alignment.

52 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Unsuccessful leaders use the Ready,  Fire,  Aim approach and 
consistently miss the target. Successful leaders practice Ready, 
Aim, Fire. Of course, another option might be to “shoot ﬁ rst and 
call what ever you hit the target.”
 There is actually a valid point in that claim. If you aim and 
get close, but  don’t always hit the bull’s- eye, is that necessarily a 
bad  thing? Maybe not. It’s likely that the more you shoot using 
the right techniques, the better you  will get.
One  thing is certain: If you  don’t take a shot, you  will never 
hit any target, much less the bull’s- eye!
Sometimes, however, the  actual target is not what every one 
thinks it is.
Be Sure to Clearly Communicate Your Target
Innovator Tom Wujec references a survey of 50,000 CEOs who 
 were asked if their vision had been clearly communicated and 
was being executed eff ectively. Not surprisingly, 80  percent an-
swered that they believed it was. However, only 20  percent of the 
team members of  those same 50,000 CEOs believed the vision 
was both clear and being carried out.9
That is quite a gap. So how do you close a gap like that?
You do it by asking your coworkers many questions and seek-
ing their honest feedback. What are they thinking, hearing, and 
understanding? Pursue the truth to get every one connected and 
moving in the same direction. It is essential to understand each 
team member’s point of view and to check frequently that the 
understanding is mutual. Identify  those gaps in your organ-
ization and eliminate them as soon as pos si ble.
 Don’t just communicate— connect the dots! Think about all 
 those emails, messages, texts, and memos you generate. Have you 
closed the loop to get the desired result? Or, as we saw with the CEO 

Chapter 5 • Targeting the Most Critical Information  
53
study, have you just put out a ton of information, hoping that something 
 will stick?
All the information that goes out from you and your staff  
and colleagues in a given month would prob ably ﬁ ll a small 
truck.
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Focus on the Big Picture
Too often, managers get caught up believing that the solution to 
a prob lem is ﬁ lling out endless forms or performing numerous 
internal pro cesses. Instead of helping,  these procedures unnecessar-
ily burden  those  people responsible for the big picture: delivering 
what customers have paid for.
I used to ask my managers to bring one or two reports to each 
staff  meeting that could be condensed or even eliminated. Staff  
then worked with the operators to analyze them and discuss their 
ﬁ ndings at the next meeting.
It was amazing to me how many reports and forms we elimi-
nated as a direct result of this  simple pro cess. Of course, this 
effi  ciency- driven focus saved staff  and operators time, and they 
all loved  doing away with unnecessary paperwork.
We had to be careful not to have so many procedures that 
 people  were overwhelmed to the point of burnout. Often  those 
procedures exist just  because that’s the way it’s always been. Leaders 
who care about their team members need to ﬁ nd ways to make 
their jobs easier and more eff ective. This involves getting rid of 
the anchors around the necks of productivity.

54 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
How You Can Deliver
• Ask questions and listen closely  until you are satisﬁ ed 
your group is aligned with your vision.
• Once you have selected your what, focus on the who, how, 
and why.
•  Don’t just communicate. Connect the dots.
• Review current practices to determine what can be 
improved and what can be eliminated.
• Question the purpose of each report. If you  don’t need 
it, get rid of it.

55
chapter 6
Cultivating the X  Factor
X  Factor (n): Critical characteristics for eff ective leadership
G
reat leaders understand that  every single person makes the 
com pany what it is. To build a championship team, hire, de-
velop, and promote  people with diverse strengths and then trust 
them to do their jobs.
This is what leads to 1 + 1  
+ 1 = 5. That’s the kind of arith-
metic that makes a leader’s job 
exhilarating and fun and the 
accountants and stockholders 
very happy, too!
It’s one  thing to build a 
championship- caliber 
team 
when you get to handpick from a pool of experienced and tal-
ented  people. It can be an entirely diff  er ent scenario when you 
take over an established organ ization where, more often than 
not, you get what you get. The business world is not like the NFL 
draft, where you choose from a long list of the best players on 
earth.
X  Factor 1: The Ability to Match  People and Jobs
 You’ve got to establish bridges of trust with your  people while 
learning each person’s strengths— and weaknesses. The ability 
to match the right individual to the right job is one of  those 
To build a championship 
team, hire, develop, and 
promote people with di-
verse strengths and then 
trust them to do their jobs.

56 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
uncanny abilities that X  factor leaders can do better than any-
one  else. The best leaders execute the se lection-and-assignment 
process with surgical precision.
Helping your  people succeed requires placing them in posi-
tions that are the right ﬁ t. However, rotating  people through a 
number of functions can bring tremendous value to the team 
and prepares them for more responsibility as they pro gress 
through their careers.
For example, former UPS Chairman and CEO Oz Nelson 
started as a part- time car washer.  After working as a package car 
driver, he worked his way through the ranks and eventually be-
came the corporate business development man ag er.  Later, he was 
promoted to chief ﬁ nancial offi  cer prior to becoming chairman 
of the board and chief executive offi  cer of the com pany.
So, just how do you surround yourself with  great  people?
Pick Good  People, Train Them Well, Then Step Back
One mea sure of your success is how much you build up  others 
and prepare them for greater responsibility. When you build up 
 others, you build up yourself. Developing  people and watching 
them grow, take on more responsibility, and succeed  will be one 
of your most rewarding experiences as a leader.
Teddy Roo se velt once said, “The best executive is one who has 
sense enough to pick good  people to do what he wants done, and 
self- restraint enough to keep from meddling with them while 
they do it.” Unfortunately, many leaders like to meddle and they 
end up making decisions their  people could and should make.
When you need to hire new employees or promote existing ones, 
ﬁ rst choose the right  people. And who are the right  people? They 
are  those who have similar values as your organ ization and a his-
tory of high integrity and a strong work ethic.  After hiring them, 
ensure they receive the proper training, clearly communicate 
your expectations, and then step back and let them do their job.

Chapter 6 • Cultivating the X  Factor 
57
As you get to know your  people better, you  will identify the 
 great ones, the good ones, and the ones who need a  little help. The 
last  thing you want is to start over with new  people and lose all 
the institutional knowledge and experience that seasoned employ-
ees have accumulated. Although turnover is sometimes necessary, 
and even a good  thing, it can be disruptive and expensive.
Learn to observe and evaluate, and resist the urge to make im-
pulsive decisions about personnel changes. Be patient and care-
fully consider your options before taking action. You  will thank 
yourself  later on.
 Under enormous pressure, I learned an impor tant lesson about 
matching the right person to a critical proj ect. Late one after-
noon while working in my offi  ce in San Francisco, I was notiﬁ ed 
we had to move out of one of the largest buildings in the district. 
Even more disturbing was the news that we had to evacuate the 
building within six months.
We had already made plans to replace the fa cil i ty in the next 
year and a half. But on this par tic u lar day, our attorneys discov-
ered that the ﬁ ne print in an amendment to the lease agreement 
gave the landlord the right to evict tenants with only a six- month 
notice. Overnight, the timeline for our well- thought- out reloca-
tion plan shrank from eigh teen months to six.
Recognize When the “Right” Person Is Wrong for the Job
Fortunately, the construction of our new building was well 
 underway; but if we  were  going to move in ahead of schedule, we 
needed to complete the move twelve months sooner than planned. 
In addition, creating an operating plan to relocate more than 
three hundred employees in such a short time frame was a mas-
sive undertaking for us.
With no time to waste, I assigned one of our best industrial 
engineers to head up the proj ect. I thought he was the perfect 
person for the job. He was one of the smartest  people in the 

58 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
district and had years of experience at UPS. I gave him  free rein 
to use what ever resources he needed to get the job done.
Much to my surprise, it soon became clear the proj ect was falling 
 behind schedule  under his leadership. He turned out to be such a 
perfectionist that he focused on  every minute detail himself, rather 
than delegating and holding his team accountable for meeting crit-
ical deadlines. He lacked a sense of urgency and wasted valuable 
time as he tried to put  every aspect of the job  under a microscope.
Before stepping in directly, I asked several staff - level managers to 
help him out, but we just  couldn’t get his ﬁ re lit. With critical dead-
lines approaching, I had no choice but to take him off  the proj ect.
Be Willing to Take a Chance
I took a chance and gave the assignment to an operations 
man ag er named Megan. She had no experience in projects like 
this, but she had a wealth of knowledge about operations and a 
reputation for getting things done. Well- respected by her peers, 
she was a team builder who  didn’t hesitate to hold  people account-
able for their per for mance.
Megan was fearless and had what it took: initiative, passion, 
courage, and the attitude to do what ever was needed to get the job 
done. Once I put her in charge, she took off  like a bullet train to 
get the proj ect back on track and into the station on time. Sparks 
ﬂ ew and urgency was in the air and that is exactly what I was 
hoping to see.
Neither Megan nor I accepted 90  percent as good enough, but 
we both realized that 98  percent and on time was better than 
100  percent and late. She might have lacked the technical back-
ground but more than made up for it with her leadership skills 
and desire to succeed.  Because of her passion and relentless drive 
to get the job done, the new building opened right on schedule, 
and the transition plan for relocation was executed ﬂ awlessly. 
Megan received a well- deserved promotion less than a year  later.

Chapter 6 • Cultivating the X  Factor 
59
At ﬁ rst, the industrial engineer seemed to be the logical per-
son to head the eff ort, especially compared to someone who had 
no experience in projects of this magnitude. However, ﬁ elding 
our best man ag er in this case meant putting the person with the 
best ﬁ t of speciﬁ c competencies in charge.
X  Factor 2: The Ability to Remove the Fog
To ensure that you clearly communicate with the members of 
your team, use this four- step approach.
Step 1: Clearly State Your Expectations and Then Follow Up
This sounds obvious, but you would be surprised how many lead-
ers just assume their team knows what to do. Assuming anything 
in a leadership role is a major  mistake.
 There is nothing more frustrating for motivated  people than 
not knowing exactly what is expected of them. Be clear by being 
speciﬁ c and then follow up (the two magic words) to ensure every-
one truly understands what you want them to do.
Continue to recast the vision, over and over. Remove all of the 
fog and, if necessary, put your expectations in writing. Keep it 
 simple and direct.
To ensure  you’ve communicated your expectations, state them in 
the following terms:
• The result you want
• The standards the result must meet
• The deadline ( whether it’s ﬂ exible or in concrete)
• The bud get
• The resources available
• Any constraints (sacred cows to avoid)
• When and how to report pro gress
• How their per for mance  will be mea sured
• That you are available to help

60 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Step 2: Translate Your Expectations into Deliverables
Deliverables are the expected results, not to be confused with the 
activities that lead to the end product. For example, if you order 
a pizza for delivery, you place your order and wait for the driver 
to bring exactly what you ordered to your  house. You  don’t tell 
them how to make the pizza or how to drive the delivery vehicle.
It’s one  thing to say, “I expect you to hit your goals for the 
month.” It’s another  thing altogether to tell your team  every  little 
detail of how to do it. You have placed  these folks in their posi-
tions  because they know how to do it. Once you have let your team 
know what they need to deliver and when it needs to arrive, get 
out of the way.
Step 3: Hold  People Accountable
Every one needs accountability— you included. It’s amazing 
how much per for mance improves when managers are around. 
Remember— what gets inspected gets done.
If you  don’t follow through with both inspections and ac know-
ledg ments, it is easy for  people to think that what  they’re  doing 
 isn’t impor tant. If assignments are not impor tant enough for the 
person in charge to check on them, then the quality of the work 
 will decline and the results  will fall short of the standards you 
expected.
Step 4: Check Your Own Pro gress Regularly
You may feel as though you have the right to tell  people what 
to do, but having that right  doesn’t guarantee you are actually 
inﬂ uencing anyone. The gap between a leader’s expectations and a 
follower’s actions is usually more about their relationship than it is about 
matters of substance. If you sense a gap, it might be time to do 
some relational fence mending.

Chapter 6 • Cultivating the X  Factor 
61
X  Factor 3: The Ability to Inspire and Go Higher
The best leaders are  great encouragers, and they inspire their 
team to achieve more than they ever thought pos si ble. Per for-
mance without acknowledgment kills morale. If all you ever do 
is state expectations and mea sure per for mance, be ready to lead 
a lifeless team.
Show Your Appreciation
You can show your appreciation to employees with a  simple, 
heartfelt “Thank you,” or a timely “Good job.” This costs you 
nothing. Failing to acknowledge  others with praise might cost 
you more than you can mea sure.
Your skill in acknowledging  people for a job well done can be 
one of your greatest assets. An encouraging word from you can 
sustain an employee for weeks, and a handwritten thank- you note 
 will be appreciated and often cherished, as they realize that you 
noticed— and it was impor tant enough that you took the time to 
write a personal note.
I always kept a stack of thank- you notes on my desk. They 
 were a constant reminder to thank  people for their good work. 
Of course,  there are many ways to inspire  people and not all of 
them are pleasant. As you  will soon see, one man’s trash can be 
the source of another man’s trea sure.
Specify the Reason for an Acknowl edgment
Whenever you recognize someone for a job well done, follow it 
with clear and speciﬁ c details as to why you think they deserved to 
be acknowledged. For example: “ Great job, Jennifer. Your quick 
and accurate information leading to the diagnosis of the prob lem 
last weekend provided the exact data that we needed to close that 
order. Keep up the  great work! I  really appreciate what you do.”

62 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
X  Factor 4: The Ability to Be Creative
Increasing package volume was not easy in the early days of UPS 
operations in Germany. Our business development  people worked 
hard, but  were making  little pro gress. They implemented all the 
tried- and- true methods that  were available to them, but they 
 were  running out of ideas and leads.
Sales leads produce business: it’s that  simple. Without sales 
leads, nothing happens, and that is what we faced. Our sales force 
was frustrated and  running out of steam.
At that time, we had two districts, north and south, which cov-
ered the entire country. The other district man ag er and I deci-
ded to have a joint meeting with all of our business development 
 people, who numbered more than one hundred. The goal of 
the meeting was to reenergize our team by collaborating, learn-
ing from each other, and talking about what was and  wasn’t 
working.
The conference setting was a typical one. To add importance, 
we invited Jim McLaughlin, our corporate president, to attend the 
meeting.
The day- and- a- half- long session went pretty much as we ex-
pected, and we had anticipated that Jim would give every one in 
attendance some inspirational closing remarks. We  were wrong.
Jim is a pull- no- punches, say- it- like- it-is kind of guy. He stood 
up at the end of the meeting and sternly announced: “Extend 
your  hotel rooms for another night. I want  every one of you to 
meet me in front of the  hotel in one hour. Wear old clothes if you 
have them. Each of you needs to bring a knife, a pair of scissors, 
or what ever you can ﬁ nd that cuts.”
Exactly one hour  later, more than one hundred UPS  people 
 were standing in front of the  hotel, each one holding some kind 
of cutting instrument.

Chapter 6 • Cultivating the X  Factor 
63
Jim said, “Follow me” and took off  walking down the main 
street of the  little village on the Baltic Sea. It looked like some sort 
of parade, as local  people began lining the sidewalks in amaze-
ment. No one, including me, had any idea what was  going on.
Suddenly our  little parade turned the corner and we found 
ourselves in an alley that ran for kilometers  behind the shops and 
stores. Jim explained our mission, which was to last well into 
the night.
“Every one divide up into teams of two— you  will take turns,” 
he instructed. “One of you  will get into the dumpster  behind 
each store and remove  every single box. Then the two of you  will 
cut the shipping and receiving label from each of  those boxes. 
When that is completed, you are to go across the street and do 
the same  thing— and continue  until  every last dumpster in this 
city has been searched.”
With that, we embarked on our assigned task. Why we  didn’t 
end up in jail is beyond me.
When some of the merchants asked us if we had lost our 
minds— wanting to know what the heck we  were  doing—we just 
told them the truth. “We are UPS salespeople, and we want the 
labels from the boxes that you are throwing out for sales leads.” 
They seemed to accept the explanation, and into the night we 
worked. Jim stayed on-scene to ensure the operation went as 
planned.
 After we ﬁ nished digging through the dumpsters, Jim in-
structed every one to return to the conference room with all of 
the labels we had collected. The fruits of our work  were stacks 
of torn and dirty labels, and our marathon sorting session 
lasted the rest of the night. Soon  people began to realize that 
what they had in front of them was gold nuggets. They  were 
leads— solid leads,  because they  were from real shippers and real 
receivers.

64 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
When the Usual Methods  Don’t Work, Find New Ones
Jim had seen a better way to get the job done. When usual meth-
ods  were not working, he got creative. His approach was  simple 
and direct. He made us get our hands dirty and pan for gold.
Times have changed, of course, and no one at UPS would dare 
suggest anything like dumpster diving  today. But hundreds of 
leads came from  those dirty old boxes mixed in with the other 
garbage. Within a few weeks, our sales staff  had contacted all 
the companies found on  those labels.
Before we knew it, our delivery centers had packages coming 
out of their ears. The leads from  those dumpsters brought us 
many new customers and cars full of new packages.
Did a Sugar Cube Save UPS Germany?
The momentum from that day snowballed. We made it a country- 
wide campaign that involved all employees. It became very com-
petitive and turned into a contest where employees and even their 
families  were rewarded for  every lead that turned into a new 
customer.
I remember handing a man ag er a paper- wrapped sugar cube 
for his coff ee at breakfast one morning and he asked me what 
it was.
“It’s a sugar cube,” I replied, wondering if he had asked a trick 
question.
The man ag er said, “No, it’s not— look!”
He showed me the wrapper. On it was printed the manufac-
turer’s name, address, and phone number. He proudly told every-
one at the  table the object he was holding in his hand  wasn’t a 
sugar cube, it was a lead. Darned if that sugar cube lead  didn’t end 
up becoming one of UPS’s largest customers in Germany.
More than thirty years  after that infamous dumpster- diving 
event, I attended a regional meeting in Germany. During the 

Chapter 6 • Cultivating the X  Factor 
65
meeting, I received a gift presented in a large, nicely wrapped box. 
I opened the box, and inside was one  little sugar cube. It, not me, 
got a standing ovation as I held it up for every one to see.
How You Can Deliver
• The sum is greater than the  whole when you hire, 
develop, and trust your  people.
• Your team  will succeed when you put the right  people 
in the right jobs.
• Mea sure your own personal success by how well your 
 people develop and grow.
• Find  those who need help, then provide it.
• Look deep, be creative, take a chance to ﬁ nd the way to 
get the job done— ﬁ nd your “Megan.”
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Guide Their Teams to Higher Levels
A worthwhile personal goal for any leader should be to help  people 
become better than you and guide them to higher levels in the com-
pany. As I did this, I surrounded myself with  great  people and 
del e ga tion took on a new meaning. I had to learn to trust my 
staff  with the whats and turn them loose on the hows.
Remove the fog about what every one is  doing. Leaders are re-
sponsible for making expectations and deliverables unmistak-
ably clear and then holding their  people accountable to meet 
them.  Great leaders assume nothing.
When the old ways  don’t work, quit hitting the same wall and get 
creative. Jim McLaughlin was a leader with that elusive X  factor. 
He led us to an unexpected place via an alleyway of dumpsters in 
a village on the Baltic Sea.

66 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
• Remove fog by stating expectations clearly in terms of 
deliverables and follow up by inspecting frequently.
• Acknowledge good performance— quickly and speciﬁ -
cally. Make a habit of ﬁ nding  people who are  doing the 
right things.
• Keep thank- you notes on your desk and use them often.
• Replace excuses with solutions.

67
chapter 7
Maintaining an Ethical Environment
Be Alert to Skewing
In my teenage years working on a ranch, part of my job was to 
clean out the barn twice a day. It was ﬁ lled with  horses, hogs, a 
few head of  cattle, and way too many chickens. The temperature 
inside the barn was normally above 80 degrees. During my ﬁ rst 
few days on the job, I could stand the smell for only a few min-
utes before I had to rush outside and gasp for fresh air. With each 
passing day, however, I found I could hang in  there for longer and 
longer periods of time.
Each day I thought the smell was a  little less overwhelming; 
but, in fact, the smell had not changed at all. My sense of smell 
had simply become skewed. In business, skewing occurs when 
 people try to make their per for mance look better than it  really 
is. In most cases, this means they are manipulating the numbers 
or taking shortcuts that violate com pany policy or its code of eth-
ics. In some circles, this is known as “making bad numbers look 
good.” Some  people may try to justify it and even convince them-
selves that it is part of  doing business.  After a while, that skewed 
picture becomes their real ity.
Skewing happens in other ways, too. How many times have you 
walked into a business that was disor ga nized or dirty or wit-
nessed employees giving poor ser vice to customers? In such or-
ganizations, sloppy appearance, poor customer ser vice, and even 
inappropriate behaviors have become not only tolerated, they 
have slowly become the norm.

68 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Over time, if management continues to neglect such critical 
warning signs, employees  will become numb to the downward 
slide. When this happens, that strong barn smell becomes 
 imperceptible to  those living in the barn, but your customers 
and  others  will certainly notice.
All employees, regardless of position, need to be honest and do 
the right things. Occasionally, a few  people convince themselves 
and  those around them that a  little fudging  here and  there is not so 
bad, and it lures them into trading their ethics for personal gain. 
 Others may mistakenly believe that as long as their chosen course 
of action is within the conﬁ nes of the law, they have done nothing 
wrong. That view disregards ethical bound aries and is simply not 
true. Just  because it  isn’t illegal  doesn’t make it right or just.
Letting your senses adapt to what’s around you may not be 
such a big deal when you are shoveling manure, but it’s a huge 
deal when you are trying to create a healthy and productive work 
environment for your  people. Perhaps, over a long time, you have 
allowed some things to become skewed in your organ ization. 
Maybe it was even that way when you got  there. What ever the case 
may be, it’s your job to right the ship.
Assess yourself and your team. Do a “smell test” occasion-
ally. Take the time to ask yourself, “Am I getting used to the 
smell around  here?” If something  doesn’t smell right, take im-
mediate action and ﬁ nd the source of this unpleasant odor.
Set the Standard and Remain Above Reproach
It is the responsibility of the organ ization’s leadership to create a 
culture based on integrity by setting the standard and remaining 
above reproach at all times.
Leaders are vulnerable; the higher your position, the more vul-
nerable you become. This means that you must do every thing 

Chapter 7 • Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
69
you can to stay away from situations where your character could 
be called into question.  Great leaders never give anyone a reason 
to question their motives or their morals and they remain 
steadfast in their belief that the right way to do things  will al-
ways be the right way to do things.
Having a clear conscience is power ful. It allows you to be 
more conﬁ dent as a leader  because  there are no invisible bur-
dens weighing you down. It may sound trivial; however, I think 
this may be the most impor tant  thing you can take away from 
this book.
Recognize When In de pen dent 
Counsel May Be Helpful
If you have forged strong bonds with your  people and created a 
climate of open and honest communication, they  will let you 
know when something  isn’t right. Whenever your employees have 
been conditioned to breathe the same exhaust you are breathing, 
you may want to get assistance from outside professionals. You 
might think you cannot aff ord a con sul tant, but the truth may 
be just the opposite. Your organ ization might be in a bad place 
 because you failed to get in de pen dent and unbiased counsel.
Outsiders  don’t stand inside your barn all day and  will thus 
be able to quickly detect “that smell.” A fresh perspective may be 
just what the doctor ordered.
Be Someone Your Team Can Trust
In a survey sponsored by Fast Com pany, the International 
 Institute for Management Development, and Egon Zehnder 
International, 95   percent of employees replied “yes” or “abso-
lutely” when asked the question: “Do the ethics of the CEO play 

70 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
a meaningful role in the way business gets done?” This echoes 
the U.S. News & World Report/Harvard University study cited 
in chapter  3 and conﬁ rms the overwhelming desire among 
 employees for their leader to have integrity above all other 
traits.
Your  people  will notice if you start work late, take long lunches, 
and leave early. They  will notice if you cut corners, waste time, 
fail to do meaningful work, or fudge  here and  there. If  people 
are  going to follow you, they want assurance that they can trust 
you. If they cannot, they  will back away. Warren Buff ett once said, 
“It takes 20 years to build a reputation and ﬁ ve minutes to ruin 
it. If you think about that, you’ll do things diff erently.” If War-
ren said it, that’s good enough for me.
Perform Regular Team Checkups
Perform regular checkups on your team, assessing the value of 
each member and his or her contributions (or lack thereof ).  These 
are indicators of your team’s vital statistics:
• Which team members contribute the most to ensuring 
that the business is successful?
• Who is negatively aff ecting your team and inhibiting 
pro gress?
• Who—or what—is slowing things down?
• Who has fallen into a rut?
• Who is pulling their coworkers off  track?
• Who on your team is keeping a low proﬁ le— hoping you 
 won’t notice their lack of accomplishments?
Believe me, in hectic business environments  there can be lots 
of places to hide.

Chapter 7 • Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
71
Identify Who’s Rocking the Boat
When every one is rowing in the same direction,  there’s practically 
nothing that can keep you from winning the race. However, 
sometimes you  will have  people who would rather rock the boat 
than help you move it forward (and almost  every organ ization 
has them). You cannot allow  these individuals to undermine your 
inﬂ uence and impede the team’s pro gress. It is your job to praise 
the rowers and tell the rockers to walk the plank.
Ensure That Your Team’s Skills  Don’t Get Rusty
 People can have all the talent, skill, and experience in the world 
and still not perform up to their potential. Why? Rust never sleeps.
Recognize when a member of your team is getting rusty or 
even burned out. If other approaches  aren’t working, you may 
want to try a more oblique approach. Get them involved with cur-
rent training opportunities. Assign them to jobs and extra du-
ties that  will ensure their skills are constantly being applied and 
improved. Reenergize them with tasks that  will put them in the 
limelight and help rekindle their enthusiasm. It’s pos si ble  there’s 
something  going on in their personal life  you’re unaware of that 
is weighing them down. Find out what buttons need pushing to 
motivate them to get back in the game.
Challenge Team Members When  They’re Coasting
Are some of your team members just  going through the motions? Muscle 
memory  isn’t all that bad for routine tasks: it’s how we play a 
musical instrument, hit a golf ball, or drive a car. But, in a busi-
ness setting,  people often put their real talents on autopi lot and 
coast, surviving rather than thriving, by innovating and push-
ing themselves to higher levels of per for mance.
If someone on your team is coasting, they are hurting the en-
tire team’s pro gress and restricting their own growth as well. Call 

72 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
them on it and challenge them to ﬂ ip the switch, reengage, and 
push themselves out of the comfortable and familiar.
And just how do you do that?
Take a step back and look at the big picture with  these 
 questions:
• Does my com pany have the right programs in place to 
prevent burnout?
• Do I rotate  people in and out of jobs?
• Do I send them to workshops or special training?
• Are my recognition programs working?
• Are my supervisors making frequent contacts with their 
 people?
• Do I have an open- door policy?
• Are my  people involved and engaged?
• Do I have frequent group meetings to keep them 
informed?
Clear communication, and lots of it, cures many things. Of-
ten, just a one- on- one talk expressing your concern is all that 
is needed.
Even a  simple  thing can have an impact, like having someone 
lead employees in stretching exercises before work.
Take Steps to Keep Team Members Involved
At the suggestion of our safety committee in one of our larger 
hubs, we hung a traffi  c light from the ceiling just inside the main 
entry door. If the light was green, the hub employees  were on a 
run with no lost- time injuries. If it turned red, every one was 
alerted that an injury had occurred. Whenever this happened, we 
would hold a group meeting with all employees  under the stop-
light as it ﬂ ashed red. We reviewed the injury in greater detail, 

Chapter 7 • Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
73
including reenacting exactly how it happened, to remind folks 
of unsafe acts or unsafe conditions. Then the safety committee, 
a team composed of part- time hourly employees, gave additional 
training on that speciﬁ c injury. At the end of the shift, the light 
switched back to green and the run started anew.
When  people arrived at work to start their shifts, the ﬁ rst 
 thing they did was look up at the light. It was a remarkably 
 simple  thing, but it brought focus to the many safety programs 
we had in place. We emphasized working safely by following safe 
work habits above anything  else, and no one wanted to make the 
red light come on. We  were proud of the fact that in a building 
with more than 1,000 employees, the light stayed green for over 
two years straight, setting the pace for the entire com pany. Many 
awards  were handed out  under that green light along the way.
 Don’t Deceive Your Leaders, Even If 
You Have to Off end Them
If you  were driving down the road and saw a sign that said, 
“Bridge Out Ahead” or “Dead End,” you would change course, 
right?  Those kinds of warning signs appear in organizations as 
well. Whenever  they’re brought to your attention, listen; they may 
help you avoid a catastrophe.
It’s easier to do well if  people feel  free to speak up when they 
see their leader heading toward the ditch. Once, when I was a 
district man ag er, I could easily have ended up in the ditch.
One of the hardest things I ever had to do was cause the ter-
mination of a colleague who, at the time, was one of my closest 
friends. It was brought to my attention that he had not only 
 violated policy, but his actions had put the com pany in a very dif-
ﬁ cult situation that could have brought serious consequences. 
When I talked to him and he conﬁ rmed what I had discovered 
was true, I was heartbroken.

74 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
I told him he needed to talk to the region man ag er. He told 
me he  couldn’t and  wouldn’t, and I honestly understood why. So, 
I did what had to be done. I reported my friend to his man ag er 
and he was ﬁ red the next morning.
Eff ective leaders surround themselves with loyal and trustwor-
thy  people who have the courage to say it like it is, even if their 
words hit sensitive topics or are painful to hear. Your best man-
agers are those who know of problems and then fearlessly bring 
them to your attention.
Some may say they  don’t want to throw their teammates  under 
the bus, but the truth is they knowingly do the team and the 
com pany a serious disser vice by not promptly reporting concerns 
so they can be addressed. That is part of leadership integrity. You 
want  people who have your back and have the courage to tell you 
about that “bridge out” ahead.
Be Prepared to Perform in a Crisis
When asked how he became a war hero, President John F. Kennedy 
said, “They sank my boat.”10 A crisis can blow you out of the 
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Act with Integrity
I learned that a leader must make the hard decisions and do what 
is right for the team  every single time, even when it is unpopular. 
When all the talk has been exhausted, leadership is a duty- based, 
disciplined mentality that exists in de pen dent of one’s own 
whims and preferences. It is a manner of thinking vastly diff er ent 
from the one I had in  those days when I was concerned primarily 
with  doing my job and my job alone. The view changed radically 
as I assumed increasing levels of responsibility for the well- being 
of the entire international organ ization.

Chapter 7 • Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
75
 water and make you lose sight of your objectives completely. It 
 doesn’t have to be that way. A crisis can actually sharpen your 
focus, but only if you maintain concentration and perspective.
When  others lose their  will, leaders strengthen their resolve 
to overcome and succeed. When you feel like your boat is sink-
ing,  don’t panic. View  every cri-
sis as an opportunity. A crisis 
can be a turning point in your 
 career. Like JFK, be prepared to 
perform  under pressure.
Plans change, employees leave, and players get injured.  People 
get sick and friends move across the country. Just when we think 
we can relax and  settle in, our kids rebel, or the boss says, “I have 
bad news.” The list never ends; in time, circumstances  will even-
tually go against you.
When you ﬁ nd yourself facing a crisis and  under the gun, 
you may ﬁ nd this three- step approach to crisis management 
helpful.
Step 1: Know Your Options
Recognize your options in crisis management, risk analy sis, 
and conﬂ ict resolution. Consider a variety of what-if scenarios 
and then prepare for  those potential crises by thinking through 
the best reactions  under a variety of diff er ent conditions. For 
example: What if half of our Seattle- to- Alaska package car 
cavalry had broken down and needed towing on the ALCAN 
Highway?
In this way, when things go bad, your team  will be ready to go 
the second it’s needed.
Step 2: Expect the Unexpected
Anticipating what can and  will go wrong can keep you calm 
and focused in a storm when a sudden crisis occurs. In law 
View  every crisis as an 
opportunity.

76 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
enforcement, this is called cognitive dominance— the  mental 
state of heightened awareness you want to be in when a ﬁ ght 
starts.
Similarly, when a crisis arises in a com pany, the leaders must 
exude “command presence.” They must operate in diff er ent 
 mental states depending on circumstances. Leaders have their 
own styles, however, when conditions dictate, they often need to 
be tough as nails. They know how to select the exact leadership 
style for the crisis at hand.  People desperately want a strong leader 
who  will take command and  will get them through the crisis. 
Think of what Jack Casey did when I called him in Seattle to tell 
him our new Alaskan operation was drowning in an unantici-
pated avalanche of packages.
Step 3: Have a Backup Plan
A seasoned guitar player always brings a backup instrument and 
extra strings to a per for mance. Tennis players carry extra rack-
ets to a tournament in the event their favorite one breaks.  Isn’t 
this a sign of being a thoroughly prepared professional?
Your industry might not be  music or sports, but you can imag-
ine what a backup plan would look like in your com pany. This 
is your go-to strategy when the unexpected strikes.
In the next chapter, you’ll see all  these principles in practice. We 
faced a group of employees acting as though they had a boss, one 
they  didn’t much like, rather than a leader. They  were following 
a bully, acting far outside the principles that drive UPS. You’ll 
see a group of leaders doggedly educating them out of that mind-
set. Come with me to choir practice.

Chapter 7 • Maintaining an Ethical Environment 
77
How You Can Deliver
• Take responsibility for building a culture based on 
integrity.
• Perform periodic checkups on your team. Address  those 
 people who are performing below standards.
• Establish continuous training and development 
 programs.
• Surround yourself with courageous  people who are 
willing to step up and tell you the truth.
• Expect the unexpected.  Don’t leave anything to 
chance when planning. Have a backup plan and 
 practice dry runs.

78
chapter 8
Fostering Positive Interactions
A
fter about two years as an operations supervisor working 
 under the wings of upper management, I was promoted to 
center man ag er. With the promotion came an assignment to an 
operation that had more than 100 employees; for the ﬁ rst time 
in my  career, I was truly on my own and had full responsibility 
for the results we attained.
Although center managers at UPS still have the full support 
of upper management, as well as numerous other resources avail-
able to them, they are completely in charge of and accountable 
for every thing that goes on within their operation. Simply put, 
the buck stops with them. They have offi  cially left the nest. Maybe 
they ﬂ y and maybe they  don’t.
The par tic u lar operation I was put in charge of was both leg-
endary and infamous, but not in a good way. Just about  every 
conceivable  human relations prob lem lived within the walls of 
that building, and the feeling of us versus them was deeply en-
trenched in the culture. When I learned my ﬁ rst assignment as a 
center man ag er would be at this location, I knew immediately 
I was being thrown into the lion’s den.
When I walked in the door that ﬁ rst day, sure enough, the 
 lions  were waiting. It was obvious they  were hungry for some 
fresh meat. When I was introduced as the new man ag er, I was 
greeted with hissing, booing, and many more one- ﬁ ngered sa-
lutes than I care to mention.

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
79
Over the weeks that followed, I spent countless hours with my 
supervisors trying to understand just what the heck was  going 
on and how this place had gotten into such a dismal state. In 
response, they proudly showed me the mountains of warning let-
ters, reprimands, and suspensions they had issued.
This reinforced my initial impression that an all- out war was 
 going on between management and our rank- and- ﬁ le employees. 
Both sides, it appeared,  were fully entrenched in a win- at- all- 
costs position, and the price our com pany had already paid was 
sky high. It was clear to me that management had failed and 
drastic changes  were necessary.
The hostilities had to end and the oversized egos had to be put 
on hold. As the center’s new man ag er, my reputation was on the 
line. My job and every thing I had worked  toward depended on my 
ability to turn this situation around. Losing was not an option.
Know When to Discard Existing 
Tactics and Start Fresh
I deci ded to go against the grain and discarded the existing man-
agement’s failed tactics. I took aggressive action to set a new 
course that would mean an entirely diff  er ent way of  doing things 
from that point on. I felt we needed a fresh start, so I called all 
the supervisors together for a meeting to lay out my plan.
“We are  going to try something new and completely out of the 
ordinary,” I told them, “and you need to get on board— even if it 
means swallowing your pride. From this point forward, we are 
 going to have zero discipline: that is, no more warning letters, 
reprimands, suspensions, or any other form of punishment.”
You could hear a pin drop.
I insisted  there would be no negative verbal or nonverbal com-
munication. This meant that each supervisor and I would make 

80 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
high- frequency, short- interval contacts with  every employee  every 
single day.  These interactions  were to be about something of 
interest to the employee, maybe even a compliment, and I would 
not tolerate any sarcastic or disparaging remarks.
“Say anything positive. Anything,” I told them, “or just make 
a passing non confrontational remark— like ‘Good morning.’ ”
This meant my supervisors had to know something personal 
and meaningful about each of their employees to be able to say, 
“Hey, good job yesterday!” or “How’s your  family?” or “Did you 
see the game last night?” For starters, I suggested they talk about 
news, sports, and weather. They  were to talk about job- related 
issues only if the message was recognizing an employee who had 
done something well.
Over time, nonconfrontational, positive interactions became 
routine  every time anyone in management had contact with an 
employee. It took a while, but eventually we broke the ice with a 
few of them. We  were “catching them  doing something right”— 
and saying so. Even the most hard core  people appreciate a com-
pliment that is delivered sincerely.
At no time did we compromise policy or sacriﬁ ce the com-
pany’s high standards. We simply worked on being good at build-
ing relationships and setting aside the old practice of attacking 
 people. If we could open up a line of communication with just a 
few of our  people, I believed the rest would follow in time.
About a mile from our building was a  little tavern where many 
of our  drivers gathered  after work. They called it choir practice. 
We  were determined to break down the barriers, so we deci ded 
to join the “choir.” Although you  won’t ﬁ nd this method in any 
UPS supervisor’s best- practices handbook, we needed radical new 
ways of thinking to break down the walls that divided us. So, one 
night  after work, off  to choir practice we went. We went again the 
next night and the night  after that.

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
81
The ﬁ rst few times we arrived at the tavern, our employees 
maintained the code of silence, but we did not give up. We went 
again and again.
Fi nally, a  couple of them began to loosen up a bit. It’s amaz-
ing what buying a  couple of beers and just plain street talk  will 
do. We could easily relate to them  because not many years be-
fore we had been in their shoes as  drivers.
Our employees ﬁ  nally realized we  were not their  enemy, just 
hard- working folks like them trying to make a living. They slowly 
made us a part of the group. When we arrived at that  little tav-
ern, they would wave us over and make room for us to sit at their 
 table. Talk about a major breakthrough!
 Those choir practices get the credit for tearing down the bar-
riers that separated us from one another. Ending the chronic 
negative interactions and mingling with employees  after hours 
created open and honest dialogue that was a welcome change 
to both sides. As I had hoped, it also carried over to the work 
environment when every one was on the clock.  There  were olive 
branches and beers all around and we all lived happily ever 
 after.
Nope, Not Quite
 There  were still a few key holdouts in the employee ranks. One 
tough guy in par tic u lar named Rich was not  going along with 
this deal at all. In fact, he became even more vocal and belligerent 
 after our communication breakthrough. Soon he began an all- 
out eff ort to get his  people back in the fold and reinstitute the 
old, hostile way of  doing things.
Rich was the most negative, antimanagement  human being 
I had ever met in my life. But  because he was extremely smart, 
calculating, and vocal, he had a following among many of his 

82 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
coworkers. He had dedicated his life to making management’s 
life miserable and he was very good at it.
Now for the Rest of the Story
As I’m sure you can imagine, UPS has very strict safety policies. 
For example, if a driver has three avoidable vehicle accidents 
within a twelve- month period, he or she is terminated. Rich had 
accumulated two avoidable accidents and was getting close to 
having one drop off  his rec ord at the end of his rolling twelve- 
month reporting period that was quickly approaching. More than 
once, Rich had made it clear to me that he would be home  free 
in a few days and that we could forget about ﬁ ring him. Then fate 
stepped in.
Just minutes before Rich’s driving rec ord would clear, the 
one- in- a- million event happened. I was in my offi  ce when all of 
a sudden I heard a loud cruuuunch!
I went out to investigate and discovered that Rich had just had 
his third accident, hitting the overhead door with the top of his 
package car.  Drivers are trained to never open an overhead door 
partway; it is  either all the way down or all the way up. Rich was 
in a hurry to get off  work so he could get to choir practice and 
start celebrating the removal of one past accident from his rec-
ord. In his rush, he had failed to raise the overhead door all the 
way. This was a rookie  mistake and he was keenly aware of the 
consequences.
So  there we  were, face to face— just Rich and me. We stood  there 
in total silence, surveying the damage. He knew he was done. A 
few minutes  later, he went to the offi  ce and ﬁ lled out an accident 
report, knowing this was the end. He could prob ably see his life 
spiraling rapidly downward into the gloom of unemployment.
Rich walked into my offi  ce, sat down, and said, “I guess this 
is one I’m not  going to get out of.” Then he started talking about 

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
83
how he would turn in his uniforms. He was resigned to the fact 
he was  going to be terminated.
 After inspecting the vehicle and the overhead door, I could see 
 there  wasn’t any signiﬁ cant damage to the door and just a minor 
scratch in the paint on the package car. Still, it was an avoidable 
accident and Rich was not likely to avoid termination. But then 
I thought, “Should I take the biggest chance of my  career? Is 
this a decision for the take- a- calculated- risk zone?” “Rich,” I 
said, “ you’ve been a pain in my neck, but inside I think  you’re 
basically a good guy [all my ﬁ ngers and toes  were crossed]. I am 
willing to take a chance on you with the hope that you’ll take a 
chance on me. Give me that accident report.”
Rich handed me the report. I tore it up and threw it in the 
wastebasket. “See you in the morning,” I said.
Now, UPS takes avoidable accidents seriously and would likely 
take disciplinary action against a man ag er who did what I did 
that day. Nonetheless, I took the calculated risk this once in the 
hope that it would help me turn around a bad situation.
This tough, hard core guy broke down in tears. Not able to 
talk, he slowly walked out. For the ﬁ rst time, he did not make 
choir practice.
Although working relationships  were much improved, we still 
had an absenteeism prob lem with a few of Rich’s loyal followers. 
We knew the absences  were all contrived and the excuses fake, 
especially the Monday morning ones. We believed many of the 
hard core employees who continued to refuse to go along with 
the new deal  were conspiring and taking turns calling in sick.
The morning  after his run-in with the overhead door, Rich 
walked into the offi  ce a half  hour before start time. Without say-
ing a word, he looked at the dispatch report, which showed the 
names of  those who had called in sick. He got on the phone and 
started calling every one on the list. Each call was a quick, one- 
sided conversation.

84 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
The  whole offi  ce could hear him as he made each call. He got 
right to the point. “This is Rich. I see you called in sick  today. 
 Unless  you’re checking into a hospital, you best get your lazy 
 behind to work right now!”
I could hardly believe what I was hearing.  Those  people who 
 were too sick to work  either experienced a healing miracle, or 
Rich had suddenly transformed into Florence Nightingale, RN.
Within the hour,  every single one of them came to work. Word 
got around quickly and the long- time absenteeism prob lem 
vanished— literally—overnight.
That was just the beginning. As I said, Rich was big, tough, 
vocal, and intimidating: he could look right through a person 
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Face the Bull
Being a leader  isn’t easy and some  people discover that greater 
leadership roles simply  aren’t for them. Eventually, I was  going 
to have to deal with the inevitable conﬂ icts that arise in any 
organ ization.
If you have ever seen a bullﬁ ght or been to a rodeo, you know 
it is not smart to mess with the bull. Taking one by the horns 
seems unthinkable, yet matadors and rodeo clowns learn how to 
look the big animals in the eye and live to tell about it. When it 
comes to conﬂ ict,  every leader needs a  little matador and even 
some rodeo clown in them if they are  going to survive.
Every one  under my supervision took their individual and collec-
tive cues from me. I had to set the tone and the pace for the work 
environment.  After all, if morale is high and excitement is in the air, 
it is  because someone at the top is thinking and acting right.
Putting  others ﬁ rst and helping them reach their dreams, I re-
alized, led to my reaching my own dreams. An old Tibetan prov-
erb bears repeating  here: “When he took time to help the man 
up the mountain, lo, he scaled it himself.”

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
85
when he talked to them. The employees  were scared to death of 
him. He called a meeting with the employees the following 
weekend and laid down the law. “Rich did not mince words,” 
said one of the attendees, who  later told me about the meeting. 
“Rich told us that from this point forward, we would all do our 
jobs, do them well, and all the BS of the past would end  here 
and now!”
The following Monday morning, we saw the radical change we 
had been hoping for all along. Having Rich in his new role was 
almost like having another supervisor. He had a huge inﬂ uence 
on a good number of the  drivers but was now working with us, 
not against us.
Trust Leads to Loyalty
I  don’t think it’s any coincidence at all that the most demanding 
work we do often forges the most meaningful and deepest friend-
ships we have in our lives. Think about it. We all remember the 
times when things  were toughest and who was standing  there with 
us, helping us ﬁ nd our way.  Those are things you just  don’t forget. 
I know I never have.
I spent much of my  career in countries far away from the 
United States. A big part of my job while working abroad was to 
teach  people new to our com pany the UPS way of  doing business. 
The more impor tant part of my job, however, was to ﬁ gure out 
how to integrate the best of their culture into the best of ours.
This took a lot of time and patience and it taught me how to 
think diff erently about  people. I gained insights into our some-
times radically diff  er ent cultures and learned the most eff ective 
ways to meld them.
Although the cultures  were diff  er ent, I found that  people from 
Paris to Peru  were similar deep inside.  People want to be re-
spected and appreciated and have meaningful and positive 

86 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
 relationships with their coworkers and the management team. 
They want to be trusted members of the team. It is up to  those 
in leader ship to make it all come together.
Be Secure in Your Role
I learned to welcome both positive and constructive feedback and 
to encourage healthy debate. Insecure leaders tend to squelch 
 others’ opinions and be heavy-handed. In contrast, eff ective lead-
ers earn their team’s trust by being conﬁ dent, competent, and 
consistent— not arrogant, disengaged, or hard- headed. When em-
ployees see their leader being calm and decisive, day in and day 
out, that self- assurance exudes a  humble conﬁ dence. It sig-
nals the leader’s strong belief in the long- term sustainability of 
their com pany. When you pour encouragement into your em-
ployees, they experience your vision ﬁ rst- hand and are empow-
ered to play a meaningful part in it. When they trust you at this 
level, make sure you have their backs and protect them when 
they make mistakes.
Cultivate Loyalty
Your team has to know that their contributions  matter to you. 
I discovered how to stand up for my  people by showing I had 
faith in them, in good times and especially in bad times. I made 
it clear that I expected them to do the same. Without two- way 
loyalty,  there can be no trust.
 There are no shortcuts to building trust. It takes time.  Doing 
the right  thing consistently and taking responsibility when you 
make mistakes are two of the best ways to start and maintain 
the trust- building pro cess. Open and honest communication  will 
speed things up, but trust cannot be rushed.

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
87
Build a Uniﬁ ed Team
Employees want to bring value to the team and be appreciated 
for the good things they do. However,  after a while,  people  will 
not  settle for just being noticed; they want to be known.  Those 
leaders who go out of their way to know their  people and give 
them a sense of purpose and direction,  will earn their loyalty.
Unfortunately,  there are obstacles in the way of leaders who 
want to get to know their  people. Too much formality and too 
 little interaction at work prevents  people from becoming better 
known. Cliques often form, which eff ectively excludes some 
 people and makes it more diffi  cult to build relationships and 
 familiarity.
For the most part, the development of cliques,  those “in” and 
“out” groups in the workplace, is not a good  thing. Leaders should 
make a point of bringing  people into their circle instead of 
e xcluding them from it.  Doing so with intentional focus opens 
up communication, makes  people feel they are part of the team 
and fosters a cohesive unit.
No one should feel like they are isolated or excluded from the 
entire team. When cliques form, other members of the team who 
are not in them  will form subgroups and thus dilute the cohesive-
ness. You no longer have one team, but instead multiple teams 
with members who may not cross bound aries to help members 
of the “other” team, creating an us-versus-them environment. 
It’s up to leaders to make sure this does not happen.
Do you take breaks or go to lunch on a regular basis with a 
small select group of  people? If so, you are part of the prob lem. 
Inclusiveness begins with the leaders’ be hav ior. Including some 
 people in your circle while excluding  others reeks of favoritism, 
sways opinions, and creates suspicion. If you treat the  people 
in your clique diff erently,  others know it and talk about it, at 

88 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
some point, it  will hit you right between the eyes. You may think 
that having your own “in” group of friends within the ranks 
is okay.
It is not. It violates the trust rule.
Some  people are more comfortable being around their select 
group, but a leader thinks about how the rest of the team may 
feel from the outside looking 
in. They want to be part of 
that group and often connect 
the perception of being ex-
cluded with not having value, 
not being noticed, and not be-
ing known. Build teamwork, 
loyalty, and commitment by 
 creating a cohesive, one- group environment with a collective vi-
sion of the  future.
When Relationships Break Down
Unfortunately, as hard as you may try to build bridges of trust 
and loyalty,  there  will be times when relationships break down 
and conﬂ icts take over. What do you do then?
Speak the Truth and Keep Your Comments Focused
We can build and maintain trust and re spect only when we are 
willing to tell the truth. If you have a prob lem with a person’s 
per for mance, say so. Keep your comments focused only on the 
person’s per for mance and job- relevant behaviors, not their char-
acter or emotions. If you disagree with a decision, explain your 
reasoning and then sincerely attempt to work together to come 
up with an agreeable solution.
Build teamwork, loyalty, 
and commitment by creat-
ing a cohesive, one- group 
environment with a collec-
tive vision of the  future.

Chapter 8 • Fostering Positive Interactions 
89
Agree to Disagree
 There  will be times when you  will have to agree to disagree or to 
ask  others to agree to disagree. Common ground is not always 
available and sometimes  people are not willing to budge. As a 
leader, you are the negotiator, the peacemaker, and the media-
tor. You are also the ultimate decision maker.
Keep your emotions out of it and focus on what is best for 
your  people and your organ ization. Listen to all sides of it and 
deal with the facts. Ask questions, then challenge  those refusing 
to see any position but their own. Try to show each of the dis-
agreeing parties why they need to reevaluate their positions and 
why they are not yet convincing to the other side.
Where the issues are complex, you may have to buy some time 
to get  others involved. It may take further research and discus-
sions. If compromise is not the right solution, tactfully explain 
why your decision to end the dispute was made. Try not to step 
on egos, but realize that making unpopular decisions is just part 
of being the leader.
Move On
Mature  people are normally able to reach the other side of a con-
ﬂ ict and still re spect one another. When all parties maintain re-
spect despite their diff erences, 
relationships grow stronger and 
the team matures. The key to 
reinforcing the bonds of trust is 
to see  those with diverse opin-
ions as allies, not opponents.  After all, you are on the same team, 
working  toward the same goals. Let opposing views help you 
make better decisions. View the goal of conﬂ ict resolution not as 
victory, but unity.
View the goal of conﬂ ict 
resolution not victory, but 
unity.

90 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
What’s  behind you is in the past and not in your  future, so 
when a tough decision has to be made, make it. Allow all team 
members to have their say, weigh the facts, make the best decision 
you can, and then move on.
How You Can Deliver
• Meet hostility and re sis tance with genuine and sincere 
engagement, and with concern and re spect for the other 
person.
• When your  people fall short, respond immediately with 
your support.
• Avoid subgroups. Create joint projects that pull every-
one together. Promote the concept of one uniﬁ ed team.
• When relationships break down, shoot straight, speak 
the truth, and agree to disagree when appropriate.
• When necessary, make the tough decisions and move on.

91
chapter 9
Moving Forward
Overcome Inertia
Many folks resist change; yet without change, pro gress is mini-
mal or non ex is tent. Truthfully, it is much easier to play it safe 
and stay comfortable, at least for a  little while. Playing it safe all 
the time is what weak leaders do.
When the downward pull of complacency sets in, fear of 
change often robs us of the courage needed to lead eff ectively.
If you want to keep climbing the leadership mountain, you 
must overcome inertia. As you do this, you  will develop a habit-
ual bias for initiating action that keeps things moving  until 
change is embraced. The fact is, sooner or  later, you  won’t have 
a choice.
The challenge is to determine which changes need to be made 
and when. Change, for the sake of change, can be beneﬁ cial at 
times, but be careful that  you’re not just moving the trash around 
into new piles to make the room look better.
If you want to accomplish something  great, then do something. 
If you want to be mediocre, take the path of least re sis tance and 
keep on  doing what’s always been done.  There are very few things 
as power ful as initiative; combined with per sis tence,  you’re bound 
to go farther faster.

92 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Be Open to New Technology
When I was district man ag er in Oregon, we took bold steps to 
enhance ser vice to our customers through a new, state- of- the- art 
technology. It was called the Delivery Information Acquisition 
Device (DIAD)— the hand held electronic unit that scans pack-
ages delivered by UPS  drivers.
We tested it ﬁ rst at one of our package operations near Port-
land, as the manufacturer was nearby. The new technology was 
a real boon for us; it revolutionized the delivery business and 
changed the information ﬂ ow on packages forever. The DIAD 
greatly enhanced ser vice and at the same time made the driver’s 
job much more effi  cient and considerably easier.
With the introduction of the DIAD, the old, slow way of man-
ually writing information on paper forms should have quickly 
faded into history. But, as with many instances when a new tech-
nology invades an industry, the quick fade into history  didn’t 
happen.
You’d naturally think the DIAD would have been welcomed 
by all with open arms, but it was a radical departure from how 
our  drivers had been  doing their jobs for many years. That old 
How to Overcome Inertia
1. Describe the goal and why it’s impor tant to the team and 
the com pany.
2. Ensure that the reward for acting exceeds the eff ort.
3. Describe the negative consequences for failure to act.
4. List all the tasks necessary to deliver the results.
5. Provide adequate resources.
6. Ensure skills are adequate.
7. Make a plan and a schedule.
8. Find someone to cheer you on.
9. Take your ﬁ rst step forward.

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
93
clipboard was what they knew; as we know, change does not come 
easy.
The majority of  drivers who converted to the DIAD raved 
about how much easier it made their job and how much their 
customers liked the device. However,  there was still a small 
group of  drivers who  weren’t fully on board with the plan and 
the pushback began in full force. I met with the group to ask 
them to give the DIAD a chance, but they told me, in no uncer-
tain terms, the death of the DIAD was imminent. Subgroups 
 were beginning to form within the ranks.
 After a few months, however, it was obvious the vast majority 
of  drivers  were very happy with the new system, so I deci ded to 
hold a meeting with all the  drivers. I announced that the test was 
complete and it was not an option; every one had to use the DIAD 
or every one had to go back to manual recording on paper.
We darned near had a riot and many of the  drivers became 
very vocal. One driver yelled out, “Who wants to keep the DIAD?” 
Hands instantly went up and the vote was 100  percent for keep-
ing the DIAD and zero against. Even the last few holdouts joined 
with their fellow  drivers and voted in  favor of it once they saw 
which direction things  were headed. Peer pressure is an amazing 
 thing to watch.
Without leadership and willingness to go up against inertia, 
that team of  drivers could have resisted the DIAD much longer— 
but it would have been to the detriment of both the individ-
ual  drivers and the com pany as a  whole. I  couldn’t let that 
happen.
Aim for Success, Not to Impress
UPS is a worldwide power house, yet we still believe in a no- 
frills management style and a culture that entrusts and empow-
ers all of its employees to carry out the mission. It’s a big ship but 

94 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
one that remains nimble— always learning, always listening, and 
always improving.
 People who are not pretentious, nor all that interested in 
 impressing  others, navigate the ship. It is this orga nizational 
humility that runs through the veins of UPS employees and 
keeps them striving to become better.
What makes UPS so effi  cient?
The dedicated  people who have an unrelenting commitment 
to success make the UPS  family what it is. They are the work-
horses who never lose sight of their purpose,  doing what ever it 
takes to grease the gears that keep the big brown machine’s 
wheels turning. They have honed the delivery business from a 
science into a ﬁ ne art.
 Because highly eff ective leaders understand the diff erence be-
tween success and failure, effi  ciency often comes down to the 
basics, the  simple  little things that are often overlooked in less 
successful companies.  These types of leaders  don’t waste time 
trying to impress anyone. They are workhorses— not show  horses. 
They go about their business and focus on getting the job done. 
 Doing their work provides them with satisfaction and inspires 
them to grow stronger as leaders and that’s all they  really need. 
If they are noticed, ﬁ ne— but they are not driven by the desire to 
wear a crown and be in the spotlight. In fact, the best leaders I 
know shy away from it.
I wish we had more leaders like this in business  today. So much 
more would be accomplished and so many more team members 
could share in the achievements.
When  there’s cause for cele bration, notice how the show  horses 
are the ﬁ rst to step into the spotlight. Yet, when  there’s trou ble, 
they head to the barn. You  will go a lot farther, with longer- lasting 
results, if you follow the work horse’s lead.

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
95
Work horse leaders have a whatever- it- takes attitude and  will 
knock down walls to complete the mission. Unlike the show 
 horses, they are  eager to get into the thick of things and take 
advantage of times when they can roll up their sleeves and go to 
work. In the end,  people following this kind of leader are hap-
pier and more productive; they  will be loyal to the work horse 
and, eventually, put the show  horse out to pasture.
A Whale of a Story
We learned again the value of ﬁ elding a team of work horses rather 
than individual stars on a proj ect of unpre ce dented scope. Into the 
storm we went and the UPS culture is, I believe, the reason the 
assignment turned out as it did.
A call came in with a request for us to ship a rather large 
package. We carefully chose a UPS team for the task and they 
immediately went to work.
The oversized package we  were hired to transport was Keiko, 
the 7,700- pound killer  whale that starred in the movie  Free Willy. 
Our job was to move him from Mexico City to his new home at an 
aquar ium in Newport, Oregon.
Our UPS team and loadmasters met, extensively, with the 
aquar ium’s staff  to come up with a plan.
First, UPS had to reengineer a C-130 air freighter. The interior 
of the aircraft would have to be retroﬁ tted to secure the custom 
holding tank that would contain Keiko. We would need to install 
a marine life-support system and an onboard laboratory.  These 
resources enabled aquar ium veterinarians to proactively monitor 
the status of Keiko by continuously checking his vital signs during 
the trip.
Getting Keiko on the plane was no easy task. The journey began 
with picking up the four- ton  whale, believed to be sixteen to seven-
teen years old, at the Reino Aventura amusement park in Mexico 
City. Keiko was hoisted into our huge,  water- ﬁ lled tank and then 
transported by truck to the Mexico City airport. The route to the 

96 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Develop Self- Assessment Skills
Sometimes leaders forget that their primary job is to get things 
done through  others. You have to be quick to recognize weak-
nesses in the team and step in before they become prob lems. This 
means taking time to recognize your own plusses and minuses.
We all have to accept that we have limitations. This has noth-
ing to do with our overall intelligence or experience. It has every-
thing to do with knowing when to ﬁ ll the gaps with  people who 
are strong where we are  weak.
Self- assessment is a critical skill that requires continual devel-
opment throughout your  career. Your ability to admit your weak-
nesses is a sign of  great wisdom and personal strength. It  doesn’t 
make you in eff ec tive, just honest.  People who admit they  don’t 
airport was lined with thousands of  people waving goodbye to the 
killer  whale who had won over many fans during his ten years at 
the amusement park.
Once aboard the aircraft, the team set environmental controls 
to ensure Keiko’s comfort during the nine- hour ﬂ ight, with fuel 
stops in Monterrey, Mexico, and Phoenix, Arizona. The plane 
required long takeoff s and landings and gradual turns while in 
the air to avoid unnecessary discomfort to the killer  whale.
 People traveled hundreds of miles to welcome Keiko and 
cheering crowds gathered when the plane landed safely. Then 
we moved Keiko from the Newport Airport to the Oregon Coast 
Aquar ium. It became a national news event as each stage of the 
 giant celebrity’s trip to his new home in the United States was 
made safely— thanks to the UPS team.
This unusual job required a specialized team composed of 
many  people with diff er ent skills and talents working together with 
precision and care to deliver Keiko.  Whether it’s a small envelope 
or a large package that ﬁ lls an entire airplane,  there is always a 
clearly deﬁ ned method for  doing the job right.

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
97
know every thing proj ect a conﬁ dence that their coworkers value. 
 People who  can’t are always found out— usually sooner rather 
than  later—and their inﬂ uence is greatly diminished.
Since every one realizes that it’s impossible to know every thing, 
you’d think it would be relatively easy to make that admis-
sion. Believe me, it is not! Show  horse leaders are ﬁ xated on 
appearances and they ﬁ nd it extremely diffi  cult to admit their 
shortcomings.
When you are candid with your team members, you may be 
surprised by how much easier it becomes to stay more focused 
and get more accomplished. In order to stay grounded, though, 
you may want to do a periodic self- assessment checkup.  Here’s 
how.
Be You
You  can’t be someone  else.  Don’t try to be.
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Find Solutions
Even though we  hadn’t shipped a  whale before, we knew  there 
was a right way to do it.  There always is. The right way leads to 
the optimal outcome for every one involved, including a four- ton 
mammal.
UPS is relentless when it comes to establishing proper meth-
ods to do almost any job and each step in the pro cess exists for 
a reason.  Whether it’s how to properly back up a package car, 
walk on slippery ice, or even how to move a huge  whale through 
customs, chances are  there’s a method to address it.
The methods, ﬁ ne- tuned for more than 100 years, have be-
come a science that allows  people to do their jobs in the safest 
way pos si ble with the least amount of eff ort. By following the 
proper procedures, maximum effi  ciency can be reached.

98 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Be Present
Give  people your full and undivided attention. When you are 
with someone,  don’t let anything distract you.  Those phone calls 
and messages can wait  until  later.
When you allow distractions to interrupt conversations with 
 others, not only are you being rude,  you’re sending a message 
that other things are more impor tant than the  people who are 
with you. They came to talk with you, not to watch you act as 
though you are too busy.
Shut out the rest of the world. It  will still be  there when you 
return. As I’ve said before, communication is good, but connec-
tive communication is better.
Be  Humble
 Don’t try to know it all.  Don’t act like you know it all.  Don’t try 
to do it all.  Don’t pretend you know how to do something better 
than someone  else. Arrogance is a culture killer.
When  people in your group are better than you at a par tic u-
lar task (and, more often than not, they should be), recognize it 
and delegate to capitalize on their strengths. In other words, let 
them do what they do best and you do what you do best.
Approach Each Day as Your Last as a Leader
The daily grind gets a bad rap. Few  people would say they wake up 
excited about the grind— that’s  because it’s  human nature to take 
the path of least re sis tance. But what if this mindset changed for you?
What if, instead, each day you approached the grind as a work-
horse leader? If each day you arrived at work fully attuned to 
your unique opportunity to improve your team’s ability to suc-
ceed? If providing the highest levels of ser vice became your pri-
mary focus at the beginning of  every day?

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
99
Without a grinder,  there is no coff ee. Roll up your sleeves and 
get your hands dirty. White shirts and ties are frequently over-
rated.
Leading from the front and getting involved (without getting 
in the way) usually brings positive results. When you let your 
 people know you are with them on the playing ﬁ eld and that 
you  will work longer and harder 
than anyone  else, they  will in-
crease their eff orts, too. Preach-
ing from your comfortable offi  ce 
is one  thing; walking the walk 
on the front line with your 
 people is something entirely dif-
fer ent. You can pretend to care 
but you  can’t pretend to be  there.
From experience, you  will sense when to jump into the grind 
and when to stay out of the way. NFL teams devote enormous 
resources to studying ﬁ lms, reviewing game scenarios, and learn-
ing from the careful analy sis of both their wins and their losses.
Teams in the business world should be no diff er ent. Study 
both your successes and failures and make adjustments as nec-
essary. One framework for  doing this is what I call the good, the 
bad, and the ugly review.
Study Your Successes and Failures 
and Make Adjustments
The Good
What’s working?  There  will be some places where your team is 
 ﬁ ring on all cylinders. Build up  these areas for sustained suc-
cess and pour more resources into them so they become the for-
tiﬁ cation of your operation. The good part of the review  will 
also highlight accomplishments you can celebrate as a team, 
Let your  people know 
you are with them on the 
playing ﬁ eld and that 
you  will work longer and 
harder than anyone  else.

100 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
allowing you an ongoing opportunity to praise members for 
positive results.
The Bad
What’s not working? Maybe deadlines  were pushed back, commit-
ments missed, and sometimes customers lost. When the bad is 
clearly identiﬁ ed, your team has the opportunity to regroup 
and refocus—make this a time for a “lessons learned” session.
The Ugly
What got ugly? Most of the time, regular team reviews  will reveal 
that things are  either good or bad. But occasionally, you and 
your team  will uncover something that is just plain ugly— worse 
than bad.
It could be gross misconduct, negligence, sabotage, or delib-
erate indiff erence resulting in a defective product or ser vice. Re-
gardless of what it is, it  will likely result in signiﬁ cant damage 
to the reputation of your com pany. When faced with an ugly, you 
need to take action immediately. Make speciﬁ c assignments to 
ﬁ x an ugly in a no- holds- barred approach. Say it like it is.
A  little fear in the air may be necessary to set things right. If 
the ugly happens to be a slacking man ag er, you may have to have 
a serious  career discussion. Management personnel, or anyone 
for that  matter, found lying down on the job or  doing the mini-
mum required is contagious; it is a bad disease that spreads fast, 
so it must be isolated and stopped.
The realities of  doing business in a team-oriented culture 
dictate  there are times when talk and second chances just  don’t 
work. Sometimes, you have to lay down the law and face the ugly 
immediately.

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
101
I  Didn’t Know Jack
As a young, newly promoted division man ag er for UPS in Seattle, 
I was anxious to make a good impression at my ﬁ rst staff  meeting. 
As fate would have it, this was also the ﬁ rst meeting for our new 
district man ag er, a man named Jack.
Jack was a rugged, rather large Irishman who grew up in a 
tough neighborhood in New York City. As you might expect, Jack’s 
reputation preceded him. He was known as a fearless street ﬁ ghter 
who pulled no punches and he carried this rough- and- tumble 
attitude with him into the offi  ce. When  people  didn’t meet his 
expectations, he  wasn’t shy about letting them know it.
On the other hand, Jack was also known to have an incredibly 
big heart and  wouldn’t think twice about  going out of his way to 
take care of his  people. He made the work fun and in ter est ing and 
was always in on the action— working side by side with his team 
and personally helping them through their most diffi  cult times. 
You always knew where you stood with Jack.
Back to the monthly staff  meeting: It was structured with a 
set agenda that was sent out well in advance of the meeting— 
attendees had weeks to prepare for it. Nothing about that had 
changed with the arrival of our new district man ag er, so every one 
knew what to expect. Even I, the newest man ag er in the room, was 
as well prepared as I could possibly be.
At 8:00 a.m. sharp, Jack walked in and called the meeting to 
order. All the chatter in the room came to an abrupt halt. Each of 
us mentally prepared to present our reports to the new man in 
charge.
 After a few introductory comments, Jack called on the ﬁ rst 
man ag er to report. Visibly ner vous, he explained he had just ﬂ own 
in that morning and had not had time to prepare for the meeting.
Big  mistake!
Jack lowered his glasses and with a face that took on a brighter 
shade of red with each passing second, he glared at the man ag er 
for what seemed to me like forever. I’m certain that the tempera-
ture in the room  rose to about 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit— I know 

102 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
that each of us could hear our hearts pounding in our chests as we 
 imagined the terrible consequences our unprepared colleague was 
about to suff er.
Sure enough, the Irishman from New York asked in a loud, 
angry voice, “Do you not have a staff ? Did you forget how to 
delegate?!”
And that was just the beginning. The verbal beating went on 
and on with no end in sight. I felt sure we  were  going to witness a 
hom i cide before it was all over.
I began to won der if Jack would notice if I  didn’t come back 
 after the break. In fact, I was seriously thinking of ways I could get 
demoted in a hurry to my familiar old job. It may not have paid as 
much, but I was pretty sure I  wouldn’t end up with any black eyes 
 either.
Fi nally, the pummeling stopped and Jack sat back in his chair 
and casually announced, “No prob lem . . .  the rest of us  will sit 
 here and wait while you step out and put your reports together.”
And that’s exactly what we did. We sat quietly in that confer-
ence room—in dead silence— for nearly ﬁ ve long hours. No breaks, 
no lunch, no talk. Jack  didn’t move, nor did we. We  didn’t dare. 
The silence was ﬁ  nally broken when the man ag er re entered the 
room and gave his report. The meeting ended a  little  after 
 midnight.
Maybe the lesson Jack taught us during the course of our 
prolonged ﬁ rst encounter with him was overkill, but we sure knew 
who was in charge. Jack was nobody to play games with. He was 
as demanding as any man ag er could possibly be.
Anyway,  after that ﬁ rst staff  meeting the word got around fast 
and you can rest assured no one ever showed up unprepared again 
for anything that had to do with Jack. I know I sure  didn’t. Al-
though my own management style diff ered greatly from Jack’s, his 
way of drawing a clear line in the sand from the very beginning 
was eff ective. He drove a stake in the ground and left no doubt in 
anyone’s mind that  there was a new sheriff  and “The Bad and The 
Ugly”  weren’t welcome in his town—only “The Good.”

Chapter 9 • Moving Forward 
103
Balance Results and the “Big Picture”
It’s so tempting to think that only the numbers  matter and every-
thing  else is secondary.  Don’t fall into this trap. Results are 
impor tant, but they are not the only things that  matter. If, for 
example, your production rec ord is the only metric  you’ve got for 
mea sur ing the health of your organ ization, you may be missing 
what  really matters: the quality of your ser vice. It is impor tant 
to mea sure all relevant factors.
Keep your sights on the big picture— production and quality 
should go hand in hand. It’s a balancing act, for sure. Lose pro-
duction and you lose proﬁ ts. Lose your quality and you lose your 
business.
My friend Jimmy Collins, former president and COO of 
 Chick- ﬁ l- A, once told me about a time he visited a well- known 
competitor’s fast- food hamburger joint. He placed an order for 
a bag of french fries and then he waited— and waited. While he 
waited, he noticed the employees rushing order  after order of 
fries to the drive- thru win dow, while completely ignoring him. 
He ﬁ  nally lost his patience and demanded to talk with the 
man ag er.
Jimmy asked the man ag er why he  hadn’t yet received his or-
der of french fries, although her staff  kept rushing  orders of 
them right past him to the drive- thru win dow. The man ag er re-
plied that the corporate offi  ce was timing the staff  on how 
quickly they ﬁ lled drive- thru  orders, so that was their top prior-
ity. Jimmy then calmly asked, “Do they mea sure how quickly you 
serve customers inside the restaurant?”
This is a classic example of missing the mark. Their intentions 
 were good, but they got it only half right. Mea sur ing the deliv-
ery time at the drive- thru win dow was a “right”  thing, just not 
the only right  thing. When you fail to mea sure all the right things, 
you get the wrong results.

104 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
How You Can Deliver
• Take charge. Do what is right; when conditions dictate 
it, be as tough as you have to be.
• Keep teams engaged with a sense of purpose. Give 
genuine and speciﬁ c praise when earned and do it 
often.
• Develop and continuously practice the skill of self- 
assessment.
• Measure the relevant things that drive your business.
• Keep every one focused on the most impor tant  thing: 
your customer.

105
chapter 10
Prepare for Places Unexpected
I 
was extremely grateful and proud to be a UPS delivery driver 
from a small town in northern Idaho. I never even considered 
the possibility that I might someday end up traveling the world 
as president of UPS International; that thought was beyond my 
wildest dreams.
My path through the organ ization spanned close to four de-
cades and I served in many diff  er ent positions within the com-
pany over my  career. However, the most unexpected one of them 
all began with a conversation one after noon in the offi  ce of our 
then CEO, Jim Kelly. I  will forever remember Jim’s words as he 
offi  cially promoted me to president of UPS International.
Jim said to me:
Ron, you operate a  little diff erently than most, maybe 
even a  little radically; but you have done pretty well and 
understand the international business. In your new 
assignment, you  will have the authority and freedom to 
operate and do what ever is necessary to make our opera-
tions outside of the United States successful, within 
policy, of course.
I was grateful to be given so much freedom to do it my way, 
or that’s at least what I thought I heard. Maybe I interpreted it as 
what I wanted to hear. Regardless, it was a dream come true for 
me; I felt like an angel who had ﬁ  nally earned his wings.

106 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
The international part of our business was not  doing well. It 
had expanded quickly and was  going through some serious grow-
ing pains. To obtain operating rights and expand our ser vices, 
we became partners with some companies that, to that point, 
did not operate up to UPS standards.
Many  people  were working hard, but our international busi-
ness continued to ﬂ ounder. I felt we needed a new look and some 
radical changes. The current way we  were operating just  wasn’t 
getting it done and over the years  there seemed to be  little 
pro gress.
My management team and I immediately went to work, focus-
ing on opening some long- locked doors and turning the place 
upside down. Within a year, it landed right- side up. It’s incredi-
ble what happens when you give your managers  free rein and 
provide them with the resources they need.
Two things happened very quickly: ﬁ rst, we rightsized the 
workforce; second, we empowered our management team to 
run their businesses as they saw ﬁ t. It could not have worked any 
other way.
Never Micromanage
As diffi  cult as it is to let go, higher- level managers must trust 
their  people to get the job done while staying out of their way. I 
never hesitated to put bound aries in place and stay close to the 
action. But, at the same time, I gave my managers the freedom 
to operate as they saw ﬁ t and to do what ever they believed was 
necessary.
 These are the same freedoms Jim Kelly gave me. Yes, mistakes 
 were made. In fact, I made a lot of them. But when my manage-
ment team wisely used  those freedoms to do it their way, the 
 little mistakes  were more than compensated for by the big things 
that brought about positive results.

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
107
In a big world tasked with leading a huge operation, micro-
managing was out of the question and time was not on our side. 
We  were given the latitude to make critical decisions and the 
freedom to operate as we saw ﬁ t. At the same time, our interna-
tional team had strong support from Jim and the corporate 
staff . Eventually, it all came together; in just over a year, Inter-
national became proﬁ table for the ﬁ rst time.
Set Bound aries
Allowing  people the freedom to operate using their own style is 
impor tant, but it must be within the framework of the organ-
ization’s culture and policies. Leaders are environment shapers— 
they set bound aries for their  people and foster productivity 
within appropriate, well- deﬁ ned 
borders. They are respected and 
followed  because they do the right 
things, the right ways, at the right 
times. They trust their  people and 
give them the authority necessary to get things done and lead in 
their own way. This starts with the way they communicate with 
the members of their team.
Never was this princi ple more clear to me than one after noon 
when I was in my offi  ce in Germany, trying to review and approve 
a time- sensitive proposal for an impor tant customer. My abso-
lute deadline was 5:00 p.m., as the customer was scheduled to 
meet with me to review our off ering at that time.
It was already  after 4:00 p.m. and I was working diligently to 
read the thick proposal. Suddenly, my administrative assistant, 
Kelly, entered my offi  ce with a pressing prob lem that  couldn’t 
wait. When I turned my attention to focus on her issues, I sud-
denly realized I had forgotten to submit a travel voucher request 
for an upcoming trip.
Foster 
productivity 
with in 
appropriate, 
well- deﬁ ned borders.

108 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
For a moment, I stopped listening to Kelly while I jotted down 
a reminder to myself about the travel voucher. The phone rang 
and, of course, I just had to answer it.
Frustrated, Kelly walked out of my offi  ce just as I asked her to 
please hold on while I answered a call. A few moments  later, she 
was back at my offi  ce door to announce that my 5  o’clock ap-
pointment was coming down the hall to sign the proposal.
Sound familiar?
With all that was  going on in  those few moments, I slipped 
into distraction distortion mode by failing to listen to Kelly’s con-
cerns and meet my deadline— two failures at one time. Both of 
the things that I lost sight of  were far more impor tant than any-
thing I allowed to distract me that after noon. I failed to set 
bound aries for myself.
Communicate Eff ectively
The primary goal in any communication is connection. You must 
connect clearly so  people get the message you are trying to convey. 
They have to feel your passion 
if you want their own enthu-
siasm and dedication for the 
cause to increase.
Listen Closely
The most eff ective way to connect is to show that you understand 
not just the words another person speaks, but also the meaning 
and intent  behind their words. To do this consistently, you have 
to listen closely to comprehend the message that’s truly being 
sent. If you only pretend to listen without paying attention to 
cues like facial expressions and body language, you may miss the 
message entirely.
Connect clearly so  people 
get the message you are 
trying to convey.

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
109
Asking questions and requesting clariﬁ cation demonstrate 
that you are interested and that you are  really listening to what is 
being said, not just hearing. A  simple, yet eff ective practice is to 
have no barriers (e.g., sit on the same side of the  table), ﬁ nd things 
you have in common, and maintain eye contact with the person 
who is speaking with you. This habit helps you focus on the 
words as well as the  actual message the other person is trying to 
convey. Your ears  will tend to follow your eyes and this combi-
nation  will make it harder for your mind to drift and miss the 
nonverbal signals the speaker may be sending.  People who talk 
about the  great communicators they have met always say one 
 thing: “She [or he] made me feel as though I was the only person 
in the room.”
Say what you mean— when your words are scarce, the ones you 
do say become all the more impor tant. What you say carries a 
lot of weight. When  there’s nothing more to say,  don’t say it.
Filter What You Say
Ten days  after retiring from UPS, I started attending classes in 
a police acad emy and have been a law-enforcement offi  cer ever 
since. Police offi  cers have a  simple rule for themselves when deal-
ing with a particularly obnoxious person: If it feels good,  don’t 
say it. The next time you are about to say something that could 
be insensitive or detrimental, take a minute to ﬁ rst put your 
thoughts through this ﬁ lter:
• Is it true?
• Is it necessary and is it necessary to say it now?
• Is it respectful, or is  there a respectful way I can say it?
Every one knows what happens whenever you forget to put the 
ﬁ lter in your coff eemaker; you start your day with a mess. If you 

110 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
forget to ﬁ lter your words as a leader, confusion reigns, feelings 
are hurt, emotions spew out, and often what was intended to be 
helpful turns out to be degrading. When you take the time to 
run your words through the ﬁ lter, you might be surprised at 
what you decide to keep to yourself.
Consider the Weight of Your Words
 Because your team listens to every thing you say and they some-
times rehash  those words endlessly, looking for any hidden 
meaning that might be directed at them personally, choose 
your words wisely. Right or 
wrong, fair or unfair, this is 
just the way it is when you 
are the person in charge. In fact, you should be aware of  those 
who are looking for reasons to ﬁ nd something adverse in your 
comments. They are out  there.
Choose your words wisely.
The Heat of the Moment in Hawaii
 There  were times when I found myself talking when I should have 
been listening. On one occasion, I found myself in some very hot 
 water while on a special assignment in Hawaii heading up a small 
team of UPSers. The goal was to integrate the UPS culture and 
operating methods into a well- established, local delivery com pany 
that UPS had acquired.
The acquisition gave us instant access to an established opera-
tion on the island and a  great opportunity to build our brand 
locally. It was, basically, a good com pany. However, it came with 
a culture much diff er ent from that of UPS. The business was 
 family- owned and the  owners had considerable trou ble holding 
a few prob lem  people accountable. They tolerated bad be hav ior 
from employees who had been with them for many years. One 
individual in par tic u lar was poisoning the organ ization. His 
name was Lance; along with a negative attitude, he had a severe 

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
111
attendance prob lem. He was constantly absent on  Mondays, 
averaging three out of four a month.
Lance openly bragged about getting away with this be hav ior 
and he actively encouraged his coworkers to do the same. When 
challenged, his excuse was that hard weekend partying meant he 
was too tired to work on Mondays. I gave him an A+ in arrogance. 
He thrived on telling management what he would and  wouldn’t do, 
letting them know they could do nothing about it. In a sense, he 
was right; in the former com pany, they had let him get away with it 
for years. I deci ded not to delegate this one and told Lance, in no 
uncertain terms, that his world was about to change.
I, personally, talked to him each time he crossed the line, increas-
ing the intensity at  every step and documenting the details of our 
discussions.  After one such meeting, I talked with the previous 
owner, telling him I was out of patience and that I had given Lance 
his ﬁ nal warning with clear instructions to be at work on Monday.
The owner replied, “That’s asking for a lot. Lance is normally 
sick on Mondays and has been for as long as I can remember.” 
Biting my tongue and sensing no support  there, it was obvious I 
was on my own in dealing with Lance.
Then it all came to a head. On the following Monday, Lance’s 
package car was loaded full of packages, but, of course,  there was 
no Lance.
I asked his new supervisor where Lance was.  After reminding me it 
was Monday, he informed me that Lance had called in sick. I lost it.
I told the supervisor, “If he is sick, he needs to be in a hospital 
to ﬁ nd out the cause of  these Monday health problems. Send an 
ambulance to his  house.” And that’s exactly what he did.
I realized I had made a major  mistake when Hawaii Five- O 
walked into my offi  ce a few hours  later and issued me a strong 
warning, leaving me with a stiff  bill for the cost of the ambulance. 
Frankly, I was lucky I  didn’t go to jail.
Lance showed up for work the rest of the week, but it  didn’t 
last. The following Monday, he called in sick again; when he 
arrived at work on Tuesday morning, I terminated him. I was a 

112 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Think Your Message through Carefully
Avoid giving  people a reason to mistrust you.
Give careful thought to your message so you do not have to 
go back to explain what you meant to say the ﬁ rst time. Set par-
ameters for yourself through 
your carefully chosen words.
Remind your team members 
that eff ective communication 
is crucial to connecting with one another and building strong 
working relationships. Carefully consider what you say, when you 
say it, how you say it and—most importantly— whether you should 
say it at all.
If you want your employees to function eff ectively as a team, get 
them actively involved so they know what’s  going on.  There should 
be no secrets, no mysteries, and no surprises. Not  doing this  will 
throw the rumor mills into action and you  will ﬁ nd yourself 
devoting far too much time and energy to putting out ﬁ res.
When you encourage collaboration, your team feels directly in-
volved in the objectives and they  will be committed to achieving 
them. This does not mean all team members  will get their way, 
but they do need to have their way considered. You, alone, are respon-
sible for the ﬁ nal decision, but your best decisions should be 
Avoid giving  people a rea-
 son to mistrust you.
 little surprised when the former  owners of the com pany and several 
of the employees commented it was about time.
Clearly, my order to the supervisor in the heat of the moment 
to call an ambulance was wrong. I should have kept my temper 
 under control. Thank goodness, he told the police that he had 
been ordered to do it by me; that’s how they ended up in my offi  ce 
giving me a well- deserved lecture. I wish I had known about ﬁ lters 
back then and better understood the weight of words. I guess 
some lessons come harder than  others.

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
113
based upon a collaborative pro cess and receiving as much rele-
vant information as pos si ble.
Put Yourself Where the Action Is
Part of being prepared for the unexpected is putting yourself 
where the action is and making unscheduled visits to see how 
things are  going. Walking around and interacting with your 
 people brings amazing results.
As you take the pulse of your personnel and get an up- close 
view of what they are  doing, you develop a tighter bond with 
them. Your visits to their workplaces say that you care about what 
they are  doing and send a strong message that what they do 
matters.  These are the times when you make it clear you are open 
to listening to what  people have to say.
Our UPS management team had a distinct advantage. They 
had risen through the ranks and knew the demands of each 
and  every job in the com pany. By the way, we always knew when 
the local management team had caught wind that we  were com-
ing to visit their facilities. The smell of fresh paint was a dead 
giveaway.
Many things surface while you are spending quality time with 
your  people. Occasionally, things come up that need attention 
and sometimes it just seems that it would have been too  simple 
to resolve them before you dropped in. Think about problems 
such as mechanical breakdowns in a ﬂ eet, computers that fre-
quently fail, or any of  those other frustrating issues that pop up. 
Are the  people in charge correcting them or ignoring them? Are they just 
giving lip ser vice to com pany policy or helplessly signaling  there is nothing 
they can do about the breakdowns?
Mechanical problems are not mechanical problems at all— they 
are  people problems that managers must solve. Employees need 
to have all the necessary tools to do their jobs properly and they 

114 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
need  those tools to work perfectly  every single day. It is up to their 
management team to make this happen, no  matter how many 
cages they have to rattle and how far up the chain of command 
they need to go.  Great leaders  will bend over backwards and do 
what ever is necessary to make sure  those  people on the front line 
get what they need. The best of the best take servant leadership to heart.
Some folks think the whiners, complainers, and squeaky wheels 
should be ignored. I believe the opposite. In my experience, more 
often than not, the  people with the courage to speak up are the 
ones trying to make conditions better, thus making the com pany 
better.
Even if it is a gripe, it means something is not right and needs 
a man ag er’s attention. Who better to tell management how things 
 really are than  those who do the job  every day? They may just have a 
 great idea that could improve the way things are done. If noth-
ing  else, just the fact that you listened to them and gave them a 
 little attention goes a long way. I  couldn’t begin to count all the 
inventions, pro cesses, and improvements within the UPS systems 
that came from our employees. And this all occurred  because 
 people  were allowed to share their ideas in the UPS culture of “we.”
Of course,  there  will be the serial complainers who just want 
to complain about every thing for no legitimate reason. Their 
concerns need to be addressed, as they are the ones who can af-
fect morale, often by spreading rumors and ignoring the facts. 
However,  those who speak up with legitimate concerns should 
always be taken seriously.
If a janitor in a UPS fa cil i ty had a better idea that would help solve 
a bottleneck on a loading dock, we wanted to hear it. If a driver 
had a better idea about how to save fuel, we wanted to hear it. If a 
clerk had a better idea for ridding ourselves of unnecessary and 
time- wasting reports, we wanted to hear it.

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
115
Assess Your Com pany’s Evaluation Program
At UPS, we conducted per for mance reviews, called Quality Per-
for mance Reviews,  every six months. Eighty  percent of the review 
was based on hard numbers or completed goals and 20  percent 
on subjective or softer mea sure ments.
When was the last time you reviewed your com pany’s formal 
evaluation program with a critical perspective? Does it accomplish 
what it was designed for, or does it do more harm than good? Are  people 
looking forward to a fair and constructive review, or do they see it as judg-
ment day? Does it align with your goals and the com pany’s mission?
Over time,  people add elements to per for mance reviews that 
are not relevant in the big picture, creating confusion and  doing 
more harm than good. Keep in mind, an evaluation is a person’s 
report card and often determines their pay, se lection for a desir-
able assignment, or opportunity for advancement. Each level 
of management should not hesitate to challenge the com pany’s 
approach to evaluation. Ask questions and hold the evaluator ac-
countable. Employees  will remember their reviews for a long time, 
especially if they feel as though they  were treated unfairly in the 
pro cess.
Not every thing can be mea sured and not every thing should 
appear as a cold, hard set of numbers listed on a preprinted eval-
uation form.
Should intangible things that are not on the evaluation form be con-
sidered? You be the judge.
Base your appraisal on per for mance over the total evaluation 
period and not just what struck you recently, good or bad. Include 
 those intangible things that are relevant as well.
All you have to do is listen and then take action. Your  people 
are handing you a way to make things better on a silver platter. 
Take it. Leadership can sprout in unexpected places.

116 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
Job evaluations should be an open, two- way conversation so 
employees understand their strengths and weaknesses. If  there 
are serious areas of concern, start by asking for their side of the 
story and focus only on their be hav ior and the consequences, 
rather than implying  there’s a ﬂ aw in their character.
HOW LEADERSHIP LOOKS FROM  HERE
Leaders Recognize That Not All Per for mance 
Criteria Are on the Evaluation Form
Not every thing can be mea sured. Allow ﬂ exibility and apply some 
common sense when evaluating  people. I remember hearing about 
the last driver returning to her UPS center one cold wintry night, 
with temperatures near the freezing point.  After checking out, she 
entered the locker room and discovered a broken pipe that was 
ﬂ ooding the  whole place. Fortunately, she noticed a mechanic in 
the parking lot and ran out to catch him as he was getting into his 
car to leave for the night. She told him about the broken pipe and 
he immediately ran back into the building and put his coveralls 
on. He and the driver worked together for the next four hours ﬁ x-
ing the  water leak and cleaning up the mess.
Repairing  those  water pipes was not in their job descriptions, 
but  these two employees took it upon themselves to do what 
needed to be done that night. They only mentioned it to one 
other mechanic several months  later, who then told me about it.
I mentioned the  water incident at evaluation time to each of 
their managers, who had not heard about this heroic action by 
their employees  either. I told them that while it was certainly up to 
them, they might want to give the driver and mechanic a nudge to 
the positive side of their per for mance evaluations. I went further 
and recognized them both as Employees of the Year.
Did I mention the night they stayed  until the wee hours of 
the morning ﬁ xing the leaky pipe was Christmas Eve?

Chapter 10 • Prepare for Places Unexpected 
117
The elements on the appraisal form should be based directly 
on the duties and outcomes in an employee’s job description. 
When an evaluation is based upon the mea sur able and relevant 
results, then the person being evaluated  will have a clear under-
standing of what is expected of them and how they are judged. 
They should never be caught off  guard. Put the rules of the game 
on the  table with full transparency for all to see.
How You Can Deliver
• Communicate to connect with  others. Talk. Listen. Act.
• Carefully consider your words before you say anything 
that could be hurtful or damaging. Remember to ﬁ lter 
your comments.
• Never give  others a reason to mistrust you.
• Make walking around a regular part of your manage-
ment routine.
• Let employees know immediately if you are dissatisﬁ ed 
with their per for mance, not during a per for mance 
review months  later.

118
chapter 11
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered
“The greatest leader is not necessarily the one who does 
the greatest things. He is the one that gets the  people to do 
the greatest things.”— Ronald Reagan
J
ust a few weeks before my retirement, I had the opportunity 
to observe the night sort at our UPS airport (formerly Clark 
Air Force Base) in the Philippines. It was one of the top- performing 
air operations in the world.
During the course of my tour, our division man ag er Ed intro-
duced me to hundreds of  people. Amazingly, he knew the names 
of  every single employee. Even more impressive were the  great 
attitudes of each one of them and the positive comments they 
made about the com pany and about Ed.
Although diffi  cult to describe, it was almost a party atmosphere 
at the airport that night as hundreds of workers unloaded and 
loaded packages into air containers, while  others on the ramp 
staged the aircraft. They  were all working extremely hard, yet they 
 were having fun.
Clearly,  there was something special  going on and I quickly 
ﬁ gured out the source. It was Ed.
I just had to know his secret, so I asked Ed to tell me what 
made him and his team so darned good. He told me something 
that night that I  will never forget.
With all the modesty in the world and a slight smile, Ed told 
me the following: “It is my four faiths. I believe in God. I believe 
in my com pany. I believe in myself. And I believe in my friends, 

Chapter 11 • Signed, Sealed, and Delivered 
119
who just happen to be my employees.” Obviously,  there is a lot 
to learn about leading  others, but then again maybe all you need 
is a  little faith.
Leaders like Ed have that extra something that makes them 
special. They ﬁ gure out how to build teams that are so capable 
they hit their targets even when the leader  isn’t around. Their loy-
alty to one another is unquestioned.
 These teams have  laser- like focus and endless energy. In a 
stormy situation, they make the prevailing winds work in their 
 favor. An inspired team can out work and outwit the competi-
tion any day of the week. Ed’s team is just one example of what 
brings success to UPS. The fact is UPS has a  whole lot of Eds 
leading our teams all over the world.
As the policy book said, customers are the reason for UPS’s existence and 
the com pany remembers that it was created to provide a ser vice.  People, 
reputation, growth, and ser vice remain the core of UPS’s success. Al-
though they are not complex,  these values have strong meaning and have 
managed to sustain the com pany since 1907. Let’s summarize a few of 
the key principles that have contributed to the success of UPS:
• Provide Opportunities for Own ership. In 1927, when the 
com pany was incorporated as United Parcel Ser vice, 
both management and nonmanagement personnel 
 were given the opportunity to buy UPS stock. Although 
several changes have been made to the program since 
then, this may be the single most impor tant part of 
the com pany’s culture. It contributs to the high 
 employee retention and gives employees a feeling that 
UPS is “my com pany.”
• Promote from Within. Managers who start with an 
organ ization and rise through its ranks are likely to be 
more aligned, committed, and experienced than  those 

120 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
brought in laterally from the outside. We  didn’t hire 
just for a job, but for a  career. This has been the com-
pany policy from the beginning and  every CEO has come 
up through the ranks. Therefore, we know that anytime 
we hire a new employee, they could be a  future CEO.
• Be Constructively Dissatisﬁ ed. No  matter how successful a 
com pany is, leaders should never be satisﬁ ed. Once we 
do something well, we continue to look for ways to do it 
better.  Great companies adapt to changing conditions. 
They  don’t deny that perplexing conditions exist, nor 
do they pretend that markets  will remain certain or be 
kind to them. In fact, they embrace  those realities and 
plan for the certainty of coming storms by staying 
nimble and agile. They are constructively dissatisﬁ ed. 
Leaders make conditions; they  don’t become victims 
of them.
• Build on the Past While Charting the  Future. We use our 
corporate values to describe what is impor tant to our 
organ ization. We tie in stories, images, and lessons 
from the com pany’s history to illustrate the fundamen-
tals that  are embedded in the UPS culture. Together, 
 these factual accounts allow us to perpetuate a win-
ning mindset that lets us move forward as a uniﬁ ed 
com pany.
• Reward Per for mance. The culture at UPS is one of impar-
tiality: each person is on par with all  others. Employees 
advance when they demonstrate more capability than 
 others, show individual merit and per for mance, and 
have superior relations and re spect for their customers 
and their peers. This mantra directly ties into our 
policy of promoting from within.
• Decentralize Management to Encourage a “Culture of We.” 
Since the beginning, UPS eff ectively implemented a 

Chapter 11 • Signed, Sealed, and Delivered 
121
decentralized management philosophy. From the 
 drivers to the most se nior executives in the com pany, 
we depend on  people fulﬁ lling their duties with mini-
mum interference, allowing  people to supervise them-
selves without someone looking over their  shoulders. 
This trust fosters an entrepreneurial spirit of  doing their 
jobs for “their com pany.”
• Encourage Adaptability. Adaptability does not require 
changing in response to  every fad or passing trend, but 
a willingness and preparedness to do so, radically and 
completely, when it is necessary. This spirit of teamwork 
and the desire to get  behind changes of tremendous 
operational and orga nizational value are essential to 
tackle signiﬁ cant challenges in the environment.
• Rotate to Develop. When you rotate  people through 
vari ous positions in a com pany, they develop and adapt 
to all aspects of the business, including diff er ent 
localities and cultures, allowing for a deeper under-
standing of the entire com pany. You create armies of 
generalists who develop into specialists  later in their 
careers. This allows managers to understand and 
appreciate what other  people do and how each job 
vitally contributes to the overall success of the com-
pany. The necessity for teamwork becomes obvious 
when you know how all the roles are integrated.
• Put the Customer First. “Anybody can deliver packages, 
from the small boy in the neighborhood on up to 
the most extensive delivery systems in the land. The 
one  thing we have to off er that  others  will not always 
have is quality.”11 This statement holds true  today, just 
as it has for more than one hundred years.
• Be  Humble. Most UPSers came from  humble begin-
nings, just as the com pany started modestly with an 

122 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
investment of $100 and a small offi  ce in a basement in 
Seattle, Washington. This humility drove the com pany 
over the years to be a quiet, but uniﬁ ed com pany— 
ordinary  people with a re spect for the com pany uniting 
to do extraordinary things. This  simple idea fosters 
teamwork and creates a competitive advantage.
All leadership begins with relationships and the level of trust 
that exists in them.  People have wasted im mense amounts of 
time through the ages arguing  whether leaders are born or 
made. The fact is, it  doesn’t  matter. If you think about it, leaders 
must have or develop the ability to inﬂ uence  others in some way 
to achieve their goals. Ministers are looked up to  because of their 
ability to communicate and relate to  people. Coaches must mo-
tivate their players to give their all. Supervisors in small offi  ces 
must get their workers to be at their best. The CEO of a multi-
national billion- dollar com pany must know how to encourage 
employees in distant locations to work seamlessly and remain 
committed to attaining the organ ization’s goals. They all must 
be trusted and trust their  people to deliver.
Napoleon reportedly once said, “Men  will work for money, but 
 they’ll die for a medal.”  Great leaders have mastered the ability 
to inspire followers to walk through ﬁ re for them. The secret? 
Relationships. In good times and bad, they are able to commu-
nicate to their team, “ We’re in this together.” A team that truly 
believes this  will be willing to give their all for you, just as Na-
poleon’s followers did for him.
It is obvious  there are many things that can produce the kind 
of leader  people are  eager to follow. Maybe it’s realizing  there is 
more power in “we” than “me.” Maybe it’s being willing to leave 
your offi  ce and get out on the front line with your  people.
The kind of leader you  will be is up to you. I hope that the 
time- tested principles in Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver  will 

Chapter 11 • Signed, Sealed, and Delivered 
123
keep you thinking— and acting— like a  great leader. You have been 
summoned to lead.  There is greatness in you waiting to be un-
leashed. Now, it’s time for you to deliver.
One of our best UPS  drivers once told me: “When I arrive at 
work, I own my job and  every part of it. That includes making 
sure I, personally,  don’t cause issues for the  people who pay me. 
In fact, I do every thing I can in my  little world to make them and 
our com pany look good.”  Great leaders do exactly the same  thing 
and then take it a step further: they do every thing they can to make 
their  people and com pany not only look good, but be good.  Here are a 
few ﬁ nal points that I believe separate the merely good leaders 
from the  great ones:
• Understand you are in the  people business.  People produce 
 great products and ser vices. If you  don’t show genuine 
appreciation to them, you’ll only be a marginal leader 
at best . . .  and likely not any kind of leader for long. 
Never allow yourself to feel entitled by your position or 
ﬂ ex your power over followers. Remain  humble at all 
times, even when times are challenging, and especially 
when things are  going  great.
• Be a Servant Leader. You are to take care of and serve 
your followers by providing them direction, guidance, 
encouragement, feedback, counseling, and resources. 
You are their servant, not the other way around.
• Be generous. Be quick to off er a word of encouragement 
or appreciation and be generous with your resources. 
It is okay to make a proﬁ t. It is not okay to be ruled by 
greed. Celebrate and give back to your employees in a 
spirit of abundance.
• See what you do as more than just a job. Be passionate 
about your job, your com pany, and your  people. Leaders 
 don’t quit at quitting time, simply  because they do not 

124 
Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver
want to. They are on a roll, in the zone— they have lost 
track of time. Ideally, you start your day, and  after 
what feels like one hour, look at the clock and see that 
eight hours have passed.
As the leader,  people  will look to you to set the pace and keep 
the team on course. If your team is working late into the night 
and on weekends on an urgent proj ect, you should be right  there 
with them and not out on the golf course. Your team needs to 
know you are  there to support them in what ever way they need 
to get the job done.
Certainly, each com pany is unique and has its own way to de-
liver its product or ser vice. The lessons in this book have en-
abled UPS to deliver the best ser vices pos si ble while growing 
dramatically and still off ers ﬁ nancial rewards to employees and 
shareholders.  These lessons in leadership presented  here may 
not always be the best way for you— improvements can always be 
made and the pursuit to ﬁ nd better ways of  doing business 
never ends.
Regardless, the success of UPS has proved that the com-
pany’s unique culture works, even on the scale of 435,000 em-
ployees. If I could only have a  couple of phrases to sum up 
what makes UPS a  great com pany, I would tell  others it all boils 
down to this: Determined  people working together in a values- based 
culture that constantly strives to be the best. We, not me.
Oh, and its heroes wear brown socks.

125
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams
Y
ou can go through Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver in a 
group setting to help you with team building and leader-
ship training. Using the questions  here as a guide, you and your 
team can develop ways to get better at what you do— individually 
and together.
Chapter 1: Delivering a Culture
1. What is a values- based culture?
2. How do you align each of the following areas with your 
organ ization’s values?
 a.  PEOPLE (do they know their jobs, the team’s 
goals?)
 b. PRIDE in your organ ization
 c. APPEARANCE of your  people, buildings, and 
 equipment
 d. PROMOTION (do they know what it takes to be 
considered for increased levels of responsibility?)
 e. PROCESS IMPROVEMENT
 f. COMMUNICATION (how do employees learn of 
com pany news?)
 g. COM PANY OWNER SHIP
 h. MENTORING
 i. EMPLOYEE SE LECTION
3. What is constructive dissatisfaction?

126 
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams
4. How do your employees, including executive manage-
ment, show re spect and appreciation for each other?
5. How do you welcome new employees to the organ-
ization and your team in par tic u lar?
6. What exactly do you know about each member of your 
team?
Chapter 2: Building a Successful Team
1. The question “Do I play my ﬁ ve best or my ‘best ﬁ ve’?” is 
a question  every leader  faces.
 a. Who are your “best ﬁ ve”?
 b. Who are your ﬁ ve best?
 c. How do you decide which ﬁ ve to play?
 d. Who has the potential to be in the “best ﬁ ve”?
2. What answer would you expect from your team if you 
asked them, “What is the reason for our success?”
3. Who is your mentor?
4. Who are you mentoring?
5. How are you preparing your team to take maximum 
advantage of opportunities?
6. Would  those  under your supervision deﬁ ne you as a 
boss or a leader? If the former, what do you need to 
change about your approach to leading?
7. Do you think the quality of an organ ization is tied 
more to its leadership or its workforce? Explain your 
answer.
Chapter 3: Divine Intervention
1. Who on your team seems to always ﬁ nd work that 
needs to be done, well beyond their assigned duties?
 a. How do you reward or recognize  those  people?
 b. How can you instill that drive in other team members?

A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams 
127
2. Do you know the following about all your team 
 members: their  family, where they grew up, hobbies, 
goals, aspirations, concerns, and anything  else that is 
impor tant in their lives?
3. What do you do to create a sense of fellowship among 
your employees?
 a. Have you shared the com pany’s history with them?
 b. Have you told them about the backgrounds of the 
key  people in your organ ization?
 c. Do you treat them as partners and not just hired 
hands?
 d. Do you stay with them as a trainer  until they can 
competently go on their own?
 e. Are they familiar with the com pany’s vision?
 f. Have you promoted a teamwork approach where they 
depend on and trust each other?
 g. Did you clearly communicate your core values to 
your  people?
4. How do you recognize your team members when they 
excel?
5. How do your create a sense of owner ship with team 
members, so that when a prob lem surfaces they “see it, 
own it, solve it, do it”?
Chapter 4: Developing Your Team’s Unique Talents
1. Make a list of the unique talents you bring to your 
business, your community, and the world.
2. What skills do  others on the team have that are better 
than yours?
3. What is your It ?
4. Do you manage your time, or does your time manage 
you? What are three things you need to do to become 
more eff ective in managing your time?

128 
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams
5. Do you have a plan to achieve your goals? If not, why? If 
so, what are your plan’s key components?
6. What do you do to ensure you lead with integrity at all 
times?
Chapter 5: Targeting the Most Critical Information
1. Ask each member of your team to describe exactly what 
the team as a  whole is to produce and what they per-
sonally are responsible to produce.
2. In what ways do you communicate to the members (the 
Who) on your team that you value them as individuals 
and care about what they think?
3. Do you know their Whats: their personal and profes-
sional goals, their work and personal concerns, their 
aspirations, their ideas on how to improve the work 
methods, the assignments  they’d  really love to have, the 
training  they’d like to attend, etc.?
4. Look at the Hows your team uses to produce its results.
a. How much do you know about each of the Hows 
(methods, pro cesses, equipment) your team uses to 
produce its results?
b. How often do you review the eff ectiveness and effi  -
ciency of the Hows?
c. How do you determine which new Hows would be 
useful for your team to adopt?
Chapter 6: Cultivating the X  Factor
1. X  factor 1: The Ability to Match  People and Jobs. 
How do you determine which  people to assign to 
which jobs?
2. Once you have the right  people in the right jobs, what 
do you do next to help them succeed?

A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams 
129
3. How do you identify which of your  people might need 
some extra help?
 a. When you identify them, how do you prepare your 
mentoring plan?
 b. If it appears a person needs to be replaced, what 
other options do you consider?
4. X  factor 2: The Ability to Remove the Fog. How do you 
ensure all your  people know the results they are ex-
pected to produce? How— and how often—do you check 
to verify your expectations are clearly known and are 
being carried out?
5. X  factor 3: The Ability to Inspire and Go Higher. How 
do you meaningfully acknowledge your team as a  whole 
and members individually?
6. X  factor 4: The Ability to Be Creative. What plans do 
you have to increase the probability that opportunities 
 will be noticed and acted on?
Chapter 7: Maintaining an Ethical Environment
1. What does skewing mean? Are you or the members of 
your team  under its inﬂ uence?
2. The phrase “breathing your own exhaust” represents 
how sometimes leaders gradually begin to fall in love 
with systems and strategies that they personally cre-
ated. Can you give an example of how you have seen 
this happen in your own leadership?
3. What is the value that each member of your team con-
tributes to the organ ization? Who are your high perform-
ers, and who is holding the team back? What are you 
 going to do to address the issue of underper for mance?
4. The way leaders respond to crises often determines their 
success. What are some principles of crisis management 
 every leader needs to have in his or her arsenal?

130 
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams
5. When it comes to managing your  people, do you lean 
more  toward a micro- or macromanagement style? If 
you answered micromanaging, what can you do to 
build the kind of relationship with your employees that 
 will stop you from meddling in things you need to 
delegate?
6. What backup plans do you have in place for when the 
inevitable crisis occurs?
Chapter 8: Fostering Positive Interactions
1. Trust is hard to gain and easy to lose. What are some 
ways leaders can gain the trust of their team members? 
What are some ways a leader can forfeit trust?
2. Do you feel secure enough as a leader to encourage 
 others to challenge your systems, strategies, and opin-
ions? Give an example of when you have done this.
3. What are you  doing to integrate the diff er ent cultures, 
perspectives, and values of your team members into a 
coordinated unit? Why is time such a valuable asset 
when it comes to building trust within a team?
4. What are some of the most eff ective ways to rebuild 
trust when relationships within your team break down?
5. Dealing with  people problems is part of the job for 
 every leader. What are some of the most eff ective ways 
 you’ve found to deal with such matters?
6. Do you have some team members forming subgroups or 
cliques? If so, what plans  will you implement to build a 
cohesive and uniﬁ ed team and not allow a disjointed and 
dysfunctional group to dominate the culture?

A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams 
131
Chapter 9: Moving Forward
1. If you want to accomplish something  great, then you 
must do something. What have you done lately that 
 will move you farther down the road to greatness?
2. Describe the diff erences between someone who is a 
work horse, and someone who is a show  horse. Which 
are you, and why? How would  others describe you?
3. We all have areas where  we’re not strong. What are 
yours? What are you  doing to address them?
4. Why do you think so few  people are grinders when it 
comes to work? What are some ways leaders can en-
courage their team members to become grinders?
5. Explain how you could use the Good, the Bad, and the 
Ugly per for mance review in your organ ization.
Chapter 10: Prepare for Places Unexpected
1. The statement “Be slow to speak and quick to listen” 
is easier said than done. What are some things leaders 
can do to become better listeners? Who are the best 
listeners you know, and exactly what makes them 
that way?
2. How do you build strong connections with the mem-
bers of your team? What can you do to further 
strengthen  those relationships and build new ones?
3. Do you ﬁ nd it easier to catch  people  doing something 
right or catch them making mistakes? How can you 
guard against a negative mindset  going forward?
4. Management by walking around is a power ful leader-
ship technique. What does it mean to you, and how 
can you improve the ways in which you use it in your 
organ ization?

132 
A Study Guide for Leaders and Their Teams
5. How often, and in what ways, do you currently provide 
feedback to the members of your team? What can you 
do, starting  today, to improve your feedback pro cess?
Chapter 11: Signed, Sealed, and Delivered
1. How can you build on your com pany’s past while 
charting a course for its  future?
2. Why is it impor tant to build your organ ization around 
team players, not superstars?
3. How can you build a more adaptable organ ization?
4. In what ways do you put your customer ﬁ rst?
5. What reminders do you put in place to keep your 
humility in check?
And ﬁ  nally . . .  
What is your biggest takeaway from reading this book, and 
what is one way it has changed you as a leader?

133
Endnotes
 1. http:// www . ups . com / content / us / en / about / facts / worldwide . html.
 2. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991), p. 9.
 3. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991), p. 13.
 4. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991) p. 38
 5. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991), p. 38.
 6. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991), p. 27.
 7. http:// www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 07 / 07 / sports / soccer / womens - world - cup 
- ﬁ nal - was - most - watched - soccer - game - in - united - states - history . html ? _ r = 0
 8. Amy Alexander, “UPS Founder Jim Casey Delivered Goods the Best,” 
Investor’s Business Daily, http:// repubhub . icopyright . net / freePost . act ? tag 
= 3 . 8218 ? icx _ id = 674589.
 9. Randy Gravitt, “Gaps,” http:// randygravitt . com / gaps / .
10. “John F. Kennedy and PT-109,” John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and 
Museum, http:// www . jfklibrary . org / JFK / JFK - in - History / John - F - Kennedy 
- and - PT109 . aspx.
11. Our Partnership Legacy— Jim Casey, UPS (1991), p. 7.

This page intentionally left blank 

135
The “We” (It’s Not Just Me!)
T
his book has been a group eff ort, and I want to thank my 
four core team members.
James Fallon
A lifelong student of leadership, Jim is corporate client group 
 director and se nior vice president for a global ﬁ nancial ser vices 
ﬁ rm. For the past nineteen years, Jim has been an active mem-
ber of the Real Deal, a leadership study group comprised promi-
nent leaders from both the corporate and nonproﬁ t worlds. 
Jim and I are partners in the Number One Group, which pro-
duces media content in the publishing,  music, and tele vi sion/ 
ﬁ lm industries. You can connect with Jim at james . fallon@icloud 
. com.
Randy Gravitt
Randy is a writer, speaker, and life coach who coauthored Find-
ing Your Way. Randy has spoken in the United States, Asia, Africa, 
and South Amer i ca. Thousands of  people each day read his blog. 
Randy is available to speak to organizations of all sizes on the 
principles in Leadership Lessons from a UPS Driver. You can connect 
with Randy through his website, RandyGravitt . com, or via Twitter 
@randygravitt.

136 
The “We” (It’s Not Just Me!)
Gary Mastro
Gary is responsible for the sales of Leadership Lessons from a UPS 
Driver. Gary is a thirty- eight- year veteran of UPS, where he was 
corporate vice president of brand and product marketing.
David Schiff 
For more than thirty years, as the founder of The Operant 
Group, Inc., David has led proj ect teams and taught  human 
per for mance engineering to Fortune 500 companies and other 
prominent organizations. He also works with the military, 
law  enforcement, and other governmental agencies to provide 
performance- based training to their staff  instructors and internal 
con sul tants. He has published numerous articles and authored 
the Con sul tant’s Digest.

137
Acknowl edgments
P
eter Economy helped us or ga nize and tighten up the ﬁ nal 
manuscript. It was Peter who brought it all together and in 
the end was responsible for connecting us with our ﬁ ne part-
ners at Berrett- Koehler Publishing.
A heartfelt thanks goes to Leslie Stephen for her vernacular 
and structural engineering of the manuscript.  Because of her 
patience and advice, and more hours of rewrites than can be 
counted, we  were able to stay on track and pull out the best of 
our thoughts and experiences.
Cregg McKinney spent countless hours helping with our 
proj ect. Cregg, along with Senator John Albers, is represented by 
the Number One Group, who is producing a movie based on a 
book they wrote called The Entitled Soul.
We appreciate the work of Mike McAlpine, Michael Agrippina, 
Roger Bonds, Mike Briggs, Edna Dawson, Matt Kunz, Bob and 
Linda Meyers, David Murray, John Quattrocchi, Jenny and 
Benjamin Schiff , and Kate Wallace.
Much gratitude goes out to Bob, Mark, and Jan Babcock 
and Laura Lyn Donahue, who helped shape the initial draft. 
Thanks to Stephanie Wetzel for her invaluable advice.
I’d also like to thank Nancy Baeur for her special touch during 
the ﬁ nal phase of our editing pro cess.  Great thanks to my pastor 
and friend, Steven Gibbs. Steven is the pastor of Stonecreek 
Church in Milton, Georgia. Stonecreek has a drive to do  great 
things and mobilizes  people to create lasting change in the world.

This page intentionally left blank 

139
Index
ability, 16–17
above reproach, 69–70
accomplishments, of leader, 
25–26
accountability, 6, 60
acknowl edgment, 61
action, 113–114
adaptability, 121
agree to disagree, 89
aim, for success, 93–94
Alaska: “best ﬁ fteen” in, 21; “best 
ﬁ ve” in, 20; Casey and, 19, 76; 
extra employees in, 20–21; 
new operation in, 19, 25; 
opening day in, 19–20; 
package cars in, 20–21
appreciation, 61
approach each day as last, 
98–99
background, 27–29
backup plan, 76
be hav iors: of bosses, 24–25; of 
employees, 110–112
be  humble, 97–98, 121–122
“best ﬁ fteen,” in Alaska, 21
“best ﬁ ve”: in Alaska, 20. See also 
play “best ﬁ ve,” not ﬁ ve best
boat rockers, 71
bosses: be hav iors of, 24–25. 
See also leader, not boss, 
with team- building
boundary- setting, 107–108
Brown, 3–4
building, of high- performance 
team, 2
build on past while charting 
 future, 120
business culture, 1, 3–4, 110; 
Casey’s initiation of, 6–7, 
9–10, 14
car. See UPS package car
Casey, Jim: Alaska opening, 19, 76; 
business culture initiated by, 
6–7, 9–10, 14; encounter with, 
7–8; as UPS founder, 5, 30, 
31–33
chance- taking, with jobs, 58–59
character, 33–34
characteristics, of eff ective leaders, 
23–24
chemistry, 16
choir practice, 80–81
cognitive dominance, 76
communication: about critical 
information, 52–53; eff ective, 
108–113; ﬁ ltering of, 109–110; 

140 
Index
communication (continued)
 
as founding princi ple, 12; 
hearing, 109; listen closely, 
108–109, 113–115; message, 
112–113; weight, of words, 
110
conﬂ ict resolution, 89–90
constructive dissatisfaction, 
13–15, 120
courage, 22
creativity: in Germany, 62–64; 
with leads, 63–65; with 
McLaughlin, 62–64; with 
sugar cube, 64–65
crisis per for mance, 74; backup 
plan, 76; expect unexpected, 
75–76; options, 75
critical characteristics, for eff ective 
leadership. See X  factor
critical information, targeting 
of: clear communication 
about, 52–53; provocative 
probing questions, 44–51; 
ready- aim- ﬁ re approach to, 
51–52
cultivation: of loyalty, 86; of X 
 factor, 55–65
culture: values- based, 1, 3, 124; 
“of we,” 6–8, 12, 120–121. 
See also business culture
culture, delivering of: constructive 
dissatisfaction, 13–15, 120; 
founding princi ples, 9–12; 
global com pany, from $100 
startup, 5–6; owned by 
man ag ers, managed by 
 owners, 12–13; promotion 
from within, 13, 119–120
customers, 119, 121
deadlines: monthly plan moni-
tored, 42; priorities deter-
mined, 41; schedule 
charted, 41–42; yearly staff  
meeting, 42
decentralize management to 
encourage “culture of we,” 
120–121
deception, 73–74
deliverables, 60
delivering, 1, 4, 118–124; how to, 
15, 26, 35, 43, 54, 65–66, 77, 
90, 104, 117. See also culture, 
delivering of
Delivery Information Acquisition 
Device (DIAD), 92–93
determined  people, 31–33, 124
discipline: accountability, re spect, 
and, 6; with extraordinary 
circumstances, 19; zero, 79
divine intervention: background, 
27–29; character comes ﬁ rst, 
33–34; early leadership 
lessons, 31; leaders have 
integrity, 33, 68; marry 
me— I’m unemployed, 29; 
solutions, for determined 
 people, 31–33; successes, 
34–35; UPS met, 30–31
employees: in Alaska, 20–21; 
be hav iors of, 110–112; stories 
about, 30–31, 37–39, 48, 
58–59, 81–85, 101–102, 
110–112, 118, 119
ethical environment: boat rockers, 
71; crisis per for mance, 
74–76; deception, 73–74; 
in de pen dent counsel, 69; 

Index 
141
involvement, 72–73; mainte-
nance of, 67–76; above 
reproach, 69–70; rusty skills, 
71; skewing, 67–68; smell 
test, 67–77; standard- 
setting, 68–69; trust, 69–70
evaluation program assessment, 
115–117
expectations stated, 59
expect the unexpected, 75–76
extraordinary circumstances, with 
team- building: in Alaska, 
19–22; discipline with, 19; 
trust with, 18–19
faith, 118–119
favoritism, 9, 10
ﬁ ltering, 109–110
ﬁ nd your “it,” 36–37
ﬁ rst- name basis, 10
focus, misdirected, 47
follow up, 59–60
fostering, of positive interactions, 
78–90
founding, of UPS, 1, 5
founding princi ples: communica-
tion, 12; “culture of we,” 6–8, 
12, 120–121; favoritism 
avoided, 9; ﬁ rst- name basis, 
10; open- door policy, 10; 
positive visual impression, 
11–12; show pride, 10–11; 
treat every one equally, 
9–10
fresh start, 79–81
Germany, 62–64
global com pany, from $100 
startup, 5–6
the good, the bad, the ugly, 
99–100
Gordon, Steve, 44–46
Hawaii, 110–112
hearing,  109
high- performance team, 2
the how, 44, 46, 48–49
importance, of leadership, 2–3
in de pen dent counsel, 69
inertia overcome, 91–92
inspiration, 61
integrity, 33, 68
involvement, of team, 72–73
jobs. See  people, jobs matched to
journey, of leadership, 2–3
Kelly, Jim, 105, 106
leader, not boss, with team- 
building: accomplishments 
of, 25–26; characteristics of 
eff ective, 23–24; diff erence 
between, 23–26
Leaders Act with Integrity, 74
Leaders Base Relationships on 
Trust and Mutual Res pect, 32
Leaders Face the Bull, 84
Leaders Find Solutions, 97
Leaders Focus on the Big Picture, 
53
Leaders Guide Their Teams to 
Higher Levels, 65
leadership: core princi ples of, 
4, 123–124; courage with, 22; 
early lessons of, 31; impor-
tance of, 2–3; integrity of, 33, 

142 
Index
leadership (continued)
 
68; journey of, 2–3; priorities 
of, 40; prob lems with, 4; 
servant, 7, 114, 123; style 
of, 4
Leaders Lead Lives, 22
Leaders Recognize That Not All 
Per for mance Criteria Are on 
the Evaluation Form, 116
Leaders Spread Their Enthusiasm, 
39
Leaders Walk the Talk, 8
leads, 63–65
listening, 108–109, 113–115
loyalty, 85, 86
maintenance, of ethical environ-
ment, 67–76
man ag ers: as ﬁ xers of prob lems, 14. 
See also owned by man ag ers, 
managed by  owners
McLaughlin, Jim, 62–64
mentoring, 18, 22
message, 112–113
micromanaging, 106–107
misdirected focus, 47
mistrust, 112
modesty, 34
monthly plan monitored, 42
move on, 89–90
moving forward: aim for success, 
93–94; approach each day as 
last, 98–99; balance results 
and “big picture,” 103; 
inertia overcome, 91–92; new 
technology, 92–93; self- 
assessment skills developed, 
96–98; successes and failures 
studied, 99–102
objective, of UPS,  3
open- door policy, 10
opening day, in Alaska, 19–20
operation, in Alaska, 19, 25
options, with crisis per for mance, 75
orga nizational values, 9
owned by man ag ers, managed by 
 owners, 12–13
owner ship opportunities, 119
package cars, in Alaska, 20–21
 people, jobs matched to, 55; 
chance- taking, 58–59; right 
person, is wrong for the job, 
57–58; se lection and train-
ing, 56–57
per for mance: rewarding of, 120. 
See also crisis per for mance; 
high- performance team
personal growth, 3
play “best ﬁ ve,” not ﬁ ve best: 
ability with, 16–17; synergy 
and chemistry with, 16
positive interactions: fostering of, 
78–90; fresh start, 79–81; 
loyalty cultivation, 86; nope, 
not quite, 81–82; relation-
ship breakdown, 88–90; 
rest, of story, 82–86; secure, 
in role, 86; uniﬁ ed team, 
87–88; us versus them, 78
positive visual impression, 11–12
pre- work communication meeting 
(PCM), 12
pride, in com pany and work, 10–11
princi ples: of high- performance 
team, 2; of leadership, 4. See 
also founding princi ples; 
UPS princi ples

Index 
143
priorities: determination of, 41; of 
leadership, 40
prob lems: with leadership, 4; 
man ag ers and, 14
productivity, 107
pro gress, 60
promotion, from within, 13, 
119–120
provocative probing questions, 
44–51
Quality Per for mance Reviews, 115
questions, provocative probing, 
44–51
ready- aim- ﬁ re approach, to 
critical information, 51–52
relationship breakdown, 88–90
results and “big picture” balanced, 
103
reward per for mance, 120
right person, is wrong for the job, 
57–58
rotate to develop, 121
rusty skills, 71
safety policies, 82–86
schedule charted, 41–42
secure, in role, 86
se lection and training, of  people, 
56–57
self- assessment skills developed, 
96–98
self- inventory,  37
self- leadership, 39–40
servant leadership, 7, 114, 123
shared goal, of UPS, 50
signed, sealed, and delivered, 
118–124
skewing, 67–68
small messenger ser vice, UPS 
as, 5
smell test, 67–77
staff  meeting, yearly,  42
standard- setting, 68–69
style, of leadership, 4
successes: “ours,” not “mine,” 34; 
study of failures and, 
99–102; yours, 34–35
synergy,  16
take- calculated- risks zone, 35
target ﬁ xation, 47
targeting, of critical information, 
44–53
team: challenges of, 71–72; check-
ups for, 70; Danny as 
member of, 37–39;  drivers of, 
37–39; high- performance, 2; 
involvement of, 72–73; 
uniﬁ ed, 87–88
team, developing unique talents of: 
deadlines, 41–42; ﬁ nd your 
“it,” 36–37; self- inventory, 37; 
self- leadership, 39–40; team 
members’  drivers identiﬁ ed, 
37–39
team, successful building of, 
87–88; with extraordinary 
circumstances, 18–22; with 
leader, not boss, 23–26; 
mentoring of, 18; play “best 
ﬁ ve,” not ﬁ ve best, 16–17; 
with teamwork, not super-
stars, 17
teamwork, not superstars, 17
technology, 92–93
treat every one equally, 9–10

144 
Index
trust, 122; in ethical environment, 
69–70; with extraordinary 
circumstances, 18–19; 
loyalty and, 85; rule of,  88
truth- speaking, 88
unexpected places, 105; action, 
113–114; boundary- setting, 
107–108; eff ective communi-
cations, 108–113; evaluation 
program assessment, 115–117; 
micromanaging, 106–107
uniﬁ ed team, 87–88
UPS: as Brown, 3–4; Casey as 
founder of, 5, 30, 31–33; 
founding of, 1, 5; Fred at, 
30–31, 48; meeting of, 30–31; 
objective of, 3; orga niza tional 
values of, 9; personal growth 
in, 3; shared goal of, 50; as 
small messenger ser vice, 5; 
as worldwide com pany, 5–6
UPS International, 1, 2, 105–106
UPS package car, 6, 20–21, 30–31
UPS princi ples, 123–124; be 
constructively dissatisﬁ ed, 
13–15, 120; be  humble, 97–98, 
121–122; build on past while 
charting  future, 120; decen-
tralize management to 
encourage “culture of we,” 
120–121; encourage adapt-
ability, 121; promote from 
within, 13, 119–120; provide 
opportunities for owner ship, 
119; put customer ﬁ rst, 119, 
121; reward per for mance, 
120; rotate to develop, 121
us versus them,  78
values- based culture, 1, 3, 124
 whale of story, 95–96
the what, 44, 46–48
the who, 44, 46, 48
the why, 44, 46, 49–51
work horses, 94–95
worldwide com pany, UPS as, 5–6
X  factor: communication, 59–60; 
creativity, 62–65; cultivation 
of, 55–65; inspiration, 61; 
 people matched with jobs, 
55–59
zero discipline, 79

About the Author
Credit: Photo courtesy of Jerry 
Drisaldi, Zaldi Photography
R
on Wallace is the former president of UPS International, 
where he was responsible for UPS in more than 200 coun-
tries and territories and had more than 60,000  people  under his 
direction. He also served on the corporate management commit-
tee that oversaw the day- to- day operations of UPS and its 435,000 
employees. In addition, he served as chairman or cochairman 
of 33 boards of directors of highly successful companies around 
the world.
Shortly  after retiring from UPS, Ron was appointed by the 
governor of Georgia as chairman of the governor’s commission 
and was charged with forming the city of Milton, Georgia. In 
2008, Ron and a friend established the famous Olde Blind Dog 
Irish Pub in Milton. In 2015, it was named the best Irish pub in 
the world, making it the ﬁ rst pub in the United States to win the 
award. In his earlier days, Ron was a professional race car driver 

146 
About the Author
and  later played semipro American football in Eu rope. He has 
been in law enforcement for more than twelve years since retir-
ing from UPS. He is currently a police offi  cer near his hometown 
as well as a director on several boards, po liti cal advisory commit-
tees, and charitable foundations.
In addition to overseeing several businesses and real estate de-
velopments that he owns, Ron is a campaign con sul tant and 
author of the book Power of the Campaign Pyramid. In 2014, he and 
Bob Meyers published a 336- page coff ee- table book titled Irish 
Pubs in Amer i ca: History, Lore, and Recipes. It won the prestigious 
Indie Book Award. Portions of the book are being made into a 
TV series, for which Ron serves as executive producer.
Ron and his wife, Kate, are blessed to have their  daugh ter Lara, 
and her husband, David, along with their grandchildren, Kelly 
and Megan, living close to them.
Visit our website at www . leadershiplessonsbyronwallace 
. com/ ups. Watch for the release of Ron’s next book, based on his 
experience as a ranch hand, titled Leadership Lessons from the Old 
West.

Berrett-Koehler is an independent publisher dedicated to an ambitious 
 mission: connecting people and ideas to create a world that works for all.
We believe that to truly create a better world, action is needed at all 
 levels— individual, organizational, and societal. At the individual level, our 
publications help people align their lives with their values and with their 
aspi ra tions for a better world. At the organizational level, our publications 
promote progressive leadership and management practices, socially respon-
sible approaches to business, and humane and effective organizations. At 
the societal level, our publications advance social and economic justice, 
shared prosperity, sustainability, and new solutions to national and global 
issues.
A major theme of our publications is “Opening Up New Space.” Berrett- 
Koehler titles challenge conventional thinking, introduce new ideas, and 
foster positive change. Their common quest is changing the underlying 
beliefs, mindsets, institutions, and structures that keep generating the same 
cycles of problems, no matter who our leaders are or what improvement 
programs we adopt.
We strive to practice what we preach—to operate our publishing company 
in line with the ideas in our books. At the core of our approach is steward-
ship, which we deﬁne as a deep sense of responsibility to administer the 
company for the beneﬁt of all of our “stakeholder” groups: authors, cus-
tomers, employees, investors, service providers, and the communities and 
environment around us. 
We are grateful to the thousands of readers, authors, and other friends of 
the company who consider themselves to be part of the “BK Community.” 
We hope that you, too, will join us in our mission.
A BK Business Book
This book is part of our BK Business series. BK Business titles pioneer new 
and progressive leadership and management practices in all types of public, 
private, and nonproﬁt organizations. They promote socially responsible ap-
proaches to business, innovative organizational change methods, and more 
humane and effective organizations.

Dear Reader,
Thank you for picking up this book and joining our worldwide community 
of Berrett-Koehler readers. We share ideas that bring positive change into 
people’s lives, organizations, and society.
To welcome you, we’d like to offer you a free  e-book. You can pick from 
among twelve of our bestselling books by entering the promotional code 
BKP92E here:  http://www . bkconnection .com/ welcome.
When you claim your free e-book, we’ll also send you a copy of our e-news-
letter, the BK Communiqué. Although you’re free to unsubscribe, there are 
many beneﬁts to sticking around. In every issue of our newsletter you’ll ﬁnd
• A free e-book
• Tips from famous authors
• Discounts on spotlight titles
• Hilarious insider publishing news
• A chance to win a prize for answering a riddle 
Best of all, our readers tell us, “Your newsletter is the only one I actually 
read.” So claim your gift today, and please stay in touch!
Sincerely,
Charlotte Ashlock
Steward of the BK Website
Questions? Comments? Contact me at bkcommunity@bkpub.com.
 Berrett–Koehler 
Publishers
 Connecting people and ideas
 to create a world that works for all

