
Praise for  
Leading the Starbucks Way
“Starbucks Coffee and Tea Company began just a few blocks 
from my business, the Pike Place Fish Market. Joseph Michelli 
helped me tell the story of how we create engaging and powerful 
experiences at Pike Place Fish. He has also been trusted to work  
with and share business principles used at companies like Star-
bucks, The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, and Zappos. In Leading  
the Starbucks Way, Joseph takes an incisive look at the leadership 
excellence of Starbucks. Unlike his prior book about the coffee 
leader, Leading the Starbucks Way helps you leverage the con-
nection you build at the person-to-person level while expand-
ing your customer bond globally, through technology, and even 
onto your products and goods. What are you waiting for? Buy 
the book, dive-in, gain practical tools, and be transformed!”
— Joh n  Yokoya m a , 
Owner of the World Famous Pike Place Fish 
Market and coauthor of When Fish Fly
“Joseph Michelli offers interesting insights into the fundamentals  
involved in creating the world’s biggest coffee chain. As a busi-
nessperson, you will learn how Starbucks leaders drive success 
as well as how they learn from setbacks. By reading Leading the 
Starbucks Way, you will be able to bypass many business pitfalls 
and streamline your pursuit of desired business objectives.”
— M a rt i n  L i nd st ro m , 
bestselling author of Buyology and 
Brandwashed
“Culture is everything! This fast-moving, fascinating book gives 
you countless practical ideas you can use immediately to create a 
company climate of inspiration and loyalty.”
—Brian Tracy, author of Full Engagement

“In Leading the Starbucks Way, Joseph Michelli shows us how 
a small Seattle-based chain of coffee shops became one of the 
most beloved brands on the planet. Charming, real-life examples  
of true service culture blend with behind-the-scenes corporate 
training strategies to create a pleasant and interesting read. So 
grab a cup of coffee, put your feet up, and read this book!”
— Ke n  Bl a n c ha rd, 
coauthor of The One Minute Manager® and 
Leading at a Higher Level
“As a Seattleite who remembers when there was just one Starbucks 
store on the planet, I continue to be fascinated by the company’s  
evolutionary journey to corporate icon. Michelli identifies the 
principles by which Howard Schultz and his team passionately 
perform in a culture that loves, respects, and rewards suppliers, 
employees, customers, shareholders, and the community.” 
— R ob e rt  Spec tor, 
author of The Nordstrom Way and coauthor 
of the forthcoming What’s Love Got to Do 
with It?: Courting, Catching, and Caring for 
the Ideal Customer
“Leading the Starbucks Way provides the key success factors of a 
lifestyle brand that is globally scaled, locally relevant, and pow-
ered by the passion of the Starbucks culture.”
— Joh n  Ti m m er m a n,  P h D, 
Senior Strategist of Customer Experience 
and Innovation, Gallup

5 Principles for Connecting 
with Your Customers, Your 
Products, and Your People
Joseph A. Michelli
the
N E W  Y O R K    C H I C A G O    S A N  F R A N C I S C O 
At h e n s    L O N D O N    M A D R I D
M E X I C O  C I T Y    M I L A N    N E W  D E L H I
S I N G A P O R E    S Y D N E Y    T O R O N T O

Copyright © 2014 by Joseph A. Michelli. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except 
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or 
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-180126-3
MHID: 0-07-180126-X
E-book conversion by codeMantra
Version 2.0
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-180125-6,    
MHID: 0-07-180125-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every  
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the  
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this 
book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales  
promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us 
page at www.mhprofessional.com.
All materials contained in this book are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, 
distributed, transmitted, displayed, published, or broadcast without the prior written permission of the author, 
Starbucks Coffee Company, or the owner of other content, as the case may be. You may not alter or remove 
any copyright or other notice from copies of the content.
Starbucks® coffee, Starbucks® café, Starbucks VIA® Ready Brew, Frappuccino® blended beverage, Seattle’s 
Best Coffee® café, Seattle’s Best Coffee® coffee, Tazo® Tea, and other names or marks in this book are  
trademarks of Starbucks Coffee Company. The absence of a trademark from this list or the absence of TM, SM, 
or ® symbol in connection with the marks in the book does not constitute a waiver of any intellectual property 
rights that Starbucks has established in any of its trademarks.
Pike Place is a trademark of The Pike Place Market PDA, used under license.
Keurig and K-Cups are trademarks of Keurig, Incorporated, used with permission.
K-Cup® packs for use in Keurig® K-Cup brewing system.
This book was prepared with the assistance of The Starbucks Coffee Company. The titles of the Starbucks 
partners and other Starbucks facts were accurate at the time the book went to print.
The author is not employed by or affiliated with Starbucks.
All internet addresses provided in the book were accurate at the time the book went to print.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. 
Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right 
to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the 
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own 
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work 
may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO 
GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF 
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT 
CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY 
DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill 
Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your 
requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its 
licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the 
work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of 
any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its 
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result 
from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such 
damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause 
arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

“If you’re looking for an inspirational path for 
  creating a likable, trustworthy, and wow! organization,    
  you’ve hit the mother lode.”
—Guy Kawasaki, former chief evangelist
   of Apple and author of Enchantment
“Required reading for anyone who wants to learn 
  how to create passionate employees and customers!” 
—Ken Blanchard, coauthor of The One Minute Manager and
The One Minute Entrepreneur
ALL TITLES ARE AVAILABLE AS A PRINT AND EBOOK
0-07-177354-1 
0-07-180125-1 
0-07-147784-5 
0-07-174958-6 
Essential leadership guides 
from New York Times bestselling 
author Joseph Michelli!
P R A I S E  F O R  J O S E P H  M I C H E L L I
a
All titles are 
available as 
a print and 
eBook
0-07-154833-5

The Wall Street 
Journal,  
BusinessWeek,  
and USA Today 
bestseller!
Also available as ebooks.
How did Starbucks turn 
 a cup of coffee into a 
worldwide business 
 phenomenon?
The Starbucks Experience 
reveals the key leadership 
principles that transformed 
an ordinary idea into an 
extraordinary experience. 
The groundbreaking guide to building long-term 
customer and employee loyalty—from #1  
New York Times bestselling author Joseph Michelli
More leadership essentials from Joseph Michelli 

This book is dedicated to the memory of my wife,  
Nora Leigh Michelli (September 7, 1961, to February 11, 2013)—
the woman with whom I shared more than half my life.  
You’ve been released from your six-year battle with breast cancer,  
and I know you heard, “Well done, good and faithful servant.” 
Nora, it is your time to enjoy the Master’s happiness! 

This page intentionally left blank 

v
Contents
	
Foreword	
vii
	
Acknowledgments	
ix
	 1.	
The Starbucks Connection	
1
P R I N C I P L E  1
Savor and Elevate
	 2.	
If You Don’t Have Passion for Your Product,  
	
	
Why Should Your Customer?	
11
	 3.	
From Replicable and Consistent to  
	
	
Magical and Unique	
36
P r i n c i p l e  2
Love to Be Loved
	 4.	
It’s a Matter of Trust and Love	
63
	 5.	
It Must Thrive Inside to  
	
	
Be Experienced Outside	
85
P r i n c i p l e  3
Reach for Common Ground
	 6.	
Assume the Universal:  
	
	
Serve the Unifying Truths of Humans	
111

vi
C on te n ts
	 7.	
Respect, Celebrate, and Customize:  
	
	
Listening and Innovating to Meet Local,  
	
	
Regional, and Global Needs	
133
P r i n c i p l e  4
Mobilize the Connection
	 8.	
Growing the Connection Through Technology	
158
	 9.	
Personal Relationships Translate:  
	
	
Sharing the Love from People to Products 	
181
P r i n c i p l e  5
Cherish and Challenge  
Your Legacy
	10.	
Honor the Past, but Don’t Be Trapped in It 	
207
	11.	
Taking the Long View:  
	
	
Building Success That Lasts	
229
	12.	
Forging a Real Lifestyle Connection	
253
	
Bibliography	
259
	
Index	
279

vii
vii
Foreword
Many business leaders today face a dynamic set of challenges. 
How does one choose employees who have the talents and in-
terpersonal qualities necessary to deliver memorable customer 
experiences? How can leaders bring on board, train, and accul-
turate team members so that they develop a passion for prod-
uct excellence and the skills required to become consummate 
service professionals? How can technology be leveraged to 
strengthen, not diminish, personal service delivery?
If you are fortunate enough to be a manager or leader in 
a company with a global footprint like The Ritz-Carlton Hotel 
Company or Starbucks, you face the added challenges of con-
stantly refining your products and services to connect with 
changing and culturally diverse customer groups—all the while 
maintaining operational excellence and the loyalty of your exist-
ing customer base. 
Each of Dr. Joseph Michelli’s books offers a learning labora-
tory that’s rich with examples from leaders as they address the 
aforementioned challenges and opportunities. They provide in-
formation, insights, and analysis on how leaders seek to create a 
high-performance organization that operates through the lens 
of humanity. This book demonstrates both the setbacks and the 
breakthroughs that the Starbucks leadership has encountered as 
it has attempted to position its products and people to deliver 
consistent, engaging, and loyalty-enhancing experiences.
I first met Dr. Michelli approximately six years ago. At that 
time, he brought his background as a customer experience pro-
fessional, business consultant, and author to The Ritz-Carlton 
Hotel Company and chronicled our never-ending commitment 

viii
for e w or d
to foster the engagement of our “Ladies and Gentlemen” and the 
guests whom we are fortunate to serve at our hotels and resorts 
in 27 countries presently. 
As president of The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, I believe 
that a company’s culture is critical to its success. At The Ritz-
Carlton, we strive to anticipate and exceed guests’ expectations 
in a warm, relaxed, and refined setting. We are constantly look-
ing for ways to infer and go beyond the wants, needs, and desires 
of our Ladies and Gentlemen and of our guests. All of the Ladies 
and Gentlemen of The Ritz-Carlton (myself included) invest  
in and communicate about our cultural foundation on a daily 
basis. 
American author M. Scott Peck suggested that we should 
“share our similarities, and celebrate our differences.” While The 
Ritz-Carlton and Starbucks are different organizations in many 
respects, Leading the Starbucks Way is a powerful and useful re-
minder that every one of us (no matter what our function or 
our industry) can contribute in some way to improved product 
quality, enhanced service delivery, emotionally engaging experi-
ences, and enriched community involvement. 
I wish you a fond farewell and joyful reading.
He rv e  Hum l e r
President and Chief Operations Officer
The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, L.L.C.

ix
ix
Acknowledgments
Physician, philosopher, and theologian Albert Schweitzer once 
wrote, “At times our own light goes out and is rekindled by a 
spark from another person. Each of us has cause to think with 
deep gratitude of those who have lighted the flame within us.” In 
the next few paragraphs, I am challenged to express the depths 
of my gratitude to so many people who have blessed my life with 
a willingness to kindle the flame that made this book possible. 
Leading the Starbucks Way would not exist were it not for 
the support of Howard Schultz and the leadership team at Star-
bucks. While a list of Starbucks partners who contributed to it 
can be found in the Bibliography, special recognition must be 
provided to Gina Woods, director, Executive Communications, 
and Heidi Peiper, program manager, Corporate Communica-
tions. Both Gina and Heidi were involved in all strategic and tac-
tical aspects needed to take Leading the Starbucks Way from idea 
to reality. Thanks for your patience, enthusiasm, insights, and 
diligence.
Lynn Stenftenagel has worked on five books with me, start-
ing with The Starbucks Experience. Through years of book writ-
ing, unimaginable business success, and our share of headwinds, 
I can resoundingly say that there is no one I admire and respect 
more than Lynn. While we continue to grow and refine our busi-
ness relationship, there is no denying the transformational im-
pact that Lynn has had on my career and my life. When it comes 
to our work, Lynn is the true “keeper of the flame.”
During that same five-book run, I have been fortunate to work 
with Donya Dickerson and Lloyd Rich. Lloyd, my publishing  
attorney, is the epitome of professionalism. He is an exceptional 

x
a ck n ow le dgm e nts
subject-matter expert with an amazing ability to create win/win 
solutions. Donya, an executive editor at McGraw-Hill, has the 
enviable ability to spark people to perform at unexpected levels. 
Donya sets clear performance expectations and dives in to help 
realize those objectives; but it is her unfailing encouragement, 
even temperament, and resourcefulness that push people past 
what they think they are capable of doing.
While this book is dedicated to Nora Michelli, I must pro-
vide some context if the remainder of these acknowledgments 
is to make sense. Nora and I met in 1987, married in 1989, and 
parted in the final stage of this book’s completion. In fact, my 
earthly time with Nora ended in 2013 as our children and I sat at 
her bedside while she took her final breath. 
Over the course of our journey, Nora and I brought into the 
world two children: Andrew and Fiona. We laughed, fought, 
delighted, angered, prayed, and battled cancer—together. I am 
happy to say that Nora knew everything about me and forgiv-
ingly loved me anyway, and for that I am eternally grateful. 
During her extended cancer fight, and upon her death, 
many people have relit my life flame. Andrew and Fiona, you are 
my most significant inspirations. I know your lives have been 
painfully altered with the loss of your mom, but I pledge to be 
the best parent possible to carry forward the part of her that was 
delighted by and believed in your greatness and your ability to 
change the world. Andrew, may your nursing career allow you to 
transfer your loving spirit into acts of healing. Fiona, congratu-
lations on Loyola and your journey into a life of leveraging busi-
ness leadership to do significant good in the world.
Jim Collins talks about the people you would place on the 
board of directors of your life. The following have earned that 
place for me by their sage counsel, amazing depths of compas-
sion, leadership vision, and resolute friendship, particularly 
during the challenges of late. Thank you, Rob Graf, Bob and 
Judy Yarmuth, Tommy and Diane Nance, Jeff Woodell, Barry 

xi
a ck n ow le dg me nts
and Lori Torman, Matt Lurz, Paul Prouty, Leanne Hadley, and  
Michael Pollard. 
Thanks as well to those who have taught me so much about 
serving others through their example. Not the least of these in-
clude Kim Blankenburg, Carolyn Churchill, and so many others 
at Janus Capital Group, as well as Christie Schatz and staff mem-
bers at Sonny’s Franchise Company. Similarly, I offer gratitude 
and praise for Saint Peter’s Healthcare System in New Bruns-
wick, New Jersey, Jackie Houston, and the special nurses of Sun-
coast Hospice.
As always, I conclude with a word of gratitude to you the 
reader. Nothing plays a greater role in sparking me to write than 
an appreciation for the willingness of someone like you to take 
the time to read, learn, and grow. Philosopher Eric Hoffer said,  
“In times of change learners inherit the earth; while the learned 
find themselves beautifully equipped to deal with a world that 
no longer exists.” I extend a heartfelt thank you for allowing me 
to learn and to share with you. May Leading the Starbucks Way 
play a small role in helping us all move forward in this grand  
adventure!

This page intentionally left blank 

1
The Starbucks 
Connection
A couple in Switzerland make their first visit to a Star-
bucks® store and are welcomed enthusiastically. When 
asked what they’d like to have prepared for them, they 
both respond that they aren’t there to make a purchase. 
They just want to see “what all the Starbucks fascination 
is about.” They become regulars at that store. 
A partner (as employees are called at Starbucks) shares 
how he was “moved” while attending the funeral of a reg-
ular customer. During the eulogy, the son of the deceased 
expressly mentioned the significance of those daily inter-
actions between his father and that Starbucks partner. 
A man sits alone at lunch in his favorite Starbucks store 
and tells a green apron–clad Starbucks barista (coffee 
preparer) that the store is his midday refuge, noting, “At 
Starbucks, you are nice to me, you remember me, and you 
seem genuinely grateful that I am here.” 
T
hese actual stories exemplify a company whose leaders es-
tablish a compelling vision and manifest behaviors that cul-
minate not only in product sales but in powerful, loyalty-rich 
human connections. You are probably looking into the pages of 
C H
A P
T
E R
 1

Le a din g th e  S ta r bu c ks Way
2
this book to essentially understand how “all this Starbucks fas-
cination comes about.” How do leaders at Starbucks strategi-
cally and tactically steward the company’s products and people 
to build customer engagement, loyalty, advocacy, and even  
brand love? How do these leaders model and inspire excel-
lence in product delivery, the creation of moments of authen-
tic service, an enterprise-wide appreciation for the importance 
of shareholder value, and a contagious demonstration of social 
conscience? You are probably also interested in what Starbucks 
partners are doing to expand relationships beyond the café en-
vironment, how they leverage technology to enhance customer 
experiences, and the ways in which they customize offerings to 
address local desires across the globe. Ultimately, lessons from 
Starbucks leaders, managers, and frontline partners will teach 
you to build connections with those you serve to effectively en-
rich your business and personal life.
Starbucks:  
A Leadership Benchmark
Starbucks is consistently recognized as one of the world’s most 
effectively led and beloved brands. For example, Entrepreneur 
magazine ranks the company among the 10 “most trusted” 
businesses, and Fortune magazine places it among the “most 
admired” global brands. Before delivering an important jobs 
speech, U.S. president Barack Obama placed a call to the presi-
dent, chairman, and chief executive officer of Starbucks, Howard 
Schultz, because of Howard’s leadership on job creation. Fortune 
magazine has named Howard Schultz as businessperson of the  
year, and other magazines have suggested that he is among  
the top tier of global leaders when it comes to his impact on 
business ethics. Leadership across all levels of the company has 
produced more than 54 million Facebook fans, and millions 
more follow the company on Twitter and Pinterest. 

T h e  Sta r bu ck s C onne cti on
3
Most important, Starbucks leaders are responsible for sub-
stantial global economic and social impact as well as consider-
able workforce stewardship. Starbucks leaders guide more than 
200,000 people who serve the more than 60 million weekly cus-
tomers frequenting more than 18,000 stores in more than 60 
countries worldwide. 
My previous book about Starbucks, The Starbucks Expe-
rience: 5 Principles for Turning Ordinary into Extraordinary, 
looked at how Starbucks leaders positioned the company for 
meteoric growth through much of the 1990s and early 2000s. 
Following the publication of that book, Starbucks leaders faced 
challenges resulting from their frenzied speed of expansion, 
decisions they made to drive year-over-year sales numbers, 
the effects of a sliding global economy, and less frequent visits 
from loyal customers to Starbucks U.S. stores. In 2008, Howard 
Schultz, who had been serving as the chief global strategist for 
Starbucks, returned to the helm as the company’s chief execu-
tive officer. At the fiscal 2008 second-quarter earnings confer-
ence call, when Howard was explaining a 21 percent earnings 
decline over the prior year period, he noted, “While our finan-
cial results are clearly being impacted by reduced frequency to 
our U.S. stores, we believe that as we continue to execute on the 
initiatives generated by our Transformation Agenda, we will re-
invigorate the Starbucks Experience for our customers, and in 
doing so, deliver increased value to our shareholders.” 
Howard’s “Transformation Agenda” is detailed in his 2011 
book titled Onward: How Starbucks Fought for Its Life without 
Losing Its Soul. At its core, Starbucks leadership crafted a tran-
sition plan that established a forward-looking vision that en-
hanced the company’s established mission. While the Starbucks 
mission was “to inspire and nurture the human spirit—one per-
son, one cup and one neighborhood at a time,” the transforma-
tion vision set an energizing and rallying objective, “to become 
an enduring, great company with one of the most recognized 

Le a din g th e  S ta r bu c ks Way
4
and respected brands in the world, known for inspiring and nur-
turing the human spirit.”
Tactically, Starbucks leaders identified “seven bold moves” 
to focus on existing strengths and identify innovations and pro-
cess improvement objectives that should position the company 
for long-term viability. Those bold moves were stated as follows:
1.	Be the undisputed coffee authority.
2.	Engage and inspire our partners.
3.	Ignite the emotional attachment with our customers.
4.	Expand our global presence—while making each store 
the heart of the local neighborhood.
5.	 Be the leader in ethical sourcing and environmental impact.
6.	Create innovative growth platforms worthy of our coffee.
7.	Deliver a sustainable economic model.
Adherence to these seven bold moves has resulted in de-
sired financial outcomes, as evidenced by 13 consecutive quarters 
of global comparable store sales growth greater than 5%. While 
Starbucks was making its turnaround, global economic factors 
were triggering peak business failure rates, as Dun & Bradstreet 
reported: “The number of formal bankruptcy filings in the 12 
months ending June 2010 . . . increased by 10% . . . and the year 
over year increase between 08 and 09 was 50%.” Unlike the lead-
ers of the proliferation of businesses that failed in 2008, 2009, and 
2010, Starbucks leadership positioned the company for enduring 
profitability and brand respect. 
This book, Leading the Starbucks Way, outlines the foun-
dational principles that have guided Starbucks leaders during 
sustained periods of meteoric growth, economic downturn,  
recovery, and transformation. Like the tactical course defined 
in the Transformation Agenda, Leading the Starbucks Way looks 
at key strategies and tools that leaders are deploying to achieve 

T h e  Sta r bu ck s C onne cti on
5
sustainable success, particularly in the areas of product creation, 
category growth, international expansion, and technological and 
social media innovation. These guiding principles and strategies 
are presented in language consistent with the Starbucks culture, 
even though that language may be somewhat unusual for most 
leadership discussions. The foundation for Starbucks leadership 
is reflected in terms like connection, humanity, humility, passion, 
and, yes, even love. 
What’s Love Got to Do with It—
Leading a High-Performance 
Organization
When you’re sitting across from Howard Schultz, it doesn’t 
take long for him to get to the heart of leadership excellence. 
From Howard’s perspective, much of leadership comes down to 
three traits: “Take love, humanity, and humility and then place 
it against a performance-driven organization; these are in con-
flict to the naked eye. But I believe that performance is signifi-
cantly enhanced by this kind of leadership. I am so convinced 
of it because we have become more performance driven than at 
any other time in our history and the values of the company are 
at a high level. If we can infuse love, humanity, and humility on 
a global basis and build it into a performance-driven organiza-
tion, we are unbeatable.”
While Howard’s views about positive emotional connec-
tions and high performance standards are somewhat unusual 
among CEOs of large corporations, that perspective is consis-
tent with a groundswell of opinions and findings from leader-
ship experts and researchers. Leadership author James Autry, for 
example, notes, “Good management is largely a matter of love. 
Or if you’re uncomfortable with that word, call it caring, because 
proper management involves caring for people, not manipulat-
ing them.” Professor Leonard Berry of Texas A&M summarizes 

Le a din g th e  S ta r bu c ks Way
6
decades of consumer research by noting, “Great brands always 
make an emotional connection with the intended audience. 
They reach beyond the purely rational and purely economic level 
to spark feelings of closeness, affection, and trust. Consumers 
live in an emotional world; their emotions influence their deci-
sions. Great brands transcend specific product features and ben-
efits and penetrate people’s emotions.” 
Consumers are not the only ones who “live in an emotional 
world.” Employees do so as well. Starbucks demonstrates, and 
research confirms, high levels of partner (employee) engage-
ment, retention, and productivity when supervisors positively 
penetrate the emotions of those they lead.
At Starbucks, leadership champions the human connection 
in all aspects of business. Additionally, leaders build their busi-
ness strategies based on opportunities that emerge from connec-
tions with partners, customers, communities, and shareholders. 
Ultimately, they manage through a lens of humanity and high 
performance expectations.
Standards, Opportunity, and 
Connection: Forging a Holistic 
Leadership Approach
This book shares essential principles used by Starbucks leaders 
as they forge emotional connections that drive innovation, grow 
new business product lines, and foster employee and customer 
loyalty. These principles are especially relevant in a service world 
that has been revolutionized by mobile technology, social me-
dia, and increasing consumer choice. Each principle is outcome-
focused and is easily applied, no matter where your business  
is in its developmental journey. The principles in Leading the 
Starbucks Way are the result of more than two years of research 
spanning all regions that Starbucks serves. Access was granted 
to leaders and partners at all levels of the company. More than 

T h e  Sta r bu ck s C onne cti on
7
500 hours of interviews and research produced the following five 
leadership principles:
1.	Savor and elevate.
2.	Love to be loved.
3.	Reach for common ground.
4.	Mobilize the connection.
5.	Cherish and challenge your legacy.
Executing on these principles produces powerful bonds 
with employees, customers, suppliers, and even noncustomers. 
In turn, these operational and emotional bonds will help any 
leader achieve sustainable profits, increase brand equity, and fuel 
online and offline stories of loyalty and love.
One such story involves Diana Kelly, a Starbucks district man-
ager who ran across a circumstance that she had seldom encoun-
tered in her suburban location of Fredericksburg, Virginia—a 
homeless man in her store. Rather than treating that man, Dom-
inic, as an unwanted intrusion in her business operation, Diana 
bought him a hot chocolate and asked him about his life. To her 
surprise, she found that he lived in a makeshift homeless encamp-
ment in a nearby woods. Diana and several other Starbucks store 
managers and baristas decided to go to the woods to “connect 
with” and serve Dominic and dozens of people like him. 
Based on those experiences, Diana and her team shared sto-
ries from the homeless camp with customers and leveraged their 
customer connections by placing collection bins in each of the 
14 stores in Diana’s district. The bins became a repository for 
items like toothbrushes, toiletries, and clothing for distribution 
at the homeless camp. A local businessman (and Starbucks cus-
tomer) donated the necessary funds and found a local attorney 
to help this grassroots community effort become an actual non-
profit organization called Project Dominic. 

Le a din g th e  S ta r bu c ks Way
8
Why did Diana take an interest in Dominic? What good 
could possibly come out of such an act, particularly as it relates 
to Starbucks sustainable profits, brand equity, and love? While I 
suspect that her initial intentions were based on nothing more 
than a genuine concern for Dominic irrespective of his ability to 
produce a visible impact on a Starbucks cash register, Starbucks 
benefited from Diana’s willingness to offer Dominic a few mo-
ments of human connection. 
Specifically, Starbucks partners in Fredericksburg have had 
the benefit of making a tangible difference in their community 
and engaging regular customers. Those partners and custom-
ers have been enriched through the chance to work together for 
good. Finally, without Diana and her team ever meaning for this 
to be a benefit, people close to and far away from Virginia are 
reading about and being inspired to engage in actions like those 
that began so humbly in Fredericksburg. Writing in The Wash-
ington Post, columnist Petula Dvorak noted, “The City Council 
called for hearings and solutions. Some residents demanded that 
all the homeless be rounded up and jailed. The leaders at Micah 
Ministries, a Christian outreach program that provides social 
services, asked for calm and understanding. . . . [Diana and Proj-
ect Dominic] bring hundreds of supply bags into the woods and, 
with each delivery, try to talk the folks into going to one of the 
city’s outreach centers for counseling, medical care and shelter. 
They are helping more than 200 people.” Call it what you want—
kindness, compassion, or love. I call it the Starbucks connection 
and leading the Starbucks way!
My hope is that this book helps you, as a leader in your or-
ganization, build and grow your business through a genuine 
relational strategy, guided by the leadership excellence of indi-
viduals like Howard Schultz and his team at Starbucks. In so do-
ing, you will not only drive success and profitability but develop 
a significant and purposeful business anchored in engaging and 
compassionate leadership practices.

P r i n c i p l e  1
Savor  
and  
Elevate

10
10
B
efore we start our deep exploration of Starbucks, I chal-
lenge you to think about your own business. Something 
drew you to sell your goods or services. Hopefully, that 
original attraction came from positive connections you formed 
with your product or industry, and those original favorable feel-
ings have grown over time and spread to those you lead and 
serve. 
“Savor and Elevate” is a business principle that emphasizes 
the importance of maximizing enthusiasm for the products, ser-
vices, and experiences your company provides. It reflects the im-
portance of helping your people autonomously master product 
knowledge, develop strong emotional connections to your prod-
ucts, and innovate timely solutions and experiences that build 
on the strengths of your product array. 
Like each of the principles in this book, ”Savor and Elevate” 
is explored in two chapters. Chapter 2, “If You Don’t Have Pas-
sion for Your Product, Why Should Your Customer?,” focuses 
on how Starbucks leaders communicate and demonstrate their 
personal passion for their product. It explores ways in which 
passion is fueled through formal training, company rituals, im-
mersive experiences, and corporate strategy.
Chapter 3, “From Replicable and Consistent to Magical 
and Unique,” sets product passion and consistent service exe-
cution as the foundation for fostering craveable customer expe-
riences. By defining an authentic and attainable set of desired 
experiences, and by engaging in active and continuous dialogue, 
Starbucks leaders have inspired and empowered employees to 
deliver products and services in the context of genuine human 
connections that result in uplifting customer moments. Chap-
ter 3 explores the ways in which Starbucks leadership communi-
cates with partners and empowers them to create extraordinary 
experiences. When good is not good enough, it’s time to lead 
your people to “Savor and Elevate.”

11
C H
A P
T
E R
 2
If You Don’t Have  
Passion for Your Product,
Why Should  
Your Customer?
Only passions, great passions, can elevate the soul to 
great things.
Denis Diderot, French philosopher
M
any books and articles suggest that with the right tech-
niques, anyone can sell anything. The authors of these 
works seem to imply that you can be successful at selling any 
product, even if you do not particularly like what you sell. Cer-
tainly, some entrepreneurs achieve success without having a pos-
itive emotional connection with their goods or services. Steve 
Chou, the founder of Bumblebee Linens, reports that his on-
line store went from zero earnings to more than $100,000 profit 
in a single year, despite the fact that he was “not terribly pas-
sionate about wedding linens. Decorative pieces of fabric don’t 
really make me excited and to be honest, I’m not in love with 
what we sell. . . . When my wife and I first started our business, it 
was all about the numbers and whether the business could make 
enough money so my wife could quit her job.” 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
12
Even Tony Hsieh, the CEO of Zappos, a company I wrote 
about in my book The Zappos Experience: 5 Principles to Inspire, 
Engage, and WOW, notes that he is “not passionate about shoes 
at all.” Despite running a company that has an inventory of more 
than 50,000 varieties of shoes, Tony has reported he owns three 
pair. Instead, Tony acknowledges that he is “passionate about 
customer service and company culture,” which may be why Zap-
pos has reached a level of success that most other stores that just 
sell shoes have not.
While passion for the product may not be necessary for 
sales success, it certainly differentiates sales leaders from most 
of their competitors. Additionally, employee passion for the 
product fuels the emotional engagement of customers and fa-
cilitates sustainability. Sales consultant Troy Harrison defines 
the link between employee passion and customer engagement 
by suggesting, “Passion is the indefinable something that cre-
ates and builds interest and excitement on the part of the cus-
tomer.” From Troy’s perspective, customer excitement emerges 
when your people have “a need to make buyers feel the same 
excitement” that they do. To achieve that level of customer en-
thusiasm, Troy suggests you have to first sell yourself “on your 
products or services. If you were in the position of a target cus-
tomer, would you buy? . . . All else is meaningless.” 
Starbucks chief executive officer Howard Schultz explains 
the transference of passion slightly differently: “You can walk 
into any store and you can feel whether the proprietor or the 
merchant or the person behind the counter has a good feeling 
about his product. If you walk into a department store today, 
you are probably talking to a guy who is untrained; he was sell-
ing vacuum cleaners yesterday, and now he is in the apparel sec-
tion. It just does not work.”
Howard consistently transfers his excitement for Starbucks 
offerings and anchors that enthusiasm to the product that is 
at the center of the company—coffee. He reports that his  

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
13
enchantment with coffee was heightened in 1982 when he joined 
Starbucks. As he described in his book Onward, he gained an en-
riched awareness of the “magic” of coffee and the coffee ritual 
a year later when he visited Milan, Italy, and experienced cof-
fee artisans who “seemed to be doing a delicate dance as [they] 
ground coffee beans, steamed milk, pulled shots of espresso, 
made cappuccinos, and chatted with customers standing side 
by side at the coffee bar.” Reflecting on his Italian experiences, 
Howard concluded that espresso, coffee, and cappuccino cre-
ation was not a “job” but a “passion.” 
To achieve the company’s mission “to inspire and nurture 
the human spirit—one person, one cup and one neighborhood 
at a time,” leaders at Starbucks crafted a set of principles to be 
lived daily, the first of which involves passion for:
Our Coffee. It has always been, and will always be, 
about quality. We’re passionate about ethically sourcing 
the finest coffee beans, roasting them with great care, 
and improving the lives of people who grow them. We 
care deeply about all of this; our work is never done. 
In support of this principle, Starbucks leaders have devel-
oped a variety of mechanisms to help everyone who comes to 
work for the company (not just those in customer-facing roles) 
understand and hopefully gain a deep connection with the rich 
history of coffee; the journey of coffee from farm to Starbucks 
cup; the economic, social, and environmental aspects of the cof-
fee industry; and also a sophisticated respect for the special nu-
ances of coffee flavor profiles. In short, Starbucks leaders have 
produced diverse tools to help Starbucks partners develop or 
deepen a genuine product passion.
The remainder of this chapter will look at the wide-ranging  
product passion-enhancing tools that Starbucks deploys  
internally and examine how those tools build excitement for 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
14
customers. In the process, you will be challenged to consider 
how training, corporate rituals, immersive employee experi-
ences, and aligned strategies for product excellence can incite 
passion in your people and your customers.
Setting the Stage  
Through Knowledge
When you think of someone who works at Starbucks, you are 
likely to envision a barista. In fact, many of us have a personal 
connection with the brand through frequent contact with this 
group of service providers. As in many large organizations, how-
ever, the barista is only one essential part of a complex array of 
professionals who function across corporate, international, re-
gional, and store-level functions. 
While many employees seek careers at Starbucks because of 
their interest in coffee or as a result of experiences that they have 
had as customers, a large number of applicants seek employment 
despite not having had a taste for the primary product the com-
pany sells. Virgil Jones, director, Partner Services, at Starbucks, 
shares his introduction to Starbucks by noting, “I used to walk 
by Seattle’s Capitol Hill Starbucks store when I was in college, 
and I knew nothing about coffee or about Starbucks. One day I 
decided to go inside, and I was confused by a number of items 
on the board. When the store manager asked if I was a new cus-
tomer, I said yes, and he responded, ‘I’m going to make you a 
mocha,’ and he handed it to me. He then said, ‘This one is on me, 
but I want you to come back, and the next time I’ll introduce you 
to some of our brewed coffees.’ I walked away that day being im-
pressed. So I did some research on the company, and my junior 
year in college decided I wanted to work for Starbucks. When I 
was graduating, I applied for probably 15 to 20 positions at Star-
bucks and got hired as temporary full-time help for the holiday 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
15
season in the warehouse.” Like so many other Starbucks partners,  
Virgil continued to evolve, and professionally grow from that 
temporary warehouse job into his career as director of the Part-
ner Services team. 
While a passion for coffee is not required in order to be 
hired at Starbucks, new partners across the company do receive 
a strong introduction to the significance, specialness, and im-
portance of coffee. At the store level, for example, Starbucks on-
boards baristas by a “first impressions” meeting with the store 
manager. That visit typically begins with the new barista experi-
encing a coffee tasting of the store manager’s favorite coffee and 
continues with activities and conversation that emphasize the 
centrality of coffee and the desired Starbucks Experience. 
Over the days and weeks that follow, new baristas learn a 
great deal about coffee-growing regions, trade practices in coffee 
purchasing, processing methods for removing the coffee bean 
from the coffee cherry, coffee roast profiles, the skills necessary 
to pull a high-quality espresso shot, the fundamentals of coffee 
brewing, steps in coffee tasting, foundational taste characteris-
tics of coffee, and all aspects of preparing Starbucks wide range 
of beverages and other offerings. This training combines a for-
mal curriculum with individual development discussions and 
job practice sessions with the new hire’s store manager and an 
experienced barista who functions as a learning coach. 
This coffee education reflects a 70/20/10 growth and de-
velopment approach. Based on research on how people inte-
grate and utilize new information, new baristas at Starbucks 
receive approximately 70 percent of their initial coffee education 
through on-the-job experience and hands-on practice. Another 
20 percent of their training is the result of feedback and men-
torship from their peers, their learning coach, and store man-
agement, and 10 percent is derived from an online modularized 
curriculum. (See the sidebar for the specific learning blocks pre-
sented in Starbucks barista certification training.) 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
16
To be certified as a barista, a new partner must com-
plete the following curriculum:
Learning Block 1: First Impressions and Customer Ex-
perience, Starbucks Experience, Coffee Brewing and 
Tasting, Espresso Bar Basics, and Food Warming
Learning Block 2: Beverage Essentials, Cold Bever-
ages, Coffee Growing and Processing, and Point of Sale
Learning Block 3: Beverage Preparation, Customer 
Service Essentials, and Coffee Roasting and Packaging
At intervals during the certification training and develop-
ment process, new partners must pass a knowledge test and 
demonstrate to their store manager skill competency in tasks 
such as preparing a cappuccino. While rich knowledge and 
skills-based education alone do not guarantee that certified 
baristas will have a passion for the products that they prepare 
and serve, education and personal growth do increase a baris-
ta’s awareness of and appreciation for coffee. Ryan, a Starbucks 
barista from Denver, Colorado, notes, “After I started working 
at Starbucks, I changed my drink preference to brewed coffee. I 
learned so much about different blends and regions. I now love 
Asian coffee; Sumatra is my go-to drink. I never really knew how 
much taste could change from coffee to coffee.” 
At Starbucks, leaders also help new hires begin to under-
stand the importance of coffee-growing communities and the 
economic challenges they face. Early training experiences iden-
tify coffee as a socially powerful product (in fact, it is one of the 
world’s most heavily traded agricultural commodities, and it 
bolsters the economies of many equatorial countries). New Star-
bucks partners are given insights into the importance of fair 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
17
trade and price transparency throughout the supply chain of 
coffee sourcing.
In addition to offering a social context for the substantial so-
cial, economic, and political impact of their product, leaders en-
courage baristas (both new and veteran) to view themselves as 
artisans of a handcrafted product. In essence, a person can be-
come passionate not only about the coffee itself, but also about 
the artistry involved in its creation. Howard Schultz notes in On-
ward, “Pouring espresso is an art, one that requires the barista 
to care about the quality of the beverage. If the barista only goes 
through the motions, if he or she does not care and produces an 
inferior espresso that is too weak or too bitter, then Starbucks 
has lost the essence of what we set out to do 40 years ago: inspire 
the human spirit. I realize this is a lofty mission for a cup of cof-
fee, but this is what merchants do. We take the ordinary . . . and 
give it new life, believing that what we create has the potential to 
touch others’ lives because it touched ours.” 
r ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Are you driving product knowledge and certifying ser-
vice excellence from the onset of employment?
2.	 What is your team’s overall level of product passion? 
How does it compare to the product passion levels at 
the best service providers you have encountered?
3.	 What first impressions do you create for new hires so 
that they can be intrigued by the products that you 
provide? What are the nuances or uniquely important 
aspects of your offerings?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
18
Can you imagine how different our lives would be if most 
business owners worked to infuse product passion into their en-
tire workforce? What if those owners also believed it was their 
job to improve or elevate the products that they touch? How 
would your next visit to your dry cleaner, post office, electronics 
store, or supermarket be different? Better yet, imagine how your 
customers might feel if all your people were passionate about 
your products and felt responsible for elevating them with each 
touch.
While the opportunity for developing a passion for cof-
fee and the artistry of its preparation is built into the forma-
tive learning experiences of Starbucks new hires, the company’s 
leadership understands that this passion is reinforced, sustained, 
and deepened through corporate rituals, immersive learning op-
portunities, and core business strategy.  But before we look at 
the Starbucks approach, let’s define corporate rituals and explore 
their relevance to developing a culture of product passion.
Corporate Rituals
For some people, the word ritual tends to conjure up images of 
religious or personal behavior; however, S. Chris Edmonds, a  
senior consultant with the Ken Blanchard Companies and co-
author of Leading at a Higher Level, defines corporate rituals “as 
events which communicate and reinforce desired performance 
and values.” Chris believes, “Few senior leaders leverage corpo-
rate rituals as an intentional strategy to define and reinforce a 
company’s desired culture.” 
Edmonds provides a structure for looking at rituals and  
criteria to assess their effectiveness. Specifically, he breaks lead-
ership rituals down into those oriented toward celebration 
and those directed toward communications. In assessing the  
effectiveness of either approach to ritual, Chris suggests that in-
tentional efforts should be made to “ensure that all corporate 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
19
rituals create a common bond, inspire commitment and inno-
vation, and build the ‘finely woven cloth’ of an effective culture.” 
Let’s look at how Starbucks leadership builds a culture of prod-
uct passion through celebration and communication rituals, and 
also define ways in which you can do the same.
Celebration Rituals 
When I described the first impressions meeting between a newly 
hired Starbucks barista and a store manager, you were given a 
preview of one of the key celebration rituals at Starbucks—the 
coffee-tasting ritual. When a store manager celebrates the first 
day with a new hire by preparing a coffee tasting, that manager is 
producing an event that both communicates the desired behav-
ior of learning the unique flavor profiles of coffee and demon-
strates values that support coffee passion.
The coffee-tasting ritual is also a prominent feature at ma-
jor cultural events for Starbucks.  For example at the October 
2012 Leadership Conference, Dub Hay, then senior vice presi-
dent, Global Coffee Authority, who was nearing retirement after 
10 years at Starbucks (with whom I have done coffee tastings in 
Costa Rica), led the assembled store managers and other leaders 
in a tasting of the newly released Starbucks® Thanksgiving Blend. 
Addressing the crowd, Dub noted, “I can’t tell you all how hum-
bling it is to be on this stage . . . knowing all the work and care 
and love that went into this coffee that now sits in your hand. 
This is probably one of the largest coffee tastings I’ve done in my 
history at Starbucks. I can’t think of a better combination than to 
be tasting Starbucks Thanksgiving Blend with 10,000 store man-
agers, the 200 Houston partners who delivered their coffee to 
you, and, as you see ringing the stage, the senior leadership team 
and managing directors from around the world.” Dub then led 
a massive tasting. Just think about the logistics of having 10,000 
Starbucks partners taste a cup of coffee simultaneously. Some 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
20
might say that such an undertaking is a pointless exercise; how-
ever, Starbucks leadership sees it as a ritual that reinforces the es-
sence of the brand.
Starbucks district manager Tisha Kimoto explains how she 
integrates coffee tasting into her leadership ritual, noting, “With 
the district manager role, we are not in the office, we are always 
in the field; I get to meet with the store managers. We start the  
meetings with coffee tastings. What do we not know about  
the coffee? What more can we learn? And for us it really is, how 
can we be passionate about the product that we sell?” Howard 
Schultz, Dub Hay, leaders and district managers with store man-
agers, store managers with new hires and their teams . . . the  
coffee-tasting ritual is alive and well at Starbucks.
This ritualization of coffee tasting is further supported by 
guidelines set for employees throughout the company. For ex-
ample, new hires are encouraged to complete a “Coffee Passport” 
within their first 90 days of employment. A Coffee Passport (see 
next page) serves as a road map and journal to guide partners 
through tasting all of the coffees that Starbucks offers. A barista 
from New York notes, “When I was first learning about cof-
fee three years ago at a Starbucks in Connecticut, I tasted Caffè  
Verona®. The partner who was doing that tasting poured some 
mocha sauce into a cup. We smelled the mocha and we smelled 
the Verona, and it was a newfound experience full of joy. I real-
ized there were different depths of flavor to coffee that I never 
knew existed. I thought coffee was just something to keep you 
awake when you were tired. So that was the beginning of my love 
affair with coffee. Part of Starbucks training is completing the 
Coffee Passport. . . . You have to taste and describe every coffee 
that we offer. I finished my passport within the first two weeks 
of my time at Starbucks. In the process, I discovered some of 
my favorite coffees and my least favorite coffees, and I couldn’t 
stop telling people about the vast array of flavors that existed be-
tween coffees. It was a brand-new world. It was exciting, and my  

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
21
A page from the Starbucks Coffee Passport.
manager seemed to understand my excitement. She nurtured 
my passion for coffee, and I never stopped.” 
Similarly, Samantha Yarwood, director of marketing, Swit-
zerland and Austria, shares how she has seen new baristas not 
only get excited about the coffees they taste but also lead oth-
ers through tastings: “I met a new barista who had been with 
the company for only two weeks when she conducted a coffee 
tasting of her own. I wish I had a picture that I could share of 
the amazing presentation she arranged. It was incredible. She 
presented chocolates, cookies, cakes, and fruit that reflected and 
paired well with the coffees she was tasting with us. She was so 
engaged and engaging. I later found out that she stayed up the 
night before to prepare all the food items she had presented. 
That coffee tasting left me saying, ‘Wow.’”
Coffee-tasting rituals and the Coffee Passport tool serve to 
create a patterned exploration of the richness and complexity of 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
22
coffee mastery that opens up many Starbucks partners to a gen-
uine fascination with and passion for the product. All the while, 
these rituals ingrain coffee’s centrality in the way things are done 
throughout the company.
Communication Rituals 
Starbucks leaders have also ritualized corporate storytelling. 
Rather than providing messages that just describe the “what” 
and “how” of their products, leaders listen for and share stories 
that help connect partners to coffee farmers and the journey that 
coffee takes before it is served at Starbucks. While I was talking 
to Howard Schultz about the rituals of communication at Star-
bucks, he noted, “One of the strengths of Starbucks is storytell-
ing and being able to infuse an authentic, genuine story about 
the journey of a coffee—where it comes from or how we do 
things. . . . Those stories are enriched by the passion and feeling 
we have about what we do. You cannot fake that. The customer is 
too smart, and our people are too smart. If our people do not be-
lieve in what you might loosely describe as the love story behind 
the coffee or the truth behind it, it is over before it starts.”
While the methods of story delivery at Starbucks are varied 
(one-on-one, group, or video), the themes of communication 
regularly highlight the coffee journey, the coffee-farming expe-
rience, and the impact of ethical sourcing on the lives of suppli-
ers. Clarice Turner, senior vice president, U.S. Business, shares, 
“As we educate our partners on our coffee, we talk about how 
the sale of coffee beverages changes the lives of farmers around 
the world, and we have a lot of specific examples that we use to 
demonstrate the importance of fair pricing and transparency.” 
Through storytelling, Starbucks leaders humanize and connect 
Starbucks partners to the very real impact of farmer support and 
ethical sourcing efforts like C.A.F.E. (Coffee and Farmer Eq-
uity) Practices. C.A.F.E. Practices were created in partnership 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
23
with Conservation International (a nonprofit environmental  
organization committed to benefiting humanity through bio-
diversity and protection of nature) to define guidelines to help 
grow coffee in a way that sustains farmers and the planet. By de-
ploying measurable objectives, including Starbucks quality stan-
dards; transparency of verified payments across the coffee supply 
chain; third-party-verified measures of safe, humane, and fair 
working conditions; and environmental leadership, Starbucks is 
able to work with coffee farmers to increase sustainability.
Kelly Goodejohn, Starbucks director, Ethical Sourcing, ex-
emplifies the effectiveness of leadership storytelling by sharing, 
“I was in Costa Rica recently visiting small-holder farms who 
were participating in C.A.F.E. Practices. Given that many of 
these farmers only work a couple of acres of land, everything 
they earned is essential for their families to thrive.” Kelly notes 
that, as always, she was greatly affected by the uplifting stories 
shared by farmers concerning the impact of the premiums Star-
bucks pays in accord with the farmer’s level of engagement with 
C.A.F.E. Practices. Many talked about how those premiums 
made the difference in their children getting a quality education 
and in some cases going on to universities. 
Noting that her visit followed a rainy period in the steep 
hills and mountains of the Tarrazú region, Kelly reported being  
particularly troubled by a farmer who said that he had been par-
ticipating in C.A.F.E. Practices in a limited way. Kelly shares, 
“The farmer pointed to a hill where an enormous landslide had 
sheared off coffee trees. He then told me he hadn’t been pay-
ing enough attention to erosion control measures, and as such 
he had lost a third of his trees in one rainy time of the year. He 
wasn’t going to be able to harvest coffee there for about three to 
five years, and a third of his income was lost. The look on his 
face expressed regret and sorrow for the impact of his choices. 
That touched me deeply. He then asked if Starbucks could help 
him manage his farm more effectively, and our agronomists are 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
24
working to give him the technical tools so that in the future, he’ll 
be able to mitigate some of the severe impacts of weather change. 
It is these experiences that result not only in passion for the cof-
fee but a deep compassion for the people and families who work 
with us all along the journey.”
Stories of coffee farming, the journey of the bean, and ethi-
cal sourcing (like the one provided by Kelly) clearly engage Star-
bucks partners. Katie McMahon, national account executive, 
Branded Solutions, shares, “One of the images that resonates 
with me is the image of the coffee farmer. You look at their hands 
and they are covered in dirt. For me, that’s at the core of who 
we are as a company, and I think about them every day when I 
work with other partners and customers.” Barista Ruth Ander-
son notes, “Our coffees travel so far before they reach us. I of-
ten hear about the first 10 feet of the coffee’s journey and about 
the lives of coffee farmers. I care that our product is ethically 
sourced and that the people at the beginning and throughout the 
coffee journey are cared for. As a barista, I need to be at my per-
sonal best to deliver that coffee for the last 10 feet of that coffee’s 
journey as I craft drinks for our customers. I see my job not just 
as a coffee preparer. I see my job as having impact on the world 
through coffee.” 
Aristotle once said, “We are what we repeatedly do. Excel-
lence is not an act but a habit.” While the celebration and com-
munication rituals in your business will certainly differ from 
those of Starbucks, isn’t it worthwhile to examine the habits, rit-
uals, and messages that you deploy? Are they facilitating emo-
tional connections, a sense of community, and product passion 
excellence? By effectively building authentic rituals into your 
business, you will also define unique aspects of your culture and 
reinforce your business’s broader purpose, particularly when the 
rituals are supported by enriched experiential learning and a 
congruent business strategy.

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
25
R ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 How have you used celebration rituals to increase the 
connection between your staff members and your 
products?
2.	 What, if any, parallels to the Coffee Passport program 
at Starbucks do you have? What might you create?
3.	 Overall, how effectively have you used corporate rit-
uals to intentionally “create a common bond, inspire 
commitment and innovation, and build the ‘finely wo-
ven cloth’” of a culture of product passion?
Immersive Experiences
It is one thing to have leaders telling stories that will help link 
staff members to product passion and quite another to place staff 
members directly in positions where they can garner stories of 
their own. When it comes to conversations about coffee farming 
and the impact of ethical sourcing, Starbucks leaders have taken 
a number of different approaches, including having coffee farm-
ers tour Starbucks stores and a rather unusual program called 
the Origin Experience. If you would like to get a glimpse of an 
Origin Experience trip, please visit: http://tinyurl.com/mrrk5wr 
or direct your QR reader here:

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
26
Valerie O’Neil, Starbucks senior vice president, Partner Re-
sources and Brand Leadership, shares the idea behind the Origin  
Experience trips: “My team and I spearheaded the pilot pro-
gram where we took 35 to 40 partners from U.S. and Americas  
to Costa Rica. We took Asia-Pacific partners to Indonesia, and 
then Europe and Middle Eastern partners to Tanzania. They 
spent a weeklong immersion seeing how coffee is grown, pro-
duced, processed, and then shipped out to our roasting plants. 
What that helped to do was not only infuse passion for the prod-
uct, but it also helped our partners understand what happens in 
the lives of the farmers and processors and all that we do to sup-
port those communities as well. It’s not only about what we buy 
and give to the farmers; but it’s also about the schools and the 
support programs in those coffee-farming areas. Participants are 
also planting seedlings and picking coffee cherries themselves.”
As you might imagine, selection for these regularly sched-
uled Origin Experience opportunities is highly competitive, and 
most of the participants come from customer-facing store-level 
functions. Criteria for participation include overall job perfor-
mance, demonstrated coffee knowledge, and communication 
skills. Valerie notes, “The participants have to be able to and 
want to share the stories from the experience. As much as we 
would love to send 200,000 partners to these regions, it would 
not be respectful to the communities or practical for us. We are 
relying on the partners who go to give their own authentic ac-
counts to other partners throughout the organization.” 
In a culture of ritualized storytelling, enriched and immer-
sive experiences provide unique opportunities for reinforcing 
important messages. In the case of coffee knowledge, Starbucks 
has also created an intensive training curriculum that produces 
impassioned subject-matter experts referred to as Coffee Mas-
ters and Coffee Ambassadors. Before we get to these masters and 
ambassadors, let’s look at the motivational importance of creat-
ing opportunities for “mastery.”

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
27
Creating Status for  
Product Expertise
Considerable research on human motivation suggests that mas-
tery is a key driver of human performance and that extrinsic 
reward programs can undermine the intrinsic joy of personal 
growth and development. Daniel Pink, author of the book Drive: 
The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us, notes, “Rewards 
can perform a weird sort of behavioral alchemy: They can trans-
form an interesting task into a drudge. They can turn play into 
work. And by diminishing intrinsic motivation, they send per-
formance, creativity and upstanding behavior toppling like 
dominoes.” With this context in mind, leaders at Starbucks en-
courage the pursuit of coffee expertise through a mastery- and 
social recognition–based approach, not through a monetary or 
reward solution. The first level of this two-tiered coffee knowl-
edge program is aptly referred to as Coffee Master, with a more 
advanced level being referred to as Coffee Ambassador. 
Carrie Dills, a former Starbucks barista, shares her journey 
to Coffee Master by noting, “The manager who hired me was 
a Coffee Master, and when he talked about the product, there 
was just this love and passion, and he infused it into me. I don’t 
even work for Starbucks anymore and should have no incentive 
to talk about coffee, but I get googly-eyed sharing about the way 
a bean is harvested, the farmers that harvested it, or how Star-
bucks takes care of those people.” Carrie notes that she has en-
countered people who are skeptical of the authenticity of her 
product passion. “People would say, ‘You’re just spewing com-
pany rhetoric,’ and I would push back that I feel it, I believe it, 
and I’ve gone out of my way to see it for myself and interview 
farmers.” While she was a barista, Carrie reports, she went on a 
personal vacation in Costa Rica, and “I visited a farm where they 
harvest Starbucks beans. I told the farmers that I was employed 
at Starbucks, and they were in awe. I sought out that experience 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
28
because of involvement with the Coffee Master program and the 
level of interest it generated in me.” 
Opportunities for Coffee Master status are not limited to 
U.S.-based Starbucks operations or exclusively to those who 
brew and serve coffee in Starbucks stores. Wang Bin Wolf, a 
Starbucks partner and supervisor at the Jianwai SOHO branch 
of Starbucks in Beijing, China, shares that he was not moti-
vated by his prior employment in a printing factory and often 
felt exhausted and drained after his workday. Wolf reports that 
his prior negative work experience was in stark contrast to the 
friendliness and knowledgeability of the baristas he personally 
had encountered at Starbucks, and that because of this, he made 
a conscious decision that he would work at Starbucks. Upon his 
employment, he became involved in the Coffee Master program.
As a result of his participation in the Coffee Master train-
ing, Wolf appreciates that “coffee-making is a form of art. . . . To 
someone who had never had coffee before Starbucks, it simply 
tasted bitter to me. During the process, I had to keep on tasting, 
and learning from others to gain more experience. Gradually, I 
discovered the complexity of flavors. . . . Once a stranger, coffee 
has now become my very good friend. . . . Through my learning 
and effort, I continued to improve. Eventually I was able to wear 
the black apron and carry the title of Coffee Master. Personally, I 
am very proud and happy.” 
Like many partners who do not serve in a customer-facing 
coffee preparer role, Jenny Cui, business analysis manager, who 
works in the Starbucks Support Center in Seattle, Washington, 
shares her journey to Coffee Master: “I grew up with tea, and cof-
fee was not really my thing. When I joined Starbucks, I was swept 
into information and experiences about coffee-growing regions, 
different taste profiles, and how to make beverages. It was a to-
tally different world for me, but I enjoyed it. And now, I’m proud 
that I am certified as a Coffee Master.” Based on her early learn-
ing experiences after her arrival at Starbucks, Jenny reports that 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
29
she decided to sign up and learn more about coffee and how the 
human connection is forged through coffee: “Through my work 
to achieve the Coffee Master designation and based on the gen-
eral culture here, I’m regularly part of groups who taste different 
blends and talk about coffee. I also attend regular coffee-roasting 
events to better understand how our coffees are crafted.” When 
asked why, as a finance professional, she would invest so much 
time in the pursuit of coffee knowledge, Jenny stated, “It’s just a 
great feeling to learn about the product that drives our business 
and to develop a deeper appreciation for the complex character-
istics of coffee and the way it comes to market.”
While the Coffee Master designation represents a sufficient 
growth challenge for many Starbucks partners, the leaders at 
Starbucks have created an additional level of coffee expertise re-
ferred to as a Coffee Ambassador. Andrea Bader, Coffee Am-
bassador for Starbucks in Switzerland, wears a special brown 
apron and offers insights on how she achieved her title: “Ten 
Coffee Masters and our store managers participated in an event 
judged by the district leadership team for our region in Switzer-
land. Each of the Coffee Masters had to present two Starbucks 
coffees and craft perfect food pairings. After being selected to 
represent my district, I joined the other district representatives 
in the Coffee Ambassador challenge for Switzerland. This time 
all store managers from Switzerland and the entire leadership 
team evaluated our coffee presentations and our food pairings. I 
am delighted to have been chosen as the Swiss Coffee Ambassa-
dor.” When asked if she was being financially rewarded (extrin-
sically motivated) for achieving this level of expertise, Andrea 
responded, “I did this to have a greater impact on coffee knowl-
edge in my company. In fact, recently I had this crazy idea to do 
coffee tastings over Skype and Facebook. Literally, 1,000 people 
from around the world joined me in the experience. People were 
asked to prepare a specific blend of coffee, and we used the Skype 
call to discuss the flavor experiences of the participants.”

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
30
Leaders at Starbucks have crafted ways to immerse staff 
members in enriched learning experiences that create oppor-
tunities for product passion. Moreover, they have found ways 
to spark mastery of product knowledge by relying on an intrin-
sic sense of accomplishment that comes from advanced learning  
and the ability to teach others. What immersive opportunities and  
volunteer training recognition resources should you consider to 
enhance product passion among your people?
Strategy Consistent with  
Product Passion
Jim Collins, author of the bestselling business book Good to 
Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don’t, 
asserts that visionary companies are led by individuals who are 
constantly assessing their company’s strategy and ensuring that 
it is in “alignment to preserve an organization’s core values, to re-
inforce its purpose, and to stimulate continued progress towards 
its aspirations. When you have superb alignment, a visitor could 
drop into your organization from another planet and infer the 
vision without having to read it on paper.” 
For all their effort to value coffee quality, passion, and 
knowledge, there was a time in Starbucks history when the stra-
tegic decisions of the leaders failed to support product passion. 
In fact, Starbucks leaders became so focused on driving posi-
tive sales numbers (reflected in year-over-year same-store com-
parables, or “comps”) that coffee excellence was compromised. 
Howard Schultz readily acknowledges that comps “were a dan-
gerous enemy in the battle to transform the company. We’d had 
almost 200 straight months of positive comps, unheard-of mo-
mentum in retail. And as we grew at a faster and faster clip dur-
ing 2006 and 2007, maintaining that positive comp growth 
history drove poor business decisions that veered us away from 
our core.” Howard goes on demonstrate what he calls the “comp 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
31
effect” by describing a store visit where he encountered a large 
pile of stuffed animals for sale: “‘What is this?’ I asked the man-
ager in frustration, pointing to a pile of wide-eyed cuddly toys 
that had absolutely nothing to do with coffee.” In response, the 
manager pointed out that the stuffed animals were good for his 
store’s comps, building incremental sales and high profit mar-
gins. This led Howard to conclude that the comp effect had pro-
duced a “mentality that had become pervasive. And dangerous.”
In his book Onward, Howard detailed a series of strategic 
moves that were made at the senior leadership level in an ef-
fort to retain the “soul” of Starbucks. A number of these efforts 
clearly demonstrated the leadership’s passion for coffee and a 
declaration that Starbucks was “reclaiming its coffee authority.” 
Some of these coffee-specific strategies included closing all U.S. 
Starbucks stores for an afternoon to retrain baristas on how to 
make the perfect espresso shot and espresso-based beverages, 
the creation and launch of the Pike Place® Roast (a transforma-
tive balanced coffee roast that brought the aroma of grinding 
fresh beans back into Starbucks stores), and the acquisition and 
thoughtful deployment of the Clover® brewing system (an ad-
vanced brewing method that creates a personalized high-quality 
coffee by drawing water down through finely ground coffee, thus 
retaining the coffee’s most flavorful oils).  
Since the company’s turnaround, leaders have maintained 
their alignment with the centrality of coffee. This is evidenced 
by coffee product innovations such as Starbucks® Blonde Roast. 
For years, Starbucks leaders had been aware that a large number  
of coffee consumers (approximately 40 percent) rejected dark roast 
coffee or preferred lighter roasts. Evaluations of coffee-roasting  
taste profiles consistently had shown that lighter roasts were 
grassy with a sour green flavor, resulting in significantly lower 
quality ratings than those for the darker roasts of Starbucks. 
Brad Anderson, one of the key coffee roasters responsible for 
Blonde, shares how the lighter roast emerged after 80 attempts.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
32
“We wanted a mild sweetness and the taste of cereal to be fla-
vor notes for Blonde. We didn’t know how to get there with our 
existing roast styles. So we started from scratch and tweaked 
things over and over again. For me, it was a technical and per-
sonal challenge, and we spent a lot of time developing that cof-
fee. Every time the product came back to us, we asked how we 
could make it better. I am extremely proud of our final product 
and the teams of people who stayed so dedicated to its creation.” 
Partners at the store level appreciate it when product-based 
strategies and values align. More important, partners experi-
ence the positive impact of that alignment on the lives of their 
customers. Barista Elisha shares, “I like dark coffee, but I think 
that making Blonde available to customers is wonderful, be-
cause many aren’t dark drinkers. Blonde is in keeping with our 
commitment to product excellence, and it hits a market of new 
customers. Bringing in those new customers allows us to talk 
R ef l e ct i o n  o n  C o n necti on
1.	 How do you help your staff fully experience your prod-
ucts or services? What are your parallels to a Starbucks 
Origin Experience?
2.	 Are you incorporating mastery and social recognition 
into your training programs? If so, how?
3.	 How aligned are your strategies and your stated values 
concerning product excellence? In the words of author 
Jim Collins, if “a visitor could drop into your organiza-
tion from another planet,” would that visitor be able to 
know your vision for product excellence “without hav-
ing to read it on paper”?

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
33
to them about coffee and lets them in on an experience others 
have enjoyed for years.” When you combine innovative products 
that add new customer segments with a loyal customer base, you 
have a recipe for business success and sustainability.
Connecting Customers to Passion
With Starbucks leadership investing a great amount of energy 
in creating an environment where partners are passionate about 
coffee, it is important to determine the return on that invest-
ment. Do product-impassioned Starbucks partners actually in-
cite product passion on the part of customers? 
In this chapter, you’ve seen how fueling a customer’s coffee 
passion can contribute to an interest in becoming a Starbucks 
partner. While most customers won’t be moved to the point of 
seeking employment with Starbucks, many will strengthen their 
relationship with Starbucks and expand the frequency, depth, 
and breadth of their purchases. For example, barista Paul Quinn 
shares how a customer’s purchase patterns changed as he shared 
his coffee passion with her: “I am in the process of becoming a 
Coffee Master, and I have found that the process has reinvig-
orated my whole-bean passion, and has in turn enhanced my 
ability to sell. Everyone has regulars, and with the knowledge  
gained . . . from my Coffee Master Journal, I’ve turned one of my 
Friday night regulars into somewhat of a coffee buddy.” Paul re-
ports that he and this regular had talked about a variety of Star-
bucks roasts and appropriate food pairings. As a result, Paul 
prepared a small coffee press of Guatemala Casi Cielo® and sam-
pled it with a slice of lemon loaf. Paul adds that the customer’s 
“face lit up as she began to understand exactly what I meant as I 
explained how the citrus enhances the taste of the coffee. . . . Now, 
I see her almost every Friday between 10:30 and 11 p.m., and 
we have a chat about what’s brewing . . . or snacks and pastries 
that go well with certain coffees.” For example, Paul notes that he  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
34
recommended Gold Coast Blend® with a Snickers bar. As a result 
of their relationship, Paul notes, “She almost always picks up a 
pound of coffee. . . . There is a genuine connection with the cus-
tomer, which is fantastic, and the Coffee Master program is only 
helping me become more knowledgeable and a better barista.” 
Increased visit frequency, wider product penetration, 
greater customer engagement, consistent product sell-through, 
and employee pride and professional development are envi-
able by-products of igniting the passion of your team members. 
Will you give your customers a reason to be passionate about 
your products? What specifically will you do to champion prod-
uct passion in your business? We know, thanks to mounting re-
search evidence, that “knowledgeable employees” is one of the 
top items on the wish list for customers today. Imagine what 
knowledgeable and passionate employees can do, not only for 
your customers, but for the morale and enthusiasm associated 
with your business. Starbucks isn’t imagining!
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• When frontline staff members are passionate about 
your products, they build interest and excitement on 
the part of your customers. 
• Passionate staff members not only sell products, but 
have a magnetically positive impact when it comes to 
turning customers into future employees and brand 
fans.
• Research suggests that effective staff growth and de-
velopment often follows a 70/20/10 approach, with 
70 percent of education coming from on-the-job ex-
perience and hands-on practice, 20 percent from 

If You D on ’ t Hav e  Pa ss ion for  Y ou r  P r od u ct
35
mentoring and coaching, and 10 percent from a for-
mal curriculum. 
• Corporate rituals are powerful ways to create a com-
mon bond, inspire commitment and innovation, and 
build an integrated and effective culture.
• Authentic corporate rituals also define unique as-
pects of your culture and reinforce your business’s 
broader purpose, particularly when those rituals are 
supported by enriched experiential learning and a 
congruent business strategy.
• Rather than providing messages that solely describe 
the “what” and “how” of your products, listen for and 
share stories that will help connect your people to the 
nuances of your products and/or special aspects of 
the customer journey. 
• As Aristotle said, “We are what we repeatedly do. Ex-
cellence is not an act but a habit.”
• Rewards can transform an interesting task into 
drudgery and diminish intrinsic motivation. Rather 
than relying on rewards, consider the power of au-
tonomy, mastery, and purpose.
• Evaluate every strategy to ensure that it aligns with 
your core values, reinforces your purpose, and stim-
ulates continued progress toward your aspirations.
• When you combine innovative products that add 
new customer segments with a loyal customer 
base, you have a recipe for business success and  
sustainability. 

36
From Replicable and 
Consistent to  
Magical and Unique
Men are rich only as they give. He who gives great ser-
vice gets great rewards.
Elbert Hubbard
W
hile passion for coffee has been and continues to be essen-
tial to Starbucks, leaders like Howard Schultz emphasize 
that human experiences are at the heart of the brand. For exam-
ple, Howard notes, “Starbucks is at its best when we are creat-
ing enduring relationships and personal connections.” Building 
on that theme in 2008, while strategizing how to mount a resur-
gence for Starbucks, Howard communicated to partners that the 
“Transformation Agenda includes . . . re-igniting our emotional 
attachment with our customers by restoring the connection our 
customers have with you, our coffee, our brand, and our stores. 
Unlike many other places that sell coffee, Starbucks built the eq-
uity of our brand through the Starbucks Experience. It comes to 
life every day in the relationship our people have with our cus-
tomers. By focusing again on the Starbucks Experience, we will 
create a renewed level of meaningful differentiation and separa-
tion in the market between us and others who are attempting to 
C H
A P
T
E R
 3

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
37
sell coffee.” People can copy your products and your services, but 
seldom can another business effectively or consistently execute  
a differentiated experiential offering—this is equally as true for a 
visit to an Apple Store as it is for a visit to Starbucks.
So, how does a company like Starbucks take a product that 
can easily be commoditized and offer it in a way that produces 
differentiation anchored to enduring relationships and personal 
connections? This chapter unpacks multifaceted aspects of Star-
bucks customer experience excellence, including how Starbucks 
leaders: 
• Define and communicate the desired and unique 
Starbucks Experience.
• Select individuals with the requisite talent to deliver 
that experience consistently. 
• Train partners on the key pillars necessary to engage 
customers routinely.  
More important, this chapter allows you to see the strate-
gic and tactical customer experience–based efforts deployed by 
Starbucks, so that you can consider how those approaches fit 
with the challenges and opportunities that you face.
 What Experience Do You Want 
Customers to Have?
American personal development pioneer Earl Nightingale ob-
served, “Success is the progressive realization of a worthy goal 
or ideal.” As was the case with product passion, the worthy cus-
tomer experience ideals at Starbucks are expressed in the com-
pany’s mission statement (to inspire and nurture the human 
spirit—one person, one cup and one neighborhood at a time) 
and are supported by the principles of how this mission is lived 
every day, including:

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
38
Our Customers
When we are fully engaged, we connect with, laugh 
with, and uplift the lives of our customers—even if just 
for a few moments. Sure, it starts with the promise of a 
perfectly made beverage, but our work goes far beyond 
that. It’s really about human connection.
Our Stores
When our customers feel this sense of belonging, our 
stores become a haven, a break from the worries out-
side, a place where you can meet with friends. It’s about 
enjoyment at the speed of life—sometimes slow and sa-
vored, sometimes faster. Always full of humanity. 
That’s brief and clear—leaders like those at Starbucks put 
customers, products, and experiences at the purposeful center 
of their businesses. 
Looking for Experience Creators
By using words like inspire, nurture, and uplift, Starbucks leader-
ship defines the Starbucks Experience as being much more than 
the accurate and efficient service of high-quality beverages. Part-
ners should aspire to deliver moments, products, and environ-
ments that elevate and transform those who are served. Human 
connection is the magic at the core of the Starbucks brand. In 
order to make the magic happen, Starbucks looks for prospec-
tive partners who are authentically and consistently interested 
in others. That interest can cut through the chaos and unpredict-
ability in the lives of customers, thus producing reliable and pos-
itive experiences at your business. Consumer data, consistently 
reflected in studies such as the American Express Global Cus-
tomer Service Barometer, validate the perspective that customer 
service is chaotic, unpredictable, and in decline. But how does 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
39
an organization select individuals who have an interest in “au-
thentically and consistently” serving others?
Charles Douglas III, a paralegal at Starbucks, believes that 
the key element in selection is observing and interviewing for 
enthusiasm and service talent. In fact, he believes he was se-
lected for his first job at Starbucks (as a barista) based largely on 
those factors. According to Charles, “I was looking for a place 
that closely aligned with my personal values and a place I would 
be proud to say that I worked.” Charles reviewed the company’s 
guiding principles and felt they were credibly reflected in the ex-
periences he had as a customer. Charles then reports that he put 
on a dress shirt and green tie and “with a smile on my face, ran 
up to a store manager as she was opening her store at 4 in the 
morning. I noticed that she was scared, but I did my best to say, 
‘I am here because I really want this job, and I bet you I want it 
more than anybody else.’” Charles goes on to note, “Starbucks 
store managers are really good at hiring based on enthusiasm, 
your sense of purpose for serving others, and a willingness to 
learn. We really look for those people who are willing to live by 
what the company holds most important, and we will train them 
from there.” Résumés, past work history, and even favorable 
recommendations notwithstanding, there is something to be 
said for observing and interacting with prospects to determine  
whether they are eager, teachable, and authentically interested 
in others. 
Guiding Experience Delivery
Many businesses orient new hires by teaching them the tasks 
to be performed on the job but fail to educate them on service  
excellence skills and/or the experience that they want those  
employees to consistently deliver. At Starbucks, however, ini-
tial training dives quickly into courses like “Customer Service  
Basics” and the “Starbucks Experience.” 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
40
During these training sessions, new hires are provided guid-
ance on what “customer experience” means at Starbucks, and 
they are placed in positions where they can observe the ser-
vice experience from the customer’s perspective. For example, 
newly hired baristas are exposed to a process tool called the 
“Store Walk Thru,” where they move through the café environ-
ment observing and recording salient aspects that a customer 
is likely to encounter as she journeys from her arrival through 
her departure. Starbucks leadership sets the expectation that af-
ter initial training, the new hire will be a part of these customer-
perspective walks, which occur once per shift at each store. Like 
all tools of this nature, store managers must constantly reinforce 
the importance and value of taking the customer’s perspective 
and ensure that this process does not become a perfunctory and 
routine task. 
In addition to this customer empathy tool (Store Walk Thru),  
initial customer service and desired experience training help 
new hires reflect on their personal history of consumer expe-
riences (inside or outside of Starbucks) to identify what makes 
an experience memorable, uplifting, inspiring, or elevated for 
them. The training hones in on the concept of “branded” expe-
riences and how customers need to be assured that all encoun-
ters that they have with a brand will deliver consistent products, 
processes, and engaging experience elements. Execution on the 
branded/consistency dimension is reflected in comments from 
customers like Jenny, who notes, “When I travel, I try to spot a 
Starbucks. It feels like you are connecting with a little bit of home 
wherever you are in the world. . . . It carries a set of expecta-
tions for products, feelings, and the way you are treated.” Even if 
a business operates from a single location, the issue is the same:  
Will I have a comparable experience the next time I visit? Will 
the expectations set today be matched or exceeded tomorrow? 
Or will I have a random, unreliable collection of encounters that 
erode the concept of the brand? 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
41
To deliver consistent experiences at Starbucks, the leader-
ship offers a defined service vision that describes what needs to 
be achieved during service experiences. Additionally, it provides 
four customer service behaviors that help partners understand 
how the customer service vision is to be accomplished. The Star-
bucks customer vision statement reads: “We create inspired  
moments in each customer’s day.” To accomplish this objective, 
partners are encouraged to focus on the following customer ser-
vice behaviors: 
• Anticipate 
• Connect 
• Personalize  
• Own
In essence, the leadership offers partners the desired service 
experience outcome (“inspired moments”) and the key actions 
needed to deliver it. For example, if a barista reads the custom-
er’s need state, the barista can anticipate, connect, personalize, 
and own that customer’s experience to create an inspired mo-
ment for him. To be more specific, if a customer looks rushed, 
the barista can anticipate and take responsibility for delivering 
an accurate and expedited beverage with a brief but personal  
moment of connection (something as simple as a genuine smile). 
By contrast, if a customer is a regular who enjoys conversation, 
the partner can make a connection by remembering his drink or 
calling him by name and taking responsibility for personalizing 
the drink or conversation in a way that produces meaningful, if 
not inspired, moments in his day. 
Customers often share the joy they experience when baristas 
execute the Starbucks service vision. Alli Higgins, a 10-year Star-
bucks customer, notes, “Baristas remember my drink and my 
name. It’s amazing, since it usually takes only one or two times 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
42
and they already know my name. That stands out in a world 
where you don’t see much of that care or thoughtfulness. Baris-
tas also remember when I take a trip and ask me about it. Be-
cause of the way I am treated at Starbucks, I’ll occasionally bake 
cookies for them. Now they’ll jokingly say, ‘Hey, Alli, where’s our 
cookies?’ That’s the kind of thing I want to do because I consider 
them part of my family.” By providing the desired destination 
and ways to arrive there, you help your teams develop exception-
ally strong bonds with customers (in Alli’s words, “I consider 
them part of my family”) that powerfully differentiate your com-
pany from the competition.
R ef l e ct i o n  o n  C o n necti on
1.	 If asked, what percentage of your employees could ar-
ticulate your customer experience vision or the way 
you want customers to feel as a result of the experi-
ences they have with your brand? What would you 
hope to hear?
2.	 Do you provide tools like the “Store Walk Thru” to help  
your staff empathize with customers and adopt their 
perspective?
3.	 Have you outlined key behaviors such as anticipate, 
connect, personalize, and own which will help your 
team members understand how to deliver your de-
sired experience?
Creating the Environment— 
Keeping It Clean and Lean
So you sell excellent products, you’ve ignited product passion 
throughout your organization, and your staff authentically and 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
43
consistently delivers your branded experience. You have mas-
tered the customer experience challenge, right? Not exactly. To 
be on the same trajectory as world-class service providers like 
those I write about (Starbucks, Zappos, or The Ritz-Carlton),  
you need to possess at least three additional competencies:  
(1) the ability to maximize customer engagement through en-
vironmental design, (2) integration of key sensory factors, 
and (3) a capacity to listen and adapt your offerings to meet 
the changing wants, needs, and desires of your customers.
In the late 1990s, business theorists and economists like  
B. Joseph Pine and James H. Gilmore started to suggest that we 
were entering an age in which “memorable experiences” served 
as key drivers for economic growth. Rather than simply focusing 
on the benefits and attributes of products or the financial advan-
tages of efficient service delivery, these pioneers initiated dis-
cussion about the benefits accrued from scripting sensory-rich 
experiences upon the “stage” of a business. Borrowing themes 
from the world of live theater, they offered guidance on how to 
remove negative and align positive cues in order to build expe-
riences that not only engage customers but “transform” them. 
While theatrical metaphors for customer experience design 
can be problematic when they refer to “staging” and “scripting” 
(which imply inauthenticity or robotic transactions), these ref-
erences allude to the importance of sensory elements and to the 
attention that is needed to build the right environment or plat-
form on which service experiences are cast.
In a variation of Shakespeare’s immortal line delivered by 
Jacques in As You Like It—“All the world’s a stage. And all the men 
and women merely players”—all business settings are a stage from 
which all experiences emerge. At Starbucks, the design of the stage 
(the store environment) and the sensory elements placed on that 
stage are carefully considered to heighten the customer experience. 
Starbucks leaders understand that the design of extraordi-
nary experiences involves a willingness to see the environment 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
44
from the customers’ perspective and to attend to the need states 
of core customer segments. While many leaders look for ways 
to improve experiences by adding elements to the environment, 
the best outcomes often come from the removal of negative cues 
that detract from a memorable experience. Howard Schultz, for 
example, removed breakfast food items from Starbucks stores 
until he could be assured that any negative smells of food prep-
aration (charred bread or burnt cheese) did not intrude upon 
a key sensory element in the coffee shop—the smell of coffee. 
This battle involved the leadership’s willingness to forgo reve-
nue from breakfast food sales until preparation technologies 
could be developed to abate unwanted food aromas. Similarly, 
decisions by Starbucks leadership to reduce non-coffee-related 
merchandise (like the stuffed animals referred to in the previ-
ous chapter), even if that merchandise contributed to positive 
margins, reflect a commitment to the elimination of cues that 
compromise an ideal experience. In the end, great customer ex-
periences depend on both the addition and the removal of emo-
tional stimuli and environmental design elements.
Lest you think that “stage” design considerations relate only 
to brick-and-mortar storefronts, every contact point between 
your customer and your business serves as an opportunity to en-
gage customers through thoughtful presentation. For example, 
Mike Peck, creative director, Packaging, Starbucks Global Cre-
ative Studio, who led the team responsible for the redesign of 
the Starbucks iconic logo, saw opportunities to enhance the cus-
tomer experience and modernize the brand through the newly 
updated mark.
The original 1971 Starbucks logo had the words “Starbucks 
Coffee and Tea” encircling the siren (the mythical character at 
the center of the logo that is often confused with a mermaid). 
The revised logos of 1987 and 1992 dropped the word tea, but 
still had the siren bound by the words Starbucks and Coffee. 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
45
Starbucks logo introduced in 1992.
According to Mike, “Although not a core reason for the up-
date to the icon, the words on the logo actually created confu-
sion in the customer experience. For example, we had Starbucks 
ice cream flavors like vanilla, chocolate, and strawberry, none of 
which have coffee in them.” With the existing logo, people who 
glanced at those particular ice cream containers might assume 
coffee was an ingredient. Mike shares, “Putting a big stamp on 
the container that says ‘coffee free’ is a rather inelegant solution. 
You want your design to be as clean and pure as possible. Con-
sumers, when they looked at it, just saw coffee and strawberries, 
not an optimal taste combination. We have other beverages do-
mestically and internationally that are not coffee-based, yet they 
would have the word coffee affixed to them by virtue of the logo. 
Ultimately our redesign opened up the siren, let her be the hero, 
broke down some barriers, and even streamlined the customer 
experience.” Looking across all your contact points with your 
company, from its logo to its product return policies, where can 
you clean up your clutter and confusion?
Starbucks logo introduced in 2011.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
46
Since eliminating clutter and increasing clarity improve cus-
tomer experiences, Starbucks has entered a “Lean” transforma-
tion process, focusing on a shift from traditional efforts toward 
enhancing value to an approach based on a discipline modified 
from pure manufacturing settings to minimize waste and in-
crease customer value. 
During this transformation period, Starbucks leaders have 
had individuals at all levels of the organization comprehen-
sively look at processes to identify issues and streamline their 
efficiency. Troy Alstead, chief financial officer and chief admin-
istrative officer, states, “As good as we were about spontaneity 
at forging human connections, we weren’t as good at remov-
ing waste and creating processes that maximized efficiency and  
customer value while making it easier for partners to serve our cus- 
tomers. Over the recent past we have made great strides in these 
areas of discipline. So the idea now is to remove the things that 
really aren’t critical to customer value. We shouldn’t be putting 
our partners in positions of having to be creative with processes. 
Let’s leverage their best practices that maximize efficiency for the 
partner and for the customer. Our partners should be encour-
aged to bring every bit of their creativity to how they interact 
with our customers, but quality and execution ultimately should 
be designed and measured by the benefit it brings to partners, 
customers, and our business.” Inherent in Starbucks approach 
to reduce inefficiencies is the understanding that to be truly ef-
fective, those reductions should produce routines that free up 
people or resources to make stronger interpersonal connections.
Unlike many other businesses that deploy Lean strategies, 
Starbucks takes a frontline empowerment approach to achieve 
its objectives. John Shook, a former executive at Toyota (the 
company from which much of Lean manufacturing practice 
emerged) and a past advisor to Starbucks, compares the strat-
egy taken to increase efficiency at Starbucks with the method-
ologies used by McDonald’s: “McDonald’s very business model 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
47
seeks a highly cookie-cutter approach. Therefore, McDonald’s 
may be successful in implementing traditional Industrial Engi-
neering (Taylorism and all that—not lean) in a very traditional, 
top-down, programmatic way.”
By contrast, John suggests, “Starbucks decided long ago—
and reconfirms this every day—that a cookie-cutter store ap-
proach is not the pathway to success for their product, which is a 
higher-end, higher-priced coffee that emphasizes the customer’s 
experience. . . . Each Starbucks store is different. The footprint 
is different, the customer experience is different. I believe Star-
bucks wants the customer experience from store to store to be 
consistent but unique. McDonald’s wants the customer experi-
ence to be exactly the same, totally common from store to store.” 
Given that the drink and syrup combinations at Starbucks 
allow for more than 80,000 different beverages to be ordered by 
any given customer, John suggests that at Starbucks, “The goal 
is to make as many things as possible routine so that the barista 
can spend just a few more seconds talking with the customer. . . .  
No workarounds due to the line backing up, no shortcuts to get 
caught up—handling each unique order as it should be handled, 
in stride, without burden, and to the customer’s satisfaction.” 
If you are looking to create consistent but unique experiences, 
Starbucks approach to Lean serves as a template. Develop ex-
pertise in Lean-type strategies and engage a dialogue with and 
informative observation of those who perform important oper-
ational tasks. Those conversations and observations will readily 
enable you to create effective routines and efficiencies. Ulti-
mately, this effort should result in more time for your people to 
create personally engaging experiences.
Adding, Erring, and Persisting
When it comes to the customer experience, quite often enhance-
ments take the form of trial-and-error adjustments in an attempt 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
48
to hit upon the right ingredients in the right quantities necessary 
to deliver an optimal customer experience. Frequently, key ele-
ments are sensory in nature, such as music. Author and journalist 
Nick Chiles notes, “For companies looking to make an emotional 
connection with consumers, music continues to be one of the 
most reliable devices in the marketer’s toolbelt. . . . Take the case 
of Starbucks, which endeavored to turn its coffee shops into a 
fully experiential adult playground that tickled and stroked every 
one of the customers’ senses while they were in the café, making 
them want to stick around all day. A big part of that was music—
interesting, off-beat, quirky musical finds that thrilled customers 
with a feeling that they had made a new discovery.” 
Because customers became so connected with the music 
that Starbucks played in the stores and the discovery moments 
associated with that music, Starbucks began selling compilation 
and compact discs of featured artists. 
What role do sensory elements play for your business? What 
do your customers hear at key touch points in their journey with 
you? Are there opportunities to incorporate sensory elements 
(auditory, olfactory, visual, or tactile) that will authentically en-
hance the customer’s experience?
Keeping It Core and Evolving
As we’ve explored previously, extraordinary customer expe-
riences rely on processes of simplification and a willingness to 
experiment with sensory enrichment. The path to excellence 
also requires an ability to merge design elements in a brand- 
congruent fashion. Arthur Rubinfeld, chief creative officer for 
Starbucks and president, Global Innovation and Evolution Fresh 
Retail, notes, “As an architect, I believe that everyone can have 
an impression and an opinion on how to create a coffeehouse 
experience. The key, however, is to support the brand’s position 
seamlessly in the physical design. The most difficult part of retail 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
49
store design is connecting the gestalt of the company, the mis-
sion of the company, the culture of the company to the physi-
cal solution. I’ve often said that in judging a store design, if you 
were to remove the logo discs and the signs from the fascia of the 
storefront tonight, would people shopping in that retail space to-
morrow know that it was a Starbucks store?”
Throughout the 1990s Starbucks certainly seemed to be mix-
ing the right ingredients to deliver coffeehouse experiences that 
contributed to the brand’s meteoric growth. Because they serve 
the ever-changing needs of people, physical spaces can’t remain 
static. In addition to sharing the importance of environmen-
tal factors in store design (which will be addressed extensively in 
Chapter 11), Arthur suggests that much has changed in creating 
Starbucks environments. “Our concepts in the 1990s were rooted 
in a thematic design, with a leading-edge color palette and ex-
tensive iconography. For example, we used a wonderful group of 
icons and swirls that gave us opportunities to present the siren and 
other nautical graphic design elements in fixture designs.” 
By contrast, today Arthur indicates that his design teams 
work to provide flexible design approaches that allow individ-
ual in-house designers to use local artists and materials to make 
them more locally relevant in their look and feel. He also sug-
gests that customers are looking for authenticity, seating choices, 
and places where they can connect with their community. Ac-
cording to Arthur, “We promote interaction and community 
gathering by providing unique and specific elements. The com-
munity table is one of them. The community table also allows 
for group meetings and participatory conversations about what-
ever is on someone’s mind. In addition, we’re trying to provide 
as many alternative-seating areas because of the varied need 
states of our customers who come in the morning, at noon, and 
in the evening. Maybe they will sit on a comfortable chair, in 
a nice settee, or at a community table. We are also incorporat-
ing 42-inch-high tables which complement the 30- and 36-inch 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
50
tables. If you are coming in to work on a laptop, a 42-inch-high 
table is ergonomically better for you, as you can stand. It’s also an 
alternative kind of perch for people to experience the ‘life’ of the 
store that goes on versus sitting in a settee in the front or back 
section of a store.” 
Starbucks leadership is comfortable experimenting with de-
sign elements that the leaders believe will address the evolving 
need states of the company’s customers. They consider emerging 
trends and observed customer behavior as they refine the stage 
on which their experiences are provided.
R ef l e ct i o n  o n  C o n necti on
1.	 Take a moment to put yourself in the place of your key 
customer group. As you walk through their experi-
ence, what elements of clutter or confusion stand out 
to you? What can be done to clean up these experi-
ence detractors? Repeat the exercise with other im-
portant customer groups. 
2.	 If you were to do a “sensory audit” of your business, 
what would be your strengths, weaknesses, and op-
portunities? What sights, sounds, smells, and tactile el-
ements do your customers experience at key contacts 
with your brand?
3.	 Have you used or are you using disciplined processes 
like Lean (or Six Sigma) to increase efficiencies, im-
prove your customer experience, or even determine 
the root cause of service breakdowns? If so, how has 
the customer experience improved? If you aren’t tak-
ing a disciplined approach, what would cause you to 
explore such processes?

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
51
Whether it is connecting the design of your physical space 
to your company’s mission, vision, and values; streamlining effi-
ciencies to improve the customer experience; or adding sensory 
elements, successful customer experience enhancements have 
one unifying component: the need to execute the details. As  
Arthur puts it, “One of my mantras is, ‘The difference between 
mediocrity and excellence is attention to detail.’ The attention to 
detail that we put into every aspect of our business is geared to-
ward staying on the leading edge of design and providing the 
most powerful, unique experience possible in our stores.” 
Executing details to achieve leading-edge customer experi-
ences works for Starbucks. How are you doing on perfecting the 
details of your desired customer experiences?
Co-create the Experience  
with Your Customer
To provide the “leading-edge” experience that Arthur referred 
to, Starbucks leaders do more than observe, try, evaluate, and 
refine their offerings. Starbucks engages with customers to help 
the leaders prioritize experience improvement targets. In 2008, 
Starbucks was at the forefront of the online “co-creation with 
customers” movement. Cecile Hudon, online community man-
ager at Starbucks, explains, “When we first launched the My 
Starbucks Idea website in March 2008, we felt we were losing 
some of the connection we had with our customers. So Howard  
Schultz spearheaded our effort to let customers know that we 
were listening. We did that by creating one of the earliest and 
most successful online idea sites at MyStarbucksIdea.com.”
Members of My Starbucks Idea can share, vote on, and discuss  
product, experience, and involvement ideas. As ideas are shared, 
site-goers vote on those ideas and also interact with Starbucks 
partners who can evaluate them and affect change. According 
to Cecile, “The secret to the success of the site is our customers  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
52
get to talk to subject-matter experts who function as modera-
tors. So as customers offer food items or suggest gluten-free 
products, for example, a partner from the Starbucks food team 
looks through those suggestions. If we had tried to support this 
site with a single person from, say, the marketing department, 
they may not recognize a good and relevant idea, because they 
Infographic prepared by Starbucks for the five-year anniversary  
of My Starbucks Idea.

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
53
are not as close to the work being done in each department and 
the process would be slower to move ideas forward. Today we 
have about 40 moderators that are on the site from all over the 
company listening to the ideas that are relevant to their work. 
Customers interacting with Starbucks partners in areas that they 
care about helps the customer feel a part of the company. Their 
opinion matters.”

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
54
As items gain popularity through the votes of members in 
the community, moderators engage in dialogue about those 
ideas. Cecile notes, “We encourage the moderators to comment 
and look for responses to the most popular ideas each week, and 
also look for diamond in the rough ideas—innovative ideas that 
have low point scores because they may be too new of a concept 
for people to recognize as a good idea.” 
Beyond commenting on ideas, moderators move the best 
options through a series of possible categories: “under review,” 
“reviewed,” “coming soon,” and “launched.” As ideas go under 
review, functional teams look at whether an idea is innovative,  
whether it is a differentiator for Starbucks, how quickly the idea 
can go to market, how much impact it will have on the customer 
experience, and whether it is a good business driver. Examples of 
ideas launched from My Starbucks Idea were identified in the in-
fographic on the preceding pages.
More than 150,000 ideas have been submitted on the site, 
and 265 ideas launched, as of this writing. My Starbucks Idea 
has helped shape the Starbucks loyalty program, inspired the  
Starbucks Card eGift program, encouraged the company to sell 
reusable cup sleeves, and prioritized its recycling efforts. Years 
after the launch, the community is vital and active, with some 
users visiting more than 200 times a month. As customers con-
tinue to share their ideas with Starbucks partners, leadership 
continues to listen and respond. Partners participate on the con-
sumer site, and a separate site has been created for them to of-
fer ideas that affect their work lives and the experience of their 
store’s customers. 
While Starbucks has developed a variety of other tools for 
engaging customer input, My Starbucks Idea demonstrates how 
customers and partners can be engaged in an advisory counsel 
function to suggest, prioritize, and invest in the evolution of expe-
rience offerings. How effectively are you mobilizing your engaged 
customers to help them help you address their wants and needs?

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
55
Permission to Build on an 
Experience Platform
If you deliver high-quality products in experiential environments, 
served up by knowledgeable and passionate staff members,  
customers not only will support your growth through that prod-
uct line but are also likely to explore other offerings you inno-
vate in the context of those core competencies. For Starbucks 
leadership, this has meant a growth plan that includes café envi-
ronments serving other high-quality beverages—enter the Evo-
lution Fresh™ and Tazo® tea stores.
In late 2011, Starbucks announced that it had acquired Evo-
lution Fresh, Inc., “as part of its commitment to evolve and en-
hance the Customer Experience with innovative and wholesome 
products.” The move signaled that Starbucks would takes its bev-
erage expertise into the $3.4 billion superpremium cold-pressed 
juice market and broadly into the $50 billion health and well-
ness sector.
Upon announcing the acquisition, Howard Schultz noted, 
“Our intent is to build a national health and wellness brand le-
veraging our scale, resources and premium product expertise. 
Bringing Evolution Fresh into the Starbucks family marks an im-
portant step forward in this pursuit.”  Prior to the acquisition, 
Evolution Fresh sold premium juice products through health su-
permarkets such as Whole Foods. Evolution Fresh, which was 
created by the founder of Naked Juice, uses patented technol-
ogy to pasteurize most of its juices without exposing them to  
nutrient-depleting heat. 
By acquiring Evolution Fresh’s existing bottled juice prod-
ucts, Starbucks leadership expanded its presence in the con-
sumer products goods space (which will be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 9, “Personal Relationships Translate: Sharing the Love 
from People to Products”) and also created a new experiential 
platform, Evolution Fresh retail stores. These stores focus on the 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
56
same principles of customer experience crafted in a traditional 
Starbucks café environment, but adapt that experience in keep-
ing with the health and wellness products that they sell.
Starbucks rolled out its first Evolution Fresh stores in the Se-
attle area. The centerpiece of these stores is the “tap wall,” which 
dispenses seasonal cold handcrafted juices like Field of Greens 
(a low-calorie blend of ginger, greens, organic apple, and cu-
cumber) and natural smoothies. The stores also offer globally 
inspired, personalized food experiences with hot and cold se-
lections, including breakfast items, lunch and dinner wraps, 
soups, sandwiches, and bowls (such as an under-300-calorie of-
fering made up principally of quinoa, organic kale, and butter-
nut squash). Of course, Evolution Fresh stores also sell Starbucks 
coffee and Tazo teas.
Kevin Petrisko, director of business operations, Evolution 
Fresh, describes the experience he wants customers to have in 
Evolution Fresh stores by noting, “Our vision is, a customer walks 
out and says, ‘Wow, that was a fantastic experience. I learned 
something new, I had an amazing human connection with the 
juice partner who guided me through this experience, ultimately 
the food or the drink taste like the fruit and vegetable it came 
from, and I have to return. I have to tell my friends how high 
the quality is of the food I’m eating and the beverage I’m drink-
ing. I’ve learned something, and I understand how this is going to 
help me think differently about what I put into my body.’”
Other than the mention of Starbucks coffee on the menu 
board, there is no signage linking Evolution Fresh to Starbucks, 
yet online customer reviews frequently make the connection. 
This is exemplified by one review that reads, “Evolution Fresh is 
Starbucks newest addition to health food. Although spendy, it’s 
totally worth the experience. The partners behind the counter 
are knowledgeable and happy.” While Evolution Fresh is its own 
independent-branded store experience, the human connection 
anchors the retail stores to the essence of Starbucks.

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
57
Unlike Evolution Fresh, which represents a fairly recent foray 
into an adjacent beverage category, the Tazo tea stores are a newly 
evolved retail concept that links back to the origins of Starbucks. 
When it was founded in 1971, Starbucks was known as the Star-
bucks Coffee and Tea Company. As the company grew, the lead-
ers positioned Starbucks with coffee at its core, but in 1999 they 
purchased a premium tea brand. A New York Times article from 
1999 described that acquisition by noting, “Tazo, the Oregon 
company that once aspired to be the Starbucks of teas, has been 
bought out by the Starbucks Corporation. . . . The Seattle-based 
Starbucks hopes that with Tazo it can attract new customers.” 
Effectively, Starbucks built Tazo from an $8.1 million purchase 
price in 1999 into a brand with more than $1.4 billion in sales, and 
recently positioned a retail concept to further grow the brand in a 
Tazo tea store setting.  The first Tazo store opened in Seattle in No-
vember 2012 and provides a retail experience where customers can 
purchase more than 80 varieties of loose-leaf teas or enjoy a freshly  
brewed cup of tea—hot, iced, or prepared as a latte. In fact, customers  
Tazo tea retail store, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
58
work with Tazo partners to create their own unique tea flavors  
and can buy those personal blends by the ounce or by the cup.
According to Charles Cain, vice president, Tazo Merchan-
dise and Operations, “In our Tazo tea retail store, we want to cre-
ate an experiential offering and a place where customers can get 
a rich sense of our extraordinary teas. Additionally, we want to 
take a leadership role in exposing people to premium tea. When 
we hit our stride, we anticipate that 25 percent of our sales will 
be from prepared tea beverages and the remainder will be from 
the purchase of loose-leaf teas and related supplies for custom-
ers to prepare their beverages at home.” 
Like the Evolution Fresh concept, the Tazo tea store is not 
branded with the iconic Starbucks logo. While having less empha-
sis on prepared beverages and more on take-home purchases, a 
Tazo tea retail store is marked by the same product passion and at-
tention to experience detail highlighted throughout this chapter. 
Annie Young-Scrivner, executive vice president and pres-
ident, Starbucks Canada, expresses the aspiration of the lead-
ership as it relates to the market relevance of decisions like the 
creation of the Tazo tea retail stores: “The tea category is explod-
ing right now; it’s literally at the point where coffee was a number 
of years ago. The majority of tea is in filter bags, not full leaf, and 
we hope to elevate tea-drinking experiences across the global 
landscape. This is a particularly relevant opportunity given our 
commitment to beverage delivery in tea-drinking counties like 
China and India. Hopefully, our collective efforts around Tazo 
tea will represent a big win that is very complementary to what 
we are doing with coffee.” Stacy Speicher, director of category 
brand management, Tea, adds, “As we move into stores designed 
around products other than coffee, we guide our decisions  
by the most important common denominator—the customer. 
At the heart of everything we do are our customer insights and 
data. We need to understand who is buying tea, where they are, 
even how to reach them through social media or advertising. We 

From Replicable and Consistent to Magical and Unique
59
need to understand our consumers backwards and forwards in 
order to do what we do best—connect with them.”
While the true success of Evolution Fresh or the Tazo tea 
retail concept won’t be fully known for years to come, it is clear 
that Starbucks success in product execution, customer connec-
tion, and experience design have allowed it to explore adjacent 
categories. Starbucks leadership appears to explore new business 
opportunities by asking questions like: 
• How can we translate our core competencies into fu-
ture opportunities for our existing and prospective 
customers?
• What external factors or consumer trends can guide 
us as we leverage our strengths?
• How will this possibility serve our mission and elevate  
the experience of our customers and all stakeholders?
• How will this opportunity enhance a connection of 
trust and love for those we serve?
In my view, these types of questions are relevant to every 
business leader. The final question, “How will this opportunity 
enhance a connection of trust and love?”, is addressed directly in 
the chapters that immediately follow under the principle titled 
“Love to Be Loved.” 
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• Human experiences are at the heart of your brand.
• People can copy your products and your services, but 
seldom can they build the powerful connections with 
customers that emerge from the well-designed expe-
riences that you deliver.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
60
• Observe and interact with your prospective employ-
ees to determine whether they are eager, teachable, 
and authentically interested in others. 
• Define your service vision in such a way that it describes  
what needs to be achieved during service experiences. 
• Well-designed experiences involve a willingness to 
see the environment from the customers’ perspective 
and attend to the needs of core customer segments.
• Great customer experiences depend on both the ad-
dition and the removal of emotional stimuli and  
environmental design elements.
• When it comes to the customer experience, quite of-
ten enhancements take the form of trial-and-error 
adjustments in an attempt to hit upon the right in-
gredients in the right quantities necessary to deliver 
an optimal customer experience.  
• Whether it is connecting the design of your physical 
space to your company’s mission, vision, and values; 
streamlining efficiencies to improve the customer ex-
perience; or adding sensory elements, successful cus-
tomer experience enhancements have one unifying 
component, the need to execute the details.
• Co-create your experience with your customers.
• If you deliver high-quality products in experiential 
environments served by knowledgeable and pas-
sionate staff members, customers will support your 
growth through that product line and are also more 
likely to explore other offerings you innovate in the 
context of those core competencies.

P r i n c i p l e  2
Love to  
Be  
Loved

62
62
I 
don’t need to tell you that these are challenging times for 
leaders. We all seek to engage staff members, create innova-
tive products, satisfy customers, and drive brand loyalty de-
spite operating in an environment of consumer anxiety. To make 
things more complicated, we have to differentiate ourselves 
from the competition in as cost-effective a manner as possible 
and react to the increasing service demands of customers, who 
expect immediate responses through their desired communica-
tion channels or on their preferred social media platforms. The 
silver lining in what appears to be a dark cloud is the fact that 
every leader is faced with these exact same opportunities and 
market conditions. Leaders at companies like Starbucks have 
found ways to maintain strong emotional bonds with their cus-
tomers and achieve their business objectives despite a landscape 
of heightened consumer empowerment and corporate cynicism. 
At the center of these sustained emotional bonds is a leadership 
principle that I refer to as “Love to Be Loved.” 
“Love to Be Loved” is presented in Chapter 4, “It’s a Matter of 
Trust and Love,” and Chapter 5, “It Must Thrive Inside to Be Ex-
perienced Outside.” Chapter 4 explores the hierarchical nature of 
customer engagement and how Starbucks leaders model integrity  
to secure stakeholders’ trust. In addition, the chapter explores the  
role that leaders play in charting a course toward brand passion.
Chapter 5 takes a broad look at the many and varied efforts 
that Starbucks leaders deploy to maximize the company’s con-
nection with partners. Given the diversity and international na-
ture of the Starbucks workforce, the chapter offers insights into 
effective communication methods that maintain personalization 
and intimacy. 
In these two chapters, you will see how employee and cus-
tomer satisfaction will keep your company’s lights on today. 
More significantly, you will come to appreciate that in order to be  
a viable force well into the future, you will most likely need to 
“love to be loved.”

63
C H
A P
T
E R
 4
It’s a Matter  
of Trust and Love
Trust is . . . the beginning place, the foundation upon 
which more can be built. Where trust is, love can 
flourish.
Barbara Smith
O
n January 5, 1914, Henry Ford more than doubled the min-
imum wage for many of his employees by introducing a 
$5 a day minimum pay scale for employees of the Ford Motor 
Company. On that same day, Ford began offering profit sharing 
to his employees and reduced shifts from nine hours to eight. 
Ford’s treasurer at the time, James Couzens, explained these bold 
leadership moves by saying, “It is our belief that social justice  
begins at home. We want those who have helped us to produce 
this great institution and are helping to maintain it to share our 
prosperity.”
On January 5, 2012, 98 years later, embittered individuals 
who identified with the Occupy Wall Street movement were in 
the 111th day of a protest that began in Zuccotti Park in New 
York City’s Wall Street financial district. These protestors were 
expressing what they perceived as economic unfairness and in-
equality resulting from corporate greed. The group’s mantra, “We 
are the 99 percent,” reflected cynicism and distrust for business,  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
64
financial, and governmental systems that they viewed as sacri-
ficing the interest of the country’s 99 percent in favor of the 
wealthiest 1 percent. Where had we come in a century?
Dov Seidman, founder, chairman, and CEO of LRN, a com- 
pany that helps businesses develop and maintain effective  
corporate governance, suggests, “This crisis of trust in our basic 
institutions is so troubling precisely because the lack of trust is 
in so many cases well deserved. Broken promises, obfuscation, 
spin, concealment, all have created a suspicion—often unfortu-
nately true—that there is something to hide.” 
Given these global trust issues, LRN commissioned research 
among U.S. citizens and executives to assess their attitudes con-
cerning the trustworthiness of corporate America. According 
to Dov, “The results were dismal. Over two-thirds (71%) of the 
Americans polled said that none, very few, or only some cor-
porations operated in a fair and honest manner. Nowhere is 
the crisis of trust more acute and widespread than in corporate 
America, although the recent scandals overseas point to a global 
problem that defies national borders. In light of the power, influ-
ence, and impact of corporations, any hope of stabilizing . . . and 
restoring trust will not only need to involve business; it must, I 
believe, be led by business and business leaders.”
Starbucks chief executive officer, Howard Schultz, also 
champions the importance of business leaders stepping up to 
address social problems like unemployment, destructive gov-
ernment partisanship (more on these two topics in Chapter 11), 
and distrust of businesses by employees and consumers. Howard 
suggests, “Most people come to work for a company having had 
previous work experiences. In many cases, their experience has 
been bad. As such, they enter with cynicism, and the burden of 
proof is on leaders to demonstrate that this is a different place.” 
Howard views the rise of distrust among employees and 
consumers as a “seismic change” that produces opportunities for 
those who behave in socially conscious ways. Howard shares, 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
65
“There is a longing by the consumer, a longing to do business 
with companies they trust, respect, and admire. Those compa-
nies, whether it is Whole Foods, Costco, or Timberland, that 
have done the right thing for a long time are winning and win-
ning for a reason. We all have competitors, and there is disparity 
in the marketplace of social responsibility. Consumers are smart 
and will reject companies that are not making deposits in the 
reservoir of trust or who are not authentic about the way they 
appear to go about it.” Alli Higgins, a regular Starbucks customer 
from Denver, Colorado, acknowledges that authentic social re-
sponsibility matters to her: “If I am going to frequent a company, 
I want to feel good about how it treats its employees, its suppli-
ers, and the earth. I think we all have to do our part with this by 
looking into the companies we support. I am all for businesses 
making healthy profits, as long as they still do the right thing. So 
that’s why I go to Starbucks.”
This chapter is about, in Howard’s terms, making authen-
tic “deposits in the reservoir of trust.” It also explores how those 
deposits produce returns in the form of engagement loyalty and 
beloved brand status. Let’s start with a conceptual framework 
for accessing brand passion by first focusing on competence and 
trust.
No Point in Seeking Lovability if 
You Aren’t Likable or Trustworthy
Most of us have had some exposure to the work of Abraham 
Maslow. Reflecting back on your high school or college course-
work, you may recall that Maslow’s 1943 paper “A Theory of Hu-
man Motivation” identified a hierarchy of five human needs 
(physiological, safety, belongingness and love, esteem, and self-
actualization). Later in Maslow’s lifetime, he went on to expand 
his theory to eight definable need levels (adding cognitive, aes-
thetic, and transcendence needs). While the number of need 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
66
levels may be subject to debate, Maslow is credited with appre-
ciating that basic survival requirements take precedence over 
more evolved social and transformational needs. In his hierar-
chy, Maslow identifies biological and safety needs as having pri-
macy over the need for love. In essence, Maslow suggests that 
humans have to answer the question, “Am I safe?” before they 
will seek to answer the question, “Am I loved?” Maslow’s hierar-
chical view has enjoyed a renaissance among business theorists 
addressing the motives of customers and employees. Maslow is 
also relevant to our exploration, as we examine the hierarchical 
nature of consumers’ need states when it comes to business trust, 
belongingness, and love.
Theorists and researchers at the Gallup Corporation, for ex-
ample, have defined a hierarchy of customer perceptions that es-
calate from low levels to full customer engagement. In the Gallup 
model, the first hurdle a company must face is the question, “Are 
you competent?” If you provide a satisfactory experience and 
customers report that they are likely to purchase from you again, 
you have established foundational competence and achieved an 
entry level of engagement by the consumer. Your customers are 
content with your offering, and for reasons of habit or conve-
nience are likely to purchase from you again. Your product or 
service delivery did not disappoint your customers, and there-
fore they feel no need to actively look elsewhere for similar prod-
ucts. Unfortunately, your customers also have no strong reason 
to stay loyal to you, and they are vulnerable to being lured away 
by competitors.
Being viewed as competent is a necessary but insufficient 
threshold for business success. In large measure, competence and 
satisfaction (which is used to determine perceived competence) 
are intellectually based perceptions that offer no protection from 
the effective marketing strategies of competitors or from the en-
trance of new businesses into your marketplace. In essence,  
your customers are a coupon away from exploring elsewhere. 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
67
If you are to ensure a more secure relationship with your 
customers, they must be able to answer the question, “Can I pre-
dict that this company will demonstrate fairness and consistency 
in the way it delivers products and experiences?” In essence, cus-
tomers must conclude that the company operates with honesty 
and integrity. Based on what they have experienced firsthand 
or gleaned from friends, online reviews, and the media, they 
are determining whether a company will honor its implied and 
stated promises. Are senior leaders acting in accordance with 
their values? When problems arise, are those problems resolved 
in a reasonable and appropriate way? Do representatives of the 
company behave in a manner that is consistent with what they 
promise or what the marketing materials suggest? 
If customers view your company as being competent and 
having integrity, you have created the environment for con-
sumer trust. That trust can set the stage for yet deeper levels of 
customer engagement, such as brand passion or beloved brand 
status. 
In the Gallup hierarchy, for example, being perceived as hav-
ing integrity establishes the opportunity for customers to expe-
rience a heightened level of emotional engagement—“pride.” 
In order to derive pride from a business relationship, custom-
ers must be able to offer a resounding yes to questions like, “Was 
I smart to have made the choice to buy here?” “Do I want to be 
known as a customer of this company and tell my friends and 
family about my positive experiences?” Customer pride comes 
when your business is viewed as a positive force in your cus-
tomers’ lives or in the lives of others they care about, as well as 
when you behave in ways that leave them pleased to associate 
with you. In some cases, pride comes from status that is derived 
through a connection to your brand.
The pinnacle of Gallup’s customer engagement hierarchy is 
passion. To determine the presence of consumer passion, Gal-
lup’s customer engagement measurement tool (CE-11) asks 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
68
questions that get at whether a company is “perfect for some-
one like” the customer or whether the customer can “imagine a 
world without” that business. (A detailed exploration of the 11 
questions that Gallup used in the CE-11 can be found in my book  
The New Gold Standard: 5 Leadership Principles for Creating a 
Legendary Customer Experience Courtesy of The Ritz-Carlton 
Hotel Company.) 
For our purposes here, the Gallup model serves to explain 
that trust is a gateway emotion on a journey to greater levels of 
engagement. As a consumer, I can be satisfied with the product 
you provide today, but I need to know that the product will be 
delivered consistently tomorrow or at other locations that carry 
your brand name. I also need to know that in the rare instances 
where something goes wrong, you will make it right and make 
me whole. Finally, if possible, I would like to feel esteem from 
my association with your brand and an even deeper sense that 
you play an intimate and personal role in things that bring plea-
sure to my life. In this context of hierarchical thresholds of cus-
tomer engagement, let’s look at how Starbucks leadership first 
establishes trust through integrity. More important, let’s connect 
Starbucks actions to the way you wish to affect your customers’ 
perceptions concerning your competence, your integrity, pride, 
and passion.
Watch Your Feet
From my vantage point, brand integrity is the result of leaders 
authentically striving to align expectations and actions. Val-
erie O’Neil, senior vice president, Partner Resources and Brand 
Leadership at Starbucks, supports this view by noting, “When 
I joined the company, I was struck by the authenticity of our 
senior leaders and how they create alignment around the im-
portance of doing the right thing for partners, customers, share-
holders, and the sustainability of our planet. By acting in accord 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
69
with a moral compass to ‘do what is right,’ leaders set the stage 
for the execution and integrity of partners who also want to do 
what is right. That has become wired into the DNA of our brand. 
It drives operational excellence, it affects how we fulfill prom-
ises, it guides the respect we offer customers, and it reinforces 
our commitment to be good stewards for our shareholders and 
neighborhoods.” 
Striving to do “the right thing” is at the core of leadership ex-
cellence, and, in today’s interconnected world, it involves both 
the public and private behavior of leaders. Dov Seidman notes, 
“Virtue has been, is, and always will be its own reward. The best 
companies have always understood this and have refused to pur-
sue the easy path to short-term gains at the sacrifice of long-term 
value and reputation. But there has been a sea change. Circum-
stances have combined to tangibly reward adherence to virtue. 
It has become practical to be principled. Why? Because the rules 
have changed to lay bare corporate behavior forever. The pro-
found impact of technology has enabled greater transparency in 
evaluating business, institutions, and organizations. The corpo-
rate veil has been pierced.”
Even before the Internet, scholars like Albert Einstein sug-
gested that success should be measured not only through short-
term profitability but also by morally considering the betterment 
of others. Einstein opined, “The most important human en-
deavor is striving for morality in our actions. Our inner balance 
and even our very existence depend on it. Only morality in our 
actions can give beauty and dignity to life.”
Based on my observation, I can say that Starbucks lead-
ers strive to demonstrate morality in their actions by making  
deposits in their stakeholders’ reservoir of trust. This is accom-
plished by:
1.	Empathetically looking at business decisions through 
the lens of humanity

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
70
2.	Communicating straightforward intent, acknowl-
edging shortcomings, and keeping promises
3.	Balancing the competing interests of stakeholders
4.	Creating operational systems and quality improve-
ment processes to deliver a consistently reliable 
product
5.	Establishing training and empowering partners to 
deliver service recovery
The first three items in this list relate to expansive leader-
ship behaviors that affect diverse stakeholders and can be ex-
emplified at Starbucks by a single, albeit significant, leadership 
decision: the retention of employee health-care benefits and the 
Bean Stock equity rewards program. The latter two items (sys-
tems and training and empowerment) will be addressed later in 
the chapter in the context of operational excellence and the pre-
dictability of products or services.
Integrity During Challenging  
Times and Looking through the 
Lens of Humanity
In 2008, in the midst of making difficult decisions about the fi-
nancial future of Starbucks, Howard Schultz was being encour-
aged, and in some ways pressured, to do away with health-care 
benefits for those who work at Starbucks. Openly, Howard and 
his leadership team took a strong stand for these and other ben-
efits. In his communications at the time, Howard reaffirmed the 
leadership’s commitment to partners, acknowledged uncertain-
ties where promises couldn’t be made, and ultimately delivered 
on his word in a way that balanced the needs of investors and 
partners. As Howard reflects, “Significant change was about to 
occur, and our people would want to know what it meant for 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
71
them and their jobs. . . . We made it clear that no one employed 
by Starbucks would lose their health-care coverage or stock in 
the company. For me, that would never be an option. As for the 
security of their jobs, that was a decision I could not predict, a 
promise I could not make.” Howard and the leadership team an-
guished about needing to scale back on jobs for the greater good 
of the organization. They also could have withdrawn employee 
benefits as part of that preservation effort; however, based on his 
promise, they trimmed jobs as necessary, but they did not cut 
into the partners’ stock benefits and health-care coverage. 
Difficult decisions that affect both people and the bottom 
line garner respect when they reflect corporate values, demon-
strate compassion and sound judgment, and reflect a unity of 
words and deeds. Corey Lindberg, senior accounting manager, 
notes, “My trust in leadership starts at the top. I came here many 
years ago, and I have watched how leaders genuinely care for 
people and know what this brand stands for. It is often the case 
that leaders lose trust with time and with familiarity, but by bal-
ancing the demands of being a profitable company with a will-
ingness to make decisions from the perspective of caring for 
people, my respect for leadership has grown. Because leaders do 
what they say and openly communicate their intentions, part-
ners do the same, and most of us aspire to our leader’s level of in-
tegrity.” When people hear your words and see you take actions 
to support those words, when they have transparency into your 
efforts to balance competing interests, and when they know that 
you care about them and also care about the long-term sustain-
ability of your business, they extend their trust. 
I have suggested that integrity, like every important compo-
nent of leadership, must be thought of on both an operational 
and a personal level. In essence, your integrity helps your people 
profit other people. Adrian Levy, founder of the performance 
improvement company RLG International, draws out the sig-
nificance of the human element as it relates to the people inside 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
72
an organization by noting, “People are not a company’s most 
important asset. People are the company. Everything else is an 
asset.” In Chapter 5, “It Must Thrive Inside to Be Experienced 
Outside,” we will examine the many ways in which Starbucks 
leaders commit to the people they call partners. Furthermore, 
it will explore how those people foster the love and profitability 
of people called customers. A willingness to make tough choices 
on behalf of your employees can make all the difference for your 
employees, your customers, and even your shareholders.
In the book titled The SPEED of Trust: The One Thing That 
Changes Everything, Stephen M. R. Covey cites a number of 
studies that show how employee trust and brand reputation even 
create financial benefits for stockholders. According to Covey, 
research by “Watson Wyatt shows that total return to share-
holders in high-trust organizations is almost three times higher 
than the return in low-trust organizations. That’s a difference of 
300 percent!” As is the case with any publicly traded company, 
the trust of investors is essential to Starbucks, and the compa-
ny’s leadership places shareholder value among its guiding prin-
ciples. In keeping with the Watson Wyatt research, Howard 
Schultz suggests that employee trust and shareholder value are 
inextricably connected at Starbucks. Howard indicates, “There 
are 200,000 people who work for Starbucks. The equity of the 
brand has been defined by the relationship we have with them 
and the relationship they have with our customers. I think the 
success we have enjoyed, which is linked to shareholder value, 
has a great deal to do with whether or not people are proud of the  
company they work for and feel as though they are part of some-
thing larger than themselves. . . . Shareholder value has increased 
significantly, in large part because management has made the 
right kind of decisions that are in the best interest of the en-
tire company. We have multiple constituencies . . . and we have 
linked shareholder value to the communities we serve and to  
our people.” 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
73
Irrespective of the stakeholder, leaders need to understand 
that integrity and trust come from the conjunction of words and 
actions. They must communicate their intent, mistakes, and  
R ef l e c ti o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Based on the hierarchical stages of customer engage-
ment (competence, integrity, pride, and passion), how 
do most of your customers and employees perceive 
your business? Are you a “competent” employer, or 
is your staff “proud” to work in your organization? Do 
customers see you as a brand with “integrity” (you  
do it right and make it right when things go wrong), 
or are you a “passion” brand that is perfect for your  
customers? 
2.	 Are most of your business decisions made solely for 
profit, or do those decisions also reflect “morality of 
action” and a desire to make “deposits in the reservoir 
of trust” for your stakeholders? 
3.	 Give yourself a letter grade as a leader in each of the 
following areas. What is the rationale for each grade? 
• Empathetically looking at business decisions 
through the lens of humanity
• Communicating straightforward intent, acknowl-
edging shortcomings, and keeping promises
• Balancing the competing interests of stakeholders
Are you content with your grades? What actions will 
you put in place to improve them?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
74
victories while acting in accordance with their values and prom-
ises. A consistent and enduring commitment to do the tran-
scendent “right thing,” despite competing interests, is essential 
to developing a high-trust organization that pays rich interper-
sonal and financial benefits. In addition to having the company 
be viewed as one that is governed with integrity, leaders must 
inspire employees to earn the trust of customers every day and 
in every interaction through excellent product delivery. At Star-
bucks, the product promise most often occurs through a consis-
tent deliverable: achieving excellence and consistency one cup 
at a time.
Trust in a Cup
People come into your business to address a need. Customers 
don’t engage in service transactions simply to see how friendly 
a service provider will be. They want to have a functional need 
met, and if you treat them in a way that engages them emotion-
ally, you will be providing a differentiating bonus. 
So how do you make sure that you are addressing func-
tional needs in as consistent a manner as possible? At Starbucks, 
that answer includes the use of cross-functional teams in prod-
uct and implementation design as well as a willingness to solicit 
and act on input received from those who have the task of deliv-
ering the product consistently. Kevin Petrisko, director of busi-
ness operations, Evolution Fresh (an acquired brand I discussed 
in Chapter 3), a 16-year Starbucks partner who has spent most 
of his career working on product rollout and consistent product 
delivery at Starbucks, notes, “From the consumer side of trust, 
they want to know that they will get the same beverage if they 
go to Starbucks in San Antonio, Honolulu, or Paris. Because of 
our team approach to product creation, implementation, and 
testing, we’ve done a pretty good job at earning trust through  
consistency.”

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
75
By bringing cross-functional teams together early to de-
velop and improve products and implementation protocols, 
Starbucks anticipates and resolves many rollout challenges long 
before new products arrive in Starbucks stores. Field-testing  
encourages barista input on how to improve the consistency,  
efficiency, and quality of product delivery. This, in turn, ensures 
that swift and effective execution will occur when the product is 
launched across the brand. All of these efforts culminate in con-
sistent product presentation that strengthens customer trust.
Kevin offers an example of how a new product was con-
ceptualized from a customer experience perspective, how that 
product was created, and how implementation was improved by 
frontline input. According to Kevin, “We had iced tea at Star-
bucks, but it really wasn’t a finished, handcrafted product like 
a beautiful latte. In previous versions, we poured the tea from a 
pitcher directly into a cup, and its presentation was rather ordi-
nary. So the original goal was to combine tea with juice or lem-
onade to see if we could create something very different and 
explore if we could also provide a more enriched experience in 
the process.” In order to deliver the shaken tea product, imple-
mentation teams had to design a beverage shaker, establish the 
optimal product build process, and establish training tools for 
ease of product introduction in the stores. 
Kevin notes, “As we tested the product, we were hearing 
from customers about noticeable variation. We’d given the part-
ners the tea shakers and said, ‘Mix the tea with the lemonade, 
add syrups as appropriate to the recipe, and shake the blend for 
10 seconds. You will then pop the lid off the shaker and then 
pour the hand-shaken drink in the cup; it’s going to be a beau-
tiful beverage.’” In an attempt to increase consistency and make 
the product easy to deliver, the team of Starbucks partners that 
was observing the product test also asked questions of the baris-
tas who were preparing the beverages in the test-market stores. 
The baristas were asked, among other things, about the ease of 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
76
drink preparation, the functionality of the newly designed shak-
ers, and the baristas’ perception of the preparation process. 
According to Kevin, an unsuspected issue emerged through 
the evaluative process. “What we learned was that the inconsis-
tencies came from our partners not knowing how to shake the 
beverage,” he explains. “It sounds kind of silly, but 10 seconds al-
lows for considerable variability, as some partners were shaking 
it for closer to 20 seconds and others for 5 seconds. As it turns 
out, that time difference in shaking made a big difference in how 
the beverage tasted. So we changed the protocol so that partners 
are to shake the tea 10 times. As a result, now you walk into our 
stores and you can still see partners shaking the tea (and count-
ing to themselves 1 through 10). That adjustment has made a 
big difference in product consistency.” To achieve trust in prod-
uct reliability, Starbucks leaders begin by leveraging teams of tal-
ented people and encouraging them to steward new ideas and 
concepts in the direction of repeatable and effective delivery sys-
tems. These teams coordinate to test those ideas with custom-
ers and with in-store partners in strategic ways to refine aspects 
of the product or delivery method to remove product or service 
variations.
Consistent and Beyond 
Expectations
Since consistency is critical to consumer trust, how do Star-
bucks leaders drive reliable and emotionally engaging service 
that not only meets but also exceeds customer expectations? In 
short, leaders at Starbucks train and develop partners to cre-
ate inspired moments by defining those service behaviors that 
should “always” or “never” occur at Starbucks. In addition, train-
ing materials communicate the impact of service basics and the 
expectations that leaders have for consistent service delivery. For 
example, as part of the Starbucks service basics, leaders have set 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
77
the expectation that baristas will connect with customers to un-
derstand their needs before making a product recommendation. 
Leadership identifies the rationale for this service expectation 
and the “always/never” behaviors that emerge from it as a matter 
of customer trust, noting that customers form trust when the in-
tent behind product recommendations is linked to the custom-
er’s best interest and not the business’s interest. The leadership 
at Starbucks asserts that inspired moments begin for customers 
when partners exceed customers’ basic service expectations—
many of which have to do with being proactive in delivering per-
sonalized service even before customers have to ask.
Wait—This Is Not What I Expected
In circumstances in which products do not live up to consum-
ers’ expectations, a critical moment of truth occurs. From the 
perspective of the customer, the internal dialogue usually goes 
something like this: “Should I let the business know that this isn’t 
right, or should I leave bad enough alone?” “Will the business 
blame me by saying something like, ‘That’s what you ordered’?” 
“Will the company stand behind this product, or is it my prob-
lem now?” or, “How much hassle will I encounter in an effort to 
get this remedied?” From the company’s side of the interaction, 
the internal dialogue should be, “What can we do to increase the 
likelihood that people will let us know when they encounter a 
problem?” “How can we ensure that every employee knows how 
to handle service recovery?” and “How do we use this break-
down as an opportunity to demonstrate integrity and facilitate 
greater levels of customer engagement?” 
Since complaints are opportunities to both reengage cus-
tomers and demonstrate integrity, strong leaders look for ways 
to encourage customers to share their concerns. At Starbucks, 
this begins with offering a customer-facing promise displayed 
in Starbucks stores and on the company’s website that reads, 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
78
“We want you to be completely satisfied. If for any reason you 
are not satisfied with your purchase, you may return it for a re-
placement or refund of the purchase price.” While it is easy to 
make such a promise, it is much more difficult to stand behind 
it. John Hargrave, founder of the humor site zug.com and author 
of Sir John Hargrave’s Mischief Maker’s Manual, decided to put 
the Starbucks promise to the test. John writes, “But would Star-
bucks really replace anything? To find out, I decided to buy the 
most perishable item on the menu, keep it in my garage for sev-
eral weeks, then attempt to exchange it.” 
While I will spare you the details concerning the condition 
of the cup at the point when John elected to return it, suffice it 
to say that John had to place the residual components of the cup 
in a plastic container. John adds, “I entered the Starbucks, feel-
ing faint from the smell, and handed the Tupperware container 
to the barista. ‘Could I get a replacement?’ I asked, ‘I think this 
one has turned.’” According to John, after the barista got past 
his confusion as to what he had been handed, the barista said, 
“‘All right, man. No problem.’ He tossed the drink in the trash, 
then added, ‘But . . . aaaahhhhhhhh!!’ He moaned, his eyes wa-
tering, as the Starbucks filled with the stink of the drink. An-
other barista quickly ran over to bag the trash, then carried it 
outside, retching. . . . But I have to say: they didn’t even ask to see 
the receipt. They made me up a new Steamy Creamy, and served 
it with a smile.” So how do leaders help employees smile and ac-
cept the type of return John offered? This can be accomplished, 
in part, by making sure that your staff is well trained in service 
recovery tools and expectations.
From the earliest phases of training, Starbucks partners are 
provided with the resources and the autonomy to resolve cus-
tomer complaints or concerns. In the context of customer service 
basics, partners are encouraged to assess the need state of the cus-
tomer as it relates to the complaint. For some, that may involve 
simply apologizing that the drink did not meet their expectations  

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
79
and offering to remake the beverage; for others, it may involve 
those components and also offering a service recovery tool like 
a beverage coupon. From the initial barista training through on-
going career development, the leadership’s message to Starbucks 
partners is clear: assess the customer’s need, own responsibil-
ity, avoid the “blame game,” make it right with urgency, and loop 
back with the customer to ensure that your resolution left him 
highly satisfied. Starbucks leaders help staff members under-
stand that customers whose reaction to their Starbucks Experi-
ences is “highly satisfied” (in the course of either ordinary service  
experiences or service recovery) are substantially more likely to 
repurchase and recommend Starbucks compared to those who 
are simply in the satisfied range. You can think of highly satisfied 
as equaling the perception that you both are competent and have 
integrity; whereas satisfied equals the conclusion that your cus-
tomer will stay with you until she gets a better offer.
R ef l e c ti o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Do you have a publicly stated service guarantee like 
Starbucks? If not, why is one not in place?
2.	 If someone were to go to extremes to test your orga- 
nization’s service skills (hopefully not quite to the 
level of John Hargrave), what situation might that 
person craft? How likely is it that you would respond 
with service recovery efficacy in the most extreme of  
circumstances?
3.	 How much time do you spend setting expectations 
and providing training on what service recovery should 
look like in your organization?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
80
It’s Time for Passion and Love
So your customers are highly satisfied, and they view you as 
competent and worthy of trust. Now how do you get them to be 
fully engaged? Part of this question has already been answered 
in Chapters 2 and 3. If you select people with genuine talent for 
serving others, give them opportunities to become more knowl-
edgeable and passionate about your products, and insist upon 
product and customer experience excellence, you are well on 
the way to gaining the pride and passion of customers. Further-
more, if you define your optimal customer experience, train staff 
to deliver it, reduce clutter, and enhance sensory elements dur-
ing the customer journey, you are even closer to reaching be-
loved brand status. So what’s missing? Often, it comes down to 
the leadership’s commitment to communicating the importance 
of emotional value and a willingness to set a goal of becoming 
a beloved and not just a strongly liked brand. It may be that ef-
fective business leaders are accustomed to making very practi-
cal and tactical moves to achieve success. To that end, they may 
view emotionality as an unwelcome aspect of their own business 
decision making. Or possibly they may not be well versed in the 
burgeoning research on emotional value. Irrespective of the rea-
sons for the resistance, it is clear that if you communicate the im-
portance of emotional value and you set “beloved” or “passion 
brand” status as your destination, you can derive a significant 
business advantage.
Graham Robertson, president of the brand strategy and 
coaching firm Beloved Brands Inc., notes, “A few brands like 
Starbucks and Zappos become beloved brands, and, sadly 
enough, they are unique. Those brands that break through like 
Starbucks have a certain magic to the work that they do.” 
To help leaders assess their journey on the continuum to 
brand love, Graham developed a brand love curve where lead-
ers self-assess consumers’ emotional connection in the context 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
81
of one of four categories (“indifferent,” “like it,” “love it,” or “be-
loved brand for life”). 
From Graham’s perspective, as businesses move to beloved 
brand status, they gain greater power in the marketplace. He 
notes, “Love is a source of power. So if I have a customer base 
that loves me, I am actually more powerful. As I exercise that 
power, I become more profitable. So if I have a following, I’ll 
likely be more attractive to vendors and other business partners. 
I will have greater ease in getting neighborhood and government 
support when needed. I’ll even have power in the context of the 
media because people will be more likely to report on things I 
do. If I launch a new skinny vanilla coffee, it will actually make 
the news in a way it wouldn’t for a nonloved brand.”
Even economists have shifted in their appreciation of the 
role that emotionality plays in consumer behavior and customer 
loyalty. Through much of the history of economics, theorists and 
researchers have evaluated consumer decision making through 
Brand Love Curve
Copyright © 2012, Graham Robertson, Beloved Brands Inc.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
82
the lens of “unbounded rationality”—essentially connecting why 
we buy what we buy with rational factors like the functionality 
of our purchases. However, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, 
psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky began a rev-
olution in economics by focusing on the role of emotional fac-
tors in decision making. The ensuing decades of exploration of 
customer behavior have supported a number of intuitively in-
teresting findings about the way reason and emotion affect pur-
chase patterns, improve customer retention, increase employee 
engagement, and even strengthen brand evangelism. 
Even though people may claim to make purchases based on 
objective factors like a product’s benefits and attributes, we know 
that those decisions are often strongly influenced by the emotional  
value that individuals attach to products or brands. Emotional-
ity is also a factor in aspects of customer loyalty, frequency, and 
spending patterns and is manifest in a willingness to refer a busi-
ness to friends and associates. Customers who make extremely 
strong emotional connections with a company actually perceive 
their preferred brands as extensions of their personality and inte- 
grate the brands into their rituals, lifestyle, and identity. 
Kate Newlin, author of Passion Brands: Why Some Brands 
Are Just Gotta Have, Drive All Night For, and Tell All Your Friends 
About, has captured the benefit of having people identify with 
your company by suggesting that a passion brand is “a brand you 
recommend to friends wholeheartedly, even evangelically—so 
much so that if they don’t embrace it as vigorously as you do, you 
perceive a cloud over their heads, blocking the sunshine of the 
brand. . . . The cloud moves on and the friendship remains. But 
still. What is going on?” Kate’s test is fairly simple: if your cus-
tomers would feel disappointed if their friends aren’t as excited 
about you as they are—you are a passion brand. 
Starbucks leaders have not been reluctant to talk about love, 
passion, or the romance of the brand. But they have also been 
very clear that the only way to become beloved is to be loving. 

It’s a  M atte r  of Tru s t a nd  L ov e
83
From the perspective of the leaders at Starbucks, love is a bi-
directional phenomenon—it is enjoyed when it is authentically 
given. So, how about you? Are you perceived as being compe-
tent and acting with integrity? In essence, have you earned the 
trust of your customers? Where are you on Graham Robertson’s 
brand love curve? Are your customers recommending you with 
such zeal that they would be disappointed if their friends did 
not share their excitement? Short-term success may be achieved 
through operational excellence and satisfaction alone. However, 
if you want to fully engage your customers, it may be time to 
authentically lead the human connection from a foundation of 
trust and set your course for belovedness.
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• If customers view your company as being competent 
and having integrity, you have created the environment 
for consumer trust. Trust is a gateway emotion on a 
journey to greater levels of emotional engagement.
• Brand integrity is the result of leaders authentically 
striving to align expectations and actions. 
• Seeking to do “the right thing” is at the core of leader-
ship excellence, and in today’s interconnected world, 
it involves both your public and your private behavior.
• Success should be measured not only through short-
term profitability, but also by whether you consider 
the betterment of others.
• Difficult decisions that affect both people and the bot-
tom line garner respect when they reflect corporate  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
84
values, demonstrate compassion and sound judg-
ment, and offer a unity of words and deeds.
• Integrity, like every important component of leader-
ship, must be thought of on both an operational and 
a personal level. In essence, your integrity helps your 
people improve the lives of others.
• Leaders must inspire employees to earn the trust 
of customers every day and in every interaction 
through excellent product delivery. 
• Complaints are opportunities to both reengage cus-
tomers and demonstrate integrity; strong leaders 
look for ways to encourage customers to share their 
concerns.
• If you communicate the importance of emotional 
value and you set “beloved” or “passion brand” status 
as your destination, you can derive a significant busi-
ness advantage.
• Customers who make extremely strong emotional 
connections with a company actually perceive their 
preferred brands as extensions of their personality 
and integrate the brands into their rituals, lifestyle, 
and identity. 

85
C H
A P
T
E R
 5
It Must Thrive Inside  
to Be Experienced  
Outside
Treat employees like partners, and they act like 
partners.
Fred Allen, American radio personality
W
ords matter! Therefore, many leaders have moved away 
from using the word employee because it connotes a power 
dynamic in the work relationship. The term suggests that there 
is a more powerful person (the employer) and a less powerful 
one (the employee). Additionally, employee describes a financial 
or transactional relationship—if you employ me, I work for you 
and you pay me. In lieu of employee, two popular alternatives 
have become part of business-speak—associate and team mem-
ber. While these words are a softer way to describe the connec-
tion between people in an organization, they also imply a more 
affiliative or collaborative environment. Sadly, at some busi-
nesses, words like associate and team member ring hollow. In 
some settings, team members are not afforded the respect, trust, 
and appreciation that would indicate members of a true interde-
pendent group. As for associates, frequently there is very little 
“association” between the leaders and the led. So why is the word 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
86
partner used at Starbucks? And does that word describe reality 
or a good-feeling intention?
Partnership? Really?
Business definitions of partnership typically involve a number 
of elements:
• An agreement between two parties to pursue com-
mon objectives
• Shared investment to realize those objectives
• A distribution of the risks and rewards emerging 
from pursuit of the objectives 
Most business owners enter into a work agreement with new 
hires that hopefully has both parties seeking a shared goal. Typ-
ically, those who have been hired invest their time and talents 
alongside the time, talents, and financial resources of the own-
ers. However, there is no true partnership because employees do 
not receive a distribution of the rewards from the business’s prof-
itability beyond a predetermined wage agreement. The employ-
ees, if you will, are definitely not partners because they have no 
access to the upside or any liability for the downside of the busi-
ness relationship. So is the Starbucks “employee” relationship a 
business partnership? Well, in the most technical sense of the 
word, no. Starbucks “partners” face no financial liability from 
their working relationship, but they do enjoy a functional part-
nership in that they are granted Bean Stock.
By 1991, Starbucks was starting to enjoy healthy enough 
levels of profitability for Howard Schultz to ask for the sup-
port of the Starbucks board of directors in creating an equity 
reward program for employees. Since Starbucks was a pri-
vate company at the time, the proposed plan was designed to 
grant stock options company-wide, calculated as a proportion 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
87
of the employees’ base pay. Howard believed that such a pro-
gram would establish a direct connection between the contri-
bution of employees and the overall market value of Starbucks. 
Though the board members expressed concern that this type 
of program might dilute the value of the shares of the investors 
who were funding the business, the plan was unanimously ap-
proved. When the Bean Stock program was presented to em-
ployees in 1991, Starbucks stopped using the term employees and 
began calling everyone partners, since even part-time staff mem-
bers could become eligible for the program after six months on 
the job.
Through the years, the Bean Stock program has continued 
to evolve to increase the benefit to partners. In November 2010, 
Starbucks began to grant Bean Stock in the form of restricted 
stock units (RSUs) instead of stock options. In addition, Star-
bucks expanded eligibility to more than 115,000 partners in 19 
markets, with a recent addition being Rwanda. Howard and the 
board shortened the vesting period and allowed partners to re-
ceive actual shares of Starbucks stock when they vest, as an al-
ternative to realizing the market gain from the time of the grant 
to the time when they exercise their stock options. Bean Stock 
and the company’s Future Roast 401(k) program, coupled to-
gether, constitute key components of Starbucks forward-looking  
compensation plan. 
In fiscal year 2012, Starbucks delivered more than $214 mil-
lion in pretax gains to partners from vested RSUs or from the 
exercise and sale of their Bean Stock options and more than 
$55 million to 401(k) participants in the form of the employer 
match, which demonstrates a guiding philosophy of leadership 
that success is best when it’s shared. Through a steadfast com-
mitment to this philosophy in good years and in bad, Starbucks 
leaders set themselves apart from those in most businesses. 
Communicating with partners in 2011, Howard noted, “For the 
past two decades, Starbucks has been one of the only retailers 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
88
with a stock program that includes part-time hourly partners. 
This truly sets us apart from other organizations by making us 
not only a preferred place to work, but a business whose part-
ners’ pride in ownership undeniably contributes to the authentic 
connections you make with your customers. Bean Stock grants 
fulfill our long-standing promise to you: that if we succeed as a 
company, you succeed with us. . . . I have been touched person-
ally by the many letters I have received from partners sharing 
how the company’s performance is helping them care for their 
families. These are difficult times for many people, and we have 
to continue earning the trust of our customers and partners in 
all aspects of our business.” 
While I certainly don’t have access to Howard’s mail, I have 
encountered my share of partners who are eager to talk about 
how the Bean Stock they have saved over time has changed their 
lives. Kaycee Kiesz, a 20-year partner and program manager, 
Global Diversity, reports, “I went on a YMCA volunteer trip to 
Thailand and to Bali for a yoga retreat thanks to Bean Stock. The 
program also helped me put 20 percent down on my house. I 
wouldn’t have been able to come up with the amount I needed 
for the house if it hadn’t been for the generosity reflected in the 
Bean Stock program. The dollars are fantastic, but I also feel 
taken care of.” One partner indicated that he had used Starbucks 
Bean Stock on three occasions, once to remodel his home, once 
to purchase land, and once to purchase dental implants, noting 
that Bean Stock had essentially given him his smile back. Vol-
unteer trips, houses, remodeling, and the ability to regain one’s 
smile—not bad rewards for partnering with Starbucks to drive 
shareholder value. 
At the Global Leadership Conference in Houston in 2012, 
approximately 5 percent of the district managers and store man-
agers in attendance had not activated their Bean Stock accounts. 
The goal was to have every one of those individuals stop by a 
conference booth to complete their activations. What a pleasant 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
89
surprise for those partners who found out for the first time that 
they had an account balance of $13,000, or better yet, a long-
time partner who had more than $50,000. Some business own-
ers would say that they don’t have the profit necessary to create a 
program like Bean Stock. I wonder if part of their problem with 
profits might not result from a failure to provide incentives to 
those who could have helped them earn more.
Beyond the Money— 
Caring About Well-Being
In the United States, the first forms of workplace insurance oc-
curred in the mid-1800s, when employees received policies cov-
ering them in the event that they sustained disabling injuries from 
steamboat or railroad accidents. While employer-sponsored  
health insurance popped up in the 1920s, such plans didn’t 
truly proliferate until World War II, when the federal govern-
ment placed stringent wage controls on businesses but exempted 
health benefits from counting against salary caps. Enriched 
health-benefit plans were a way for companies to attract the best 
employees possible in a challenging wartime labor market. 
Now fast-forward to 1961. Although many employers pro-
vided health insurance at that time, Howard Schultz’s father was 
not lucky enough to work for such a company. That year, How-
ard personally experienced hardship because of the uninsured 
health costs his family incurred as a result of his father’s breaking 
his ankle at work. Jump with me one last time to 1987. Howard 
Schultz, along with a group of investors, purchased Starbucks 
from Howard’s former employers. Within one year, the com-
pany had grown from 17 to 55 stores, and Howard was in front 
of his board of directors making a pitch for health-care bene-
fits for full-time and eligible part-time employees. Since Star-
bucks wasn’t profitable at the time (unlike when Howard sold 
the idea of Bean Stock in 1991), he experienced considerable  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
90
resistance from the board. Howard argued that the cost of provid-
ing health-care benefits was 50 percent less than the cost of hir-
ing and retaining a new employee. He made a case for part-time 
employee coverage on the grounds that two-thirds of the work-
force at the time were not full-timers. In addition to the fixed  
costs of replacing employees, Howard addressed the impact of 
high turnover on the customer experience by indicating that 
regular customers form relationships with baristas that are dis-
rupted when employees churn. Howard’s reasoning was compel-
ling, and the board approved the Starbucks health-care benefit. 
As a result, Starbucks became among the first companies in the 
United States to provide comprehensive health insurance for all 
eligible employees, including people who worked just 20 hours a 
week. What some would see as an unnecessary expense, Howard 
saw as an investment in people and in Starbucks future. Toward 
the end of this chapter, we will look at the return on that invest-
ment from the standpoint of partner engagement and retention. 
Furthermore, we will explore the impact of high levels of em-
ployee engagement on innovation and customer loyalty. 
The provision of health-care benefits in the quick-service 
restaurant sector was revolutionary in 1988, as was the exten-
sion of health-care benefits to part-time workers. In 1994, U.S. 
president Bill Clinton even consulted with Howard as the pres-
ident explored health-care policy. To date, most employers still 
do not offer health benefits to part-time employees, and many 
of those that had provided them dropped the offering during 
the recent economic challenges. According to the 2012 Kaiser 
Family Foundation’s Employer Health Benefits Survey, “In 2012, 
28% of all firms that offer health benefits offer them to part-time 
workers, a significant increase from the 16% reported in 2011 
but similar to the 25% reported in 2010.”
I started this chapter by saying that words matter. In the 
words of Starbucks partners, concern shown through wide-
spread health-care benefits matters more. Posting on a blog, one 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
91
barista wrote, “I can also say in all seriousness that I owe Star-
bucks my life. If it weren’t for the OUTSTANDING health cov-
erage Starbucks provides to its employees, I wouldn’t have been 
able to spend 90 days at a residential treatment center for a life-
threatening eating disorder. The health insurance I had through 
my part-time job at Starbucks paid for a major portion of my 
treatment and aftercare, neither of which I would have been able 
to afford on my own.” Juan, a Starbucks shift supervisor, puts it 
this way: “It’s really amazing to me that we can just start out for 
a few months working 20 hours a week and get quality health 
insurance and its good benefits. I’ve had some health problems 
recently that required hospitalization. My insurance was my sav-
ing grace. It seems like a gift. Health insurance is but one exam-
ple of how I feel valued and appreciated. In essence, leadership is 
saying my work means something, and that’s a large part of why 
I have such a strong love for this company.” 
Throughout this chapter, I will be discussing a variety  
of ways in which Starbucks leaders demonstrate appreciation of, 
respect for, and investment in their people. My intent is not to 
say that this is “the” way to make the connection or to imply that 
the way Starbucks connects is perfect. I am, however, asserting 
that Starbucks leadership is dedicated to employee engagement 
and that concerted effort is needed to sustain a substantial work-
force advantage. 
Investing in Growth  
and Development
In a blog article posted on the website for CollegePlus, a com-
pany that creates customized dual credit and bachelor’s degree 
programs, columnist and blogger Caitlin Muir explains that the 
title of her article 33 Companies That Can Save You From College 
Debt was not her initial choice. “Originally, this article was going 
to be ‘Why I love Starbucks.’ As a former barista, the company 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
92
was good to me. Not only did I get cheap health insurance, great 
hours, and a flexible schedule but I got something that really 
helped me. Tuition reimbursement.” Caitlin goes on in the ar-
ticle to explain how this Starbucks benefit, along with other re-
sources, allowed her to graduate without having student loans 
hanging over her head.
The “ability to grow and develop” is a key factor in secur-
ing employee engagement. To make that growth happen, lead-
ers must attend to workplace opportunities and seek educational 
opportunities outside of the workplace. “Starbucks U” is an  
example that merges on-the-job training with formal academic 
offerings. 
Starbucks U refers to a recently created program for U.S. 
partners, wherein they are eligible to receive college credits  
for training provided as part of their job (for example, the barista 
training course described in Chapter 3, shift supervisor training, 
and so on). Starbucks leaders have secured college-credit eligi-
bility for partners by working with the American Council of Ed-
ucation (ACE) to accredit select training offerings. Similarly, the 
leadership has collaborated with City University of Seattle and 
Strayer University to amplify the impact of the company’s exist-
ing tuition reimbursement program for eligible partners in the 
United States and Canada. The City University program, for ex-
ample, provides eligible Starbucks partners with the opportunity 
to have their application fee waived, a 25 percent reduction in all 
undergraduate and graduate tuition, and exclusive scholarships, 
among other benefits. Similarly, the Strayer University program 
offers 20 percent tuition discounts, free academic tutoring and 
advising, and the flexibility of 24/7 online courses. One partner 
noted, “I decided to go back to school last year. . . . I enrolled 
at Strayer University and received an initial $1,000 scholar-
ship from Strayer as well as a 20 percent discount on tuition 
and credit for Starbucks training. A few months after I started 
school, I received a $2,500 fall scholarship from Starbucks U. All 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
93
of this is because I am a Starbucks partner. Starbucks has made a 
difference in my life, a girl from Haiti who barely spoke English 
when I started working here. It has been the best time of my life.” 
Leaders who are interested in growing their people find ways to 
collaborate with other businesses and with learning institutions 
like Strayer University and City University to offer benefits that 
they might not be able to provide alone. By finding strategic al-
liances, these leaders stretch and extend their employee bene-
fit budgets and serve to answer an important question for their 
people: “Do you care enough about me to help me achieve per-
sonal as well as professional development objectives?”
Uniting Partners in Crisis  
and in Community
In addition to supporting partners through the Bean Stock pro-
gram, retirement funds, health-care coverage, and educational 
benefits, Starbucks leadership oversees a program that encour-
ages partners to help one another. The CUP (Caring Unites Part-
ners) Fund began in 1998. It emerged when a group of partners 
worked with Starbucks leadership to establish a mechanism for 
raising and distributing funds for partners who encounter a dis-
ruptive hardship. Funding for the program comes from volun-
tary contributions by partners and the proceeds of fund-raising 
events that they sponsor. Starbucks administers the fund. An ap-
plicant may receive up to $1,000 if that partner is determined to 
have encountered an uncontrollable, financially unmanageable, 
catastrophic circumstance—such as the impact of Superstorm 
Sandy, which affected many partners in the northeastern quad-
rant of the United States in 2012. Eligibility for funding is inde-
pendent of a partner’s ever having made a contribution. While 
employee-to-employee funds have become more prominent 
since the late 1990s, the CUP Fund at Starbucks is noteworthy on 
several levels: sustainability, infrastructure, ongoing leadership  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
94
support for the fund, expansion into international markets 
(more on this in Chapter 6), and how the CUP Fund connects 
partners to one another and to organizational pride.
People have a natural tendency to want to help those with 
whom they work. Many of those helping efforts, however, are 
ad hoc or poorly organized. Since employee engagement is con-
nected to peer cohesion as well as employer support, leaders at 
companies like Starbucks offer the infrastructure and systems to 
maximize a caring community (this is evidenced not only in the 
CUP Fund program, but also in the Partner Access Alliance Net-
work, which will be addressed later in the chapter). The compa-
ny’s participation in the program is largely administrative, but it 
also takes the form of financial contributions such as those from 
the busy Starbucks store located on the eighth floor of the Star-
bucks Support Center in Seattle, Washington. 
Starbucks partners express appreciation for the opportunity 
to give to and receive from the CUP Fund. Partner Shao Wei, a 
student at Tianjin University in Tianjin, China, experienced two 
tragic events in rapid succession shortly after becoming a part-
time employee at the Starbucks Baisheng store: her father was 
diagnosed with advanced liver cancer, and six months later, doc-
tors needed to operate to remove a tumor from her mother. Shao 
notes, “For a poor family like ours, the huge medical cost is an 
extremely heavy burden. The store manager found out about the 
sudden blow to my family. He was very accommodating in terms 
of shift arrangement. Later, I had to work at several different 
stores. The store managers and partners at each store were both 
helpful and supportive. They even helped me apply for the CUP 
Fund. The aid from the CUP Fund is more than just money. It’s 
more of a mental support.” 
Thanks to the support of her peers, Shao Wei is looking to 
make a career at Starbucks. “This June, I will graduate from college. 
I plan to stay at Starbucks for further professional development.  

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
95
Starbucks gives me energy. Starbucks makes me stronger. In 
my future work, I will pour my passion into every cup of cof-
fee and serve every customer with a smile.” Even those who have 
not needed assistance from the CUP Fund find value in it. Ali-
son Edwards, program manager, Global Learning at Starbucks, 
adds, “The CUP Fund is about taking care of other partners. 
They are part of my community. Given all the challenges in the 
world today, we all need a community that cares and offers a se-
curity blanket, like the CUP Fund. When I go home each day,  
I am proud that I work for a company where people can feel 
loved and I can give and receive support.” 
While you may or may not be able to help create or admin-
ister a program that allows your team members to support one 
another in times of crisis, clearly there are low-cost aspects of 
your infrastructure that can be leveraged to care for your team 
members. Often the returns to your company (in the case of 
Shao Wei, an interest in going from a part-time job to pursuing 
“professional development” as she serves “every customer with a 
smile”) are far in excess of the resources you will expend. 
The Starbucks Partner Networks are yet another example of 
a low-cost/high-return investment on the part of the leadership. 
Partner resource groups are provided meeting space at Star-
bucks and opportunities to work with senior leaders. 
Starbucks Partner Network Groups 
(Groups are voluntary and open to all partners.)
• Starbucks Access Alliance Network promotes equal 
access to physical locations, product, communication 
tools, and information for all partners and customers.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
96
Kaycee Kiesz, program manager, Global Diversity, notes, 
“The company regularly leverages our networks to derive full 
value from new business, drive innovations, build relevance in 
• Starbucks Armed Forces Network supports Star-
bucks military partners, their families, and transition-
ing veterans, and creates a military-friendly culture in 
the workplace.
• Starbucks Black Partner Network works to cultivate, 
enhance, and share the African American experience 
at Starbucks, one partner and one customer at a time.
• Starbucks China Club Network develops a global 
community driving business acumen, nurturing culture, 
and developing leaders through the lens of the China/
Asia-Pacific partner network and the growth agenda.
• Starbucks Hora Del Café Network is a Hispanic af-
finity group dedicated to creating an environment 
for partners to develop professionally, build cultural 
awareness, and celebrate Hispanic culture while affect-
ing the community in a positive way.
• Starbucks Pride Alliance Network works to produce 
positive change and increase awareness of the LGBT 
community within Starbucks. It strives to cultivate an 
equitable, dynamic, and supportive environment for 
LGBT partners, allies, and customers.
• Women’s Development Network focuses on the pro-
fessional and personal development of its members. 
The network focuses on three established pillars: com-
munity, education/development, and networking.

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
97
new markets, and reinforce the humanity of our brand in the 
global communities we serve. The senior leadership team listens 
to concerns and supports the efforts of the members. The Ac-
cess Alliance Network, for example, consulted with our Legal 
department to update our service dog policy. The network was 
also instrumental in creating our Starbucks Braille and large-
print menus and Braille Starbucks Card. The Armed Forces  
Network partners closely with staffing/recruiting to help veter-
ans make the transition into Starbucks careers. Our networks 
are often called upon to provide translation services, offer feed-
back on marketing materials, and help in product development.” 
According to Carolina Morales, senior financial analyst at 
Starbucks, one project of importance to the partner group Hora 
Del Café was to connect with partners in Brazil. “Our group fo-
cuses on kindling connections to Hispanic heritage. We share 
our love of Hispanic culture, food, music with one another and 
with all interested partners and leadership. We also want to be 
able to help our leaders look at Starbucks business through the 
lens of our culture. Recently, our executive sponsor helped us ar-
range a videoconference with our Brazil office, and we explored 
their aspirations for the Brazil market and began a conversation 
as to how we could help. We had a packed house here at the Sup-
port Center in Seattle, with so many people wanting to know 
more about Brazil and what the opportunities are there. It was 
such a powerful start to our relationship; our partners in Brazil 
seemed so inspired that we were enthusiastic here in the United 
States about them. The love was there.” Often caring for other 
team members involves a critically important yet not costly in-
vestment: logistics support. When a business makes meeting 
space, business infrastructure, and organizational abilities avail-
able to employees who seek to care for one another and/or create 
positive communities, its team members engage one another in 
pursuits that fortify a dynamic and healthy workplace.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
98
Listening and Empathizing
President Woodrow Wilson once said, “The ear of the leader 
must ring with the voices of the people.” This is easily said, but 
less easily done! In fact, systematic and authentic listening may 
be one of the most economical and differentiating investments 
a leader can make. Many leaders either are too busy to listen or 
are more interested in speaking. As a result, listening intently, 
regularly, and respectfully to team members separates the great 
leader from the good one. 
At Starbucks, effective listening takes many forms. While 
leaders listen informally at an individual or team level, Star-
bucks also has formalized a department that consistently listens 
for the needs and engagement level of partners. Virgil Jones, di-
rector, Partner Services, at Starbucks, notes, “Our team con-
ducts surveys, focus groups, and continuously takes a pulse on 
R ef l e c ti o n  o n  C o n n ecti on
1.	 What are your employees saying about your level of 
financial support for them in terms of their physical, 
emotional, educational, and financial well-being? 
2.	 Have you looked for strategic partnerships that could 
allow you to extend your employee benefits budget 
(for example, an academic institution that will work 
with you to accredit your training classes for college 
credit)? 
3.	 How might you leverage your business infrastructure 
to produce high-value/low-cost opportunities to sup-
port your team members logistically?

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
99
our partner population. Within that department, the most im-
portant thing I do on a daily basis is listen to our partners. The 
second most important thing I do is continue to touch base 
with our partners and adjust, because with the way technology 
is advancing, the things that are hot, interesting, and engaging 
with our partners today is going to be completely different 18 
months from now.” By routinely asking questions and listening 
to partner input, Starbucks leaders are able to anticipate, tailor, 
and shift their employee-related resources for an ever-changing  
workforce. Virgil adds, “If you look at our total pay, we have 
many traditional buckets—401(k), health-care benefits, com-
pensation—and my group is the X-factor group where we con-
sistently look at our demographic and we try to come up with 
new, innovative programs that will appeal to our partners. For 
example, health and wellness and college-related needs are im-
portant to our demographic. Included under health and well-
ness is our Partner Connection program.”
According to Virgil, Starbucks has about 400 different teams 
and clubs in the United States, with 30,000 partners participat-
ing. For sports teams, Starbucks typically offsets approximately 
50 percent of the fees that participants incur and welcomes non-
Starbucks partners to participate. Since approximately 60 per-
cent of Starbucks partners are technology-savvy students, many 
partner-engaging services involve discount programs with com-
puter and phone companies. 
Michelle Gass, president, Starbucks EMEA (Europe, Mid-
dle East and Africa), like many other Starbucks senior leaders, 
demonstrates a different kind of regular and personal listening 
that fuels partner engagement. Her approach comes in the form 
of “listening tours.” According to Michelle, “I travel across the 
EMEA region regularly and conduct listening tours and round-
table meetings. These are informal meetings where we spend 
about 90 minutes paying attention to the thoughts, needs, and 
ideas of those we serve. While listening is important, taking 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
100
swift action to elevate experiences is essential. These tours are 
an ongoing process of connection and discovery, not an event.” 
Starbucks senior leaders deploy a variety of processes to con-
nect, discover, and respond to the needs of partners. 
For many leaders, one of the earliest forms of empathy 
building they encounter comes in the form of store immersion. 
Clarice Turner, senior vice president, U.S. Business, arrived at 
Starbucks with a solid background in food and beverage service. 
She had worked with PepsiCo and Yum! Brands for 16 years, and 
immediately prior to coming to Starbucks, she had been presi-
dent and COO of Papa Murphy’s Pizza. Despite her varied and 
established experience in the industry, she was sent to a four-
month immersion program that began with working behind 
a Starbucks counter. Clarice reports, “At that time, I thought, 
‘Okay, I’ve been in this industry for a long time. Surely I can get 
up to speed quicker than four months.’ But those experiences are 
something I now credit as having the most impact on me being 
able to hit the ground running and truly embrace the essence of 
Starbucks. That time was such a gift. I did every job in the store, 
from taking out the trash and cleaning the bathrooms to actually 
training to be the store manager. I also trained to be a district 
manager, regional director, and regional vice president before 
I assumed my role at the time as division senior vice president. 
From the onset, it was clear that my role as a leader involved im-
mersing myself into and empathizing with our partners.” 
It is common for Starbucks leaders to talk about the signifi-
cance of their initial immersive experiences. Cliff Burrows, pres-
ident, Americas, indicates, “I worked for six weeks at our Queen 
Anne store in Seattle. I am sure I wasn’t the best barista ever, but 
I enjoyed every moment of my store immersion. That was over 
10 years ago, and I will never forget the people and experiences 
I had there. It was an immediate, profound, and personal intro-
duction to our work and to the world of partners who make it 
happen one cup at a time every day.” At Starbucks, the practice of 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
101
immersion was initially introduced for leaders at the level of vice 
president or above. Now new managers and leaders throughout 
the organization are afforded opportunities to gain a deeper un-
derstanding of the life of barista partners by spending time in 
the store and behind the bar.
Often leaders see listening as a passive pursuit. At Starbucks, 
listening is synonymous with connecting, discovering, under-
standing, empathizing, and responding. The benefits of this lis-
tening fuel the entrepreneurial and adaptive spirit of a brand that 
could easily have lost its nimbleness as a result of its growth and 
scale. In many ways, when leaders demonstrate formal and infor-
mal listening, they not only engage employees but also gain ac-
cess to information that helps them stay relevant to the needs and 
observations of their team members. Of course, listening is a skill  
that parallels another critical leadership behavior: observation. 
When it comes to employee engagement, observation often comes  
in the form of acknowledgment and recognition programs.
The Power of an  
Acknowledging Leader 
While most of us intend to recognize the achievements of our 
team members regularly, those intentions often get lost amid 
the deluge of challenges and demands that we face every day. By 
creating effective reward and recognition programs, leaders at 
Starbucks develop recognition excellence as a core competency 
within the organization. In their book The Carrot Principle: How 
the Best Managers Use Recognition to Engage Their Employees, 
Retain Talent, and Accelerate Performance, Adrian Gostick and 
Chester Elton suggest, “In response to the question ‘My orga-
nization recognizes excellence,’ the organizations that scored in 
the lowest fourth overall had an average return on equity (ROE) 
of 2.4 percent, whereas those that scored in the top fourth had 
an average ROE of 8.7 percent. In other words, companies that 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
102
most effectively recognize excellence enjoy a return that is more 
than triple the return of those that do so the worst.” Similarly, 
Gostick and Elton found that managers who were rated highest 
on recognizing employee contributions also typically produced 
the highest levels of employee satisfaction, employee retention, 
and even customer satisfaction. 
Because of the importance of recognizing excellence, Star-
bucks leadership has developed a broad array of recognition and 
award programs, which include, but are not necessarily limited 
to, the following:
Performance Award Programs
M.U.G. award
Bravo award
Team Bravo award 
The Green Apron program
Spirit of Starbucks award 
Team Spirit of Starbucks award
Manager of the Quarter
Manager of the Year
District Manager of the Year 
A detailed review of all of the Starbucks awards and recogni-
tion programs is beyond the scope of this book, but the diversity 
of offerings affords a number of important teachable lessons, in-
cluding the following:
• The value of peer-to-peer recognition
• The need to scale rewards at both the individual and 
team levels

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
103
• Reliance on social aspects of recognition
• The enterprise-wide importance of awards
Many of the reward programs offered at Starbucks involve 
nominations from peers (Bravo awards, Spirit of Starbucks 
awards) and/or direct and immediate recognition by peers 
(M.U.G. awards, the Green Apron program). Rather than rely-
ing only on managers or leaders to catch people who meet the 
criteria for recognition, the entire organization is mobilized to 
immediately, or through nomination, bring those acts of excel-
lence to light.
Similarly, excellence is recognized in terms of both individ-
ual effort and team collaboration at Starbucks. In the course of 
my function as a professional speaker, I have attended a large 
number of sales conferences, award banquets, and even service 
recognition events. It is rare to see awards provided to groups at 
these events. At Starbucks, an award like the Team Spirit of Star-
bucks “is presented to teams or groups of partners who work 
together to contribute well beyond their day-to-day responsibil-
ities, making a significant and positive difference at Starbucks. 
The Team Spirit of Starbucks Award recognizes a team of part-
ners for a single, exceptional achievement.” According to the 
criteria for the award, that exceptional achievement must also 
reflect the Starbucks mission. While individual awards can fos-
ter healthy competition within an organization, they can also 
undermine collaboration. Balancing individual and team recog-
nition allows both independent and interdependent excellence 
to be acknowledged at your company.
While some businesses get caught up in high-cost extrinsic 
rewards and bonuses, most of the awards offered at Starbucks 
do not involve items with substantial tangible value. In the case 
of M.U.G. awards, Bravo awards, or Green Apron recognition, 
partners receive pins, handwritten notes, or certificates to ac-
knowledge their achievement. These pins often carry a social 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
104
value among baristas, who typically wear them on their aprons. 
Consistent with trends in social psychological research showing 
that extrinsic rewards can extinguish intrinsic motivation, the 
emphasis at Starbucks is much less on prizes and much more on 
acknowledgment.
Kay Corio, a former Starbucks partner and a recipient of 
the Spirit of Starbucks award, shared her views of recognition 
at Starbucks. “I was honored to win the award. I appreciated 
that leadership let us know what excellence looks like and that 
I would be in a position to garner acknowledgment for my ef-
fort. I believe that recognition at Starbucks plays an important 
role in offering us uplifting moments in acknowledgment of the 
work we do.” Providing uplifting moments for those who uplift  
customers—that is the role of leadership at Starbucks.
R ef l e c ti o n  o n  C o n n ecti on
1.	 Do you conduct “listening tours” with your people? 
What are your systematic approaches to leadership lis-
tening (for example, formal surveys or regular round-
table sessions)?
2.	 In addition to your direct observation of behavior that 
demonstrates excellence, what peer-to-peer recogni-
tion programs have you developed?
3.	 How are you balancing individual and team awards? 
Do you emphasize acknowledgment or rewards of 
substantial financial value?

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
105
The Return on Partner Investment
So why invest so much in your people? While it feels good to 
generously encourage the growth, development, and well-being 
of your team members, does it make good business sense? Let’s 
address this issue at a macroeconomic level and then examine 
the specific benefits that Starbucks derives from its partner en-
gagement efforts. 
Across industries and continents, companies with highly 
engaged employees have been shown to produce improved sales, 
profits, and shareholder value. One such example comes from 
the Kenexa Research Institute’s WorkTrends report. According 
to the findings, “Organizations with highly engaged employ-
ees achieve seven times greater 5-year TSR [total shareholder 
return] than organizations whose employees are less engaged.” 
Other research groups have found that as employee engagement 
increases, workplace errors and lost-time accidents decrease. El-
evated employee engagement is also linked to increased repeat 
customer purchases and strong customer advocacy. 
As you will recall, Howard Schultz initially appealed to the 
Starbucks board of directors for health-care benefits based on 
his projection that it would ultimately save the company money 
in turnover-associated costs. From a research perspective, such 
an argument is sound, given findings like those of the Corpo-
rate Executive Board, which state, “By increasing employees’ 
engagement levels, organizations can expect an increase in per-
formance of up to 20 percentile points and an 87% reduction in 
employees’ probability of departure.” However, do investments 
in programs such as health insurance for eligible part-time em-
ployees at Starbucks actually result in retention rates greater than 
those of competitors in the quick-service sector? Typically, Star-
bucks reports a voluntary annual turnover rate for full-time part-
ners of around 12 to 15 percent (meaning that 12 to 15 percent  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
106
of full-time partners voluntarily elect to leave the company for 
other options); however, this percentage does not reflect the en-
tire picture of turnover, since a large number of employees are 
part-time. Analysts who have taken into consideration both the 
full-time and part-time employees suggest that the actual turn-
over rate is somewhere around 65 percent. For many of us, 65 
percent seems remarkably high, but author, broadcaster, and 
journalist John-Paul Flintoff puts it in perspective: “While other 
fast-food retailers lost staff at rates as high as 400% a year, Star-
bucks’ turnover was a relatively low 65%.”
Assuming that your turnover costs exceed your cost of ben-
efits and you turn over one-sixth as many employees as your 
competition, your business will be well positioned for long-
term success. This is particularly true if your engaged employ-
ees help you innovate new processes or help you reduce waste. 
Given the size of Starbucks, a simple act performed by an en-
gaged partner can result in phenomenally large benefits to the 
company. Such is the case of Joe Young, a barista in Hutchison, 
Kansas, who was engaged in his job and developed a process im-
provement that also eliminated waste of an expensive Starbucks 
product, namely, whipped cream. Cliff Burrows announced 
the accomplishment at the 2012 Global Leadership Confer-
ence, noting, “Joe found a way in his store to improve the quality  
of the partner experience, the quality of the beverage, and he 
saved the company between 5 and 10 million dollars within the 
year.” Are your employees engaged and generating solutions that 
produce savings (albeit probably not on the scale of Joe Young’s) 
in your business? Are they seeing the business from the perspec-
tive of an owner?
At Starbucks, the ultimate value of employee engagement 
occurs in the millions of interactions that take place every day 
in buildings carrying the Starbucks brand. Since managers can’t 
monitor all of those interactions, the care and concern leaders 

It M ust T h r iv e  I ns ide  to Be  E xp e r i e nce d  O ut s id e
107
extend to partners is reflected in the loving discretionary effort 
partners show in their moments with customers. A highly en-
gaged workforce consistently contributes to remarkable service 
experiences for customers, much like the ones reported by Star-
bucks customers. 
In a blog post written by a member of the My Starbucks Idea 
community, one customer writes about her visit to a store she 
had not previously visited. Her father had died the night be-
fore, so she and her sister were getting the arrangements made  
for the days to come. They stopped at a Starbucks for drinks, 
and the barista could see that she had been crying and asked 
what was wrong. The customer described what happened after 
she told the partner that her father had died: the barista “reached 
onto the counter and patted my hand, extending her sympa-
thy and telling me the drinks were on them. It sounds so trite 
but it was such a comfort. . . . I will always remember that kind-
ness.” The barista who served that customer went off task to give 
comfort to the deeply saddened person, and in the process was 
fully engaged in the Starbucks mission of producing uplifting  
moments.
Having an engaged workforce means that employees can 
do what is right for customers without having to be told. They 
can rise above the rules, processes, and procedures inherent in 
doing a job to make purposeful connections with the people 
they serve. In the end, employee engagement produces mem-
orable kindness, profitability, sustainability, and customers for 
life. As an added benefit, it is much easier to manage a fully en-
gaged workforce when the work culture is a pleasant and enjoy-
able one. What steps will you take to drive greater engagement 
within your team? The engagement of your customers relies on 
the engagement you produce for your employees, partners, team 
members, associates, or whatever you choose to call the people 
you serve.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
108
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• The ability to grow and develop is a key factor in se-
curing employee engagement.
• Leaders who are interested in growing their people 
find ways to work with other businesses and learning 
institutions to offer benefits that those leaders might 
not be able to provide alone. 
• People have a natural tendency to want to help those 
with whom they work. Consider overseeing a pro-
gram that encourages employees to help one another.
• Listening is not a passive pursuit; listening is synon-
ymous with connecting, discovering, understanding, 
empathizing, and responding. 
• Good leaders provide uplifting moments for those 
who uplift customers. 
• Rather than relying only on managers or leaders to 
catch people meeting the criteria for recognition, the 
entire organization should be mobilized to recognize  
individuals and teams that perform acts of excellence. 
• Across industries and continents, companies with 
highly engaged employees produce improved sales, 
elevated profits, and increased shareholder value. 
• Having an engaged workforce means that employees 
do what is right for customers without having to be told. 
• Employee engagement contributes to memorable kind-
ness, profitability, sustainability, and customers for life. 
• It is much easier to manage a fully engaged workforce 
when your work culture is a pleasant and enjoyable one.

P r i n c i p l e  3 
Reach  
for  
Common 
Ground

110
110
C
ultural anthropologists have been engaged in a long-
standing debate between two conflicting perspectives: 
universalism and cultural relativism. While the words 
sound daunting, the concepts are rather straightforward. Uni-
versalism suggests that the underlying similarities among all 
people are greater than their cultural differences. By contrast, 
cultural relativism asserts that cultural differences have a pro-
found effect on people, making it difficult for “outsiders” to fully 
understand the relevant context of behavior. While anthropol-
ogists may argue for universalism or cultural relativism, most 
business owners and leaders are not interested in winning a 
debate. Instead, they need to scale their business to maximize 
commonalities while making local adjustments to assure mar-
ket acceptance.
Chapter 6, “Assume the Universal: Serve the Unifying Truths 
of Humans,” examines how Starbucks leaders create connection 
with maximum global appeal. Conversely, Chapter 7, “Respect, 
Celebrate, and Customize: Listening and Innovating to Meet Lo-
cal, Regional, and Global Needs,” looks at how leaders localize 
certain aspects of their products, environments, and service de-
livery to forge relationships that are relevant to local customers 
throughout the world.
Starbucks leaders have made their share of mistakes in at-
tempting to strike a balance between the universal and the cul-
tural. In the process of their setbacks and victories, Starbucks 
serves as a helpful guide on how to make powerful and respect-
ful connections in new markets. Whether you are considering 
customers in the next town, in an adjacent state, or through on-
line delivery in this global economy, or even if you are opening a 
location in a country that is half a world away, this is your oppor-
tunity to “reach for common ground.” 

111
C H
A P
T
E R
 6
Assume the Universal: 
Serve the Unifying  
Truths of Humans
All things are the same except for the differences, and 
different except for the similarities.
Thomas Sowell
D
o you believe that people want similar things from a ser-
vice experience in two different boroughs of New York City 
(say, Manhattan and Queens)? Do people in New York and New 
Delhi want the same things from service experiences? A num-
ber of research groups have looked at what customers want 
when they are being served. These studies segment customers 
by industry, nationality, age, gender, income, and a myriad of 
other demographic distinctions. While some differences surface 
across this breadth of variables, a number of service universals 
remain, regardless of time and place. This consumer research in-
tersects closely with the work of theorists and researchers con-
cerning overall human similarity. 
Michelle Gass, president, Starbucks Europe, Middle East 
and Africa (EMEA), states, “The balance between the univer-
sal and the local is much more an art than it is a science. We 
have global brand standards, and my expectation is leaders who 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
112
are making decisions have the Starbucks brand in their blood, 
so they can provide good judgments. I think you have to create 
an experience where it’s undeniably Starbucks.” Upon assuming 
her position as president of EMEA, Michelle toured her region, 
sitting down with partners and customers to understand their 
views on the company and its offerings. Michelle reported that 
she had expected to hear more of a desire for local relevance in 
Starbucks stores, but instead she had heard quite the opposite. 
Customers want to connect with the key elements that led to 
brand growth and love in the United States. 
Whether the issue is wide cultural differences among em-
ployees, customers, or regions, your “love story” or underlying 
brand value proposition has to translate and your actions have to 
connect with those you serve. Starbucks has a fundamental ser-
vice platform and leadership approach that fuels global connec-
tions because the company operates from an understanding of 
universal needs.
For the sake of our exploration, let me guide you through 
a discussion of universal human needs with insights into how 
Starbucks leadership is addressing them. Furthermore, I will ex-
amine how you can connect to transcendent human service by 
focusing on attention, appreciation, and community, as well as 
comfort and variety.
Attention
Jean-Marie Shields, director, Brand Strategy, at Starbucks, notes, 
“The number one request or desire of every human around the 
world is to be seen and heard. The magic of the Starbucks brand 
comes from a willingness to actively see and hear our customers 
on many levels.” At the individual service level, for example, the 
“seeing” and “hearing” aspects to which Jean-Marie refers come 
with an initial greeting that acknowledges a customer’s presence 

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
113
and starts a human connection. Karen Joachim, a customer from 
Albert Lea, Minnesota, notes, “Quite often when I buy some-
thing, I feel invisible. Starbucks is a different story. They actu-
ally make a momentary but noticeable connection.” Diala, a 
customer in the Mall of Emirates in Dubai, puts it this way: “I 
want to feel acknowledged whenever I am in a human interac-
tion. Much more of the time at Starbucks than at many other 
businesses, I feel like I am noticed as a person, not viewed as a 
transaction.”
Clearly, it is a challenge for the leader of any business with 
high levels of transactions to help employees see the uniqueness 
of the next customer. Barbara McMaster, district manager, Star-
bucks Northern Ireland, notes, “As a leader, I am responsible for 
keeping a spotlight on the next customer. Each customer needs 
to be recognized in the same manner as our first customer of the 
day. It’s a lot about empathizing and thinking about how I would 
want to be treated. It’s more than eye contact; with time, it is a 
matter of actually coming to know your repeat customers. Who 
is this is in front of me? What are their needs? What can I do?” 
Going beyond an initial greeting that connects, Barbara’s com-
ment ratchets up the idea of authentically “knowing” and ac-
knowledging those whom you serve. A greeting may signal that 
you have seen your customer, but to feel known, those custom-
ers have to experience you as having taken the time and interest 
to connect with their uniqueness.
Names and Controversy
Michelle Gass reports that upon being appointed president 
of Starbucks EMEA, she and her leadership team sought to 
strengthen the Starbucks “knowing” or personal connection in 
her region. “We went back to our universal principal around hu-
man connection. What does every person walking the planet 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
114
have? They have a name. As such, we started considering 
whether we should ask each customer for their first name and 
place their name on their cup. We certainly had lots of debate 
around the possible risks with doing it.” Those risks included the 
possibility that cultural differences might produce resistance in 
parts of the region. Michelle notes, “We concluded that the ben-
efits were worthy of the attempt, since a loyal customer might 
now be ‘known’ as a tall, skinny mocha, but would feel much 
better walking in our door and having us really ‘know’ them by 
saying, ‘Hey, Jane, how’s your day going today?’”
In the United States, asking customers for their names and 
placing the names on their cups has not consistently been a re-
quired standard, and partners had never been required to place 
their names on their uniforms. However, in March 2012, Star-
bucks launched its “names on cups and names on partners” 
campaign in EMEA. In addition to asking for customers’ names, 
Starbucks baristas began wearing name tags on their aprons. An 
online video and paid advertisement content introduced the 
United Kingdom to this concept: 
Have you noticed how everything seems a little imper-
sonal nowadays? We’ve all become user names, refer-
ence numbers and IP addresses. That’s why at Starbucks 
we’ve decided to do things differently. From now on, we 
won’t refer to you as a ‘latte’ or a ‘mocha’, but instead 
as your folks intended: by your name. Ok, we know it’s 
only a little thing but hey, why don’t we buy you a cof-
fee . . . and you can introduce yourself. We’re Starbucks. 
Nice to meet you. 
To see the actual commercial, point your web browser to 
http://tinyurl.com/lecr7d2 or direct your QR reader here:

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
115
As predicted, some people in England were skeptical about 
the “first name” approach to personalization. For example, Chris 
Hackley, professor of marketing at Royal Holloway, University of 
London, told the BBC, “Some people might like being called by 
their first name, but I think many will be indifferent, and some 
might feel awkward—like it’s over-familiar, or a bit of an intru-
sion into privacy. . . . It’s a bogus personalisation of an economic 
relationship. Friendship needs to be genuine.” 
While I certainly agree that privacy is paramount for cus-
tomers and employees today, providing a first name that will be 
written on a cup or that is placed on a barista’s apron is not per-
ceived as a threat by most people. Additionally, customers are 
free to choose the name they provide or to elect not to offer a 
name at all. Typically, in cases of resistance, customers will pro-
vide playful names or baristas will simply draw something like 
a smiling face on their cup. While Professor Hackley notes that 
friendship needs to be genuine, I am of the opinion that Star-
bucks leaders are seeking a connection that is more personal 
than a “hey you,” but that is less intimate than friendship.
Dirk Nickolaus, Starbucks district manager in Germany, 
talks about the speed of acceptance for offering names in Ger-
many: “When we first started asking our customers for their first 
names, it took some people by surprise, and it was a bit challeng-
ing for us. Now I hear our customers say, ‘Wow! I used to walk 
in and the baristas would recognize me and know my drink, but 
now they actually address me by name. It feels welcoming.’” 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
116
Despite growing acceptance of the practice of putting names 
on cups, there are real downside risks, not the least of which are 
misspelled names or other inadvertent errors. While break-
downs can and will occur in the use of a customer’s name, they 
happen in all aspects of human interaction. The goal of leader-
ship is to create the right environment for human connection 
to occur and to help staff members manage the inevitable is-
sues that surface. The success of name badges and name seek-
ing in the EMEA region has had additional functional benefits.  
Michelle Gass notes, “Customers and partners have told me 
about improved handoff accuracy by having names on cups. It 
can be quite unsettling if a customer isn’t sure if they are grab-
bing their cup from several on the bar. The last thing you want 
to do is leave the store and find you’ve taken the wrong drink. 
So now your name gives reassurance that you are getting your  
beverage.”
The positive benefits of names on cups and names on part-
ners in EMEA has prompted leaders in other regions to more 
systematically engage in a similar process. At the Starbucks 
2012 Global Leadership Conference in Houston, Cliff Bur-
rows, president, Americas, noted that he had been inspired by 
Michelle and her team to make names on cups and names on 
partners a standard practice in the United States, Canada, and 
Latin America. Cliff added, “It’s a way we can innovate. It’s a 
way we can differentiate. And it’s a way we can strengthen that 
relationship between our partners and our customers.” As a  
result of this commitment, Starbucks leadership has devel-
oped training tools to strengthen connections with customers 
by helping partners learn and use the customer’s name and per-
sonalize the customer’s cup. At the center of this training is an 
appreciation that baristas have an opportunity to build deeper 
relationships with the people they serve (particularly regular cus-
tomers) by learning their names and appropriately calling them  
by name.

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
117
Innovation, Differentiation, and  
Strengthening Relationships 
By taking a simple step like asking people for their first names, 
Starbucks leadership is systematically differentiating the brand. 
Karen Mishra, marketing professor at Meredith College and co-
author of the book Becoming a Trustworthy Leader, highlights 
the power of differentiation through relationships. In the course 
of my research, I happened upon an online Twitter post from 
Karen in which she shared her surprise at receiving a birth-
day note on a Starbucks cup. During a follow-up interview, 
Karen added, “The partners at my Starbucks know me. Tanya 
is the manager. We lived in Durham years ago, left for a couple 
of years, and when we came back, Tanya still remembered me 
and my husband.” Karen notes that she is impressed by Tanya’s 
memory for customers’ names and how much she knows about 
her customers. Karen adds, “When training new hires, Tanya 
will say, ‘Okay, now, Justin, this is so-and-so, and they’re mar-
ried to so-and-so, and this is their drink.’” Karen asked Tanya 
about this ability to remember people, and Tanya responded 
that people should be remem-
bered and that she makes a 
point of learning the name of 
one new person every day. It is 
in the context of that commit-
ment to “knowing” that Karen 
posted the microblog entry 
that caught my eye. On Karen’s 
birthday, her husband let her 
sleep in and went to Starbucks 
to get her coffee. When he was 
asked where Karen was, her 
husband mentioned that it was 
her birthday. Karen notes, “Any  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
118
time one of us isn’t there, the baristas at that store will write our 
names and a little note like ‘hi’ on our cups, but this time it was a 
special birthday message signed by my ‘Starbucks family,’ and I 
just had to share it online.”
Because a group of baristas at a single store, led by a man-
ager like Tanya, cared about seeing, hearing, and knowing their 
customers, Karen was compelled to share a message about the 
differentiated care she received at Starbucks. Karen’s status as a 
marketing professor and an author on brand trust was probably 
not a consideration for the barista who wrote Karen’s name and 
birthday wish on her cup, but clearly that simple act of acknowl-
edgment has led to a story through which Starbucks itself has 
been acknowledged.
Are you paying attention to your customers’ need to be 
seen and heard? Would you go so far as to say they feel under-
stood and known? In your business, customer knowledge may 
require more than remembering names and drink preferences. 
However, by getting to know your customers, you will proba-
bly differentiate yourself through transformative customer  
relationships.
Appreciation
Worldwide, customers want to be appreciated for their business. 
In fact, one of the most powerful opportunities for building loy-
alty occurs after the sale. Do your employees say thank you, offer 
a warm farewell, and invite customers into future opportunities 
to connect? At a leadership level, are you creating an environ-
ment of gratitude and structuring your business to demonstrate 
appreciation for loyal patronage?
When I wrote my first book about Starbucks in 2006, I had 
spent the prior two years occasionally talking with the company’s 
leaders about the absence of a corporate loyalty card program.  

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
119
At the time, the typical response I heard centered on the pos-
sibility that such a program might dilute the perceived value of 
Starbucks products. Like many businesses operating in the ro-
bust economy of the late 1990s and early 2000s, Starbucks lead-
ership knew the value of repeat business, but wasn’t rewarding 
customer loyalty. All that changed for Starbucks in June 2008, 
when the company made its first significant move toward a re-
wards program. Aimee Johnson, vice president, Digital Com-
merce, Loyalty and Content at Starbucks, established the 
rationale for the program by noting the brand was unveiling 
“bold consumer-facing elements to further enhance the Star-
bucks Experience and deepen the relationship with our cus-
tomers.” By creating an account, loading a Starbucks Card with 
funds, and paying an annual membership fee of $25, a customer 
could participate in the Starbucks rewards program and receive, 
among other benefits, a 10 percent discount on most purchases, 
a complimentary birthday beverage, and two hours of free wire-
less internet (at the time, Wi-Fi was a paid service that was avail-
able only at some Starbucks stores—more on that in Chapter 8). 
Ron Lieber reviewed Starbucks initial effort at loyalty rewards in 
a 2008 New York Times article and noted, “We all want to be rec-
ognized for our loyal patronage. . . . Starbucks is a company that 
others look to as a model. What it does with this program will 
influence plenty of businesses that deal in higher-dollar prod-
ucts. And that is why I’m glad to report that Starbucks is indeed 
considering some sort of elite status. It is also studying ways that 
card use can speed up your visit and is looking for ways to make 
the giveaways more generous. Big, ambitious loyalty programs 
evolve over many years. So it will be fascinating to see what Star-
bucks adds to the mix.” As Ron predicted, Starbucks has contin-
ued to refine its loyalty reward concept to include special status 
and streamlined ease of use. Starbucks also did away with paid 
subscription as a point of entry and expanded the perks asso-
ciated with membership. As a Gold-level member, I routinely 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
120
receive announcements and member benefits that complement 
the free food or beverage item that I receive with each twelfth 
purchase. 
What’s noteworthy about the evolving Starbucks reward 
program, now called My Starbucks Rewards™, is how it ad-
dresses not just a need in the United States, but a global desire to 
be acknowledged as a valued customer. Since launching the pro-
gram in the United States, Starbucks has progressively rolled out 
similar reward programs around the world. In 2010, a blogger 
in Singapore noted, “After many years of not having any sort of  
rewards/loyalty program . . . [Starbucks] finally launched a  
card! . . . It’s definitely good to be rewarded after being a regular 
customer for many years.” 
In announcing its first-quarter results for 2012, Starbucks 
leadership reported that the company had gained 413,000 new 
members of its loyalty program in December 2011, increasing 
total membership to more than 3.7 million. The reward program 
in China demonstrated exponential growth, with 250,000 par-
ticipants enrolled since its inception approximately 10 months 
earlier. In North America, the purchases made under the My 
Starbucks Rewards loyalty program represent almost 20 percent 
of Starbucks Card purchases. 
Ying, a customer from Bangkok, Thailand, says it best:  
“I notice when employees say thank you for my business, and I  
also notice when managers appreciate their employees and 
leaders appreciate their customers. I see all those things hap-
pening at Starbucks. Nowadays, I particularly feel valued and 
appreciated for my purchases by the loyalty rewards I receive 
in return.” In a world in which so much investment is made in 
marketing and advertising goods and services, the simple act of  
saying thank you or rewarding customers for their loyalty can go 
a long way toward securing their repeat business and emotional 
engagement.

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
121
R ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 What universal needs for service is your business  
addressing? 
2.	 When it comes to seeing, hearing, and knowing your 
customers, what are the strengths and opportunities 
for your business? Are you connecting with each cus-
tomer verbally and nonverbally upon first contact? Do 
you go from listening to customers to customer knowl-
edge on which you can act?
3.	 Do you have an appreciative business culture? Is that ap-
preciation demonstrated in service interactions through 
the way managers treat frontline workers and the way 
leaders craft customer rewards and recognition?
Community
John Donne’s classic poem “For Whom the Bell Tolls” begins 
with an observation of the human condition relevant to most 
business leaders. In it, Donne says, “No man is an island, en-
tire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the 
main.” In essence, people may enter your business individually, 
but many of them seek the opportunity to connect with like-
minded individuals to experience the benefits of community.
Some business leaders have a heightened awareness of the 
human craving for community, while others have failed to help 
connect customers to something larger than themselves. I viv-
idly remember sitting in a Fast Company magazine “Circle of 
Friends” group in Las Vegas, Nevada, in the late 1990s. In 1997, 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
122
the founders of the magazine created an opportunity for regular 
readers to get together to talk about the ideas raised in each issue 
of the magazine. While that community building at Fast Com-
pany was fairly innovative at the time, online groups and discus-
sion boards have since proliferated.
Similarly, Starbucks leadership has demonstrated innova-
tion in building a community that consists of customers and 
partners; in addition, it has added a key element of social ac-
tivism. Community service involvement occurs year-round at 
Starbucks, and the leaders set ambitious goals to motivate part-
ners and customers to contribute 1 million hours per year in 
support of causes that have a meaningful impact. Starbucks 
has dedicated a website to helping partners and customers con-
nect (community.starbucks.com), giving listings of upcoming 
projects and blogs and stories of past activities. In addition, the 
website confers virtual community service badges as a way of 
recognizing those who progress from being a new volunteer up 
through the level of community change maker.
In addition to its year-round efforts, for the past several 
years, Starbucks has declared April to be the Global Month of 
Service. In April 2012, nearly 60,000 Starbucks partners and cus-
tomers, local organizations, and community members provided 
more than 700,000 individual community service acts that made 
a difference in more than 34 countries. More than 230,000 hours 
of service were donated, and 2,100 community service projects 
were completed in the one-month time frame. The global res-
onance of a program that builds purposeful community is re-
flected in the 50 percent increase in projects completed and 45 
percent increase in volunteered hours when compared to prior-
year levels.
Clearly, the level of participation in the Starbucks Global 
Month of Service is high and growing, and the projects are 
producing substantial positive benefits. For example, the 2012 
Global Month of Service included projects such as 250 volunteers  

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
123
in Vancouver, British Columbia, building pathways, storage 
shelves, and cubicles in support of the Strathcona Community 
Centre to assist inner-city youth programs and 395 volunteers 
in Shanghai, China, sprucing up the Gumei community in the 
Minhang District while assisting local residents to reuse waste 
material and engage in organic gardening.
In addition to mobilizing direct opportunities to serve in the 
community, Starbucks leaders have engaged customers to deter-
mine who should receive a portion of Starbucks grant money. 
A 2012 program referred to as “Vote.Give.Grow” allowed Star-
bucks Card holders to register at www.votegivegrow.com. Once 
they were registered, customers could vote weekly through-
out the month of April concerning the recipients of $4 million 
in grant funding from the Starbucks Foundation. While other 
forms of direct corporate giving will be discussed in Chapter 11, 
suffice it to say that Starbucks leaders continue to look for ways 
to partner with customers to do “good” in the world. 
In Asia, for example, customers were able to connect with 
members of their community through purchases of Muan Jai®, 
a mix of arabica coffees from Thailand and other Pacific island 
countries. By purchasing this coffee blend, customers in Thai-
land and elsewhere helped improve the environment and the 
socioeconomic conditions of hill-tribe coffee farmers and their 
families in northern Thailand. A portion of the proceeds of the 
Muan Jai blend was contributed directly to the farmers. Not so 
coincidentally, in the Northern Thai language, Muan Jai means 
“wholehearted happiness.”
One additional example that had reach both within the 
United States and across international borders was an alliance 
forged between Starbucks leadership and the HandsOn Network 
to create the “I’m In!” campaign. After U.S. president Barack 
Obama was inaugurated for his first term, Starbucks offered free 
beverages to individuals who pledged five hours of volunteer 
time through the HandsOn Network. The HandsOn Network is 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
124
a subsidiary of the Points of Light Foundation, with 250 volun-
teer action centers in 16 countries worldwide. The response to 
the “I’m In!” campaign was more than 1.25 million pledged vol-
unteer hours worldwide.
Jeremy Tolmen, a customer in San Diego, California, re-
ports how he connects with Starbucks through its commitment 
to community. “I was in Starbucks at a launch party for a non-
profit I work with, and I had my non-profit’s shirt on. I started 
talking to a Starbucks partner named Kate. She asked about our 
non-profit and if we needed coffee for our event. It turns out 
Kate was the store manager, and she ended up donating all of the 
coffee for our event, along with five or six boxes of Tazo tea, and 
all the additional supplies we needed for our coffee bar. She even 
put together a Starbucks basket to raffle off; it had a pound of 
coffee in it and two mugs. I think it’s amazing that a humongous 
corporation like that can be so generous and connect on such a 
small community-based level.” Amazing, generous, connection, 
and community: Jeremy’s words capture the unique and powerful 
opportunity that leaders have to forge special relationships with 
customers by community building. All leaders have the oppor-
tunity to look at their businesses as offering more than products 
or services. With good stewardship and a willingness to think 
beyond the tangible benefits and attributes of their product  
offerings, leaders can create places of belonging and purposeful-
ness for their customers. 
Comfort and Variety
It seems that humans have contrary needs for both predictable 
comfort and variations from the predictable. In other words, we 
want our comforts to remain stable and yet to have sufficient va-
riety to avert boredom. In a social context, irrespective of where 
people live, they want to manage the inconsistencies of life by 
having what Starbucks offers, namely, a pleasing physical location  

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
125
where they can relax, unwind, and savor their favorite beverage. 
It is a place of comfort for locals and travelers alike. 
Helen Wang, author of The Chinese Dream: The Rise of the 
World’s Largest Middle Class and What It Means to You, notes 
that even in countries like China, where the historically pre-
ferred beverage has been tea, Starbucks has deployed staff train-
ing and inviting physical locations to foster aspiration, comfort, 
and success: “The chic interior, comfortable lounge chairs, and 
upbeat music are not only differentiators that set Starbucks apart 
from the competition, but also have strong appeal to younger 
generations who fantasize about Western coffee culture as a 
symbol of modern lifestyle. Starbucks [also] understands the 
value of its global brand and has taken steps to maintain brand 
integrity. One of Starbucks best practices is to send their best 
baristas from established markets to new markets and train new 
employees. These baristas act as brand ambassadors to help es-
tablish the Starbucks culture in new locations and ensure that 
service at each local store meets their global standards.” 
Uniformly executing against brand standards and consis-
tently creating a welcoming physical environment allow people 
to develop daily habits and rituals that comfort them. One 
blogger noted, “I suppose I’m a creature of habit. . . . I just run 
through Starbucks on my way to work. . . . I do have to admit, 
as a single person, it’s nice to start your morning with a friendly 
face that actually knows you. A few of us have developed a 
strange little Drive Thru window friendship.” 
While many of us lead companies where customer contact 
is not a repeated daily occurrence, rituals can still be created  
around seasonal product offerings or even annual events. For 
Starbucks, these seasonal rituals include such things as the global 
rollout of Starbucks® “red cups” to coincide with the Thanks-
giving and Christmas holiday season in the United States. The 
worldwide appeal of the red cups is evidenced by a website titled 
countdowntoredcups.com, which is not affiliated with Starbucks.  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
126
Even before there is an announcement of the cup’s release date, 
the website posts wording like “we’re still waiting for official con-
firmation from Starbucks, but our guess is that it starts Novem-
ber 2nd.” As a result, a countdown clock clicks away based on the 
website owner’s best guess. 
In addition to the countdown to red cups website, the inter-
net is flooded with photos that people share when they hold their 
first red cup of the season, as well as with tweets and blog posts 
like, “Today is the day! . . . we stopped by our favorite neigh-
borhood Starbucks and there. . . low and behold . . . the Mother  
Ship . . . Red Cup Day. That alone just makes me happy. I don’t 
know what it is about those happy red cups but for me it marks 
the beginning of the holiday season and just puts me in the mood 
for cookie baking, snuggling by the fire and enjoying your family 
and friends. . . . I did a happy dance with the baristas, (my hus-
band tried to hide and pretend he doesn’t know me).” When you  
have people doing happy dances with your team members,  
you know you have produced a comforting ritual. 
The allure of the red cup not only results from its seasonal 
presence but emerges from the changing design of the cup from 
year to year. It is the combination of the predictable and the an-
ticipation of change that strengthens interest. Surely you have 
grown tired of brands that provide predictable products but fail 
to add new or exciting offerings. Or, by contrast, maybe you have 
lost your interest in a company when it removed an iconic prod-
uct to accommodate an endless parade of “just arrived” or “new 
this year” items. Thanks to a strong core set of offerings, sea-
sonal introductions, and a small set of enticing new products, 
Starbucks leadership drives customer loyalty, comfort, and en-
thusiasm. Tracy Olsen, a U.S. citizen teaching in Korea, notes, 
“I love Starbucks. It’s the only place I can get a chai tea latte in 
Daegu. It’s the place where I can get a comforting experience of 
home and enjoy new and interesting products. I can also enjoy  

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
127
some products that are unique to the culture of which I am a 
part.” While Chapter 7 will look at how Starbucks adds unique 
elements to product selection, environment, and service deliv-
ery, Tracy’s comment reflects the comfort derived from the right 
mix of predictable and varied offerings. 
R ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 What do your employees and customers value? What 
causes, events, or educational opportunities might 
serve to bring together a community of customers or 
a unity of customers and employees? How might you 
play a facilitating role in building social connections 
among like-minded people?
2.	 What aspects of your products or services create com-
fort or a sense of stability for your customers? How can 
you enhance the comfort aspects of your business? 
What products at the core of your business should re-
main constant? 
3.	 What brands do you view as striking an effective bal-
ance between consistent delivery of legacy items or 
services with a mix of new product or service offer-
ings? What percentage of stable to new items best 
suits the needs of your customers? 
The Proof Is in the Café
Let’s assume you have identified ways in which you can serve 
underlying human needs through your products, services, and 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
128
community involvement. Furthermore, let’s assume that you 
have just launched a branch of your business in a new setting 
(possibly on the other side of your state or even on another con-
tinent). How do you know whether your brand will be well re-
ceived? Moreover, how will you know whether you are creating 
a sustainable connection? 
For Starbucks leaders, initial acceptance in a new market can 
often be seen in the enthusiasm of people who anticipate a store’s 
opening or by the lines that occur at its launch. In October of 
2012, for example, Starbucks, accompanied by its joint-venture  
partner Tata Coffee Group, made its long-awaited entrance into 
India with a flagship store in Mumbai.
Starbucks store in Mumbai, India.
Approximately a week and a half after the opening, Shyman-
tha Asokan wrote the following in an article for the Guardian: 
“During the past 10 days, sweaty queues of up to 50 people have 
formed outside an old colonial building in downtown Mumbai, 
while a security guard operates a one-in-one-out policy. These 
hopefuls are not trying to get into an edgy new nightclub or 

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
129
shake hands with a visiting politician. They are waiting for up 
to an hour to go to Starbucks.” No celebrities and no edgy enter-
tainment venue; just the first Starbucks to come to India. 
Customer Hazel Hardijzer understands the eagerness with 
which people anticipate a Starbucks opening in markets around 
the world. According to Hazel, “Starbucks opened at [Amster-
dam’s] Schiphol airport around 2007. I remember that getting 
our ‘own’ Starbucks was something very special for us. Having 
traveled quite a bit by that time, I had experienced Starbucks in 
other countries and could report that I had ‘been there, done 
that’ and enjoyed the unique treat of the Starbucks coffee experi-
ence.” When customers are eager to get “their” own new store or 
are willing to wait an hour to get through the line at a store open-
ing, you know that your product has appeal. But as the hype and 
novelty wear off, will you be able to sustain the enthusiasm and 
keep the cash register ringing?
For Starbucks, international success is validated by the com-
pany’s financial sustainability or growth in many regions of the 
world. Much like the story of Starbucks success in the United 
States, growth came fairly swiftly during periods of global eco-
nomic prosperity and positive brand reputation (although there 
have been exceptions in an occasional market; see Chapter 7). 
Even during sustained global economic challenges, Starbucks 
has been experiencing stability throughout North America and 
Europe, with strong growth noted in Latin America and Asia. 
For example, in 2012, Starbucks launched its first store in Costa 
Rica as a joint-venture partnership with Corporación de Fran-
quicias Americanas and also opened a Farmer Support Center 
in Colombia. Latin American growth plans also include hun-
dreds of new stores in Brazil and more than 300 new openings 
in Argentina and Mexico by 2015. Pan Kwan Yuk, a reporter and 
commentator who specializes in emerging markets, suggests, 
“As in the U.S. before Starbucks came along, there are few places 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
130
in Latin America where one can just sit with a book or a lap-
top and while the day away.” From the standpoint of stability in 
the rest of the Americas, Starbucks achieved the landmark of 25 
years in Canada in 2012. Canada is Starbucks oldest and largest 
international market. In 2013, Starbucks marked 42 years of op-
eration in the United States, with nearly 11,000 stores across all 
50 states. 
Some of the greatest growth of the brand is occurring 
throughout Asia, with 500 new stores planned to open in fiscal 
year 2013. More than half of those openings are in China alone. 
Also, 2013 marks the opening of Starbucks 1,000th store in Ja-
pan, the first international location of the brand outside of North 
America.
According to a report in MSN Money in August of 2012, 
Asia was contributing approximately 13 percent of Starbucks 
profits. At the time, John Culver, president, Starbucks China 
and Asia Pacific, noted, “With high-store margins and low-store 
penetration, given the size of the country we are in the very early 
stages of what we think this market can ultimately reach.” China 
will probably eclipse Canada as Starbucks largest market outside 
the United States in 2014.
Overall, at the start of fiscal year 2012, Starbucks anticipated 
1,200 new store openings (representing growth of approximately 
three stores per day), with the bulk of them likely to occur out-
side of the United States. These numbers suggest that the Star-
bucks connection is robust and thriving globally, thanks in large 
measure to the leadership’s ability to position the brand to meet 
the product and the universal emotional, social, and lifestyle 
needs of customers from very diverse backgrounds. Even with 
that strong universal platform, however, Starbucks leaders, like 
those in every successful broad-sweeping company, have had 
to find ways to enhance the local relevance of their offerings—
which happens to be our exploration in Chapter 7.

A ss u m e  th e  U ni ve r sa l
131
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• Customers want to be seen and heard.
• While cultural difference may affect how you dem-
onstrate it, a willingness to seek personal connec-
tions with customers will help your business stand 
out from your competitors.
• A goal of the leadership should be to create the right 
environment for human connection to occur and to 
help staff members manage the inevitable challenges 
that emerge during human interactions. 
• By getting to know your customers, you are likely to 
differentiate yourself from the many brands that try 
to sell without listening.
• One of the most powerful opportunities for building 
loyalty occurs after the sale, with your employees say-
ing thank you, offering a warm farewell, and inviting 
customers into future opportunities to connect.
• Leaders must create an environment of gratitude and 
structure the business to demonstrate appreciation 
for loyal patronage.
• All leaders have the opportunity to look at their busi-
nesses as offering more than products or services. 
Leaders can create places of belonging and purpose-
fulness for their customers. 
• Demonstrate innovation in building a commu-
nity that consists of both your customers and your  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
132
employees; in addition, consider adding an element 
of social activism.
• Human beings want their comforts to remain stable, 
and yet to have sufficient variety to avert boredom. 
• While many of us lead companies where customer 
contact is infrequent, rituals can still be created 
around seasonal product offerings or even annual 
events.

133
Respect, Celebrate,  
and Customize: 
Listening and Innovating 
to Meet Local, Regional, 
and Global Needs
Our Similarities bring us to a common ground; Our 
Differences allow us to be fascinated by each other. 
Tom Robbins
M
arket expansions are challenging, and companies often 
overreach or fail to understand the local needs of their new 
market. While this chapter will explore the challenges that Star-
bucks has faced as it has attempted to ensure its relevance on a 
global stage, let’s take a quick glimpse at major lessons learned 
from Intuit, the company behind the very successful U.S. prod-
uct Quicken tax preparation software, which was started in 1983. 
In the 10 years following the product’s U.S. launch, Intuit 
successfully expanded into the Canadian and British markets. 
Shortly thereafter, the firm’s leaders launched the product in 
other European countries, South America, Mexico, and Japan. 
Despite considerable media attention at its introduction in those 
C H
A P
T
E R
 7

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
134
countries, Intuit’s sales dropped after the initial orders were 
filled. As a result, the company pulled back its operations in all 
countries except the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United 
States. In explaining the failed expansion efforts, the founder of 
Intuit, Scott Cook, noted, “The root cause was baked into our 
early decision where we didn’t build these products based on a 
deep study of the countries. We built them based on what we 
had in the U.S. . . . The reason we succeeded in the U.S. was be-
cause we studied the potential customer better than anyone else. 
We knew them cold and built a product so native to the way they 
worked. . . . We didn’t do that overseas; we gave them the prod-
uct we had built in the U.S.” Upon pulling out of these markets, 
Intuit avoided global expansion for more than a decade. As Scott 
Cook notes, when Intuit renewed its global growth plan, it ben-
efited from the lessons it had learned during its first large-scale 
foray, this time “doing it the right way, hiring people locally who 
can go in and understand the customer cold and design what the 
solutions should be, not what they are stuck with from the US.” 
Since Intuit revised its approach, the company has successfully 
expanded into Singapore, India, South Africa, and New Zealand.
This chapter takes you through a series of key approaches 
and adjustments that Starbucks leadership has deployed to 
maximize the local relevance of products, services, and physi-
cal environment. The journey begins with a regionalized model 
of operations. The chapter also explores the role of local busi-
ness partnerships and outlines specific methods for customizing 
products and services to address culturally specific wants and 
needs.
Decentralization and 
Revitalization
Prior to July 2011, Starbucks operated as two centralized busi-
ness entities, Starbucks U.S. and Starbucks International, both 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
135
of which were led from Seattle, Washington. In 2011, a dramatic 
shift in operations took place to address the mounting chal-
lenges and to seize emerging global opportunities. Starbucks 
senior leaders decentralized and separated into a three-region 
model. Earlier in this book, I’ve shared stories from the leaders 
in each of these regions, but for clarity, the leaders and regions 
are as follows:
China and Asia Pacific Rim; president, John Culver. Coun-
tries included in this region are Australia, China, Hong 
Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, New Zea-
land, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thai-
land, and Vietnam.
Europe, Middle East and Africa; president, Michelle Gass. 
The countries in EMEA include Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Jor-
dan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, 
Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi 
Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Arab 
Emirates, and the United Kingdom. 
Americas; president, Cliff Burrows. The region includes 
Argentina, Aruba, the Bahamas, Brazil, Canada, Chile, 
Costa Rica, Curaçao, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, 
Peru, Puerto Rico, and the United States.
The impetus behind this Starbucks restructuring was to cre-
ate a model that was less U.S.-centric but that still leveraged the 
best of Starbucks in ways that are relevant in global markets. This 
restructuring gives regional presidents a geographic area for 
which they are responsible and gives them full authority to de-
velop strategic plans that address business objectives in their ar-
eas. Michelle Gass, president, EMEA, demonstrates the regional 
nature of business strategy development: “It’s fair to say that the 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
136
EMEA business is the lowest profit unit of the three, whether 
you are calculating profit on an absolute or percentage basis.” 
After spending a considerable amount of time traveling around 
the region, Michelle and her leadership team created a strategy 
based on observations and perceived needs in their geographic 
area, including such things as exploring the local relevance of 
coffee offerings, building inspirational store environments, and 
attempting to increase the “daily ritual” of coffee by enhancing 
access and availability consistent with the lifestyle of customers 
across the region. Later in the chapter, we will look specifically 
at changes made to espresso drinks in EMEA, store redesign ap-
proaches, and the enhanced availability of Starbucks products 
and beverages for people on the go. However, for the purpose 
of this discussion, senior leaders like Michelle are no longer at-
tempting to manage a global business from the Starbucks Sup-
port Center in Seattle, Washington, and are better positioned, 
with full independence, to do what is needed in their regions. 
Certainly, the challenges faced by John Culver in the China and 
Asia Pacific market are quite different from those faced by Mi-
chelle in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. For example, John 
has to help Starbucks be viewed as an employer of choice in 
China and skillfully steward expansion and distribution oppor-
tunities in India and greater China while also exploring many 
opportunities in emerging regional markets like Vietnam.
In addition to having a new leadership structure in the re-
gions and creating autonomous business planning, this reorga-
nization continues to afford leaders like Michelle, John, and Cliff 
the ability to share best practices that can prove helpful in other 
areas of the world. We saw how well this worked in Chapter 6 
when Cliff Burrows, president, Starbucks Americas, adopted the 
“names on partners and names on cups” approach that Michelle 
had deployed in EMEA. 
While repositioning the leadership to generate local over-
sight has its advantages, it is not a panacea for global success. 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
137
Each business leader at Starbucks must still balance relevant cul-
tural needs with a recognizable Starbucks brand connection. The 
objective is not to subsume the Starbucks brand beneath cultural 
differences, nor is it to deliver an Americanized Starbucks Ex-
perience that overpowers the needs of the customers in a local 
market. In fact, researchers have suggested that brands like Star-
bucks both shape communities and are shaped by local cultures. 
Craig Thompson and Zeynep Arsel, writing in the Journal of 
Consumer Research, note, “In recent years, anthropological stud-
ies have built a strong empirical case . . . [that] consumers often 
appropriate the meanings of global brands to their own ends, 
creatively adding new cultural associations, dropping incompat-
ible ones, and transforming others to fit into local cultural and 
lifestyle patterns. . . . From this perspective, the interjection of 
global brands into local cultures paradoxically produces hetero-
geneity as global brands take on a variety of localized meanings.” 
In essence, all successful brands must realize that they need to 
be shaped by local culture and, in turn, that they are a force that 
shapes the cultures of those they serve.
Finding Local Partners
In the beginning of this chapter, I highlighted the initial chal-
lenges Intuit faced in its global expansion efforts. In reposition-
ing the brand for success, founder Scott Cook suggested that 
getting global growth right means “hiring people locally who 
can go in and understand the customer cold and design what the 
solutions should be.” At Starbucks, hiring is extremely important 
in each market, but so is the selection of joint-venture business 
partners. Starbucks often must carefully vet and rely on busi-
ness allies to bring an awareness of difficult-to-discern cultural  
subtleties as well as operational knowledge of needed business 
practices, optimal real estate positioning, and even local con-
sumer behavior.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
138
In 2007, while I was speaking and consulting across India, 
I repeatedly faced questions like, “When is Starbucks coming to 
India?” My typical response was, “I suspect when the company 
finds the right local business partner to assure its success here.” 
Given that India has a young population (median age around 25 
years) of 1.2 billion people who have been exposed to a grow-
ing café culture in local coffeehouses, it has long been an attrac-
tive market for Starbucks. In January 2011, Starbucks leadership 
deepened this exploration through a nonbinding memorandum 
of understanding with Tata Coffee. Ultimately, this relationship 
resulted in a joint-venture partnership arrangement. 
Tata is a public company that is traded on the Bombay Stock 
Exchange. It is part of the Tata Group, a multinational conglom-
erate operating in seven business sectors in more than 80 coun-
tries across six continents. Tata Coffee was founded in 1922 and 
has been described as the “largest integrated coffee plantation 
company in the world.” The partnership with Tata not only pro-
vides Starbucks with an opportunity to leverage cultural rele-
vance but also created a sourcing and roasting platform with 
supply chain opportunities for procuring green arabica coffee 
beans from Tata Coffee plantations and roasting those beans at 
existing Tata roasting facilities. 
After Starbucks opened its first store in Mumbai (followed 
a week later by the opening of three additional stores), Howard 
Schultz was also asked why it had taken Starbucks so long to enter 
India. His answer echoed the importance of waiting until it had 
secured an arrangement with Tata to warrant the substantial risk 
and investment: “[India] is a very complex market to enter. At 
one point we thought we could come here alone and we under-
estimated the complexity. But once we met the people from Tata, 
we realized overnight that the assets were so complementary 
between Tata and Starbucks that together we could co-author  
a very unique strategy—bring Starbucks in India and over a time 
build a very substantial significant business together.”

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
139
Howard’s answer not only highlights the role of partner-
ship selection but also suggests the importance of the patient, 
long-term commitment required to achieve success in a global 
setting. John Culver, president, Starbucks China and Asia Pa-
cific, shares, “Success in the global marketplace is not instan-
taneous. Your global partners and the communities you enter 
need to know that you are committed to their long-term growth 
and development. They want a good corporate citizen who will 
make them better and who will go through ups and downs to 
achieve sustainable success and positive outcomes. If you consis-
tently provide these things, those partners and communities will 
make you better over the long term.” As it specifically relates to 
the Starbucks joint venture in India, Howard Schultz adds, Tata 
and Starbucks “are bringing an unparalleled experience to In-
dia customers. We are investing for the long term and see great 
potential for accelerated growth in India.” Careful selection of 
business partners, decentralized leadership, patient execution  
of strategy that integrates your brand essence with locally rele-
vant needs, and a commitment to the long term is quite the for-
mula for success beyond your hometown.
Striking a Balance Through the 
Physical Environment
Many brands enter communities and appear “out of place” sim-
ply because they either do not understand or have not attempted 
to integrate the physical properties or history of the new com-
munity. Kimberlee Sherman, program manager, Global De-
sign and Construction Support Services, acknowledges that for 
a time Starbucks was not adapting its store designs to provide 
local relevance. “We were becoming very ubiquitous, and in-
dependent coffeehouses were able to distinguish themselves in 
local communities by providing interesting spaces. Their loca-
tions were more contemporary and relevant to the communities  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
140
they served. We had to admit that we needed to update our de-
sign approach. After the economic downturn, we started to 
really reevaluate the uniqueness and fit of our design concepts.” 
As a result of this reevaluation process, Starbucks design 
leaders crafted a more customizable approach to store design. 
During its high-growth period, Starbucks did benefit from con-
sistency of store presentation and economies of scale. By repli-
cating store designs, Starbucks could purchase tables, chairs, and 
other fixtures in a cost-effective way; however, the stores began 
to look more similar and local relevance was minimized. This 
cookie-cutter approach to design probably detracted from the 
specialness of the Starbucks Experience and had an impact on 
customer loyalty. More freedom for unique design has been a 
component of the turnaround strategy. As a result, Starbucks has 
developed a scalable, malleable, and innovative solution that be-
gan with store design concepts referred to as heritage, artisan, 
and regional modern.
Kimberlee adds, “We take what we learn from concept store 
tests and harvest the great ideas, baking those key learnings into 
standard offerings for our core stores. Within each of those con-
cept styles, there is a lot of variety in the furniture and fixtures 
that a local store designer can select. We have a design resource 
center website which is a one-stop shop for designers anywhere 
in the world. At that site, designers can find design guidelines 
and also select store elements to fit and inspire the community 
to be served. Then they can provide more uniqueness with local 
custom artwork, finishes, and the like.” From Kimberlee’s per-
spective, this blended approach, with standard items and oppor-
tunity for local variation, serves a central objective. Kimberlee 
continues, “We wanted to be locally relevant. We want the design  
to work for the customers who use each individual store. De-
signers need to understand the architecture of the store, the 
neighborhood, the customer base, and the competition. They 
look for anything historical or interesting about the architecture 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
141
that they can use versus eliminate. Just like our baristas custom-
ize the drinks for our customers, we’re customizing solutions for 
our regions and our markets to make the third-place environ-
ment suit them.”
To better understand how Starbucks designers make stores fit 
with local communities, we need only look at the redesigns made 
prior to the 2012 Olympic Games in England. Thom Breslin,  
director, Design, Starbucks UK, suggests that a redesign process 
can sometimes be disruptive for both partners and customers. 
Thom sees this process as needing to drive functional, financial, 
and creative returns that will justify this disruptive investment. 
Thus, he suggests that local use patterns must first be addressed: 
“Considering local cultural influences is an important layer of 
our design process to ensure market relevance. For us, it starts 
with listening and observing the needs of our partners and cus-
tomers. It’s about communicating up front, talking to customers, 
listening to partners, and it’s also seeing things through the lens 
of that collective experience. Our partners spend a great deal of 
time in this environment, so if we fail to design a relevant expe-
rience for them, it’s hard to create a physical space that allows 
them to effectively connect with our customers. Design is about 
supporting neighborhoods with great-looking stores that sur-
pass community ambitions and needs where people are able to 
develop an emotional connection with our brand.” 
There are many examples of Starbucks integrating brand 
connection with local building design; however, for our pur-
poses, let’s look at the Dazaifutenmangu Ometesando store in 
Dazaifu, Japan. The space was designed by Kengo Kuma and As-
sociates; it integrates aspects of traditional Japanese and Chinese 
architecture (piling small items from the ground up) and uses 
more than 2,000 wooden batons to create a woven lattice. Ac-
cording to an article in Dezeen magazine, the “location of this 
Starbucks is somehow characteristic, as it stands on the main ap-
proach to the Dazaifutenmangu, one of the most major shrines 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
142
in Japan. Established in 919 A.D., the shrine has been worshiped 
as ‘the God for Examination,’ and receives about 2 million visi-
tors a year who wish their success. . . . The project aimed to make 
a structure that harmonizes with such townscape, using a unique 
system of weaving thin woods diagonally.”
While store design must have functional and local relevance 
to the communities being served, often the products served in 
those settings must also change to fit with local preferences. At 
Starbucks, product variations typically occur with food offerings 
and in some cases through beverage innovation. 
Innovating and Evolving Product
Have you had a black sesame green tea or a mooncake at Star-
bucks? If not, you probably don’t live near or haven’t visited a 
Starbucks in China. Belinda Wong, Starbucks president, China, 
noted, “Our customers can definitely expect to see more locally 
relevant innovations across our food and beverage offerings.” 
The company’s local food and beverage innovations are far too 
numerous to list here, but they have included items like Murg 
Tikka (chicken cooked in a tandoori oven) in India, Azuki Mat-
cha Frappuccino® blended beverage (matcha green tea, sweet red 
beans, and a sprinkle of kinako or soybean powder) in Japan, 
pão de queijo (traditional cheese bread) in Brazil, and Mozaik 
Pasta (a favorite local chocolate cake) in Turkey. 
Barbara McMaster, district manager in Northern Ireland, 
shares how customized items can fit an important taste pref-
erence in a region. “We’re doing work to constantly evolve our 
food offerings and to provide choices that make sense in Eng-
land and here in Northern Ireland. One example is our evolu-
tion of the bacon butty, a sandwich that people often enjoy with 
a cup of coffee and which serves as a comfort food. We originally 
positioned it as a morning item, but as a result of customers’ re-
quests, it is now available all day. It made sense to add the bacon 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
143
butty to our lineup, and we did consumer research to assure we 
are providing the taste experience our customers are looking for.”
While many of Starbucks localized products are items that 
are unique to the preferences of a region, Samantha Yarwood, 
director of marketing, Starbucks Switzerland and Austria, adds, 
“At times we simply need to make a few adjustments to our tra-
ditional offerings to accommodate local appetites. Customers 
in Switzerland and Austria often come to us for an American-
style experience and are looking for high-quality American-style 
beverages and food categories like muffins, donuts, and cheese-
cake. In our region, and in others throughout Europe, American 
pancakes are served with honey, syrup, or fruit, even if pancakes 
aren’t part of a typical menu in Starbucks in the United States.” 
Clearly there are trade-offs in seeking local relevance. For all 
the gains derived from connecting with local preferences, custom-
ers have many other choices for local fare. Brands like Starbucks  
R ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Are you seeking to sell your same products to cus-
tomers in new markets, or are you understanding the 
needs of those markets and tailoring your solutions  
to be relevant to them? How far can and do you go to 
achieve local relevance?
2.	 How effectively have you sought partnerships and re-
positioned your leadership structure to achieve rele-
vance in new markets? 
3.	 Have you created a “sense of place” in your new mar-
kets such that you can blend your brand with local 
needs?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
144
must also consider whether they can execute local offerings at a 
level of quality consistent with that of their core products. 
How Far Can You Go?
The localized food and beverage items discussed thus far in-
volve either new market-specific product innovations or adjust-
ments of important but not core products. While those changes 
are guided by consumer research, certainly some products, like 
the recipe for Starbucks lattes or Starbucks® Espresso Roast, can’t 
possibly be changed, even if local consumer sentiment favors a 
modification. Or can they?
Kris Engskov, managing director, Starbucks UK and Ire-
land, addresses a rather historic change in lattes in his region: 
“People drink Starbucks lattes throughout the world, and it’s our 
top-selling beverage. Historically, we’ve held to the notion that 
our latte, like all of our core coffee offerings, should be the same  
everywhere all the time.” Despite that traditional view, Kris notes 
that Starbucks in the UK and Ireland were hearing from custom-
ers that they wanted a “stronger” latte, and over a five-year pe-
riod, stores in the region had noted an approximately 60 percent 
increase in customers adding an extra shot of espresso to their 
lattes. Kris continues the product evolution story by noting, “We 
considered making our latte stronger by defaulting to an extra 
shot of espresso. We test-marketed that idea, and that recipe was 
a success—a success not only in the taste tests with our custom-
ers, but also in tests with a key competitor’s customers; 60 per-
cent of the competitor’s customers liked our latte better than the 
latte being prepared by the competitor. So at no extra charge, 
we changed our tall latte to a two-shot espresso drink.” Shortly 
thereafter, a headline in the London Telegraph read, “Starbucks’ 
UK sales boosted by extra shot of espresso.” The article added 
that a 9 percent increase in latte and cappuccino sales occurred 
even in “cash-strapped” and “difficult economic times.”

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
145
A similar challenge occurred with the Starbucks Espresso 
Roast in France. Rob Naylor, managing director, Starbucks 
France, shares, “We were hearing anecdotally from custom-
ers that they would like us to consider a change to our Espresso 
Roast. You have to understand our Espresso Roast has been 
the absolute foundation of the brand for over 40 years—so any 
changes would certainly be unlikely.” Despite his reluctance 
to consider a change, Rob reports that consumer research was 
conducted. As expected, the existing Espresso Roast received 
“extremely good” ratings from a large portion of the French con-
sumer base; however, a significant number of younger females 
in those tests preferred a lighter Espresso Roast. Rob remem-
bers getting sample data from 1,000 customers and addressing 
the findings with Michelle Gass and Howard Schultz. Rob notes, 
“That was a tough message to deliver, but Howard, with good 
grace, said, ‘We’ve got to give people what they want. Let’s give it 
a go as long as it’s the highest quality coffee, it’s ethically sourced, 
and it’s served in a way that is consistent with our brand and val-
ues.’” So Starbucks created the Starbucks® Blonde Espresso Roast 
for the French market. If you were to place the beans that con-
stitute the standard and Blonde Espresso Roast side by side, you 
would see that the standard bean is very deep brown (almost 
black) and glossy, whereas the Blonde Espresso Roast bean is 
lighter in color, an almost chestnut brown, with a substantially 
different flavor profile. 
While brewed coffee is a key business driver in the United 
States, straight espresso (or what is sometimes referred to as a 
long espresso) is essential to success in France. Rob shares the 
significance of this product addition: “Our Blonde Espresso 
Roast now accounts for about 25 percent of all the espresso we 
sell. I think it’s a great story about listening to the consumer and 
then doing something bold about what you hear. We have done 
research in a number of areas in the past—food being a good  
example—and we’ve made incremental improvements, but  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
146
adding a new espresso blend specifically for the needs of a mar-
ket like France . . . that is simply a breakthrough for us and our  
customers!” 
One essential takeaway from both the new latte recipe in the 
UK and the Blonde Espresso Roast in France is that each increases 
customer choice in a relevant way. While the default recipe for a 
tall latte in the UK is now two shots of espresso, customers who 
prefer the nonregional standard can easily ask for a single-shot 
drink. In the case of Blonde Espresso Roast, the traditional blend 
is available and is serving the largest section of the market. Lead-
ers at Starbucks understand that maximized choice is essential to 
today’s global consumer, but with choice comes a responsibility 
to ensure that you can execute the new product offerings at a level 
commensurate with your existing levels of excellence. 
Localizing to Location
Its origins are still a subject of debate, but the first printed refer-
ence to the phrase “location, location, location” appears to be a 
real estate advertisement in the Chicago Tribune in 1926. While 
the phrase is more than 87 years old, it remains particularly im-
portant when it comes to opening stores in new markets. From 
the perspective of the United States, for example, Starbucks has 
opened a coffee shop directly on the slopes of Squaw Valley, near 
Lake Tahoe in California. Skiers can literally ski in (no need to 
remove your boots or skis) and ski out. To see customers being 
served in this unique and relevant location, go to http://tinyurl 
.com/onq59kl or point your QR-enabled mobile device to:

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
147
Daily rituals and product use patterns across the world vary 
greatly, and site selection is critical. Rob Sopkin, vice president, 
Starbucks Store Development East, offers a sense of the eco-
nomic risk involved in a Starbucks store opening: “Every deci-
sion about opening a store is about a $1 million investment. . . . 
Site selection is often a mix of art and science, a combination of 
strategy and opportunity.” 
Frank Wubben, managing director, Starbucks Switzerland 
and Austria, shares how strategy and opportunity combined to 
provide the planned 2013 debut of Starbucks stores on Swiss Fed-
eral Railways trains: “We are always looking to provide Starbucks 
opportunities that meet people where they are. We essentially 
want to position ourselves in the high-traffic lifestyle locations 
of our customers.” Frank adds that the head of passenger traffic 
for Swiss Federal Railways had been a longstanding and devoted 
Starbucks customer who was committed to transforming the pas-
senger train experience. Shortly after assuming her position with 
Swiss Federal Railways, she initiated a program called “Home on 
Track” and shared with Frank that she wanted to create the same 
type of experience on Swiss trains that Starbucks was creating in 
its stores. Frank adds, “We put a project team together, and within 
six months, we were able to get the green light to build two fully 
equipped stores in two double-decker trains.” 
In many countries, Starbucks is seeking to locate in areas 
that not only provide high “on-the-go” traffic but also serve as 
community hubs. In China, for example, business strategist and 
author Moe Nawaz suggests that Starbucks positions stores that 
are “aiming at the young urban Chinese demographic, and store 
locations are comfortable and offer a social setting—a welcome 
break from cramped apartments.” The social as well as the more 
mobile store positioning strategy depends on cultural values and 
the lifestyle use patterns of local consumers. 
Starbucks leaders are looking for ways to be where people are 
and not make customers have to seek them out. They understand  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
148
the need to position their product offerings in accordance with  
local lifestyles. Frequently, leaders will also experiment with bold  
concepts to keep the brand fresh and to determine what new 
ideas resonate in communities.
Experimenting to Relevance
Thom Breslin, director, Design, Starbucks UK, puts it rather 
succinctly, “If you don’t innovate, renovate, and constantly seek  
relevance—you die.” One example of this energizing innovation 
occurred in Amsterdam with a store referred to as “the Bank.” 
While one might think that “the Bank” refers to how Starbucks 
is banking on the innovations of the concept, the name simply  
arose from the fact that the store is located in a former bank 
vault. Liz Muller, a Dutch-born designer and Starbucks concept 
design director, worked with 35 craftsmen and artists to make 
the underground store locally relevant and sustainable under 
LEED® (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) cri-
teria (more on environmental building practices in Chapter 11). 
Rich Nelsen, senior vice president, Starbucks Europe, Middle 
East and Africa, described the Bank as “the ultimate expression 
of coffee, design, and community at its best.”
Qaalfa Dibeehi, chief operating and consulting officer of Be-
yond Philosophy, validates the design and community aspects 
through his experience at the Bank by noting, “All of the dis-
plays and materials and design are from the Netherlands. . . . 
The space is designed to encourage interaction between custom-
ers themselves and between customer and employee. There are 
spaces for bands to play live music; there is a central area where 
a gigantic long communal table is situated. The counters are all 
at just slightly above waist height so as to minimise the counter  
barrier. This store has its own Twitter hashtag (#starbucksthe 
bank) where employees tweet things like when the next fresh-
baked cookies will be put out. . . . Additionally, there is ‘Slow bar’ 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
149
which is where a barista will make you a specially brewed cof-
fee. The coffees on offer in this area are specially prepared small 
batch makes and are to be enjoyed ‘black’. . . . Three types of 
brewing methods were on offer: coffee press, slow brew (a slow 
drip method) and a new technology called ‘Clover’” (the Clover 
brewing system).
Suffice it to say that the Bank and other cutting-edge concept 
stores are not scalable as designed. Each offers an experimental 
opportunity to highlight and explore aspects of an experience 
tailored for a community. From those explorations and observa-
tions of customer behavior, Starbucks can adopt, adapt, and ex-
trapolate new ideas that will connect both locally and globally.
R ef l e ct i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Would you be willing to make a change like Starbucks 
leaders did when it came to the recipe for lattes in the 
United Kingdom and Ireland? How are you adding 
choice for potential customer groups who might not 
have an affinity for your core product offerings?
2.	 What are the product rituals and daily use patterns of 
prospective customers in new markets? How are you 
positioning your product (such as Starbucks on Swiss 
trains) to capture customers in the context of their  
lifestyles?
3.	 If Thom Breslin is correct and a failure to “innovate, 
renovate, and constantly seek relevance” leads to cor-
porate death, what are you doing to stay alive and 
thrive in new markets?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
150
Special Sensitivities
While most of the major customization issues required to 
achieve broad business success have already been covered in this 
chapter, it’s important to realize that every location has unique 
nuances that must be considered from the point of your market 
entry all the way through your mature market presence. In the 
case of Starbucks, these special considerations range from logo 
presentation to the structure of loyalty programs. 
Subtle cultural differences affect delivery across a gamut of 
needs. These variations even affect things like the desire to be 
valued as a customer, as discussed in the loyalty program infor-
mation in Chapter 6. For example, Starbucks leaders have had 
to craft culturally relevant customer reward incentives that are 
consistent with community-based values. Starbucks leaders 
in China teamed up with a local digital engagement company 
around a holiday promotion that involved outdoor signs, so-
cial media, and location-based services. Starbucks used digital 
outdoor signs to describe the promotion. Customers then used 
their mobile devices to check into Starbucks stores in the prov-
inces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and in the process received a vir-
tual badge on their device. When 30,000 badges had been given 
out, a large electronic billboard at Raffles City in Shanghai lit up 
with special Christmas wishes, a virtual Christmas tree lit up on 
the Starbucks event website, and customers were notified that 
they had received a drink upgrade. This promotion worked well 
in the collaborative Chinese culture, as customers texted friends 
and family members, telling them to check into Starbucks stores 
so that the community could achieve the virtual Christmas tree 
lighting. Feng Bao, international market manager at Starbucks, 
explains, “Similarly, our actual loyalty program in China focuses 
more on sharing experiences with friends and family and less 
on achieving individual rewards based on individual purchases.” 
Whether it is market entry, segregated service delivery, or the 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
151
structure of promotions and loyalty programs, culture affects 
how people want to connect with your brand.
Culture Is More than Country
While much of our exploration has been provided in the context 
of continental or national differences, it is important to empha-
size that localization needs are not defined by national borders. 
In the case of China, for example, Starbucks has forged rela-
tionships based on regional differences within the country. Ac-
cording to author Helen Wang, “China is not one homogeneous 
market. There are many Chinas. The culture from northern 
China is very different from that of the east. Consumer spending 
power inland is not on par with that in coastal cities. To address 
this complexity of the Chinese market, Starbucks collaborated 
with three regional business partners as part of its expansion 
plans. . . . Each partner brings different strengths and local ex-
pertise that helped Starbucks gain insights into the tastes and 
preferences of local Chinese consumers.”
Even when working with the Walt Disney Corporation, 
which has a strong corporate culture and themed customer ex-
periences in its parks, Starbucks leadership tailored the pre-
sentation of its product offerings to blend into the prevailing 
Disney environment. In April 2012, Starbucks announced that 
it would be opening six stores in Disneyland and Disney World. 
The first of these locations opened at Disney’s California Adven-
ture within the Fiddler, Fifer & Practical Cafe (after the charac-
ters from the Three Little Pigs). The name tags and aprons of the  
baristas in the café match those of Disney cast members, and  
the overall theme of the costumes is consistent with Los Ange-
les in the 1920s. 
The store is split between a more traditional Starbucks pre-
sentation and a side with soups and sandwiches. Customer Nicole  
Mancini notes, “The Starbucks offerings were my focus during 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
152
my visit (three in one weekend, in fact). . . . In addition to the 
menu, this café offers a quiet escape from the hustle and bustle 
of a busy park. All in all, I am excited that Disney and Starbucks 
have partnered together in order to help bring better options 
to the parks. Due to their commitment to quality products and 
commitment to responsible business practices, the two compa-
nies are bound to find success while working together over time. 
This is already obvious based on the amount of people that can 
be seen on line in the café or walking around the park showing 
off their beverages emblazoned with the Starbucks logo.”
There are extensive commonalities that underlie the human 
condition and ample similarities in what people desire when it 
comes to connections. At the same time, there is a vast chasm 
of subtle local variability that can make the difference between 
successful and failed brand extensions. Starbucks leaders ac-
tively seek local relevance and adjust their product and service 
offerings accordingly. When leaders find the right business part-
ners and make conscious and concerted efforts to give custom-
ers what they love, their businesses achieve lasting connections 
and maximal success.
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• Market expansions are challenging, and companies 
often either overreach or fail to understand the local 
needs of their new markets. 
• Successful expansion often involves choosing the 
right local business partner who can assist you in un-
derstanding subtleties in the needs and desired solu-
tions of your target audience. 

Re sp e c t,  C e le br ate ,  a nd  C u stomi ze
153
• Store design must have functional and local rele-
vance to the communities served, as should the prod-
ucts offered in those settings.
• Maximized choice is essential to today’s global con-
sumer, but with choice comes a responsibility to en-
sure that you can execute your new product offerings 
at a level commensurate with your existing levels of 
excellence. 
• Leaders look for ways to be where people are and not 
make customers have to seek them out. 
• In an increasingly competitive marketplace, it is es-
sential that you experiment with bold concepts to 
keep your brand fresh and to determine what new 
ideas resonate in the communities you serve.
• Observe your customers, then adopt, adapt, and ex-
trapolate new ideas that will connect both locally and 
globally.
• Internationally, people have many common needs, 
but culture affects how people will want to connect 
with your brand.

This page intentionally left blank 

P r i n c i p l e  4 
Mobilize  
the 
Connection

156
156
U
p to this point in the book, we have primarily examined 
the bond that Starbucks forges with its customers in the 
context of Starbucks stores. While “brick-and-mortar” 
connections tend to be terrific opportunities to develop personal 
face-to-face relationships, much of today’s commerce is happen-
ing outside of a traditional retail building. People are making 
purchases while they are sitting in front of a computer or are en-
gaging with brands through their mobile devices. This business 
principle, “Mobilize the Connection,” looks at how Starbucks 
strengthens the relationships formed in Starbucks stores and ex-
tends them into the home, office, and supermarket experiences 
of customers. Moreover, it examines how Starbucks leaders le-
verage technology to integrate a multichannel relationship with 
their customer base. 
Many business leaders have a love/hate relationship with 
technology. On the one hand, technological advances offer great 
business opportunities. On the other hand, the infrastructure 
costs associated with technology shifts and the rapid pace of 
technological change pose strategic and operational challenges. 
Although some business leaders fall in love with technology for 
technology’s sake, Starbucks love of its customers and its appre-
ciation for the relationship that those customers have with tech-
nology leads to a functional use of digital, social, and mobile 
tools. In the words of Howard Schultz, you have to “run with 
people in the way they run their lives.” Chapter 8, titled “Grow-
ing the Connection Through Technology,” explores how the 
leadership has improved the in-store experience through the use 
of technologies such as the Starbucks Digital Network. It also 
examines the comprehensive digital strategy that Starbucks de-
ploys, including internal assets like mobile apps and external re-
sources like social media.
Chapter 9, “Personal Relationships Translate: Sharing the 
Love from People to Products,” explores the multichannel strat-
egy adopted by Starbucks leaders that has resulted in Starbucks 

157
157
products being available for customers not only in Starbucks 
stores but also in their homes, their offices, other businesses, and 
virtually anywhere they go. Building on concepts from the prior 
chapter, “Personal Relationships Translate” looks at how tech-
nology and marketing can interface to encourage customers to 
explore offerings across product channels. Chapter 9 is also de-
signed to assist you as you consider ways to present products to 
your customers in as many locations as you can reasonably man-
age. Starbucks is no longer just a coffee brand or a company lim-
ited by its brick-and-mortar footprint. Just as the Starbucks logo 
was redesigned to release the siren from the circle that confined 
her, the Starbucks connection has emerged beyond the bound-
aries of the Starbucks store. 

158
C H
A P
T
E R
 8
Growing the Connection 
Through Technology
Information technology and business are becoming  
inextricably interwoven. I don’t think anybody can 
talk meaningfully about one without talking about 
the other.
Bill Gates
I
n a 2012 Time magazine survey, people were forced to choose 
one item to take to work: their wallet, their lunch, or their mo-
bile device. The result: 66 percent chose their mobile device over 
their lunch, and 44 percent chose their mobile device over their 
wallet. In the same study, 68 percent of adults report that they 
sleep with their mobile phone next to them, and 89 percent say 
that they couldn’t make it through a single day without using 
their mobile device.
In my 2006 book The Starbucks Experience, I spent little time 
talking about technology or the future of mobile communication 
and interconnectivity. Instead, I shared how Starbucks leaders 
positioned their coffeehouse as the “third place,” an environ-
ment that provided a desired alternative to customers’ first place 
(home) and their second place (work). In the intervening years, 
Starbucks leaders have widened their focus to engage custom-
ers in the first and second places (more on that in Chapter 9),  

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
159
as well as to innovate connections in a mobile world that essen-
tially encompasses all the places where customers find them-
selves other than work, home, or Starbucks stores. While I was 
discussing this evolution with Howard, he shared, “We started 
out before there was a digital revolution; the third place was our 
stores. Our mobile focus has evolved to the point where every-
one is getting primary information and communicating in a way 
that was nonexistent before. I don’t think any enterprise or orga-
nization can exist in the future without having a primary relevant 
position in the minds and hearts of people through these mecha-
nisms, whether it is technology or software. I think we are off to 
a very good start, but we also recognize it could be fleeting. As 
such we must continue to make the investments and understand 
what is relevant. Many brands will come and go in terms of rele-
vancy and trust in the digital world, as trust and relevance will be 
harder to maintain digitally than through a physical presence.” 
Starbucks has become a recognized leader in digital plat-
forms, social media engagement, and innovation. For example, 
Starbucks was selected by Forbes as one of the top 20 innovation 
companies in 2011 and was recognized by General Sentiment’s 
QSR MediaMatch report in 2012 as having the highest impact 
value ($111 million) among the quick-service restaurant sec-
tor. Impact value assesses the reach of a brand and determines 
a monetary estimate based on the broad discussions and over-
all exposure garnered by a company. Additionally, the Starbucks 
Card mobile app received the Wireless Application and Mobile 
Media (WAMM) award as Best Retail, Shopping and Commerce 
Application in 2011. 
At the core of Starbucks successful digital strategy are sev-
eral interrelated areas that all business leaders should consider 
when they are attempting to connect with customers from the 
broad mass market to the one-to-one. The five key components 
of this digital strategy are (1) commerce, (2) company-owned 
web and mobile channels, (3) loyalty/customer relationship 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
160
management (CRM)/targeted database, (4) social media, and 
(5) paid digital marketing. 
Commerce, Starbucks Web and 
Mobile Channels, and Loyalty/CRM/
Targeted Database
One of the largest components of Starbucks current mobile 
strategy is anchored to commerce and connects through the 
Starbucks Card. Even before Starbucks initiated the loyalty card 
program discussed in Chapter 6, the leaders had created a Star-
bucks gift card. To understand the dimensionality of the card 
business, let’s assume that you buy a $10 Starbucks Card as a gift 
for a friend. Your friend can use the $10 and simply throw the 
card away. Alternatively, he might add value to the card while 
he is in a Starbucks store and continue to use it as a prepayment 
card. Finally, he may register the card online (thus becoming part 
of the Starbucks loyalty program). Once the card is registered on 
the Starbucks website, your friend can either manually or auto-
matically replenish the Starbucks Card from a credit card that he 
places on file or add value to the card at the register. Given these 
options, the Starbucks Card itself represents a multibillion- 
dollar business, with half of Starbucks Card customers using it 
solely as a gift card and the other half using it as their own loyalty 
and prepayment mechanism. 
As of January 2011, customers in the United States with an 
iPhone, iPod touch, or BlackBerry were able to download the 
Starbucks Card mobile app, add their Starbucks Cards, track re-
wards, and reload their cards through either PayPal or a credit 
card. Subsequently, Starbucks enhanced the app’s capability to 
include phones with Android-based operating systems, merged 
it with an existing app so that it includes a store locator and other 
features, and expanded its availability outside of the United 
States. Adam Brotman, chief digital officer, offers a sense of the 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
161
importance of these enhancements and the challenges involved 
in them: “It was hugely important for us to extend our mobile 
pay app to Android and integrate functions of our existing apps 
into one seamless app experience. Android took off fast as we  
were developing our original iPhone and BlackBerry apps, so  
we worked as quickly as possible to produce a well-integrated 
app for this exploding population of mobile phone customers.”
Through these efforts, Starbucks leaders produced a com-
plex, yet easy-to-use, mobile payment and social app that also 
offers a rich value-added experience for Android and iOS mo-
bile platforms. From the standpoint of ease of mobile payment, a 
customer simply selects “touch to pay” and positions her phone 
for a Starbucks barista to scan. In addition to ease of payment, 
customers can track purchases and see their progress toward re-
wards, receive messages in a mobile inbox, garner information 
on food and beverages, and select e-gifts. 
The Starbucks mobile app was the first widespread mobile 
payment program of its kind in the United States, and it reflects 
the leadership’s willingness to take a practical and innovative 
step into the mobile arena. Starbucks leaders did not attempt 
to declare a technical standard in mobile payment, as they be-
lieved that future standards would probably emerge from credit 
card companies working with businesses like Square, Google, 
Amazon, PayPal, Microsoft, and Apple. Instead, Starbucks lead-
ers took a pragmatic and adaptable approach, utilizing the most 
readily available technology at the time—the 2D barcode. As 
part of a large-scale upgrade of the company’s Point of Sale sys-
tem (POS), Starbucks leaders purchased 2D scanners and inte-
grated them into the POS. 
After extensive testing prior to the initial launch, Adam 
Brotman notes, “Mobile pay is the fastest way to make a pur-
chase at Starbucks. Not only is the transaction quick but the line 
isn’t slowed down with customers reloading their cards. It’s bet-
ter for everybody. Our customers are voting with their hands 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
162
and they want mobile payment.” Within approximately a year 
and a half of starting to accept mobile payments, Starbucks had 
captured more than 100 million transactions, and by late 2012, it 
was capturing more than 2 million mobile payment transactions 
per week. Adam adds, “Mobile pay is accelerating, but we also 
realize that not every customer is going to be a member of our 
loyalty program. Not everyone is going to have a Starbucks Card 
and want to pay with it.” Although Starbucks Card transactions 
are 25 percent of Starbucks tender, leaders wanted to give cus-
tomers more choices. In essence, they wished to reach a larger 
segment of their customer base through the mobile momentum 
that they achieved with their mobile payment app. As a result, 
they looked for a mobile wallet that would give customers the 
ability to make purchases directly from a debit or credit card us-
ing their mobile device.
In August 2012, Starbucks announced a strategic alliance 
with and a $25 million investment in Square Inc. to achieve a 
mobile wallet solution. Square gained widespread attention in 
2009 when it launched a mobile credit card capture solution 
geared primarily to small business owners. That solution in-
volved placing a small credit card capture device into the head-
phone jack of an iPhone. Square’s leadership in mobile payment 
technology served as the foundation for the Starbucks leader-
ship’s choosing Square’s existing wallet software for expanded 
use in Starbucks stores. Curt Garner, Starbucks chief informa-
tion officer, notes, “There are a large number of Starbucks cus-
tomers who pay with traditional credit and debit cards. That 
may be because their visit frequency is low or they prefer not to 
use prepaid cards. Square is an option for those people so that 
they can enjoy the convenience of mobile and all the benefits of 
tracking their purchases, along with getting digital receipts. Ad-
ditionally, their mobile wallet provides a directory of businesses 
near them that accept mobile pay tender on their platform.” 
At full functionality, the Starbucks and Square collaboration is  

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
163
expected to utilize geotracking technology that will facilitate not 
only mobile payment but mobile ordering as well.
Within three months of the announced alliance between 
Starbucks and Square, the Square Wallet mobile payment option 
went live, with initial mobile payment benefits at 7,000 company- 
operated U.S. Starbucks stores. At the time of the launch, Marcus  
Wohlsen, a staff writer for business at WIRED magazine, pre-
dicted that a mobile payment revolution would be initiated at 
Starbucks: “Because of its openness and seamless approach, 
Square at Starbucks is better positioned than any other technol-
ogy to become the gateway drug that could finally make mobile 
payments mainstream. . . . Paying with Square at Starbucks is 
simple. People will start using it because of little perks like get-
ting your receipt via text. Soon you’ll also be able to add a tip just 
by tapping. Multiply that usage by even a few dozen customers 
at each of 7,000 Starbucks stores, and the network effect starts to 
ripple. You use Square next at a merchant nearby because you 
see it in the app. Merchants near Starbucks start using Square 
to get into the directory. A virtuous cycle ensues, and Square—
which is to say your phone—becomes just another way you pay.” 
Both the Square Wallet and the Starbucks Card mobile app af-
ford customers convenience in the purchasing process. These apps 
also provide valuable information to customers. In the closed-
loop system of a loyalty program (one where you can track the 
effectiveness of marketing efforts through the sales information 
obtained during loyalty card or loyalty app use), a merchant can 
also learn from and refine its offerings for its customers. Adam 
Brotman, Starbucks chief digital officer, gives a specific example 
of the power of integrating customer analytics, customer relation-
ship management information, and a targeted database approach. 
According to Adam, there are more than 10 million members 
in the Starbucks loyalty program, of which about 5.5 million 
have opted in to receive communications, marketing messages, 
and offers from Starbucks. On average, those 5.5 million opt-in  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
164
customers receive a weekly e-mail from Starbucks (although the 
frequency is higher for those who purchase merchandise from 
the StarbucksStore.com website and separately opt in for com-
munications through that platform). The frequency of e-mails 
also tends to increase around the holidays. 
Adam addresses the targeted nature of these e-mails by 
noting, “We tend to create about five or six different groups of 
emails so that we can make sure that people get an offering that 
is highly relevant to them. For example, we looked at our data-
base of My Starbucks Rewards members and isolated custom-
ers who buy food regularly. We then started examining other 
characteristics about this group such as what drinks they were 
buying, when they were coming in, and other demographic or 
psychographic variables. We then did predictive modeling by 
looking at the rest of our My Starbucks Rewards customer da-
tabase.” In essence, Adam notes that his team found other in-
dividuals in the rewards customer database who were similar 
to the regular food customers in behavioral and demographic 
characteristics, with one exception: they were not buying food at 
Starbucks. Adam’s team then crafted a message targeted at these 
individuals, encouraging them (without making a discount of-
fer) to consider Starbucks food offerings. The e-mail also fea-
tured attractive pictures of Starbucks food. Several hundred 
thousand of these customers who had behavioral characteris-
tics that resembled those of regular food customers received this 
targeted e-mail. According to Adam, “Customers who received 
the food email purchased food seven times more often than they 
ever did before. We had an initial sales lift with a sustained tail 
effect and this targeted group performed 700 percent better than 
the control group performed.” 
While Starbucks is utilizing data gathering, analysis, and 
data modeling approaches to better forge relevant messages 
to and connections with customers, Adam and other leaders 
at Starbucks readily admit that they are still working to create 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
165
more tools to automate these processes. Additionally, the lead-
ers are looking for ways to communicate more efficiently and 
personally into the mobile inbox that is part of the Starbucks 
Card mobile app. Rather than targeting their communications to 
traditional e-mail, the future holds great opportunities for Star-
bucks leaders to send messages through the mobile app, thus 
utilizing the app as a one-to-one connection platform. Eventu-
ally, Starbucks leaders will also be able to personalize the look 
and feel of the company’s website and mobile app based on their 
knowledge of the individual user. The Starbucks website and app 
can be presented differently depending on the characteristics of 
the customer. 
Before we leave our discussion of the capabilities and im-
portance of the Starbucks Card mobile app, let’s take a moment 
to understand how the app engages customers through “gam-
ification” strategies. Amish Shah, chief product officer of the 
mobile apps company Bitzio, Inc., describes gamification as “us-
ing game-type mechanics in non-game businesses to increase 
efficiency, customer loyalty and engagement.” As it relates to 
Starbucks, Amish notes, “Starbucks has incorporated game me-
chanics and design into its popular loyalty program. Through 
multiple reward levels and a progression tracker, Starbucks cof-
fee lovers are continually given incentives to engage with the 
brand.” From a visual perspective, this “progression tracker” 
takes the form of virtual gold stars falling into a virtual cup on 
the Starbucks Card mobile app, and it is just one example of the 
company’s deployment of gamification principles.
Conversations with Starbucks leaders who are involved 
with digital technology often focus on the mechanics of popu-
lar online games. Beyond acknowledging the fun and theatrics 
of games like World of Warcraft, Zynga Poker, and Rovio’s An-
gry Birds, common drivers behind the success of these games 
include factors such as achievement, rewarding frequency, and 
being able to publicly show advancement. With this awareness,  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
166
leaders at Starbucks are integrating emotional drivers from 
game theory into the ways they engage customers through their 
mobile devices. One example of how Starbucks deploys gamifi-
cation came in the form of a two-week, seven-round scavenger 
hunt in collaboration with the American pop singer and song-
writer Lady Gaga. Each round involved customers decoding 
clues by going into Starbucks stores, using mobile QR readers, 
and visiting Starbucks digital properties and blogs. The scaven-
ger hunt was designed to get customers to want to work in teams 
and share their experiences. The venture was a win/win for both 
Starbucks and Lady Gaga, as she released a new album during 
the hunt and customers gained exclusive access to it on the Star-
bucks Digital Network. The winners of each round received 
Starbucks and Lady Gaga prizes. The Starbucks/Lady Gaga mar-
keting and gamification example reflects the power of working 
with individuals or organizations that have the ability to gener-
ate social media interest, followed by welcoming customers to 
gain special access or playfully interact. 
R ef l ec t i o n  o n  C o n n ect i o n
1.	 How would you assess your success in forging a digital 
connection of trust and relevance?
2.	 Do you have a multipronged and integrated strategy 
concerning digital and mobile solutions? 
3.	 Are you using game-type mechanics to increase effi-
ciency, customer loyalty, and engagement? How can 
you deploy common drivers behind popular games 
more successfully in your digital strategy, such as by re-
warding achievement or frequency and enabling pub-
lic displays of achievement?

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
167
Giving Customers Something  
to Talk About—It’s  
a Social Media World 
In many ways, Starbucks, by the nature of its culture, was well 
suited for social media. After all, Starbucks leaders value emo-
tional engagement and connections with customers and com-
munity. Yet in other ways, a full commitment to digital and 
social strategy took a mind shift for its leaders. For example, 
Chris Bruzzo, senior vice president, Channel Brand Manage-
ment, was charged with launching Starbucks in the social space. 
Chris notes that the social connection is authentic to the Star-
bucks brand and that coffeehouses by their nature facilitate so-
cial meeting networks: “In a sense, coffeehouses have served as 
the original social network. That said, Howard called me around 
Christmastime in 2007 and shared, ‘We need to be in the social 
and digital space. I know people have been giving me that mes-
sage for a while, but now we’ve got to move. We are struggling to 
hear our customers, and we must address this digitally.’ Howard 
propelled us to launch the My Starbucks Idea customer idea site 
in 2008, and shortly thereafter to move into Twitter.”
In Chapter 3, I shared the benefits of the MyStarbucksIdea 
.com site from the perspective of hearing the voice of the cus-
tomer. It is important to note that the site has also helped change 
the Starbucks culture in a way that is necessary for future social 
media success. Prior to the customer idea site, messages to and 
from customers were mainly routed through the brand commu-
nication division at the Starbucks Support Center. My Starbucks 
Idea created a much broader and more immediate dialogue be-
tween customers and Starbucks subject-matter experts. Against 
that backdrop, Starbucks could next launch onto the highly in-
teractive microblog platform of Twitter. Chris Bruzzo notes 
that Starbucks Twitter (@starbucks) launch was greatly aided 
by having the right person approaching the right leader at the 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
168
right time: “This young technical guy knocked on my door one 
day and said, ‘Chris, I want to grow and I want to help develop 
the business through social. I think Twitter could be the place.’ 
This was before Twitter was a well-known concept, and frankly, I 
didn’t fully appreciate what it had to offer or how it would effec-
tively work for us. But since this partner had a background as a 
barista and he envisioned Twitter as a ‘way to extend the barista 
connection online,’ I thought we should give it a chance. Star-
bucks engaged Twitter before any other social media thanks to 
that partner because he perceived it to be the place for brands. 
Facebook was not getting a great deal of traction for companies 
at the time. On the first day the account was created, Starbucks 
had 600 followers; 1,500 the second day. Starbucks has over 3 
million followers as of mid-2013.” 
From the perspective of outside analysts, the Starbucks ap-
proach to Twitter is praised on the basis of its direct engagement 
with customers and responsiveness to customer service issues. 
Kylie Jane Wakefield, writing for The Content Strategist, notes, 
“Checking out Starbucks’ Twitter page, it’s visible that most of 
the tweets are directed at users. . . . In fact, many of its tweets start 
with ‘sorry about that!’ or ‘sorry to hear!,’ offering dismayed cus-
tomers solutions to their problems. Instead of losing disgruntled 
customers, Starbucks directly responds, solving the issues and 
making sure that customers are, in the end, satisfied. . . . By re-
sponding to customers directly and doing its best to fix the prob-
lem, Starbucks shows that it cares about the people who buy its 
products.” From a social media perspective, Twitter fits well with 
the Starbucks focus on “uplifting moments” and personal con-
nections. As a result, the Starbucks Twitter strategy is to speak di-
rectly with customers as opposed to microblogging “look at us” 
or marketing-type messages.
While Starbucks had an easy entry into Twitter, the compa-
ny’s Facebook page required initial groundwork. Alex Wheeler, 
vice president, Global Digital Marketing, and the first person to 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
169
be hired to address social and digital issues as part of the Star-
bucks brand team back in 2006, notes, “It took a little effort for us 
to establish our official presence on Facebook. In order for that to 
happen, we connected with the Facebook page owners of about a 
dozen existing fan pages. All together there were probably about 
30,000 fans across those dozen pages. We let those page owners 
know that we wanted to consolidate their pages to have an offi-
cial presence. Everybody was very receptive and excited about 
that consolidation and that was the beginning of our Facebook 
journey.” 
Two of the key elements in the Starbucks Facebook strategy 
are authenticity and interesting content. Starbucks is committed 
to making friends, not offers. In essence, the Starbucks social me-
dia team wants to generate credible interest, not to give people 
incentives to follow the company. Using that test, Alex and her 
colleagues on the social media team have helped steer the Star-
bucks page away from “baits.” A bait is where you get someone to 
“like” your page so that he can see additional content. 
In addition to authentic and high-quality content, Starbucks 
leaders seek to deliver frequent and consistent messages. For ex-
ample, the social media team tweets daily and posts on Facebook 
with regularity, but not in an overwhelming fashion. Specifically, 
the team believes that its Facebook feeds should engage the ap-
petite of Starbucks followers without overwhelming them with 
content. The social media team also reads posts that people place 
on the Facebook wall and engages with them actively. A signif-
icant challenge for this team is managing the scale of activity 
on these sites. For example, there have been threads that had 
30,000 comments on a status update. From a strategic perspec-
tive, managing scale is a good problem to have. Twitter posts 
and Facebook feeds should engage the appetite of your follow-
ers without your bombarding them with messages. Twitter and 
Facebook are about connecting. There are more appropriate set-
tings for selling and closing. 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
170
In addition to Facebook, Starbucks has a strong social pres-
ence through YouTube, Google+, Foursquare, Instagram, and 
Pinterest. Also, the company’s employment team has been ac-
tively involved with LinkedIn. With regard to YouTube, a market-
ing content specialist at Pardot, Matt Wesson, notes, “Starbucks 
is constantly expanding its content channels and exploring new 
formats to connect with its customers. I believe it is also one of 
the best companies out there when it comes to the use of video 
to tell its brand story. The company’s YouTube channel has over 
250 videos that focus on the company’s values, give ‘behind the 
scenes’ insight, and share customer’s personal experiences.” 
Despite effective expansion onto new platforms and praise 
from analysts, forward-moving Starbucks leaders are contin-
uously looking for new ways to innovate their social media 
strategy. Adam Brotman states, “We are excited about the op-
portunity to do a lot more with YouTube. When we tell story 
through video, we’re just as apt to embed those videos into the 
player on the home page of Starbucks.com as well as embed 
them within Facebook. So when we connect and tell our story 
through video, YouTube is only one of several different chan-
nels that we’re utilizing. Given the speed of change in the digital 
space, complacency or a sense of contentment is not an option.” 
Great leaders continually seek to leverage the options that are 
emerging through technology and to position their businesses 
on social platforms more effectively and strategically.
Why Starbucks Is Successful  
in Social Media
In 2012, PhaseOne, a leading analytical-based marketing com-
munication research firm, conducted a study that looked at 75 
top brands across six vertical markets: automotive, dining, food/
beverage, retail, services, and technology. In order to assess so-
cial engagement, PhaseOne analyzed the brands in its survey 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
171
by using metrics such as Facebook likes, Klout scores, and Net-
base sentiment analyses. The conclusion: Starbucks is the number 
one brand when it comes to engaging social media users. In dis-
cussing this finding, PhaseOne researchers noted, “To achieve 
this successful social media engagement, Starbucks focused 
its Web page, Facebook page and television advertisements on  
the individual and his or her individualized experience with the  
brand. For example, Starbucks Facebook page engages the visi-
tor by speaking to his or her coffee preferences and personal sto-
ries.” While individualized experiences and unique preferences 
are substantial components of Starbucks social media success, 
the company also benefits from a thoughtful and respectful ap-
proach to each social platform in which it participates. By tak-
ing this strategic and methodical approach, Starbucks ultimately 
draws participants on those platforms toward the brand. 
Many companies jump on emerging social platforms with 
zeal; however, Starbucks leaders take a more calculated approach 
to entry. Members of the Starbucks social media team examine 
each new platform opportunity to determine whether there is a 
fit with the human connection that is the essence of the brand. 
Similarly, they look at whether they have the resources to engage 
on that platform effectively while seeking to respect the exist-
ing members of the community. Adam Brotman notes, “Con-
sidering the level of reach and engagement we have achieved, we 
are a pretty small team that is very thoughtful about our com-
mitment to an emerging platform. Let’s take Pinterest as an ex-
ample. It is such a personal platform that we knew we should be 
there. As it was taking off, we saw a lot of our customers on Pin-
terest and we were eager to reach and connect with them but we 
spent about 6 months discussing our launch. Behind the scenes, 
we were agonizing about not getting on the platform quickly, but 
we also wanted to do it right. If you get into Pinterest you real-
ize there’s a way to engage and a respectful way to show up. Just 
like on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram, there is an authentic  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
172
approach needed to engage the community and we had to place 
that into the context of how we honor our brand essence. When 
we did engage Pinterest with a concept of Starbucks love, we 
tended to post and pin a lot of things that were not our own. 
We put considerable thought into the Pinterest boards we put 
up.” In the context of its “Starbucks Loves” theme, Starbucks pins 
things like coffee, food, music, and inspiration. As a result, Star-
bucks boards include “real food,” “coffee moments,” and “inspir-
ing places.” These themes are not only at the heart of the brand 
but close to the hearts of Starbucks customers.
By building social media connections through individual-
ized experiences, unique preferences, thoughtful platform selec-
tion, and respect for the platform community, Starbucks pulls 
customers to its content, as opposed to pushing marketing ma-
terial to them. Mark Bonchek, PhD, founder of ORBIT+Co, de-
scribes this as creating “gravity.” Mark states, “Where traditional 
companies push out messages and products, these companies 
pull customers in. Instead of treating customers as passive tar-
gets, they treat them as active participants. Like the sun in a solar 
system, they create a gravitational field that pulls customers into 
their orbit. They go beyond customer loyalty to building cus-
tomer gravity.”
Thanks to this gravity, Starbucks has done what many 
brands only talk about: translate social media and digital spend-
ing into ROI. Alex Wheeler, vice president, Starbucks Global 
Digital Marketing, notes, “One of the really important moments 
in our social media journey occurred in 2009 when we did 
Free Pastry Day. We decided to launch our new food platform 
through digital only, which was very unusual for us. The ques-
tion was: could digital and a free food offer drive traffic? On the 
strength of digital/social, a million people went into Starbucks 
that day, and we created awareness through about a million and 
a half pastries.” While it’s one thing to see that many people in 
a Starbucks store for a free item, the company routinely garners 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
173
hard data that show digital investment to be an efficient business 
driver. As Alex puts it, “We have validation of the amplifying 
effect that digital engagement has on the direct marketing and 
paid marketing investment.” 
Benefiting from the Amplifying 
Effect of Social Media on  
Paid Digital Advertising
On a purely strategic level, Starbucks leaders see both social me-
dia and paid digital advertising as playing important roles in cre-
ating connections with customers. Paid ads expand the brand’s 
reach, while social media addresses reach along with engage-
ment, fun, and brand building. Starbucks leaders are building 
fans and followers through social media and are deciding when 
to do something in that space that is directed at promotion or at 
engagement. If leaders are seeking engagement, they attempt to 
trigger “virality.” Adam Brotman puts it this way: “In social, if 
somebody likes you or likes your comment, it shows up to their 
friends, family, and followers. When they retweet you in social, 
it literally amplifies and magnifies your brand’s reach. The ben-
efit of social is that people are engaging with us. They are telling 
their friends that they are checking in at a Starbucks, and they are 
usually telling it on Foursquare and connecting their Foursquare 
to Facebook or Twitter or Instagram. We integrate paid digital 
advertising into our social strategy. We take the viral effect of the 
messages we send into our regular feed and enhance them intel-
ligently by connecting with paid digital advertising in the social 
space. So when we do promoted tweets and promoted stories on 
Facebook and Twitter, we efficiently lower the cost of each paid 
impression and connect with that many more customers.” 
Dave Williams, CEO, BLiNQ Media, who likens Facebook 
to the world’s largest cocktail party, suggests that the goal of the 
medium should not be to give a hard sell on the platform, but to 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
174
achieve likes—the equivalent of receiving a business card at the 
party. Dave notes that the Starbucks approach to the integration 
of social and paid media is a desirable best practice. “For me, 
consumer-initiated ads are the future of advertising, not only 
on Facebook, but across other social networks too. Facebook’s 
Sponsored Stories—initiated by the consumer, not the brand—
is one of the cleverest ways to tap into this data mine. Here the 
user becomes a brand champion, with micro interactions such 
as likes, posts, check-ins or apps used relayed to friends and 
turned into subtle, but promoted content. Starbucks is the obvi-
ous brand example here that has utilized Sponsored Stories well, 
steadily building up its fan base before using the social graph to 
pick up on discussions around coffee breaks and its various food 
and drink products, and serving up ads with a social context.”
Given Starbucks thought leadership on social media strat-
egy, I asked Adam Brotman to offer his advice directly to read-
ers like you. His response was straightforward: “I can’t imagine 
there is a more powerful place than digital when it comes to 
connecting with your customers, telling your story, or gaining 
reach. Digital is everything from a website to digital marketing 
and even loyalty. Square is a great example—for a physical retail 
merchant, Square gives you the ability to not just have an effi-
cient way to accept credit card payments easily but they’ve cre-
ated an entire operating system between the small merchant and 
his or her customers and you can complement that with Twit-
ter and Facebook and a compelling website.” Adam also offered 
the opinion that every business should have a dedicated person 
or team that pays attention to community management, brand 
building, and marketing through digital. If a business is small, 
those responsibilities might be only part of a single individu-
al’s job description, but they need to be addressed consistently 
and tactically. Adam suggests that you need someone to “com-
mit time to thinking about the platform that fits your business 
and customer interface, and not just social media but your own 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
175
website, your loyalty program, how you use payment as a form 
of communication, the nature of customer relationship man-
agement systems, and how data can guide your marketing and 
engagement strategy. Whether there are two people or 2,000 
people in your business, you have to have a strategy. You can be 
scalable and customizable, but you must have someone to chart 
and monitor the course.”
R ef l ec t i o n  o n C o n n e ct ion
1.	 How strategic are your decisions concerning the  
social media platforms through which your brand will 
engage?
2.	 Are you looking for ways to measure the ROI and am-
plifying effects of your social and media strategies? 
Are you linking paid digital advertising to your social 
media strategy?
3.	 Have you dedicated resources to “commit time to 
thinking about the platform that fits your business and 
your customer interface, . . . your own website, your 
loyalty program, how you use payment as a form of 
communication, the nature of customer relationship 
management systems, and how data can guide your 
marketing and engagement strategy”?
Technology That  
Serves Mission
Starbucks leadership has made vast investments in technology, 
some of which its customers and partners notice, while others 
operate in the background. The bulk of these capital expenditures  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
176
targets the delivery of uplifting moments and enhancement of the 
Starbucks connection. One of the most obvious of these changes 
was the company’s transition to having one-touch free Wi-Fi in 
stores. The company’s former chief information officer told me 
he knew Starbucks was behind the times several years back when 
he went to the taco truck outside the Starbucks Support Center 
in Seattle and noticed that the truck was offering one-click free 
Wi-Fi, but Starbucks was giving customers only two hours of Wi-
Fi a day, and only if they registered a Starbucks Card and kept a 
minimum balance of $5 on it. So in 2009 Starbucks made the in-
vestment needed to make Wi-Fi seamless and easy to use. At the  
same time, Starbucks worked with content partners to create  
the Starbucks Digital Network, which allows customers who use the  
in-store Wi-Fi network to access free curated Internet content 
from various partners. For example, customers can get a Pick of 
the Week download from iTunes, view local businesses on the 
Square Directory, scan a local restaurant review, or read a book 
through New Word City. From premium content to locally rele-
vant information, the Starbucks Digital Network provides added 
value to enhance the in-store Starbucks Experience.
Another less obvious example of technology being used to 
improve the in-store connection is a project as mundane yet 
massive as the overhaul of the stores’ Point of Sale (POS) sys-
tem to something called Simphony. Curt Garner, Starbucks chief 
information officer, notes, “To take an order in our old POS, it 
had to be entered in a particular sequence, with size first and 
then drink and then any modifiers.” Leaders observed ordering 
interactions and noticed that even regular Starbucks customers 
who had actually learned the correct ordering sequence for their 
drinks occasionally were tripped up. For instance, let’s assume 
that someone regularly comes into Starbucks by himself, but on 
a particular occasion is accompanied by his child. The customer 
says, “I’ll have a double short peppermint mocha, a hot chocolate,  
an oatmeal, and a turkey bacon breakfast sandwich.” In that 

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
177
stream, the barista would be forced to remember the hot choc-
olate and not ring it in until she could go back and clarify the 
size. Obviously such a system placed a considerable cognitive 
demand on the baristas, distracted them from full engagement, 
and produced ordering errors. A new customer might come in 
and give an order that was not in the prescribed sequence; the 
barista would repeat the order in the way that was necessary 
to ring it into the POS, but it often sounded as if the customer 
was being corrected. Curt notes, “From all those observations, 
the idea of conversational ordering was born. That notion was 
we would let technology resolve the order of a drink entry. The 
barista could enter a drink into the system in any order consis-
tent with the customer’s ordering pattern.” 
In essence, the computer starts constructing the drink on 
the screen, and it shows the default part of that recipe in light 
gray and what needs to be marked on the cup in dark green. 
Curt and his colleagues anticipated that the conversational or-
dering aspects of the new POS would be of particular value to 
new baristas, but they were surprised to find that tenured baris-
tas appreciated the new system as well because it gave them a vi-
sual check that they had rung the order in correctly. Curt adds, 
“We also took advantage when rolling out Simphony, our Point 
of Sale solution, to do several things from a tech perspective that 
tried to look around the corner into the future. One was to create 
a networked solution so instead of having dumb cash registers 
sitting on a counter disconnected from anything in the enter-
prise, and then dialing into them once a day to retrieve sales, 
every single register has an IP address on our network. We are 
pulling sales from those registers constantly and also sending 
and receiving information from them continually. The POS ar-
chitecture allows us to connect with APIs (application program-
ming interfaces) and other routines that enable us to plug and 
play things like scanners and afforded us a 90-day turnaround 
time on Square.” 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
178
A great deal of technology spend at Starbucks is also occur-
ring on behalf of streamlining communication to those within 
the organization. As difficult as it is to deliver consistent lead-
ership messages in a small organization, Starbucks leaders have 
the added challenge of communicating to hundreds of thou-
sands of partners around the world. As a result, Starbucks lead-
ership is constantly working to develop integrated technology 
solutions to offer options other than relying on very busy store 
managers to see to it that all messages cascade down. 
When asked what the future of technology and digital looks 
like for Starbucks, Alex Wheeler said it succinctly: “Technology 
will evolve and people will change, but our mission will guide us. 
Technology will serve our mission, and we will deploy our strat-
egies to engage our partners and customers wherever they spend 
their time. We will seek to stay relevant to them and uplift them 
through human connection.” 
Technology is powerful when you view it as a way to enhance  
the human connection rather than as inevitably leading to im-
personalization. In the area of leveraging technology to fuel hu-
manity, Starbucks leaders have produced some interesting and 
unexpected results, even in other businesses. For example, Jack 
Dorsey, CEO of Square, discontinued the use of the word users 
thanks to the Starbucks leadership. According to Jack, Howard 
Schultz, a member of Square’s board of directors, privately in-
quired why Square referred to its customers as users. Jack re-
flected, “The term ‘user’ made its appearance in computing at 
the dawn of shared terminals. . . . It was solidified in hacker cul-
ture as a person who wasn’t technical or creative, someone who 
just used resources and wasn’t able to make or produce anything 
(often called a ‘luser’).” Based on the provocative nature of How-
ard’s question, Jack noted that Square will replace the word user 
with the word customer. From Jack’s perspective, this simple 
word change reflects a shift to a more humanity-based focus on 
service. Specifically, he notes that Square must stop “distancing  

Gr owing th e  C on n ec tion  Th r ou gh  Te ch no l o gy
179
ourselves from the people that choose our products over our  
competitors. . . . We have customers we earn. They deserve  
our utmost respect, focus, and service.”
When talking about the word partner in Chapter 5, I said 
that words matter. Hopefully, the lessons provided here will help 
you see the powerful “human connection” that you can forge 
with the help of technology. Technology is not an end unto itself, 
nor is it something that is provided for technology “users”; it is 
a tool for serving and connecting with your “people” and your 
“customers”!
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• While “brick-and-mortar” connections tend to be 
terrific opportunities to develop personal face-to-
face relationships, most brands today face the chal-
lenge of building or extending personal connections 
outside of a traditional retail building. 
• Key components of a comprehensive digital strat-
egy include (1) commerce, (2) company-owned web 
and mobile channels, (3) loyalty/customer relation-
ship management (CRM)/targeted database, (4) so-
cial media, and (5) paid digital marketing. 
• Today, successful businesses look for ways to inte-
grate their digital assets to build online commerce, 
brick-and-mortar traffic, customer engagement, and 
consumer loyalty.
• Twitter and Facebook approaches should focus on 
consistent but not overwhelming levels of communi-
cation, delivered for the purpose of connecting.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
180
• When you consider engaging on an emerging social 
media platform, you should consider three aspects: 
Does the platform fit with your brand? Do you have 
the resources to sustain engagement? Have you spent 
time understanding how people prefer to interact on 
that platform?
• By building social media connections around indi-
vidualized experiences and unique preferences, you 
are likely to pull customers to your content.
• No matter what the size of a business, its leaders 
should designate someone to be in charge of social 
media strategy.
• Technology should serve the mission, not the reverse.
• Technology is powerful when you view it as a way to 
enhance the human connection rather than seeing it 
as inevitably leading to impersonalization.
• Technology might be something that you should not 
view as being provided for “users,” but instead should 
see as a tool for serving and connecting with your 
“people” and your “customers”!

181
C H
A P
T
E R
 9
Personal Relationships 
Translate: 
Sharing the Love from 
People to Products
Advertising moves people toward goods; merchandis-
ing moves goods toward people. 
Morris Hite
W
hen personal relationships are created between employees 
and customers and strengthened through the use of tech-
nology, brands are given permission to transfer those emotional 
connections to new product offerings. Starbucks is an example 
of how to take in-store person-to-person connections and lever-
age them into consumer packaged goods (CPG) categories such 
as Starbucks VIA® Ready Brew (individual servings of instant 
coffee), Starbucks ready-to-drink beverages, bulk-packaged cof-
fee and tea, and other Tazo and Starbucks-owned branded prod-
ucts that are served by foodservice providers. In a case study on 
relational capital (translating human connections into market-
able value), Ranjay Gulati, Sarah Huffman, and Gary Neilson  
suggest that Starbucks has earned a license to sell consumer 
packaged goods: “Due in large part to Howard Schultz’s careful  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
182
nurturing and development of the Starbucks Experience, the 
company has been able to leverage its increasingly strong brand 
through a variety of alliances to sell Starbucks coffee and develop 
new products with the Starbucks name. The goal in establishing 
these relationships has been to continue to develop the brand 
outside the company’s retail stores in order to reach customers 
through multiple points of contact . . .”
That having been said, many people are surprised to find 
that Starbucks started out in the bulk-goods business, not the 
brewed coffee business. The original Starbucks store dark-
roasted small batches of coffee beans and sold them to in-store 
customers, by mail order, and to local restaurateurs. In essence, 
Starbucks began as a consumer packaged goods business. Lead-
ers later strategically positioned the company as a global service 
experience business, delivering brewed coffee and espresso-
based drinks. While the leaders built the brand into the global 
giant that it is through the store-based connection (the third 
place), they have more recently mobilized the connection to 
move into customers’ homes (the first place) and offices (the sec-
ond place). Because of the success, connection, and love they’ve 
forged in the Starbucks stores, the leaders have also developed 
a substantial market selling in the business-to-business space. 
In addition, the leadership has fostered new product innovation 
that serves consumers’ mobile lifestyles. 
Throughout this chapter, we will examine how Starbucks de-
ploys a multichannel approach to product creation, launch, and 
delivery. We will explore innovation in both coffee and adjacent 
categories, and also look at how Starbucks positions its products 
to be used where customers want them—and not necessarily re-
quiring customers to come into a Starbucks-branded location. 
This chapter is designed to help you see how Starbucks inno-
vates relevant product offerings in new categories through ei-
ther strategic business alliances, innovation, or acquisitions. It is  

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
183
intended to help you take your existing connection with custom-
ers and extend it into their highly mobile lifestyles.
Reclaiming Coffee  
Merchandising—In Store
While most customers look at a Starbucks store as a place to grab 
a cup of coffee or to share a conversation while enjoying a bever-
age or food item, each store also has a limited amount of prime 
merchandising space available. As you will recall from Chapter 
2, in the mid-2000s, Starbucks store managers became so con-
cerned with their year-over-year comps that the merchandise 
shelves in Starbucks stores were filled with non-coffee-related 
products. This prompted Howard Schultz (who was functioning 
as the chief global strategist for Starbucks at the time) to write an 
e-mail memo to then–chief executive officer Jim Donald, with 
copies to the Starbucks senior leadership team, on February 14, 
2007. That e-mail, which somehow was leaked to the media, was 
titled “The Commoditization of the Starbucks Experience.” In 
it, among other things, Howard wrote, “I am not sure people to-
day even know we are roasting coffee. You certainly can’t get the 
message from being in our stores. The merchandise, more art 
than science, is far removed from being the merchant that I be-
lieve we can be and certainly at a minimum should support the 
foundation of our coffee heritage. Some stores don’t have cof-
fee grinders, French presses from Bodum, or even coffee filters.”
Merchandising in Starbucks stores has certainly changed 
since Howard crafted his cautionary memo. In my nearest Star-
bucks store in St. Petersburg, Florida, and probably in a store 
close to you, there are normally two seven-feet-tall by four-feet-
wide displays with seven shelves of merchandise in each. This 
merchandise usually includes the Bodum French Press pots that 
Howard wanted to see in 2007. In addition, the shelves contain 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
184
various hot and cold Starbucks-logoed mugs and cups, canisters 
of full-leaf Tazo tea, boxes of Tazo tea bags, and Starbucks VIA 
instant coffee and tea packages. These shelving units are supple-
mented by four or five wicker baskets that sit in containers on 
the floor and typically hold various coffee blends and occasion-
ally packaged food items like potato chips or gourmet popcorn. 
Complementing these baskets are packaged food and beverage 
items in or around the display case, including Starbucks Refresh-
ers™ beverages, Evolution Fresh juices, milk products, fruit cups, 
yogurt cups, Starbucks ready-to-drink beverages, Ethos® water 
(a Starbucks subsidiary), and Starbucks branded nuts and fruit 
snacks. At various locations around the café, there are specialty 
merchandise tables displaying items like the Starbucks at-home 
espresso brewing machine, the Verismo® system by Starbucks, 
and espresso and milk pods used in that machine. 
The presence of coffee-related items in Starbucks stores is 
congruent with a broader business strategy that includes diver-
sifying the company’s sales mix well beyond the products that 
baristas handcraft for customers. This enhancement of Starbucks 
consumer goods follows a path that has been successfully trav-
eled by foodservice brands like Ben & Jerry’s ice cream, which 
was once a small ice cream store in Vermont and is now a power-
ful brand that is owned by Unilever. Ben & Jerry’s now operates 
a vast global network of ice cream shops and enjoys widespread 
distribution of its packaged ice cream in supermarkets and con-
venience stores. Jeff Hansberry, president, Starbucks Channel  
Development and Emerging Brands, notes, “Starbucks captures 
only a small portion of the $100 billion coffee, tea, and ready-
to-drink beverage market globally. . . . We are working to build 
a greater share of that global opportunity with our [consumer 
packaged goods] business by growing across channels, catego-
ries, and countries where our products are sold.” 
Annie Young-Scrivner, president, Starbucks Canada and for-
mer global chief marketing officer and president of Tazo, places 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
185
the scope of this retail opportunity in the context of the four Star-
bucks location models: “We really want to make sure we’re earn-
ing the connection with the customers no matter where they are. 
Our future is based on selling coffee and related products for cus-
tomers to use at home, at work, in our stores, and on the go. We 
have great opportunities for gaining market share and expand-
ing our business out through consumer channels that stretch 
well beyond our vast store footprint.” The evolution of this Star-
bucks channel strategy offers lessons for us all—namely, define 
an initial channel of delivery, master execution in that channel, 
then direct your efforts more broadly to other channels of dis-
tribution that meet your customers’ needs wherever they are. As 
you look at your business, how are you performing on the “four-
place” model that Starbucks uses? Are you engaging your cus-
tomers with your products, services, or communications in their 
home, at their work, in your building, and at all the places in be-
tween? To achieve this breadth of presence in its customers’ lives, 
Starbucks must rely upon and serve the needs of other businesses 
that wish to either sell or distribute its products. Given this reli-
ance on other business entities, let’s take a moment to understand 
the business-to-business side of Starbucks.
Delivering the  
Business-to-Business Connection
Starbucks is not exclusively a business-to-customer (B2C) com-
pany. In reality, the company engages in several types of 
business-to-business (B2B) relationships that support an ever-
widening sales mix. Most notably, these include foodservice cus-
tomers, licensed stores, and joint-venture partnerships. 
On the foodservice side, Starbucks offers training, market-
ing, and merchandising expertise along with equipment and a 
portfolio of beverage products (including brewed coffee, hot 
and cold espresso-based drinks, syrups, cocoa, and Tazo tea) to 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
186
business customers in retail settings such as fine dining, travel, 
recreation, universities, government offices, lodging, and health-
care facilities. In addition, Starbucks sources companies’ inter-
nal beverage needs, including those for cafeterias, public spaces, 
meetings, and catering. When you attend a conference and the 
break station has a sign that says we “proudly brew” Starbucks 
coffee or when you see Starbucks coffee being served at a restau-
rant at which you are dining, you are experiencing the Starbucks 
brand extension into the foodservice space.
In the case of licensed stores, businesses like Kroger, Vons, 
and Safeway (large supermarket chains) own, staff, and operate 
the physical store or kiosk locations under a Starbucks-approved 
license. In addition to a strong licensed store position in super-
markets (a favorable affinity placement for leveraging sales into 
supermarket aisles), licensed stores are also frequently located 
in airports, general merchandise retailers like Target and Meijer, 
and other compatible settings. 
In some cases, Starbucks goes beyond a licensing agree-
ment to a full-fledged joint-venture alliance with a distribution 
partner. In fact, Starbucks longstanding relationship with other 
companies in consumer goods began in 1994 with its North 
American Coffee Partnership agreement, which involved collab-
oration with PepsiCo North America. Through this agreement, 
Pepsi manufactures, markets, and distributes ready-to-drink 
coffee beverages in a joint-venture arrangement. Currently these 
ready-to-drink beverages carry either the Starbucks or the Seat-
tle’s Best Coffee brand. (Seattle’s Best Coffee is a company that 
started roasting coffee on a Seattle pier in 1970. It was a rival com-
pany that Starbucks purchased in 2003.) Specific coffee bever-
ages made available through this joint venture include Starbucks® 
bottled Frappuccino® coffee drinks, Starbucks Doubleshot®  
espresso drinks, Starbucks Doubleshot® Energy+Coffee drinks, 
Starbucks® Iced Coffee, Starbucks Discoveries, Iced Café Favor-
ites, and Starbucks Refreshers.

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
187
In these joint-venture arrangements, Starbucks leadership 
must ensure that both parties are carrying out their responsi-
bilities in a reciprocal relationship where both companies gain 
from the other’s efforts. In Chapter 7, we discussed how choos-
ing the right collaborative business partner is critical to success 
in new markets, particularly international ones. Similarly, part-
ner selection is of great importance when it comes to extending  
the breadth of your offerings. Gary Stibel, founder and CEO of the  
New England Consulting Group, notes, “The key is choosing a 
partner. . . . Everybody thinks most licenses succeed—it’s abso-
lutely the opposite. The vast majority of all licensing arrange-
ments or attempts to enter [consumer packaged goods] by 
restaurants fail.” To appreciate the complexity of the challenge 
of CPG licensing, food and travel writer Robert Lillegard notes, 
“Even long-standing relationships can grow sour. Starbucks and 
Kraft had a very ugly public split in 2011 after the coffee giant 
claimed that the distributor wasn’t doing enough to promote its 
products.” Robert adds that Kraft sought to enjoin the 13-year 
partnership from dissolving, “but was ultimately unsuccessful. 
Now the two companies compete for shelf space, with Kraft’s 
Gevalia and Maxwell House going up against Starbucks’ offer-
ings.” The Kraft relationship notwithstanding, Starbucks lead-
ers have enjoyed strong licensed and joint-venture partnership 
arrangements, largely because of the way Starbucks leaders per-
ceive themselves as serving their business partners.
Whether it is selling through a foodservice customer, a Star-
bucks licensed store, or a joint-venture partner, Starbucks lead-
ers expect business-to-business service experiences to reflect 
Starbucks mission and values while producing strong connec-
tions and relationships like those forged in the café environ-
ment. Starbucks seeks to provide solutions and partnerships 
that improve outcomes by connecting with and anticipating 
the needs of business customers. Beyond products, Starbucks 
leaders want the company’s business customers to experience  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
188
personalized care based on a deep understanding of where their 
business is going and the goals they wish to realize from work-
ing with Starbucks. In essence, business customers should enjoy 
a Starbucks Experience marked by personalized attention and a 
commitment to a lasting relationship. 
For Starbucks, serving business customers and business 
partners takes on added significance for brand equity. Andrew 
Linnemann, vice president, Green Coffee Quality and Engage-
ment at Starbucks, notes, “When a customer is served in a licensed 
store, for example, our name is on the cup. We need to care for 
our business customers and select our business partners carefully 
because their actions reflect on the way Starbucks is perceived 
through the customers they serve. When it comes to licensed 
store partners and joint-venture partners, we are looking to not 
only understand their operational competencies but we want to 
know who they are as a company and a culture. Do they share 
and demonstrate similar values as us?We will walk away from a 
licensee or joint-venture partner if it’s not the right fit.” 
In the mind of the end consumer, a Starbucks is a Starbucks, 
whether it is a licensed store in an airport or a company-owned 
store down the street. From the perspective of the leadership, the 
service experience at Starbucks should be uplifting, personal, and 
relationship-focused, whether a Starbucks partner is serving a  
customer in a Starbucks store or a Target employee is serving 
Starbucks products to a customer in a Target location. In the 
end, a business is not buildings or brand names; it is a collection 
of people who should share like-minded objectives. While the 
delivery of a business-to-business experience has to vary based 
on the needs of the business being served, this is equally true for 
the delivery of experiences to individuals.
Ultimately, the principles that define great customer experi-
ences are extremely similar, no matter whether your customer is 
an individual consumer or a group of individuals from different 
departments within a business. With the right partners in place 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
189
and a rich understanding that the needs of your business part-
ners have similarities to those of your individual customers, you 
should be positioned to present your offerings to connect with 
your customers across all settings. For Starbucks, a key strate-
gic opportunity exists in serving customers in their first place—
their homes.
R ef l ec t i o n  o n C o n n e ct ion
1.	 With whom do you partner to magnify the scope of the 
customers you can serve?
2.	 Do you view business partners as customers of your 
business? How do you see your relationship with your 
partners affecting your service to your end customers 
or to those that they serve?
3.	 Have you earned a “license to sell” other services or 
products to your customers through the strength of 
the connections that you form in the delivery of your 
current slate of offerings?
Serving Customers at Home
While it initially partnered to distribute its packaged coffee 
products, Starbucks has taken over the manufacturing, distribu-
tion, and sale of those items, and the leaders at Starbucks con-
tinue to innovate ways to place their coffee products in settings 
other than their stores. This has led critics to warn that Starbucks 
is grabbing for profit in mass retail in a way that will compro-
mise its in-store sales. For example, when Starbucks launched its 
single-serve instant coffee product VIA in 2009, Steve Toback, 
managing partner of Invisor Consulting, noted, “Starbucks is  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
190
positioning VIA against its own fresh brewed coffee, challenging 
people to see if they can taste the difference. So, why should cus-
tomers pay a premium for Starbucks fresh brewed coffee when 
they can get VIA for a buck a cup? If the campaign is success-
ful, won’t VIA potentially cannibalize fresh brewed coffee sales?” 
While these outsiders’ concerns are reasonable, Starbucks lead-
ers have not experienced cannibalization and in fact have grown 
sales by combining in-store and in-home coffee options. Ulti-
mately, the leaders’ ability to see and seize opportunities across 
channels is what drove the decision to expand the company’s of-
ferings. The decision emerged largely from the leadership’s acute 
sensitivity to the different need states and rituals that surround 
coffee consumption. Some customers may visit Starbucks regu-
larly for their morning coffee, but still have times when they want 
to make high-quality coffee at home. Similarly, some might have 
a morning ritual in which they routinely make coffee at home, 
but also stop at a Starbucks store during a morning break. In es-
sence, coffee consumption is not a zero-sum game where custom-
ers choose to either brew at home or go into a Starbucks store, and 
this is something of which the leadership team was acutely aware. 
Because of the complexities and the dynamic nature of the 
consumer packaged goods marketplace, Starbucks leaders are 
constantly facing tactical challenges. For example, Starbucks 
worked with a competitor, Green Mountain Coffee Roasters 
(GMCR), to craft a partial partnership. GMCR, a Vermont-based  
specialty coffee company, acquired Keurig Incorporated in 2006. 
Keurig is the market leader in single-cup brewing machines for 
the consumer market. The Keurig machines offer ease of coffee 
brewing by requiring coffee drinkers to simply place a mug under  
the brewing mechanism, add water to a reservoir, insert a single- 
serving coffee packet (referred to as a K-Cup pack), and push 
a button. Through the acquisition of Keurig, GMCR posi-
tioned itself as the exclusive supplier of K-Cup packs. In addi-
tion to providing its own coffee brand, GMCR purchased the 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
191
Quebec-based coffee company Van Houtte and added K-Cup 
packs with the Van Houtte name. Other brands like Newman’s 
Own and Folgers have entered into licensing agreements with 
GMCR for manufacturing and distribution of their coffees in  
K-Cup packs for use in Keurig brewing systems. 
So what could Starbucks do in terms of positioning its prod-
ucts in K-Cups? Starbucks had previously endorsed the Tas-
simo coffee brewer (which is a direct competitor to Keurig) 
and sourced coffee in a different single-serving format (t-discs) 
needed for use in the Tassimo system. Given the termination of 
Starbucks agreement with Kraft Foods Inc., the Tassimo system, 
which was created by Kraft, was less integrated into Starbucks 
existing distribution system. Many coffee consumer analysts 
speculated on the course Starbucks would take with its historic 
rival GMCR and the Keurig system. Some suggested that Star-
bucks would acquire GMCR; others indicated that Starbucks 
would create its own alternative to both Tassimo and Keurig. 
But in March 2011, Starbucks and GMCR announced a K-Cup 
agreement. Since that time, Starbucks has expanded its license 
with GMCR to include products for Green Mountain’s Vue™ 
brewer (which is a newer system that produces stronger, hotter, 
and larger beverages). Through their collaboration, Starbucks is 
the exclusive licensed super-premium brand for GMCR’s tradi-
tional Keurig and Vue brewers. In addition, GMCR distributes 
Starbucks K-Cups and Starbucks Vue packets to department, 
specialty, and mass retail stores. In discussing the decision to en-
gage with GMCR, Andrew Linnemann, vice president, Green 
Coffee Quality and Engagement, notes, “In the United States, 
the growth of the coffee sector has been refueled by single-cup 
brewing systems, and it makes sense to offer our highest-quality  
coffee to those looking to enjoy the convenience and consistency 
of delivery through their Keurig.” Imagine that one of your com-
petitors creates a platform on which you can sell your goods. 
You know that selling on that platform will be good for you from 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
192
a distribution standpoint, but will also fuel the strength of your 
competitor. What would you do? While Starbucks has found a 
way to collaborate with GMCR, that does not imply that healthy 
competition has ended. 
In 2012, Starbucks released a home-brewing single-serve sys-
tem. The Starbucks brewer creates not only drip coffee drinks, but 
espresso and latte beverages as well. The Verismo system features  
Swiss-engineered high-pressure technology to create Starbucks-
quality drinks through the use of milk and coffee pods. From the 
perspective of Starbucks leaders, Verismo offered a variety of im-
portant opportunities for customers and for Starbucks. These in-
cluded such things as (1) an at-home brewed coffee option, with 
an adjustable high-pressure system specific to your drink selec-
tion, (2) an opportunity to release a product that goes beyond 
brewed coffee and also creates Starbucks signature espresso bev-
erages, and (3) a chance to create a proprietary coffee-brewing 
platform for Starbucks that fits nicely as a merchandise item in 
Starbucks stores. The tactical decisions made in the highly com-
petitive coffee brewer world demonstrate key lessons for leaders. 
Specifically, leadership requires skill in collaboratively position-
ing products in the context of competitors’ proprietary delivery 
systems while constantly innovating proprietary delivery sys-
tems of their own through strategic relationships with manufac-
turing and distribution partners. 
Coffee in the Second Place:  
The World of Work
A 2012 Reuters survey suggests that about 10 percent of the 
world’s workforce works from home. The remainder may find 
themselves at the mercy of the oft-maligned world of office coffee. 
Through the years, companies like Starbucks have been elevating  

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
193
the experience of the office coffee brewer and providing solu-
tions to meet their customers at work. Companies with between 
20 and 50 employees can select a Starbucks coffee service that 
provides brewing equipment, ground Starbucks coffee, and reg-
ular service. Additional items like Tazo tea, napkins, and cups 
are also available. Larger companies can enjoy the same coffee 
service or upgrade their brewing system to the Starbucks Inter-
active Cup® brewer, which grinds and brews individual cups or 
carafes of coffee with the push of a button. To see the Starbucks 
Interactive Cup brewer demo, go to http://tinyurl.com/bovsqhm 
or point your QR reader here:
The success of Starbucks efforts to win the second place 
can be demonstrated through examples such as an alliance be-
tween Starbucks and Selecta. Selecta, Europe’s largest vending 
services company, is working with Starbucks in Switzerland to 
deliver three solutions to address the needs of businesses of all 
sizes. These brewing/dispensing options range from small table-
top products to large integrated coffee corners. Selecta provides 
its customers with a swath of Starbucks products, including Va-
nilla Latte, Espresso, Doppio Espresso, Cappuccino, Café Crème, 
Caffè Latte, Chai Tea Latte, Latte Macchiato, Espresso Macchiato, 
and Hot Chocolate, and a variety of Tazo teas, including Calm™, 
China Green Tips, Earl Grey, English Breakfast, and Refresh™.
According to Frank Wubben, managing director, Starbucks  
Switzerland and Austria, “I met the CEO of Selecta and we cre-
ated the vision of how the two market leaders in coffee, Selecta in 
office coffee and Starbucks in retail, could bond together to build 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
194
an exciting office customer proposition through Starbucks cof-
fee. In about 5 months’ time, we were able to develop our scalable 
office coffee concept. For me, the most important part is custom-
ers who come to our stores will have the opportunity to enjoy 
their favorite beverage at their office desk. Conversely, people 
who have not entered our stores may now do so thanks to the 
quality of Starbucks coffee they are enjoying at work.” The lead-
ers are banking on the fact that, rather than detracting from the 
in-store Starbucks connection, a product must be available in 
the context of both a customer’s work and home life. This avail-
ability increases customer contact with the product and embeds 
it more deeply into the customer’s rituals, lifestyle, and identity.
Creating On-the-Go Solutions
While much of life is experienced at home or at work, Starbucks 
has created product offerings for the grab-and-go speed at which 
many of us live. Whether it was testing Drive Thrus in California 
in 1994, collaborating with Pepsi to manufacture bottled Frap-
puccino beverages in 1996, or the arduous process of creating 
VIA, the instant single-serving coffee product that was launched 
in 2009, Starbucks has been constantly looking to make its prod-
ucts available to customers so that they can enjoy a high-quality  
beverage wherever they go. Howard Schultz explained VIA to 
Starbucks partners by noting, “We announced that Starbucks 
will introduce an instant coffee, providing our customers with 
great tasting Starbucks coffee, anywhere and anytime. Not sur-
prisingly, this news raised some eyebrows, and some cynics are 
asking, ‘Why go instant, Starbucks?’ There are numerous logi-
cal reasons: the significant size of the instant coffee market . . . ;  
the increasing mobility of consumers (imagine a cup of Star-
bucks VIA Ready Brew on a mountaintop); and, regardless of 
our ubiquity, that customers continue to tell us they want more 
Starbucks, and more ways and opportunities to enjoy it.” 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
195
Beyond market trends, Howard also emphasized the impor-
tance of sustaining the company’s core values and innovating  
dynamic solutions that respond to the changing needs of cus-
tomers irrespective of the inevitable criticism: “I know some 
will question our decision, and I understand this reaction. Ex-
pectations from brands like Starbucks are high, and interaction 
with our brand is very personal. Yet in spite of those high expec-
tations (or perhaps because of them), we are confident we can 
disrupt and reinvent the instant coffee category—introducing 
quality coupled with value. I believe that Starbucks VIA Ready 
Brew is just that—and the proof is in the cup.”
The proof is not only in the Starbucks cup, but in the profit-
ability of products like VIA, which had global sales of $100 mil-
lion in its first 10 months. That represented approximately 30 
percent of the $330 million premium single-serving (or pod) 
category. Domenick Celentano, an entrepreneurial food ex-
ecutive, chose Starbucks VIA as one of the “most memorable 
new product launches” based largely on how effectively Star-
bucks partners sampled the product in stores and across chan-
nels (in-store and supermarket), as well as how effectively the 
leadership embedded the product launch through social media 
strategies like those discussed in Chapter 8. As far as sampling is 
concerned, Domenick notes, “Sampling is a time proven method 
for facilitating consumer trial. Starbucks having ultimate con-
trol in their own stores orchestrated sampling customers with 
free VIA coffee. To control their sampling effort they waited to 
introduce the product in grocery stores until sometime in 2010. 
Even though they were not in retail groceries initially, they used 
the brand presence of their regular line of coffee and dispatched 
baristas to retailers such as Safeway and Target stores to give out 
VIA samples to shoppers.” 
Annie Young-Scrivner, president, Starbucks Canada, echoes 
Domenick’s view concerning sampling. Talking about the rollout 
of Starbucks Blonde Roast, Starbucks light roast coffee, Annie 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
196
notes, “What is different here than at other consumer package 
companies is our sheer ability to drive awareness and trial in a 
very cost-effective way. So as an example, after two weeks we 
had exceptional awareness on Starbucks Blonde Roast, which 
is incredible.” Annie suggests that those extraordinary levels 
of awareness are achieved with an absolute spending rate that 
is only 10 percent of what competitors often need to spend to 
achieve similar results. She explains, “We have been able to ef-
ficiently gain awareness and trial due to the excitement and en-
thusiasm of our fantastic 200,000 partners across the globe who 
engage nearly 70 million consumers every single week. In or-
der for other CPG companies to get a trial, they typically have 
to go through a third-party grocery sampling or a dry sampling.  
We, however, can get a fresh cup of coffee right in front of our 
customers as they walk through the door and create excitement 
around the new product launch, while also soliciting helpful 
feedback.” By training Starbucks partners in how to sample new 
products, collect feedback, and share it with the leadership, Star-
bucks has a distinct in-store advantage. In the case of VIA, as 
Domenick Celentano noted, Starbucks baristas were then de-
ployed in the shopping aisles of Target and Safeway. This ap-
proach demonstrates the genius of leveraging human assets to 
maximize effectiveness in cross-channel efforts. Once baristas 
had mastered sampling VIA in the Starbucks store environment, 
the expertise and the overall acumen of those baristas was used 
to drive the product’s success across channels. 
From the perspective of integration with social media and 
cross-channel promotion, Domenick observes, “You just can’t 
get away from the fact that social media in food [promotion] is 
powerful and Starbucks being marketing geniuses know this. . . .  
Social media gave them viral publicity and very little cost to 
the company. . . . They promoted their VIA Taste Challenge 
through Facebook driving people into their stores comparing 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
197
VIA against freshly brewed Starbucks coffee. The Facebook pro-
motion offered a free coffee in-store for trying.” Using social  
media to drive customers into your business so that your people 
can enrich the connection and engage increased customer 
awareness, trial, and product adoption—that sounds like a for-
mula for success, doesn’t it?
Getting Customers to  
Cross the Channel 
In addition to the cross-channel promotions mentioned previ-
ously, Starbucks has explored and engaged both low- and high-
tech ways to drive customers from one channel to the next. On 
the low-tech side of the equation, Starbucks has provided cus-
tomers with a free in-store tall coffee when they bring in an 
empty one-pound. bag of coffee beans purchased outside of a 
Starbucks store (such items had a coupon that was not present 
on coffee bean packages purchased in Starbucks stores). Simi-
larly, early in the launch of the Verismo system, purchasers were 
provided with a Gold-level membership in the My Starbucks 
Rewards program, which ordinarily would have required the 
customer to buy 42 beverages before receiving special loyalty re-
wards on in-store beverages and food. 
On the higher-tech side of integration, Starbucks is working 
with some supermarkets and other distributors to enable pur-
chases of Starbucks bulk coffee or related Starbucks consumer 
products to count toward loyalty rewards on the Starbucks Card 
and is exploring packaging materials that will interface with the 
Starbucks mobile app. Annie Young-Scrivner shares how tech-
nology and Starbucks packaging have merged: “Caffè Verona is 
one of our dark roast coffees and we actually call it our coffee  
of love. On Caffè Verona bags we have placed a QR code that 
links to stories of the coffee. One such example is of a couple’s 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
198
engagement story. The man had a first date with his girlfriend at 
Starbucks and later proposed to her in a forest that he staged to 
look like a Starbucks. He took pictures of the engagement scene 
and posted them on Facebook. We found that couple and asked 
if we could re-create his engagement experience and make the 
story available through a QR code on our bags. So if you’re in 
the supermarket aisle or drinking your coffee at home, you can 
click on the Caffè Verona bag and experience a true love story 
about our customers and Starbucks. That’s an example of how 
we seek to share our story, leverage technology, and engage with 
customers across channels. It is our effort to reach for the magi-
cal.” Since you may not have that particular Starbucks bag avail-
able, you can experience that story by directing your browser to 
http://tinyurl.com/clu9bmm or using your QR reader here: 
Suffice it say that Starbucks leadership is perpetually seeking 
magic and exploring synergies that will encourage customers or 
give them incentives to widen the array of Starbucks products 
that they purchase or consume and the settings in which they 
purchase and consume them. Often the magic can be achieved 
in rather subtle ways, including simple e-mails like one I re-
ceived announcing that I would receive a holiday Starbucks Card 
if I bought three qualifying Starbucks or Tazo products. The  
e-mail depicted consumer products and indicated that qualify-
ing products had to be purchased outside of a Starbucks store. 
Redemption required the original grocery register receipt and 
the universal product code (UPC) from the qualifying products’ 
packaging.

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
199
Starbucks and Tazo holiday e-mail promotion.
R ef l ec t i o n  o n C o n n e ct ion
1.	 Have you outlined the key contact points you have 
with customers? Have you identified strategic oppor-
tunities that might enable you to connect with and 
serve your customers in more settings?
2.	 What methods do you use to drive awareness, trial, 
and product adoption cost-effectively? How can you 
allow customers to sample your services or products? 
3.	 How are you encouraging your customers to experi-
ence the breadth of your product or service offerings, 
so that they are not siloed into one channel of your  
deliverables? 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
200
Innovating and Acquiring  
Strong Products in  
Adjacent Categories
In Chapter 3, I shared how Starbucks leaders tactically moved 
into adjacent beverage categories through the acquisition of 
Tazo and Evolution Fresh. In that chapter, we focused specifi-
cally on how those products allowed Starbucks to migrate the 
brand’s core competency of creating in-store experiences onto 
other product platforms. Through those types of acquisitions, 
combined with non-coffee-based innovation, Starbucks has also 
been able to strengthen its consumer packaged goods footprint. 
For example, bottled Evolution Fresh juices include flavors in 
four categories: 
• Fruit (organic orange, pomegranate, and so on) 
• Greens and vegetables (a wide array, including essen-
tial vegetables and vital greens) 
• Refreshment (organic ginger limeade, pineapple  
coconut water, and so on) 
• Smoothies (apple berry fiber smoothie, protein 
power smoothie, super greens smoothie, and more) 
These beverages are being made available through select 
Starbucks stores in the United States. Both Evolution Fresh and 
Tazo are becoming more prominent consumer brands through 
their presence in grocery stores like Whole Foods, Albertsons, 
Ralphs, Vons, and Gelson’s. In fact, to accommodate the demand 
for Evolution Fresh juices, Starbucks has had to expand from its 
original 72,000-square-foot manufacturing facility in San Ber-
nardino, California, to a 260,000-square-foot building in Ran-
cho Cucamonga, California. 
Not only has Starbucks opened the Tazo Tea store concept 
mentioned in Chapter 3, but in late 2012, Starbucks also purchased  

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
201
Teavana. Teavana has more than 300 company-owned stores and 
reaches customers globally through its website, www.teavana 
.com. As the name implies, Teavana is positioned as the “heaven 
of tea” and is a specialty retailer that caters to newcomers to the 
world of tea as well as tea connoisseurs, offering more than 100 va-
rieties of premium loose-leaf teas, crafted teaware, and other mer-
chandise associated with tea. While the full strategic value of the 
acquisition has yet to be realized, Teavana creates for Starbucks a 
ready-made distribution channel (given Teavana’s existing store 
network in prominent high-traffic areas like shopping malls) and 
the opportunity to serve a broader base of consumers.
Starbucks has also expanded its retail opportunities through 
pure innovation, particularly when it comes to products like 
Starbucks Refreshers, a drink made with Green Coffee Extract 
that fits into the “energy drink” category as opposed to the “cof-
fee” category. In announcing the launch of Refreshers in 2012, 
Annie Young-Scrivner, president, Starbucks Canada, suggests 
the importance of Starbucks entry into the energy drink sec-
tor by stating, “The energy category is the fastest-growing cate-
gory within measured CPG channels at $8 billion, up 16 percent 
over the last year. The launch of Starbucks Refreshers beverages 
continues to support our growth strategy to innovate with new 
products, enter new categories, and expand into new channels 
of distribution.”
Starbucks Refreshers come in three forms: handcrafted in-
store beverages, canned sparkling beverages, and a VIA single-
serve instant option. The essence of Refreshers across these three 
presentation formats is a blend of fruit juice and Green Coffee 
Extract. Cliff Burrows, president, Starbucks Americas, empha-
sizes the importance of the innovative component of Starbucks 
Refreshers by noting, “Innovation is at the core of everything we 
do. . . . The introduction of Starbucks Refreshers beverage plat-
form, featuring Green Coffee Extract, is an innovative extension 
of the coffee market and is the perfect solution for customers 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
202
looking for a boost of natural energy and thirst-quenching, de-
licious refreshment.” Extending the coffee market into tea, juice, 
and energy drinks certainly affords more opportunities to grow 
the brand through both café/beverage service environments and 
shelf space in retail establishments, but as with all strategic deci-
sions, there are both risks and rewards. 
The Risks and the Payoffs
Jane Genova, a member of the Motley Fool Blog Network, el-
oquently identifies four key risks of Starbucks expanded con-
sumer packaged goods approach. From Jane’s perspective, these 
challenges include competition with established consumer 
packaged goods brands, competition from private-label dis-
count brands, projections of flat packaged coffee sales, and “the 
fourth possible peril is this: A combination of brand fatigue (too 
much Starbucks distributed through too many market channels) 
and unbundling the beverage from the iconic ritual of carrying it 
around in a cup with the green logo and the cardboard wrapper.” 
Certainly Jane raises an important question about brand fatigue 
and the presentation of products outside of the familiar relation-
ship forged with customers; however, Starbucks has invested a 
great deal in the creation of the primary relationship with cus-
tomers in the retail store environment and has created a global 
demand for its product offerings. Rather than people becoming 
tired of the brand, the company finds ways to broaden its oppor-
tunities to engage customers and expand the places where it can 
do so. Thus, Jane’s concerns are addressed by Starbucks diversifi-
cation beyond packaged coffee sales and by the return on invest-
ment generated by Starbucks channel strategy. 
In 2012, Starbucks grocery revenues were growing almost 
three times as fast as its in-store sales. Currently, Starbucks is 
still deriving most of its revenue from its retail stores. However, 
operating revenue for fiscal year 2011 reflects that the packaged 

P e rson a l R e lation s h ip s Tr a n sl at e
203
goods business was 32 percent of global revenue and 19 per-
cent of its U.S. business. Bill Smead, portfolio manager at Smead 
Capital Management Inc., notes, “The company’s real value and 
growth potential lies in its brand. . . . They sell water, milk, and 
coffee beans at boiling temperatures. Warren Buffett says the 
best companies buy a commodity and sell a brand.”
Starbucks leaders definitely buy commodities, build connec-
tions, and then mobilize those connections to further strengthen 
the Starbucks brand. As reflected in earlier chapters, the lead-
ers at Starbucks begin with their passion for their commodities 
and their people. From there, the leaders steward relationships 
(connections) between partners and customers. Once those con-
nections are made, Starbucks leaders build even greater brand 
strength by leveraging technology and constantly exploring ways 
to provide wider sets of offerings in more areas of a consumer’s 
life. In the end, the leaders elevate products to the status of brands 
and then leverage brand strength to deliver more products that are 
designed to ultimately create even greater brand equity.
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• When personal relationships are created between em-
ployees and customers and strengthened through 
technology, brands are given permission to transfer 
those emotional connections to new product offerings. 
• To achieve a maximum presence in your customers’ 
lives, you may have to serve the needs of other busi-
nesses in order to get them to sell or distribute your 
products. 
• The central decision in brand expansion is the degree  
to which your company owns the infrastructure 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu c ks Way
204
through which you are growing your brand and 
the degree to which you can control versus influ-
ence those you entrust with maintaining your brand  
standards.
• A business is not buildings or brand names; it is a  
collection of people who should share like-minded 
objectives. 
• The principles that define great customer experiences 
are extremely similar no matter whether your cus-
tomer is an individual consumer or a group of indi-
viduals from different departments within a business. 
• Leadership in the world of consumer packaged goods 
requires skill in collaboratively positioning your 
products in the context of competitors’ proprietary 
delivery systems and constantly innovating proprie-
tary delivery systems of your own through strategic 
relationships with manufacturing and distribution 
partners. 
• When it comes to new product introduction, social 
media is an important tool for driving your custom-
ers’ awareness, trial, and product adoption.
• Forward-thinking leaders find ways to encourage 
customers or give them incentives to widen the ar-
ray of products that they purchase and consume and 
expand the settings in which they purchase and con-
sume them. 
• According to Warren Buffett, the best companies buy 
a commodity and sell a brand.

P R I N C I P L E  5
Cherish  
and 
Challenge 
Your  
Legacy

206
206
A
s a consultant and speaker, I work with a considerable 
number of entrepreneurs, business owners, and corpo-
rate executives. While there are great differences among 
these leaders, most of them share two commonalities. First, they 
wish to guide their people and their businesses in the direction 
of profitability. Second, they want to make a substantial and sus-
tainable difference through their work. This principle, “Cherish 
and Challenge Your Legacy,” addresses both the success and the  
significant ambitions of leaders, while also examining how  
the leadership at Starbucks approaches these goals. 
Chapter 10, “Honor the Past, but Don’t Be Trapped in It,” 
demonstrates how Starbucks leaders have renewed the entre-
preneurial spirit that led to the company’s success as a start-up. 
Additionally, the chapter explores how the leaders direct that en-
trepreneurship toward solutions that will meet the future needs 
of their partners and customers. In Chapter 10, you will expe-
rience some of the bold and experimental steps that Starbucks 
leaders are taking to increase the relevance and uniqueness of 
the brand. In addition, you will encounter some of Starbucks in-
novative breakthroughs and setbacks.
Chapter 11, “Taking the Long View: Building Success That 
Lasts,” explores how Starbucks leaders make choices to achieve 
a lasting positive impact on partners, customers, and commu-
nities. It examines how Starbucks serves as a catalyst in areas 
such as sustainable building design, environmental steward-
ship, small business viability, and global employment. Further, it 
demonstrates the strength of conviction required to sustain a fo-
cus on the significance of your impact and not simply your quar-
terly profit and loss statements.
Ultimately, “Cherish and Challenge Your Legacy” should 
encourage you to define the legacy you wish to leave and evalu-
ate your leadership performance, in part, based on your progress 
toward that legacy.

207
C H
A P
T
E R
 1
0
Honor the Past, but  
Don’t Be Trapped in It
The day before something is a breakthrough, it’s a 
crazy idea. 
Peter Diamandis 
B
efore we examine the adaptive and progressive strategies 
Starbucks designed to ensure that the brand stays relevant, 
let’s take a moment to look at one of the biggest challenges to  
fostering innovation for strong brands like Starbucks: compla-
cency and inertia born of success. One of the best examples of 
the liability created by past accomplishments is the Polaroid 
Corporation. 
The glory days for the legendary Polaroid brand ran from 
the company’s creation in 1937 through the late 1970s. During 
World War II, the company prospered as a defense contractor, 
but the pivotal innovative moment for the brand occurred in 
1948, when Polaroid’s founder, Edward Land, created a camera 
that could process a photograph in minutes. For the next 20-plus 
years, that single invention was the ticket to Polaroid’s monopoly 
on the instant photography marketplace. 
Despite having invested more than 40 percent of Polaroid’s 
research and development budget in digital technology, the 
company’s leaders never fully engaged customers in their efforts 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
208
to develop digital cameras. As a result, Polaroid saw its mar-
ket share drop and was ultimately forced to file for bankruptcy  
in 2001. 
Andrea Nagy Smith, writing for the Yale School of Manage-
ment, places the responsibility for the company’s failure squarely 
on faulty “fundamental assumptions that did not allow top man-
agement to adjust to new market realities. First, Polaroid leaders 
believed that customers would always want a hard-copy print. . . .  
When customers abandoned the print, Polaroid was taken by 
surprise.” Andrea further points out that the leaders at Pola-
roid had a history and a bias toward making money in photog-
raphy through chemistry as opposed to digital breakthroughs. 
According to Andrea, “The sheer profitability of film sales cre-
ated another obstacle to thinking about new business models. . . .  
‘Instant film had gross margins well in excess of 65%. So if 
you’re dealing with a media change, how do you replace that 
with something that’s almost or probably as profitable as instant 
film?’” Polaroid’s leaders were victims of their own success. The 
very strengths that had brought Polaroid dominance in its mar-
ket worked against the leadership’s nimble pursuit of an alter-
native path. To a lesser degree, Starbucks leaders in the early to 
mid-2000s became overly fixated on a rapid store growth model.
Changing the Paradigm
When I wrote my previous book about Starbucks in 2006,  
I noted that the company was opening a store every four hours 
and that Howard Schultz suggested that Starbucks was “in ‘the 
early stages of growth,’ ‘the second inning of a nine-inning 
game,’ and the ‘beginning chapters of a long book.’” In 2006, I 
also gave examples of Starbucks imminent growth plans, includ-
ing “aggressive growth in China, in-store downloading of music 
on customers’ MP3 players, espresso dating in conjunction with 
Yahoo!TM Personals, and the distribution of movies and books.” 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
209
While the focus on international growth (in China and 
throughout the world) has been sustained since 2006, a great deal 
has changed. MP3 players are not as popular as they once were. 
In fact, drippler.com, an electronic gadget news source, reported 
a substantial rise in site visitors in 2012 who no longer had an in-
terest in owning an MP3 player because of the surge in the de-
sirability of smartphones. Yahoo! Personals shut down in 2010, 
and customers were migrated over to Match.com. Starbucks  
2006 plunge into the movie marketing business with the release 
of the movie Akeelah and the Bee failed to deliver the hoped-for 
result, so the company pulled back from movie distribution. The 
ultimate reality was that the 2006 rate of Starbucks store growth 
was also not sustainable. In fact, opening six new stores a day 
posed such an operational and staffing challenge that Starbucks 
was not able to sustain the strength of its brand connection, par-
ticularly in the context of global economic challenges.
Jon Gertner, author of The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the 
Great Age of American Innovation, describes how Starbucks 
leaders shifted their strategic course. He opines, “Starbucks no 
longer seems to perceive its future as depending on an abil-
ity to clone its essential store concept ad infinitum. . . . These 
days, the overarching gestalt of the company—demonstrated by  
its plans for redesigned stores, investments in innovative cof-
fee machines, an expansion of its digital networks and rewards  
programs—is striving for every branch to be both more versatile 
and more artisanal.” 
Tightening Up
In addition to reliance on artisanship and versatility, Troy Al-
stead, Starbucks chief financial officer and chief administrative 
officer, suggests that the transition was also anchored to fervent 
attention to operational excellence and efficiency: “It’s interest-
ing for me in hindsight to recognize that new store growth was 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
210
masking problems we were beginning to experience before we 
closed 800 U.S. stores in 2008 and 2009. Many in the press, con-
sumers, analysts, and even most of us inside Starbucks believed 
that we were great store operators.” Troy goes on to note that 
Starbucks brand strength in attracting customers was clouding 
the picture, covering merely satisfactory operations. Specifically, 
he points to the leadership’s historically marginal performance 
on the effectiveness of labor deployment or on using data to de-
termine whether a store’s hours should be adjusted. Troy shares, 
“Across many important operational elements, we were just get-
ting by. As such we have had to innovate to exercise greater fi-
nancial discipline. We still need to achieve powerful human 
connections, but in the process we also need to create more effi-
cient staff deployment as well as greater management of produc-
tivity and waste.”
A key element in the success of the Starbucks transforma-
tion in the area of efficiency improvement results from an align-
ment between leaders who are charged with driving change and 
those who are responsible for ensuring consistent operations. 
As Craig Russell, senior vice president, Global Coffee, puts it, 
“If you only let operators run the world, we probably wouldn’t 
have as many stores and we wouldn’t have as much innovation. 
If you only let innovators run the world, you’d have businesses 
that would be very hard to run and may not make as much 
money. Our challenge has been to bring both sides of this equa-
tion together so we could produce innovations that improve 
operations, drive growth, enhance the partner and customer ex-
perience, and increase profitability. That’s a tall order, but it of-
ten occurs in the most subtle ways.” Ultimate success in driving 
innovation hinges on the alignment of those who foster change 
and those who maintain stability.
One example of the subtlety of the improvements that have 
emerged from an “operational innovation” mindset is the Star-
bucks “steaming pitcher.” Starbucks leaders announced the new 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
211
pitcher in 2012 by noting that the innovative “design will al-
low Starbucks baristas to handcraft espresso beverages more ef-
ficiently and consistently, so they can continue to deliver great 
customer service.” Specifically, the pitcher’s tapered bottom not 
only was created in pursuit of perfectly steamed milk, but also al-
lowed baristas to easily pour milk to lines marked in the pitcher 
that conformed to all Starbucks drink sizes. It also limited the 
space available to overfill the pitcher, thus decreasing waste. In 
essence, the pitcher, which was smaller than its predecessor, of-
fered a threefold win: (1) improved product quality and consis-
tency, (2) increased ease of use for baristas, and (3) reduced milk 
waste. While some innovation occurs through changing a cen-
tral tool like the steaming pitcher, other breakthroughs come 
from reworking entire delivery systems like Drive Thru.
As mentioned in Chapter 9, the history of the Starbucks 
Drive Thru concept dates back to 1994, when the first Drive Thru 
was opened in Vancouver, Washington. While early exploration 
verified that many customers had the desire to buy Starbucks 
beverages from the comfort of their vehicle, the execution of that 
delivery has been a source of continued innovation and opera-
tional improvement. Clarice Turner, senior vice president, U.S. 
Business, indicates, “Drive Thru has been somewhat of a chal-
lenge for us at Starbucks. We pride ourselves on the third place 
experience, and it is often difficult to bring that to life in a Drive 
Thru. In fact, our customer research had shown a difference in 
how our Drive Thrus perform relative to the in-store experience. 
The core of these differences involved consistency and speed 
of service.” One baseline assessment of success in the Drive 
Thru is the balking rate, or the rate at which people leave the 
Drive Thru line prior to ordering. Clarice notes, “Our balk rates 
were unacceptable, so we created a burning platform around 
this information and asked our partners, ‘How do we fix this?’ 
The answer involved operationalizing standards, making the 
work simpler, and clarifying roles to drive consistent outcomes  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
212
across our Drive Thrus.” This was essential for Starbucks, since 
Drive Thrus are company-operated stores that contribute nearly 
45 percent of U.S. retail profit. 
According to Clarice, the standardization process began 
with an across-the-board upgrade to state-of-the-art headsets 
and other tools to ensure that baristas could communicate effec-
tively with customers. Timers were later introduced as an aware-
ness tool, with the caveat that speed of service was important, 
but it was not the only aspect of the experience. Subsequently, 
wireless 2D scanners were introduced to facilitate mobile pay-
ment in the Drive Thru lanes. Upon announcing the availabil-
ity of using the Starbucks Card mobile app while paying at a 
Drive Thru, Starbucks leaders explained the innovation chal-
lenges they had faced: “Implementing mobile pay in the Drive 
Thru took a few more considerations than it did inside the store. 
For one, we needed something that would allow you to perform 
R ef l ec t i o n  o n  C o n n ecti on
1.	 What are the strengths of your business that have been 
most instrumental to the success you have achieved? 
How might those success drivers inadvertently be-
come traps that could constrain future growth?
2.	 How aligned are the operators and the innovators in 
your business? Would you say that both groups share 
an “operational innovation” mindset?
3.	 Is your organization innovating product delivery tools 
as well as comprehensive and integrated process  
improvements?

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
213
the scan yourself, rather than handing your phone over to us. 
Plus, we needed a scanner that would still provide a smooth ex-
perience when the weather acts up and at night when it’s harder 
to see, and one that you could comfortably reach from vari-
ous car heights.” If you are using your mobile phone to pay at 
a Starbucks Drive Thru, the barista can easily use her wireless 
2D handheld scanner to capture the bar code off your phone, ir-
respective of weather, lighting, or the vehicle you are driving. 
Obstacles overcome, innovation implemented, operational effi-
ciencies achieved, and customer experience enhanced—that is 
the evolution of great advances in business.
Curiosity Directed Inward
While many people have offered their opinions concerning the 
differences between an invention and an innovation, I have al-
ways favored the view that an invention is a new creation and an 
innovation is a new solution that attracts a customer. In essence, 
innovation is an applied and marketable phenomenon. It in-
volves taking an invention and/or an existing product or service 
and improving on it in a way that makes it more valuable to those 
you serve. Often leaders have a robust appetite for customer- 
facing innovation, but at Starbucks, equal attention is directed 
to improvements that add value to the lives of partners. At the 
forefront of this innovation is curiosity and a willingness to ask 
about and listen to the ideas and concerns of your people. 
While Starbucks leaders have a long history of surveying 
partners, they intensified their efforts as part of the company’s 
transformational agenda. Specifically, the leaders engaged in a 
30-minute comprehensive interview approach to supplement 
the company’s routine closed-ended 10-minute survey. That 
more intensive survey was geared to get to the core of the part-
ner experience and involved a qualitative dialogue that asked 
probing questions. Given the size of the Starbucks workforce,  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
214
involving partners in a survey that takes three times as long as 
the ordinary format requires a sizable investment. This was par-
ticularly true when the first wave of the survey produced a 91 
percent response rate from the more than 100,000 U.S. partners. 
The survey also required substantial time to process, given the 
hundreds of thousands of open-ended comments that it gar-
nered. Later, Starbucks rolled out the detailed survey in interna-
tional markets and achieved a similar 90 percent response rate. 
Those responses were used to guide leadership efforts to better 
understand partner needs and innovate improvements in offer-
ings that were important to partner groups, such as Starbucks U 
(discussed in Chapter 5). 
Howard Schultz describes one such partner-focused inno-
vation by noting, “We just did something in China that I think 
is one of the most innovative things we have ever done in our 
history—and it had nothing to do with the customer. . . . Think 
about an Annual Meeting of Shareholders; we had a similar 
meeting with partners and their parents in Beijing and Shang-
hai, and we had about 90 percent participation.” From Howard’s 
perspective, the benefit of this novel approach (meeting with the 
parents of Chinese partners) reflects the company’s ability to 
weave Starbucks connection–based values into a family-centric 
event reflecting cultural and local relevance.
Relevance and Risk 
By definition, the key to innovation is relevance to the audi-
ence. However, seeking relevance is not for the faint of heart or 
the risk-averse. At the same time, the pursuit of relevance is not 
a reckless pursuit. In fact, it is often a combination of small it-
erative improvements mixed with calculated bold—hopefully 
game-changing—moves. Many of Starbucks game-changing ef-
forts have been discussed in previous chapters. They include the 
significant investments needed to create VIA, Blonde, Verismo, 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
215
the Starbucks mobile app, and the partnership with Square. Sim-
ilarly, they can be seen in the courage and capital involved in ac-
quiring Tazo, La Boulange, Evolution Fresh, and Teavana. 
While talking about relevant innovation, Howard Schultz 
best described the role of calculated risk and bold moves by not-
ing, “The future of our company is based on having the kind of 
curiosity that is linked to the DNA of the entrepreneurial en-
deavors that we have had for 40 years. And that curiosity has to 
anticipate and understand what is coming and what will be rel-
evant. Then you have to make a big bet.” As an example of a “big 
bet,” Howard mentioned the company’s willingness to enter the 
instant coffee market with VIA. In essence, Starbucks leadership 
decided to enter a more than $17 billion category that had expe-
rienced virtually no innovation in 50 years and that was domi-
nated primarily by a single company. Howard adds, “We decided 
to take the premium franchise of Starbucks and go down a road 
that has been linked to the bowels of quality. We had enough 
insight, curiosity, courage, and confidence that we cracked the 
code on quality by leveraging technology. We were willing to 
make a big bet, take a big swing, and demonstrate to our people 
and our customers that we had the wherewithal to take the road 
less traveled because this is who we are.” 
In the context of that “insight, curiosity, courage, and confi-
dence,” Howard is quick to caution that no company can make a 
large number of big bets in a year. He believes that each one has 
to be “highly calculated and supported. There has to be a vested 
interest by the leaders of the company that we are united be-
cause we have to convince an organization to follow us and give 
them a reason why they should do so. You have to ask and an-
swer the question in the affirmative, ‘What is in it for them for 
doing this?’” 
By achieving alignment at the leadership level and then con-
sidering the impact of innovative changes on those who will be 
asked to implement them, Starbucks creates a culture of risk  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
216
tolerance. Katie Seawell, vice president, Espresso and Brewed 
Coffee at Starbucks, notes, “What I love about this company is 
we’re not afraid to explore new ideas. It is scary pursuing Blonde 
or VIA, or going into juices, but you need to be willing to take 
your brand and product into new spaces. If you don’t, you run 
the risk of becoming dated, and customers and partners alike 
will lose interest in you as competitors claim the white space 
filled with new products and ideas.” 
While the next “big thing” or “big risk” is an essential part of 
business leadership, Starbucks attempts to balance a sense of ur-
gency with due diligence. While recognizing Starbucks as being 
among the Top 25 Most Innovative Companies in Fast Company 
magazine, innovation author Jon Gertner describes Starbucks 
balancing act between urgency and prudence by pointing out 
that Howard Schultz (as Steve Jobs was at Apple) is “still the 
company’s main instigator—has a kernel of an idea. . . . He then 
activates a team, even inviting members over to his house for 
pizza, if that helps to create a stir of urgency. Ideas at Starbucks 
are supposed to undergo a rigorous review process and 6 to 12 
months in the company pipeline. Sometimes, too—as was the 
case of Blonde (18 months in development) or VIA instant 
(about 20 years)—it can take far longer.” In other cases, such as 
launching an in-store campaign to sell wristbands in support of 
a Starbucks job-creation program called Create Jobs for USA 
(which will be discussed in Chapter 11), the process of innova-
tion and launch was compressed to a brisk 30 days. 
Overall brand innovation at Starbucks is a by-product of lis-
tening to the voice of the stakeholder, careful new idea evalua-
tion, a timely development cycle, and a careful test-marketing 
phase. Troy Alstead, Starbucks chief financial officer and chief 
administrative officer, notes, “We’ve become much better at tak-
ing ideas, exploring their viability, making adjustments, and 
turning those ideas into profits. Part of that comes from learn-
ing as a result of our past mistakes and limiting the scope of new 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
217
idea tests. One such example of an unsuccessful launch was our 
Sorbetto product.”
Starbucks test-marketed Sorbetto™ iced beverage in a few se-
lect stores north of Seattle in the spring of 2008, and by the sum-
mer of that year had engaged in a slightly broader test market 
throughout Los Angeles and Orange County in southern Cal-
ifornia. Melody Overton, who writes a popular Starbucks blog 
titled StarbucksMelody.com (which garners approximately 
55,000 unique visitors and 90,000 monthly page views), suggests 
that Sorbetto’s failure was not a function of taste. She states, “It 
was absolutely delicious. Lots of people liked it.” Melody goes 
on to highlight factors that probably led to Sorbetto’s demise. 
Her list includes the timing of the product’s release relative to 
both the U.S. recession and the closing of Starbucks stores. Mel-
ody viewed Sorbetto as ambiguously falling somewhere between 
beverage and dessert, and she noted, “The machines required 
to make the beverage in the store were a terrible problem. They 
were incredibly labor-intensive to clean. They took up a lot of 
precious counter space. They looked like a big Slurpee machine 
which created a very poor 7-11 type image for Starbucks. All in 
all, it just didn’t add up.”
While Sorbetto was not a commercial success for Starbucks, 
Troy Alstead suggests that the way in which the launch was han-
dled reflects the maturation of leadership: “Sorbetto shows how 
our innovation strategy continues to evolve. For example, we 
only provided the product to some of our stores, and we were 
quick to reverse course when it did not make financial sense 
to pursue.That is different from prior years, where we would 
broadly launch an unsuccessful product like Chantico™ and 
leave it in the market for a year.” Chantico was a thick, sweet, hot, 
drinking chocolate of a type that could be found in European 
cafés. Starbucks launched the product nationally in January 
of 2005, describing it as a “drinkable dessert.” At launch, Star-
bucks leaders predicted that Chantico would produce a handful 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
218
of beverage line extensions; however, it was removed from Star-
bucks stores around January 2006. Failed product tests are never 
a desirable outcome, but leaders who successfully drive innova-
tion learn how to manage the speed and scope with which those 
products are presented to and removed from the marketplace.
The Ever-Moving Relevance Target
John Kotter, a former professor at the Harvard Business School 
and author of Leading Change: An Action Plan from the World’s 
Foremost Expert on Business Leadership, confirms what many 
leaders experience every day, namely, that the “rate of change in 
the world today is going up. It’s going up fast, and it’s affecting 
organizations in a huge way. . . . New companies spring up seem-
ingly overnight. Products and services that were revolutionary 
two years ago are rendered obsolete if they don’t adapt to mar-
ket changes fast enough.” Throughout this book, you’ve been ex-
posed to many ways in which Starbucks leaders attempt to stay 
ahead of the obsolescence curve. For the purpose of discussion 
here, let’s look at how Starbucks leaders approach innovation 
through food and beverage experimentation, new concept de-
signs, and technological advances both inside and outside of the 
Starbucks store.
Food and Beverage Experimentation
From its inception, Starbucks has had a conflicted history with 
food delivery. In 1998, Starbucks test-marketed a full-service 
restaurant concept that it called Café Starbucks. Three Café Star-
bucks had opened in the Seattle area by the fall of 1998, serv-
ing items prepared on-site such as chicken pot pie and meatloaf. 
Roseanne Harper, writing at the time for Restaurant News, 
noted, “The Café Starbucks concept includes a wait staff, seat-
ing for up to 65, and a menu that covers all dayparts beginning 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
219
with full breakfasts. In addition to a repertoire of espresso-based 
drinks, Café Starbucks serves wine and beer.” 
Also in 1998, Starbucks leaders were testing a brand con-
cept, Circadia, in San Francisco, California. Mark Gimein de-
scribed Circadia in Fortune magazine by noting, “Surrounded by 
San Francisco’s pricey new loft apartments, [Circadia] resurrects 
the feel of the 1960s coffee shops of Greenwich Village. . . . Cir-
cadia may be the start of a bigger chain and a testbed of concepts 
for Starbucks’ flagship store.” Mark went on to describe Circadia 
as a drop-in office for prospective San Francisco entrepreneurs, 
complete with high-speed Internet (which required a credit card 
swipe for use) and a well-equipped conference room that could 
be rented for $50 per hour. According to Mark, the menu at Cir-
cadia included “salads, sandwiches, and ‘nosh plates.’ . . . Circa-
dia’s full bar features the usual and the creative.” While neither 
Café Starbucks nor Circadia proved to be a successful venture, 
they reflect the long history of the brand’s exploration of food 
and noncoffee beverages. 
As discussed in Chapter 3, Howard Schultz kept prepared 
food items out of the morning Starbucks lineup until he could 
be sure that the smell of food (particularly burnt cheese) did 
not overwhelm the aroma of brewed coffee. By 2008, not only 
had Starbucks leaders found ways to allow coffee and warmed 
foods to coexist in the Starbucks store, but they had also cham-
pioned healthier “grab-and-go” and “right-sized” food options. 
Erin Zimmer, national managing editor for Serious Eats, noted, 
“Starbucks pitched a new game plan . . . a ‘healthier’ breakfast 
line-up with fewer calories and more protein.” 
Continuing in the direction of fewer calories and ready-
to-eat options, in 2011, as part of the company’s fortieth- 
anniversary celebration, Starbucks leaders introduced eight 
managed-portion desserts and eight Bistro Boxes (four snack-
sized and four entrée portions). The dessert items, referred to as 
Starbucks Petites, included Peanut Butter Mini Cupcakes, Red 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
220
Velvet Whoopie Pies, Lemon Sweet Squares, and Cake Pops. 
Each of these mini-desserts was less than 200 calories. The ini-
tial Bistro Box lineup included items such as Chipotle Chicken 
Wraps, Sesame Noodles, Tuna Salad, as well as Chicken and 
Hummus. All Bistro Box items were created to be less than 500 
calories, and the specific items just listed were less than 400 cal-
ories. Over time, the lineup of mini-desserts and Bistro Boxes 
changes, but the focus remains on creating flavorful options that 
offer convenience and managed portion sizes. 
Starbucks strategic approach to food led Christine Hall, a 
66-year-old Virginia woman, to gain media attention when she 
reported that she had adhered to what has now been called the 
“Starbucks Diet.” Over a period of more than two years, Christine  
had gone from 190 to 115 pounds by eating almost exclusively at 
Starbucks. On an average day, Christine purportedly would have 
black coffee and a cup of oatmeal for breakfast. At lunch and 
dinner, she would have either a Bistro Box or a panini sandwich. 
As part of the continuing evolution of Starbucks food items, 
Starbucks purchased Bay Bread LLC, a bakery company with 20 
La Boulange stores across the San Francisco Bay area, for $100 
million in 2012. Upon making the acquisition, Cliff Burrows, 
Starbucks president, Americas, indicated, “It’s a superb oppor-
tunity to bring high-quality food into Starbucks,” and when talk-
ing about expansion, stated that Starbucks “will take it one store 
at a time. Wherever opportunity takes us.” Once experimenta-
tion is engaged in or an acquisition is made, leaders must truly 
have the patience and the discipline to allow brands to move in 
the direction of their optimal success.
New Concepts
Consistent with this chapter’s title, Starbucks leaders did not 
abandon their values or turn their back on their core competen-
cies in pursuit of the changes needed as part of the company’s  

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
221
Transformation Agenda. However, some observers have ex-
pressed concern over the speed and magnitude of Starbucks 
leaders’ appetite for innovation. For example, some commen-
tators sounded an alarm over the possibility that alcohol would 
become a prominent feature in all Starbucks stores, and head-
lines like “Latte or Lager” proliferated when the leaders at Star-
bucks incorporated alcohol sparingly and strategically through 
an emerging concept called Starbucks Evenings. Stores that pro-
vide Starbucks Evenings offer the traditional Starbucks items 
throughout the day and evening, but add a menu of wine, beer, 
and small plates after 4 p.m. By late 2012, only five Starbucks 
Evenings stores had opened in and around Seattle, Washing-
ton; five more were in the Chicago, Illinois, area; four were open 
in and near Atlanta, Georgia; two could be found in Los An-
geles, California; and one was open in Portland, Oregon. Star-
bucks Evenings stores are designed as neighborhood meeting 
spots. The Starbucks website shares the value proposition be-
hind the Starbucks Evenings concept by suggesting that it gives 
customers who already love Starbucks during the day even more 
reasons to love the brand at night. According to the Starbucks 
website, “Sometimes you just want a glass of wine and a deli-
cious bite to eat without going to a bar or making a restaurant 
reservation. . . . Drop in after work, with friends, after yoga, by 
yourself, after a long day or after a great day. The food is amaz-
ing. The wine selection is simple and smart. The chairs are just 
as comfortable as they are in the morning.” From the standpoint 
of food, Starbucks Evenings locations offer items such as truf-
fle macaroni and cheese, bacon-wrapped dates with balsamic 
glaze, artichoke and goat cheese flatbread, and chocolate fondue. 
Rather than seeing the Starbucks Evenings concept as a ubiqui-
tous strategy to drive traffic during the evening hours, the lead-
ership is exploring a targeted approach by making the option 
available only in neighborhoods where the leaders believe that 
Starbucks Evenings will be an excellent fit. 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
222
In a similar vein, Starbucks leaders launched a dramati-
cally varied walk-up/drive-up store concept, the first of which 
was opened in Denver, Colorado, in late 2012. Mark Wilson, 
writing in fastcodesign.com, describes this concept by noting,  
“Starbucks opened a store unlike any before it. There are no 
leather chairs or free power outlets. In fact, there’s no space for 
the customer at all. Starbucks has reimagined the coffee hut as a 
‘modern modular,’ LEED® certified drive-thru and walk-up shop. 
The building was constructed in a factory and delivered from 
a truck, but its facade is clad in gorgeous old Wyoming snow 
fencing. As diminutive as the shop may be, its designer wants  
New modular store concept, Denver, Colorado, USA.

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
223
drivers to pass by and ask ‘What is that?’ only to conclude that, 
oh, ‘it’s art.’” 
This concept store addresses sustainable building objectives 
(which will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 11), while 
also achieving local relevance in a low-cost, easily scalable op-
tion. The walk-up/drive-up takes only 500 feet of retail space 
and can accommodate five baristas and all the equipment neces-
sary to deliver the full Starbucks menu. 
According to Chris Carr, executive vice president, U.S. Re-
tail Stores, every emerging concept, whether it is Starbucks 
Evenings, the walk-up/drive-up store, or an idea that is just be-
ginning to surface in the Starbucks innovation pipeline, must 
be “analyzed through the three filters of our retail operating 
model: partner, customer, and business. We have established the  
R ef l ec t i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 Are you willing to make potentially game-changing big 
bets? How would you rate your ability to drive inno-
vation from the standpoint of your insight, curiosity, 
courage, and confidence? 
2.	 What innovation risks are you presently taking? What 
are the risks you incur from not taking your brand into 
a new space?
3.	 When it comes to exploring innovative ideas, do you 
ask if the proposed solution makes sense for your cus-
tomer, your business, and your staff? What other filters 
(for example, cost, ease of implementation, or likely 
reward) do you apply when you are evaluating the vi-
ability of an idea?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
224
operational discipline to ask ourselves: Does it make sense for 
our partners? Does it make sense for our customers? Does it 
make sense for our business? When we are testing any new ini-
tiative, we hold ourselves accountable to ensure that our inno-
vative solution will successfully pass all three filters. If the test 
does not deliver on behalf of our partners, customers, and busi-
ness, we have developed the discipline to walk away.” Innovation 
is only as good as the mechanisms an organization has to inter-
pret the success or viability of the concepts. At Starbucks, lead-
ers have clearly defined the criteria by which innovation should 
be advanced or curtailed.
Technological Advances for  
In- and Out-of-Store Experiences
In Chapter 8, we looked at how Starbucks leaders have deployed 
technology to enhance the customer connection. From the per-
spective of innovation, technology is also being advanced to cre-
ate forward-looking product delivery options and experience 
enhancements. From the standpoint of new delivery approaches, 
imagine having your favorite coffee beverages prepared just for 
you—by a vending machine. The first prototypes for this tech-
nology were presented through the Seattle’s Best Coffee brand.
As you recall, Seattle’s Best Coffee is the Seattle-based cof-
fee company that Starbucks purchased in 2003. Chris Bruzzo, 
senior vice president, Channel Brand Management, highlights 
the overall strategy behind the Seattle’s Best Coffee reposition-
ing. Chris notes, “We’ve struggled at times clarifying the role of 
Seattle’s Best Coffee within our brand family. That brand is now 
focused on being the on-ramp to premium coffee for individuals 
whose lifestyle might not presently connect with the Starbucks 
brand. We are positioning ourselves to serve the 107 million 
adults in the United States with median household incomes 
around $50,000. For most of these people, time is precious and 

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
225
their coffee rituals are tied to their vehicles and/or linked to con-
venience and value. They’re on their way to work, and they’re 
getting their coffee at convenience stores, gas stations, or quick 
service restaurants like Subway and Burger King.” 
Given the target consumer for Seattle’s Best Coffee, the 
brand is innovating in the direction of product positioning at 
convenience or QSR settings, as well as creating franchised de-
livery models and the Seattle’s Best Coffee vending machine. In 
keeping with this strategy, leaders at Seattle’s Best Coffee an-
nounced a franchise Drive Thru model in 2012. Melissa Allison, 
Seattle Times business reporter, noted, “In Seattle’s Best Coffee’s 
latest divergence from corporate parent Starbucks, every new lo-
cation will be a 523-square-foot Drive Thru-only café. . . . The 
chain expects to open thousands of little red stores from which 
baristas will dispense brewed coffee, sweet flavored lattes, hand-
held pies and breakfast sand-
wiches. . . . If all goes according 
to plan, the tiny cafés will be sit-
uated mostly in empty subur-
ban spaces. . . . The stores will be 
owned by franchisees who can 
afford multiple locations, with 
launch costs at the low end of Se-
attle’s Best current startup range 
of $265,000 for a kiosk.” 
If 523 feet of space is too 
much for coffee delivery, how 
about a 9-square-foot retail 
“on-the-go” footprint? Leaders  
at Seattle’s Best Coffee have 
worked with Coinstar Inc. (the 
company associated with Red- 
box DVD kiosks) to create a vend-
ing option called the Rubi kiosk  
Seattle’s Best Coffee  
Rubi kiosk.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
226
that grinds and brews a 12-or 16-ounce cup of premium coffee  
and other beverages in just about a minute. According to Bill  
Mikulka, Rubi’s general manager, “The coffee market is enormous 
. . . [and] is very much about convenience, quality and value. We’ve 
built a platform that can be in arm’s length of desire.” In the spirit 
of affordability and value, Rubi kiosks serve fresh-brewed coffee 
with prices starting at just $1 per cup. 
Other technology explorations at Starbucks are looking to 
enhance the quality of the coffeehouse experience. One such ex-
ample is the wireless charging spots with Duracell Powermats. As 
someone who has used Starbucks stores as a location for crafting 
the words of my books, I have often faced the challenge of finding  
an available power outlet for my laptop computer. In an effort to 
decrease the power source search, Starbucks leaders have placed 
inductive charging technology in some of its tabletops in select 
Boston, Massachusetts, locations. The purpose of this effort is to 
assess how customers respond to emerging charging technolo-
gies in the context of their overall utility in the café experience.
A Virtual Learning Lab 
It would be impossible to provide an in-depth review of all the 
product, service delivery, and experience enhancement innova-
tions that are currently being explored at Starbucks. Such inno-
vations take forms as diverse as a relationship with the National 
History Museum in the United Kingdom to offer My Starbucks 
Rewards members the opportunity to receive two-for-one deals 
and priority access to the annual Christmas ice rink near the mu-
seum. Additionally, technological innovation can take the form  
of a pop-up screen for computer users in Starbucks stores in 
Switzerland and Austria, asking them to rate the quality of their 
beverage so that instant service recovery can occur, if needed. 
Ultimately, Starbucks benefits from a leadership team that 
maintains the passion for entrepreneurship that led to the  

H onor  th e  Past,  bu t Don ’t Be  Tr a p p e d  in It
227
company’s meteoric rise. That passion was reawakened dur-
ing the push for the brand’s survival during the 2008–2009 time 
frame. The leaders have tightened up their operational disci-
pline and diversified their delivery platforms. Howard Schultz 
encapsulated the necessity of innovation at Starbucks, and prob-
ably for your business as well, when he told a London British  
Forum, “Any company, small or large, consumer or otherwise, 
that is going to embrace the status quo as an operating princi-
ple is just going to be dead. . . . The need for constant innova-
tion and pushing forward has never been greater than it is today.  
Every company must have the ability and the discipline to really 
be curious and look around the corners [to] see things and antic-
ipate things that other people don’t see. But, that is not enough. 
You must then have the courage to go after those things. Not to 
bet the company on them, but execute [that] kind of courage.” If 
you had to reduce the Starbucks model of innovation down to a 
sentence it would simply be the following:
Mix curiosity, courage, and discipline in a tireless pur-
suit of the ever-changing needs of your people, your 
customers, and the profitability of your business.
Sounds like a solid formula for any leader who wants to 
“honor the past but not be trapped in it.” 
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• Complacency and inertia are challenges to innova-
tion for successful brands.
• A great deal of long-term business success is associ-
ated with innovations in operational excellence and 
efficiency.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
228
• Alignment among leaders is essential to innovation. 
Innovators and operators must share a common vision. 
• An invention is a new creation. An innovation is a 
new creation that attracts a customer.
• By definition, innovation must be relevant to your 
identified audience.
• When making potentially game-changing big bets, 
leaders must demonstrate insight, curiosity, courage, 
and confidence.
• If you’re unwilling to take your brand into a new 
space, people will lose interest in it as others bring 
forward new products and new ideas.
• In order to turn ideas into profits effectively, leaders  
must be willing to make mistakes and learn from them.
• Innovation should be filtered through three ques-
tions: Does it make sense for your customers? Does 
it make sense for your business? Does it make sense 
for your staff?
• If you embrace the status quo as an operating princi-
ple, your business is likely to die. 
• Great corporate leaders must have the ability and the 
discipline to look around the corners to see and an-
ticipate things that other people can’t see.

229
C H
A P
T
E R
 1
1
Taking the Long View: 
Building Success  
That Lasts
You are not here merely to make a living. You are here 
in order to enable the world to live more amply,  
with greater vision, with a finer spirit of hope and 
achievement.
Woodrow Wilson
W
hat are your primary responsibilities as a leader? Are 
they to drive profitability, maximize the potential of your 
people, and strengthen your brand equity? In their book A Lead-
er’s Legacy, James Kouzes and Barry Posner suggest that true 
leadership “brings with it a responsibility to do something of 
significance that makes families, communities, work organiza-
tions, nations, the environment and the world better places than 
they are today.” While Kouzes and Posner’s words might seem 
like lofty and untenable platitudes, the leaders at Starbucks view 
themselves as being responsible for more than business success. 
In fact, Howard Schultz integrates the broader social good with 
the overall viability of Starbucks business by noting, “Since Star-
bucks earliest days, I have believed in a strong link between our 
company’s performance, our values, and the impact we have on 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
230
the communities where we do business. This interdependence 
is at the heart of our mission. . . . Such interdependence is also 
right for our business, especially in the times we now live. Con-
sumers have long rewarded brands with their loyalty when they 
feel a company’s mission and aspirations align with their own.”
In fact, at Starbucks, the leadership’s aspirations regarding 
social responsibility are defined in one of the company’s guiding 
principles, that involving neighborhoods. That principle reads:
Our Neighborhood
Every store is part of a community, and we take our re-
sponsibility to be good neighbors seriously. We want 
to be invited in wherever we do business. We can be a 
force for positive action—bringing together our part-
ners, customers, and the community to contribute ev-
ery day. Now we see that our responsibility—and our 
potential for good—is even larger. The world is look-
ing to Starbucks to set the new standard, yet again. We 
will lead.
Throughout this chapter, we will look at just a few of the so-
cially responsible areas where Starbucks sets “the new standard” 
and “leads.” For our purposes, we will look specifically at be-
haviors leadership demonstrates in the course of setting goals, 
taking action, and measuring progress in the areas of environ-
mental stewardship, ethical sourcing, community development, 
and job creation.
Environmental Stewardship
If you were to Google the phrase “saddling future generations,” 
you’d come up with more than 356,000 results. Most of these ref-
erences apply to the perceived shortcomings of political lead-
ers globally who borrow money to pay for present-day services 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
231
and leave the repayment of those loans to future generations of 
taxpayers. While this behavior is expedient for a politician’s re-
election, many critics see it as myopic and irresponsible social 
policy. The parallel in business is a leader who achieves short-
term profitability at the expense of long-term sustainability. 
Such a leader might consume large quantities of finite raw ma-
terials and “saddle future generations” of leaders with a supply 
shortfall. For example, leaders in agribusiness and commercial 
fishing have been accused of short-term profit taking in the form 
of overfarming or overfishing. 
At Starbucks, leaders not only consider the short-term im-
pact of the resources they consume, but also look for ways of do-
ing business that decrease consumption over the near and long 
term. Additionally, these leaders seek to drive initiatives that will 
help influence other organizations to consider responsible stew-
ardship of finite resources. This impact on other organizations is 
particularly evident in the areas of sustainable building design, 
the recyclability of Starbucks cups, and manufacturing processes 
(for example, the environmentally friendly changes to the Star-
bucks cup sleeve).
Sustainable Building Design
While I have spent time talking about culturally relevant build-
ing design (such as the Bank store in Amsterdam) and designs 
that offer new delivery platforms (such as the walk-up/drive-
up concept in Denver, Colorado), Arthur Rubinfeld, chief cre-
ative officer for Starbucks and president, Global Innovation and 
Evolution Fresh Retail, indicates that the galvanizing and ener-
gizing force among Starbucks store designers is “a stake we put 
in the ground around 2008, when we announced our goal to 
lead the world in global, sustainable retail building practices in  
company-owned stores worldwide. Environmental consider-
ations have long been a part of our company, but in 2008, we 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
232
claimed a specific aspiration and shifted our role to not only be 
stewards but responsible educators. We are building stores with 
sustainable products by utilizing metal, wood, and stone/organ-
ics, as well as recyclable and recycled materials. As importantly, we 
are making sustainability more visible so people around the world  
might consider an environmental lifestyle. We’re educating con-
sumers about water conservation, energy conservation, and we 
have taken a leadership position when it comes to eco-conscious 
stores. There is immense satisfaction in inspiring others.” 
One highly visual example of the sustainable store design 
can be found in a Starbucks concept store referred to as the Rec-
lamation Drive Thru, located in Tukwila, Washington.  
Reclamation Drive Thru, Tukwila, Washington, USA.
Anthony Perez, senior manager, Global Store Design, was 
responsible for the project and shares the eco-conscious nature 
of its design: “Shipping containers source our coffees and teas 
from around the world. But many end up in scrap yards once 
they reach their average 20-year lifespan. Reclamation Drive 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
233
Thru was inspired by a desire to help keep items used through-
out our supply chain, like old shipping containers, out of the 
waste stream. The result: a 450-square-foot Drive Thru and 
walk-up store made from four end-of-life-cycle shipping con-
tainers. One small 20-foot container holds garbage, recycling, 
and storage, but other than that, the whole store is contained 
within the shells of four containers that have been reclaimed, re-
furnished, renewed, and revived. And it works! . . . This small 
project came at a perfect time here at Starbucks as we challenge 
ourselves to deliver LEED certified stores across the U.S.”
LEED certification refers to meeting Leadership in Energy 
and Environmental Design criteria. If these criteria are met, the 
result is a voluntary third-party verification by the U.S. Green 
Building Council, indicating that the building has been designed 
and constructed and is being operated in an ecologically sound 
manner. It is an approach to creating a built environment that 
conserves water and energy, reduces greenhouse emissions, de-
creases waste sent to landfills, and increases occupants’ health 
and safety. Many business leaders have passed on remodeling 
or building physical spaces that meet LEED standards because 
they fear that building costs will be considerably higher. How-
ever, the Natural Resource Defense Council suggests, “Green 
building skeptics sometimes argue that it’s difficult or even im-
possible to build green without paying a big cost premium. But 
real-world examples show that you can complete a LEED cer-
tified green building project for an average of 2 percent more 
in upfront costs, and sometimes even below standard market 
construction costs. Plus, any extra first costs you pay can be re-
covered through faster lease-up rates, rental premiums and in-
creased market valuation.”
Responsible management of capital expenditures is impor-
tant, and when it comes to Starbucks stores, so are responsible 
sustainability efforts. Jim Hanna, director, Environmental Im-
pact at Starbucks, notes, “Around 75 percent of our controllable 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
234
environmental footprint comes from our retail operations. . . .  
For us to have any credibility as a responsible company in this 
arena, we had to tackle our stores first.” 
Ben Packard, former vice president, Global Responsibility, 
puts Starbucks leadership position on LEED in perspective by 
noting, “We have been working with the organization respon-
sible for LEED certification, the U.S. Green Building Council, 
since 2001. Rather than setting our own standards on sustain-
able buildings and then going out to validate our effort, we knew 
it would be important to have a trust mark conferred by an inde-
pendent certifying agency. LEED criteria were designed for of-
fice buildings and not retail spaces, so I became involved as chair 
of the retail development committee at the U.S. Green Building 
Council to work with other retail industry and environmental 
leaders in making appropriate adjustments to the criteria. Once 
those retail standards were established, we pursued LEED certi-
fication aggressively.” 
In a Starbucks LEED certified store, some energy- and water- 
saving elements might be noticeable by customers. These would 
include items like LED lightbulbs; energy-efficient equip-
ment such as icemakers, dishwashers, or blenders; low-flow 
faucets; and dual-flush toilets. Non-customer-facing energy- 
efficient, water-saving efforts would include energy manage-
ment systems, which have shown reductions of 20 percent in 
heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) energy con-
sumption; a water filtration system that produces 50 percent less 
wastewater than prior systems, and a sanitizing sink that saves a 
substantial quantity of fresh water while adhering to all applica-
ble health standards. 
To have an interactive virtual tour of a LEED certified Star-
bucks store, please go to http://tinyurl.com/orvk49d. 
Each year Starbucks publishes a corporate social respon-
sibility report that serves as a report card on the company’s 
progress toward social and environmental goals. In 2011, for 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
235
example, the report validated that the company was “on track” 
to meet its goal of having all its company-owned new buildings 
make their way through the lengthy process of becoming LEED 
certified, noting that 75 percent of new company-owned stores 
had, in a year, already achieved LEED certification status.
The lessons learned from Starbucks journey to LEED in-
clude the importance of setting ambitious sustainability goals; 
seeking third-party criteria to validate your achievement of 
those goals; playing a role in refining these criteria for your in-
dustry, if necessary; executing against those goals; and trans-
parently reporting your progress toward your objectives. In a 
smaller business setting, you may wish to access tool kits pro-
vided by the Office of Small Business Programs at the U.S. En-
vironmental Protection Agency (an example of which can be 
found at http://tinyurl.com/m7tl7td).
In addition to receiving recognition like the Green Building 
Design Award from Global Green USA and a 2012 Good De-
sign Is Good Business Award conferred by Architectural Record 
for the company’s efforts toward LEED certifications, Starbucks 
has also been acknowledged for its overall accomplishments 
in energy conservation and its reliance on renewable energy. It 
has been recognized as a Green Power Leadership Award win-
ner by the Environmental Protection Agency, since Starbucks 
is a top U.S. purchaser of renewable energy. For example, in 
2011, Starbucks purchased more than 421 million kilowatt-
hours of green energy through Green-e® certified renewable 
energy credits. Those wind-generated electricity purchases pow-
ered more than 50 percent of Starbucks U.S. company-owned 
stores. The company has set goals of reducing its energy use 
by 25 percent from 2008 levels and having 100 percent of its 
electricity consumption generated through renewable energy  
by 2015.
Merging innovation with efforts to reduce energy con-
sumption, Starbucks has teamed up with the Bonneville Power 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
236
Administration and a collective of public utilities in the north-
western United States to explore whether changes in human be-
havior can result in substantial energy savings. Instead of relying 
solely on energy-saving technology, Starbucks leaders will chal-
lenge store partners to compete with partners in other stores to 
see who can create the greatest energy reductions. The leaders 
at Starbucks are taking responsibility for short-term energy ef-
ficiency and long-term environmental stability. In the process, 
they are leading others in the pursuit of more sustainable busi-
ness practices. This leadership position could not be more evi-
dent than in the area of recycling. 
Bringing Materials Back for a Sequel
Just as Starbucks leaders worked with the U.S. Green Building 
Council to establish LEED criteria for retail buildings, so too 
have company leaders collaborated with other experts and lead-
ers in the area of recycling to create a solution that decreases 
the waste associated with Starbucks cups. As I was completing 
my previous book about the company, Starbucks was poised to 
launch the industry’s first hot beverage paper cup with 10 per-
cent postconsumer recycled fiber. By demonstrating the safety 
of the recycled content in its cups, Starbucks had been able to 
encourage the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to change its 
position prohibiting the use of postconsumer recycled content 
in paper products that came in contact with food. 
While the use of postconsumer recycled content in cups 
was an important step, it did not mean that the cups themselves 
were necessarily recyclable. This was problematic for the lead-
ers at Starbucks, who had set a goal of ensuring that 100 per-
cent of their cups would be reusable or recyclable by 2015. Ben 
Packard, former vice president, Global Responsibility, notes, 
“Our cups are made of paper, but that paper is covered with a 
polymer. This means in cities where the recycling market will 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
237
take that material, the cup is recyclable. In other cities, the poly-
mer makes it nonrecyclable. This type of variability prompted 
us to begin hosting a meeting in 2009 which we call the Cup  
Summit.” 
The Cup Summit has continued to grow annually and brings 
together individuals from all areas of the plastic and paper cup 
value chain. These stakeholders include raw material suppliers, 
government officials, beverage and retail businesses, cup man-
ufacturers, nongovernmental organizations, recyclers, and ac-
ademic experts from institutions like MIT. According to Ben, 
“Initially, we thought our solution would come from changing 
materials, but we were encouraged to challenge all assumptions 
and map every aspect of a cup’s journey. As such, we literally had 
a map from tree to garbage dump on which we outlined all the 
things that would have to change and how we would need to go 
about effecting those changes.” Because of the knowledge gained 
through the Cup Summits, the leaders at Starbucks have already 
implemented recycling in a number of U.S. markets by develop-
ing close relationships with the leaders of various municipalities. 
The company has also initiated recycling pilot projects across 
the United States and collaborated with Canadian and U.S. pa-
per mills to explore compatibility and ways to drive demand for 
cups with postconsumer content. 
Jim Hanna, director, Environmental Impact, notes that Star-
bucks is committed to the recyclable cup issue because it is good 
for the environment and because it is important to customers. 
He offers, “Our footprint is most affected by our built environ-
ment as well as the energy and other resources that go into run-
ning our stores, but when we talk to our customers and other 
stakeholders, they are asking about our progress on the recy-
clability of our cups. The Starbucks cup is a touchable, tangible, 
visible icon of the company, and it symbolizes our environmen-
tal performance.” When an environmental issue is salient to your 
customers, it has to rise on your project priority list.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
238
A similar iconic and tangible aspect of the Starbucks cup 
experience is the cup sleeve. In 1997, Starbucks introduced the 
sleeve made of corrugated paper in an effort to reduce the waste 
that occurred when customers requested that their hot beverage 
be double cupped. The sleeve offered an insulating layer between 
the customer’s hand and the Starbucks cup, with the added ben-
efit that it could be constructed with postconsumer recycled fi-
ber, since the sleeve never made contact with the coffee. At the 
time it was launched, 60 percent of the composition of the sleeve 
came from this recycled material.
The sleeve was initially intended to be an interim solution 
as Starbucks leaders researched alternative strategies to alter the 
thermal properties of the company’s cups. In the end, it was de-
termined that the sleeve was the most viable option—thus, it 
continues to be used today. Matt Cook, president of LDP Man-
ufacturing, the supplier that provides the cup sleeves, suggests 
that the leadership at Starbucks pushed his company to im-
prove the sleeve: “Starbucks leaders essentially asked us, ‘What  
does the next generation of a hot cup sleeve look like? Is it pos-
sible to create a product that has less material, increases recycled 
content, and offers the same or even superior thermal insula-
tion?’ I can’t express to you the magnitude of that challenge, but 
we worked with Hinkle Corporation on the chemistry around 
the internal adhesives and ultimately produced a groundbreak-
ing technology. It is the new hot cup sleeve, which Starbucks 
calls the EarthSleeve™.” Without compromising its thermal 
properties, the new sleeve uses 35 percent less paper and is made 
from 85 percent postconsumer recycled fiber (a 25-percentage-
point increase from its predecessor). Certifying organizations 
have determined the sleeve to be fully compostable, and Western 
Michigan University has determined it to be repulpable. With 
nearly 3 billion cup sleeves produced in 2011 alone, Starbucks 
calculations suggest that the EarthSleeve™ will save more than 
100,000 trees. 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
239
While cups and sleeves are high profile, most of Starbucks 
recycling efforts are not customer-facing. Many initiatives in-
volve things like syrup bottles, milk jugs, and cardboard boxes. 
However, the leaders at Starbucks are never content with those 
behind-the-counter efforts. They understand that sustainability 
is not something that is done as a marketing or publicity effort;  
it is an authentic commitment to the future viability of busi-
nesses and to future generations of customers. While smaller 
business owners aren’t likely to be able to support recycling re-
search, they can take simple steps like looking for a printing 
company that uses recycled paper or seeking out vendors that 
supply environmentally friendly products. In the end, it is not 
enough to talk about sustainability. True leadership requires a 
willingness to invest in the long-term health of one’s business 
and active collaboration with others, out of a genuine sense of 
responsibility.
R ef l ec t i o n  o n C o n n e cti on
1.	 How are you ensuring that your leadership decisions 
are not “saddling future generations” of leaders with 
sustainability challenges?
2.	 Where have you not only responsibly managed energy- 
efficiency, recycling, or green building issues for your 
business, but also partnered with other leaders to ad-
vance these issues in your industry?
3.	 What are the most salient customer-facing and  
non-customer-facing environmental issues you are  
addressing?

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
240
Caring About the People That  
Bring Products to Market
In Chapter 2, I discussed C.A.F.E. Practices, Starbucks commit-
ment to the success and sustainability of suppliers in its coffees’ 
countries of origin. I also noted that Starbucks had worked with 
Conservation International in the creation of these practices 
so that the needs of coffee farmers would be met. To that end, 
the leadership has set out three specific farmer-related sourcing  
objectives: 
• “Ensure 100% of our coffee is ethically sourced  
by 2015.”
• “Invest in farmers and their communities by increas-
ing farmer loans to $20 million by 2015.”
• “Improve farmers’ access to carbon markets, helping 
them generate additional income while protecting 
the environment.”
By 2011, Starbucks was on track with each of these objectives, 
as 86 percent of its coffee was ethically sourced under C.A.F.E. 
Practices, $14.7 million in loan commitments had been made to 
farmers, and programs in Mexico and Indonesia were paving the 
way for more farmers to have access to carbon markets and en-
vironmental protection. 
Starbucks has a massive supply chain challenge that extends 
beyond coffee farmers. At the store level alone, it requires more 
than 83,000 deliveries a week to enable its stores to operate when 
a partner opens the door in the morning. The supply chain must 
also address the future growth and expansion of the business 
across products, categories, and channels. In many ways, the 
Starbucks brand rests on whether the supply chain can take ideas 
and create a physical manifestation of them in the marketplace.  

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
241
Despite those challenges, the leaders at Starbucks must ensure 
that their suppliers are diverse and that they are committed to 
business ethics and humane operations. Starbucks leaders un-
derstand that they can outsource physical activity, but they can-
not outsource responsibility for the quality of their products or 
the way people are treated in the creation of those products.
An example of Starbucks willingness to take strong but re-
spectful actions when its suppliers’ behaviors are suspect oc-
curred when workplace safety allegations were made concerning 
a supplier’s U.S.-based manufacturing plant. According to Kelly 
Goodejohn, director, Ethical Sourcing, “In that case, we sent 
a message to plant management saying, ‘Over the short term, 
we’re going to stop doing business with you, but we want to un-
derstand what’s happening in your facility and then want to talk 
about capacity building and remediation.’” After Starbucks no-
tified the manufacturer, the leaders had a third-party monitor-
ing company with whom Starbucks works globally go into the 
manufacturer’s facility and conduct a three-day, in-person re-
view. In addition to direct observations and meetings with plant 
leadership, the evaluation team spoke directly with employees 
in the plant. 
In cases where third-party evaluations are required, Star-
bucks leaders hope those evaluations will result in verifiable re-
mediation of the problem areas and allow for the maintenance 
of the supplier relationship. If that is not possible, those supplier 
relationships will be terminated. Kelly notes, “We recognize that 
the amount of money we spend with suppliers is significant and, 
as such, we have a responsibility to make sure that our values 
permeate throughout our supply chain. That is not an easy task 
because you’re dealing with a wide array of cultures and different 
corporate priorities. But we tie the importance of ethical sourc-
ing back to the fact that taking care of your people and your 
community produces positive business results.” As Starbucks 
demonstrates a positive connection between humane treatment 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
242
of workers and strong business growth, Starbucks suppliers are 
also demonstrating similar behavior for subcontractors and sup-
pliers. In essence, being a humane and responsible company is 
good for business.
Upping the Community  
Partnership
The leaders at Starbucks have a long history of working on is-
sues of employment opportunity, leadership development, and 
economic growth. For example, in 1998, Starbucks worked with 
former National Basketball Association star Earvin “Magic” 
Johnson through his Johnson Development Corporation in 
a joint venture, referred to as Urban Coffee Opportunities, to 
build Starbucks stores in underserved urban neighborhoods. 
Magic, who sold his stake in the 105 stores involved in the joint 
venture back to Starbucks in 2010, noted, “Through our partner-
ship with Starbucks, we were able to serve as an economic cata-
lyst in urban cities through the creation of new jobs.” 
By 2011, Starbucks had begun making a transition from Ur-
ban Coffee Opportunities to a new model for community stores 
in the Harlem neighborhood in New York and in Los Angeles’s 
Crenshaw community. That pilot approach was designed to take 
financial contributions from those stores and share them di-
rectly with a community-building organization in each of those 
regions. In announcing the new community store model, How-
ard Schultz noted, “Starbucks is partnering with two organi-
zations doing heroic work to address the economic, social and 
education challenges in their communities. . . . These two part-
nerships are intended to help us learn how our company can 
successfully join with change-making community organiza-
tions in a localized, coordinated and replicable way.” Through 
these initial coordinated efforts, Starbucks shared approximately 
$245,000 with the two community organizations in the first year  

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
243
of operations. Based on the success of the initial community stores,  
Starbucks leaders announced that they were expanding the pro-
gram to Houston, Texas, by contributing funds based on the per-
formance of a newly remodeled Gulfgate Center Mall store to 
the Association for the Advancement of Mexican Americans. 
On a smaller scale, leaders can simply look for ways to support 
community activities through service organizations, schools, 
and community-based nonprofits. These types of opportunities 
forge reciprocal win/win relationships leading to business suc-
cess and the overall health of the communities served.
Stewardship in Foundation Form
The Starbucks Foundation, which was created in 1997 with the 
purchase price from Howard’s first book, Pour Your Heart Into It, 
has served as a launchpad for many of Starbucks community de-
velopment projects, starting with a focus on literacy programs in 
the United States and Canada. Over the years, the foundation has 
broadened its efforts globally. At present, the Starbucks Foun-
dation supports community development projects in coffee-,  
tea-, and cocoa-growing regions. These projects include such 
things as improving water sanitation, increasing health and nu-
trition, and providing microcredit and agricultural training. 
The Starbucks Foundation also has become involved with Ethos  
Water, a company started in 2001 with the simple mission, “help 
children get clean water.” Ethos Water, which is now a Starbucks 
subsidiary, has made more than $7 million in grants in support 
of that mission, with 5 cents from every bottle of Ethos Water 
purchased being dedicated to clean water efforts. The Starbucks 
Foundation also administers community service grants to non-
profit organizations and provides funds in the form of matching 
grants to organizations in which local Starbucks partners ac-
tively invest their own time and money.

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
244
Since there is not enough space in this book to dive deeply 
into all the projects and programs supported by the Starbucks 
Foundation, let’s look at a couple of initiatives that address the 
primary themes of education and leadership development. For 
example, the Starbucks Foundation established the Starbucks 
China Education Project. The project, which began in 2005, 
builds on the strong cultural values concerning formal educa-
tion that are found throughout China. In support of this project, 
Starbucks committed $5 million (approximately RMB 40 mil-
lion) to learning programs in China through a U.S. nonprofit or-
ganization called Give2Asia. Funds from the project are used in 
China to train teachers in rural areas, support scholarships for 
teaching college students, and aid teachers as well as students 
who were affected by the 2008 Sichuan earthquake.
The Starbucks Foundation is also committed to youth lead-
ership training globally through the Youth Leadership Grants 
program. Leaders at Starbucks reported in 2012 that “there are 
more than 1.2 billion 15 to 24 year olds, the largest global cohort 
of young people in history. Unfortunately, a growing number of 
these young people are disengaged and unemployed, often re-
ferred to as NEET (not engaged in employment, education, or 
training). The Starbucks Foundation is interested in supporting 
organizations that equip young people ages 15 to 24 years old.” 
Specifically, the Starbucks Foundation is providing Youth Lead-
ership Grants to international organizations that assist young 
people in developing skills in business savvy, social conscience, 
and collaborative communication. 
Starbucks commitment to maximizing the employability of 
youth goes beyond the grants extended through the Starbucks 
Foundation. For example, Blair Taylor was the CEO of the Los 
Angeles Urban League when he approached Howard Schultz 
with a set of concerns and a request. Specifically, Blair shared 
that he told Howard, “Kids in urban schools are not getting 
the experiential learning that kids in suburban schools receive. 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
245
They’re not going away to Europe on their summer vacation or 
touring the Hamptons. They don’t get the opportunity to see 
outside of their neighborhoods.” Furthermore, Blair suggested 
to Howard “that urban school kids from inner-city schools and 
poor rural schools are keeping up pretty well with their subur-
ban counterparts during the school year, but a gap emerges as 
a result of the differences in the experiences they have over the 
summer months.” 
Blair advised Howard that, because of this, he wanted to take 
a delegation of 20 to 30 kids from Crenshaw High School, a low-
performing high school in the Los Angeles Unified School Sys-
tem, to China in the summer of 2011. In order to make this trip 
a reality, Blair had to line up three corporate partners. Blair’s ra-
tionale for the trip to China was to give students from this inner- 
city Los Angeles school a view into the twenty-first-century 
global economy. According to Blair, Howard was the first busi-
ness leader to jump in and support the effort. Blair stewarded a 
contingent of Crenshaw students and teachers in meetings with 
Chinese business leaders, entrepreneurs, and students from 
the number one high school in China. According to Blair, “We 
toured Shanghai, Beijing, and Tianjin. We rode the speed bullet 
train that travels at 200 miles an hour and got to see things that 
were life-changing for these kids. Most of these Crenshaw stu-
dents had never been outside of Los Angeles County; 90 percent 
of them had never been on an airplane; some of them had never 
even seen the ocean, although they live 5 to 8 miles away.” At the 
end of the trip, Blair asked the students in his delegation why 
they thought they had met with premier high school students in 
China. According to Blair, “One young man raised his hand and 
said, ‘Because one day those kids are going to be running China.’ 
Then the young man paused and said, ‘And one day we are go-
ing to be running the United States, and we need to know each 
other.’ When these kids came back, they looked at themselves as 
world ambassadors and future world leaders—not as kids from 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
246
a low-performing school.” In the next year, Blair Taylor left his 
position as CEO of the Los Angeles Urban League and became 
the chief community officer at Starbucks, helping the brand con-
tinue to provide unique opportunities to raise the expectations 
and skills of young people. 
Starbucks efforts to promote ethical sourcing, global im-
provements in children’s access to clean water, education grants, 
and support of youth leadership initiatives all share a common 
thread. Each effort reflects a belief that a business must lever-
age its size and prosperity for good. I suspect that your custom-
ers will become increasingly aware of the environmental track 
record of business leaders and their concern for their suppliers 
and the communities they serve. Those efforts are likely to be 
an important consideration for a growing number of consum-
ers. Socially conscious decisions will probably result not only 
R ef l ec t i o n  o n  C o n n ecti on
1.	 Have you set ethical sourcing guidelines and objectives?
2.	 How would you handle a supplier against which work-
place safety allegations are leveled? Do you have an 
established process for evaluating, remediating, and, 
if necessary, severing relationships with suppliers who 
are not transparent or do not honor the human rights 
of those they hire?
3.	 Do your social responsibility initiatives go beyond 
grants and involve the active participation of your 
people? Have you identified key social giving targets 
such as clean water, education, and leadership to max-
imize the impact of your efforts? 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
247
in short-term sales success, but also in a brighter long-term fu-
ture. Leaders must develop a perspective that considers the well-
being of future generations—many members of whom may  
become employees or consumers.
Job Creation
Abraham Lincoln offered sage advice to leaders when he said, 
“Be sure you put your feet in the right place, then stand firm.” 
However, like much wise counsel, Lincoln’s words are easier un-
derstood than followed. Throughout 2011, Howard Schultz put 
his feet in a number of bold places by writing a memo to part-
ners titled “Leading Through Uncertain Times” and an open 
letter to Americans that was printed as a full-page ad in publi-
cations like the New York Times. Howard essentially challenged 
readers to take swift action and stand firm for increased business 
involvement in job creation and decreased partisan gridlock in 
the U.S. Congress.
Specifically, Howard noted, “Let’s tell our government lead-
ers to put partisanship aside and to speak truthfully about the 
challenges we face. Let’s ask our business leaders to create more 
job opportunities for the American economy. And as citizens, 
let’s all get more involved. Please, don’t be a bystander. Under-
stand that we have a shared responsibility in solving our na-
tion’s problems. We can’t wait for Washington. At Starbucks, we 
are trying to live up to our responsibility by increasing our lo-
cal community service and helping to finance small-business job 
creation with Create Jobs for USA. Our company is far from per-
fect, and we know we can do more for America. But we need 
your help. We need your voice.” Howard asked readers to share 
their input on blogs, offer inspiring photos on Pinterest, and 
provide innovative ideas on Facebook. Howard also asked read-
ers to include the hashtag #indivisible in their posts so that Star-
bucks could collect and amplify the shared ideas. 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
248
In addition to taking out an advertisement and facilitating 
online innovation and idea sharing, Howard Schultz encour-
aged campaign donors to withhold funding from either political 
party “until the Congress and the president return to Washing-
ton and deliver a fiscally disciplined long-term debt and deficit 
plan to the American people.” More than 100 CEOs from major 
U.S. companies and scores of other contributors heeded How-
ard’s call in an effort to get government officials to focus on debt 
reduction and job creation. At the same time, Starbucks was in 
full swing with its Create Jobs for USA program. 
To launch Create Jobs for USA in November 2011, the Star-
bucks Foundation donated $5 million to support community 
development financial institutions (CDFIs) through the Oppor-
tunity Finance Network, a national network of CDFIs that invest 
in opportunities to benefit low-income, low-wealth, and other 
disadvantaged communities in the United States. Columnist Joe 
Nocera, writing in the New York Times, explains, “It didn’t take 
long for Starbucks to find the perfect financial partner. . . . Most, 
but not all, CDFIs are nonprofit, and their loan default rates are 
extremely low. . . . Opportunity Finance Network acts as an um-
brella group to the best of them.”
Starbucks then created and made available a red, white, and 
blue wristband embossed with the word INDIVISIBLE for those 
who chose to make an in-store or online contribution of at least 
$5 to support Create Jobs for USA; 100 percent of the donations 
went directly to Opportunity Finance Network to support com-
munity lending across the country. In essence, Starbucks sought 
to create greater access to credit for small business owners in or-
der to stimulate job creation and economic growth. The Create 
Jobs for USA program not only leveraged the participation of 
Starbucks customers but also amplified the power of capital. Joe 
Nocera adds, “Here is the most beautiful part about the whole 
arrangement. The donations to Create Jobs for USA will not be 
loaned to the CDFIs. They will be turned into capital . . . that  

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
249
equity can be leveraged 7 to 1 . . . if 10 million Starbucks custom-
ers donate $5, that will support $350 million worth of lending. 
That’s real money.”
In June 2012, Starbucks expanded contribution opportuni-
ties for Create Jobs for USA by creating, selling, and donating a 
portion of the proceeds from an artisanal INDIVISIBLE ceramic 
mug and other INDIVISIBLE items such as whole bean coffee 
and merchandise. The mug was produced at one of two surviving 
potteries in East Liverpool, Ohio, a town that was once the ce-
ramic capital of the United States. Ulrich Honighausen, the owner  
of Hausenware, a tableware company based in Sonoma County, 
California, and the supplier of the INDIVISIBLE mug, noted, “I 
am a U.S. citizen raising three children in this country, and for 
years I’ve wanted to make ceramics in the United States. A week 
after I heard Howard first talk about job creation in the United 
States, I was at a housewares conference and started asking people 
where could I make ceramics domestically. When Starbucks of-
ficially launched their Create Jobs for USA program, I thought 
I had to do my part to help create jobs in America, and that led 
me to contract with a small factory in East Liverpool. I was so 
inspired by what I saw in Ohio—the craftsmanship, need, and 
opportunities there—that I started another factory in the area  
which will compete in a more automated way against imports.”
For a more detailed exploration of East Liverpool, Ohio, and 
the INDIVISIBLE mug, please go to http://tinyurl.com/cmzr7ds 
or point your QR reader to: 
By April of 2012, Howard shared the initial success of Cre-
ate Jobs for USA with CBS News: “We’re getting money in the 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
250
hands of [CDFIs], (who then) lend it to small businesses, cre-
ate jobs in start-ups and existing businesses. In fact, 80 percent 
of the money we’ve raised has already been (given) out. And we 
can document with great transparency where the money’s going 
and the jobs that are being created.”
An example of the benefits from funding through the Star-
bucks jobs program is Gelato Fiasco. In 2007, Josh Davis was 25 
years old when he and Bruno Tropeano, his 24-year-old business 
partner, opened a Gelato Fiasco gelateria in Brunswick, Maine. 
Because of their success in Brunswick, a town of approximately 
23,000 people, Josh and Bruno had their sights set on an expan-
sion into Maine’s largest city, Portland, approximately 25 min-
utes to the south. Josh and Bruno found an optimal location for 
their new store, but they had to make a decision quickly to se-
cure the 10-year lease. A call to their bank gave Bruno and Josh 
sufficient assurances of funding to lead them to sign their lease 
agreement. Unfortunately, after the lease was signed, their bank 
and several other lenders denied their loan requests. 
As a last resort, Josh and Bruno went to a CDFI supported by 
the Create Jobs for USA program and received a $140,000 loan, al-
lowing them to expand and add 10 new employees (full- and part-
time) to their 21-person staff. Josh notes, “Starbucks turned what 
was going to be a truly unmitigated disaster into a real success 
story.” Not only did Gelato Fiasco open in Portland, but the new 
Gelato Fiasco store was located approximately a block away from 
a busy Starbucks store. Oh, by the way, the Portland Gelato Fi-
asco serves coffee. So what was Starbucks response to a neighbor/ 
competitor that it had supported? According to Josh, “The staff 
at Starbucks actually posted an article about our business in 
their store. Even though we were setting up shop a block away, 
they acted out of abundance and not competition.” 
Josh and Bruno were grateful for the trust placed in them 
and decided to take that gratitude and “pay it forward.” To that 
end, they created a gelato flavor for their wholesale business 

Ta k in g th e  Long  Vi e w
251
(which distributes gelato to supermarkets throughout Maine 
and New England) and directed a portion of the revenues from 
that flavor back to the Create Jobs for USA program. Accord-
ing to Josh, “The motto of the city of Portland, Maine, is ‘Resur-
gam,’ which means ‘I will rise again,’ and we thought that motto 
applied well to our situation, so we named our special commis-
sioned flavor Sweet Resurgam and gave $1 per pint back to the 
Create Jobs for USA program.” 
Few business leaders make a public call to fellow business 
leaders and politicians to set aside selfish differences and act in 
the greater good. Even fewer refocus themselves to partner with 
customers to generate solutions that produce tangible economic 
benefits, some of which might be perceived as competitive in 
nature. While many of Howard Schultz’s actions may be out-
side the scope of what is achievable for you as a leader, Howard 
serves as a reminder to all of us that we can do more than com-
plain about social challenges—we can (and, moreover, we have a 
responsibility to) be a force for constructive change. 
•CONNECTING POINTS•
• Leadership carries with it a responsibility to make the 
world a better place than you find it today.
• There is typically a strong interdependence between 
a company’s performance, its values, and the impact 
it has on the communities it serves. 
• When it comes to sustainability, it is important that 
you set ambitious goals; seek third-party criteria to 
validate your achievement of those goals; play a role 
in refining those criteria for your industry, if neces-
sary; execute against those goals; and transparently 
report your progress toward your objectives. 

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
252
• When an environmental issue is salient to your cus-
tomers, it has to rise higher on your project prior-
ity list. 
• Sustainability is not something that is done for mar-
keting or publicity purposes; it is an authentic com-
mitment to the future viability of your business and 
to future generations of customers.
• It is not enough to talk about sustainability; true lead-
ership requires a willingness to invest in the long-term 
health of your business and to actively collaborate with 
others out of a genuine sense of responsibility.
• Being a humane and responsible company is good for 
business.
• Leaders must develop a perspective that considers the 
well-being of future generations—many members  
of whom may be employees or customers.
• As a leader, it is essential (in the words of Lincoln) 
that you put your feet in the right place, then stand 
firm.
• You can do more than complain about social chal-
lenges—you can (and, moreover, you have a respon-
sibility to) be a force for constructive change. 

253
C H
A P
T
E R
 1
2
Forging a Real  
Lifestyle Connection
T
ake a moment and think about your ideal customers. Now 
imagine them waking up in the morning and using one of 
your products in their homes. On their way to work, they stop 
by your store, check in on Foursquare, open your app, and pur-
chase an item with mobile payment. At the office, they take a 
break and encounter your products or go online to check their 
Facebook page and read a post of yours in their feed. During 
the afternoon, they sign up to participate with your team in a 
community improvement project on their day off. They invite 
their friends to participate in that event with them. They take 
pictures as they help their community and post those images 
on Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook. They use your products at 
the event. They stop at the supermarket on their way home, and 
your offerings are on their shopping list. Okay, it’s time to come 
back to reality.
It is important to remember that Starbucks started out as 
a single store and that anything is possible if we take the les-
sons learned from Starbucks as a nudge to think about how we 
can innovate and expand our products, services, social media 
tools, technologies, and channels. The leaders at Starbucks also 
demonstrate what is possible when you foster product passion, 
teach your people the importance of human connections, seek  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
254
operational excellence and efficiency, and engage in a never-
ending pursuit of relevance. 
Howard Schultz puts it this way: “Any consumer brand  
today—whether Starbucks or a product like Tide— . . . [must] 
create relevancy in all aspects of your customers’ lives. . . . The 
price of admission is not good enough if your relevancy and 
market position is only where the product is sold. We said to 
ourselves that we have to be as relevant socially and digitally as 
we are when the customer is inside our four walls . . . companies 
that don’t understand [that] are going to [be] left behind.”
Traditionally, marketers talk about lifestyle brands as those 
that connect with customers’ personal identity. They are brands 
that “promote a lifestyle” customers value or to which they as-
pire. Starbucks is certainly a business that has all the traditional 
aspects of lifestyle branding, as its leaders have stewarded the 
brand to authentically project an image of product passion, con-
cern for the human connection, and community values. How-
ever, Starbucks leaders have also taken their value proposition 
up a level to something I refer to as an “advanced lifestyle” brand. 
Not only does Starbucks “project a lifestyle,” but it enters the life-
style of its customers.
Typically, Starbucks builds its connection with custom-
ers through its primary well-distributed channel: Starbucks 
retail stores. In fact, some research suggests that 80 percent of 
U.S. citizens live within 20 miles of a Starbucks store, and that 
the farthest anyone would have to travel to get to a Starbucks  
company-owned store is 140 miles (the study did not include li-
censed stores, so the distance may be even shorter). Once that 
connection is forged through the store channel, the leaders at 
Starbucks have positioned their brand to meet their customer on 
the go, whether that be on a mountaintop with VIA, in a health 
food store with Evolution Fresh juice, on a train in Switzerland, 
or through a mobile app in Beijing. Aimee Johnson, vice presi-
dent, Digital Commerce, Loyalty and Content, notes, “We are 

For gin g a  Re a l Lif e sty l e  C onne cti on
255
committed to understanding our in-store customers and con-
necting to them in ways that fit both where and who they are!”
A proliferation of your brand certainly has risk. Reuben 
Gregg Brewer, director of digital content at Value Line, cautions 
that there are “material risks to Starbucks recent expansion ef-
forts. While going global is a great idea, moving outside of one’s 
niche can, and often has, proven disastrous. Time and again new 
concepts in the quick service space flame out after coming to 
market. . . . Starbucks’ efforts could, indeed, result in a lack of  
focus. . . . Moving into additional distribution channels, Star-
bucks’ could risk oversaturation with its core brand and all of the 
others it has just added.” 
Many partners with whom I have spoken report having con-
fidence in Starbucks future based on the ability of the leader-
ship to adapt and transform to changing customer needs. This 
confidence is not limited to those within Starbucks. Jim Cramer, 
bestselling author and television host of the popular CNBC pro-
gram Mad Money, noted after the release of the Verismo system 
in 2012, “I am going with Schultz—not against him—because it 
has been a horrendous bet to go against Schultz in either the first 
or the second iteration and I think it will be a horrendous bet 
once again. . . . Schultz has primed Starbucks for a third round of 
growth and you don’t want to be caught outside looking in.” From 
my vantage point, success always hinges on high-quality prod-
ucts, provided the way customers want them, offered in a caring 
environment that builds connections. As long as Starbucks— 
or any business, for that matter—is achieving those objectives, 
customers will offer it their sustained support. While I imag-
ine the leaders at Starbucks will continue to guide their brand 
wherever the opportunities and customers take them, I am cer-
tain that they will remind partners that the ultimate future of the 
brand depends on connecting in “uplifting moments.” 
These moments are like those provided by Starbucks barista 
Daniel Rowe. Daniel had a relationship with a regular customer,  

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
256
Kelly Dietrich. On most occasions, Kelly would also order a Tall 
Nonfat Latte for his wife. As Daniel shares, “One day Kelly up-
sized his wife’s nonfat latte to 
a grande. I figured she might 
need a little extra that day, so I 
wrote ‘Hope your day gets bet-
ter’ on her cup.” 
Kelly’s wife, Gini Dietrich, 
founder and CEO of Arment 
Dietrich, a Chicago-based in-
tegrated marketing commu-
nication firm, and coauthor of 
Marketing in the Round, notes, 
“The fact that the barista at 
Starbucks knew I was in for a  
long day because I ordered  
a larger drink was pretty incredible. I took a picture of the cup 
and uploaded [it] to Facebook, and essentially I thought that 
would be the end of our interaction. To my surprise, about a 
month later, my husband came home with another personalized 
cup from Barista Dan, which 
asked if I was real.” 
Gini checked “maybe” 
on her cup and added, “It 
depends on your definition 
of real.” Dan had never met 
Gini, but for months they had  
made a very “real” connec-
tion through Gini’s hus-
band and messages sent back 
and forth a couple of times 
a week on Starbucks cups. 
Gini expanded her relation-
ship with Dan through her 

For gin g a  Re a l Lif e sty l e  C onne cti on
257
Facebook network, taking pictures of each cup and asking her 
friends to vote on how she should answer each inquiry. Gini re-
ported that she experienced sadness when she received a cup 
that mentioned that Dan was going to be leaving Starbucks in a 
month: “I made a point of stopping by to meet and say goodbye 
to Dan on his last day at Starbucks, as he was going to pursue his 
pastry career at the Trump Tower. I think Dan epitomizes the 
best of Starbucks, particularly in his sustained efforts to main-
tain our unique and special connection and to really care about 
my husband and me.” 
 
Dan notes, “I worked for Starbucks for six years, and they 
encouraged me to grow and develop. I gained interpersonal and 
management skills that will help me run a kitchen. They taught 
me what it means to be customer-focused. I am extremely 
pleased that Gini took the time to meet me. I really didn’t think 
I was doing anything special; I was just playing my part in Star-
bucks culture by connecting personally—even if her person 
wasn’t ever physically available.”

Le a din g th e  Sta r bu ck s Way
258
Need I say more? Let me leave you with one question: 

259
259
Bibliography
Chapter 1
“Entrepreneur magazine ranks the company among the ten ‘most 
trusted’ businesses”: Paula Andruss, “Secrets of the 10 Most-Trusted 
Brands,” Entrepreneur, March 20, 2012, http://www.entrepreneur 
.com/article/223125.
“Fortune magazine places it among the ‘most admired’ global brands”: 
“World’s Most Admired Companies,” Fortune, March 21, 2011, 
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/mostadmired/2011 
/full_list/.
“U.S. president Barack Obama placed a call to the chief executive officer 
of Starbucks, Howard Schultz, because of Howard’s leadership on 
job creation”: David A. Kaplan, “Howard Schultz Brews Strong Cof-
fee at Starbucks,” Fortune, November 17, 2011, http://management 
.fortune.cnn.com/2011/11/17/starbucks-howard-schultz-business 
-person-year/.
“Fortune magazine has named Howard Schultz as businessperson of 
the year”: Richard McGill Murphy, “2011 Businessperson of the 
Year,” Fortune, November 17, 2011.
Joseph A. Michelli, The Starbucks Experience: 5 Principles for Turning 
Ordinary into Extraordinary (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
“While our financial results are clearly being impacted by reduced fre-
quency to our U.S. stores”: Howard Schultz, “Financial Release: Star-
bucks Reports Second Quarter Fiscal 2008 Results and Announces 
Long-Term Financial Targets for 2009 to 2011,” Starbucks Investor 
Relations, April 30, 2008, http://investor.starbucks.com/phoenix 
.zhtml?c=99518&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=1137657&highlight.
Howard Schultz and Joanne Gordon, Onward: How Starbucks Fought 
for Its Life Without Losing Its Soul (New York: Rodale, 2011).

Bibliogr a p hy
260
“Adherence to these seven bold moves has resulted in desired finan-
cial outcomes, as evidenced by 13 consecutive quarters of global 
comparable store sales growth greater than 5%.”: Information as of 
Q2FY13 furnished by Starbucks, Q2FY13 Earnings Transcript.
“The number of formal bankruptcy filings in the 12 months end-
ing June 2010 . . . increased by 10% . . . and the year over year in-
crease between 08 and 09 was 50%”: Dun & Bradstreet, “D&B 
U.S. Business Trends Report,” October 2010, http://www.dnb.com 
/content/dam/english/economic-and-industry-insight/us_business 
_trends_2010_10.pdf.
“Good management is largely a matter of love. Or if you’re uncom-
fortable with that word, call it caring, because proper management 
involves caring for people, not manipulating them”: James A. Au-
try, Love and Profit: The Art of Caring Leadership (New York: Avon 
Books, Inc., 1991).
“Great brands always make an emotional connection with the intended 
audience”: Leonard L. Berry, Discovering the Soul of Service: The Nine  
Drivers of Sustainable Business Success (New York: Free Press, 1999).
“The City Council called for hearings and solutions”: Petula Dvorak, 
“Encounter with a Homeless Man Touches a Virginia Starbucks 
Manager”: Washington Post, June 18, 2012, http://articles.washing 
tonpost.com/2012-06-18/local/35460526_1_homeless-population 
-long-term-homelessness-dominic.
Chapter 2
“Steve Chou, the founder of Bumblebee Linens, reports that his online 
store went from zero earnings to more than $100,000 profit in a sin-
gle year”: Steve Chou, “Why You Don’t Have to Love What You Sell 
when Starting an Online Store,” mywifequitherjob.com, http://my 
wifequitherjob.com/why-you-dont-have-to-love-what-you-sell/.
“Not passionate about shoes at all”: Joseph A. Michelli, The Zappos  
Experience: 5 Principles to Inspire, Engage, and WOW (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012). 
“Tony has reported he owns three pair”: Justin Fenner, “You’ll Never 
Guess How Many Shoes Zappos’ CEO Owns,” Styleite.com (blog), 
November 17, 2010, http://www.styleite.com/media/tony-hsieh 
-three-shoes/.
“Passionate about customer service and company culture”: Valerie 
Khoo, “The Celebrity CEO: Zappos’s Tony Hsieh,” theage.com.au,  

Bibliogr a p h y
261
February 17, 2012, http://m.theage.com.au/small-business 
/managing/blogs/enterprise/the-celebrity-ceo-zapposs-tony-hsieh 
-20120216-1ta85.html.
“Passion is the indefinable something that creates and builds interest 
and excitement on the part of the customer”: Troy Harrison, “Sales 
Without Passion Isâ€¦Well, It Isnâ€™t Sales,” salesforcesolutions.net 
(blog), 2013, http://www.salesforcesolutions.net/blog/hotsheets 
/sales-without-passion-isâ€¦well-it-isnâ€™t-sales. 
“As he described in his book Onward, he gained an enriched awareness 
of the ‘magic’ of coffee”: Howard Schultz and Joanne Gordon, On-
ward: How Starbucks Fought for Its Life Without Losing Its Soul (New 
York: Rodale, 2011).
“To inspire and nurture the human spirit—one person, one cup 
and one neighborhood at a time”: Our Starbucks Mission State-
ment, http://www.starbucks.com/about-us/company-information 
/mission-statement.
“Our Coffee. It has always been, and will always be, about quality”: Our 
Starbucks Mission Statement, http://www.starbucks.com/about-us 
/company-information/mission-statement. 
“Pouring espresso is an art, one that requires the barista to care about 
the quality of the beverage”: Howard Schultz and Joanne Gordon, 
Onward: How Starbucks Fought for Its Life Without Losing Its Soul 
(New York: Rodale, 2011).
“As events which communicate and reinforce desired performance and 
values”: S. Chris Edmonds, “Use Social Rituals to Reinforce Your 
Desired Culture,” www.drivingresultsthroughculture.com, Decem-
ber 20, 2010, http://drivingresultsthroughculture.com/?p=871.
“When I was first learning about coffee three years ago at a Starbucks in 
Connecticut, I tasted Caffè Verona®”: “Ratatouille Taught Me How 
to Taste Coffee,” www.coffeeandthecity.com (blog), January 17, 2011, 
http://www.coffeeandthecity.com/2011/01/ratatouille-taught-me 
-how-to-taste.html.
“Rewards can perform a weird sort of behavioral alchemy: They can 
transform an interesting task into a drudge”: Daniel H. Pink, Drive: 
The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us (New York: River-
head Books, 2009).
“Jim Collins . . . asserts that visionary companies are led by individ-
uals”: Jim Collins, “Aligning Action and Values,” www.jimcollins 
.com, June 2000, http://www.jimcollins.com/article_topics/articles 
/aligning-action.html.

Bibliogr a p hy
262
“Were a dangerous enemy in the battle to transform the company”: 
Howard Schultz and Joanne Gordon, Onward: How Starbucks 
Fought for Its Life Without Losing Its Soul (New York: Rodale, 2011).
“I am in the process of becoming a Coffee Master”: Paul Quinn, Starbucks 
community, http://community.starbucks.com/message/6853#6853. 
Chapter 3
“Starbucks is at its best when we are creating enduring relationships 
and personal connections”: Howard Schultz and Joanne Gordon, 
Onward: How Starbucks Fought for Its Life Without Losing Its Soul 
(New York: Rodale, 2011).
“Transformation Agenda includes . . . re-igniting our emotional at-
tachment with our customers by restoring the connection our 
customers have with you, our coffee, our brand, and our stores”: 
Howard Schultz, “Transformation Agenda Communication #1,” star 
bucks.tekgroup.com, http://starbucks.tekgroup.com/article_print 
.cfm?article_id=76.
“Our Customers. When we are fully engaged”: Our Starbucks Mis-
sion Statement, http://www.starbucks.com/about-us/company 
-information/mission-statement. 
“Consumer data, consistently reflected in studies such as the American 
Express Global Customer Service Barometer, validate the perspec-
tive that customer service is chaotic, unpredictable, and in decline”: 
“2012 Global Customer Service Barometer: Findings in the United 
States,” a research report prepared for American Express, Echo, 
about.americanexpress.com, http://about.americanexpress.com 
/news/docs/2012x/AXP_2012GCSB_US.pdf.
“Memorable experiences”: B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The 
Experience Economy: Work Is Theater and Every Business a Stage 
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
“McDonald’s very business model seeks a highly cookie-cutter ap-
proach”: John Shook, “A Lean ‘Teachable Moment’: Starbucks in 
the Wall Street Journal,” Lean Enterprise Institute, August 7, 2009, 
http://www.lean.org/shook/displayobject.cfm?o=1085.
“The goal is to make as many things as possible routine so that the barista 
can spend just a few more”: John Shook, “A Lean ‘Teachable Moment’:  
Starbucks in the Wall Street Journal,” Lean Enterprise Institute, Au-
gust 7, 2009, http://www.lean.org/shook/displayobject.cfm?o=1085. 
“For companies looking to make an emotional connection with con-
sumers”: Nick Chiles, “Corporations Use Music to Make Emotional 

Bibliogr a p h y
263
Connection to Consumers,” Atlanta Black Star, July 26, 2012, http://
atlantablackstar.com/2012/07/26/corporations-use-music-to-make 
-emotional-connection-to-consumers/.
“As part of its commitment to evolve and enhance the Customer Ex-
perience with innovative”: “Starbucks Acquires Evolution Fresh to 
Establish National Retail and Grocery Health and Wellness Brand,” 
news.starbucks.com, November 10, 2011, http://news.starbucks 
.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=587.
“Our intent is to build a national health and wellness brand leverag-
ing our scale, resources and premium product expertise”: “Star-
bucks Acquires Evolution Fresh to Establish National Retail and 
Grocery Health and Wellness Brand,” news.starbucks.com, Novem-
ber 10, 2011, http://news.starbucks.com/article_display.cfm?article 
_id=587.
“Evolution Fresh is Starbucks newest addition to health food”: Emily 
K., yelp.com, July 30, 2012, http://www.yelp.com/filtered_reviews
/666xh85KxFjcBVFqsTQy0w?fsid=r8JwQGC9dQ2YFYcbr0g3bg.
“Tazo, the Oregon company that once aspired to be the Starbucks of 
teas, has been bought out”: “Company News: Starbucks Acquires 
Tazo, a Tea Retailer in Oregon,” New York Times, January 13, 1999, 
http://www.nytimes.com/1999/01/13/business/company-news 
-starbucks-acquires-tazo-a-tea-retailer-in-oregon.html.
“Starbucks built Tazo from an $8.1 million purchase price in 1999”: 
Lisa Baertlein, “Starbucks Plans to Open Tazo Tea Store This Year,” 
Reuters.com, June 20, 2012, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012 
/06/20/us-starbucks-tea-idUSBRE85J17620120620.
“Into a brand with more than $1.4 billion in sales”: Kelly Blessing, 
“Starbucks to Open Tazo Tea Store,” Bloomberg.com, June 20, 2012, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-06-20/starbucks-to-open 
-tazo-tea-store.html.
Chapter 4
“It is our belief that social justice begins at home”: The Learning Network,  
“Jan. 5, 1914: Henry Ford Implements the $5-a-Day Wage,” New York  
Times, January 5, 2012, http://learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2012 
/01/05/jan-5-1914-henry-ford-implements-5-a-day-wage/.
“This crisis of trust in our basic institutions is so troubling precisely be-
cause the lack of trust”: Dov Seidman, “The Case for Ethical Lead-
ership,” Academy of Management Executive 18, no. 2, 2004, http://
home.sandiego.edu/~pavett/docs/gsba532/ethical_leadership.pdf.

Bibliogr a p hy
264
“The results were dismal. Over two-thirds (71%) of the Americans 
polled”: Dov Seidman, “The Case for Ethical Leadership,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive 18, no. 2, 2004, http://home.sandiego 
.edu/~pavett/docs/gsba532/ethical_leadership.pdf.
“Reflecting back on your high school or college coursework, you may 
recall that Maslow’s 1943 paper ‘A Theory of Human Motivation’”: 
A. H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Re-
view 50, 1943, 370–396.
“Are you competent?”: Ed O’Boyle, “B2B Customers Have Feelings 
Too,” Gallup Business Journal, May 14, 2009, http://businessjournal 
.gallup.com/content/118339/b2b-customers-feelings.aspx.
“A detailed exploration of the 11 questions that Gallup used in the CE-
11 can be found in my book The New Gold Standard”: Joseph A. Mi-
chelli, The New Gold Standard: 5 Leadership Principles for Creating a 
Legendary Customer Experience Courtesy of The Ritz-Carlton Hotel 
Company (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008).
“Virtue has been, is, and always will be its own reward”: Dov Seid-
man, “The Case for Ethical Leadership,” Academy of Management 
Executive 18, no. 2, 2004, http://home.sandiego.edu/~pavett/docs 
/gsba532/ethical_leadership.pdf.
“Significant change was about to occur, and our people would want to 
know what it meant for them and their jobs”: Howard Schultz and 
Joanne Gordon, Onward: How Starbucks Fought for Its Life Without 
Losing Its Soul (New York: Rodale, 2011).
“People are not a company’s most important asset”: Ira A. Jackson and 
Jane Nelson, “Values-Driven Performance: Seven Strategies for De-
livering Profits with Principles,” quoted from a speech by Adrian 
Levy, founder of RLG International, March 2001, Ivey Business Jour-
nal, November/December 2004, http://www.humanresourcesoncall 
.ca/coach/coach_quotes.htm.
“Watson Wyatt shows that total return to shareholders in high-trust or-
ganizations”: Steven M. R. Covey, The Speed of Trust: The One Thing 
That Changes Everything (New York: Free Press, 2008).
“But would Starbucks really replace anything? To find out”: John 
Hargrave, “The Starbucks Prank: Will Starbucks Really Return 
Anything?,” Zug.com, August 24, 2009, http://www.zug.com 
/live/82273/The-Starbucks-Return-Prank-Will-Starbucks-Really 
-Return-ANYTHING.html.
“Psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky began a revolu-
tion in economics by focusing on the role of emotional factors in 

Bibliogr a p h y
265
decision making”: David Laibson and Richard Zeckhauser, “Amos 
Tversky and the Ascent of Behavioral Economics,” Journal of Risk 
and Uncertainty 16, no. 1, April 1998, 7–47, http://link.springer 
.com/article/10.1023%2FA%3A1007717224343-page-1.
“A brand you recommend to friends wholeheartedly, even evangeli-
cally”: Kate Newlin, Passion Brands: Why Some Brands Are Just 
Gotta Have, Drive All Night For, and Tell All Your Friends About 
(New York: Prometheus Books, 2009).
Chapter 5
“For the past two decades, Starbucks has been one of the only retail-
ers with a stock program that includes part-time hourly partners”: 
Howard Schultz, internal memo to partners, 2011. This memo was 
provided by Starbucks.
“In 2012, 28% of all firms that offer health benefits offer them to part-
time workers”: “2012 Employer Health Benefits Survey,” Kaiser 
Family Foundation/Health Research & Educational Trust (HRET), 
2012, www.kff.org/insurance/ehbs091112nr.cfm.
“I can also say in all seriousness that I owe Starbucks my life”: Barista-
Berry, blogs.starbucks.com, March 29, 2011, http://blogs.starbucks 
.com/blogs/customer/archive/2011/03/29/onward.aspx.
“Originally, this article was going to be ‘Why I love Starbucks.’ As a for-
mer barista”: Caitlin Muir, “33 Companies That Can Save You from 
College Debt,” collegeplus.org (blog), http://www.collegeplus.org 
/blog/33-companies-that-can-save-you-from-college-debt.
“In response to the question ‘My organization recognizes excellence,’ 
the organizations that scored in the lowest fourth overall”: Adrian 
Gostick and Chester Elton, The Carrot Principle: How the Best Man-
agers Use Recognition to Engage Their People, Retain Talent, and Ac-
celerate Performance (New York: Free Press, 2009).
“Organizations with highly engaged employees achieve seven 
times greater 5-year TSR”: “The Impact of Employee Engage-
ment,” Kenexa Research Institute, 2008, http://www.kenexa.com 
/getattachment/8c36e336-3935-4406-8b7b-777f1afaa57d/The 
-Impact-of-Employee-Engagement.aspx.
“By increasing employees’ engagement levels, organizations can ex-
pect an increase in performance of up to 20 percentile points”: 
“Driving Performance and Retention Through Employee En-
gagement,” Corporate Executive Board, mckpeople.com.au, 2004, 

Bibliogr a p hy
266
http://www.mckpeople.com.au/SiteMedia/w3svc161/Uploads 
/Documents/760af459-93b3-43c7-b52a-2a74e984c1a0.pdf.
“While other fast-food retailers lost staff at rates as high as 400% a 
year, Starbucks’ turnover was a relatively low 65%”: Andrew Low-
ery (quoting Richard Lofthouse, a writer for CNBC Business), “The 
Changing Landscape in the Restaurant Industry,” Restaurant Indus-
try 1.0 (blog), November 19, 2012, http://restaurantindustryblog 
.wordpress.com/2012/11/19/the-changing-landscape-in-the 
-restaurant-industry/.
“Reached onto the counter and patted my hand, extending her sympa-
thy and telling me the drinks were on them”: “BetterBefore,” blogs 
.starbucks.com, March 31, 2011, http://blogs.starbucks.com/blogs 
/customer/archive/2011/03/29/onward.aspx.
Chapter 6
“Some people might like being called by their first name, but I think 
many will be indifferent, and some might feel awkward”: Vanessa 
Barford, “Will You Tell Starbucks Your Name?,” BBC News Mag-
azine, March 14, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine 
-17356957.
“We all want to be recognized for our loyal patronage. . . . Starbucks is 
a company that others look to as a model”: Ron Lieber, “The Card-
Carrying Starbucks Fan,” New York Times, June 7, 2008, http://
www.nytimes.com/2008/06/07/business/yourmoney/07money 
.html?pagewanted=all.
“In April 2012, nearly 60,000 Starbucks partners and customers, lo-
cal organizations, and community members provided more than 
700,000 individual community service acts that made a difference 
in more than 34 countries”: “Community Service: Every Starbucks 
Store Is a Part of a Community, and We’re Committed to Strength-
ening Neighborhoods Wherever We Do Business,” starbucks.com, 
http://www.starbucks.com/responsibility/community/community 
-service.
“One additional example that had reach both within the United States 
and across international borders was an alliance forged between 
Starbucks leadership and the HandsOn Network”: “Starbucks I’m 
In! Campaign,” handsonnetwork.org, http://www.handsonnetwork 
.org/starbucks. 
“The chic interior, comfortable lounge chairs, and upbeat music are not 
only differentiators that set Starbucks apart from the competition”:  

Bibliogr a p h y
267
Helen H. Wang, “Five Things Starbucks Did to Get China Right,” 
Forbes, August 10, 2012, http://www.forbes.com/sites/helen 
wang/2012/08/10/five-things-starbucks-did-to-get-china-right/1/.
“Today is the day! . . . We stopped by our favorite neighborhood Star-
bucks and there . . . low and behold . . . the Mother Ship . . . Red Cup 
Day”: Chrissy, “Starbucks Red Cup Day Is the Happiest Day of the 
Year,” thymeinmygarden.com (blog), November 2, 2010, http://www 
.thymeinmygarden.com/starbucks-red-cup-day-is-the-happiest 
-day-of-the-year/.
“During the past 10 days, sweaty queues of up to 50 people have 
formed outside an old colonial building in downtown Mumbai”: 
Shymantha Asokan, “India’s First Starbucks Branches Draw Long 
Queues,” guardian.co.uk, October 29, 2012, http://www.guardian 
.co.uk/world/2012/oct/29/india-first-starbucks-long-queues.
“As in the US before Starbucks came along, there are few places in 
Latin America”: Pan Kwan Yuk, “Starbucks in LatAm: Selling 
Ice to Eskimos?,” blogs.ft.com, June 21, 2012, http://blogs.ft.com 
/beyond-brics/2012/06/21/starbucks-in-latam-selling-ice-to 
-eskimos/#axzz2Ab61xixC. 
“With high-store margins and low-store penetration”: Kim Peter-
son, “Starbucks’ Next Growth Area: Asia,” MSN Money, August 
13, 2012, http://money.msn.com/investment-advice/article-2 
.aspx?post=53fc5012-8606-4deb-b1e6-adf22572a73d.
Chapter 7
“The root cause was baked into our early decision where we didn’t 
build these products based on a deep study of the countries”: Chris 
Beier and Daniel Wolfman, “Intuit’s Scott Cook on Failed Global 
Expansion: ‘We Should’ve Known Better,’” Inc.com, http://www.inc 
.com/chris-beier-and-daniel-wolfman/intuit-quicken-scott-cook 
-global-expansion-failed.html.
“In recent years, anthropological studies have built a strong empirical 
case. . . . [that] consumers often appropriate the meanings of global 
brands to their own ends”: Craig J. Thompson and Zeynep Arsel, 
“The Starbucks Brandscape and Consumers’ (Anticorporate) Expe-
riences of Glocalization,” Journal of Consumer Research 31, 2004, 
http://zeyneparsel.files.wordpress.com/2010/06/thompson-arsel 
-jcr.pdf.
“Hiring people locally who can go in and understand the customer 
cold and design what the solutions should be”: Chris Beier and 

Bibliogr a p hy
268
Daniel Wolfman, “Intuit’s Scott Cook on Failed Global Expansion: 
‘We Should’ve Known Better,’” Inc.com, http://www.inc.com/chris 
-beier-and-daniel-wolfman/intuit-quicken-scott-cook-global 
-expansion-failed.html.
“[India] is a very complex market to enter. At one point we thought 
we could come here alone and we overestimated the complex-
ity”: Sonali Krishna, “India’s Coffee Market Competition Is Fero-
cious: Howard Schultz, Starbucks,” Economic Times, October 25, 
2012, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2012-10-25 
/news/34729911_1_starbucks-howard-schultz-tatas.
“Are bringing an unparalleled experience to India customers”: Mark J. 
Miller, “Starbucks Expands to India with Mumbai Flagship Open-
ing,” brandchannel.com, October 19, 2012, http://www.brand 
channel.com/home/post/2012/10/19/Starbucks-Opens-India 
-Store-101912.aspx.
“Location of this Starbucks is somehow characteristic, as it stands on 
the main approach to the Dazaifu Tenmangu”: Kengo Kuma and 
Associates, “Starbucks Coffee at Dazaifu Tenman-gū,” Dezeen.
com, February 23, 2012, http://www.dezeen.com/2012/02/23 
/starbucks-coffee-at-dazaifu-tenman-gu-by-kengo-kuma-and 
-associates/. 
“Shortly thereafter, a headline in the London Telegraph read, ‘Star-
bucks’ UK sales boosted by extra shot of espresso’”: Nathalie 
Thomas, “Starbucks’ UK Sales Boosted by Extra Shot of Espresso” 
Telegraph (London), April 26, 2012, http://www.telegraph.co.uk 
/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/9229791/Starbucks 
-UK-sales-boosted-by-extra-shot-of-espresso.html.
“Its origins are still a subject of debate, but the first printed reference 
to the phrase ‘location, location, location’ appears to be a real es-
tate advertisement in the Chicago Tribune in 1926”: William Safire, 
“Location, Location, Location,” On Language, New York Times, June 
26, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/28/magazine/28FOB 
-onlanguage-t.html?_r=0.
“Aiming at the young urban Chinese demographic, and store loca-
tions are comfortable and offer a social setting—a welcome break 
from cramped apartments”: Moe Nawaz, “‘Starbucks-China’ Plans 
to Open 8,000 Branches,” mastermindcoach.com, http://www 
.mastermindcoach.com/business-ideas/starbucks-china-plans-to 
-open-8000-branches/.

Bibliogr a p h y
269
“Liz Muller, a Dutch-born designer and Starbucks concept design di-
rector, worked with 35 craftsmen and artists to make the under-
ground store locally relevant and sustainable”: Dave, “Starbucks ‘the 
Bank’ Concept Store in Amsterdam,” Contemporist, March 6, 2012, 
http://www.contemporist.com/2012/03/06/starbucks-the-bank 
-concept-store-in-amsterdam/.
“All of the displays and materials and design are from the Netherlands. 
. . . The space is designed to encourage interaction”: Qaalfa Dib-
eehi, “The Destination Starbucks—a Concept Customer Experi-
ence,” beyondphilosophy.com (blog), September 5, 2012, http://www 
.beyondphilosophy.com/blog/destination-starbucks-concept 
-customer-experience.
“China is not one homogeneous market”: Helen H. Wang, “Five 
Things Starbucks Did to Get China Right,” Forbes, August 10, 2012, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/helenwang/2012/08/10/five-things 
-starbucks-did-to-get-china-right/2/.
“The Starbucks offerings were my focus during my visit (three in 
one weekend, in fact)”: Nicole Mancini, “Frappes, Lattes, & Liq-
uid Gold: Starbucks Opens in Disney’s California Adventure,” 
DIS Unplugged, August 11, 2012, http://www.disunplugged 
.com/2012/08/11/frappes-lattes-liquid-gold-starbucks-opens-in 
-disneys-california-adventure/.
Chapter 8
“In a 2012 Time magazine survey, people were forced to choose one 
item to take to work: their wallet, their lunch, or their mobile de-
vice”: Time Mobility Poll, in cooperation with QUALCOMM, 
“Poll Results,” August 2012, http://www.qualcomm.com/media 
/documents/time-mobility-poll-cooperation-qualcomm.
Joseph A. Michelli, The Starbucks Experience: 5 Principles for Turning 
Ordinary into Extraordinary (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
“Starbucks was selected by Forbes as one of the top 20 innovation com-
panies in 2011”: “The World’s Most Innovative Companies,” Forbes, 
http://www.forbes.com/special-features/innovative-companies-list 
.html.
“Recognized by General Sentiment’s QSR MediaMatch report in 2012 
as having the highest impact value”: “Starbucks Named Top QSR in 
Media Impact Value,” QSR, June 13, 2012, http://www.qsrmagazine 
.com/news/starbucks-named-top-qsr-media-impact-value.	  

Bibliogr a p hy
270
“Because of its openness and seamless approach, Square at Starbucks 
is better positioned than any other technology to become”: Mar-
cus Wohlsen, “Square Launches at Starbucks—You Think You  
Won’t Use It, but You Will,” WIRED.com, November 8, 2012, http://
www.wired.com/business/2012/11/square-launches-at-starbucks 
/all/.
“Using game-type mechanics in non-game businesses to increase effi-
ciency, customer loyalty and engagement”: Amish Shah, “The Art 
and Science of Gamification,” ipadbiz.ulitzer.com, August 2, 2012, 
http://ipadbiz.ulitzer.com/node/2323173.
“Checking out Starbucks Twitter page, it’s visible that most of the tweets 
are directed at”: Kylie Jane Wakefield, “How Twitter Helps Star-
bucks Brew Up an Excellent Customer Experience,” contently.com 
(blog), February 23, 2012, http://contently.com/blog/2012/02/23 
/starbucks-twitter-strategy/.
“Starbucks is constantly expanding its content channels and explor-
ing new formats to connect with its customers”: Matt Wesson, 
“How to Use Content to Raise the Bar for Branding,” Content Mar-
keting Institute, July 12, 2012, http://contentmarketinginstitute 
.com/2012/07/content-raises-the-bar-for-branding/.
“To achieve this successful social media engagement, Starbucks fo-
cused its Web page, Facebook page and television advertisements”: 
“Starbucks Rates Number 1 in Study of Most Socially Engaged 
Companies by Research Firm PhaseOne,” PhaseOne, March 28, 
2012, http://www.phaseone.net/news/starbucks-rates-number 
-1-in-study-of-most-socially-engaged-companies-by-research 
-firm-phaseone/.
“Where traditional companies push out messages and products, these 
companies pull customers in. Instead of treating customers as pas-
sive targets”: Mark Bonchek, “How Top Brands Pull Customers 
into Orbit,” Harvard Business Review Blog Network, March 5, 2012, 
http://blogs.hbr.org/cs/2012/03/how_top_brands_pull_customers 
.html.
“For me, consumer-initiated ads are the future of advertising, not 
only on Facebook, but across other social networks too”: Dave 
Williams, “How to Work Your Facebook Following,” blog.cream 
global.com, February 23, 2012, http://blog.creamglobal.com/right 
_brain_left_brain/2012/02/how-to-work-your-facebook-following 
.html.

Bibliogr a p h y
271
Chapter 9
“Due in large part to Howard Schultz’s careful nurturing and devel-
opment of the Starbucks Experience, the company has been able 
to leverage its increasingly strong brand”: Ranjay Gulati, Sarah 
Huffman, and Gary Neilson, “The Barista Principle: Starbucks 
and the Rise of Relational Capital,” Strategy+Business, no. 28, 
http://www.auburn.edu/outreach/ecdi/documents/wfd_barista 
_principal.pdf.
“I am not sure people today even know we are roasting coffee”: “Star-
bucks Chairman Says Trouble May Be Brewing,” Media and Mar-
keting, Wall Street Journal, February 24, 2007, http://online.wsj 
.com/article/SB117225247561617457.html. 
“Starbucks captures only a small portion of the $100 billion coffee, tea, 
and ready-to-drink beverage market globally”: Robert Lillegard, 
“How to Win in Retail,” QSR, July 2012, http://www.qsrmagazine 
.com/growth/how-win-retail.
“The key is choosing a partner. . . . Everybody thinks most licenses suc-
ceed—it’s absolutely the opposite”: As quoted in Robert Lillegard, 
“How to Win in Retail,” QSR, July 2012, http://www.qsrmagazine 
.com/growth/how-win-retail.
“Even long-standing relationships can grow sour. Starbucks and Kraft 
had a very ugly public split in 2011 after the coffee giant claimed 
that the distributor wasn’t doing enough”: Robert Lillegard, “How 
to Win in Retail,” QSR, July 2012, http://www.qsrmagazine.com 
/growth/how-win-retail.
“Starbucks is positioning VIA against its own fresh brewed coffee, chal-
lenging people to see if they can taste the difference”: Steve Tobak, 
“Starbucks Via: How to Blow a Turnaround,” CBS Money Watch, 
September 30, 2009, http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505125_162 
-28242944/starbucks-via-how-to-blow-a-turnaround/.
“Through their collaboration, Starbucks is the exclusive licensed super-
premium brand for GMCR’s traditional Keurig and Vue brewers”: 
“Starbucks Corporation and Green Mountain Coffee Roasters, Inc. 
Enter into Strategic Manufacturing, Marketing, Distribution and 
Sales Relationship,” news.Starbucks.com, March 10, 2011, http://
news.starbucks.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=504.
“A 2012 Reuters survey suggests that about 10 percent of the world’s 
workforce works from home”: Patricia Reaney, “About One in Five 
Workers Worldwide Telecommute: Poll,” Reuters, January 24, 2012, 

Bibliogr a p hy
272
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/24/us-telecommuting 
-idUSTRE80N1IL20120124. 
“We announced that Starbucks will introduce an instant coffee, provid-
ing our customers with great tasting Starbucks coffee, anywhere and 
anytime”: Howard Schultz, “Staying Real in an Instant,” Huffington 
Post, February 17, 2009, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/howard 
-schultz/staying-real-in-an-instan_b_167381.html.
“I know some will question our decision, and I understand this reac-
tion. Expectations from brands like Starbucks are high”: Howard 
Schultz, “Staying Real in an Instant,” Huffington Post, February 17, 
2009, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/howard-schultz/staying 
-real-in-an-instan_b_167381.html.
“Sampling is a time proven method for facilitating consumer trial. Star-
bucks having ultimate control in their own stores orchestrated sam-
pling customers with free VIA coffee”: Domenick Celentano, “Most 
Memorable New Product Launches Part 2,” foodbeverage.about 
.com, February 2009, http://foodbeverage.about.com/od/Food 
_Entreprenur_Spotlight/a/Most-Memorable-N.
“You just can’t get away from the fact that social media in food [pro-
motion] is powerful and Starbucks being marketing geniuses 
know this”: Domenick Celentano, “Most Memorable New Product 
Launches Part 2,” foodbeverage.about.com, February 2009, http://
foodbeverage.about.com/od/Food_Entreprenur_Spotlight/a/Most 
-Memorable-N.
“The fourth possible peril is this: A combination of brand fatigue (too 
much Starbucks distributed through too many market channels) 
and unbundling the beverage from the iconic ritual”: Jane Genova, 
“Starbucks: Humbled in the Grocery Aisle?,” beta.fool.com (blog), 
March 28, 2012, http://beta.fool.com/janegenova/2012/03/28 
/starbucks-humbled-grocery-aisle/3185. 
Chapter 10
“Fundamental assumptions that did not allow top management to ad-
just to new market realities”: Andrea Nagy Smith, “What Was Po-
laroid Thinking?,” Yale Insights, November 2009, http://qn.som.yale 
.edu/content/what-was-polaroid-thinking.
“In ‘the early stages of growth,’ ‘the second inning of a nine-inning 
game,’”: Joseph A. Michelli, The Starbucks Experience: 5 Principles 
for Turning Ordinary into Extraordinary (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2006).

Bibliogr a p h y
273
“Drippler.com, an electronic gadget news source, reported a substan-
tial rise in site visitors in 2012”: “iPod and Other MP3 Player Sales 
Fade as iPhones, Androids and Other Smartphones Take Over as 
the Digital Music Players of Choice,” PR Web, February 29, 2012, 
http://www.prweb.com/releases/gadgets/iphone/prweb9236591 
.htm.
“Starbucks no longer seems to perceive its future as depending on an 
ability to clone its essential store concept ad infinitum”: Jon Gertner, 
“For Infusing a Steady Stream of New Ideas to Revive its Business,” 
Fast Company, 2012, http://www.fastcompany.com/most-innovative 
-companies/2012/starbucks.
“Design will allow Starbucks baristas to handcraft espresso beverages 
more efficiently and consistently”: “Fact Sheet: New Milk Steaming 
Pitcher,” news.starbucks.com, March 6, 2012, http://news.starbucks 
.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=627.
“Implementing mobile pay in the Drive Thru took a few more con-
siderations than it did inside the store. For one, we needed some-
thing that would allow”: Dana K., “The Starbucks App Is Now 
Drive Thru Friendly!,” starbucks.com/blog, March 26, 2012, http://
www.starbucks.com/blog/the-starbucks-app-is-now-drive-thru 
-friendly-/1172.
“We just did something in China that I think is one of the most inno-
vative things we have ever done in our history”: “Howard Schultz 
on Global Reach and Local Relevance at Starbucks: An Interview 
with the CEO,” BCG Perspectives, October 17, 2012, https://www 
.bcgperspectives.com/content/videos/leadership_management 
_two_speed_economy_howard_schultz_global_reach_and_local 
_relevance/.
“Still the company’s main instigator—has a kernel of an idea. . . . He 
then activates”: Jon Gertner, “For Infusing a Steady Stream of New 
Ideas to Revive its Business,” Fast Company, 2012, http://www 
.fastcompany.com/most-innovative-companies/2012/starbucks.
“It was absolutely delicious. Lots of people liked it.”: Melody Over-
ton, “Starbucks Sorbetto: The 2008 Delicious Test Product That 
Didn’t Make It (A Piece of Starbucks History),” starbucksmel 
ody.com (blog), October 20, 2010, http://www.starbucksmelody 
.com/2010/10/20/starbucks-sorbetto-the-2008-delicious-test 
-product-that-didnt-make-it-a-piece-of-starbucks-history/.
“Rate of change in the world today is going up. It’s going up fast, and it’s 
affecting organizations in a huge way”: John Kotter, “Can You Handle  

Bibliogr a p hy
274
an Exponential Rate of Change?,” Forbes, July 19, 2011, http://www 
.forbes.com/sites/johnkotter/2011/07/19/can-you-handle-an 
-exponential-rate-of-change/.
“The Café Starbucks concept includes a wait staff, seating for up to 65, 
and a menu that covers all dayparts beginning with full breakfasts”: 
Roseanne Harper, “Starbucks Percolates Its Third Full-Service 
Restaurant,” Supermarket News, November 30, 1998, http://super 
marketnews.com/archive/starbucks-percolates-its-third-full 
-service-restaurant. 
“Surrounded by San Francisco’s pricey new loft apartments, [Circadia] 
resurrects the feel of the 1960s coffee shops of Greenwich Village”: 
Mark Gimein, “Behind Starbucks’ New Venture: Beans, Beatniks, and 
Booze,” Fortune, May 15, 2000, http://money.cnn.com/magazines 
/fortune/fortune_archive/2000/05/15/279773/index.htm.
“Starbucks pitched a new game plan . . . a healthier breakfast line-up 
with fewer calories and more protein”: Erin Zimmer, “Starbucks In-
troduces a New Line of ‘Healthier’ Breakfast Foods,” Serious Eats, 
September 4, 2008, http://www.seriouseats.com/2008/09/starbucks 
-new-healthy-breakfast-options.html.
“Starbucks Diet”: “Woman Claims She Lost 75 Pounds on ‘Starbucks 
Diet,’” New York Daily News, September 17, 2012, http://articles 
.nydailynews.com/2012-09-17/news/33907123_1_diet-starbucks 
-woman-claims.
“Sometimes you just want a glass of wine and a delicious bite to eat”: 
“Starbucks Evenings,” Starbucks.com, http://www.starbucks.com 
/coffeehouse/starbucks-stores/starbucks-evenings.
“Starbucks opened a store unlike any before it. There are no leather 
chairs or free power outlets”: Mark Wilson, “An Experimental New 
Starbucks Store: Tiny, Portable, and Hyper Local,” Fast Company 
Design, http://www.fastcodesign.com/1670889/an-experimental 
-new-starbucks-store-tiny-portable-and-hyper-local#1.
“In Seattle’s Best Coffee’s latest divergence from corporate parent Star-
bucks”: Melissa Allison, “Seattle’s Best Coffee Plans Thousands of 
Drive Thru-Only Cafés,” Seattle Times, November 13, 2012, http://
seattletimes.com/html/businesstechnology/2019676822_seattles 
bestxml.html.
“Any company, small or large, consumer or otherwise, that is going 
to embrace the status quo”: Howard Schultz, “Innovation,” You 
Tube.com, May 16, 2011, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 
ll-64gNuT3E. 

Bibliogr a p h y
275
Chapter 11
James Kouzes and Barry Posner, A Leader’s Legacy (Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2006).
“Since Starbucks earliest days, I have believed in a strong link between 
our company’s performance, our values, and the impact”: How-
ard Schultz, “2012 Global Responsibility Report, Message from  
Howard Schultz,” Starbucks.com, 2012, http://www.starbucks.com 
/responsibility/global-report/leadership-letter.
“Green building skeptics sometimes argue that it’s difficult or even im-
possible to build green without paying a big cost premium”: Nat-
ural Resources Defense Council, “Fact Sheets: How Much Does 
Green Building Really Cost?,” http://www.nrdc.org/buildinggreen 
/factsheets/cost.asp.
Green Building Design Award: Bonnie Christian, “Global Green 
USA Honors Adrian Grenier, Starbucks with Sustainable Design 
Awards,” Huffington Post, November 15, 2011, http://www.huffing 
tonpost.com/2011/11/15/global-green-usa-adrian-grenier_n 
_1095304.html.
2012 Good Design Is Good Business Award: Linda Lentz, “2012 
Good Design Is Good Business Award Winners,” Architec-
tural Record, April 23, 2012, http://archrecord.construction.com 
/news/2012/04/2012-Good-Design-is-Good-Business-Award 
-Winners.asp.
Green Power Leadership Award winner: “Starbucks Listed on EPA’s 
Top 50 Green Organizations,” FastCasual.com, April 24, 2012, 
http://www.fastcasual.com/article/193480/Starbucks-listed-on 
-EPA-s-Top-50-green-organizations.
“Without compromising its thermal properties, the new sleeve uses 
35 percent less paper and is made from 85 percent postconsumer 
recycled fiber: “New Starbucks EarthSleeve™ Blends Performance 
with Environmental Sensibility,” news.starbucks.com, July 19, 2012, 
http://news.starbucks.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=681.
“Ensure 100% of our coffee is ethically sourced by 2015”: “Star-
bucks Global Responsibility Report: Goals and Progress 2011,” 
http://globalassets.starbucks.com/assets/c007fb25782442 
ac8283b154364c1016.pdf. 
“Through our partnership with Starbucks, we were able to serve as 
an economic catalyst in urban cities through the creation of new 
jobs”: “Starbucks Acquires Remaining Interest in Magic Johnson 

Bibliogr a p hy
276
Enterprises’ Urban Coffee Opportunities (UCO),” news.starbucks 
.com, October 21, 2010, http://news.starbucks.com/article_display 
.cfm?article_id=452.
“Starbucks is partnering with two organizations doing heroic work”: 
“Starbucks Announces Store Partnership Model with Commu-
nity Organizations in Harlem and Los Angeles,” news.starbucks 
.com, October 4, 2011, http://news.starbucks.com/article_display 
.cfm?article_id=574. 
Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang, Pour Your Heart into It: How Star-
bucks Built a Company One Cup at a Time (New York: Hyperion, 1997).
“Ethos Water, which is now a Starbucks subsidiary, has made more 
than $7 million in grants in support of that mission”: “2012 Global 
Responsibility Report: Year in Review,” starbucks.com.
“There are more than 1.2 billion 15 to 24 year olds, the largest global 
cohort of young people in history”: “Youth Leadership Grants,” star 
bucks.com, http://www.starbucks.com/responsibility/community 
/youth-action/grant.
“Let’s tell our government leaders to put partisanship aside and to 
speak truthfully about the challenges we face”: Howard Schultz, 
“An Open Letter: How Can America Win This Election?,” star 
bucks.com, June 29, 2012, http://www.starbucks.com/blog/an-open 
-letter-how-can-america-win-this-election/1207.
“Until the Congress and the president return to Washington and de-
liver a fiscally disciplined long-term debt and deficit plan to the 
American people”: Cameron Joseph, “100 CEOs Promise No Cam-
paign Contributions,” The Hill (blog), August 25, 2011, http://the 
hill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/178211-100-ceos 
-promise-no-campaign-contributions.
“It didn’t take long for Starbucks to find the perfect financial part-
ner”: Joe Nocera, “We Can All Become Job Creators,” New 
York Times, October 17, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011 
/10/18/opinion/nocera-we-can-all-become-job-creators.html 
?_r=0.
“We’re getting money in the hands of [CDFIs], (who then) lend it 
to small businesses, create jobs in start-ups and existing busi-
nesses”: “Starbucks CEO Touts Program to Create U.S. Jobs,” 
CBSNews.com, April 3, 2012, http://www.cbsnews.com/8301 
-505268_162-57408557/starbucks-ceo-touts-program-to-create-u.s 
-jobs/.

Bibliogr a p h y
277
Chapter 12 
“Any consumer brand today—whether Starbucks or a product like 
Tide—[must] create relevancy”: John Gertner, “Starbucks CEO 
Howard Schultz on Connecting With Customers Everyday, All 
Day,” Fast Company, November 26, 2012, http://www.fastcompany 
.com/3003147/starbucks-ceo-howard-schultz-connecting-customers 
-everyday-all-day.
“Material risks to Starbucks recent expansion efforts. While going 
global is a great idea, moving outside of one’s niche”: Reuben Gregg 
Brewer, “The Good and Bad of the Cool Caffeine Store’s Expansion,” 
Motley Fool Blog Network, November 20, 2012, http://beta.fool 
.com/reubengbrewer/2012/11/20/the-good-and-bad-of-the-cool 
-caffeine-stores-expan/16903/.
“I am going with Schultz—not against him—because it has been a hor-
rendous bet to go against Schultz”: Drew Sandholm, “Starbucks 
CEO Draws Comparison to Steve Jobs,” Mad Money w/ Jim Cramer, 
CNBC, September 20, 2012, http://www.cnbc.com/id/49111861. 
Much of the content of this book emerged from face-to-face meetings, 
telephone interviews, and other forms of support involving Starbucks 
partners. These partners include, but are not limited to:
Adam Brotman, Adam Novsam, Aimee Johnson, Al Griggs, Alex 
Wheeler, Alisa Martinez, Alison Edwards, Andrea Bader, Andrew  
Linneman, Anna Konopke, Annie Young-Scrivner, Anthony Perez, 
Arthur Rubinfeld, Barbara McMaster, Belinda Wong, Ben Packard,  
Blair Taylor, Brad Anderson, Brad Nelson, Brett Buchanan,  
Carlos Jimenez, Carol Wise, Carolina Morales, Catherine Chu,  
Cecilia Carter, Cecilia DeFranco, Cecile Hudon, Charles Cain, 
Charles Douglas III, Chris Bruzzo, Chris Carr, Christina McPherson,  
Christina Ryan Foster, Clarice Turner, Cliff Burrows, Corey duBrowa, 
Corey Lindberg, Craig Russell, Curt Garner, D. Major Cohen, Dan 
Berger, Dan Kassa, Diana Barnes, Diana Kelly, Dirk Nickolaus,  
Dub Hay, Elisha Trombley, Emma Evans, Ernst Florian, Feng Bao, 
Frank Wubben, Gabe Wiborg, Gina Woods, Heidi Durham, Heidi 
Peiper, Howard Schultz, Janeen Simmons, Jean-Marie Shields, Jenny 
Cui, Jim Hanna, Jim Olson, Joe Young, John Culver, Juan Rivers, Kalen 
Holmes, Katie McMahan, Kaycee Kiesz, Kelly Goodejohn, Kevin  
Petrisko, Kimberlee Sherman, Kris Engskov, Laura Baker, Linda Mills, 
Lionel Sussman, Lisa Passé, Lissa Law, Liz Muller, Maggie Jantzen, 

Bibliogr a p hy
278
Marthalee Galeota, Megan Adams, Meredith Bell, Michelle Bonam, 
Michelle Gass, Mick James, Mike Peck, Paula Boggs, Peter Gibbons, 
Rebecca Alexander, Rich Nelsen, Rob Naylor, Rob Porcarelli, Rob  
Sopkin, Rodney Hines, Ruth Anderson, Ryan Hudson, Samantha  
Yarwood, Sandra Bucher, Shao Wei, Stacy Speicher, Stephen Gillett, 
Tam Marpoe, Thom Breslin, Thomas Mayer, Tina Olsson Schulz, Tom 
Barr, Troy Alstead, Valerie O’Neil, Virgil Jones, Vivek Varma, and 
Wang Bin Wolf.

279
Access Alliance Network, 95, 97
Adaptability, 43, 255
Allen, Fred, 85
Allison, Melissa, 225
Alstead, Troy, 46, 209–210, 216, 217
Americas region, 135–136. See also 
Burrows, Cliff
Anderson, Brad, 31–32
Anderson, Ruth, 24
Applicants, 14–15
Appreciation, 118–120
Architecture, 140–141
Aristotle, 24
Armed Forces Network, 96, 97
Arsel, Zeynep, 137
Artistry, 17
Asokan, Shymantha, 128–129
Attention, 112
to innovation, differentiation, and 
relationship strengthening, 
117–118
to names, 113–116
Autry, James, 5
Bader, Andrea, 29
the Bank, 148–149
Bay Bread LLC, 220
Bean Stock, 86–89
Ben & Jerry’s, 184
Berry, Leonard, 5–6
Bistro Box, 219–220
Black Partner Network, 96
Bonchek, Mark, 172
Bonneville Power Administration, 
235–236
Brand Love Curve, 80–81
Brand passion, 62, 80–83
Breslin, Thom, 141, 148
Brewer, Reuben Gregg, 255
Brotman, Adam, 160–164, 170–171, 
174–175
on benefits of social media, 173
Bruzzo, Chris, 167–168, 224
Burrows, Cliff, 100, 106, 135, 136
on innovation, 201–202
Business-to-business connection,  
185–189
C.A.F.E. Practices. See Coffee and 
Farmer Equity Practices
Café Starbucks, 218–219
Caffè Verona, 197–198
Cain, Charles, 58
Canada, 130
Caring Unites Partners (CUP) Fund, 
93–95
Carr, Chris, 223
Celebration ritual, 18–22
Celentano, Domenick, 195, 196–197
Chantico™, 217
Cherish and Challenge Your Legacy 
(business principle), 206. See also 
Innovation; Social responsibility
connecting points, 227–228, 251–252
Chicago Tribune, 146
Chiles, Nick, 48
China and Asia Pacific Rim region, 
130, 135–136, 142, 150, 151, 245. 
See also Culver, John
China Club Network, 96
Index

In de x
280
China Education Project, 244
Chou, Steve, 11
Circadia, 219
City University program, 92
Clinton, Bill, 90
Clover® brewing system, 31, 149
Co-creation with customers 
movement, 51
Coffee Ambassadors, 26, 27, 29
Coffee and Farmer Equity Practices 
(C.A.F.E. Practices), 22–24, 240
Coffee education, 15
Coffee Masters, 26, 27–29, 33–34
Coffee Passport, 20–22
Coffee-tasting ritual, 19–22
Collins, Jim, 30
Comfort, 124–127
Commerce, 160–166
Communication, 18, 62
ritual, 22–24
Community, 121–124
development financial institutions, 
248
development projects, 243
partnership, 242–243
table, 49
Comp effect, 30–31
Competency, 66, 68
Connection. See also Mobilize the 
Connection
business-to-business, 185–189
emotional, 5, 6, 80–82
farmer-partner, 22–24
forging, 29
human, 38
lifestyle, 253–258
social media and, 167–170
technology and, 178–179
Conservation International, 23
Consistency, 75–77
Consumer
behavior, 81–82
trust, 74
Consumer packaged goods, 181–182, 190
risks and payoffs, 202–203
Cook, Matt, 238
Cook, Scott, 134, 137
Corio, Kay, 104
Couzens, James, 63
Covey, Stephen M. R., 72
Create Jobs for USA program, 248, 
249–251
Crenshaw High School, 245
CRM. See Customer relationship 
management
Cross-functional teams, 74–75
Cui, Jenny, 28
Cultural relativism, 110, 133–134,  
151–152. See also Local relevance
connecting points, 152–153
Culver, John, 130, 135, 136
on partnerships, 139
CUP Fund. See Caring Unites Partners 
Fund
Cup Summit, 236–237
Curiosity, 213–214
Customer engagement, 7–8, 12, 80, 107
through design, 43
hierarchy, 66–68
pride and, 67
social media and, 168, 171–173
Customer experience, 36–38, 75,  
188–189
co-created, 51–54
enhancements, 47–48
evolving, 48–51
Customer relationship management 
(CRM), 159–160
Customers
complaints, 77–79
cross-channel, 197–199
loyalty rewards, 119–120, 150
motives of, 66
product passion and, 33–34, 67–68
Davis, Josh, 250–251
Dazaifutenmangu Ometesando store, 
141–142
Decentralization, 134–137
Design, 43, 48–49
local relevance and, 139–142
sustainable building, 231–236
Dezeen magazine, 141–142
Diamandis, Peter, 207

In de x
281
Dibeehi, Qaalfa, 148
Diderot, Denis, 11
Dietrich, Gini, 256–257
Dietrich, Kelly, 256–257
Differentiation, 117–118
Digital advertising, 173–175
Digital strategy, 159–166. See also 
Social media
team, 174–175
Dills, Carrie, 27
Donald, Jim, 183
Donne, John, 121
Dorsey, Jack, 178
Douglas, Charles, III, 39
Drive Thru, 211–212, 222–224, 225, 
232–233
Dvorak, Petula, 8
East Liverpool, 249
Edmonds, S. Chris, 18
Education development, 244–247
Efficiency, 209–213
Einstein, Albert, 69
Elton, Chester, 101–102
E-mails, 163, 183, 199
EMEA. See Europe, Middle East and 
Africa
Emotional connections, 5, 6, 80–82
Empathy, 98–101
Employee, 85, 87. See also Partner
part-time, 90, 105–106
Energy use, 234–236
Engskov, Kris, 144
Entrepreneur magazine, 2
Environment, 42–47. See also Design
comfort of, 124–127
Environmental stewardship, 230–239
Ethical sourcing, 22–24, 241, 246
Ethos Water, 243
Europe, Middle East and Africa 
(EMEA) region, 135–136. See also 
Gass, Michelle
Evolution Fresh™ stores, 55–57, 200
Experience. See also Customer 
experience; Starbucks Experience
branded, 40
connecting points, 59–60
Experience (cont’d):
creators, 38–39
guiding delivery of, 39–42
immersive, 25–26
platform to build on, 55–59
Experimentation, 218–220
Expertise, 27–30
Facebook, 168–169, 173–174, 196–197, 
256–257
Fair trade, 16–17
Farmers, 16
partner-, connection, 22–24
sourcing objectives, 240
Fast Company magazine, 121–122
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” (Donne), 121
Ford, Henry, 63
Fortune magazine, 2
France, 145–146
Fredericksburg, Virginia, 7–8
Future Roast 401 (k) program, 87
Gallup Corporation, 66–68
Gamification strategies, 165–166
Garner, Curt, 162, 176–177
Gass, Michelle, 99–100, 111–112
names and, 113–114, 116
on regional strategy development, 
135–136
Gates, Bill, 158
Gelato Fiasco gelateria, 250–251
Genova, Jane, 202
Gertner, Jon, 209, 216
Gilmore, James H., 43
Gimein, Mark, 219
Global Month of Service, 122–123
Goodejohn, Kelly, 23–24, 241
Gostick, Adrian, 101–102
Green Mountain Coffee Roasters,  
190–191
Green Mountain’s Vue™, 191
Growth and development. See also 
specific development initiatives
investments, 91–93, 105–108
rates, 208–209
70/20/10 approach, 15
Gulati, Ranjay, 181–182

In de x
282
Hackley, Chris, 115
Hall, Christine, 220
HandsOn Network, 123–124
Hanna, Jim, 233–234, 237
Hansberry, Jeff, 184
Hardijzer, Hazel, 129
Hargrave, John, 78
Harper, Roseanne, 218–219
Harrison, Troy, 12
Hay, Dub, 19, 20
Health-care benefits, 70–71, 89–91, 105
Higgins, Alli, 41–42, 65
Hite, Morris, 181
Home, 189–192
Honighausen, Ulrich, 249
Hora Del Café Network, 96, 97
Hsieh, Tony, 12
Hubbard, Elbert, 36
Hudon, Cecile, 51, 54
Huffman, Sarah, 181–182
Humility, 5
“I’m In!” campaign, 123–124
Immersion program, 100–101
Immersive experience, 25–26
Impact value, 159
India, 128–129, 138
Indivisible, 248–249
Infographic, 52
Innovation, 117–118, 159
challenges to, 207–208
connecting points, 227–228
curiosity and, 213–214
efficient, 209–213
energy reduction and, 235–236
ever-moving relevance target and, 
218–227
experimentation and, 218–220
for local relevance, 142–144
model, 227
new concepts and, 220–224
product offerings and, 200–202
product relevance and, 214–218
technological advances and,  
224–226
Insurance. See Health-care benefits
Integrity, 67, 68–69, 125
during challenging times, 70–74
love and, 80–83
in product delivery, 74–76
in service recovery, 77–79
Intuit, 133–134, 137
iPhone, 160–161
Japan, 141–142
Joachim, Karen, 113
Job creation, 2, 247–251
Johnson, Aimee, 119, 254–255
Johnson, Earvin “Magic,” 242
Johnson Development Corporation, 
242
Jones, Virgil, 14, 98–99
Kahneman, Daniel, 82
Kelly, Diana, 7–8
Keurig Incorporated, 190–191
Kiesz, Kaycee, 88, 96–97
Kimoto, Tisha, 20
Knowledge, 14–18
Kotter, John, 218
Kouzes, James, 229
Lady Gaga, 166
Latin America, 129–130
Leadership, 7, 229–230, 239. See also 
Schultz, Howard
alignment, 215–216
benchmark, 2–5
development, 244–247
holistic approach to, 6–8
immersion programs for, 100–101
legacy, 206
love and, 5–6
regional, 135
Lean transformation process, 46, 50
LEED® certification, 233–235
Levy, Adrian, 71
Licensing agreement, 186, 188
Lieber, Ron, 119
Lifestyle connection, 253–258
Lillegard, Robert, 187
Lincoln, Abraham, 247
Lindberg, Corey, 71
LinkedIn, 170

In de x
283
Linnemann, Andrew, 188, 191
Listening, 98–101
tours, 104
Local relevance, 134, 151–152
choice and, 144–146
decentralization and revitalization 
for, 134–137
design and, 139–142
experimentation and, 148–149
innovation for, 142–144
location and, 146–148
partnerships for, 137–139
sensitivities and, 150–151
“Location, location, location,” 146
Logo, 44–45
Love, 5–6, 80–83
Love to Be Loved (business principle), 
62. See also Trust; specific 
supporting elements
connecting points, 83–84, 108
Loyalty/CRM/ targeted database,  
160–166
Mancini, Nicole, 151
Market conditions, 62
Market expansion, 133–134. See also 
Local relevance
international, 128–130, 137, 209
Maslow, Abraham, 65–66
Mastery, 27–30. See also Coffee 
Masters
McDonald’s, 46–47
McMahon, Katie, 24
McMaster, Barbara, 113, 142
Merchandise, 183–185
Mikulka, Bill, 226
Mini-desserts, 219–220
Mishra, Karen, 117–118
Mobile pay, 161–163
Mobilize the Connection (business 
principle), 156–157. See also 
Product offerings; Technology
connecting points, 179–180, 203–204
Modular store concept, 222–223
Morales, Carolina, 97
Morality, 68–70
Muan Jai® blends, 123
Muir, Caitlin, 91–92
Muller, Liz, 148
Music, 48
My Starbucks Idea website, 51–54, 
107, 167
My Starbucks Rewards™, 120, 164
Names, 113–116
Nawaz, Moe, 147
Naylor, Rob, 145
Need. See Universal needs
Neighborhoods, 230
Neilson, Gary, 181–182
Nelsen, Rich, 148
Netherlands, 148–149
New concepts, 220–224
New hires, 15–18, 20–21, 39
Newlin, Kate, 82
Nickolaus, Dirk, 115
Nightingale, Earl, 37
Nocera, Joe, 248–249
Obama, Barack, 2
Occupy Wall Street, 63–64
Olsen, Tracy, 126–127
O’Neil, Valerie, 26, 68
On-the-go solutions, 194–197
Onward: How Starbucks Fought for 
Its Life without Losing Its Soul 
(Schultz), 3, 13, 31
Origin Experience, 25–26
Packaging, 197–198
Packard, Ben, 234, 236–237
Paradigm shifts, 208–209
Partner Access Alliance Network, 94
Partner engagement, 90
growth and development 
investments and, 91–93,  
105–108
listening and, 98–101
partner-to-, 93–95, 103
value of, 106–107
Partners, 1, 6, 38, 66, 70–71. See also 
New hires; specific benefits
farmers-, connection, 22–24
return on investment in, 105–107

In de x
284
Partners (cont’d):
reward and recognition programs, 
101–104
trust, 72
uniting, 93–97
well-being, 89–91
Partnerships, 151–152, 186–188, 214
community, 242–243
local, 137–139
Part-time employees, 90, 105–106
Passion, 11, 14, 227. See also Product 
passion
brand, 62, 80–83
Schultz on transference of, 12–13
Peck, Mike, 44–45
Perez, Anthony, 232–233
Performance standards, 5
Petrisko, Kevin, 56, 74–75
PhaseOne, 170–171
Pike Place® Roast, 31
Pine, B. Joseph, 43
Pink, Daniel, 27
Pinterest, 170, 171
Place model, 158–159, 185. See also 
specific places
Point of Sale (POS) system, 161, 176–177
Polaroid Corporation, 207–208
POS. See Point of Sale
Posner, Barry, 229
Pride, 67
Pride Alliance Network, 96
Product, 144–146, 193. See also 
Relevance
delivery, 74–76
tests, 75–76
Product offerings, 182
business-to-business connection 
and, 185–189
connecting points, 203–204
cross-channel customers and,  
197–199
home, 189–192
innovation in, 200–202
in-store, 183–185
on-the-go, 194–197
risks and payoffs of, 202–203
workplace, 192–194
Product passion, 12–13
through celebration ritual, 18–22
through communication ritual, 
22–24
connecting points on, 34–35
customers and, 33–34, 67–68
through immersive experiences, 
25–26
through knowledge, 14–18
mastery and, 27–30
strategy consistent with, 30–33
Project Dominic, 7
Quinn, Paul, 33–34
Reach for Common Ground (business 
principle), 110. See also Cultural 
relativism; Universalism
connecting points, 131–132,  
152–153
Reclamation Drive Thru, 232–233
Recommendations, 76–77
Recycling, 236–239
Red cups, 125–126
Regional leadership, 135
Relational capital, 181–183
Relational strategies, 8
Relationship strengthening,  
117–118
Relevance, 214–217. See also Local 
relevance
ever-moving target, 218–227
Revitalization, 134–137
Reward and recognition programs
customer, 119–120, 150
partner, 101–104
Risk, 214–218
product offerings and, 202–203
Rituals, 18–24, 126. See also specific 
rituals and ritual types
Robbins, Tom, 133
Robertson, Graham, 80–81, 83
Rowe, Daniel, 255–257
Rubi kiosk, 225–226
Rubinfeld, Arthur, 48–49, 51, 231
Russell, Craig, 210

In de x
285
Satisfaction, 66, 79
Savor and Elevate (business principle), 
10. See also Experience; Product 
passion
connecting points, 34–35, 59–60
Schultz, Howard, 2–5, 20, 51, 70–72, 
216, 227, 229–230, 254–255
on artistry, 17
Bean Stock and, 86–88
on comp effect, 30–31
on customer experience, 36
e-mail to Donald, 183
on health-care benefits, 89–90,  
105
on Indian market, 138
on innovation, 215
on job creation, 247–250
on on-the-go solutions, 194–195
on social responsibility, 64–65
Starbucks Foundation and,  
244–246
on storytelling, 22
on technology, 156, 159
on transference of passion, 12–13
Seating areas, 49–50
Seattle’s Best Coffee, 224–225
Seawell, Katie, 216
Seidman, Dov, 64, 69
Sensory factors, 48, 50
integration of key, 43
Service
recovery, 77–79
vision, 40–42
Shah, Amish, 165
Shareholder value, 72
Sherman, Kimberlee, 139–141
Shields, Jean-Marie, 112
Shook, John, 46–47
Simphony, 176
Site selection, 146–148
Sleeve, 238–239
Smith, Andrea Nagy, 208
Smith, Barbara, 63
Social media, 167–169, 196–197. See 
also specific social media
benefits of, 173–175
success in, 170–173
Social responsibility, 64–65, 122, 229
during challenging times, 70–74
community partnership and, 242–243
connecting points, 251–252
environmental stewardship and, 
230–239
job creation and, 247–251
report, 234–235
stewardship in foundation form, 
243–247
supply chain and, 240–242
Sopkin, Rob, 147
Sorbetto™, 217
Sowell, Thomas, 111
Speicher, Stacy, 58–59
Square Inc., 162–163, 174, 178–179
Square Wallet, 163
Starbucks® Blonde Espresso Roast, 145
Starbucks® Blonde Roast, 31–32
Starbucks Card, 54, 159, 162–163
mobile app, 160–161, 165, 212, 213
Starbucks Digital Network, 176
Starbucks® Espresso Roast, 145
Starbucks Evenings, 221
Starbucks Experience, 3, 15, 38, 182
Starbucks Foundation, 243–247, 248
Starbucks ice cream, 45
Starbucks Interactive Cup® brewer, 193
Starbucks Partner Networks, 95–97
Starbucks Refreshers, 201
Starbucks® Thanksgiving Blend, 19
Starbucks U, 92–93
Steaming pitcher, 210–211
Stewardship, 243–247
environmental, 230–239
Stibel, Gary, 187
Stock benefits, 70–71
Store Walk Thru, 40
Storytelling, 22–24
Strategy, 8. See also Digital strategy
gamification, 165–166
product-based, 30–33
regional development, 135–136
site selection, 146–148
Strayer University program, 92
Supply chain, 240–242
Sustainable building design, 231–236

In de x
286
Tassimo system, 191
Taste profiles, 31
Tata Coffee Group, 128–129, 138
Taylor, Blair, 244–246
Tazo® tea stores, 55, 57–58, 200
Tea, 58
Team Spirit of Starbucks Award, 103
Teavana, 200–201
Technology, 156, 158–159. See also 
Digital strategy
advances in, 224–226
connecting points, 179–180
mission served by, 175–179
packaging and, 197–198
“A Theory of Human Motivation” 
(Maslow), 65–66
Thompson, Craig, 137
Time magazine, 158
Toback, Steve, 189–190
Tolmen, Jeremy, 124
Training, 15, 16, 39–40. See also New hires
for consistency, 76–77
service recovery, 78–79
Transformation Agenda, 3–5, 36, 221
Transparency, 16–17, 69
Tropeano, Bruno, 250–251
Trust, 62, 63–68, 72. See also Integrity
connecting points, 83–84
consumer, 74
Turner, Clarice, 22, 100, 211–212
Turnover, 105–106
Tversky, Amos, 82
Twitter, 167–168, 169
United Kingdom, 141, 144
Universal needs, 127–130
appreciation, 118–120
attention, 112–118
comfort and variety, 124–127
community, 121–124
Universalism, 11–112, 110
connecting points, 131–132
Urban Coffee Opportunities, 242
U.S. Green Building Council, 233–234
Variety, 124–127
Vending machines, 224–226
Verismo system, 192
VIA® Ready Brew, 181, 184, 189–190, 
194–195
Taste Challenge, 196–197
Virtual learning lab, 226–227
Vote.Give.Grow, 123
Wakefield, Kylie Jane, 168
Walk-up/drive-up, 222–224
Walt Disney Corporation, 151–152
Wang, Helen, 125, 151
Web and mobile channels, 160–166. 
See also specific channels
Wei, Shao, 94–95
Wesson, Matt, 170
Wheeler, Alex, 168–169, 172, 178
Wi-Fi availability, 176
Williams, Dave, 173–174
Wilson, Mark, 222
Wilson, Woodrow, 98, 229
Wireless Application and Mobile 
Media, 159
Wohlsen, Marcus, 163
Wolf, Wang Bin, 28
Women’s Development Network, 96
Wong, Belinda, 142
Workplace, 192–194
Wubben, Frank, 147, 193–194
Wyatt, Watson, 72
Yarwood, Samantha, 21, 143
Young, Joe, 106
Young-Scrivner, Annie, 58, 184–185, 
195–198
Youth Leadership Grants program, 
244–245
Yuk, Pan Kwan, 129
Zappos, 12
Zimmer, Erin, 219

About the Author 
Dr. Joseph Michelli helps companies and 
organizations develop leaders, engage em-
ployees, elevate human experiences, master 
service skills, and innovate relevant solutions. 
To achieve these measurable outcomes, 
Dr. Michelli provides: 
Keynote speeches 
Workshop presentations
Panel facilitation
Leadership retreats
Customer experience audits
Daylong and extended customer experience–  
and leadership-focused consulting services
Dr. Michelli is the chief experience officer of the Michelli 
Experience, where he has dedicated his career to helping lead-
ers achieve loyalty-building customer experiences and dynamic 
workplace cultures. In addition to writing the book you are 
holding, Dr. Michelli is a New York Times, Wall Street Journal, 
USA Today, and BusinessWeek bestselling author who has also 
written:
The Zappos Experience: 5 Principles to Inspire, Engage,  
and WOW

Prescription for Excellence: Leadership Lessons for Creat-
ing a World-Class Customer Experience from UCLA Health 
System
The New Gold Standard: 5 Leadership Principles for Creat-
ing a Legendary Customer Experience Courtesy of The Ritz-
Carlton Hotel Company, and
The Starbucks Experience: 5 Principles for Turning Ordinary 
into Extraordinary
In addition, Dr. Michelli and John Yokoyama, the owner of 
the World Famous Pike Place Fish Market in Seattle, Washing-
ton, coauthored When Fish Fly: Lessons for Creating a Vital and 
Energized Workplace.
For more information on how Dr. Michelli can present at 
your event, provide training resources, or help you with your 
products, your people, or your customers’ experience, please 
visit www.josephmichelli.com.
Dr. Michelli is eager to help you lead the Starbucks way.  
He can be reached through his website, by e-mail at josephm 
@josephmichelli.com, or by calling either (734) 697-5078 or 
(888) 711-4900 (toll free within the United States).

