
Leading Diversity 
in the 21st Century

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity 
in the 21st Century
edited by
Terri A. Scandura
University of Miami
Edwin Mouriño-Ruiz
Rollins College
INFORMATION AGE PUBLISHING, INC.
Charlotte, NC • www.infoagepub.com

Copyright © 2017 Information Age Publishing Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, microfilming, recording or otherwise, without written permission 
from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
  A CIP record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
    http://www.loc.gov
ISBN:	 978-1-68123-876-0 (Paperback)
	
978-1-68123-877-7 (Hardcover)
	
978-1-68123-878-4 (ebook)


v
CONTENTS
	
	 Introduction: Leading Diversity in the 21st Century: 
Developing High-Quality Connections................................................ 1
Terri A. Scandura and Edwin Mouriño-Ruiz
SECTION I
WOMEN AND MINORITIES
	 1	 Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional 
Construct: Implications for Leaders, Subordinates, and 
Teammates............................................................................................ 27
Frankie J. Weinberg and A. O’Shea Cleveland
	 2	 Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations:  
Who Helps Whom and What Difference Does It Make?................... 55
Nancy DiTomaso and Catrina Palmer
	 3	 Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora.................85
Clive M. Mukanzi, Terri R. Lituchy, Betty Jane Punnett,  
Bella L. Galperin, Thomas A. Senaji, Elham K. Metwally,  
Lemayon Melyoki, Courtney A. Henderson, Vincent Bagire,  
Cynthia A. Bulley, and Noble Osei-Bonsu
	 4	 Managing the Hispanic Workforce in the Context of Values, 
Acculturation, and Identity................................................................111
Carolina Gomez and Patricia G. Martínez

vi    ﻿Contents
	 5	 Leading Women: Unique Challenges and Suggestions 
for Moving Forward............................................................................ 137
Caren Goldberg, Lucy Gilson, and Sarah Nesci
SECTION II
AGE AND GENERATIONS
	 6	 The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach  
to Age Diversity................................................................................... 161
Jacqueline H. Stephenson
	 7	 Leader–member Relations in an Aging Workforce......................... 191
Barbara A. Fritzsche and Ghada Baz
	 8	 Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials: Leader–
Member Exchange in the Face of Evolving Generational 
Diversity in the Workplace................................................................. 221
Daniel P. Gullifor, Lori L. Tribble, and Claudia C. Cogliser
	 9	 Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations: 
Setting the Record Straight............................................................... 243
Cort W. Rudolph and Hannes Zacher
SECTION III
EMERGING TRENDS
	 10	 LMX and Autism: Effective Working Relationships........................ 281
Amy E. Hurley-Hanson and Cristina M. Giannantonio
	 11	 Trans Formational: LMX, Cisgenderism, and Building 
Inclusive Workplaces..........................................................................303
Manuel J. Tejeda
	 12	 Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century.......... 327
Pamela McCauley and Edwin Nassiff
	
	 About the Contributors...................................................................... 357

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 1–24
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
1
INTRODUCTION
LEADING DIVERSITY 
IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Developing High-Quality Connections
Terri A. Scandura
University of Miami
Edwin Mouriño-Ruiz
Rollins College
ABSTRACT
This chapter reviews current leadership research and practice, noting that de-
spite the increase in studies of leadership, attention to diversity in the literature 
remains piecemeal and sparse. This persists despite the challenges faced by 
leaders in the development of quality relationships with diverse followers. Key 
workforce trends are highlighted, and the implications for leading diversity in 
the 21st century are noted. There is a need for new perspectives on diversity 
given these trends. To provide an overview of this edited volume, a unifying 
framework based upon the development of high-quality connections (HQCs) 
from the perspective of positive organizational scholarship is discussed. Key per-
spectives from positive organizational scholarship (POS) including exchange, 
identity, growth, and learning are presented, noting how HQCs might enhance 

2    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
leaders’ ability to connect with diverse followers from each of these four per-
spectives. Next, the role of how HQCs can help leaders shape positive identities 
for followers is discussed, noting recent research on multiple identities and 
identity negotiation. An overview of the edited volume is presented, noting the 
contributions of each chapter to the development of HQCs. In conclusion, con-
siderations and recommendations for practice are presented.
LEADERSHIP THEORY AND PRACTICE: CURRENT STATUS
Key Workforce Trends
When diversity was in the early stages from a business perspective, Dr. 
Roosevelt Thomas wrote that diversity was beyond just race and gender 
(Thomas, 1992). Over time, this title could not have been more predictive 
of what was going to come. Today and into the future, when we speak of 
diversity, workforce, organizational, and leadership implications it is better 
to think of it from a broader and more systemic perspective. The following 
trends highlight and accentuate how diversity has evolved and how organi-
zational leaders need to think of the topic from a broader perspective and 
changing paradigm.
These trends include the need for organizational change due to the 
technological explosion, the educational challenges and opportunities, an 
aging workforce, four generations in the workplace, an increasing diverse 
(particularly Latino) workforce, the changing demands of the 21st century 
workforce, and the challenges and opportunities for organizational leaders 
and leadership development (Mouriño, 2014).
Organizational change is partly being driven by business models that did 
not exist probably as recently 5 years ago as represented by organizations 
like Uber, Lyft, and Airbnb. Where organization that were written about 
in books like Good to Great for their excellent qualities, like Circuit City 
(Collins, 2001), either did not adapt or change fast enough and now do 
not exist. These organizational shifts of companies being created and/or 
disappearing is not new since in the span from 1955 through 2011, 87% of 
Fortune 500 firms have disappeared (Chew, 2012).
Other causes of these changes in addition to globalization is the trend 
regarding the technological shift created by growth in this area. An exam-
ple to put things in perspective is that it took the radio 38 years to reach 
50 million people. Today it is estimated that there are more than 9 billion 
mobile devices and that is expected to grow to 12 billion by 2018 (Radicatti, 
2014). These devices in union with advancing apps have enabled more than 
3 billion users on the Internet (James, 2015). The continual evolution of 
technology has also enabled 3D printing, smart luggage, and smart homes, 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    3
and due to the obsession we seem to have with texting and not looking 
where we’re going, some countries are beginning to create laws and signs to 
ensure everyone’s safety. Presently, “45% of tasks performed by U.S. work-
ers can be automated by currently existing technology” (Fortune, 2016).
These technological changes, in turn, affect what is needed from the 
current and future educational system. The challenge is that the United 
States ranks 26th out of 34 countries in math and 38% of PhDs in science in 
the United States are held by foreign born individuals (Augustine, 2007). 
By 2018, it is expected that 63% of U.S. jobs will require a postsecondary 
education, and presently we only have 40% (Schroeder, 2015). While this 
highlights the need for technological skills, the top 10 skills needed for 
workers in 2020 include people and interpersonal skills like critical think-
ing, people management, emotional intelligence, and creativity, among 
others (Gray, 2016).
At the same time, we have an aging world and workplace. In the future 
demographic world map, only two countries—Mexico and India—look to 
have enough of a workforce for the future where most do not meet the 
minimum 2.1 number, which includes immigration, emigration, births, and 
deaths (Shervani, 2015). This is further highlighted in a 2014 TED Talk 
regarding the global aging workforce crisis (Strack, 2014). All of this will 
only make it more important to attract and retain an engaged workforce as 
competition increases for an aging workforce. This is particularly relevant 
when most workers crave meaning and purpose in life and few find this at 
work, or most organizations do not provide the type of workplace that most 
wish for (Mackey & Sisodia, 2014).
While there is an aging workforce in the 21st century, it is also time for 
four generations in the workplace, with baby boomers beginning to retire 
and Millennials as two of the major generations in the workplace. These 
two generations approach work differently, with the baby boomers known 
for being dedicated, expecting face time, increasingly working for a pur-
pose (Hesselbein & Goldsmith, 2009), while Millennials are interested in 
collaboration, recognition, innovation, and relationships (Tapscott, 2008). 
These four generations provide a richness for a diverse workforce, espe-
cially as both older and younger staff members get promoted into leader-
ship roles. The diversity of generations in the workplace will provide both 
opportunities and challenges in leader–member relationships.
While this generational change is taking place, there is also an increas-
ing Latino demographic who are part of the growing Millennial workforce. 
There are presently 53 million Latinos in the United States, which make 
the United States the second largest country with the most Latinos in the 
world and also the second largest Spanish speaking country with an average 
age of 27 compared to 40 years old in the Anglo demographic (Rodriguez, 
2007). Presently, in the Millennial potential workforce, the Latino portion 

4    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
make up 44% or the largest demographic segment of the Millennials (Krog-
stad, Lopez, López, Passel, & Patten, 2016). Latinos will make up 74% of 
labor force growth by 2020, which makes this group both an important part 
of the present workforce and client base for organizations in the United 
States. This too will present challenges and opportunities for organizations 
from a variety of perspectives. From a leader–employee relations perspec-
tive, this will be key to understanding how to relate to this growing demo-
graphic segment. Considering the potential for leadership development, 
this demographic will be a crucial one to keep in mind, especially with its 
younger age individuals as potential leaders.
With all of these changing demographics that include an aging work-
force, four generations, and a growing Latino workforce, they all have one 
thing in common: an increasing need for employee engagement. When 
an organization has an engaged workforce, there is a tendency for higher 
productivity, fewer accidents, employees who are less inclined to leave an 
organization, and higher customer satisfaction (Friedman, 2015).
What these trends call for is leaders to be more engaged and sensitive to 
the changing needs of their workforce and attune to the changing diversity 
of the 21st century workplace, which includes an aging workforce, increas-
ing technology, a global presence; and a need for a more educated work-
force. Competition will be stiffer for the changing workforce, and helping 
to reduce turnover will be a challenge. This is a challenge that can be ad-
dressed by hiring good leaders who in turn retain more top talent (Besi & 
Glatzhofer, 2016), and are better equipped to ensure success within their 
organizations and with their workforce.
THE U.S. WORKFORCE AND ABROAD
Challenges for Leaders
The problem has been that for a while and still today organizations con-
tinue to promote or hire leaders with great analytical skills and poor social 
skills (Rock, 2013). This will not be adequate for the workforce in the 21st 
century and for the success of organizations. The key skills for today and 
going forward will be the social skills, so that workers and their leaders can 
work effectively as teams, which will mean organizations will increasingly 
need workers and leaders with relationship skills (Colvin, 2016). The skills 
needed in 2020 will consists primarily of people management skills that 
include emotional intelligence, coordinating with others, service orienta-
tion, and creativity, as examples (Gray, 2016). These “people skills” will be 
needed in organizations today and into tomorrow to engage an increas-
ingly diverse workforce.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    5
Despite these needs, or possibly due to these needs, some organiza-
tions have given up on managers and have gone without managers, like 
Zappos and W. L. Gore (Morgan, 2014). These organizations possibly did 
this due to their lack of belief and support of their management teams. So 
while some organizations have gone this route, most organizations are still 
developing their leaders and trying to make a difference. The challenges 
ahead are not just for the United States, but globally, including a diversity of 
countries such as India, China, Egypt, and Spain. Some of these challenges 
include leading a team, guiding change, developing employees, inspiring 
others, and in essence managerial effectiveness among others (Gentry, Eck-
ert, Stawiski, & Zhao, 2016). All of these trends will have implications on 
leader and employee relations, particularly with the increasingly diverse 
workforce. This workforce is expecting more than just jobs, and craves 
meaning in the current context of work.
New Perspectives Needed
For the reasons previously mentioned and more, we believe this book is 
needed. We have not found many resources that take a comprehensive view 
regarding the evolving and increasing importance of diversity in the 21st 
century for organizations, its leaders, and its employees. In addition, the in-
creasingly important need of organizations and its leadership development 
will continue to be a strategic need and imperative for organizations. This 
is continuing to grow in importance with an aging baby boomer workforce, 
where workers tend to leave organizations due to poor management, and 
most employees don’t feel they are recognized even though recognition 
topped a global survey for job seekers (Strack, 2014). This book looks at 
leadership and diversity from a variety of perspectives, including a global 
view and different workforce, such as one with more autistic employees. 
This sets the stage for the importance of connections between leaders and 
their subordinates irrespective of their differences, and the need for cre-
ating a positive organizational environment with an engaged workforce, 
while maximizing the changing diversity in the workplace. We next turn 
to positive organizational scholarship perspectives on high-quality connec-
tions at work to develop a unifying theme for this book.
HIGH-QUALITY CONNECTIONS AS A UNIFYING THEME
Dutton and Heaphy (2003) define the quality of the connection between in-
dividuals in organizations by focusing on the degree to which the “connec-
tive tissue” between individuals gives life or depletes it. Thus, high-quality 

6    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
connections (HQCs) reflect positive scholarship (to be discussed) because 
they explain how and why leaders may influence the well-being, positive 
work attitudes, and ability of followers to thrive. HQCs have been studied 
as leader–member exchange (LMX) and mentoring at work, but are not 
limited to these connections. HQCs can be characterized in terms of the 
strength of the tie between individuals, the subjective experience of the 
connection, and the physiological experience (e.g., lower blood pressure).
Positive Organizational Scholarship
Positive organizational scholarship (POS) focuses on the dynamics leading 
to the development of human strength that produces resilience and restora-
tion, and fosters vitality and ultimately enhances performance. According to 
Cameron and Caza (2004), “POS investigates positive deviance, or the ways 
in which organizations and their members flourish and prosper in especially 
affirmative ways” (p. 731). These authors unpack the term POS and explain 
that positive refers to an affirmative bias focused on processes in organiza-
tions that elevate individuals working in organizations. Organizational refers 
to the processes, conditions, and contexts in organizations. Scholarship re-
fers to scientific, theoretically based, research that investigates positive pro-
cesses in organizations. POS has roots in positive psychology, which started 
with an influential presidential address to the American Psychological Assso-
ciation (APA) in 1998 (Seligman, 1999). Rather than focusing on pathology, 
Seligman called upon psychologists to focus on what is good and fulfilling 
in the lives of healthy people. This approach focuses on concepts such as 
optimism and hope, and starts with different assumptions regarding human 
nature. With the publication of an influential edited book (Cameron, Dut-
ton, & Quinn, 2003), and the Center for Positive Organizations at the Univer-
sity of Michigan (http://positiveorgs.bus.umich.edu/), themes from positive 
psychology have been transported into organizational theory and behavior. 
POS provides new perspectives through which organizational phenomena 
may be viewed, and focuses on theory, research, and the practice of how in-
dividual strengths can be best manifested in the work context. Examples of 
the influence of POS on current theory and research include positive profes-
sional identities (Roberts, Cha, Hewlin, & Settles, 2009) and mentoring re-
lationships (Ragins, 2009), The POS lens can increase our understanding of 
leader–member exchange (LMX) mentoring, and the development of posi-
tive identities for diverse followers. Indeed, Graen and Scandura (1987) de-
fined the LMX relationship by articulating the equally important aspects of 
relationship quality and the coupling of behaviors. Consistent with the POS 
perspective, such understanding can explain the dynamics of interpersonal 
relationships that create the conditions under which individuals can thrive, 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    7
which is the joint experience of learning and vitality (Spreitzer, Sutcliffe, Dut-
ton, Sonenshein, & Grant, 2005).
The POS perspective sheds light on four broad perspectives central to 
understanding high-quality connections (Dutton & Heaphy, 2003). These 
perspectives will be reviewed in what follows noting the importance of each 
for understanding the development of HQCs with diverse followers. Follow-
ing this review, the role of how leaders can facilitate positive work identities 
through HQCs will be discussed.
Exchange Perspective
Based upon the exchange theories of Thibaut and Kelley (1959) and 
Homans (1958), the premise of exchange theory is that people exchange 
commodities of value. The commodities may involve money, but may also 
include nonmonetary exchanges, such as social support and loyalty. Dut-
ton and Heaphy (2003) specifically refer to the LMX theory of leadership 
development as an example of how relationships are negotiated over time 
as leaders and followers exchange “currencies” of exchange. The authors 
note, “The building of HQCs improves the flow and rate of valued resource 
exchange, which further cements and deepens the dyadic connection” 
(p. 270). While LMX theory and research predate research on POS by more 
than 30 years (cf. Graen, Orris & Johnson, 1973), it is clear that the LMX 
theory informs the emergent work on HQCs through the exchange lens.
Mentoring relationships have also been examined using a social ex-
change perspective. For example, Ensher, Thomas, and Murphy (2001) ap-
plied social exchange theory as a conceptual framework to understand how 
different types of mentors and support on protégés’ related to mentor sat-
isfaction and perceived career success. This study of 142 ethnically diverse 
protégés in informal mentoring relationship found that reciprocity related 
to protégés’ satisfaction with their mentors. Young and Perrewe (2000) re-
viewed the mentoring literature and applied a social exchange framework, 
concluding that exchange explains why some mentoring relationships de-
velop and others do not.
In sum, the exchange lens of POS offers a great deal of insight into the 
development of HQCs. Particularly in the early phases of relationship devel-
opment, exchange of valued economic and social resources may help explain 
why some leaders are able to reach diverse followers and develop positive and 
productive work relationships. Exchange perspectives are premised on the 
idea that each follower is a unique individual and that different exchanges 
will occur with each individual. Troester and van Knippenberg (2012) found 
that relational demography effects are likely more positive when leaders are 
more similar to team members, or high on openness. It appears that the key 
is for the leader to show openness and listening skills so that the appropriate 
resources are matched to each follower’s particular needs.

8    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
Identity Perspective
Work identities are developed, in part, through interactions with others. 
HQCs may have a powerful influence on how individuals see their roles 
at work and how this becomes part of their overall identity. Fletcher and 
Ragins (2007) propose that the mentoring interactions may enhance one’s 
acceptance of one’s identity. Through mentoring, a junior person grows 
into acceptance of a professional identity over time. Also mentor and pro-
tégé develop and identify in relationship to one another. This is consid-
ered separate from individual identity and is known as a relational identity, 
which is “the nature of one’s role-relationship, such as manager-subordi-
nate and coworker-coworker. It is how role occupants enact their respective 
roles vis-a`-vis each other” (Sluss & Ashforth, 2007). These authors further 
suggest that relational identity integrates person- and role-based identities, 
and thus individual, interpersonal, and collective levels of self as reflected 
in social identity (Hogg & Terry, 2000). Thus, the development of an HQC 
with a leader or mentor may help reduce the salience of the in-group bias 
found in research on social identity theory (SIT; Tajfel & Turner, 1986). 
In-group bias results when a person evaluates members of their own group 
more favorably than a designated out-group (Bettencourt, Charlton, Dorr, 
& Hume, 2001). Out-groups in organizations are often women and minori-
ties who are not part of the power networks (Ibarra, 1995, 1997). Thus, 
leaders can have a positive influence on the reduction of the salience of 
out-group membership by reducing the influence of social identity on in-
dividual identity and emphasizing the importance of a diverse follower’s 
relationship to them. However, research has indicated that leaders should 
allow the subgroup identity to be expressed rather than to force assimila-
tion (Hornsby & Hogg, 2000). The creation of a superordinate identity (for 
example, “We are all on the same team”) may be helpful.
Growth and Development Perspective
From this lens, followers thrive when they are able to grow and learn as a 
result of working. This is, in part, enabled by HQCs with leaders and others 
at work. This perspective builds on the attachment theory (Bowlby, 1969), 
which focuses on the relationship systems in early life that contribute to a 
person’s growth, development, and sense of purpose. Attachment theory 
suggests that there are two adult attachment dimensions: anxiety and avoid-
ance (Brennan, Clark, & Shaver, 1998). The anxiety dimension is associated 
with a negative self-identity and a higher need for approval from others. 
The insecure-avoidant attachment style manifests as self-reliance and emo-
tional distancing, or detachment in day-to-day interpersonal relations. Bowl-
by argued that individuals strive to create attachments to others because 
they generate a sense of security; this is termed the secure attachment style. 
This greater level of security within an interpersonal relationship allows the 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    9
person to experiment and learn new things. Research in the area of mentor-
ing supports the importance of attachment styles to HQCs. Allen, Shockley, 
& Poteat (2010) found that a protégé’s anxious attachment was associated 
with less feedback seeking and less feedback acceptance. Protégé feedback 
acceptance was associated with both the quality and frequency of feedback 
provided by the mentor. In a study of matched mentor-protégé pairs, Wang, 
Noe, Wang, and Greenberger (2009) found that avoidance and anxiety at-
tachment styles had a significant influence on the willingness to mentor 
in the future. Thus, mentor and protégé attachment styles may influence 
both the HQC and the outcomes of the mentoring relationship. Despite the 
interesting findings from attachment theory and mentoring, less is known 
about how individuals with diverse backgrounds might differ in how the ef-
fects of anxiety and avoidance might play out in the development of HQCs.
Learning Perspective
According to Dutton and Heaphy (2003), HQCs “enable people to 
expand their knowledge about the self, the relationship, and the world” 
(p. 273). By creating environments of empathy that allow for concerns to 
be voiced, leaders and mentors can enhance the learning of their followers. 
For example, mentoring interactions create personal learning (Lankau & 
Scandura, 2002), and as such, mentoring relates to this perspective. Per-
sonal learning comprises relational job learning and personal skill devel-
opment. Both having a mentor and mentoring functions (vocational, so-
cial support and role modeling) were found to be antecedents of personal 
learning. Personal learning enhanced the relationship of mentoring to out-
comes of job satisfaction, role ambiguity, turnover intentions, and actual 
turnover. Fletcher (1999) describes the process of “empathic teaching” in 
which the teacher considers the emotional context as well as the intellec-
tual context to create a learning environment characterized by respect. It 
seems that a similar approach to empathic leading and mentoring would 
enhance the development of HQCs.
Thus, learning appears to be part of a HQC and relates to personal and 
organizational outcomes. That said, there is a paucity of theory and re-
search on how diversity may influence the learning process in the context 
of organizational relationships. A notable exception is a study by Gersick, 
Bartunek, and Dutton (2000) that examined the role of personal relation-
ships in the development of professional identities. In this interview study, 
the top reasons why interviewees selected their “top two most important 
professional relationships” were collegiality, admiration for the other per-
son, positive mentoring, and support. These findings are consistent with 
the literature on mentoring. However, the analysis also revealed gender 
differences with respect to the impact of personal relationships. Men were 
more likely to tell stories about the relationships that described career 

10    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
help. Women, on the other hand, were more likely to tell stories that de-
scribed harm. These harming stories described either marginalization in 
the work environment or refusal of resources needed to complete work. 
This research underscores the importance of HQCs for the enablement of 
learning in a relationship, but also a potential “dark side” of relationships 
that must be addressed, particularly in the context of diversity.
HIGH-QUALITY CONNECTIONS AND IDENTITY
In considering the four lenses provided by POS (exchange, identity, growth, 
and learning), it seems that one way to examine the influence of diversity is 
to consider the influence of HQCs and the emergence of identity. As noted 
previously, identity is nested and comprises individual, relational, and social 
identities. For the relational identity to merge with the individual and social 
identity, there needs to be a recognition of three important aspects of iden-
tity. First, psychological safety must be present within the connection so that 
the diverse follower is willing to trust, take risks, and self-disclose. Second, 
there must be a recognition that followers have multiple identities, and that 
the leader needs to learn about the follower. Third, research on identity ne-
gotiation has shown that the revelation of identity is a process that unfolds 
over time. These three key themes in understanding now HQCs relate to 
identity will be discussed next.
HQCs and Psychological Safety
One of the most important aspects of having HQCs is that these bonds 
create a climate of psychological safety. This is particularly important for 
women and minorities, since they may be reluctant to trust and share per-
sonal information. In a longitudinal study, Carmeli, Brueller and Dutton 
(2009) found that high-quality relationships predicted psychological safety. 
As noted previously from the learning perspective, psychological safety pre-
dicted increased learning. Their study also found that HQCs were both 
directly and indirectly related to learning through psychological safety. In 
another study, Carmeli and Gittel (2009) found HQCs generate relational 
dimensions of relational coordination (shared goals, shared knowledge, 
and mutual respect), and this fostered psychological safety. Because of 
this, respondents reported that they were better able to learn from their 
failures. In other words, psychological safety plays a pivotal role in under-
standing how HQCs relate to outcomes, such as learning on the job. This 
study underscores the importance of having HQCs in the workplace for 
creating environments that are supportive and psychologically safe. This is 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    11
important for women and minorities due to invisible and visible stigma as-
sociated with their social identities.
An employee may have an “invisible stigma” that the individual feels un-
comfortable disclosing to their leader or mentor. Ragins, Singh and Corn-
wall (2007) found that the disclosure of gay identity at work invoked fear 
for those that had not disclosed. However, employees reported less fear 
and more disclosure when they worked in a group that was perceived as 
supportive and sharing their stigma. The fear of disclosure was related to 
lower work attitudes, such as job satisfaction and increased psychological 
strain. Other invisible stigmas include disabilities such as epilepsy, alcohol-
ism, drug abuse, cancer, HIV/AIDS, stroke, mental disability, and mental 
illness (Ragins, 2008). Ragins discusses the key role of “supportive and ally 
relationships,” which can alleviate identity disconnects and make it safe 
for an employee to disclose their invisible stigma. In addition to invisible 
stigmas, the negative workplace impact of visible stigmas such as age and 
disability may be alleviated by a supportive and/or transformational lead-
er (Boehm & Dwertmann, 2015). Their analysis points out that age and 
disability are correlated, and thus any given employee may be a member 
of multiple groups and thus have multiple identities. In other words, an 
employee might be disabled, African American, and/or a union member. 
All of these identities influence how they may view themselves, their role at 
work, and their relationship with leaders, mentors, and coworkers.
Multiple Identities
Subordinates have an influence on the development of the HQC by pro-
viding valued resources for leaders, mentors, and coworkers. Creary, Caza, 
and Roberts (2015) have articulated a theory of how multiple identities 
are managed within the manager-subordinate relationship. However, their 
analysis is relevant for mentoring and coworker relationships as well. They 
employ LMX theory and relational cultural theory to explain how an em-
ployee’s management of multiple identities in the workplace may affect the 
HQC with the manager. They define multiple identities as “two or more 
meanings that individuals attach to themselves as a function of their multi-
ple social group memberships (i.e., social identities)” (p. 539). By recogniz-
ing that identities are multifaceted, leaders are better able to create condi-
tions of psychological safety that encourage followers to disclose. This safety 
must communicate that multiple identities reflect diversity and are valued 
by the organization as important resources. To develop HQCs with all fol-
lowers, leaders must understand identity dynamics, which describe the pro-
cess through which identity unfolds. This is articulated in self-verification 
theory, also known as the identity negotiation process.

12    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
Identity Negotiation
Research on identity negotiation has demonstrated that individuals seek to 
self-verify by having others see them as they truly are. In other words, people 
are motivated to have others see them as they see themselves (Swann, 1983). 
Individuals need to reinforce their sense of identity, and this need exists even 
if the identity is negative (i.e., the person is a member of a minority or a stig-
matized group) (Swann, 1987; Swann, Polzer, Seyle, & Ko, 2004). Individuals 
may join organizations that reflect their identity to maintain a sense of self 
(Swann, 1983). Once in the organization, Swann (2005) suggests that people 
next seek self-verification partners who they decide they will disclose their 
identity to. Interestingly, people with low self-esteem seek out others who 
will reinforce their negative self-views. However, when confronted with dis-
confirming evidence (i.e., being told they are dominant when they are not), 
people will defend their self-views (Swann & Hill, 1982). In follow-up studies, 
Swann and Ely (1984) found that this defending reaction only occurs when 
people are certain about their identities. Longitudinal research has demon-
strated that individuals make attempts to bring others views of themselves 
into line with their own self-views (McNulty & Swann, 1994; Swann, Milton, & 
Polzer, 2000). In sum, research on this perspective demonstrates that identity 
unfolds over time. Individuals engage in self-disclosure with another person 
because they are driven to have their identity affirmed by others. People will 
protect their sense of identity, and will go to great lengths to do so.
 As noted previously, psychological safety is essential for an employee to 
trust their coworkers to discuss multiple aspects of their identity, particu-
larly if the individual is a member of a stigmatized group. People self-verify 
over time, and “test” out whether the environment is safe to divulge their 
multiple identities. Taken together, the processes of identity negotiation 
and the management of multiple identities within a climate of psychologi-
cal safety helps explain what leaders can do to facilitate HCQs and the out-
come of positive self-worth through affirming followers’ identities.
CHAPTER NOTES
Women and Minorities
No book on leading diversity in the 21st century would be complete 
without inclusion of chapters on women and minorities. In the first sec-
tion of this book, six chapters address this topic. Weinberg and Cleveland 
(Chapter 1) describe gendered communication styles (GCOM) as a form 
of deep-level diversity that has important organizational implications. The 
authors introduce a useful typology of GCOM and articulate implications 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    13
of these communicative orientations for leaders, managers, and their sub-
ordinates. This chapter may be viewed as a deep-level analysis of how com-
munication may facilitate self-disclosure and supportive HQCs when one 
party to the dyad is female.
To follow up this chapter, DiTomaso and Palmer discuss the roles of men-
tors and sponsors and their helping behaviors for women (Chapter 2). This 
chapter provides a critical review of the mentoring literature, clarifies the 
difference between mentor and sponsor, and raises new questions that have 
not been given sufficient attention in the research literature about who helps 
whom in the labor force and to what effect. The chapter ends with a discus-
sion of how employees who may be at a disadvantage in gaining access to sup-
portive relationships in the workplace can improve their chances of positive 
outcomes. This chapter focuses on mentoring as a HQC, to which women 
have had less access, and discusses recommendations for future practice.
Chapter 3 provides a fascinating overview of leadership diversity in Af-
rica and the African diaspora (Mukanzi et al.). The chapter reviews results 
of a large-scale research project in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Ghana, Egypt, 
the Caribbean, the United States, and Canada. The authors provide insight 
into leadership diversity in countries that are among the most ethnically, 
religiously, and culturally diverse in the world. Leadership in these regions 
reflects ethnic groups split into multiple states having different languages, 
cultures, and ethnic compositions. This chapter underscores the need for 
in-depth, deep-level research into understanding the nuances of identity in 
Africa and the African diaspora, and provides useful guidance for managers 
operating in these cultures.
Chapter 4 (Gomez & Martinez) focuses on managing the Hispanic work-
force, considering cultural values, acculturation, and identity. Their review 
and analysis suggests that Hispanic employees view leadership differently 
than other groups due to culturally-embedded assumptions, which suggest 
the need for the development of HQCs due to Hispanics having a relational 
perspective. The chapter highlights paternalistic leadership and interac-
tional justice as recommendations for practicing leaders to develop HQCs 
with Hispanics. These practices must acknowledge employees’ Hispanic 
identity, noting that some are more acculturated and have weaker ethnic 
identification and may be more similar to U.S. majority members.
The final chapter in this section, Chapter 5 by Goldberg, Gilson, and Ne-
sci, provides an excellent summary of theory and research on leading wom-
en and minorities. The chapter addresses unique challenges faced by wom-
en and minorities in the workplace, including the role of stereotypes. Their 
recommendations for moving forward include training to address these 
challenges, as well as to provide guidelines for managers to develop HQCs 
with diverse followers. Recognition of hiring practices is also discussed in-
cluding token hiring, creating larger pools of women and minorities, and 

14    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
creating affinity groups within organizations. By creating critical mass in 
organizations, these practices will enable greater psychological safety for 
women and minorities, which is essential for them to thrive at work. This 
chapter provides an excellent summary for many of the themes from the 
first section of the book, and provides very specific practice guidelines for 
leaders to create climates of inclusion that develop HQCs.
Age and Generations
The second section of the book addresses trends that have been noted 
for some years related to age and generations at work. Chapter 6 (Stepha-
nson) discusses the leader–member exchange (LMX) approach and how it 
can address the issues of age diversity in the workplace. This chapter exam-
ines the persistent stereotypes and discrimination of older workers, rather 
than viewing them as having unique skills and talents. The LMX approach 
is suggested as a remedy due to its focus on the uniqueness of each in-
dividual. Stereotypes are a challenge for the identity negotiation process, 
and leaders must be sensitive to them to develop HCQs with older workers. 
The key roles of leaders and human resource practitioners are highlighted 
in changing the work environment and provide needed support to older 
workers. Clear practice implications to develop trust, fairness, and ultimate-
ly enhanced productivity for older workers are presented.
The chapter by Fritzsche and Baz (Chapter 7) continues the discussion 
of leader–member relations in an aging workforce. This chapter examines 
challenges brought by the aging workforce, while focusing on the roles of 
a leader of all ages in developing HQCs with older subordinates. The chap-
ter first reviews the research related to leader behaviors and age, including 
LMX relationships when the supervisor is younger than the subordinate. 
The role of workplace ageism is discussed, followed by a discussion of the 
challenges and opportunities associated with an aging workforce. Finally, 
evidence-based recommendations for building HQCs with older workers 
are presented. Taken together, Chapters 6 and 7 provide a comprehensive 
overview of the micro- and macro-organizational issues related to identity 
as an aging worker, and how leaders can develop high-quality relationships 
with older subordinates.
Chapter 8 by Guilfor, Tribble, and Cogliser reports results of a qualita-
tive study of LMX across generations. This research was based upon so-
cial identity theory and fits with the theme of the book with respect to the 
role of leaders in negotiating identity at work. The authors suggest that 
individuals engage in behaviors that are congruent with salient aspects of 
their identities, but higher levels of organizational identification are nec-
essary for them to thrive. The research examines whether views of HQCs 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    15
are consistent across generations (baby boomers, Gen X, and Millennials). 
Generational differences in approaches to developing connections are ex-
plored, noting how the identities of the different generations might clash, 
but may also complement one another. Since Millennials now comprise the 
largest group in the U.S. workforce, understanding these differences is es-
sential knowledge for leaders and mentors.
The final chapter in the section on age and generations is by Rudolph 
and Zacher (Chapter 9). This chapter “sets the record straight” by debunk-
ing several common myths and misconceptions about generations at work. 
Next, a lifespan developmental perspective is presented that addresses the 
process of leading workers of different ages. This approach is consistent 
with the POS lens of growth and development, and the authors argue that 
this approach is more useful for leading an age-diverse workforce than the 
model of generational differences. The chapter concludes with best prac-
tice recommendations based on this lifespan perspective.
Emerging Trends
The final section of the book addresses recent and emerging trends in 
leading diversity. First, the chapter on LMX and autism by Hurley-Hanson 
and Ginnantonio addresses one of the stigmas that has been discussed in 
the identity literature. The authors note that over the next decade, close 
to half a million people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) will reach 
adulthood and enter the workforce (Chapter 10), yet, there is almost no 
research on the work experiences of employees with ASD and how they 
may develop HQCs. Leaders play an important role in the success of ASD 
followers, and several relevant leadership theories are reviewed comment-
ing on how they may be employed to create effective working relationships 
between leaders and their employees with ASD. The authors conclude by 
urging leaders to consider practices to support ASD employees, including 
diversity and inclusion training for coworkers, managers, and supervisors; 
understanding the costs of accommodating employees with ASD as well as 
the benefits; encouraging leaders to develop empathy; developing mentor-
ing programs for employees with ASD; and examining all the company’s 
human resource programs and policies toward attention to this group.
Chapter 11 discusses the emerging trend of building inclusive workplac-
es for transgendered employees (Tejeda). This stigmatized identity group 
faces challenges at the workplaces that are not yet well understood. This 
chapter is a breakthrough work that explores how workforces maintain gen-
der essentialism and reinforce stereotypical representations that restrain 
gender identity and expression. A useful typology of gender identity and 
expression is presented that focuses predominantly on transgender issues 

16    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
in the workplace. The chapter then explores how the development of HQCs 
may provide a mechanism for dismantling the coded privilege within the 
workplace and promote inclusivity. Recommendations and considerations 
for organizations and leaders to promote such inclusiveness are presented.
The final chapter discusses how dynamic changes in technology can 
be leveraged to enhance diversity initiatives (Chapter 12). This chapter 
focuses on the scientific communities’ response to social media and the 
importance of diversity for innovation. Specific details are provided about 
a social media platform to connect scientists for the purposes of increas-
ing representation of diverse groups in the innovation process. The role of 
social media as an influence on our world cannot be understated, and this 
chapter offers a cutting-edge view of how it can be harnessed as a positive 
force for creating HQCs and change.
IMPLICATIONS FOR ORGANIZATIONS, LEADERS, 
LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT, AND LEADING DIVERSITY
Diversity has been associated with many organizational benefits, including 
being more innovative, and some organizations can have up to 95% higher 
return on equity if they have a more diverse executive board (Grillo, 2014). 
Diversity provides everyone involved a broader view of issues and problems 
as well as different approaches to consider. Creativity and innovation are fun-
damentally important for organizations to reinvent themselves in these con-
stantly changing times, and diversity enables organizations to be more broadly 
creative and innovative. If organizations can capitalize on diversity from a stra-
tegic perspective, it enables the organization, its leadership, and workforce to 
have a more creative, innovative, and customer-focused approach to success.
Yet diversity efforts have continued to fail, as exemplified by the mil-
lions of dollars paid out by corporations due to discrimination, and partly 
due to using old approaches to solving 21st century challenges (Dobbin 
& Kalev, 2016). Organizations and their leadership need to look at diver-
sity from a systemic and holistic perspective while providing the leadership 
commitment and support, and not just lip service. An example is for an 
organization to have employee resources groups (ERG) that are one piece 
of a bigger organizational commitment. However, it does not help the or-
ganization and hinders leadership’s credibility if they claim to have ERGs 
for women, Latinos, and other minority groups, but have minimal leader 
representation at the organizational level of these groups.
Taking a systemic and organizational change approach will position or-
ganizations better for success. First, organizations need to ensure they have 
a clear vision of why the organization wants to be a leader on diversity, 
this will help articulate “where” the organization is headed and minimize 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    17
confusion. The organization needs to ensure its leadership team and work-
force overall have the right skills in order to work in an increasingly diverse 
workforce, which will help minimize anxiety as to why the change is hap-
pening. Everyone from top to bottom in an organization needs to have an 
incentive to accept being a diverse organization to minimize resistance by 
implementing gradual change. All employees need to be provided with the 
resources to work effectively in a changing diverse workforce to minimize 
frustration. Finally, leaders and their workforce need to have an action plan 
in order to achieve change and diversity and to minimize false starts.
Many organizations and their leadership claim to be diversity friendly 
and recognize that diversity is not only good for business, but a good moral 
issue to embrace. It not only helps organizations but society overall. Orga-
nizations have to take a proactive and systemic approach to diversity and 
treat it as a major change effort to minimize resistance. Most employees 
resist change because they don’t like it, don’t understand it, or don’t like 
the deliverer of change (Maurer, 2010). This can be seen as progressive IT 
companies like Twitter and Pinterest struggle with aligning diversity and 
strategic efforts in the 21st century (Wells, 2016).
Trying the same thing and expecting different results has been defined 
as insanity. And while eliminating bias is a noble cause, it seems to have not 
worked as extensively as most would like. All one has to do is watch the 5 
o’clock news or read various Internet articles to see what still occurs in so-
ciety, along with the constant news of companies getting sued for discrimi-
nation. What some suggest is that a better approach would go beyond the 
focus on reducing biases and also focus on changing the way leaders recruit 
and promote (Morse, 2016). It is important to note that different audiences 
look at the topic of diversity differently. For example, Millennials consider 
diversity to be about inclusion and valuing varying employee perspectives, 
while older workers tend to believe diversity is about equitable representa-
tion and assimilation (Burrell, 2016). This raises the issue of ensuring there 
is a similar understanding regarding what the organization and its leader-
ship mean by diversity. The top management team must communicate that 
diversity goes beyond race and gender and Affirmative Action and Equal 
Employment Opportunities (EEO). Organizations cannot skim past these 
fundamental and legal issues since studies continue to find discrepancies 
linked to race, gender, and ethnicity in job interviews (Burrell, 2016). What 
organizations need to consider is a new approach to diversity for its leaders, 
leadership development, and its changing workforce especially when tried 
ways from the past don’t seem to be as effective.
Part of the leadership development process for organizations needs to be 
beyond leadership training development workshops. It needs to ensure that 
this process is part of a bigger systemic effort that includes accountability, re-
wards, and 360-degree feedback, and that the effort is transparent to all. This 

18    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
can enable an organization create an organizational culture that is healthy 
and helps the organizational brand by making an engaging workplace envi-
ronment. Taking a holistic view and a systemic approach to engagement can 
help in this effort. This means an organization must ensure it has competent 
managers in order to minimize underperformance; that there are clear and 
contextual goals in order to minimize confusion and missed deadlines; that 
there are objective metrics to ensure minimizing a disgruntled workforce; 
that there are right and adequate resources so as to minimize frustration; 
and last, that there is an environment that enables autonomy in order to 
minimize the feeling of being micromanaged (Cardius, 2014).
How leaders treat a staff who is different than themselves will impact en-
gagement and turnover (Jones & Harter, 2005). In addition, organizational 
leadership must not lose sight of the fact that engaged employees should 
have a strong connection with their organization, and that engagement 
serves as a driver for organizational success (Lockwood, 2007). How lead-
ers treat their subordinates who have ethnic, gender, age differences, and 
other identities can create an engaged environment that can lead to success 
all the way around the organization. Leader effectiveness has been linked 
to diversity, particularly collectivism when using the LMX model (Herrera, 
Duncan, Ree, & Williams, 2013). So not only does an organization need to 
focus on its diversity strategic efforts, it must also focus on the leader–mem-
ber relationships. This dual approach enhances the chances of success in 
the pursuit of diversity as a business imperative. One way to consider this is 
to take a three-pronged approach to engaging managers on the front end 
and throughout the journey, expose them to different groups, and encour-
age social accountability and change (Dobbin & Kellev, 2016).
Organizations need to learn to harness the power of diversity and take 
advantage of their growing diverse workforces, including Millennials of 
which the Latino Millennials make up a large segment of this new work-
force (Coulombe & Gil, 2016). Diversity is not only both a moral and busi-
ness imperative, it also helps the company brand gain free public relations 
by becoming a great place for a diverse workforce and a great organization 
to work for that is perceived as being a workplace of fairness, high morale, 
and inclusion (Fortune, 2016). The organizations that do not take this im-
perative will do so at their own peril, and this could lead to them being on 
the list of Fortune 500 organizations that won’t exist in the future.
CONCLUSION
We have provided an overview of this much-needed book that updates the-
ory, research, and practice on leading diversity. Our hope is that this book 
will not only provide additional insights from a global and more progressive 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    19
view in the 21st century, but also will provide readers with more questions 
and considerations for implementation within their own or client organiza-
tions. Leadership and diversity are topics that keep evolving. This is partly 
due to changing times and changing demographics. Worker expectations 
are dramatically changing, and organizations and their leadership must 
adapt, evolve, and keep pace (Mackey & Sisodia, 2014). We have reached 
a point where diversity is definitely beyond race and gender, but it remains 
crucial as present and future leaders work to be more effective and cre-
ate an engaged workforce, maximize diversity and inclusion, enable their 
respective organizations to be great places to work, and work to achieve 
organizational success in this new era of work, or as some have called it 
the fourth industrial revolution (Gray, 2016). Going forward, leaders must 
remember that everyone lights up a room, some when they walk in and 
others when they walk out. Which ones do they want to be? What will be 
their brand as a leader, and how effective will they be at leading a diverse, 
inclusive, and engaged workforce in the 21st century? Successful leaders of 
the future will need to be emotionally agile and focused on results while be-
ing transparent, accountable, and forward thinking. They must do so while 
ensuring they are making the workplace a positive experience and being 
more concerned about what employees do versus where they do it while 
maximizing diversity at work (Meister & Mulcahy, 2016). We hope this book 
provides some current insights and reflective points to consider in leading 
the workforce of the future.
REFERENCES
Augustine, N., Barrett, C., Cassell, G., Chu, S., Gates, R., Grasmick, N., . . . Zare, R. 
(2007). Rising above the gathering storm: Energizing and employing America for a 
brighter economic future. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Allen, T. D., Shockley, K. M., & Poteat, L. (2010). Protégé anxiety attachment and 
feedback in mentoring relationships.  Journal of Vocational Behavior,  77(1), 
73–80.
Besi, A., & Glatzhofer, P. (2016). Reducing turnover starts with hiring and develop-
ing great leaders (A white paper). Retrieved from: http://www.selectinterna-
tional.com/whitepaper-reducing-turnover-starts-with-hiring-and-developing-
great-leaders
Bettencourt, B., Charlton, K., Dorr, N., & Hume, D. L. (2001). Status differences 
and in-group bias: A meta-analytic examination of the effects of status sta-
bility, status legitimacy, and group permeability. Psychological Bulletin, 127(4), 
520–542.
Boehm, S. A., & Dwertmann, D. J. (2015). Forging a single-edged sword: Facilitating 
positive age and disability diversity effects in the workplace through leadership, 
positive climates, and HR practices. Work, Aging and Retirement, 1(1), 41–63.

20    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
Morse, G. (2016). Designing a bias-free organization: It’s easier to change your 
processes than your people [An interview with Iris Bohnet]. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, July–August, 62–67. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2016/07/
designing-a-bias-free-organization
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Separation, anxiety and anger (Vol. 2). New 
York, NY: Basic Books.
Brennan, K. A., Clark, C. L., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Self-report measurement of 
adult attachment. In J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory 
and close relationships. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Burrell, L. (2016). We just can’t handle diversity: A research roundup. Harvard Busi-
ness Review. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2016/07/we-just-cant-handle 
-diversity
Cameron, K. S., & Caza, A. (2004). Introduction contributions to the discipline 
of positive organizational scholarship. American Behavioral Scientist, 47(6), 
731–739.
Cameron, K., & Dutton, J. (Eds.). (2003). Positive organizational scholarship: Founda-
tions of a new discipline. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Cardius, M. (2014). The five levers of employee engagement. Retrieved from https://
mikecardus.com/the-5-levers-of-employee-engagement-2/
Carmeli, A., & Gittell, J. H. (2009). High-quality relationships, psychological safety, 
and learning from failures in work organizations. Journal of Organizational Be-
havior, 30(6), 709–729.
Carmeli, A., Brueller, D., & Dutton, J. E. (2009). Learning behaviors in the work-
place: The role of high-quality interpersonal relationships and psychological 
safety. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 26(1), 81–98.
Chew, J. (January, 2012). Fortune 500 extinction. Retrieved from http://csinvesting.
org/2012/01/06/fortune-500-extinction/
Collins, J. (2001). Good to great: Why some companies make the leap. New York, NY: 
HarperCollins.
Colvin, G. (2016). Humans are underrated: What high achievers know that brilliant ma-
chines never will. New York, NY: Penguin.
Coulombe, K., & Gil, W. (2016). The changing U.S. workforce: The growing Hispanic de-
mographic and the workplace. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/hr-today/
trends-and-forecasting/research-and-surveys/pages/chci-growing-hispanic-
demographic-report.aspx
Creary, S. J., Caza, B. B., & Roberts, L. M. (2015). Out of the box? How managing a 
subordinate’s multiple identities affects the quality of a manager–subordinate 
relationship. Academy of Management Review, 40(4), 538–562.
Cummings, & B. Staw. (Eds.). Research in organizational behavior, 9, 175–208. Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.
Dobbin, F., & Kalev, A. (2016). Why diversity programs fail. And what works better. Re-
trieved from https://hbr.org/2016/07/why-diversity-programs-fail
Dutton, J. E., & Heaphy, E. D. (2003). The power of high-quality connections. In 
K. S. Cameron, J. E. Dutton, & R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational 
scholarship: Foundations of a new discipline (pp. 263–278). San Francisco, CA: 
BerrettKoehler.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    21
Dutton, J. E., & Ragins, B. 2007. Exploring positive relationships at work: Building a 
theoretical and research foundation. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ensher, E. A., Thomas, C., & Murphy, S. E. (2001). Comparison of traditional, step-
ahead, and peer mentoring on protégés’ support, satisfaction, and percep-
tions of career success: A social exchange perspective. Journal of Business and 
Psychology, 15(3), 419–438.
Fletcher, J. K. (1999). Disappearing acts. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.
Fletcher, J. K., & Ragins, B. R. (2007). Stone center relational cultural theory: A 
window on relational mentoring. In B. R. Ragins & K. E. Kram (Eds.), The 
handbook of mentoring at work: Theory research and practice. Thousand Oaks: CA. 
SAGE.
Fortune. (2016). Best workplaces for diversity 2016. Retrieved from: https://www.
greatplacetowork.com/best-workplaces/diversity/2016/default
Fortune. (2016). The future of work is. Retrieved from http://fortune.com/future 
-work-jobs-industries/
Friedman, R. (2015). The best place to work: The art and science of creating an extraordi-
nary workplace. New York, NY: Penguin.
Gentry, W., Eckert, R., Stawiski, S., & Zhao, S. (2016). The challenges leaders face around 
the world: More similar than different (White paper). Retrieved from http:// 
insights.ccl.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/04/ChallengesLeadersFace.pdf
Gersick, C. J., Dutton, J. E., & Bartunek, J. M. (2000). Learning from academia: 
The importance of relationships in professional life. Academy of Management 
Journal, 43(6), 1026–1044.
Graen, G. B., Orris, J. B., & Johnson, T. W. (1973). Role assimilation processes in a 
complex organization. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 3, 395–420.
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. A. (1987). Toward a psychology of dyadic organizing. 
In L. L. Cummings, & B. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 9, 
175–208. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Gray, A. (2016). The 10 skills you need to thrive in the fourth industrial revolution. Re-
trieved from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-10-skills-you 
-need-to-thrive-in-the-fourth-industrial-revolution
Grillo, G. (2014). Diverse workforces are more innovative. Retrieved from https://
www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/mar/27/
diversity-innovation-startups-fortune-500-companies
Herrera, R., Duncan, P., Ree, M., & Williams, K. (2013). Diversity as a predictor of 
leadership effectiveness. Journal of Diversity Management, 8(1), 1–14.
Hesselbein, F., & Goldsmith, M. (Ed.). (2009). The organization of the future 2: Visions, 
strategies, and insights on managing in a new era. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. 2000. Social identity and self-categorization processes in 
organizational contexts. Academy of Management Review, 25, 121–140.
Homans, G. C. (1958). Social behavior as exchange. American Journal of Sociology, 
597–606.
Hornsey, M. J., & Hogg, M. A. (2000). Assimilation and diversity: An integrative 
model of subgroup relations. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4(2), 
143–156.

22    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
Ibarra, H. (1995). Race, opportunity, and diversity of social circles in managerial 
networks. Academy of Management Journal, 38(3), 673–703.
Ibarra, H. (1997). Paving an alternative route: Gender differences in managerial 
networks. Social Psychology Quarterly, 91–102.
James, J. (2015). Data never sleeps 3.0. Retrieved from https://www.domo.com/
blog/data-never-sleeps-3-0/
Jones, J., & Harter, J. (2005). Race effects on the employee engagement-turnover 
intention relationship. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 11(2), 
78–88.
Krogstad, J. M., Lopez, M. H., López, G., Passel, J. S., & Patten, E. (2016). Mil-
lennials make up almost half of Latino eligible voters in 2016: Youth, naturaliza-
tions drive number of Hispanic eligible voters to record 27.3 million. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2016/01/19/millennials-make-up-almost-half 
-of-latino-eligible-voters-in-2016/
Lankau, M. J., & Scandura, T. A. (2002). An investigation of personal learning in 
mentoring relationships: Content, antecedents, and consequences. Academy 
of Management Journal, 45(4), 779–790.
Lockwood, N. (2007). Leveraging employee engagement for competitive advantage: HR’s stra-
tegic role. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/india/hr-topics-and-strategy/ 
employee-advocacy-relations-and-engagement/documents/07marresearch 
quarterly.pdf
Mackey, J., & Sisodia, R. (2014). Conscious capitalism: Liberating the heroic spirit of busi-
ness. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School.
Maurer, R. (2010). Beyond the wall of resistance. Austin, TX: Bard Press.
McNulty, S. E., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (1994). Identity negotiation in roommate rela-
tionships: The self as architect and consequence of social reality. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1012–1023
Meister, J., & Mulcahy, K. (2017). The future workplace experience: 10 rules for master-
ing disruption in recruiting and engaging employees. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Morgan, J. (2014). The future of work: Attract new talent, build better leaders, and create a 
competitive organization. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Mouriño, E. (2014). The perfect human capital storm: Workplace challenges and opportu-
nities in the 21st century. North Charleston, SC: CreateSpace.
Radicati. S. (2014). Mobile statistics report, 2014–2018. Retrieved from http://www.
radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Mobile-Statistics-Report-
2014-2018-Executive-Summary.pdf
Ragins, B. R. (2008). Disclosure disconnects: Antecedents and consequences of dis-
closing invisible stigmas across life domains. Academy of Management Review, 
33(1), 194–215.
Ragins, B. (2009). Positive identities in action: A model of mentoring self-structures 
and the motivation to mentor. In L. M. Roberts & J. E. Dutton (Eds.), Explor-
ing positive identities and organizations: Building a theoretical and research founda-
tion (pp. 237–264). New York, NY: Routledge.
Ragins, B. R., Singh, R., & Cornwell, J. M. (2007). Making the invisible visible: Fear 
and disclosure of sexual orientation at work. The Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 92(4), 1103–1118.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century    23
Roberts, L. M., Cha, S. E., Hewlin, P. F., & Settles, I. H. (2009). Bringing the in-
side out: Enhancing authenticity and positive identity in organizations. In 
L. M. Roberts & J. E. Dutton (Eds.), Exploring positive identities and organiza-
tions: Building a theoretical and research foundation (pp. 149–170). New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Rock, D. (2013). Why organizations fail. Fortune. Retrieved from http://fortune.
com/2013/10/23/why-organizations-fail/
Rodriguez, R. (2007). Latino talent-effective strategies to recruit, retain, and develop his-
panic professionals. New York, NY: Wiley.
Schroeder, L. (2015). Redefining the college degree. Chief Learning Officer Maga-
zine. Retrieved from http://www.clomedia.com/2015/11/23/redefining-the 
-college-degree/
Seligman, M. E. (1999). The president’s address. American Psychologist, 54(8), 559–562.
Shervani, T. (2015). The workforce of the future. Retrieved from http://www.ey.com/
Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-the-workforce-of-the-future/$File/ey-the-work-
force-of-the-future.pdf
Sluss, D. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (2007). Relational identity and identification: De-
fining ourselves through work relationships.  Academy of Management Re-
view, 32(1), 9–32.
Spreitzer, G., Sutcliffe, K., Dutton, J., Sonenshein, S., & Grant, A. M. (2005). A social-
ly embedded model of thriving at work. Organization Science, 16(5), 537–549.
Strack, R. (2014). The workforce crisis of 2030 and how to start solving it now. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ted.com/talks/rainer_strack_the_surprising_workforce_
crisis_of_2030_and_how_to_start_solving_it_now
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into harmony with 
the self. In J. Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Social psychological perspectives on 
the self (Vol. 2; pp. 33–66). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1987). Identity negotiation: Where two roads meet. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 53, 1038–1051.
Swann, W. B., Jr (2005). The self and identity negotiation. Interaction Studies, 6(1), 
69–83.
Swann, W. B., Jr., & Ely, R. J. (1984). A battle of wills: Self-verification versus behav-
ioral confirmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 1287–1302.
Swann, W. B., Jr., & Hill, C. A. (1982). When our identities are mistaken: Reaf-
firming self- conceptions through social interaction. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 43, 59–66.
Swann, W. B., Jr., Milton, L. P., & Polzer, J. T. (2000). Should we create a niche or fall 
in line? Identity negotiation and small group effectiveness. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 79, 238–250.
Swann, W. B., Jr., Polzer, J. T., Seyle, D. C., & Ko, S. J. (2004). Finding value in diver-
sity: Verification of personal and social self-views in diverse groups. Academy of 
Management Review, 29, 9–27.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. 
In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (2nd ed.; 
pp. 7–24). Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.
Tapscott, D. (2008). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

24    T. A. SCANDURA and E. MOURIÑO-RUIZ
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. Oxford, Eng-
land: John Wiley.
Thomas, R. (1992). Beyond race and gender: Unleashing the power of your total workforce 
by managing diversity. New York, NY: Amacom.
Troester, C., & van Knippenberg, D. (2012). Leader openness, nationality dissimi-
larity, and voice in multinational management teams. Journal of International 
Business Studies, 43, 591–613.
Wang, S., Noe, R. A., Wang, Z. M., & Greenberger, D. B. (2009). What affects will-
ingness to mentor in the future? An investigation of attachment styles and 
mentoring experiences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74(3), 245–256.
Wells, G. (2016). Tech companies delay diversity reports to rethink goals. Retrieved 
from http://www.wsj.com/articles/tech-companies-delay-diversity-reports-to 
-rethink-goals-1480933984
Young, A. M., & Perrewé, P. L. (2000). The exchange relationship between mentors 
and protégés: The development of a framework. Human Resource Management 
Review, 10(2), 177–209.

SECTION I
WOMEN AND MINORITIES

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 27–54
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
27
CHAPTER 1
GENDER AS A DEEP-LEVEL, 
COMMUNICATED, AND 
INTERACTIONAL CONSTRUCT
Implications for Leaders, Subordinates, 
and Teammates
Frankie J. Weinberg
Loyola University
A. O’Shea Cleveland
Louisiana State University
ABSTRACT
Although variance among individuals’ communication styles is considered by 
the Society of Human Resource Management (SHRM, n.d.) to contribute to 
organizational diversity as a unique individual characteristic, there remains 
little guidance on how workforce practitioners may effectively lead efforts as-
sociated with this form of deep-level, interactional diversity. This chapter will 
describe gendered communication styles (GCOM) as a form of deep-level 
diversity that has important organizational implications. The authors will ini-

28    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
tially introduce a typology of GCOM congruent with gender schema theory 
(Bem, 1974) and discuss the various multilevel influences that inspire GCOM 
styles in the workplace. Building on these models, a series of taxonomies will 
be presented in which GCOM is considered a social process that manifests 
as a variety of communicative orientations. The implications of these com-
municative orientations are discussed in terms of interactional effectiveness 
between two or more individuals, and several suggestions for leaders, manag-
ers, and their subordinates are offered.
GENDER AS A DEEP-LEVEL DIVERSITY CHARACTERISTIC
In the interest of inclusivity and to embrace ongoing societal and cultural 
changes, many organizations have recognized the importance of foster-
ing an expanded definition of diversity that moves beyond visible or sur-
face-level differences to include “an infinite range of individuals’ unique 
characteristics and experiences, including communication styles” (Society 
for Human Resource Management, n.d.). Communication is considered 
a dynamic and systemic process that at once reflects both content (lit-
eral meaning) and relationship (the communicator’s self-attribution and 
perceptions, and metaperceptions referent to the intended recipient[s]) 
(Shectman & Kenny, 1994; Wood, 2013). In other words, one’s commu-
nication style encompasses (a) what the communicator is saying, (b) how 
the communicator perceives herself, (c) how the communicator perceives 
the intended recipient, and (d) the communicator’s perception of what the 
recipient thinks about her. As a result, one’s communication style serves as 
a manifestation of deep-level (less readily apparent, attitudinal) diversity, 
which is understood to have a substantial effect on functioning of work-
place relationships (Harrison, Price, & Bell, 1998; Harrison, Price, Gavin, 
& Florey, 2002; Phillips, Northcraft, & Neale, 2006; Riordan, 2000; Tepper, 
Moss, & Duffy, 2011).
One form of communication practice that has been shown to have im-
portant organizational implications is gendered communication styles 
(GCOM) among employees. Referent to the sex-typed (male/female) bi-
nary and congruent with gender schema theory’s concept of gender as a so-
cially constructed performance (Bem, 1974; Mumby, 2006), GCOM repre-
sents the externalized enactment of gender along stereotypical masculine 
and feminine dimensions. Drawing on discourse-driven theories of socially-
constructed gender, Weinberg, Treviño, and Cleveland (2015) deducted 
and organized several characteristics that previous research had used to 
describe masculine communication (MCOM) and feminine communica-
tion (FCOM) styles. Specifically, MCOM encompasses assertive, egocentric, 
abstract, and instrumental facets, while FCOM encompasses egalitarian, 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    29
compassionate, concrete, and relational facets (for a comprehensive re-
view, see Weinberg et al., 2015).
Consideration of gender as a communicated, deep-level characteristic 
enables us to strengthen our conceptualization of the gender construct 
by expanding beyond some of the boundaries associated with sex-typed 
categorizing. As elaborated by Cañas and Sondak (2014), “Diversity affili-
ations are often portrayed as absolute and clearly distinct;” yet this type of 
essentialist thinking reduces our capacity to consider diversity as a “fluid, 
continuous, and indefinite” concept necessary to encompass the expand-
ed definition of diversity (p. 12). Importantly, as displayed in Figure 1.1, 
GCOM maintains consideration of the gendered binary, but shifts the ma-
jority focus of the conversation from male-female to masculine-feminine. 
This focus acknowledges the importance of enacted gender as emergent 
from social situations, and serves to legitimize the fundamental gender 
division present in today’s society (West & Zimmerman, 2003). In so do-
ing, it enables a more elaborate understanding of masculine and feminine 
styles as a two-dimensional paradigm, rather than as two ends of a single 
continuum (Bem, 1974; Wood, 2013).
The purpose of this chapter is to draw on the multifaceted GCOM con-
struct to consider the important role that communicative interaction with-
in the binary plays in organizational life. Specifically, the objectives of this 
chapter are as follows:
•	 to introduce the reader to an expanded conceptualization of or-
ganizational diversity that includes gender as a deep-level, socially 
constructed, and communicated performance,
•	 to outline several influences in the organizational environment that 
shape expectations for and motivations to engage in gendered com-
munication, and
•	 to describe how gendered communication manifests as a social pro-
cess that influences interactional effectiveness in organizations.
In order to realize these objectives, we must begin by visualizing gendered 
communication as a two-dimensional paradigm.
As evidenced in Figure 1.1, the masculine and feminine dimensions of 
gendered communication are orthogonal; that is, they are statistically in-
dependent from one another, but not mutually exclusive (Leaper & Ayres, 
2007; Palomares, 2016). Thus, any expressed communication could be cat-
egorized simultaneously along the masculine and feminine dimensions, 
such that the placement of any uttered communication onto this two-di-
mensional map will depend on both the degrees to which the communica-
tion is characterized as high/low masculine and high/low feminine. For 
instance, a statement such as, “I need to meet with you right now,” which 

30    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
expresses largely egocentric and assertive connotations, would fall into the 
masculine (high masculine, low feminine) quadrant. On the other hand, 
the expression “I need to meet with you as soon as possible to share ideas, 
if you have time” retains some of the assertiveness and egocentric nature 
(referent to the communicator, “I”), while referring to collaborative idea 
sharing and inviting the recipient to participate in the decision to meet. 
Accordingly, this latter statement could be categorized in the androgynous 
(high masculine, high feminine) quadrant in Figure 1.1. It is important 
to recognize that although the terms masculine and feminine refer to ste-
reotypic attributes of men and women respectively, these gendered com-
munication categorizations remain independent from one’s biological sex. 
Further, it is possible that although individuals may each have a preferred 
communication style, men and women both may employ varying gendered 
communication styles to meet the needs of different situations and con-
texts. For these reasons, current research has, for the most part, withdrawn 
from asking essentialist questions
regarding women’s versus men’s workplace communication styles [and] has 
largely given way to the idea that gendered organizational identities are so-
cially constructed, and that these processes of construction are political, rou-
tine, and at the very core of the dialectics of power and resistance that charac-
terize organizational life. (Mumby, 2006, p. 94)
Figure 1.1  Gendered communication style as a two-dimensional paradigm.

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    31
CURRENT STATE OF GENDERED COMMUNICATION 
APPLICATION AND RESEARCH
Although gendered communication has a long and rich history within the 
field of feminist communicology (cf. Ashcraft & Mumby, 2004; Ashcraft, 
2014), we will focus this section on the application of gendered communica-
tion styles in workplace-specific interactions. It is worth noting that despite 
the recognized distinction between men/masculinity and women/femi-
ninity, the authors have encountered a considerable number of missteps 
whereby even academics trained in diversity research neglect to properly 
distinguish sex from gender. This is complicated further by the existence 
of an ongoing stream of inquiry surrounding differences between men 
and women in the workplace, and alternative types of diversity research 
such as gender identity and sexual orientation. As recently elaborated by 
President Barack Obama, “Gender stereotypes affect all of us, regardless 
of our gender, gender identity, or sexual orientation” (2016). Throughout 
the remainder of this chapter, it is important that the reader put aside ex-
pectations of sex-based differences and similarities, and focus on employ-
ees’ gendered communication styles and preferences above and beyond 
consideration of their biological sex or identification. That is not to say 
that sex-based differences are irrelevant; indeed, research suggests that the 
interaction of one’s biological sex and enacted gender roles may have im-
portant implications for several organizational outcomes, including career 
advancement and leadership effectiveness (Johnson, Murphy, Zewdie, & 
Reichardt, 2008; Smith, Weinberg, & Treviño, 2014).
While scholarly thinking has increased in complexity and has simultane-
ously advanced to represent shifts in individual and societal attitudes over 
the years, several basic components of gendered communication theory 
have remained relatively stable. Specifically, (a) gender is a socially con-
structed and performed/communicated construct separate from one’s bio-
logical sex and ranging along the binary depicted in Figure 1.1; (b) there 
exist gendered norms regarding expectations for behavior and deviations 
from those norms; (c) gendered communication is relevant to meaning-
making; and (d) the way in which gendered communication is interpreted 
and perceived are situationally and culturally bound.
Early research “sought to expose and challenge biased perceptions that 
block women from climbing the hierarchy,” focusing largely on similarities 
between men and women, and making the case that training standardiza-
tion could encourage equal treatment between the sexes (Ashcraft, 2014, 
p. 128). The influence of this early focus has been far reaching: For over 
four decades, literature on advancement, gender, and communication has 
called for training employees to use a masculine communication style con-
sistent with a think leader, think male stereotype (Dow & Wood, 2006). These 

32    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
suggestions stem largely from Lakoff’s (1975) study of women’s language in 
which she concludes: “If we [women] are aware of what we’re doing, why 
we’re doing it, and the effects our actions have on ourselves and everyone 
else, we will have the power to change” (p. 83). Her conclusion “inspired 
classes and workshops that encouraged women to learn to be more asser-
tive, strong communicators (i.e., to speak more like men)” (Wood, 2006, 
p. 3). Naturally, this type of training and associated expectations prompted 
the “endorsement of agentic and task-oriented leadership characteristics 
for women” (Duehr & Bono, 2006, p. 815). Such workshops remain com-
monplace today; in fact, a 2016 Google search for the term “workshop and 
speak and assertively” yields approximately 1.4 million results. The preva-
lence of this type of training, however, lends to the tacit assumption that 
assertive communication styles typically associated with men are superior to 
those typically expressed by women (Wood, 2013). Whether this preference 
for masculine-dominant organizational communication is an appropriate 
default has begun to be brought to question.
The controversy regarding universal applicability of gender role theory 
and appropriateness of masculine communication at work has been sum-
marized recently by Anne-Marie Slaughter, formerly the director of policy 
planning at the State Department and dean of Princeton’s Woodrow Wilson 
School of Public and International Affairs:
I continually push the young women in my classes to speak more. They must 
gain the confidence to value their own insights and questions, and to present 
them readily. My husband agrees, but he actually tries to get the young men 
in his classes to act more like the women—to speak less and listen more. If 
women are ever to achieve real equality as leaders, then we have to stop ac-
cepting male behavior and male choices as the default and the ideal. (Slaugh-
ter, 2012, p. 102)
This focus may be described as a different but equal versus a different but 
superior framing; a framing that has resulted in myriad studies that began 
to consider the politicization of gender at work, power relations among or-
ganizational members, and restoration of the value of things associated with 
women and femininity (Ashcraft, 2006, 2014). Indeed, some research has 
begun to offer an alternative perspective that femininity may offer advan-
tages in the workplace. Building on this stream of thought, organizational 
studies of gender differences have started to unravel the think manager, 
think masculine/male mindset, and have postulated that deviance from the 
masculine norm could at times be construed as positive. These studies have 
found that employees often prefer feminine qualities in their leaders (El-
sesser & Lever, 2011), that effective leadership often incorporates elements 
of both feminine and masculine communication behaviors (Eagly & Carli, 
2007; Eagly, Johannesen-Schmidt, & van Engen, 2003; Fletcher, 1999), and 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    33
that both masculine and feminine communication styles are uniquely relat-
ed to positive career outcomes (Weinberg et al., 2015). From this stream of 
research, it is clear that both styles of communication are necessary toward 
effectiveness in organizations and their teams (Wood, 2013).
While gender difference studies focus almost entirely on the individual 
as the unit of analysis, research with its basis in systems theory has begun 
to take a more macrolevel, embedded approach to the discussion of en-
acted gender at work. Beginning with standpoint theory, which incorporates 
consideration of contextual factors, researchers (e.g., Allen, 1996; Dough-
erty, 1999) have begun to view organizing as a fundamentally communica-
tive phenomenon. Such research suggests that “our ways of knowing and 
communicating are influenced by our contexts . . . as our contexts change, 
so might our ways of thinking, communicating, and performing . . . gender” 
(Wood, 2013, p. 244). Building on this consideration of context as an influ-
ential factor, Smith et al. (2014) recently found considerable variance in the 
effectiveness of masculine and feminine communication styles by male and 
female employees when the two styles are used in organizational contexts 
characterized as either male or female dominated. This follows a mode of 
thought that organizations produce gender differences as a product of their 
formal processes and structures (Acker, 1990; Trethewey, Scott, & LeGreco, 
2006). Therefore, studies that examine gender performance in organiza-
tions benefit from considering not only the individual actor’s characteris-
tics, but also the organizational context. Communication styles are learned 
(rather than innate; Wood, 2013), and men and women have demonstrated 
the ability to develop new communicative proficiencies to serve effectively 
in their jobs (Buzzanell & Lucas, 2006). This suggests the potential for or-
ganizational members to influence the effectiveness of their interactions by 
performing gender through managed and locally situated gendered com-
munication practices (Ashcraft, 2014; West & Zimmerman, 2003).
ORGANIZATIONAL RELEVANCE
Most discussions of gender and communication in organizations take one 
of three perspectives: (a) societal expectations frame gendered expecta-
tions at work (gender as shaped by societal influences); (b) organizations as 
gendered discourse communities (gender at the organizationally-referent 
level); or (c) gender identity shapes communication habits (gender at the 
intrapersonal level). In this chapter, we acknowledge all of these respec-
tive influences on gendered communication while building the case that 
GCOM is often influenced by and determined (in)effective largely within, 
group and dyadic interactions. As displayed in Figure 1.2, several forces 

34    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
both internal and external to the organization serve to influence expecta-
tions for and motivation to engage in masculine or feminine GCOM styles.
External Influences on Gendered Communication Styles
The outermost layers in Figure 1.2 (society and industry) represent 
the more macrolevel influences on GCOM. Whereas societal perceptions 
inform gender and gendered expectations (Ashcraft & Mumby, 2004), 
societal changes serve important pivotal roles in stimulating changing 
expectations. For instance, emerging evidence suggests that today’s young-
er-generation workers tend to prefer using communication styles that are 
higher in FCOM and lower in MCOM than their older colleagues (Wein-
berg et al., 2015). Further, given that differing global societies tend to value 
high and low masculinity to varying degrees (House et al., 2004), these 
differences are likely to play an important role in setting expectations for 
gendered communication styles in contemporary multinational and vir-
tual teams. Finally, standards and expectations for GCOM expression may 
vary by industry, though one study suggests that inter-industry variance in 
GCOM styles may not be as substantial as expected (Weinberg et al., 2015). 
Occupational influence refers to an individual’s specific job, and while it 
is likely that there exists some level of standardized GCOM preferences 
Figure 1.2  Multilevel influences on gendered communication styles at work.

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    35
within a profession, organizational context may also play a role in dictating 
this. Thus, even within one particular occupation, there may be consider-
able instances of variation among communicative expectations given that 
culture “conditions attitudes toward communication and communication 
processes,” including both the creation of messages and interpretation of 
those messages (Brown & Starkey, 1994, p. 811).
For instance, whereas feminine styles of communication may be char-
acteristic of salespeople, who could benefit from building even temporary 
relationships and rapport with potential clients (relationship marketing, 
cf. Oly Ndubisi, 2004). This would likely be exacerbated in an organiza-
tional culture that encourages cooperation and discourages competition 
among sales force members. In a more competitive climate (for example, 
one in which sales commissions are based on relative rank compared to 
average sales or when communication is more oriented toward a one-time 
payout as opposed to developing a longer-term working relationship), this 
may set the stage for a tournament-like setting in which salespeople may be 
expected to employ more assertive communication strategies with clients/
customers (Verbeke, Bagozzi, & Belschak, 2016). This climate could also 
inspire egocentric communication styles among sales force members/com-
petitors when communicating with one another. Another example draws 
on the potentially considerable differences in communicative tasks that 
may be asked of a professional in one setting as compared to another; for 
instance, in the nursing profession, a school nurse, pediatric nurse, or geri-
atric care nurse might be expected to communicate in a more compassion-
ate and relational manner in their jobs due to their continual interactions 
and ongoing relationships with patients. Alternatively, an operating room 
nurse who communicates primarily with other medical practitioners in a 
high-risk setting could be expected to communicate in a more instrumental 
and necessarily assertive manner to meet the unique demands of this job, 
though one study found evidence of a structured disposition of operating 
room nurse silence that “may reflect an actualization of structured power 
dynamics” among operating room teams (Gardezi et al., 2009, p. 1397). 
By suggesting that team dynamics and occupational characteristics could 
clash, this complication serves as an example of the potential for cross-level 
effects among the various embedded levels indicated in Figure 1.2.
Internal Influences on Gendered Communication Styles
Figure 1.2 also displays several factors that are likely to influence GCOM 
expectations that are internal to the organizational environment, includ-
ing: (a) organization-level influencers such as institutionalized meanings, 
identity, and power relations owing to organizational culture and the sex 

36    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
composition of managers; (b) team-level influencers such as team task, the 
sex composition of team members, and the amount of time members have 
spent working together; (c) interpersonal influencers at the one-on-one (dy-
adic) level, including power differential, sex composition of the dyad, time 
together and the state of relationships between leaders and each member 
(i.e., leader–member exchange, LMX); and (d) intrapersonal influencers 
such as sex-based attributions, authenticity to oneself, the communicator’s 
personal motivation to engage in communication, and the communicator’s 
formal and informal organizational positioning. In keeping with this vol-
ume’s focus on leader–employee relationships, we will focus the remainder 
of this chapter largely on interpersonal communication in team and dyadic 
relationships.
Relevance to the Contemporary and Future Workplace
Several aspects of today’s changing workplace lend value to the proposi-
tion that consideration of GCOM styles is becoming increasingly important. 
For instance, as there are more women entering the workforce than ever be-
fore, this implies that while these new female employees are working their 
way into more senior positions there will likely exist several opportunities 
for opposite-sex leader-follower and mentor-protégé relationships (Wein-
berg & Lankau, 2011). Further, the popularity of team-based and flatter 
organizational structures has permeated contemporary thought on work-
place organizing. Together, these organizational changes may be contribut-
ing to a preference among U.S. workers for more feminized leadership that 
may be described as a desire to work for a strong, sensitive leader (Elsesser 
& Lever, 2011; Johnson et al., 2008). Given that people select and enact 
gendered communication styles in response to the contexts in which they 
are situated (Wood, 2013), two common forms of organizational context 
are worth elaborating on with regard to the impact that they could have on 
GCOM utilization in the workplace: dyads and teams. Thus, as gendered 
communication is an interactional and interpersonal phenomenon (West 
& Zimmerman, 2003), GCOM styles play a particularly important role at 
the team and dyadic levels, those contexts in which employees communi-
cate throughout their daily work interactions.
Dyadic Influences on Gendered Communication
Dyads are clusters consisting of two members interacting with one an-
other, these could include a leader and a follower, a mentor and a protégé, 
two coworkers, or any combination of two individuals. Dyadic relation-
ships create the backbone for patterns of communication throughout an 
organization and accordingly are the unit of analysis at which studies of 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    37
entire social networks are analyzed. Several characteristics of a dyad could 
influence the manner in which gendered communication is enacted within 
each two-person relationship. First, aligning with the notion of gender as 
an externalized performance (e.g., Butler, 2004), people are often driven 
to communicate in a way that they believe the other member would expect 
them to perform (for a review of how this may play out with regard to ex-
pectations for gendered communication at work, see Smith et al., 2014). 
The purpose of the relationship will also play an important role: In men-
toring relationships, for instance, the relationship serves two general pur-
poses: career development and sponsorship. While feminine components 
of relational and compassionate communication styles could be effective 
toward these purposes (i.e., in expressing empathy and enabling others 
to feel safe, or to display openness to personal development), masculine, 
instrumental communication could also serve an important instructional 
function. Even in a developmental dyadic relationship, each member could 
be motivated to communicate in egocentric, assertive manners at times in 
order to emphasize their authority over a specific subject matter. Mentors 
or leaders, for instance, could apply this communicative tactic early in the 
relationship to gain leadership status in the eyes of the follower who would 
attribute subject matter expertise to the leader (Chiu, Balkundi, & Wein-
berg, 2017). Alternatively, a dyad could involve two members who are in 
competition with one another in which case the relationship would likely 
foster enactment of low feminine and high masculine communication, par-
ticularly in regards to the egocentric facet.
Sex differential within a dyad is also likely to affect communication 
among the members, especially as the relationship develops in its earliest 
stages (Weinberg & Lankau, 2011). Stereotype activation is defined as “the 
increased accessibility of the constellation of attributes that are believed to 
characterize members of a given social category” (Wheeler & Petty, 2001, 
p. 797), and gender serves to affect stereotype activation (Correll & Ridge-
way, 2006). This bias is particularly salient in instances where male mem-
bers are the observers (Koenig, Eagly, Mitchell, & Ristikari, 2011). Further, 
women (men) when interacting with other women (men) may choose to 
communicate in a manner that is congruent with their biological sex in or-
der to avoid negative reactions stemming from a presumed lack of feminin-
ity (masculinity). This could result from a desire to encourage perceptions 
of similarity in the dyad. Further, in instances where one member has great-
er authority than the other, a high extent of power differential between the 
two parties could encourage these members to enact gender strategically 
as a political act (Ashcraft & Mumby, 2004). For instance, one might be 
inclined to use masculine forms of communication such as dominating the 
conversation or interrupting the other member, as these methods are asso-
ciated with improved status and influence (Farley, 2008); hence, members 

38    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
could attempt to influence decisions in the dyad by emulating the mascu-
line stereotype in this manner.
Team Influences on Gendered Communication
Likewise, team characteristics are likely to influence the styles of gen-
dered communication enacted by team members. In the early stages of team 
development, the relationship-building, collegial and affiliative character-
istics associated with feminine communication could relay one’s availabil-
ity and willingness to work as a team player, and could consequently serve 
to help the team members form an understanding of how they will work 
together. Here, clear communication of concrete reasoning (also associ-
ated with feminine communication) will help to cultivate personal connec-
tions (Wood, 2013). Beyond the foundational stages of team development, 
however, as with any work-related environment, teams tend to develop cer-
tain norms as members begin working together functionally (Allen, 1995); 
norms inherent to the group serve as tacit guidelines for behavior, includ-
ing the style of communication that is generally fostered and accepted. In 
this sense, teams may act as speech communities in which shared commu-
nicative norms result from a system of shared symbolisms, meanings, and 
experiences (Labov, 1972; Wood, 2013). Similarly, other cultural features of 
the team environment could influence the ways in which members commu-
nicate with one another; for instance, whether there exists a team culture 
of support, competitiveness, or indifference toward other members. Group 
norms and perceptions of those norms are also likely to be linked to the 
sex composition within the team, such that acting in a manner that is ste-
reotypically linked to the dominant sex group is a tactic that members may 
choose to employ to gain favor (Tharenou, 1997).
Further, the purpose of the team will play a role in influencing members’ 
communication styles. For instance, if the team faces shared goals for which 
all members expect to be collectively rewarded, members are more likely 
to employ feminine, egalitarian communication that relinquishes control, 
empowers others, and encourages productive discourse toward navigating 
dilemmas more so than in instances where the team goal is not entirely 
shared (Ashcraft, 2000). Also, if the team’s purpose is to follow specified 
rules to accomplish a set task, masculine communication could be called 
for; however, if the team’s purpose centers on collaborative problem solving 
or creative outcomes or presents an opportunity to create rules, feminine 
communication would be welcomed and considered useful. In a similar 
vein, team leadership style would play an important role in determining 
which communication styles are welcomed; for instance, even when a team 
leader chooses to employ a style in which each member has the opportu-
nity to build on other members’ opinions and suggestions (i.e., egalitarian, 
feminine communication), this process could be conducted with varying 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    39
degrees of group interaction, and could potentially result in advice-giving 
behaviors and/or competition for the leader’s or other members’ attention 
(i.e., egocentric masculine communication). Finally, team structuring itself 
is often associated with a flattened organizational hierarchy (Ahuja & Car-
ley, 1998) in which case feminine communication, which is associated with 
nonhierarchical career success (Weinberg et al., 2015), may be a preferred 
mode of communication.
Again, when discussing team-level influence on GCOM, it is worth noting 
potential complexities associated with potential cross-level effects referent 
to the levels of influence outlined in Figure 1.2. Specifically, various con-
figurations of dyadic relationships within the team, and the development of 
subgroups within the team could affect the degree to which overall team-
level characteristics influence the emergence of members’ GCOM styles. 
For instance, members undergo strong psychological pressure to agree 
with others who they consider to be close personal friends, and “this pres-
sure becomes [more] powerful as soon as a dyadic interaction (between 
two people) expands to include three people” (Balkundi & Kilduff, 2006, 
p. 429). Under such coalition-like conditions, two possible GCOM-related 
outcomes could come about: On one hand, it is possible that a member 
who relies upon a clique of teammate-colluders for support may be more 
likely to assert the coalition’s shared ideas by using a bold MCOM style. But 
on the other hand, if this individual is simultaneously embedded within 
several sets of mutually discrepant cliques, as happens in complex organiza-
tional environments (Balkundi & Kilduff, 2006), she might feel pressure to 
remain impartial by employing a more egalitarian FCOM style.
Toward Dyadic and Team Effectiveness
It goes without saying that gender and communication diversity can have 
an enormous effect on dyadic and team functioning (cf. Mulac, Wiemann, 
Widenmann, & Gibson, 1988; Savicki, Kelley, & Lingenfelter, 1997). How-
ever, research to date has barely scratched the surface of possibilities with 
regard to the ways in which the gendered communication binary may be 
drawn on in organizational discourse to enact a variety of goals. Specifi-
cally, by restricting research questions to only the two binary dimensions of 
masculine and feminine communication, extant studies have limited our 
capacity to imagine the possibilities of multiplex communication patterns 
among employees. The purpose of this section is to take a deeper look at 
underlying facets of MCOM and FCOM styles to provide a more nuanced 
examination of the ways in which various overlapping forms of communi-
cative gender performance (i.e., GCOM) can be utilized to influence the 
interactive functioning of organizational teams and dyadic relationships.

40    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
Communicative Orientations Emerging From Gendered 
Communication
Building on several key facets of the gendered communication construct 
presented by Weinberg et al., 2015, we have developed a number of com-
municative orientations through which GCOM is viewed as a social process. 
These communicative orientations are displayed through a series of taxo-
nomic classifications in Figures 1.3a-1.3c.
Relationship-Building and Instrumentality
As displayed in Figure 1.3a, the intersection of instrumental and relation-
ship-building communication styles produce diverse communicative orien-
tations dependent on the relative strengths of each style. Task orientation, 
represented in the upper-left quadrant, characterizes a highly instrumen-
tal and low relationship-building style. Long touted as a positive approach 
to conflict in teams (Amason, 1996), meta-analytic evidence suggests that 
this may not always be the case (De Dreu & Weingart, 2003). Task-oriented 
communication is clarity-focused, concentrating on such issues as policies, 
requirements, interpretation of the assigned task, and other aspects relat-
ed to how members should approach getting the job done. Accordingly, 
it has a reduced focus on interactional rules and interpersonal relation-
ships (i.e., issues of power dynamics, trust, and emotional states among 
members). A socializing orientation, on the other hand, involves friendly 
chatting without serving any instrumental purpose. In so doing, socializing-
oriented communication promotes a sense of togetherness within a group 
and can encourage psychosocial bonding among members.
Quiescence refers to a state of inactivity or dormancy. Accordingly, quies-
cent-oriented communication, characterized as neither highly instrumental 
nor relationship-building, involves a passive style that maintains the status 
quo without complicating issues. This passive communication style can be 
useful at times, especially when tensions in the group may be running high 
or if members have recently entered a state of agreement. Unlike quiescent-
oriented communication’s dormant characteristics, a dynamics-oriented 
communication style tends to be more action-driven. This type of commu-
nication helps to produce processes (i.e., norms, roles, and action plans) 
that simultaneously represent the group’s common goal(s) and the individ-
ual characteristics and preferences of each member. Thus dynamics-orient-
ed communication, high on both instrumental and relationship-building 
focus, can help to set the stage for a state of functional interdependence 
among members. Finally, a networking orientation, characterized as some-
what instrumental oriented and somewhat relationship-building-oriented, 
helps to build relationships that serve a purpose. Networking-oriented 
communication can at once be both self-serving (for instance, positioning 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    41
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.3  Two-dimensional taxonomies of gendered communication as a social 
process: (a) Network Orientation, (b) Cohesion Orientation, (c) Critical Orientation.

42    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
oneself in a more central position of an important social group) and help-
ful toward group efficiency, as it encourages an exchange of information 
that could produce improved intragroup transactive memory systems and 
a denser advice network (Cross, Borgatti, & Parker, 2001); that is, network-
ing orientation within group communication can enable members to have 
a better idea of who knows what and be more prepared to acquire relevant 
information from the appropriate members when needed.
Egalitarian and Egocentric/Ego-Protective
Figure 1.3b considers the intersection of a highly egocentric/ego-pro-
tective communication style (characterized as self-oriented individuals) 
with highly egalitarian (other-oriented) communication style. Self-orienta-
tion can be helpful in both dyadic and team settings for several reasons. For 
instance, such an orientation is necessary when negotiating one’s position, 
focusing attention to one’s strengths, or in circumstances where a member 
is highly confident that her approach to a task is the most effective or oth-
erwise appropriate solution. Similarly, an other-oriented standpoint can be 
equally useful toward dyadic or team effectiveness as it can serve to provide 
support for another’s ideas, provide opportunities for others to be heard, 
and can contribute to expeditious decision-making. While a noncommittal 
orientation (characterized by low egocentric and low egalitarian communi-
cation styles) may on the surface sound like an unproductive or impracti-
cal approach, this, too, can serve team functioning. By not communicating 
the merit of each member’s submitted ideas, nor believing that one’s own 
initial thoughts about an idea are necessarily correct or even defendable, 
noncommittally oriented members may enable a critical dialogue to unfold 
naturally within a dyadic or team setting.
Opposite the noncommittal orientation resides an optimization orienta-
tion, characteristic of an individual who both favors equality while heartily 
proposing and defending his or her own viewpoints. Although this may ini-
tially appear somewhat oxymoronic, this combination depicts a member who 
at once elicits and enforces equal consideration of each member’s proffered 
ideas, but upon judging the merits of one idea to be superior will aggressively 
encourage others to agree to this selected idea’s veracity. This orientation is 
optimization-driven in that it inspires swift, efficient decision making while 
encouraging full team participation, but could be considered off-putting to 
a less egocentric communicator who favors either a different idea or the op-
portunity to continue developing new alternatives. Finally, a cohesion orien-
tation refers to communication that falls in the middle of the egocentric/
ego-protective and egalitarian model. A member who enacts cohesion-orient-
ed communication may avoid the pitfalls of sharing too little (noncommittal 
orientation), administering too much (self-orientation), heavily weighting 
other members’ viewpoints (other-orientation) or putting one’s own weight 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    43
behind a single idea (optimization orientation) and could accordingly serve 
the purpose of discursively shaping the team into a united whole.
Concrete/Relational and Abstract
Although it is generally agreed that gendered communication has two 
unique dimensions (i.e., masculine and feminine) rather than existing 
along a single continuum, the one set of facets that may be considered po-
tentially the most opposite from one another are those related to concrete 
versus abstract communication. Concrete communication refers to disclo-
sure of details and concrete reasoning, which aids in cultivating a close and 
personal connection (Ashcraft & Mumby, 2004; Hall & Langellier, 1988) 
and sharing oneself via disclosure of personal details in a conversation 
(Johnson, 1996; Weinberg & Locander, 2014). Therefore, concrete com-
munication is highly related to relational discourse, in which one commu-
nicates with the purpose of creating and maintaining relationships (Wood, 
2013). Communicatively, this style emerges as having an anecdotal orienta-
tion, characterized by storytelling involving oneself and one’s own experi-
ences, and in so doing, enables a more tangible connection between com-
municator and recipient(s). Abstract communication, on the other hand, 
involves the use of impersonal, general terms that serve to distance the 
communication from personal experiences and feelings (Newman, Groom, 
Handelman, & Pennebaker, 2008). The theoretical orientation associated 
with highly abstract (and low concrete) communication can come across 
as somewhat detached from reality. While this type of communication may 
encourage innovative thinking by leaving open a range of possible inter-
pretations, the intangible nature of heavily abstract communication could 
make it difficult for some members to digest.
Yet, despite the surface opposition between abstract and concrete styles, 
we view these styles as having a potentially very useful role in organizational 
communication when applied jointly in conjunction with one another. Re-
ferred to in Figure 1.3c as relating to an applied theory orientation, this hy-
brid style of communicative positioning serves to bridge theory and reality 
and accordingly serves the important purpose of translating abstract ideas 
into practical lessons digestible to a wide audience of members whose back-
grounds and perceptions may vary. The potential importance of this trans-
lating role cannot be overstated; in the words of Werner Heisenberg, theo-
retical physicist and pioneer of quantum mechanics, “Even for the physicist 
the description in plain language will be a criterion of the degree of un-
derstanding that has been reached” (Heisenberg, 1958, p. 168). Opposite 
to an applied theory orientation is an evidence orientation, characterized 
by low abstract and low concrete/relational communication. A member 
with an evidence-oriented communication style would likely default to in-
puts involving best-available known alternatives and draw on the advice of 

44    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
experts when contributing to the conversation. Finally, a critical orientation 
is characterized as falling within the midpoint of the abstract-concrete/rela-
tional model without prescribing to either ideological approach. A critical 
approach is pragmatically integrative and as a result, someone who leans 
toward a critical orientation would likely view communication as an oppor-
tunity to at once express the merits and potential faults associated with a 
line of reasoning, and could be well-suited to serve as devil’s advocate in a 
decision-making process. By harmoniously integrating personal case-study 
examples with more removed theoretical considerations, a member with 
this orientation could serve as a communicative bridge between analytically 
minded teammates and those more inclined toward less systematic or more 
emotional or artfully constructed decision processes.
Communicative Orientations: Key Points and Emerging Issues
The discussion of communicative orientations serves several purposes: 
First, it enables us to effectively draw on the two-dimensional gendered com-
munication binary to create unique communicative patterns that serve vary-
ing purposes in workplace interactions. In so doing, it illuminates how the use 
of different GCOM styles along the binary can work together to produce a 
series of communicative purposes. Further, it depicts no one style or combina-
tion of styles as necessarily superior to another; rather, we can draw on this set 
of communicative orientations to achieve effectiveness based on characteris-
tics of the communicator, the intended audience, the situation in which the 
communicator and audience are embedded and the outcomes of interest.
The communication orientations presented in Figure 1.3 represent mere-
ly a sampling of taxonomical configurations that could result through the 
compounding of various facets of masculine and feminine communication. 
Other potentially notable configurations could include within-gender taxon-
omies that consider; for instance, the degree to which one communicates in 
both an egocentric and assertive masculine manner as compared to commu-
nication that focuses on only one of these MCOM facets. The study of such 
nuances within masculine and feminine communication styles could pro-
mote a greater understanding of which components of MCOM and FCOM 
could be serviceably applied to meet different desired outcomes. Future 
work is needed to flesh out the potential effects that contextual variables such 
as communicator sex and the sex composition of the communicator’s work-
place, could have on the effectiveness of each of these GCOM orientations.
IMPLICATIONS FOR LEADERS AND ORGANIZATIONS
This final section covers some ways that organizational leaders may incor-
porate knowledge of gendered communication styles to ensure that their 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    45
organizations and teams benefit, while simultaneously ensuring that indi-
viduals succeed. These will be discussed as a process that considers both 
challenges and opportunities for leader–member relations and considers 
both the leaders’ and members’ perspectives. Briefly, this process involves 
assessment and education, followed by facilitation.
Assessment
Understanding deep-level and performed gender differences can help 
organizational members relate to each other. And this begins with assess-
ment. Assessment is a co-created process that incorporates a mutuality per-
spective (Dobrow, Chandler, Murphy, & Kram, 2012; Weinberg & Locander, 
2014). That is, leaders must inspire members to assess their own styles and 
those of their coworkers and their leader, while the leader herself concur-
rently engages in self-assessment. Thus, before a leader may begin to make 
inferences regarding the appropriateness or effectiveness of different com-
municative orientations for a given situation, she must initially find out 
what kinds of GCOM styles the members have and understand her own 
styles as well.
To lead members through assessment requires a leader to listen to the 
employees, encouraging them to reflect upon and describe their own com-
municative preferences. In order to ensure that the assessment focuses on 
deep-level diversity and performance so that it can ultimately be viewed 
through a GCOM lens, the leader could ask members to consider organiza-
tional communication from the perspective of roles they enact on the job 
and their perceived expectations of various stakeholders and more gener-
ally of society. Further, assessment involves both the leader and members 
considering the various multilevel contexts in which these communicative 
roles are played out (see Figure 1.2) and the influences that each of these 
embedded contexts may have on their own GCOM styles and effectiveness. 
This involves analyzing the structural elements of the organization and its 
external environment and the communicative arrangement of coworkers 
and supervisors.
Assessment must precede facilitation, and we suggest that it precede 
education as well. First, members are likely to be more receptive to feed-
back and to new ways of knowing once they have become aware of their 
own communicative styles and attributions. Further, following assessment, 
subsequent conversations are more likely to proceed in a way that is cen-
tered on interactive communication styles, rather than on the people, their 
ideas, or their own personal needs; that is, the members would be oriented 
toward deep-level (as opposed to surface-level) communicative diversity.

46    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
Education
Once employees have had the opportunity to assess organizational com-
munication through a masculine- and feminine-typed lens, the leader’s 
next step is to ensure that members are sufficiently introduced to principles 
of gendered communication so that they may begin to organize these as-
sessments around the GCOM binary. Importantly, this education should 
include a discussion of the historical context of gender and sex-typed at-
tributions and expectations so that employees can begin to recognize the 
deeply sociological nature of gender performance. The concept of gender 
as a socially-learned and performed construct can be one that remains dif-
ficult for many individuals to conceptualize, and accordingly this must be 
clarified and given appropriate focus.
Education enables members to know the various styles of communica-
tion arranged along the gender binary and to begin to recognize some of 
the more nuanced communicative orientations that stem from this binary. 
Mapping their own communication assessments onto the GCOM taxonom-
ical map would allow members to become aware of how they communicate 
and teach them about different ways they and others around them could 
communicate. Being aware of such distinctions is important toward cre-
ating change. To this end, it is equally important to recognize that com-
munication styles are dynamic and can change (Buzzanell & Lucas, 2006). 
Learning about how referent others communicate and how you yourself 
communicate could help to prompt not only a greater mutual understand-
ing, but also change when necessary.
Facilitation
Leading Facilitation
The purpose of GCOM facilitation is to provide tools to better under-
stand how to approach and solve interpersonal dilemmas in a way that 
draws on performed gender diversity to create a more cohesive work envi-
ronment. It is worth noting that we refer to this stage as facilitation as op-
posed to training. Whereas training involves content matter expert(s) pre-
senting predetermined known lessons to an audience, facilitation does not 
necessitate that the leader is a gendered communication expert; moreover, 
it does not require there to exist a known desired outcome; rather, facilita-
tion involves assisting an engaged group through a process by which the 
members themselves leverage their own perceptions and expertise to com-
municatively discover previously unknown knowledge and understanding.
Before the member-centric facilitation process begins, the leader could 
encourage members to focus the discussion by asking questions such as, what 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    47
are our goals, which styles of communication could help us to achieve them, 
where are we now with our preferred communication styles, what types of 
communicative gaps might be creating challenges for us, and how could 
we overcome these challenges? After opening with a topic-and-communica-
tion-centric introduction, the leader could then facilitate a member-centric 
discovery process. For facilitation to be effective, both listening and clear 
communication are key. Consider, for instance, a scenario where members 
have not been meeting productivity goals. The session could involve discus-
sion of how the various member-assessed communication elements might 
be hindering productivity; in this way, the understanding that had arisen at 
the assessment and education stages can be applied such that connections 
between communication styles and productivity are better understood. In 
this scenario, the leader could facilitate this by asking employees why they 
don’t feel they are achieving their goals and when necessary (re)focus the 
conversation on the communicative differences/difficulties that come up.
Leader–Member Relations During Facilitation and Beyond
A leader may draw on different GCOM styles to improve communication 
between herself and members as well as communication among members. 
For instance, understanding members’ unique communication styles can 
help guide a leader to determine the best way to approach each subordi-
nate when introducing a topic. Also, assigning tasks that are best suited to 
members’ communication styles could work with each member’s strengths 
and abilities, ultimately helping to improve efficiency and strengthen com-
munication among members. Thus, it is important that the leader attempt 
to develop strong exchange relationships with each member in order to 
better understand the members’ communicative styles and preferences. 
With that said, it is worth recognizing the aforementioned contemporary 
trend whereby employees, on average, have begun to express preference 
for a more feminized style of leadership. Thus, understanding not only sub-
ordinates’ personal communication preferences, but also the type of com-
munication each member expects from and respects in a leader, could go a 
long way toward influencing whether an individual is viewed as a leader by 
her subordinates.
Further, the arrangement of power within a relationship could also dic-
tate the degree to which MCOM and FCOM could be differentially effective. 
Formality designates hierarchy, and therefore masculine forms of communi-
cation may be more accepted of leaders in formal relationships. In cases of 
informal leadership, however, asserting one’s individuality and communicat-
ing egotistically without considering others’ ideas may be less accepted, as in-
dividuals tend to dislike being told what to do by those to whom they do not 
officially report. Paradoxically, it is just this type of communication style that 
may help to bolster an individual to gain informal leadership status; again, it 

48    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
is a matter of individual differences that could be remedied by knowing who 
the members are in terms of their individual GCOM preferences. From the 
nonleader member’s perspective, gendered communication could be lever-
aged to influence the relationship between this individual and the leader. 
For instance, asserting one’s support for a leader’s initiatives could serve to 
gain favor with the leader; alternatively, a follower who communicates con-
crete details could be viewed as humble, a characteristic that could also serve 
to gain the leader’s favor (Castiglioni, 1528/1976).
Lastly, several team-referent factors could influence the effectiveness 
and desirability of different GCOM styles between leaders and members. In 
early stages of team formation, a leader’s balance of egocentric and egalitar-
ian communication (identified taxonomically as either having a cohesion 
or optimization orientation) could enable team members to more clearly 
understand their respective roles and responsibilities, while opening the 
opportunity for teammates to get to know one another and begin working 
together. Strong masculine communication from a team leader could prove 
particularly helpful when there exists a deep divide among group members, 
as it would serve to avoid the situation typically associated with having “too 
many cooks in the kitchen.” This could also be useful if time-urgent deci-
siveness and quick decision making are a factor. On the other hand, strong 
feminine communication by the leader could prove most helpful when en-
couraging members to share ideas. The comfortable and open communica-
tive environment produced by egalitarian and compassionate (feminine) 
leader communication could potentially enable members to feel safe to 
speak their minds without fear of negative repercussion (a concept referred 
to as psychological safety).
Leading Through the Unknown
It goes without saying that there is still very much presently left unknown 
about the effects of GCOM in various organizational circumstances, par-
ticularly toward more macro organizationally relevant outcomes. As we 
suggested earlier, uncovering the broader effects of GCOM styles in orga-
nizations will entail consideration of members’ communicative orienta-
tions across various organizational and relational contexts. Further, there 
currently exists little to no guidance with regard to how masculine and 
feminine communication can respectively be leveraged by executives to 
improve organizational performance and drive change. We suspect that as 
with leader–member and team relations, the relationship between GCOM 
and organizational outcomes could be complex: Factors such as conflicting 
stakeholder demands and expectations, executive managers’ social power 
among those various sets of stakeholders, and contingencies such as the 

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    49
firm’s current position on the organizational life cycle and competitiveness 
of the organization’s market could all play a part in determining which 
styles could be effectively employed by top organizational leaders.
Finally, it is worth noting two important boundary conditions that cur-
rently limit the extent to which we can predict the effectiveness of gendered 
communication in the global contemporary workplace. The first is that 
the overwhelming majority of theory and empirical evidence connecting 
GCOM to organizationally relevant consequences is U.S.-centric; hence, 
the degree to which suggestions presented in this chapter would general-
ize outside the United States or in multicultural teams is largely unknown. 
Second, although studies have begun to establish a predictable pattern of 
relationships between GCOM and workplace outcomes, it is not yet entirely 
understood whether the effectiveness of this relationship wanes if it is used 
politically as a type of influence tactic as opposed to applied in a more 
authentic manner. This topic was tangentially touched upon by President 
Obama in a recent op-ed:
It’s easy to absorb all kinds of messages from society about masculinity and 
come to believe that there’s a right way and a wrong way to be a man. But as 
I got older, I realized that my ideas about being a tough guy or cool guy just 
weren’t me. They were a manifestation of my youth and insecurity. Life be-
came a lot easier when I simply started being myself. (Obama, 2016)
Adding to this, limited empirical evidence appears to suggest that those 
individuals who retain a single, identifiable GCOM style may benefit from 
stronger personal outcomes (Weinberg et al., 2015). With this in mind, 
until the relationship between authenticity and GCOM are better estab-
lished, we caution practitioners to continually assess their potentially shift-
ing GCOM preferences, and consider how to best employ their preferred 
style to meet situational expectations and demands.
A Caveat
It is important to recognize that, by drawing attention to how communi-
cation may be dichotomized based on gendered styles (following the way 
in which extant theory draws on language referent to stereotypical expecta-
tions of males and females, e.g., Dow & Wood, 2006; Wood, 2013), this work 
and enactment based on it “also renders the social arrangements based on 
sex category accountable as normal and natural, that is legitimate ways of 
organizing social life” (West & Zimmerman, 2003, p. 71). That is, by re-
ferring to communication as having masculine- and feminine-typed facets, 
we are training ourselves to execute aspects of assertiveness, egalitarian-
ism, and other sex-category-attributed performances, and as a result are 

50    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
contributing to the reification of a gendered differential, thereby render-
ing sex-typed distinctions as legitimate. In so doing, the binary model “risks 
essentializing both men and women, thus largely preserving extant rela-
tions of institutional power” (Ashcraft & Mumby, 2004, p. 41).
CONCLUSION
When the authors first began working to expand gendered communica-
tion research into the field of quantitative organizational science, we were 
asked by a prominent organizational psychologist why we chose to use what 
sounded to him as somewhat archaic terminology in describing the com-
munication styles as masculine and feminine. Our answer was twofold: (a) 
so doing serves to build conceptually on currently existing diversity theory 
that draws on this binary classification, and (b) a failure to do so would 
prejudicially ignore the important role that changing sex stereotypes and 
expectations and sex-typed organizing and biases continue to play in to-
day’s global society. It is our sincere hope that continued work in this area 
will serve to illuminate further ways in which organizations, their teams, 
and members may benefit from the potent opportunities associated with 
deep-level gender diversity.
REFERENCES
Acker, J. (1990). Hierarchies, jobs, bodies: A theory of gendered organization. Gen-
der & Society, 4, 139–158.
Ahuja, M. K., & Carley, K. M. (1998). Network structures in virtual organizations. 
Organization Science, 10, 741–757.
Allen, B. J. (1996). Feminist standpoint theory: A black woman’s (re)view of organi-
zational socialization. Communication Studies, 47, 257–277.
Allen, M. W. (1995). Communication concepts related to perceived organizational 
support. Western Journal of Communication, 59, 326–346.
Amason, A. C. (1996). Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional 
conflict on strategic decision making: Resolving a paradox for top manage-
ment groups. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 123–148.
Ashcraft, K. L. (2000). Empowering “professional” relationships: Organizational 
communication meets feminist practice.  Management Communication Quar-
terly, 13, 347–392.
Ashcraft, K. L. (2006). Sights/sites of difference in gender and organizational com-
munication studies. In B. J. Dow & J. T. Wood (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of 
gender and communication (pp. 97–122). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Ashcraft, K. L. (2014). Feminist theory. In L. L. Putnam & D. K. Mumby (Eds.), The 
SAGE handbook of organizational communication (3rd ed., pp. 127–150). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    51
Ashcraft, K. L., & Mumby, D. K. (2004). Reworking gender: A feminist communicology of 
organization. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Balkundi, P., & Kilduff, M. (2006). The ties that lead: A social network approach to 
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 17, 419–439.
Bem, S. L. (1974). The measurement of psychological androgyny. Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology, 42, 155–162.
Brown, A. D., & Starkey, K. (1994). The effect of organizational culture on commu-
nication and information. Journal of Management Studies, 31, 807–828.
Butler, J. (2004). Undoing gender. London, England: Routledge.
Buzzanell, P. M., & Lucas, K. (2006). Gendered stories of career: Unfolding dis-
courses of time, space, and identity. In B. J. Dow & J. T. Wood (Eds.), The 
SAGE handbook of gender and communication (pp. 161–178). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE.
Cañas, K., & Sondak, H. (2010). Challenging and improving the teaching of diver-
sity management. International Journal of Diversity in Organisations, Communities 
& Nations, 10, 139–158.
Castiglioni, B. (1976). The book of the courtier (G. Bull, Trans.). London, England: 
Penguin. Originally published in 1528.
Chiu, C. Y., Balkundi, P., & Weinberg, F. J. (2017). When managers become leaders: 
The role of manager network centralities, social power, and followers’ percep-
tion of leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(2), 334–348. doi:10.1016/j.
leaqua.2016.05.004
Correll, S. J., & Ridgeway, C. L. (2006). Expectation states theory. In J. Delamater 
(Ed.), Handbook of Social Psychology (pp. 29–51). New York, NY: Springer.
Cross, R., Borgatti, S. P., & Parker, A. (2001). Beyond answers: Dimensions of the 
advice network. Social Networks, 23(3), 215–235.
De Dreu, C. K., & Weingart, L. R. (2003). Task versus relationship conflict, team 
performance, and team member satisfaction: a meta-analysis. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 88, 741–749.
Dobrow, S. R., Chandler, D. E., Murphy, W. M., & Kram, K. E. (2012). A review 
of developmental networks: Incorporating a mutuality perspective. Journal of 
Management, 38, 210–242.
Dougherty, D. S. (1999). Dialogue through standpoint: Understanding men’s and 
women’s standpoints of sexual harassment. Management Communication Quar-
terly, 12, 436–468.
Dow, B. J., & Wood, J. T. (2006). The evolution of gender and communication re-
search: Intersections of theory, politics, and scholarship. In B. J. Dow and J. 
T. Wood (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of gender and communication (pp. ix–xxiv). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Duehr, E. E., & Bono, J. E. (2006). Men, women, and managers: Are stereotypes 
finally changing? Personnel Psychology, 59, 815–846.
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2007). Through the labyrinth: The truth about how women 
become leaders. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Eagly, A. H., Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C., & van Engen, M. L. (2003). Transforma-
tional, transactional, and laissez-faire leadership styles: A meta-analysis com-
paring women and men. Psychological Bulletin, 108, 233–256.

52    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
Elsesser, K. M., & Lever, J. (2011). Does gender bias against female leaders persist? 
Quantitative and qualitative data from a large-scale survey. Human Relations, 
64, 1555–1578.
Farley, S. D. (2008). Attaining status at the expense of likeability: Pilfering pow-
er through conversational interruption.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior,  32, 
241–260.
Fletcher, J. (1999). Disappearing acts: Gender, power and relational practice at work. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gardezi, F., Lingard, L., Espin, S., Whyte, S., Orser, B., & Baker, G. R. (2009). Si-
lence, power and communication in the operating room. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 65, 1390–1399.
Hall, D., & Langellier, K. (1988). Storytelling strategies in mother-daughter com-
munication. In B. Bate & A. Taylor (Eds.), Women Communicating: Studies of 
women’s talk (pp. 107–126). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., & Bell, M. P. (1998). Beyond relational demography: 
Time and the effects of surface-and deep-level diversity on work group cohe-
sion. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 96–107.
Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., Gavin, J. H., & Florey, A. T. (2002). Time, teams, and 
task performance: Changing effects of surface-and deep-level diversity on 
group functioning. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 1029–1045.
Heisenberg, W. (1958). Physics and philosophy. New York, NY: Harper& Row.
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (Eds.). 
(2004). Culture, leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Johnson, F. (1996). Friendship among women: Closeness in dialogue. In J. T. Wood 
(Ed.), Gendered relationships: A reader (pp. 301–316). Fairfax, VA: George Ma-
son University Press.
Johnson, S. K., Murphy, S. E., Zewdie, S., & Reichard, R. J. (2008). The strong, 
sensitive type: Effects of gender stereotypes and leadership prototypes on the 
evaluation of male and female leaders. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 106, 39–60.
Koenig, A. M., Eagly, A. H., Mitchell, A. A., & Ristikari, T. (2011). Are leader stereo-
types masculine? A meta-analysis of three research paradigms. Psychological 
Bulletin, 137, 616–642.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylva-
nia Press.
Lakoff, R. T. (1975). Language and woman’s place. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Leaper, C., & Ayres, M. M. (2007). A meta-analytic review of gender variations 
in adults’ language use: Talkativeness, affiliative speech, and assertive 
speech. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 328–363.
Mulac, A., Wiemann, J. M., Widenmann, S. J., & Gibson, T. W. (1988). Male/female 
language differences and effects in same-sex and mixed-sex dyads: The gen-
der-linked language effect. Communications Monographs, 55, 315–335.
Mumby, D. K. (2006). Gender and communication in organizational contexts: In-
troduction. In B. J. Dow & J. T. Wood (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of gender and 
communication (pp. 89–95). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

Gender as a Deep-Level, Communicated, and Interactional Construct    53
Newman, M. L., Groom, C. J., Handelman, L. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2008). Gen-
der differences in language use: An analysis of 14,000 text samples. Discourse 
Processes, 45, 211–236.
Obama, B. (2016, August 4). Glamour exclusive: President Barack Obama says, 
“This is what a feminist looks like.” Glamour. Retrieved from http://www.
glamour.com/story/glamour-exclusive-president-barack-obama-says-this-is-
what-a-feminist-looks-like
Oly Ndubisi, N. (2004). Understanding the salience of cultural dimensions on rela-
tionship marketing, its underpinnings and aftermaths. Cross Cultural Manage-
ment: An International Journal, 11, 70–89.
Palomares, N. A. (2016). Language and gender. In C. R. Berger & M. E. Roloff 
(Eds.), The international encyclopedia of interpersonal communication (pp. 965–
976). West Sussex, England: Wiley.
Phillips, K. W., Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A. (2006). Surface-level diversity and 
decision-making in groups: When does deep-level similarity help? Group Pro-
cesses & Intergroup Relations, 9(4), 467–482.
Riordan, C. M. (2000). Relational demography within groups: Past developments, 
contradictions, and new directions. Research in Personnel and Human Resources 
Management, 19, 131–174.
Savicki, V., Kelley, M., & Lingenfelter, D. (1997). Gender, group composition, and 
task type in small task groups using computer-mediated communication. Com-
puters in Human Behavior, 12, 549–565.
Shectman, Z., & Kenny, D. A. (1994). Metaperception accuracy: An Israeli study. Ba-
sic and Applied Social Psychology, 15, 451–465.
Slaughter, A-M. (2012, July/August). Why women still can’t have it all. The Atlantic 
Magazine. Retrieved from http://​www.​theatlantic.​com/​magazine/​archive/​
2012/​07/​why-women-still-cant-have-it-all/​309020/​?​single_​page=​true
Smith, C., Weinberg, F. J., and Treviño, L. J. (2014, November). The effects of gen-
dered communication and gender composition on objective indicators of career success. 
Paper presented at the Southern Management Association Annual Meeting, 
Savannah, Georgia.
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM). (n.d.). Defining diversity. Re-
trieved from: htt.p://hrasm.shrm.org/defining-diversity
Tepper, B. J., Moss, S. E., & Duffy, M. K. (2011). Predictors of abusive supervision: 
Supervisor perceptions of deep-level dissimilarity, relationship conflict, and 
subordinate performance. Academy of Management Journal, 54, 279–294.
Tharenou, P. (1997). Explanations of managerial career advancement. Australian 
Psychologist, 32, 19–28.
Trethewey, A., Scott, C., & LeGreco, M. (2006). Constructing embodied organiza-
tional identities: Commodifying, securing, and servicing professional bod-
ies. The SAGE handbook of gender and communication (pp. 123–141). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Verbeke, W., Bagozzi, R. P., & Belschak, F. D. (2016). The role of status and lead-
ership style in sales contests: A natural field experiment. Journal of Business 
Research, 69, 4112–4120.
Weinberg, F. J., & Lankau, M. J. (2011). Formal mentoring programs: A mentor-
centric and longitudinal analysis. Journal of Management, 37, 1527–1557.

54    F. J. WEINBERG and A. O'SHEA CLEVELAND
Weinberg, F. J., & Locander, W. B. (2014). Advancing workplace spiritual develop-
ment: A dyadic mentoring approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 391–408.
Weinberg, F. J., Treviño, L. J., & Cleveland, A. O. (2015). Gendered communica-
tion and career outcomes: A construct validation and prediction of hierarchi-
cal advancement and non-hierarchical rewards. Communication Research, doi: 
10.1177/0093650215590605
West, C., & Zimmerman, D. H. (2003). Doing gender. In R. J. Ely, E. G. Foldy, & M. 
A. Scully (Eds.), Reader in gender, work, and organization (pp. 62–74). Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.
Wheeler, S. C., & Petty, R. E. (2001). The effects of stereotype activation on behav-
ior: a review of possible mechanisms. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 797–826.
Wood, J. T. (2006). Introduction to part I: Gender and communication in interper-
sonal contexts. In B. J. Dow and J. T. Wood (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of gender 
and communication (pp. 1–8). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Wood, J. T. (2013). Gendered lives: Communication, gender, and culture (10th ed.). Bos-
ton, MA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning. 

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 55–83
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
55
CHAPTER 2
MENTORS, SPONSORS, 
AND DIVERSITY IN WORK 
ORGANIZATIONS
Who Helps Whom and What Difference 
Does It Make?
Nancy DiTomaso and Catrina Palmer
Rutgers Business School
ABSTRACT
A major theme in the literature on diversity in the labor force is the impor-
tance of mentors for those who get ahead in their careers. Noting that wom-
en and minority employees are less likely to have mentors who can provide 
advice and help compared to White men, women and minority employees 
have been urged to find mentors, and companies have been urged to pro-
vide them, sometimes in formal programs and sometimes informally. More 
recently, a distinction has been made between a mentor who can give advice 
and a sponsor who can give more substantive help, although the focus on 
mentors who give advice still predominates in discussions about career needs 
for women and minority employees. In this paper we will make three contri-

56    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
butions: (a) we provide an overview of the research with regard to mentoring; 
(b) we reinforce and clarify the distinctions between the roles of mentors and 
sponsors, along with the related roles of coaches, role models, and networks; 
and (c) we raise critical questions that have not been given sufficient atten-
tion in the research literature about who helps whom in the labor force and 
to what effect. We end with a discussion of how employees who may be at a 
disadvantage in gaining access to supportive relationships in the workplace 
can improve their chances of positive outcomes.
After years of research documenting the importance of getting help from 
colleagues and others for career success, it has now become common wis-
dom that having supportive relationships in the workplace makes a differ-
ence in terms of career outcomes (Fagenson, 1989; Hewlett, 2013; Kram, 
1985; Lunding, Clements, & Perkins, 1979; Scandura, 1992; Thomas, 1989). 
Such relationships take different forms, and include in various studies the 
roles of mentors, sponsors, coaches, role models, and networks. While 
these roles overlap and are sometimes discussed together in the many 
studies on workplace supportive relationships, there are some distinctions 
that should be preserved in order to understand what issues need to be 
addressed in fostering better career outcomes, especially for women and 
minority employees.
Although most discussions of workplace supportive relationships have 
been under the label of mentors who give advice, more recent attention 
has been given to the role of sponsors who are thought to play a more sub-
stantive role in career assistance (Hewlett, Peraino, Sherbin, & Sumberg, 
2011; Smith, 2005; Thomas, 1990). Workplace supportive relationships 
have both instrumental and socioemotional functions (Ibarra, 1993, 1995; 
Kram, 1985; Scandura, 1992). Such relationships can be beneficial to those 
employees who gain access to them as well as to those providing assistance 
and to the employing organizations. In this paper we make three contribu-
tions: (a) we provide an overview of the research with regard to mentoring; 
(b) we reinforce and clarify the distinctions between the roles of mentors 
and sponsors, along with the related roles of coaches, role models, and net-
works; and (c) we raise critical questions that have not received sufficient 
attention in the research literature about who helps whom in the labor 
force and to what effect. In our analyses, we place the discussion of mentors 
and sponsors in the larger literature on diversity and inequality (DiTomaso, 
Post, & Parks-Yancy, 2007).
The focus on workplace supportive relationships in the management lit-
erature emerged, in part, because of the recognition that women and mi-
nority employees have had less access to and receive less favorable outcomes 
from such relationships than do White men (Ibarra, 1993, 1995; Ragins, 
1997; Thomas, 1990, 2001). A number of explanations have been given 
for this discrepancy, including the characteristics of women and minority 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    57
employees themselves (Hennig & Jardim, 1977), the difficulties inherent in 
cross-sex and cross-race relationships (Hunt & Michael, 1983; Ragins, 1997; 
Thomas, 1989, 1990) and the lower status positions held disproportionately 
by women and minority employees compared to White men in most organi-
zations (McGuire, 2000; McGuire & Reskin, 1993). Despite these challeng-
es, women and minority employees have been urged to find mentors, while 
organizations have been urged to provide them through formal programs 
or to encourage them informally (Chun, Sosik, & Yi, 2012; Hewlett, 2013; 
Hewlett, Peraino, Sherbin, & Sumberg, 2011).
In the first part of this paper, we will discuss the different types of work-
place supportive relationships, giving special attention to the distinctions 
between mentors and sponsors. We then discuss how career progression 
might be affected by workplace supportive relationships in order to high-
light the different outcomes that are likely from mentors versus sponsors. 
In our discussion, we pose a key question about how mentors and spon-
sors interact with their protégés, and we ask specifically whether women 
and minority group members are more likely to receive advice that has a 
modest effect on career outcomes, while White males are more likely to be 
given opportunities, which can have a substantial and positive impact on 
their careers (DiTomaso, Post, Smith, Farris, & Cordero, 2007). Further, we 
argue that inattention to the varied patterns by which workplace supportive 
relationships are often enacted contributes to the unequal outcomes that 
have been frequently noted for women and minority employees (DiToma-
so, 2015). In the final part of the paper, we outline ways that women and 
minority employees can use this information to improve the likelihood that 
they can form relationships on the job that will provide them with oppor-
tunity as well as advice. In our discussion, we challenge companies to take 
note of how opportunities get shared within their companies and to change 
policies and practices if they want to foster a more diverse workforce.
WORKPLACE SUPPORTIVE RELATIONSHIPS
Mentors, sponsors, coaches, role models, and networks each have been 
found to affect workplace outcomes, but there are important differences 
across these roles and in how they contribute to those who have access to 
them. Although the research literature often mixes the specific functions 
for each of these roles and indeed the functions overlap in any given re-
lationship, the most basic definitions suggest that mentors primarily give 
advice, sponsors provide opportunity, coaches help improve skills, role 
models provide inspiration and often a vision of what might be possible 
and networks, although inherent in each of the other roles, are especially 
valuable as a form of social capital that links employees to others who might 

58    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
be able to provide information, influence, or opportunity, depending on 
the nature of the relationship (Adler & Kwon, 2002).
Mentors
In Greek mythology, Mentor is a friend of Odysseus who asked Mentor to 
take charge of his son, Telemachus, when Odysseus left for the Trojan War. 
In modern usage, being a mentor means to provide wisdom and advice, 
and that is the way that it has been used most often in the management 
literature. Mentoring is characterized as a developmental relationship in 
which a more experienced and knowledgeable person offers both career 
and psychosocial support to a protégé, who is usually younger and less ex-
perienced (Kram, 1985). Career support includes giving advice, enhancing 
visibility for the protégé and assisting with the navigation of the political 
environment. Psychosocial support includes offering both friendship and 
an emotional connection for the protégé (Kram, 1985). Although mentor-
ing relationships often develop naturally (i.e., informally) for White men in 
organizations, women and minority employees are less likely to gain access 
to mentors through informal processes than are White men (Chao, Walz, & 
Gardner, 1992; Ragins & Cotton, 1999). When the relationships are infor-
mal, protégés receive more career-related support and higher salaries than 
protégés in formal relationships (Chao et al., 1992; Ragins & Cotton, 1999). 
Thus, informal mentoring processes tend to favor White men. Formal men-
toring relationships, however, have been found to provide more access to 
mentors for women and minorities than they might be able to obtain on 
their own (K. E. O’Brien, Biga, Kessler, & Allen, 2010).
Mentoring relationships are reciprocal (Ragins, 1997), in that both the 
mentors and the protégés potentially gain benefits from mentoring rela-
tionships that work well. Having a mentor is assumed to benefit protégés 
because gaining the advice and support from a more experienced and of-
ten higher status colleague can help protégés understand the culture of the 
organization, the political landscape, how to best present themselves to oth-
ers in the workplace, how to map out a career path and ways to address de-
velopmental needs. Not all mentors are equally capable of providing such 
benefits, and not all protégés are equally capable of productively using the 
advice that they receive. Thus, the quality of the mentoring relationship 
often depends on the career success of the mentor, the warmth of the rela-
tionship between the mentor and protégé, the duration of the relationship 
and the savviness of the mentor both with regard to the organization and in 
his or her own career. Most mentoring relationships do not last over time, 
both because of the growth of the protégé and the changes in the circum-
stances of the mentor including job changes and otherwise. Those who 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    59
have studied mentoring relationships note that most last approximately 3 
years, so it is important for protégés to know both how to enter a mentoring 
relationship and also how to end or transition out of one (Hill & Kamprath, 
1991). Given the fragility and temporality of mentoring relationships, em-
ployees are encouraged to have more than one mentor, especially over time 
and to draw from mentors what each individual mentor can best offer.
Mentors may be internal to the protégé’s organization or external to 
it. Some have suggested that internal mentors are likely to provide more 
instrumental advice, whereas those from other organizations can provide 
more socioemotional support (Ibarra, 1993, 1995). Due to proximity, in-
ternal mentors may be more physically accessible than external mentors, 
and they also may have better insight into navigating political turmoil and 
adversities within the workplace (Chao et al., 1992). Internal mentors are 
also better positioned to use influence on behalf of their mentees when 
opportunities come along and, in that regard, serve the role of sponsors 
(Ragins, 1997, p. 484). External mentors, in contrast, are typically in a bet-
ter position to provide their protégés with “long-range career interventions 
and lateral career transitions” (Ragins, 1997, p. 485).
Because of the assumption that the higher the status position held by the 
mentor, the better for the mentee, women and minority employees are at a 
disadvantage in finding mentors who match their demographic characteris-
tics, because both women and minority employees are less well represented 
among those in higher status positions in most organizations. Although 
higher status mentors may be able to provide protégés more support, for 
example in controversial situations (McGuire, 2000) and help them gain 
greater visibility as well as “reflected power” (Kanter, 1989; Ragins, 1997, 
p. 487), women and minority employees in relatively low status positions 
who find mentors who hold higher status positions may also face additional 
complications associated with cross-sex and cross-race mentoring relation-
ships (Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999; Ensher & Murphy, 1997; Gibbons, 1993; 
Thomas, 1989, 1990). Such relationships often pose additional challenges 
for both mentors and mentees who are not matched by gender or race/
ethnicity. Because of the paucity of women and minorities in high status 
corporate positions, junior level women may prefer to have male mentors 
and junior level minority employees may prefer to have White mentors, 
especially for internal mentoring relationships (Ibarra, 1993, 1995). For 
junior level women, cross-sex mentoring relationships may be fraught with 
sexual innuendos or tensions that cause both the mentor and the mentee 
to hesitate in their engagement in the relationship (Hewlett et al., 2011). 
For junior level minority employees, cross-race relationships may impede 
communication openness and the ability to gain reliable feedback (Thom-
as, 1989, 1990).

60    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
There are benefits for mentors who provide advice and support for less 
experienced protégés. Mentors may gain satisfaction and fulfillment from 
the professional and personal development of their protégés (Ragins & 
Scandura, 1994). Mentors may also themselves gain recognition from the 
support that they provide, especially if their mentees demonstrate compe-
tence and capability that benefits the organization (Ragins & Scandura, 
1994). A protégé’s performance can reflect on the reputation of the men-
tor, and thus, high-performing mentees can enhance their mentor’s organi-
zational role (Kram, 1985). Research has shown, however, that women are 
less likely to receive the same favorable recognition as men while serving as 
mentors ( McGuire, 2000). Even in high status positions, women may ex-
perience greater visibility and performance pressures when they are in the 
minority (Kanter, 1977, 1979). Mentoring relationships can amplify both 
successes and failures (Ragins & Scandura, 1994). Thus, if the protégés do 
not perform well, female mentors may risk their own reputations. Female 
mentors may also be subject to accusations of favoritism if they try to help 
female mentees (Ragins & Sundstrom, 1989).
Although mentoring relationships are thought to be beneficial primarily 
to those involved in the relationships, employing organizations gain ben-
efits as well. In the context of what has often been called the “war for tal-
ent” or talent management, companies have been encouraged to either 
create formal programs or to encourage and facilitate workplace supportive 
relationships within their organizations targeted especially to women and 
minority employees, because both continue to be less well represented in 
top level management and on boards of directors (Joecks, Pull, & Vetter, 
2013; Post & Byron, 2015). Some companies have responded by creating 
formal mentoring programs, while others have provided mechanisms to 
make networking and connections more likely among their employees. Al-
though research finds that such programs may extend access, they also have 
very little effect overall in terms of improving the career prospects for wom-
en and minority employees (Burke & McKeen, 1997; K. E. O’Brien et al., 
2010). Because neither formal nor informal mentoring programs have had 
the effects promised, recent research has argued that women and minority 
employees need more than the advice given by mentors. They instead need 
sponsors who will actively look out for their career interests (Hewlett, 2013; 
Hewlett et al., 2011).
Sponsors
Unlike mentors who give advice and share information, sponsors are 
likely to help with career advancement (Cable & Murray, 1999; DiTomaso, 
Post, Smith et al., 2007; Thomas, 1990; Turner, 1960). Sponsors actively 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    61
advocate for their protégés in meetings when opportunities are available 
(Ibarra, Carter, & Silva, 2010). Sponsors also both enhance visibility of their 
protégés and try to provide them with opportunities that will be valuable 
for their careers. Furthermore, sponsors help their protégés make connec-
tions with people who can help them, and they look out for the interests of 
their protégés. In other words, sponsors often take an active role in guiding 
the career steps of their protégés, whereas in mentoring relationships, it is 
often the mentee who has to take the initiative to ask for help and to keep 
the relationship active (Hewlett et al., 2011, p. 5).
Thus, despite the emphasis within the career literature on the impor-
tance of mentors, inequality by gender and race/ethnicity still exists in the 
workplace with men earning more; holding positions with greater author-
ity; and having greater opportunity for assignments that develop skills, pro-
vide visibility, and position the protégés for more responsibility and promo-
tion opportunities. Not surprisingly, therefore, past research has found that 
men are more likely than women to have access to sponsors in the work-
place, although for both men and women only a small proportion have 
people who can sponsor their upward mobility. Hewlett et al. (2011, p. 8), 
for example, found that only 19% of men in their study had sponsors, but 
even fewer women, 13%, did.
In a corporate environment where White men disproportionately hold 
top level managerial positions, it is quite likely that White men will have 
disproportionate access to both mentors and sponsors (DiTomaso, 2015). 
Further, White men who are in positions to pass along opportunities and 
resources will do so primarily to other White men (DiTomaso, 2015). Such 
connections follow the principles of homophily (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, 
& Cook, 2001) in that people tend to gravitate to similar others. The in-
group favoritism associated with homophily also leads to the belief that 
those who are in the normative in-group (usually U.S. born White men) are 
both more competent and trustworthy as well as more likable than those 
from outgroups (Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 2002; Hogg, 2001; Hogg & 
Terry, 2000; Hogg & Turner, 1985; McPherson et al., 2001; Ridgeway, Boyle, 
Kuipers, & Robinson, 1998; Ridgeway & Erickson, 2000).
Progressive organizations are taking more of an active role in creating 
formal sponsorship programs; however, the majority of relationships are 
created informally. In the informal environment, high-performing employ-
ees who embody the organizational culture and values are sought after by 
key executives. There are notable attributes that the sponsor evaluates to 
determine whether or not a protégé is worth his or her investment, such as 
an exceptional work ethic and trustworthiness (Hewlett, 2013). Essentially, 
the sponsor has to be confident in promoting an individual who not only 
delivers superb results and exudes an executive presence, but also an in-
dividual with whom the sponsor shares similar values and attitudes, which 

62    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
often notably will be those from the same demographic groups as the spon-
sor. Similarly, effective mentoring relationships may transform into a spon-
sor and protégé relationship (Hewlett, 2013), but that is more likely when 
both sponsors and their protégés are White men.
Like mentorship, sponsorship relationships are also reciprocal (Hewlett, 
2013) in that there can be positive gains for the protégé, sponsor, and the 
organization. Protégés may be offered visibility, good job assignments, or 
new positions by high-status, seasoned executives who share their limited 
time and abundant resources with the selected junior-level employees they 
choose to help (Hewlett, 2013; Hewlett et al., 2011). As a result of these 
connections, protégés may enhance their intangible skills, such as man-
aging the organizational political landscape and having the opportunity 
to form interpersonal relationships with key executives. Sponsors may also 
benefit from their protégé relationships. These benefits include having 
their brand extended through a promising, junior employee whom they 
believe embodies their work ethic, values, and philosophy (Hewlett, 2013). 
Additionally, the sponsor’s reputation is augmented for identifying the pro-
tégé’s potential and grooming him/her for successful leadership. Lastly, 
organizations benefit from the pipeline of talented employees who are 
groomed for success. As long as White men are disproportionately repre-
sented in managerial positions and as long as they choose protégés who are 
like them, then naturally forming sponsor-protégé relationships will repro-
duce inequality in organizations.
Under current circumstances, women and minorities are less likely to 
benefit from sponsorship relationships to the same extent as White men. 
In a recent study, Hewlett (2013, pp. 75–76) found that women and mi-
norities do not seem to understand the differences between mentors and 
sponsors. This is critical, as the individuals who some women and minori-
ties identify as sponsors are not truly advocating and championing on their 
behalf. Furthermore, similar to mentoring relationships, some studies sug-
gest that cross-race (Thomas, 2001) and cross-sex (Hewlett et al., 2011) re-
lationships tend to hinder women and minorities from accessing effective 
sponsorship. With White men historically being placed in positions of au-
thority and power and having greater access to sponsors, it is not surprising 
that White men are still disproportionately represented in organizational 
leadership positions.
Even when women are able to gain access to sponsors, they do not seem 
to develop the relationship capital that is expected of such connections 
(Hewlett et al., 2011). Research has shown that women and men cultivate 
relationships differently (Babcock & Laschever, 2003; Fels, 2004; Hewlett, 
2013; Hewlett et al., 2011). Women participate in less negotiating and quid 
pro quo transactions than do their male counterparts, who engage in self-
promotion more than do women. According to Babcock and Laschever 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    63
(2003), women are more likely than men to believe that their hard work 
and exceptional performance speak for themselves, and thus women ex-
pect others to notice and certify their contributions. Hewlett et al. (2011) 
attribute these behaviors to the socialization of women compared to men. 
Women’s inclinations are reinforced through social and cultural expecta-
tions of them as more concerned about others than for themselves.
Women face further barriers in their efforts to find sponsors and men-
tors because they are evaluated differently for the same behaviors exhibited 
by men. A number of studies have found, for example, that the characteris-
tics associated with being a leader overlap the characteristics associated with 
being masculine, which has sometimes been translated into the phrase, 
“think manager, think male” (Eagly, Makhijani, Mona, & Klonsky, 1992; 
Fiske et al., 2002; Rudman, 2001; Ryan & Haslam, 2007; Schein, 1973). This 
implicit association, which is held by both men and women, can lead to 
what is called a “double bind” for women (Eagly & Carli, 2007), in which 
they face a trade-off between being thought of as competent as leaders and 
being thought of as sufficiently feminine (Fiske et al., 2002). Women who 
show their competence as leaders are often perceived as not being friendly 
or warm, (i.e., as not being feminine enough), while women who come 
across as friendly and warm are often thought of as not especially compe-
tent. In either situation, women can be thought of as not meeting expecta-
tions. Men do not face the same trade-off. They can be perceived as both 
competent and friendly or warm when enacting leadership roles.
Coaches
The primary purpose of a coach is to assist an employee with skill acquisi-
tion (Fournies, 1978; Hackman & Wageman, 2005). The coach facilitates 
learning by training an individual within a specific domain in which he or 
she is known to be an expert. A coach can assist with the development of 
hard technical skills or soft relational skills. Unlike a mentor or sponsor, 
a coach is not necessarily someone in a higher status position (Feldman, 
2001). Skills can be learned from peers, from senior-level employees and 
even from subordinates. The defining characteristic of a coach is someone 
who helps with the acquisition of specific skills that can enhance devel-
opment and potential mobility for employees who have access to coaches 
(Fournies, 1978). Coaching relationships are typically shorter than those of 
mentors or sponsors, lasting perhaps three to six months (Feldman, 2001; 
Thach & Heinselman, 1999).
The use of executive or career coaches have become more prevalent 
in the last two decades (Feldman, 2001; Hall, Otazo, & Hollenbeck, 1999; 
Thach & Heinselman, 1999). Coaching relationships are usually narrowly 

64    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
focused. The main objective of such relationships is for the coach to as-
sist the improvement of skills (Feldman, 2001). A coach may be asked to 
help with the development of soft skills such as improving emotional intel-
ligence, or verbal and nonverbal communication, which can benefit the 
organization by improving employee interactions and customer relations. 
A coach may also be asked to teach specific hard skills, such as how to use a 
new system or piece of technology.
The success and effectiveness of a coaching relationship depends on the 
communication and trust that is built between the coach and the client 
(Ianiro, Lehmann-Willenbrock, & Kauffeld, 2015; Thach & Heinselman, 
1999). How easily communication and trust are built between the two par-
ties can be affected by whether the coach is internal to the organization or 
external. External coaches may be preferred when dealing with an issue 
that is highly sensitive and requires confidentiality, while internal coaches 
may be preferred for issues that require immediate resolution and insight 
into the organizational culture, policies, and practices (Feldman, 2001; 
Hall et al., 1999).
A coaching relationship is mostly one-directional in that the employee 
being coached develops a new competency, while the coach provides a ser-
vice. Internal coaches, though, have the opportunity to reap the benefits 
of their client’s improved behavior or skillset. As with a mentor or spon-
sor, a coach’s reputation may be enhanced if he or she is effective in help-
ing the development of others. Organizations also benefit from the coach 
and client relationship. By investing in their human capital, organizations 
can reap long-term benefits, such as employee retention, improved perfor-
mance, and increased satisfaction that outweighs short-term performance 
and cost (Feldman, 2001).
Because White men are disproportionately represented in managerial 
and especially in leadership positions in most companies, they are likely to 
get more training and assistance from coaches than are women and minor-
ity employees (Duncan & Hoffman, 1979; Evertsson, 2004; Tomaskovic-De-
vey & Skaggs, 2002). In fact, the lack of access to training is one of the key 
factors that contribute to disadvantages for women and minority employees 
in the labor market. Even when training is available, women and minority 
employees may not gain the same benefit from it as do White men (Everts-
son, 2004). Further evidence suggests that women and minority employees 
also get less feedback and less honest feedback (Harber, 1998). Some evi-
dence also suggests that women and presumably minority employees, may 
get too much help or not enough, often leading to their inability to develop 
and present themselves as competent in work settings (Kanter, 1979).

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    65
Role Models
Role models also play an integral part in individuals’ professional devel-
opment by potentially shaping their career path (Buunk, 2007). Though 
role models and mentors share similar attributes, they differ in their uti-
lization. Drawing upon social learning theory and cognitive development 
theory (Bandura, 1969), role models exemplify a level of success that can 
be emulated by others. Individuals typically select role models with whom 
they are able to identify, often because of shared demographic and social 
characteristics. Further, individuals must perceive the role model’s level of 
success as challenging, yet attainable (Gibson, 2003, p. 592). Hence, role 
models can possibly enhance one’s confidence and provide a template of 
how to achieve his or her desired career goals.
Selecting role models are especially important for women and minori-
ties, who want to improve in their careers. Especially for out-group mem-
bers, role models become a reference for defining an individual’s sense of 
self. Positive role models can enhance performance and reduce stereotype 
threat (Steele & Aronson, 1995). Marx, Ko, and Friedman (2009), for ex-
ample, found that President Obama served as a role model for Black stu-
dents, and as such reduced the performance gap between Black and White 
students. They (Marx et al., 2009, pp. 953–954) argue that role models can 
provide such benefits to negatively stereotyped groups when the role model 
is perceived as competent, thought of as an in-group member, and when 
the role model demonstrates competence in areas about which negative 
stereotypes of the in-group would otherwise be expected.
The primary beneficiary of role models is the individual who selects the 
role model. For example, when race and gender are salient, selecting a role 
model can increase both inspiration and motivation to break barriers and 
can reinforce beliefs that the individual can accomplish his or her goals by 
adopting similar leadership traits and styles (Marx et al., 2009). The effects 
of role models are complicated; however, under some circumstances they 
can counter negative stereotypes and improve performance, but under 
other circumstances, they can reinforce stereotypes or induce stereotype 
threat (Bages, Vernies, & Martino, 2015; Cheryan, Siy, Vichayapai, Drury, 
& Kim, 2011; Marx & Goff, 2005: O’Brien et al., 2016; Singh, Vinnicombe, 
& James, 2006; Taylor, Lord, McIntyre, & Paulson, 2011; Young, Rudman, 
Buettner, & McLean, 2013). Role models who counter negative stereotypes 
are likely to be more inspiring to both women and minority employees, 
but role models who reinforce negative stereotypes or who present images 
that seem unattainable can be demotivating. Unlike a mentor, sponsor, or 
coach, a role model does not need to be in close proximity to have influ-
ence on and benefit targets (Marx et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2011). Role 
models can be helpful even from a distance.

66    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
Especially within organizations, role models may be harder to find for 
women and minority employees, because they are less likely to be repre-
sented in leadership positions. Although women and minority employees 
can look to people from outside their organizations for inspiration, to do 
so requires that they are able to relate the experiences of those they think 
of as role models to their own situations. When employees do not have role 
models whom they can emulate, it may undermine or limit their motiva-
tion and sense of self-efficacy, but role models have to meet conditions that 
reinforce competence and counter negative stereotypes in order to serve 
the intended function for women and minority employees. These kinds of 
conditions are less likely to affect Whites and males in the workplace.
Networks
Embedded in the larger conversation of workplace supportive relation-
ships are networks, which consist of mentors and sponsors, along with fam-
ily, friends, and acquaintances. Networks are a means by which individuals 
look to gain career-related information and a key vehicle that employers 
utilize to access potential job candidates. Relying less on the formal labor 
market, insider referral contacts are favored informal tools that employ-
ers use to obtain information about potential job candidates (Elliot, 2001). 
Insider referrals are obtained through an individual’s social network that 
typically consists of friends, kin, and acquaintances who may evolve into 
mentors or sponsors. Accordingly, social networks play a dual role by (a) 
assisting individuals in gaining timely insider information that may not be 
available to others, thus increasing their chances of career advancement 
(Elliott, 2001, p. 403), and (b) providing employers with a means to match 
people to jobs (DiTomaso, 2013, 2015; Elliott, 2001).
The structure of social networks, such as whether or not the relationship 
is created formally or informally, has implications for determining career 
advancement outcomes (Ibarra, 1993; McGuire, 2000, p. 503). Formal re-
lationships are typically initiated by the organization with the goal of com-
pleting a specified task or project. With formal networking, an individual’s 
interactions may be limited to work-related purposes with defined boundar-
ies on how to interact (Ibarra, 1993, p. 58; McGuire, 2000, p. 503). Informal 
relationships are more discretionary and contain broader scope, often con-
sisting of work, social, and personal interactions and goals (McGuire, 2000, 
p. 503). These relationships tend to form organically through shared inter-
ests or on the basis of social and demographic similarities. Social networks 
can affect who gains access to distributed resources within an organization. 
While formal network ties may shift when job positions change, informal 
ties are likely to continue over time (Podolny & Baron, 1997, p. 677).

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    67
Networks vary in terms of both the strength of ties and the composi-
tion, which affect what is likely to be gained from such social relationships. 
Strong ties are “close, stable, and binding relative to weaker, more super-
ficial links lacking in emotional investment” (Ibarra, 1993, p. 62). A lot of 
network literature focuses on the instrumental value gained from the in-
formation available from weak ties, because it is assumed that weak ties will 
have knowledge of jobs not known to strong ties (Burt, 1992; Granovetter, 
1973, 1995). In contrast, strong ties tend to bond people who have similar 
attributes and a close relationship, typically including family and friends 
(Burt, 1992; Granovetter, 1973, 1995; Ibarra, 1993). With close ties among 
people who share the same background and who feel an obligation to each 
other, it is assumed that information about jobs will be shared and thus will 
also be redundant compared to what can be learned from those with whom 
one may have a more distant relationship and who is involved in networks 
with people with whom one is not already connected (Burt, 1992; Granovet-
ter, 1973, 1995; Ibarra, 1993).
Research findings indicate that gender and race are significant factors in 
the formation of networks (Ibarra, 1993; Moore, 1990; Stoloff, Glanville, & 
Bienenstock, 1999). Women are more likely to develop supportive relation-
ships through the strong ties of family and friends because of the roles they 
occupy within their families and because of their greater relational skills 
(Moore, 1990). Men, in contrast, are likely to have more nonkinship, job-
related ties that consist of more instrumental interactions than are women 
(Hewlett et al., 2011; Moore, 1990). Additionally, White males have more 
access to high-status network connections than do women and minority em-
ployees. As such, White men are more likely than are women or minority 
employees to gain information that is valuable for promotion and advance-
ment. According to McGuire (2000), the structural positions of White men 
versus women and minority employees in organizations is the primary fac-
tor that determine the outcomes of valuable social networks. High-status 
organizational members can provide those with whom they form networks 
with valuable resources, including information, influence, and opportuni-
ties (Adler & Kwon, 2002; McGuire, 2000).
Thus, while social networks are instrumental in connecting employees to 
valuable social and organizational resources and providing employers with 
an efficient process for matching candidates to opportunities and jobs, the 
use of social networks for distributing such resources appears to be more 
favorable for White men than for women and racial minorities (McPher-
son et al., 2001; Trimble & Kmec, 2011). Accordingly, over the last several 
decades, scholars have examined the access to and use of social networks 
to better explain inequality in who gains access to which jobs and how valu-
able social resources are distributed (DiTomaso, 2013, 2015; Elliott, 2001; 
Mouw, 2003; Petersen, Saporta, & Seidel, 2000). Since White men have 

68    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
historically been more likely to occupy high-status positions of authority 
(Stainback & Tomaskovic-Devey, 2012), they are likely to have greater ac-
cess to social connections that can help them in the labor market. The 
homophily that is inherent in social network formation not only reproduc-
es advantage through the exchange of valuable social resources, but such 
networks are reinforced as well by the perceptions that those who fit the 
prototype of those already in positions of authority are likely to be more 
competent and trustworthy (Haslam, Oakes, Reynolds, & Turner, 1999; 
Hogg & Ridgeway, 2003; Hogg & Terry, 2000; Ridgeway, 2001). In order for 
women and minority employees to gain similar opportunities, they usually 
need to seek out and form ties with those in higher status positions than 
their own and likely with White men from whom they can “borrow” social 
capital (Burt, 1997, 1998; Ibarra, 1993, 1995; Stoloff et al., 1999). Of course, 
because White men disproportionately hold high-status positions in many 
organizations and given the tendency toward homophily in the formation 
of social networks, women and minority employees are at a disadvantage in 
terms of developing the social network ties that might be most beneficial to 
their careers (McGuire, 2000; Stoloff et al., 1999; Trimble & Kmec, 2011).
Those who have access to each of these types of workplace supportive 
relationships are better able to enhance their career outcomes than those 
who have limited access to such assistance. The inequality that results from 
the differential access to such relationships overlays the existing inequality 
in which White men are more likely to hold positions of power, authority, 
and influence. While women and minority employees who are dispropor-
tionately found in lower level or lower status positions in most organizations 
can seek to form beneficial relationships with peers or even with subordi-
nates and with those outside their organizations, their access to supportive 
relationships that might enhance their career outcomes are more limited 
and more challenging than is the case for White males, in general. Even 
when women and minority employees are able to find mentors or sponsors 
among those who hold higher status positions, in many cases these rela-
tionships are more likely to include cross-sex and cross-race characteristics, 
which as noted, may impede a sense of openness and cause hesitation in 
full engagement in the relationship on the part of either or both parties. 
While some organizations have tried to overcome this potential barrier to 
the success of women and minority employees by creating formal programs 
to assign mentors or sponsors, such programs have not transformed the 
unequal outcomes that continue to get reproduced in most organizations 
over time. To understand both the limits and the promise of workplace sup-
portive relationships as a means to enhance inclusiveness in the labor force, 
we would like to look more closely at the roles of mentors versus sponsors 
and to consider ways that women and minority employees might use such 
relationships to better effect than has often been found to be the case.

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    69
THE STRUCTURE OF CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND 
GAINING ACCESS TO CAREER ASSISTANCE
In order to understand the role that workplace supportive relationships can 
play in the career development of women and minority employees, as well 
as for White men, we should give some attention to how the labor market 
is structured and the usual progression that is necessary in order for one to 
achieve career success in terms of obtaining positions of power, authority, 
and influence. In terms of formal theory in economics and sociology, the 
assumption is that people obtain employment through a process of match-
ing people to jobs (Elliott, 2000; Goldberg, Finkelstein, Perry, & Konrad, 
2004; Handel, 2003). In most cases, there is an assumption that this process 
is an open one in which jobs are made available and potential candidates 
seek out an opportunity to be chosen for jobs for which they are qualified. 
In such conceptions of the labor market, there is recognition that some 
potential job candidates may have better credentials, more motivation, and 
may make more effort in order to be recognized and selected for desirable 
job positions. Similarly, there is understanding that some jobs and some 
employers provide better opportunities for job growth and career success. 
Those who are selected for jobs for which their skills are matched, then en-
ter organizations for which there is an internal process of job matching that 
might lead over time to promotions to higher level positions, or in some 
cases to opportunities with other organizations for which one is able to 
compete and move up through changes in either jobs or employers (Cao, 
2001; Ibarra et al., 2010; James, 2000; Smith, 2005).
Career success, then, is a process of continually being on the lookout for 
new opportunities in which one can develop or utilize skills in ways that en-
able new responsibilities and potentially greater rewards (Burt, 2000, 2001; 
Lin, Cook, & Burt, 2001). Although the literature often speaks of careers 
as if there are defined paths to follow, in most cases there is a labyrinth 
through which job seekers must find a way forward, often going around 
obstacles and often doing so by recognizing or creating their own opportu-
nities (Benko & Anderson, 2010; Eagly & Carli, 2007). In the career litera-
ture, job seekers are encouraged to create personal brands and to enhance 
their marketability through continual learning. Given the importance of 
the job matching process throughout one’s career, it is also important to 
extend information about new opportunities on an ongoing basis by net-
working both with those with whom one has a close personal relationship 
and through the development of more distant relationships with people 
who have links to other sources of information and connections (Baker, 
2000; Brass, Galaskiewicz, Greve, & Wenpin, 2004; Fernandez & Fernandez-
Mateo, 2006; Marsden & Gorman, 2001; McGuire, 2000; Seidel, Polzer, & 
Stewart, 2000).

70    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
We know from the extensive research on career development that hav-
ing friends and supporters in the labor market helps, because they can 
provide information about new opportunities, can use influence to ease 
one’s access to being selected for desirable positions and often can provide 
or make opportunities known that can give one an inside edge (Adler & 
Kwon, 2002; de Janasz, Sullivan, Whiting, & Biech, 2003; Hewlett, 2013; 
Scandura, 1992; Seibert, Kraimer, & Liden, 2001). In this general process of 
using connections to enhance career outcomes, knowing lots of people and 
being known by them matters in terms of career success. Further, job seek-
ers with high aspirations are often advised to recognize that some assign-
ments matter more than others and that some jobs are better gateways to 
upward mobility than are others. Moving ahead requires finding the right 
pathway and doing so often requires developing relationships with people 
who can provide valuable assistance (Baker, 2000). Relationship building is 
an investment that career seekers are told to undertake, but they are also 
told that some investments in networking pay off more than others, so one 
should seek to develop those relationships that will be more instrumental 
for his or her own career development and where he or she can make the 
most contributions. As one seeks to develop his or her own career pathway, 
one can also enhance their networking position by acting as a broker for 
others (Burt, 1992). Being able to provide others with information, influ-
ence, or opportunity is a way to enhance one’s own power with reference to 
others and doing so can also lead those with similar kinds of valuable social 
resources to reciprocate.
Against this ideal conception of the functioning of the job market, there 
has, of course, been recognition that sometimes discrimination takes place 
and that it may disadvantage some potential applicants over others, but 
understanding the extent and nature of such discriminatory processes has 
been the subject of disagreement in the labor force literature (Aigner & 
Cain, 1977; Becker, 1957; Bendrick, Jackson, & Reinoso, 1994; Blau & Fer-
ber, 1987; Reskin, 2000; Sturm, 2001). Some believe that the labor force, 
in general, functions as expected, but that there are isolated pockets of 
discrimination that take place because of the ill will of a few gatekeepers in 
a few organizations. Others believe that discrimination is more widespread 
and systemic and that to curtail discriminatory actions requires regulations 
and close monitoring that restrain the ability of those who might want to 
discriminate to act on their preferences.
In either case, however, the focus has been on discrimination in terms 
of negative actions toward disadvantaged groups, for example, of Whites 
toward non-Whites or men toward women (DiTomaso, 2015; Greenwald & 
Pettigrew, 2014). The assumption in such analyses is that the mechanism 
that leads to inequality is a process of exclusion of disadvantaged groups 
from full access to opportunities. In the discussion of the roles of mentors 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    71
and sponsors, the same kind of focus on exclusion has been the norm. 
When the issue of the need for mentors or sponsors is raised, the problem 
is framed in terms of the lack of such relationships for women and minority 
employees, rather than, for example, the overabundance of mentors and 
sponsors that White males seem to have available to them. We believe that 
to fully understand the structure of the labor market, including the role of 
workplace supportive relationships like those of mentors and sponsors, that 
we should turn this framework around and think more about advantage 
than about discrimination and about the inclusion that takes place within 
and among dominant groups more so than about the exclusion of women 
and minorities (DiTomaso, 2015).
Specifically, we argue that it may not be what Whites do to or against 
Blacks or other non-Whites that reproduces inequality in the labor force as 
much as what Whites do for each other (DiTomaso, 2013, 2015; Greenwald 
& Pettigrew, 2014). In other words, White men often act, both consciously 
and subconsciously, to give preference to other White men (DiTomaso, 
2015; Stainback & Tomaskovic-Devey, 2012). White men are more often 
offered opportunities and are chosen for important assignments or jobs, 
and these processes of inclusion are what contribute most to the repro-
duction of inequality in the labor force and throughout careers. We know 
from the research on processes of homophily and in-group favoritism that 
under most circumstances, we give preferences to those who are like our-
selves (Brewer, 1999; McPherson et al., 2001; Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Thus, 
when there is unequal representation across organizations in terms of who 
holds positions of authority, power, and decision making, with White men 
overrepresented as one moves from lower to higher status levels, then the 
enactment of homophily and in-group favoritism contributes to the repro-
duction of an already unequal system (Brewer, 1998; Ibarra, 1992, 1995; 
McPherson et al., 2001). The research evidence suggests that when inequal-
ity is long term and there is a dominant in-group, such as the position held 
by White men in the United States that they become associated with proto-
types or schema that suggest that they will be evaluated as more competent, 
more likeable, more trustworthy, and importantly, that when resources are 
available to distribute, members of the dominant in-group members will 
be favored (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 2008; Fiske et al., 2002; Stainback & 
Tomaskovic-Devey, 2012; Tilly, 1998). Despite these well documented pat-
terns in the labor force and career literature, our theoretical models still 
focus on discrimination and racism or sexism against women and minority 
employees more so than on advantage and favoritism that benefits White 
men as the drivers of career outcomes.

72    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
Advice Versus Opportunity From Workplace Supportive 
Relationships
In this context, we want to raise questions about how the roles of men-
tors versus sponsors have been understood, and we want to challenge or-
ganizational leaders to consider more carefully how opportunities are ac-
cessed and distributed within their organizations. In prior research on the 
performance evaluations of scientists and engineers, we considered the 
relative importance of having mentors versus being given favorable work-
ing conditions that facilitate performance (DiTomaso, Post, Smith et al., 
2007). With data from more than 3,000 scientists and engineers from 24 
large, U.S. based companies, we found that both White and Black women 
were more likely to say that they had mentors, but White men were more 
likely to say that they had “technical control,” meaning that they had a 
strong say in deciding the projects on which they worked. Importantly, we 
found as well that having a mentor had no effect on how the scientists and 
engineers were evaluated by their managers, but having technical control 
contributed significantly to improved evaluation of performance on both 
innovativeness (i.e., technical skills) and promotability into management. 
We interpreted these results to mean that women were getting advice, while 
men were getting opportunity. These results led us to consider more care-
fully what the role of mentors are for career success and what outcomes 
might be likely from the growth of programs to encourage more mentors 
for women and minority employees, whether formally assigned or infor-
mally encouraged.
Two issues became evident as we explored more fully the role of mentors 
as a solution to workforce inequality for women and minority employees. 
First, if one does a basic Internet search of the term mentor, most of the 
definitions zero in on giving advice or imparting wisdom. The notion that 
what mentors do is primarily give advice, of course, is inconsistent with how 
the issue of mentoring arose in the first place. It was through the recogni-
tion that most people who get ahead, meaning those who rise to positions 
of power and authority, do so with the help of others who led early propo-
nents of mentoring to argue that in order to succeed, women and minority 
employees would need people to help them. But the kind of help that those 
who have been successful have gotten has not been so much getting advice 
from those who have themselves succeeded, as much as it has been being 
offered opportunities, in the form of access, visibility, rewards, and most 
importantly good jobs and good job assignments (Fagenson, 1989; Hewlett, 
2013; Kram, 1985). In this regard, it is not advice that women and minority 
employees need. Rather it is someone to sponsor their advancement and to 
do so by being in a position to make sure that they get opportunities when 
they are available (Hewlett, 2013). Also necessary is someone to help them 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    73
get the right training, to meet the right people, to have the right job assign-
ments and to have the resources necessary to get the job done well. That 
is not the role that most mentors assume they are taking on and in many 
cases, those who serve as mentors for women and minority employees are 
not necessarily themselves in a position to offer such advantages to those to 
whom they are giving advice. Therefore, with growing attention to the dis-
tinctions between the roles of mentors and sponsors, there has been more 
recognition of the need for more substantive assistance than advice, but 
even in this conversation, there has been little discussion of how such roles 
are likely to work in an organizational system that is both hierarchical and 
unequal at the outset, and one in which White men are disproportionately 
in charge. Further, White men have not been held accountable in most 
organizations for how they distribute resources and opportunities on an 
everyday basis.
That is the second issue that we believe is important to consider when 
thinking about workplace supportive relationships. Because the focus on 
diversity and inclusion and more specifically on workplace inequality has 
been on discrimination in terms of a negative framing of Whites and men 
excluding non-Whites and women from job opportunities, there has been 
much less attention to the way that White men take steps to include, i.e., to 
look out for the interests of people like themselves (DiTomaso, 2015). It is 
not that they do so consciously or purposely, but because of the kind of in-
group favoritism that is pervasive in which we tend to think of people who 
are like ourselves as more competent and worthy, when opportunities come 
along, those who are likely to come to mind and who are likely thought to 
be especially well suited to new opportunities are likely to be similar oth-
ers, especially in terms of gender and race/ethnicity. The evidence for this 
kind of favoritism is rather clear in the evidence (Reskin, 2003; Stainback 
& Tomaskovic-Devey, 2012). Even from the initial hire, White men are paid 
more, promoted sooner, and provided with more resources to do the job. 
Over time, they are found disproportionately at higher levels of authority, at 
higher income levels, and with more options available to them well before 
they have demonstrated performance. As Stainback and Tomaskovic-Devey 
(2012) found in their study using data from the Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission from 1966 through 2005, White men retained their over 
representation in the best jobs, the jobs with the most authority, and the 
jobs with the most training associated with them. Thus, despite legislation 
to protect against discrimination, over a 50-year period since the passage of 
the Civil Rights Act, White men are as well situated in the labor market as 
ever before, and in fact in some sectors, they have expanded their repre-
sentation. As long as companies look only to prevent discrimination against 
women and minorities, but do not pay attention to the opportunities that 

74    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
are preferentially offered to White men, then the structure of existing in-
equality will be reproduced over time, as it has been for decades.
In this context, what is it that mentors, whether formal or informal, are 
likely to do? They can give advice to their protégés, but unless they also 
consciously look out for their interests, pass along information, use influ-
ence, and offer opportunity as well, then the effects of the mentoring rela-
tionship may be modest at best. In an organizational system that is already 
unequal in terms of who is distributed into which sorts of positions and 
in which there is no attention to or salience of how opportunities are dis-
tributed and who gets considered first for advancement and rewards, then 
it is quite likely that even in well-meaning organizations who claim their 
commitment to diversity, women and minority employees will continue to 
get advice, while White men get opportunity. With a higher proportion of 
those who themselves have the capacity to offer meaningful opportunity 
being White men in most organizations, one might wonder if those who 
serve as “mentors” might offer advice to those who are not like themselves, 
but opportunity to those who are. In other words, they serve as mentors for 
women and minority employees, but as sponsors for other White men.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR BOTH MENTORS 
AND MENTEES
Broadening the Role for Mentors: More Than Advice
By calling attention to the way that favoritism, advantage, and privilege 
works in organizations that focus only on processes of discrimination, we 
hope to challenge the usual assumptions about why women and minorities, 
for example, may need “mentors,” and importantly what mentors and/or 
sponsors should undertake in their efforts to provide workplace support. 
Certainly, our intention is to argue that meaningful support in the work-
place requires more than offering advice or imparting wisdom. Those who 
want to make a difference and help change the outcomes over time should 
also champion, open doors, and connect their protégés with opportunities 
that will enhance their visibility, strengthen their skills, and position them 
for potential advancement. Mentors should, as has been assumed in past lit-
erature, teach leadership skills, suggest ways to develop competencies and 
provide recommended pathways for dealing with difficult situations. But 
mentors should also take on the role of sponsors who broker, influence, 
and actively engage where it is possible for them to do so in ways that might 
provide substantive opportunity for those they are trying to support.
Too often the discussion about mentors—and even discussions about 
mentors being sponsors—has not confronted head on the reality that 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    75
taking on a role to help others get ahead is, on its face, a system of un-
equal influence in which some will benefit more than others. What would it 
mean in organizations if everyone had a mentor or sponsor? Presumably if 
it means that the organization is actively taking an interest in making sure 
that all employees have the resources they need and the developmental 
opportunities to enhance their skills and their contributions to the organi-
zation, then one would expect a better environment for employees and an 
overall better performance for the organization. But instead, such a system 
of workplace supportive relationships is uneven. Some have more access 
than others, some mentors are more powerful or better placed to be help-
ful than are others, and some protégés stand out as fitting the prototype of 
the competent employee more so than others. In that environment, when 
the point is to get an inside edge against potential competition, then men-
tors and sponsors both contribute to what might be perceived by some in 
the organization as a system that is unfair. By not paying attention overall 
to how opportunities are passed along, to whether there is favoritism or 
preference given, especially for already advantaged groups more so than 
for others and to whether managers accept a responsibility to assist the 
development and advancement of all of their employees, then inequality 
will be reproduced in the company and it is likely that women and minority 
employees will continue to get less benefit from a system of mentoring, or 
even sponsorship, than the literature suggests that they should.
How Mentees Can Help Their Mentors Open Doors 
for Them
In raising these issues about mentoring and inequality, however, we would 
be remiss if we did not also consider ways that women and minority em-
ployees, or White men for that matter, can improve their experiences with 
those with whom they form relationships in the workplace and, in doing so, 
also gain more substantive outcomes (Hill & Kamprath, 1991; Humberd & 
Rouse, 2015; Scandura, 1992; Wellington & Spence, 2001). As already men-
tioned, mentoring relationships rarely last more than three years, because 
people change positions, organizations, and take on other responsibilities. 
It is good advice for all employees, therefore, to foster good workplace re-
lationships with a number of people, across multiple positions, and across 
time. Because any given relationship takes time and effort to develop and 
maintain, there are limits to what one can do in developing such relation-
ships, but there are ways that one can be the type of person in an organiza-
tion who others want to know and help, and that is one of the primary goals 
(Hill & Kamprath, 1991). Those mentees who help mentors help them will 
likely receive more benefit from a given relationship. First, being someone 

76    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
whom others will want to be around, to reach out to help and to be associ-
ated with helps in building meaningful mentor-protégé relationships. In 
other words, if you are someone who makes your mentor look good be-
cause of the association with you, there will be more incentive for your men-
tor to act more like a sponsor and to look out for your interests. One can be 
the type of person whom others want to help by taking initiative, standing 
out for doing a good job, taking on difficult assignments, demonstrating 
competence, and being a person of ideas and good will. Mentoring is not a 
one-way relationship. The mentee can help the mentor, as well as the other 
way around, even in terms of things like extending their networks and help-
ing them understand what is going on in other parts of the organization. 
When a protégé has multiple mentors and actively pursues relationships 
across functions and both inside and outside the organization, then he or 
she can act as a bridge to new sources of knowledge that can be beneficial 
to the mentor as well as to oneself. The relationship of mentor and protégé 
should be one where both parties grow and change with the relationship, so 
that when the time comes that the relationships take a new path, both are 
grateful for the experience and ready to move forward. These, of course, 
are ideal representations of the kinds of relationships that would be most 
beneficial to both employees and to those who might help them and to the 
organization as well.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have tried to review briefly the research on different types 
of workplace supportive relationships, with special attention to the con-
cepts of mentors versus sponsors. In doing so, we have raised questions 
about the seemingly overemphasis given to mentors, who are people who 
give advice, rather than to those who can provide more substantive help by 
looking out for the interests of those who are being helped and providing 
them with opportunities that will enhance their skills, their potential for 
advancement and their rewards. We have discussed why White men have 
been the beneficiaries of such relationships, whether mentors, sponsors, 
coaches, role models, or networks, and we have especially noted the inat-
tention to the ways that White men are favored in the distribution of such 
social resources in most organizations. Rather than focusing policy con-
cerns primarily on discrimination and exclusion of women and minorities, 
it seems that more organizations should recognize and make more visible 
the advantage, preference, and favoritism that are often provided to White 
men, who more easily form relationships with those in positions of power, 
authority, and influence, because of the already existing inequality that ex-
ists in many organizations, with White men disproportionately in higher 

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    77
status positions. Programs that try to expand the access of women and mi-
nority employees to mentors, or even to sponsors, but which do not also 
address more broadly the way social resources are shared and distributed 
across the organizations on an everyday basis are not likely to have major 
effects in reducing inequality or changing who is likely to end up in charge.
The issues that we raise are large ones and not ones that are easy to ad-
dress in most organizations. Most organizations are hierarchical, unequal, 
and do not have much of a mandate to change those characteristics. Unless 
there is more of a commitment for outcomes and not just process, it is un-
likely that programs of amelioration, focused on what women and minority 
employees lack or how they are excluded, are not going to lead to major 
change. But, there are things that women and minority employees can do 
to better position themselves for organizational success, including for form-
ing relationships with potential mentors and sponsors. Understanding the 
nature of such relationships, the importance of being actively involved in 
fostering them and also recognizing that one has to be someone who oth-
ers will want to know and help may shift the conversation about how to be 
successful in organizations. Knowing that taking initiative, accepting chal-
lenges, acting as a broker, and generally being someone who other people 
like (which is a skill that can be learned like other leadership behaviors) 
can enable women and minority employees to understand ways to stand out 
and stand up and in doing so can also enhance both their confidence and 
capabilities in ways that may make a difference over time.
REFERENCES
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S.-W. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 27(1), 17–40.
Aigner, D. J., & Cain, G. C. (1977). Statistical theories of discrimination in labor 
markets. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30, 175–187.
Babcock, L., & Laschever, S. (2003). Women don’t ask: Negotiation and the gender divide. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bages, C., Vernies, C., & Martino, D. (2015). Virtures of a hardworking role model 
to improve girls’ mathematics performance. 40(1), 55–64.
Baker, W. E. (2000). Achieving success through social capital: Tapping the hidden resources 
in your personal and business networks. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bandura, A. (1969). A social learning theory of identification process. Handbook of 
Socialization Theory and Research. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Becker, G. S. (1957). The economics of discrimination (1st ed.). Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Bendrick, M., Jr., Jackson, C. W., & Reinoso, V. A. (1994, Summer). Measuring em-
ployment discrimination through controlled experiments. The Review of Black 
Political Economy, 23, 25–48.

78    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
Benko, C., & Anderson, M. (2010). Lattice ways to work: How companies can reconfig-
ure when, where, and how work happens. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review 
Press.
Blau, F. D., & Ferber, M. A. (1987). Discrimination: Empirical evidence from the 
United States. American Economic Review, 77(2), 316–320.
Brass, D. J., Galaskiewicz, J., Greve, H. R., & Wenpin, T. (2004). Taking stock of 
networks and organizations: A multilevel perspective. Academy of Management 
Journal, 47(6), 795–817.
Brewer, M. B. (1998). In-group favoritism: The subtle side of intergroup discrimina-
tion. In D. Messick & A. Tenbrunsel (Eds.), Codes of conduct: Behavioral research 
and business ethic (pp. 160–170). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Brewer, M. B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice: Ingroup love or outgroup hate? 
Journal of Social Issues, 55(3), 429–444.
Burke, R. J., & McKeen, C. A. (1997). Not every managerial woman who makes it has 
a mentor. Women in Management Review, 12, 136–139.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Burt, R. S. (1997). The contingent value of social capital. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 42, 339–365.
Burt, R. S. (1998). The gender of social capital. Rationality and Society, 10, 5–36.
Burt, R. S. (2000). The network structure of social capital. Research in Organizational 
Behavior, 22, 345–423.
Burt, R. S. (2001). Structural holes versus network closure as social capital. In N. 
Lin, K. Cook, & R. Burt (Eds.), Social capital: Theory and research (pp. 31–56). 
New York, NY: Aldine De Gruyter.
Buunk, A. P., Peiró, J. M., & Griffioen, C. (2007). A positive role model may stimulate 
career-oriented behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37(7), 1489–1500.
Cable, D. M., & Murray, B. (1999). Tournaments versus sponsored mobility as de-
terminants of job search success. The Academy of Management Journal, 42(4), 
439–449.
Cao, Y. (2001). Careers inside organizations: A comparative study of promotion de-
termination in reforming China. Social Forces, 80(2), 683–711.
Chao, G. T., Walz, P. M., & Gardner, P. D. (1992). Formal and informal mentorships: 
A comparison on mentoring functions and contrast with nonmentored coun-
terparts. Personnel Psychology, 45(3), 619–636.
Cheryan, S., Siy, J. O., Vichayapai, M., Drury, B. J., & Kim, S. (2011). Do female and 
male role models who embody STEM stereotypes hinder women’s anticipated 
success in STEM? Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2(6), 656–664.
Chun, J. U., Sosik, J. J., & Yi, Y. N. (2012). A longitudinal study of mentor and 
protege outcomes in formal mentoring relationships. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 33(8), 1071–1094.
Cohen, G. L., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. D. (1999). The mentor’s dilemma: Providing 
critical feedback across the racial divide. Personal and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
25, 1302–1318.
Cuddy, A. J. C., Fiske, S. T., & Glick, P. (2008). Warmth and competence as universal 
dimensions of social perception: The stereotype content model and the bias 
map. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 61–137.

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    79
de Janasz, S. C., Sullivan, S. E., Whiting, V., & Biech, E. (2003). Mentor networks 
and career success: Lessons for turbulent times. The Academy of Management 
Executive, 17(4), 78–93.
DiTomaso, N. (2013). The American non-dilemma: Racial inequality without racism. New 
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
DiTomaso, N. (2015). Racism and discrimination versus advantage and favoritism: 
Bias for versus bias against. Research in Organizational Behavior, 35, 57–77.
DiTomaso, N., Post, C., & Parks-Yancy, R. (2007). Workforce diversity and inequality: 
Power, status, and numbers. Annual Review of Sociology, 33(1), 473–501.
DiTomaso, N., Post, C., Smith, D. R., Farris, G. F., & Cordero, R. (2007). Effects of 
structural position on allocation and evaluation decisions for scientists and 
engineers. Administrative Science Quarterly, 52(2), 175–207.
Duncan, G. J., & Hoffman, S. (1979). On-the-job training and earnings differences 
by race and sex. Review of Economics and Statistics, 61, 594–603.
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2007, September). Women and the labyrinth of leader-
ship. Harvard Business Review, 62–71.
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, Mona G., & Klonsky, B. (1992). Gender and the evaluation 
of leaders: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 111(1), 3–22.
Elliott, J. R. (2000). Class, race, and job matching in contemporary urban labor 
markets. Social Science Quarterly, 81(4), 1036–1052.
Elliott, J. R. (2001). Referral hiring and ethnically homogeneous jobs: How preva-
lent is the connection and for whom? Social Science Research, 30, 401–425.
Ensher, E. A., & Murphy, S. E. (1997). Effects of race, gender, perceived similar-
ity, and contact on mentoring relationships. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50, 
460–481.
Evertsson, M. (2004). Formal on-the-job training: A gender-typed experience and 
wage-related advantage? European Sociological Review, 20(1), 79–94.
Fagenson, E. A. (1989). The mentor advantage: Perceived career/job experienc-
es of protégés versus non-protégés. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 10(4), 
309–320.
Feldman, D. C. (2001). Career coaching: What HR professionals and managers 
need to know. People and Strategy, 24(2), 26–35.
Fels, A. (2004, April). Do women lack ambition? Harvard Business Review, 82(4), 
50–56, 58–60.
Fernandez, R. M., & Fernandez-Mateo, I. (2006). Network, race, and hiring. Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 71, 41–71.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) ste-
reotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived 
status and competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6), 
878–902.
Fournies, F. F. (1978). Coaching for improved work performances. Bridgewater, NJ: Van 
Nostran Reinhold.
Gibbons, A. (1993). White men can mentor: Help from the majority. Science, 
262(5136), 1130–1134.
Gibson, D. E. (2003). Developing the professional self-concept: Role modelconstru-
als in early, middle, and late career stages. Organization Science, 14(5), 591–610.

80    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
Goldberg, C. B., Finkelstein, L. M., Perry, E. L., & Konrad, A. M. (2004). Job and 
industry fit: The effects of age and gender matches on career progress out-
comes. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25(7), 807–829.
Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78, 
1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. (1995). Getting a job: A study of contacts and careers (2nd ed.). Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Greenwald, A. G., & Pettigrew, T. F. (2014). With malice toward none and charity for 
some. American Psychologist, 69(7), 669–684.
Hackman, J. R., & Wageman, R. (2005). A theory of team coaching. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 30(2), 269–287.
Hall, D. T., Otazo, K. L., & Hollenbeck, G. P. (1999). Beyond closed doors: What 
really happens in executive coaching. Organizational Dynamics, 27(3), 39–53.
Handel, M. J. (2003). Skills mismatch in the labor market. Annual Review of Sociology, 
29(1), 135–165.
Harber, K. D. (1998). Feedback to minorities: Evidence of a positive bias. Journal of 
Personality and Social Pscyhology, 74(3), 622–628.
Haslam, S. A., Oakes, P., Reynolds, K. J., & Turner, J. C. (1999). Social identity sa-
lience and the emergence of stereotype consensus. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 25, 809–818.
Hennig, M., & Jardim, A. (1977). The managerial woman. Garden City, NY: Anchor 
Press/Doubleday.
Hewlett, S. A. (2013). Forget a mentor, find a sponsor: The new way to fast–track your 
career. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Hewlett, S. A., Peraino, K., Sherbin, L., & Sumberg, K. (2011). The sponsor effect: 
Breaking through the last glass ceiling Harvard Business Review. Boston, MA.
Hill, L., & Kamprath, N. (1991). Beyond the myth of the perfect mentor: Building a net-
work of developmental relationships.(Product #491096). Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press.
Hogg, M. A. (2001). A social identity theory of leadership. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Review, 5(3), 184–200.
Hogg, M. A., & Ridgeway, C. L. (2003). Social identity: Sociological and social psy-
chological perspectives. Social Psychology Quarterly, 66, 97–100.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. (2000). Social identity and self-categorization processes 
in organizational contexts. Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 121–140.
Hogg, M. A., & Turner, J. C. (1985). Interpersonal attraction, social identification, 
and psychological group function. European Journal of Social Psychology, 15, 
51–66.
Humberd, B. K., & Rouse, E. D. (2015). Seeing you in me and me in you: Personal 
identification in the phases of mentoring relationships. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 41(3), 435–455.
Hunt, D. M., & Michael, C. (1983). Mentorship: A career training and development 
tool. Academy of Management Review, 8(3), 475–485.
Ianiro, P., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Kauffeld, S. (2015). Coaches and Clients 
in action: A sequential analysis of interpersonal coach and client behavior. 
Journal of Business and Psychology, 30(3), 435–456.

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    81
Ibarra, H. (1992). Homophily and differential returns: Sex differences in network 
structures and access in an advertising firm. Administrative Science Quarterly, 
37, 422–438.
Ibarra, H. (1993). Personal networks of women and minorities in management: A 
conceptual framework. Academy of Management Review, 18, 56–87.
Ibarra, H. (1995). Race, opportunity, and diversity of social circles in managerial 
networks. Academy of Management Journal, 38(3), 673–703.
Ibarra, H., Carter, N. M., & Silva, C. (2010). Why men still get more promotions 
than women. Harvard Business Review, 88(9), 80–85.
James, E. H. (2000). Race-related differences in promotions and support: Underly-
ing effects of human and social capital. Organization Science, 11(5), 493–508.
Joecks, J., Pull, K., & Vetter, K. (2013). Gender diversity in the boardroom and firm 
performance: What exactly constitutes a “critical mass?” Journal of Business 
Ethics, 118, 61–72.
Kanter, R. M. (1977). Men and women of the corporation. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Kanter, R. M. (1979). Power failure in management circuits. Harvard Business Re-
view, 57(4), 65–75.
Kanter, R. M. (1989). The new managerial work. Harvard Business Review, 67(6), 
85–92.
Kram, K. E. (1985). Mentoring at work: Developmental relationships in organizational life. 
Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Lin, N., Cook, K. S., & Burt, R. S. (Eds.). (2001). Social capital: Theory and research. 
New York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Lunding, F. S., Clements, C. E., & Perkins, D. S. (1979). Everyone who makes it has 
a mentor. Harvard Business Review, 56, 89–101.
Marsden, P. V., & Gorman, E. H. (2001). Social networks, job changes, and recruit-
ment. In I. Berg & A. L. Kalleberg (Eds.), Sourcebook on labor markets: Evolving 
structures and processes (pp. 467–502). New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
Marx, D. M., & Goff, P. A. (2005). Clearing the air: The effect of experimenter race 
on targets’ test performance and subjective experience. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 44, 645–657.
Marx, D. M., Ko, S. J., & Friedman, R. A. (2009). The “Obama effect”: How a salient 
role model reduces race-based performance differences. Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, 45(4), 953–956.
McGuire, G. M. (2000). Gender, race, ethnicity, and networks: The factors affecting 
the status of employees’ network members. Work & Occupations, 27, 500–523.
McGuire, G. M., & Reskin, B. (1993). Authority hierarchies at work: The impacts of 
race and sex. Gender and Society, 7(4), 487–506.
McPherson, J. M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Ho-
mophily in social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415–444.
Moore, G. (1990). Structural determinants of men’s and women’s personal net-
works. American Sociological Review, 55, 726–735.
Mouw, T. (2003). Social capital and finding a job: Do contacts matter? American 
Sociological Review, 68, 868–898.
O’Brien, K. E., Biga, A., Kessler, S. R., & Allen, T. D. (2010). A meta-analytic inves-
tigation of gender differences in mentoring. Journal of Management, 36(2), 
537–553.

82    N. DiTOMASO and C. PALMER
O’Brien, L. T., Hitti, A., Shaffer, E., Van Camp, A. R., Henry, D., & Gilbert, P. N. 
(2016, October). Improving girls’ sense of fit in science: Increasing the im-
pact of role models. Social Psychological and Personality Science Online First. URL: 
journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1948550616671997
Petersen, T., Saporta, I., & Seidel, M.–D. L. (2000). Offering a job: Meritocracy and 
social networks. American Journal of Sociology, 106(3), 763–816.
Podolny, J. M., & Baron, J. N. (1997). Resources and relationships: Social networks 
and mobility in the workplace. American Sociological Review, 62(5), 673–693.
Post, C., & Byron, K. (2015). Women on boards and firm financial performance: A 
meta-analysis. Academy of Management Journal, 58(5), 1546–1571.
Ragins, B. R. (1997). Diversified mentoring relationships in organizations: A power 
perspective. Academy of Management Review, 22(2), 482–521.
Ragins, B. R., & Cotton, J. L. (1999). Mentor functions and outcomes: A comparison 
of men and women in formal and informal mentoring relationships. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 84(4), 529–550.
Ragins, B. R., & Scandura, T. A. (1994). Gender differences in expected outcomes of 
mentoring relationships. The Academy of Management Journal, 37(4), 957–971.
Ragins, B. R., & Sundstrom, E. (1989). Gender and power in organizations: A longi-
tudinal perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 105(1), 51–88.
Reskin, B. F. (2000). The proximate causes of employment discrimination. Contem-
porary Sociology, 29(2), 319–328.
Reskin, B. F. (2003). Modeling ascriptive inequality: From motives to mechanisms. 
American Sociological Review, 68(1), 1–21.
Ridgeway, C. L. (2001). The emergence of status beliefs: From structural inequality 
to legitimizing ideology. In J. T. Jost & B. Major (Eds.), The psychology of legiti-
macy (pp. 257–277). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ridgeway, C. L., & Erickson, K. G. (2000). Creating and spreading status beliefs. 
American Journal of Sociology, 106(3), 579–615.
Ridgeway, C. L., Boyle, E. H., Kuipers, K. J., & Robinson, D. T. (1998). How do status 
beliefs develop? The role of resources and interactional experiences. Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 63(3), 331–350.
Rudman, L. A., & P. Glick. (2001). Prescriptive gender stereotypes and backlash 
toward agentic women. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 743–762.
Ryan, M. K., & Haslam, S. A. (2007). The glass cliff: Exploring the dynamics sur-
rounding the appointment of women to precarious leadership positions. 
Academy of Management Review, 32(2), 549–572.
Scandura, T. A. (1992). Mentorship and career mobility: An empirical investigation. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13(2), 169–174.
Schein, V. E. (1973). The relationship between sex role stereotypes and requisite 
management characteristics. Journal of Applied Psychology, 57(2), 95–100.
Seibert, S. E., Kraimer, M. L., & Liden, R. C. (2001). A social capital theory of career 
success. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 219–237.
Seidel, M.–D., Polzer, J. T., & Stewart, K. J. (2000). Friends in high places: The ef-
fects of social networks on discrimination in salary negotiations. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 45(1), 1–24

Mentors, Sponsors, and Diversity in Work Organizations    83
Singh, V., Vinnicombe, S., & James, K. (2006). Constructing a professional identity: 
How young female managers use role models. Women in Management Review, 
21(1), 67–81.
Smith, R. A. (2005). Do the determinants of promotion differ for white men versus 
women and minorities: An exploration of intersectionalism through spon-
sored and contest mobility processes. American Behavioral Scientist, 48(9), 
1157–1181.
Stainback, K., & Tomaskovic-Devey, D. (2012). Documenting desegregation: Racial and 
gender segregation in private-sector employment since the Civil Rights Act. New York, 
NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test of 
performance of African-Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
69, 797–811.
Stoloff, J. A., Glanville, J. L., & Bienenstock, E. J. (1999). Women’s participation in 
the labor force: The role of social networks. Social Networks, 21(1), 91–108.
Sturm, S. (2001). Second generation employment discrimination: A structural ap-
proach. Columbia Law Review, 458(101).
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behaviour. 
In S. Austin & W. Worchel (Ed.), The social psychology of intergroup relations 
(pp. 7–24). Chicago, IL: Nelson Hall.
Taylor, C. A., Lord, C. G., McIntyre, R. B., & Paulson, R. M. (2011). The Hillary Clin-
ton effect: When the same role model inspires or fails to inspire improved 
performance under stereotype threat. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 
14(4), 447–459.
Thach, L., & Heinselman, T. (1999). Executive coaching defined. Training & Devel-
opment, 53(3), 34–39.
Thomas, D. A. (1989). Mentoring and irrationality: The role of racial taboos. Hu-
man Resource Management, 28, 279–290.
Thomas, D. A. (1990). The impact of race on managers’ experiences of develop-
mental relationships (mentoring and sponsorship): An intra-organizational 
study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 11(6), 479–492.
Thomas, D. A. (2001, April). The truth about mentoring minorities: Race matters. 
Harvard Business Review, 79(4), 99–107.
Tilly, C. (1998). Durable inequality. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Tomaskovic-Devey, D., & Skaggs, S. (2002). Sex segregation, labor process organi-
zation, and gender earnings inequality. American Journal of Sociology, 108(1), 
102–128.
Trimble, L. B., & Kmec, J. A. (2011). The role of social networks in getting a job. 
Sociology Compass, 5(2), 165–178.
Turner, R. H. (1960). Sponsored and contest mobility and the school system. Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 25(6), 855–867.
Wellington, S., & Spence, B. (2001). Be your own mentor: Strategies from top women on 
the secrets of success. New York, NY: Random House.
Young, D. M., Rudman, L. A., Buettner, H., & McLean, M. C. (2013). The influence 
of female role models on women’s implicit science cognitions. Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 37(3), 283–292.

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 85–110
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
85
CHAPTER 3
LEADERSHIP DIVERSITY 
IN AFRICA AND THE 
AFRICAN DIASPORA
Clive M. Mukanzi
Jomo Kenyatta University 
of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kenya
Terri R. Lituchy
CETYS Universidad, Mexico
Betty Jane Punnett
University of the West Indies, 
Barbados
Bella L. Galperin
University of Tampa
Thomas A. Senaji
Kenya Methodist University, 
Kenya
Elham K. Metwally
American University  
in Cairo, Egypt
Lemayon Melyoki
University of Dar es Salaam 
Business School, Tanzania
Courtney A. Henderson
Berkeley College
Vincent Bagire
Makerere University Business 
School, Uganda
Cynthia A. Bulley
Central University, Ghana
Noble Osei-Bonsu
Central University, Ghana

86    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
ABSTRACT
The motivation for this chapter is to demonstrate how leadership is diverse in 
Africa and the African diaspora. The chapter summarizes the findings from 
the LEAD (Leadership Effectiveness in Africa and the Diaspora) research 
project. The chapter incorporates the findings of the LEAD research in Ke-
nya, Uganda, Tanzania, Ghana, Egypt, the Caribbean, the United States, and 
Canada. This is made possible by an analysis of the results from Delphi Tech-
nique and focus groups discussion used in the LEAD project. Using these 
techniques, we have been able to develop a greater understanding of leader-
ship diversity in Africa and the African diaspora. African countries are among 
the most ethnically, religiously, and culturally diverse in the world with many 
ethnic groups split into multiple states that are different in terms of language, 
culture, and ethnic composition. The study found that some aspects of lead-
ership diversity are not included in the popular Western measures and con-
cepts as found in the extant literature. For example is the case of the big men, 
Ubuntu, religion and spirituality. It is important to recognize that the LEAD 
results took place in selected African countries, but more countries have been 
included for future research. The chapter provides a broader understanding 
of how leadership is diverse in Africa and the African diaspora.
Africa is the fastest growing region of the world. A large number of compa-
nies from China, Japan, the United States, Britain, and India are investing 
in the continent (The Economist, 2011). The World Economic Forum re-
port listed several African countries with the highest index in terms of ease 
of doing business in 2015–2016 (World Economic Forum, 2015). African 
countries are among the most ethnically and culturally diverse in the world 
with many ethnic groups split into multiple states (Robinson, 2014) that 
are different in terms of language and religion (e.g., Bodomo, Anderson, & 
Dzahene-Quarshie, 2009; Lupke, 2009; Phinney, 1996). Posner (2004) not-
ed that African countries are ethnically diverse, and the ethnic heterogene-
ity and linguistic diversity can be linked to the way leadership is perceived 
in the continent. Africa has approximately 2,000 of the 6,000 languages of 
the world (Lupke, 2009). Many of the languages are spoken by millions of 
people making the continent the epicenter of linguistic and cultural di-
versity in the world. For example, Ghana has 85 ethnic communities and 
more than 87 languages (Agbedor, 1996; Bodomo, 1996, 1997; Dolphyne & 
Kropp-Dakubu, 1988; Gordon & Grimes, 2005), while Kenya has 42 ethnic 
communities with more than 70 languages (Ongechi, 2003).
The Caribbean on other hand is seen as a blend of African influenc-
es with European colonial practices (Punnett, Singh, & Williams, 1994). 
This has influenced the way leadership is perceived (Galperin, Lituchy, Ac-
quaah, Bewaji, & Ford, 2014) in the region. Nettleford (1978) noted that 
as a result of the colonial influence, Caribbean natives remain pressured by 
institutions, mechanisms, processes, or psychological pressures to liberate 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    87
themselves in the service of values and norms of an outside power and cul-
ture. In connection with what defines modern Caribbean leadership and 
culture, Thomas (1988) believed that the resulting interrelationship of 
class and ethnicity, sex, color, religion, rural/urban, and language divisions 
in the region made the social structure and culture even more difficult to 
analyze. The influence of the colonial cultures mixed with that of the im-
ported cultures results in a culturally plural place.
Management scholars have called for more management research in un-
derresearched countries (Lituchy, Ford, & Punnett, 2013; Punnett, Dick-
Forde, & Robinson, 2006), other scholars have pointed to the fact that 
management knowledge is severely biased toward Western perspectives 
(Lituchy & Punnett, 2014; Bruton, 2010; Zoogah & Nkomo, 2013). Zhang 
et al. (2012) admit that almost all leadership studies and theories have 
been developed based on the Western context therefore making them very 
limited in their applicability to different economies and cultures. Lituchy, 
Ford, and Punnett (2013) and Lituchy, Punnett, and Puplampu (2013) as 
well as Zoogah and Nkomo (2013) have discussed the limited management 
research in Africa. Lituchy and Punnett (2014) acknowledge that little is 
known of Caribbean people’s views on their own culture or of their beliefs 
regarding leadership. Only a few researchers have looked at the role and 
impact of culture on leadership diversity in Africa (Jackson, Amaeshi, & 
Yavuz, 2008; Wanasika, Howell, Littrell, & Dorfman, 2011) or at indigenous 
concepts such as Ubuntu (Brubaker, 2013; Mbigi, 2000), big man, (James, 
2008) and Tree of Talking (Wambu, 2007). A paper by Lituchy, Punnett, 
Ford and Jonsson (2009) found that there is leadership diversity in coun-
tries across Africa, the Caribbean, and North America that is brought about 
by cultural differences that exist between developed (North America) and 
developing countries (Africa and the Caribbean). For example, Africans in 
the United States and Canada have different conceptions and perceptions 
of what leadership is compared with their counterparts in the Caribbean.
The United States has the largest African diaspora living in any single 
country of the world accounting for about 12% of the total American popula-
tion (The World Factbook, 2012). Canada, on the other hand, has a relatively 
small African diaspora with around 800,000 people accounting for around 
2.7% of the population (Statistics Canada, 2010). Researchers have suggested 
that the African diaspora can play an important role in influencing demo-
cratic leadership and social processes, such as religious networks and politi-
cal institutions, in African countries (Mohan & Zack-Williams, 2002). Kaba 
(2011) has argued that African immigrants with relatively high incomes in 
developed countries have contributed to the increase in remittances to fam-
ily members remaining in Africa. The establishment of the World Bank’s Afri-
can Diaspora Program has further facilitated the human and financial capital 
contributions of the African diaspora to the economic development of their 

88    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
home countries (Lituchy, Galperin, & Punnett, 2016). The program seeks to 
leverage diaspora skills for development in Africa by better utilizing the abili-
ties and knowledge of millions of people of African descent.
Despite these developments, research on leadership diversity in Africa 
and the African diaspora are largely invisible in mainstream management 
literature (Lituchy, Punnett, Ford & Jonsson, 2009; Nkomo, 2011) with West-
ern literature tending to ignore the dynamics that shape Africa’s leadership 
differences (Mangaliso, 2001). A number of scholars in management are 
critical of the Western perspectives of understanding leadership in Africa 
and the African diaspora (Zoogah & Nkomo, 2013; Lituchy & Punnett, 
2014). Others have acknowledged that leadership in divergent parts of the 
world should be looked at within specific cultural contexts (Tsui, 2004; Wa-
nasika, Howell, Littrell & Dorfman, 2011). A host of these authors have advo-
cated for an increase in research in the African continent (Lituchy, Punnett, 
Ford & Jonsson, 2009; Zoogah & Nkomo, 2013; Nkomo, 2011). Additionally, 
the management scholars have found that Western theories have failed to 
address the leadership diversity issues in Africa and the African diaspora 
(Lituchy, Punnett & Puplampu, 2013; Lituchy & Punnett, 2014).
We believe that the lack of knowledge about leadership diversity in non-
Western countries and developing countries means that very little is known 
about leadership diversity from a more global perspective. We hope that 
this chapter will help scholars and practitioners to appreciate the leader-
ship diversity in Africa and the African diaspora by highlighting differences 
among various groups and the effect on peoples and institutions. This book 
chapter is important as it incorporates the concepts of religion and spiritu-
ality, belief in ancestry, Ubuntu, and the Big Man theory when discussing 
leadership diversity in Africa as well as what is considered morality, wisdom, 
serving others, visionary, inspirational, caring, and accountable leadership 
for the African diaspora. In this chapter, we will review the current litera-
ture on leadership diversity experiences in multinational companies and 
the African culture so as to build a model of the diversity in leadership. We 
conclude by supporting the Delphi Technique and focus group discussion 
to understand leadership diversity in Africa and the African diaspora, and 
we also propose further areas of investigation.
WHY LEADERSHIP DIVERSITY IN AFRICA 
AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA?
This chapter demonstrates how leadership is diverse in the context of Af-
rica and the African diaspora (Canada, United States, and the Caribbean). 
This is significant from a theoretical perspective to understanding leader-
ship differences in unfamiliar contexts. It is relevant to the management 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    89
of enterprises, especially in the under-researched countries, groups, and 
regions of the world, which today are being considered to be the fast grow-
ing regions of the world. Management researchers have carried out cross-
cultural studies and cross-national studies, and have come up with a basis 
of understanding national and cultural similarities and differences. For ex-
ample, a study by Hofstede (1981) on culture demonstrated that different 
countries have different cultural values that impact the way leadership is 
viewed. Cross-country research (Hale & Fields, 2009; Lituchy & Punnett, 
2014; Lituchy, Ford, & Punnett, 2013; Morrison, 2000) has highlighted some 
similarities and differences in perceptions of leaders in various countries, 
their characteristics, and the relationship between culture and leadership 
behaviors. GLOBE studies by Waldman et al. (2006) on cultural and leader-
ship predictors of corporate social responsibility values of top management 
in 15 countries; Koopman, Den Hartog, and Konrad (2009) on national 
culture and leadership profiles in Europe in 21 European countries; and 
House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, and Gupta’s (2004) study involving 62 
societies around the world provide important insight demonstrating diver-
sity in leadership in various regions. Therefore those studies are relevant to 
this context. Such large studies remain relatively rare, and certain regions 
and groups of the world continue to be largely ignored. Similarly, the Afri-
can diaspora has been essentially ignored in most studies. This is of concern 
because the perception of effective leadership differs among cultures (Den 
Hartog, House, Hanges, Ruiz-Quintanilla, & Dorfman, 1999). This gap 
must be addressed especially in those areas identified as under-researched. 
Addressing this gap, while important for academic knowledge, is particu-
larly so from a practical perspective as managers and executives conducting 
business in different parts of the world can draw on the knowledge.
Leadership Diversity
Diversity is created by group members who on the basis of their differ-
ent social identities categorize others as similar or dissimilar (Mazur, 2010). 
“A group is diverse if it is composed of individuals who differ on a charac-
teristic on which they base their own social identity” (O’Reilly, Williams, & 
Barsade, 1998, p. 186). Leadership diversity is all about leaders having mul-
tiple, overlapping identities and using those identities to ensure that the com-
munity prospers. Leadership diversity alludes to the different forms, styles, 
and characterizations that exist among different groups. Diversity basically 
encompasses all the many characteristics and cultural norms and traits that 
differentiate one leader from the other. Certainly cultural characteristics 
might influence how a leader behaves. However, despite the various leader-
ship theories, comparative research in these areas is not extensive (Morrison, 

90    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
2000; Suutari, 2002) with a limited number of studies (Galperin et al., 2014; 
Graham, 1994; Parker, 1996) that focus on Africa and the African diaspora.
Leadership Diversity in Africa
One review of 17 papers dealing with management in Africa (Lituchy, 
Punnett, Ford, & Jonsson, 2009) found that three dealt with Africa in gen-
eral, another with southern Africa, and the other with western Africa. Fur-
ther, much of this management literature from Africa and African diaspora 
was conceptual rather than empirical. Empirical literature shows that there is 
diversity leadership in Africa. For example, James (2008) described the tradi-
tional concept of leadership as encompassing the “Big Man” who is all-pow-
erful, fearsome, all-knowing, and an infallible multifaceted problem solver in 
Africa. The Big Man (always a male) is the head of the community and enjoys 
fanatical support from the community. He is also a political leader whose 
leadership is eternal. The leaders’ main function is focused on representing 
the community to the outside, resolving disagreements, and providing pro-
tection to the community, and successful warrior and gains cattle (wealth) 
through raids, which later serve to benefit the community (Wandibba, 2004). 
The Big Man status rests on certain characteristics that distinguish him from 
his fellows: wealth, eloquence, generosity, physical fitness, bravery, and super-
natural powers. Men are considered big men because they have certain per-
sonalities. They amass resources during their own lifetime and they did not 
inherit their wealth or position. The Big Man personality at the organization 
level helps in the development of careers, particularly at high managerial lev-
els, which depend on accumulation of power as the vehicle for transforming 
individual interests into activities that influence other people.
Servant Leaders
Nelson (2003) described servant leaders as leaders with a focus on the 
good of their followers. Servant leader constructs are virtues, including a 
good moral quality, the general quality of goodness, and moral excellence. 
A servant leader serves diligently and selflessly, and always puts the needs of 
people first. While Ekundayo (2013) described a servant leader as one ca-
pable of showing clear sensibility and feelings to lead others in time of cri-
sis. His influence is not necessarily exerted by the personal authority of the 
leader, but by being the servant of the community he leads (Smith, 2002) 
focused on spirituality, which is seen as eternal, and who acknowledges the 
importance of ancestors along with a connection to the ancestors’ world, 
the land, and communalism. Smith concluded that decisions are holistic 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    91
and collective in spiritual leadership, while Wellman, Perkins, and Wellman 
(2009) suggested that spirituality is the core of effective leadership in Af-
rica, and it guides the way leaders behave and interact with others. Spiri-
tuality leadership includes three subcategories of caring for others in the 
society: transcendence and seeking goodness, being truthful, and forgiving 
others for their bad deeds.
Mangaliso (2001) considered Ubuntu leadership as demonstrating com-
passion, dignity, respect, and a humanistic concern for relationships. Mbigi 
and Maree (1995) described Ubuntu as a sense of brotherhood among 
marginalized groups combined with spiritualism. Blunt and Jones (1997) 
suggested that in Africa the effective leadership styles are more paternalis-
tic than the effective leadership styles in the West, and that in Africa inter-
personal relations are placed higher than individual achievement. Lead-
ers bestow favor and expect to receive obeisance or deference. Consensus 
is highly valued and decision making within levels can therefore take a 
long time. Between levels (downwards) observance of hierarchy means 
that consensus can be achieved relatively quickly (Blunt & Jones, 1997). 
Hale (2004) thought that the transformational leadership model was not 
the most effective leadership model in the African perspective. He found 
West Africa high on hierarchy with leaders expected to be powerful and to 
make decisions. He proposed an effective leadership model for Africa as a 
blending of transformational leadership theory with servant leadership, the 
components of which include egalitarianism, moral integrity, empowering, 
empathy, and humility (Mittal & Dorfman, 2012). Walumbwa, Orwa, Wang, 
and Lawler (2005) compared the relationship of transformational lead-
ership to organizational commitment and job satisfaction in the United 
States and Kenya. They identified African leadership as authoritarian due 
to high power distance and hypothesized that this may negate the positive 
impact of transformational leadership. They found that respondents from 
the United States rated transformational leadership and satisfaction higher 
than Kenyan respondents; however, they found that in both cultures the 
relationship between transformational leadership and commitment and 
satisfaction was positive.
Leadership Diversity in African Diaspora  
(Canada, United States)
The African diaspora is simply defined as “having African roots,” (Ford 
& Miller, 2014, p. 270), and therefore inclusion of respondents of African 
descent from the United States and Canada is important in the understand-
ing leadership diversity across national boundaries. Research suggests that 
cultural characteristics influence differences in leadership across cultures 

92    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
(Aimar & Stough, 2007; Galperin, Lituchy, Acquaah, Bewaji & Ford 2014; 
Lanik, Thornton, & Hoskovcova, 2009). Furthermore, empirical literature 
in the field of cultural psychology suggests that African Americans have a dif-
ferent cultural identity than other ethnic groups, which influences the way 
they view what leadership is all about (Galperin et al., 2014). Zaff, Blount, 
Phillips, and Cohen (2002) found that African American students scored 
significantly higher on ethnic identity compared to Caucasian American stu-
dents. In Pierce, Hudson, and Singleton’s (2011) examination of the ethnic 
identities of various groups from the African diaspora, they found a high 
ethnic identity among all three African diaspora groups: (a) native born—
African Americans born in the United States to parents born in the United 
States; (b) first generation—those born in the United States with at least one 
parent born outside the United States; and, (c) Black immigrants—those 
not born in the United States with parents not born in the United States.
Studies on leadership in Canada have only focused on a single culture at 
a time (e.g., Arnold & Loughlin, 2010; Block, 2003; St-Onge, Morin, Bellehu-
meur, & Dupuis, 2009). For example, Arnold and Loughlin’s (2010) study on 
leadership (examining five provinces within the country) found that leaders 
were more likely to engage in supportive rather than developmental, indi-
vidually considerate, and transformational leadership behavior. Block (2003) 
used a sample from a North American organization wherein she combined 
Western Canadian and American participants. Block (2003) found that em-
ployees who rated their supervisors high in transformational leadership were 
more likely to view their organizational culture in positive terms.
Leadership Diversity in the African Diaspora 
(Caribbean)
The Caribbean comprises 26 states with a population of about 41.6 mil-
lion in 2010 (ILO, 2011; United Nations, 2010). The people of the Carib-
bean are largely of sub-Saharan African descent representing around 73% 
of the total population (Central Intelligence Agency, 2013). Descendants 
of African slaves brought to the Caribbean during the slave trade have lived 
in the Caribbean for generations, and the culture in the Commonwealth 
Caribbean is seen as a blend of African influences with European colonial 
practices (Punnett, Singh, & Williams, 1994; Holder, Knight, Punnet & 
Charrles, 2014). Thomas (1988) found that leadership in the Caribbean is 
influenced by the interrelationship of class, ethnicity, sex, color, religion, 
and language divisions. In most Caribbean countries, African descendants 
make up the majority of the population; however, some countries also 
have a large Indian descended population (notably Guyana, Trinidad, and 
Tobago) and there is a substantial number of individuals with a Chinese 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    93
background in many islands, while European descendants represent small-
er numbers (Central Intelligence Agency, 2013). Research in the Carib-
bean has mainly focused on the historic experiences of the African and 
Indian descendants and the racial divides in the region (Johnson, 1998) 
with little management research.
The Caribbean culture tends to be analyzed through the class structures 
that emerged after the gaining of independence. The result of the colo-
nial and postcolonial periods was an enhanced class consciousness in the 
region. Bolland (2001) suggested that the resulting class structure had its 
roots in the late 19th century when the middle class was comprised of ed-
ucated professionals whose roles were teachers, doctors, lawyers, and civil 
servants. Bolland asserted that during this period of change class conscious-
ness, which coincided with racial-consciousness, manifested itself in various 
forms of class struggle (strikes/protests) resulting in the emergence of a 
broader middle class. The postcolonial class structure remains very com-
plex (Thomas, 1988) in that the region’s ruling class has found the ways 
and means of ensuring its continued influence thus inevitably continuing to 
complicate and affect the social relations and the structure of the Caribbean 
states. Thomas (1988) found that this influence reached as far as creating 
divisions within the working class along sexual, ethnic, and religious lines.
Some recent cultural research based on Hofstede’s Value Survey con-
cepts suggested that people in the English-speaking Caribbean are low 
on hierarchy/power distance, moderate on individualism, and high on 
uncertainty avoidance preferring certainty and avoiding risk (Punnett & 
Greenidge, 2009; Punnett et al., 2006). Nurse and Punnett (2002) also 
noted the importance of religion and spirituality in the Caribbean context. 
Punnett, Singh, and Williams (1994) argued that the Caribbean cultural 
profile reflected both African and European roots. This research found 
that respondents were high on both individualism and collectivism, which 
were measured separately, and were relatively high on thinking/controlling 
and relatively low on doing/action.
Method
This chapter summarizes the findings from the LEAD (Leadership Ef-
fectiveness in Africa and the Diaspora) research project. The chapter in-
corporates the findings of the LEAD research in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, 
Ghana, Nigeria, Egypt, the Caribbean, the USA and Canada. This is made 
possible by analysis of the results from Delphi Technique and focus groups 
used in the LEAD project. Using these techniques, we have been able to 
develop a greater understanding of leadership diversity in Africa and the 
African diaspora.

94    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
The key question for the LEAD research project is: How do cultural dif-
ferences effect the perception of effective leadership for people in the Ca-
ribbean, United States, Canada, and Africa?
Delphi Technique
The LEAD project began with an emic approach involving the Delphi 
Technique (Linstone & Turoff, 1975). The emic approach is used to in-
vestigate how the local people think, perceive, and categorize the world 
around them and how they imagine and explain things around them (Kot-
tak, 2006). The emic strives to understand the culture of people from a 
native’s/local point of view (Ludwig, 1997). While the emic links cultural 
practices to external forces or factors such as economic and ecological con-
ditions that may not be salient to the cultural practices of the locals (Harris, 
1979). Why the Delphi Technique? This technique was important in the 
research because we wanted to find out how participants in Africa and the 
African diaspora understood the concept of leadership and to compare the 
leadership diversity that is being brought out. The Delphi Technique meth-
od for achieving convergence of opinion concerning real-world knowledge 
solicited from experts within certain topic areas. The Delphi Technique is 
designed as a group communication process that aims at conducting de-
tailed examinations and discussions of a specific issue for the purpose of 
goal setting, policy investigation, or predicting the occurrence of future 
events (Ludwig, 1997; Turoff & Hiltz, 1996).
The Delphi Technique is a means and a method for consensus building 
by using a series of questionnaires to collect data from a panel of selected 
subjects and to analyze and provide feedback (Young & Jamieson, 2001). 
This provides the opportunity for individuals to revise their judgments on 
the basis of feedback. The participants in the Delphi Technique held vari-
ous leadership positions in various organizations in five countries in Africa 
(Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda), three Caribbean countries (Bar-
bados, Trinidad and Tobago, St. Vincent and the Grenadines), Canada and 
the United States. The leaders were identified from the following groups: 
(a) academics, (b) private sector, (c) public sector, and (d) other (religious 
leaders, leaders in non-governmental and charitable organizations, and 
community leaders). Following the Delphi Technique, data was also collect-
ed from people not considered as experts by use of focus group discussion. 
The purpose of the focus groups was to find out if responses to the same 
questions from nonleaders would support the Delphi Techniques’ findings. 
The method is useful for exploring people’s knowledge and experiences 
(Kitzinger, 1995) and can be used to examine what people think, how they 
think, and why they think that way. In round one, participants were asked 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    95
a series of seven open-ended questions regarding culture, leadership, and 
motivation that included: (a) What three to five words best describe your 
ethnic or cultural background? (b) What words/terms would you use to 
describe an effective leader? (c) What does an effective leader do? (d) What 
motivates leaders to succeed? (e) What motivates people (other than lead-
ers) to work hard? (f) Name three to five people, men or women, who 
you consider to be, or to have been, effective leaders (they can be local, 
national, or international) and why each is effective? and (g) How would 
you describe “your culture”? With round two, respondents were asked to 
rate the most common responses that emerged in round one on a 5-point 
Likert scale in terms of their importance. A total of 86 participants were 
involved in the Delphi process distributed across the countries as follows: 
Egypt (21), Ghana (12), Kenya (15), Nigeria (10), Uganda (16), Barbados 
(7), Trinidad and Tobago (3), and St. Vincent and the Grenadines (2). 
Knowledgeable people were identified from the following groups: (a) aca-
demics, (b) private sector, (c) public sector, and (d) other (religious lead-
ers, leaders in non-governmental and charitable organizations, and com-
munity leaders). For example the Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, and St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines’s 12 respondents (7 males and 5 females) 4 of 
whom were born in Barbados, 3 in Trinidad and Tobago, 2 in St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, with the remaining 3 born in Britain and St. Lucia but 
living in Barbados for 32, 44, and 46 years, respectively. Their ages ranged 
from 28 to 56 years with an average of 47.3 years. Of the 12 respondents, 8 
had postgraduate degrees, 3 had undergraduate degrees, and 1 had a col-
lege diploma. All were in leadership positions in their respective organiza-
tions. For a more detailed overview of the Delphi process that was used in 
the LEAD project see Lituchy and Punnett (2014). For the results of the 
Delphi Technique used in the United States and Canada see Ford, Lituchy, 
Punnett, Puplampu, and Sejjaaka (2013) and Lituchy, Ford, and Punnett 
(2013). For a more detailed overview of the Delphi process used in the 
LEAD project see Lituchy and Punnett (2014).
Focus Groups
Focus group sessions utilized the same questions from the two rounds 
of the Delphi Technique. Several focus groups were conducted across the 
countries of interest to further explore and refine the Delphi findings. In 
focus group sessions, comfortable settings were arranged, refreshments 
provided, and participants were encouraged to sit around in a circle, which 
helped to establish the right atmosphere. The groups were from four to 
eight participants. The sessions took one to two hours but sometimes ex-
tend into a whole afternoon. The lead facilitator explained the aim of the 

96    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
focus groups and encouraged each participant to talk. Participants were 
assured that the results and their information would remain confidential. 
Each focus group participant was provided with paper and a pen for taking 
notes. The lead facilitator encouraged a discussion of each question and 
recorded the responses. The focus group participants were not leaders or 
leadership experts but lower level managers, supervisors, and employees 
in followership roles. The focus groups were conducted by two facilitators, 
and the discussion culminated with each participant being asked to rank 
the top five responses that emerged for each question. A total of 119 par-
ticipants, all of whom were of African descent, took part in focus groups 
distributed across the countries as follows: United States, 29; Canada, 27; 
Ghana, 7; Kenya, 6; Nigeria, 20; Barbados, 15; and Trinidad and Tobago, 15 
(Lituchy & Punnett, 2014).
Focus group discussions enhance the group process, which can help 
people to explore and clarify their views in ways that would be less easily 
accessible in a one-on-one interview. Focus group discussion is particularly 
appropriate when the interviewer has a series of open-ended questions and 
wishes to encourage research participants to explore the issues of impor-
tance to them (in their own vocabulary) generating their own questions 
and pursuing their own priorities. Similar to the Delphi Technique, focus 
groups prevent researchers from imposing their own ideas and ensure 
that the results reflect the thinking of the participants (Lituchy & Punnet, 
2014). We believe that the two approaches provide a valuable design for a 
research project in under-researched areas as it is particularly important 
to avoid introducing a Western researcher’s bias into these concepts, as 
cautioned by other researchers (Nkomo, 2011; Lituchy & Punnet, 2014).
RESULTS OF DELPHI AND FOCUS GROUPS
Leadership Diversity in Africa Results
The results from the Delphi Technique and focus groups conducted 
across multiple countries highlight some of the diversity within and be-
tween visible minority groups. The perceptions of the effectiveness and mo-
tivation of leaders across several countries in Africa (Ghana, Egypt, Kenya, 
Nigeria, and Uganda) and across the African diaspora in the Caribbean 
(Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago), the United States, and Canada were 
varied in some regards. The African paper by Senaji, Metwally, Sejjaaka, 
Puplampu, Michaud, and Adedoyin-Rasaq (2014) showed the result from 
five African countries (Ghana, Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, and Uganda). The 
authors found that the majority of participants agreed that there is leader-
ship diversity across the five countries. Fairness/impartiality, commitment/

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    97
dedication, honesty/trustworthiness, and being knowledgeable were de-
scriptors of effective leadership. Focus group respondents from Ghana, Ke-
nya, and Nigeria agreed that effective leaders were visionary, charismatic, 
intelligent, and innovative. Some interesting variance emerged in the data 
from the respondents in Africa on leadership effectiveness. For example, 
in Kenya respondents considered “assertiveness” as an attribute of effective 
leadership; whereas in Nigeria, respondents mentioned “modesty” or “un-
assuming” as an effective leader trait; and in Egypt respondents mentioned 
“enthusiastic.” On effective leadership behavior, the respondents across all 
samples indicated effective leaders “lead by example,” “inspire and influ-
ence others,” “motivate and encourage others,” and “delegate.” Differenc-
es in responses by country that emerged were such that in Uganda, Kenya, 
and Nigeria respondents stressed “caring and empathetic” behaviors as be-
ing effective leader behaviors. Additionally, in Uganda and Ghana respon-
dents indicated effective leaders should “innovate.”
Leadership Diversity in African Diaspora Results 
(Canada, United States)
For the paper by Galperin, Lituchy, Acquaah, Bewaji, and Ford (2014), 
10 focus groups were conducted in the United States and Canada. There 
was agreement that visionary, effective communicator, honest/trustworthy, 
and wise/knowledgeable described an effective leader. In terms of motiva-
tion, participants in both countries described the need to support, mon-
etary rewards, and nonmonetary rewards as factors that motivated leaders 
to succeed. All participants saw security, potential rewards, and recogni-
tion as important motivators for people who were not in leadership posi-
tions. Differences in words and phrases used to describe an effective leader 
were such that in Canada respondents also mentioned decisiveness. In the 
United States, respondents additionally believed effective leaders should be 
empowering. Differences in responses to leadership behavior emerged in 
the United States and Canada. In the United States, respondents expected 
leaders to demonstrate competence, in Canada effective leaders were ex-
pected to build consensus.
Leadership Diversity in the African Diaspora Results 
(Caribbean)
In the Caribbean paper by Holder, Knight, Punnett, and Charles (2014), 
the authors presented the results of both the Delphi Technique and focus 
groups to examine diversity in leadership. The authors stated that in most 

98    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
Caribbean countries the African diaspora made up a majority of the popu-
lation. They found that effective leaders were charismatic, visionary, and 
results oriented. They motivated others, led by example, and developed vi-
sions and goals. The leaders believed that they were motivated by “making 
a difference.” Nonleaders were perceived as being motivated primarily by 
financial rewards.
Discussion
The objective of this book chapter was to demonstrate leadership diver-
sity in Africa and the African diaspora. The results of this emic research 
(Delph technique and focus group) show that there is leadership diver-
sity across the different groups, countries, and cultures. Using an emic ap-
proach the respondents were allowed to define and describe the character-
istics of effective leadership, what effective leaders do, and what motivates 
leaders to succeed. Overall, the findings suggest that there is leadership 
diversity regarding the way people from African and the African diaspora 
perceive effective leadership and what motivates leaders to succeed. Partici-
pants in the United States revealed that effective leaders are involved in ex-
ecuting plans, inspiring others to take action, leading by example, mentor-
ing, and grooming others to lead; while the Canadian participants revealed 
that effective leaders focus on encouraging others, developing vision, goals, 
objectives and planning ahead, and living up to demands of their follow-
ers. Therefore, one can relate these findings to the Hierarchical Taxonomy 
of Leadership Behavior (Yukl, Gordon, & Taber, 2002; Yukl, 2012), which 
categorizes leader behavior in three groupings: task behavior, relations be-
havior, and change behavior.
To show that leadership diversity was expressed in leaders’ behavior in 
the United States, our findings suggest that effective leaders engaged in a 
wide range of relations behavior including inspiring others to take action, 
leading by example, motivating, and listening. Nevertheless executing a 
plan, which represents task behavior in the taxonomy, received the high-
est average ranking. In the Canadian sample, the response “encourages,” 
which falls under relations behavior in the taxonomy, received the high-
est ranking. Other relations behaviors in our sample included: motivator, 
communicates, and delegates responsibilities. Task behaviors in our sample 
included: setting a vision, lives up to demands takes control, and adaptively 
executes. Finally, the response “leads” may include both task and relations 
behaviors. Interestingly, different aspects of relations and task behaviors 
were represented in our United States and Canadian samples.
In terms of leadership diversity qualities, United States participants sug-
gested that effective leaders exhibited qualities including being a visionary, 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    99
inspirational, caring and showing unwavering morals and ethics, as well 
as being selfless, hardworking, and accountable. Interestingly, the three 
most important characteristics (charisma, wise/knowledgeable, and humil-
ity) of effective leaders in the United States were not mentioned by the 
Canadian sample. Canadian participants stated that effective leaders ex-
hibited unwavering morals and ethics and believed in a cause, which were 
not mentioned as part of the most important characteristics of a leader 
(inspirational, wise/knowledgeable, and motivated) in an earlier question. 
These findings reveal that the ideal leadership characteristics preferred by 
the African diaspora (United States and Canada) for effective leaders are 
different from the leadership qualities they identify with and the attributes 
they assign to effective leaders. Moreover, the list of effective leaders and 
the reasons provided for their effectiveness clearly show that the African 
diaspora (United States and Canada) considers leaders who are visionaries, 
strong, and decisive, as well as caring, selfless, and ethical.
The participants of the African diaspora (Caribbean) identified effec-
tive leaders as charismatic, visionary, and results oriented. This is quite dif-
ferent in comparison to respondents from Africa, the United States, and 
Canada. Therefore, it seems clear that the idea of charisma, inspiration, 
and vision are seen as important in a good leader and along with this so 
are good management abilities such as goal orientation, ability to create 
a team, competence, and communication. These are all words that are re-
flective of current Western thinking on leadership, where transformational 
leadership has come to be thought of as effective leadership. These char-
acteristics are similar to those that would flow from Western definitions 
of leadership; thus, we suggest that these characteristics may be seen as 
effective across different cultures similarly (House et al., 2004), and results 
suggest that charismatic leadership, including visionary, performance ori-
ented, and integrity were preferred in all countries. There are other words 
or phrases in our findings that have different implications; for example, 
phrases like wise, moral, serving others, mentorship, and compassion. The 
second set of characteristics might be interpreted in overall terms as ser-
vant leadership, leadership incorporating morality, wisdom, serving others, 
and compassion. Dennis and Bocarnea (2005) described Servant Leaders 
as leaders with a focus on the good of their followers. Servant Leader con-
structs were virtues, including a good moral quality, the general quality of 
goodness, and moral excellence. The Delphi results also suggested wise, 
moral, and servanthood as components of effective leaders of the Caribbe-
an group. These attributes are all somewhat different from what we might 
expect from Western theories.
Leadership diversity in the Caribbean is also expressed in what effective 
leaders do. Here responses included motivating and inspiring others, lead-
ing by example, developing a vision and goals, and attracting people. This 

100    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
was quite different from the Africa result. The Delphi responses and those 
from the focus group were in agreement on the main ideas. These ideas 
were also consistent with Western concepts of what leaders do and again 
support the findings of House et al. (2004) that certain ideals are univer-
sal. These support the characteristics that leaders in the Caribbean should 
exhibit to be effective. Leaders appear to see their motivation as most im-
portantly coming from an “other” orientation, which would support the 
concept of servant leadership seen in the responses to what describes an 
effective leader. Interestingly, respondents from the first Delphi round in 
the Caribbean mentioned self-fulfillment and financial security only twice 
compared to five times on the desire to help others. A desire to help others 
was the favored answer for Delphi respondents, while in the focus groups 
self-interest was indicated as more important to leaders; specifically, self-ful-
fillment was indicated in the Barbados and financial rewards were indicated 
in Trinidad and Tobago. This suggests that the experts, who were in fact 
leaders in their fields, see themselves quite differently from those who are 
not in leadership positions. This difference in perceptions is particularly 
interesting because the leaders see themselves as “other” oriented, while 
they are perceived by nonleaders as being self-oriented.
We examined leadership diversity in Africa by carrying out LEAD re-
search in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Ghana, Nigeria, and Egypt and looked 
at characteristics pertaining to effective leadership, culture, and motivation 
in order to expand the literature on the personal characteristics, behaviors, 
and motivations of effective leaders that had been largely based on West-
ern cultures, beliefs, and values (Steers, Sanchez-Runde, & Nardon, 2010). 
Overall, the findings suggested that factors that motivate leaders to work 
hard (extrinsic factors such as money and intrinsic factors such as need to 
succeed) can be applied in African countries. Further, both leaders and 
nonleaders placed importance on both extrinsic and intrinsic motivators, 
which has important implications for policy around the compensation of 
leaders in Africa. Of particular interest were notions of what motivates lead-
ers (involvement with people, respect of subordinates, involvement with 
society, etc.) and what constitutes engagement of the human spirit in the 
work place (May, Gilson, & Harter, 2004).
In the Africa study, it was suggested that effective leaders motivate peo-
ple, are involved in activities of society, and show vigor, passion, and dedi-
cation in all issues around them. This confirms Puplampu’s (2010) notion 
of leadership as a process of engagement. There has been much scholarly 
writing about the limitations and deficit of leadership in Africa (Agulanna, 
2006). It is therefore interesting to note that issues around justice, helping 
others, and service are considered important drivers for leaders’ motiva-
tions. Therefore, one may suggest that where leaders engage with the aspi-
rations of the community, they find a greater synchronization or mutuality 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    101
of purpose, which may prove a powerful tool for change. We also found that 
participant perceptions of effective leaders included focus on maintaining 
discipline, giving hope/inspiration, setting goals, and delegating to others.
Implications for Research
The LEAD research study increased our knowledge and understand-
ing of leadership diversity in Africa, the Caribbean, the United States, and 
Canada. It informed us about the perceptions people have on effective 
leadership and what motivates leaders to behave or succeed. Our unique 
attention to Africa and the African diaspora makes a valuable contribu-
tion to international management and cross-cultural literatures, which has 
been criticized for putting a lot of emphasis on Western theories. Our study 
provides a greater understanding of the complex and multidimensional 
approach to leadership and motivation among Africans in Africa and the 
African diaspora in the Caribbean, the United States, and Canada. More-
over, our study contributes to a better understanding of leadership theories 
in a cross-cultural context. For example, according to implicit leadership 
theory (ILT; Epitropaki & Martin, 2004) people’s beliefs, assumptions, and 
convictions regarding attributes and behaviors of leaders comprise their 
ILT, and these persons’ ILTs, in turn, influence the values they attribute to 
leadership and the values they place on selected leader behaviors (House, 
Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman, & Gupta, 2004). From the findings, we acknowl-
edge that personal characteristics such as charisma, influence, and empow-
erment fell under the dynamism category. Thus, this finding suggests that a 
leader who develops strong interpersonal relationships is important (New-
enham-Kahindi, 2009). The most important characteristics that were used 
to describe an effective leader by the participants in Africa and the African 
diaspora were charismatic, visionary, inspirational, wise/knowledgeable, 
honest and trustworthy, and humble, which are related to the same con-
struct of transformational leadership (Avolio & Bass, 1988).
This paper also contributes to our understanding of what motivates lead-
ers to succeed. The LEAD results seem to suggest that leaders largely ascribe 
to intrinsic motivation and self-determination motivation theory (Ryan & 
Deci, 2000). That is motivation that is driven by an interest or enjoyment 
in the task itself and which exists within the individual rather than relying 
on external pressures or a desire for reward. Need theories of motivation 
(cf. Maslow, 1943; McClelland, 1961) explain what drives behavior based on 
what we observe day to day in many leaders’ behaviors. In line with Maslow’s 
need hierarchy theory, participants from the Caribbean, the United States, 
and Canada stated that leaders were motivated to succeed by lower-level 
needs such as safety, as well as by higher-level needs such as esteem; while 

102    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
participants from Africa suggested that leaders were motivated by the ex-
trinsic rewards of money and financial gain, which possibly helped to satisfy 
some leaders’ basic physiological and safety needs (Maslow, 1943). We be-
lieve the intrinsic and self-determination motivation theories offer promise 
for further examining the findings related to motivation, which may not 
have been so prominent in other studies of leadership.
The findings also highlight the diversity among the people in Africa 
and the African diaspora in terms of what motivates leaders to succeed. Al-
though participants described support, monetary rewards, and nonmone-
tary rewards as factors that motivated leaders to succeed, the United States’s 
participants placed more emphasis on support and nonmonetary rewards, 
with the top three as desire for the best, supporting others, and passion 
for people and country. Canadian participants emphasized task completion 
and monetary rewards with the most important being desire to complete a 
task, empathy, and monetary or financial compensation. In the Caribbean, 
leaders were motivated by making a difference, and nonleaders were mo-
tivated primarily by financial rewards. In Africa, leaders were motivated by 
the need to achieve, serve others, and get recognition.
The findings offer some practical implications for leadership research 
into Africa and the African diaspora. Our results underline the importance 
of understanding leadership diversity within organizations. Managerial pro-
cesses should be sensitive to normative differences that may exist within 
Africa and the African diaspora. While similarities were found between the 
perceptions of effective leadership and motivation in Africa and the African 
diaspora, differences also emerged between Africa and the African diaspora, 
pointing to the importance of cross-cultural differences between the Africa 
countries, the Caribbean, the United States, and Canada. Our findings can 
help companies better manage diversity within their organizations. Manag-
ers will be more equipped to effectively lead and motivate their diverse em-
ployees. This study contributes improved approaches toward development 
of leaders in Africa and the African diaspora by informing the content and 
philosophy of such development programs. It also lends a dialogue on how 
effective leaders behave and how such practices may be promoted.
Although there are some universal characteristics about leadership 
across cultures, transformational leadership characteristics—such as in-
spirational, visionary, charismatic, and motivational—were found to be 
important to Africa and the African diaspora. There was also a focus on 
characteristics based on the vestiges of the African cultural value system, 
such as spirituality or godliness along with collectivist and autocratic char-
acteristics. Some phronetic leaders from the African diaspora may use their 
knowledge and cultural ties to Africa to help in better understanding a 
culturally distinct perspective of leadership and motivation in the African 
diaspora and Africa.

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    103
The findings also support the importance for practitioners to better un-
derstand the diversity within their organizations and their countries, and the 
role of national culture in determining what motivates employees and deter-
mines perceptions of what behaviors constitute effective leader behaviors. 
Finally, the empirical findings reported in the special issue papers could po-
tentially translate into better and more realistic leader development training 
programs and HR systems for managing employees in the countries studied 
by informing the content and philosophy of such programs.
Turning our attention to the extant research specifically focused on 
sub-Saharan Africa, researchers have shown that in southern and eastern 
Africa there is a prevalence of the Ubuntu philosophy, which is a humanis-
tic approach to African management with an emphasis on respect, human 
dignity, compassion, relationship building, personal interaction, and mu-
tual respect (Wanasika, Howell, Littrell, & Dorfman, 2011). For example, 
Newenham-Kahindi (2009) found that several South African multinational 
corporations exhibited cross-cultural human resource management prac-
tices that incorporated humanistic traditions. Ncube’s (2010) illustration of 
the Ubuntu leadership philosophy enumerates six steps to this philosophy, 
which are similar to some of the finding of the LEAD research in Africa:
1.	 Setting the example and modeling the way
2.	 Inspiring a shared vision among followers
3.	 Searching for opportunities to initiate change through people and 
the use of consensus decision making
4.	 Building relationships with others that foster interconnectedness 
and interdependency
5.	 Having a collectivist mentality that encourages teamwork and a 
noncompetitive environment
6.	 Cultivating innovation and empowering others through continuous 
development of human potential, mentoring, and building rela-
tionships
The Ubuntu leadership philosophy shows how Ubuntu can be applied 
practically as a leadership model as demonstrated by the data from the 
LEAD project results.
Limitations and Future Research Direction
There are a number of limitations that came from Africa; for example, 
in Kenya male participants dominated the second Delphi round and there-
fore appropriate levels of gender representation and balance need to be 
considered in future studies. Also, this research used a rather small sample 

104    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
size for the Delphi process. We recognize that with the continent’s huge 
population and diverse in-country demographics, capturing the African re-
ality requires sampling decisions that cover both the depth and representa-
tion of countries within Africa. Larger samples from many more countries 
are needed in order to generate more robust results. The research was con-
ducted in English because all countries included in the study were English 
speaking, despite indigenous African languages such as Kikuyu and Luo for 
Kenya, Yoruba and Igbo for Nigeria, Akan and Ewe for Ghana, and Ganda 
and Muganda for Uganda. It is possible that the research may have missed 
nuances peculiar to those languages. The research did not use samples 
from French- and Portuguese-speaking Africa.
The United States and Canadian study also had limitations. First, while 
focus groups were conducted in various locations across the United States 
and Canada in order to achieve a representative sample of the African di-
aspora in the two countries, future studies should conduct focus groups 
in areas where more comparisons can be drawn. For example, as the fo-
cus groups were conducted in both English-speaking and French-speaking 
Canada, it would be interesting to conduct focus groups in the English- and 
French-speaking United States. The state of Louisiana has strong historical 
ties with France and would allow such comparisons. While all other U.S. 
states’ legal systems are based on common law, Louisiana’s legal system is 
based on the Napoleonic civil code. In addition, the state has a large con-
centration of people from one region of Africa that strongly shaped the 
Louisiana Creole culture (Hall, 1992). Due to historical and administrative 
ties between France and Senegal, two-thirds of the slaves brought to Louisi-
ana by the French slave trade came from Senegambia, which is the region 
between the Senegal and Gambia rivers. Participants in the United States 
and Canadian samples possessed a minimum of a high school diploma or 
were pursuing undergraduate or post-graduate degrees.
The Caribbean group had small sample sizes that were not randomly 
selected; rather, they were selected because of known characteristics and 
often because the respondents were known to the researchers. In addition, 
the Trinidad and Tobago group consisted entirely of women. This meant 
that there were likely biases in the responses reported. The result was also 
obtained from a limited number of Caribbean countries, and we would like 
to expand this sample to obtain a more truly Caribbean picture.
In conclusion, we note that the findings add to the call for contextualized 
research. We conclude that management and organizational research in Af-
rica and the African diaspora requires significant use of methods that allow 
the voice of those sampled to be heard. Future research should examine 
the development of mass surveys that use the findings (such as those report-
ed here) to construct survey items and interview questions. Such surveys 
need to answer specific questions such as what corporate leaders in Africa 

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    105
and the African diaspora actually do; how followers and interest groups per-
ceive leader effectiveness; how leader behaviors influence employee moti-
vation; and how leader/follower behaviors and aspirations construct and 
reconstruct leader behaviors in an iterative and social constructionist way. 
Future research should include participants from a broader demographic 
spectrum, including more women and greater representation from various 
African countries and the diaspora group. Future research should increase 
the number of focus groups in each city as well as increase the number of 
cities in each country to investigate possible differences within the coun-
tries. In addition, future research should empirically examine similarities 
and differences between Africa and the African diaspora.
REFERENCES
Agbedor, P. K. (1996) Educational language planning for development in Ghana: 
Problems and prospects. Legon Journal of the Humanities, 9, 25–56.
Agulanna, C. (2006). Democracy and the crisis of leadership in Africa. The Journal of 
Social Political and Economic Studies, 31(3), 255–264.
Aimar, C., & Stough, S. (2007). Leadership: Does culture matter? Comparative prac-
tices between Argentina and United States of America. Academy of Educational 
Leadership Journal, 11(3), 9–43.
Arnold, K. A., & Loughlin, C. (2010). Individually considerate transformational 
leadership behavior and self-sacrifice. Leadership & Organization Development 
Journal, 31, 670–686.
Avolio, B. A., & Bass, B. M. (1988). Transformational leadership, charisma and be-
yond. In J. G. Hunt, B. R. Balaga, H. P. Bachler, & C. Schriesheim (Eds.), 
Emerging leadership vista (pp. 29–50). Emsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
Block, L. (2003). The leadership-culture connection: An exploratory investigation. 
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 24, 318–334.
Blunt, P., & Jones, M.L. (1992). Managing organizations in Africa. Berlin, Germany: 
Walter De Gruyter.
Bodomo, A. B. (1996). On language and development in sub-Saharan Africa: The 
case of Ghana. Nordic Journal of African Studies, 5(2), 31–53.
Bodomo, A. B. (1997). Linguistics, education, and politics: An interplay on Ghana-
ian languages. In R. Herbert (Ed.), African linguistics at the crossroads: Papers 
from Kwaluseni (pp. 469–484). Koln, Germany: Rudiger Koppe Verlag.
Bodomo, A., B., Anderson, J., & Dzahene-Quarshie, J. (2009). A Kente of many col-
ors: Multilingualism and the complex ecology of language shift in Ghana. So-
ciolinguistic Studies, 3(3), 357–379.
Bolland, O. N. (2001). The politics of labor in the British Caribbean: The social of authori-
tarianism and democracy in the Labor movement. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle.
Brubaker, T. A. (2013). Servant leadership, ubuntu, and leader effectiveness in 
Rwanda. Emerging Leadership Journeys, 6(1), 95–131.

106    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
Bruton, G. D. (2010). Business and the world’s poorest billion: The need for an 
expanded examination by management scholars. Academy of Management Per-
spectives, 24(3), 6– 10.
Central Intelligence Agency. (2013). The world factbook. Retrieved October 30, 2016, 
from 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/resources/the-world-fact-
book/index.html
Den Hartog, D. N., House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Ruiz-Quintanilla, S. A., & Dorfman, 
P.W. (1999). Culture specific and cross culturally generalizable implicit lead-
ership theories: Are attributes of charismatic/transformational leadership 
universally endorsed? The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), 219–256.
Dennis, R. S., & Bocarnea, M. (2005). Development of the servant leadership as-
sessment instrument. Leadership and Organizational Development Journal, 26(8), 
600–615.
Dolphyne, F. A., & Kropp-Dakubu, M. E. (1988). The volta-comoe languages. In M. 
E. Kropp-Dakubu (Ed.), The languages of Ghana. London, England: KPI.
Ekundayo, J. M. (2013). Out of Africa: Fashola—Reinventing servant leadership to engen-
der Nigeria’s transformation. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse.
Epitropaki, O., & Martin, R. (2004). Implicit leadership theories in applied settings: 
Factor structure, generalizability, and stability overtime. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 89(2), 293–310.
Ford, D., Lituchy, T., Punnett, B. J., Puplampu, B., & Sejjaaka, S. (2013). Leadership 
in Africa and the diaspora. In T. Lituchy, B. J. Punnett, & B. Puplampu (Eds.), 
Management in Africa: Macro and micro perspectives (pp. 249–269). New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Ford, D. L., & Miller, C. D. (2014). Leadership and motivation in Africa and the 
African diaspora (LEAD): Summary and epilogue. Canadian Journal of Admin-
istrative Sciences, 31(4), 270–279.
Galperin, B., Lituchy, T., Acquaah, M., Bewaji, T., & Ford, D. (2014). Leadership and 
motivation in the African diaspora: The United States and Canada. Canadian 
Journal of Administrative Sciences, 31(4). doi:10.1002/CJAS.1296
Gordon, R. G, Jr., & Grimes, B. F. (2005). Ethnologue: Languages of the world (15th 
ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL International.
Graham, S. (1994). Motivations in African America. Review of Educational Research, 
64, 55–117.
Hale, J. R. (2004, August). A contextualized model for cross-cultural leadership in West 
Africa. Proceedings of the Servant Leadership Research Roundtable. Retrieved from 
https://www.regent.edu/acad/global/publications/sl_proceedings/2004/ 
hale_contextualized_model.pdf
Hale, J. R., & Fields, D. L. (2009). Exploring servant leadership across cultures: A 
study of followers in Ghana and the U.S.A. Leadership, 3(4), 397–416.
Hall, G. M. (1992). Africans in colonial Louisiana: The development of Afro-Creole culture 
in the eighteenth century. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University.
Harris, M. (1979). Cultural materialism. New York, NY: Random House.
Hofstede, G. (1981). Cultures consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Holder, K., Knight, N., Punnet, B. J., & Charrles, R. (2014). Culture, leadership and 
motivation in two commonwealth Caribbean countries: One look at the Afri-
can diaspora. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 31, 245–256

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    107
House, R., Hanges, P., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P., & Gupta, V. (2004). Culture, leader-
ship and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE.
ILO Decent Work Team. (2011). Caribbean countries and territories. Retrieved from 
http://ilocarib.org.tt/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id= 
1146&itemi.
Jackson, T., Amaeshi, K., & Yavuz, S. (2008). Untangling African Indigenous man-
agement: Multiple influences on the success of SMES in Kenya. Journal of 
World Business, 43(4), 400–416.
James, R. (2008). Leadership development inside-out in Africa. Non Profit Manage-
ment & Leadership, 18(3), 359–375.
Johnson, H. (1998). White women and a West India fortune: Gender and wealth 
doing slavery. In H. Johnson & K. Watson (Eds.), The white minority in the Carib-
bean (pp. 1–16). Chicago, IL: James Currey.
Kaba, J. A. (2011). The status of Africa’s emigration brain drain in the 21st century. 
Western Journal of Black Studies, 35, 187–207.
Kitzinger, J. (1995). Qualitative research: Introducing focus groups.  BMJ: British 
Medical Journal, 311(7000), 299.
Koopman, P. L., Den Hartog, D. N., & Konrad, E. (1999). National culture and 
leadership profiles in Europe: Some results from the GLOBE study. European 
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 8, 503–520.
Kottak, C. (2006). Mirror for humanity. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Lanik, M., Thornton, G., & Hoskovcova, S. (2009). A flat world? A comparative study 
of achievement motivation in the Czech Republic and the United States. Stu-
dia Psychologica, 51, 69–84.
Linstone, H., & Turoff, M. (1975). The Delphi method: Techniques and applications. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lituchy, T. R., Ford, D., & Punnett, B. J. (2013). Leadership in Uganda, Barbados, 
Canada and the U.S.A: Exploratory perspectives. African Journal of Economic 
and Management Studies, 4(2), 201–222.
Lituchy T. R., & Punnett, B. J. (2014). Leadership effectiveness and motivation in 
Africa and the African diaspora (LEAD): An introduction. Canadian Journal 
of Administrative Sciences, 31, 221–227.
Lituchy, T. R., Punnett, B. J., Ford, D. L., & Jonsson. C. (2009, June). Leadership 
effectiveness in Africa and the diaspora. Eastern Academy of Management Inter-
national Proceedings. Rio, Brazil.
Lituchy, T. R., Punnett, B. J., & Puplumpu, B. (2013). Introduction. In T. R. Lituchy, 
B. J. Punnett, & B. B. Puplampu (Eds.), Management in Africa: Macro and micro 
perspectives (pp. 1–8). London, England: Routledge.
Ludwig, B. (1997). Predicting the future: Have you considered using the Delphi 
methodology? Journal of Extension, 35(5), 1–4.
Lüpke, F. (2009). At the margin-African endangered languages in the context of 
global endangerment discourses. African Research & Documentation, (109), 15.
Mangaliso, M. P. (2001). Building competitive advantage from ubuntu: Manage-
ment lessons from South Africa. Academy of Management Executive, 15(3), 
23–32.
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50, 370–396.

108    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
May, D., Gilson, R., & Harter, L. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaning-
fulness, safety and availability and the engagement of the human spirit at 
work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77(1), 11–37.
Mazur, B. (2010). Cultural diversity in organizational theory and practice. Journal of 
Intercultural Management, 2(2), 5–15.
Mbigi, L. (2000). In search of the African business renaissance: An African cultural per-
spective. Randburg, South Africa: Knowledge Resources.
Mbigi, L., & Maree, J. (1995). Ubuntu: The spirit of African transformation management. 
Randburg, South Africa: Knowledge Resources.
McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. New York, NY: Free Press.
Mittal, R., & Dorfman, P. W. (2012). Servant leadership across cultures. Journal of 
World Business, 47(4), 555–570.
Mohan, G., & Zack-Williams, A. B. (2002). Globalization from below: Conceptualiz-
ing the role of the African diasporas in Africa’s development. Review of African 
Political Economy, 29(92), 211–236.
Morrison, A. J. (2000). Developing a global leadership model. Human Resource Man-
agement, 39(2), 117–32.
Ncube, L. (2010). Ubuntu: A transformative leadership philosophy. Journal of Lead-
ership Studies, 4(3), 77–82.
Nelson, L. (2003). An exploratory study of the application and acceptance of servant lead-
ership theory among black leaders in South Africa. Retrieved from https://www.
regent.edu/acad/global/publications/dissertations/nelson2003.cfm
Nettleford, R.M. (1978). Caribbean Cultural identity: Caribbean cultural identity: The 
case of Jamaica. Kingston, Jamaica: Herald Limited.
Newenham-Kahindi, A. (2009). The transfer of ubuntu and indaba business models 
abroad: A case of South African multinational banks and telecommunication 
services in Tanzania. International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 9(1), 
87–108.
Nkomo, S. M. (2011). A postcolonial and anti-colonial reading of ‘African’ leader-
ship and management in organization studies: Tensions, contradictions and 
possibilities. Organization, 18(3), 365–386.
Nurse, L., & Punnett, B. J. (2002). A review of management research in the English 
speaking Caribbean. Journal of Eastern Caribbean Studies, 27(2), 1–37.
Ogechi, N. O. (2003). On language rights in Kenya. Nordic Journal of African Stud-
ies, 12(3), 277–295.
O’Reilly, C.A., III, Williams, K.Y., & Barsade, W. (1998). Group demography and 
innovation: Does diversity help? In D. Gruenfeld (Ed.), Research on managing 
groups and teams (pp. 183–207). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
Parker, P. S. (1996). Gender, culture, leadership: Toward a culturally distinct model 
of African American women executives’ leadership strategies. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 7, 189–214.
Phinney, J. S. (1996). Understanding ethnic diversity. The American Behavioral Scien-
tist, 40, 143–152.
Pierce, W. J., Hudson, R. E., & Singleton, S. M. (2011). Ethnic identity and propen-
sity for practice among African descended MSW students. Journal of Social 
Work Education, 47, 403–421.

Leadership Diversity in Africa and the African Diaspora    109
Posner, D. N. (2004). Measuring ethnic fractionalization in Africa. American Journal 
of Political Science, (48), 4
Punnett, B. J., Dick-Forde, E., & Robinson, J. (2006). Culture and management in 
the English speaking Caribbean. Journal of Eastern Caribbean Studies, 31(2), 
44–57.
Punnett, B. J., & Greenidge, D. (2009). Culture, myth and leadership in the Carib-
bean. In E. H. Kessler & D. J. Wong-Mingji (Eds.), Cultural mythology and global 
leadership (pp. 65–78). Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Punnett, B. J., Singh, J. B., & Williams, G. (1994). The relative influence of econom-
ic development and anglo heritage on expressed values: Empirical evidence 
from a Caribbean country. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 18(1), 
99– 115.
Puplampu, B. B. (2010). Leadership as engagement, leadership as systems devel-
opment: A contextualized Ghanaian study. European Business Review, 22(6), 
624–651.
Robinson, A. L. (2014). National versus ethnic identification in Africa: Modern-
ization, colonial legacy, and the origins of territorial nationalism. World Poli-
tics, 66(4), 709–746.
Ryan, R., & Deci, E. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of in-
trinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 
55(1), 68–78.
Senaji, T. A., Metwally, E., Sejjaaka, S., Puplampu, B. B., Michaud, J., & Adedoyin‐
Rasaq, H. (2014). LEAD-leadership effectiveness, motivation, and culture in 
Africa: Lessons from Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and Uganda. Canadian 
Journal of Administrative Sciences, 31(4), 228–244.
Smith, B. (2002). Worldview and culture: Leadership in sub-Saharan Africa. New 
England Journal of Public Policy, 19(1), 243–274.
Statistics Canada. (2010). Visible minority population, by province and territory (2006 cen-
sus). Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/ 
cst01/demo52a-eng.htm
Steers, R. M., Sanchez-Runde, C. J., & Nardon, L. (2010). Management across cultures: 
Challenges and strategies. London, England: Cambridge University Press.
St-Onge, S., Morin, D., Bellehumeur, M., & Dupuis, F. (2009). Managers’ motivation 
to evaluate subordinate performance. Qualitative Research in Organizations and 
Management: An International Journal, 4, 273–293.
Suutari, V. (2002). Global leader development: An emerging research agenda. Ca-
reer Development International, 7(4), 218–233.
The Economist. (2011, December 3). Africa rising. Retrieved October 30, 2016, 
from http://www.economist.com/node/21541015
The World Factbook. (2012). The United States. Retrieved September 19, 2012, from 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/The-World-Factbook/Index.Html
Thomas, C. Y. (1988). The poor and the powerless: Economic policy and change in the 
Caribbean. London, England: Latin America Bureau (Research and Action) 
Limited.
Tsui, A. (2004). Contributing to global management knowledge: A case for high 
quality indigenous research. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 21, 491–513.

110    C. M. MUKANZI et al.
Turoff, M., & Hiltz, S. R. (1996). Computer based Delphi process. In M. Adler, & E. 
Ziglio (Eds.), Gazing into the oracle: The delphi method and its application to social 
policy and public health (pp. 56–88). London, England: Jessica Kingsley.
United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 
Population Estimate and Projection Section. (2010). World population prospects 
(2010 revision). New York, NY: Author.
Waldman, D. A., De Luque, M. S., Washburn, N., House, R. J., Adetoun, B., Barrasa, 
A., & Dorfman, P. (2006). Cultural and leadership predictors of corporate 
social responsibility values of top management: A GLOBE study of 15 coun-
tries. Journal of International Business Studies, 37(6), 823–837.
Walumbwa, F., Orwa, B., Wang, P., & Lawler, J. (2005). Transformational leadership, 
organizational commitment, and job satisfaction: A comparative study of Ke-
nyan and U.S. financial firms. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 16(2), 
235–256.
Wambu, O.(2007). Under the tree of talking: Leadership for change in Africa. London, 
England: Counterpoint.
Wanasika, I., Howell, J. P. Littrell, R. F., & Dorfman, P. (2011). Managerial leadership 
and culture in sub-Saharan Africa. Journal of World Business, 46(2), 234–241.
Wandibba, S. (2004). Kenyan cultures and our values. Wajibu, 19(1), 3–5.
Wellman, W., Perkins, G., & Wellman, N. (2009). Educational leadership: The re-
lationship between spirituality and leadership practices. Spirituality in Higher 
Education Newsletter, 7, 1–6.
World Bank. (2014). The African diaspora program. Retrieved January 26, 2014, from 
http:www.worldbank.org/en/search?q=+The+African+Diaspora+Program.+&
currentTab=1
World Economic Forum. (2015). The global competitiveness report 2015–2016. Geneva, 
Switzerland: Klaus Schwab.
Young, S. J., & Jamieson, L. M. (2001). Delivery methodology of the delphi: A com-
parison of two approaches. Journal of Park & Recreation Administration, 19(1).
Yukl, G. (2012, November). Effective leadership behavior: What we know and what 
questions need more attention. Academy of Management Perspectives, 66–85.
Yukl, G., Gordon, A., & Taber, T. (2002). A hierarchical taxonomy of leadership 
behavior: Integrating a half century of behavior research. Journal of Leadership 
and Organizational Studies, 9, 15–32.
Zaff, J. F., Blount, R. L., Phillips, L., & Cohen, L. (2002). The role of ethnic identity 
and self-construal in coping among African American and Caucasian Ameri-
can seventh graders: an exploratory analysis of within-group variance. Adoles-
cence, 37, 751–773.
Zhang, X., Fu, P., Xi, Y., Li, L., Xu, L., Cao, C., & Ge, J. (2012). Understanding indig-
enous leadership research: Explication and Chinese examples. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 23(6), 1063–1079.
Zoogah, D. B., & Nkomo, S. (2013). Management research in Africa: Past, present 
and future. In T. R. Lituchy, B. J. Punnett, & B. B. Puplampu (Eds.), Man-
agement in Africa: Macro and micro perspectives (pp. 9–31). London, England: 
Routledge.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 111–135
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
111
CHAPTER 4
MANAGING THE HISPANIC 
WORKFORCE IN THE CONTEXT 
OF VALUES, ACCULTURATION, 
AND IDENTITY
Carolina Gomez
Florida International University
Patricia G. Martínez
Loyola Marymount University
ABSTRACT
Discussions about leading the 21st century workforce must include Hispan-
ics, the largest ethnic group who will account for 80% of the U.S. labor force 
growth in the next four decades. In today’s multicultural context, leading 
Hispanic employees requires knowledge of cultural values and how these are 
related to social identity and acculturation. Within this context, we review 
research on how Hispanic employees may perceive leadership, organizational 
justice, teams, and the effect of job factors on motivation. Additionally, we 
discuss how culturally embedded leadership favors a relational perspective. 
Paternalistic leadership emphasizes such relational leadership as does the use 

112    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
of interactional justice. Furthermore, differences in attribution styles need 
to be noted so as to minimize conflict between managers and Hispanic em-
ployees. Research also suggests that in teams, Hispanics will emphasize the 
importance of team maintenance behaviors as well as potentially providing 
special treatment to in-group members. Finally, extrinsic job factors such as 
colleagues, benefits, company reputation, and managers will be related to 
motivation. Nevertheless, all of these factors need to be taken in the context 
of employees’ levels of acculturation and identification with Hispanic ethnic-
ity and values. As employees are more acculturated and have weaker ethnic 
identification, Hispanics will display cultural values, job characteristic and 
leadership preferences which are more similar to U.S. majority members. We 
conclude with a discussion of several managerial implications.
Any discussion of workforce trends in the 21st century must include a dis-
cussion of the Hispanic workforce, which is projected to increase from 
14.8% of workers in 2010 to 18.6% in 2020 (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
2012). As the largest ethnic group in the country, currently 55 million (U.S. 
Census Bureau, 2014) and projected to represent about 80% of the total 
growth in the U.S. labor force over the next four decades, Aguinis and 
Joo (2014) argue that future research on Hispanics and Latin Americans 
is likely to have important social implications. Hispanic culture reflects val-
ues that may differ from the mainstream U.S. culture, and these important 
cultural differences may lead to differences in workplace preferences and 
behaviors. In this chapter we discuss Hispanics’ perceptions of leadership, 
organizational justice, the group context, and motivation, and how their 
levels of acculturation and social identity may further affect these impor-
tant organizational issues.
HISPANIC CULTURAL VALUES
First and foremost it is important to note that when we refer to Hispanics, 
we are referring to those whose origin is Spain or the Spanish-speaking 
countries of Latin America. While such a definition comprises people from 
many different countries, research on cultural values (Hofstede, 1980; 
House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman & Gupta, 2004) supports that individu-
als with these origins have a common set of cultural values. Blancero and 
Stone (2014) argue that cultural similarities arise from a common religion, 
the mestizaje (mixing) of races, more than 400 years of shared history and 
other factors that influence attitudes and behaviors. For example, without 
a doubt, Hofstede’s (1980) research found that Latin American countries 
are collectivistic cultures. Furthermore, Marin and Triandis (1985) note 
that Hispanics in the United States also are collectivistic. This collectivis-
tic orientation is important because individuals with such values tend to 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    113
emphasize group solidarity and obligations (Triandis, 1994a). Moreover, 
individuals from collectivistic cultures tend to belong to a select few in-
groups, such as families and friendship circles (Triandis, Bontempo, Vil-
lareal, Asai, & Lucca, 1988). These in-groups tend to be stable over time 
(Triandis et al., 1988) and collectivists favor members from their in-group.
Collectivism has been studied extensively as it seems to affect many be-
haviors, such as cooperation (Cox, Lobel, & McLeod, 1991) and social loaf-
ing (Earley, 1989). Interestingly, Early found that while collectivists worked 
better in groups compared to individualists, their performance was lower 
when they thought they were working alone or in an out-group. Thus the 
relationship was moderated by who comprised the group (in-group or out-
group members). Other research has shown how collectivists will be more 
generous in their rewards toward team members who they believe to be 
part of their in-group (Gomez, Kirkman, & Shapiro, 2000). These results 
confirm the importance of in-group members to individuals with a collec-
tivist orientation. In addition, Gomez et al. (2000) also found that collectiv-
ists seemed to value group maintenance contributions, while individualists 
valued task contributions.
Research also supports important differences in attributional biases be-
tween collectivists and individualists. Markus and Kitayama (1991) discuss 
how individualists’ independent view and collectivists’ interdependent view 
affects their cognition, emotions, and motivations. A collectivistic view leads 
people to make more external attributions (e.g., the environment or luck), 
while a more individualistic view is associated with more internal attribu-
tions (effort or ability). Choi, Nisbett, and Norenzayan (1999) note that 
research across a diverse set of collectivistic cultures supports collectivists’ 
tendency to make external situational attributions. The interdependent 
view of the self-results in Hispanics (Betancourt & Weiner, 1982; Newman, 
1991), as well as other collectivist cultures, reflect a tendency toward more 
external attributions. Individuals with a collectivist culture will make inter-
nal attributions, but appear to be more sensitive to the contextual variables, 
which may better explain behavior and phenomena. Therefore, collectiv-
ism, a value that characterizes the Hispanic culture, seems to have a strong 
impact on employee perceptions and behaviors.
Related to the collectivist orientation, Hispanics place great importance 
on the family (Marin & Marin, 1991). Familialism is defined as individu-
als’ strong identification and attachment with their families, both nucle-
ar and extended, and strong feelings of loyalty, reciprocity and solidarity 
among members of the same family (Triandis, Marín, Betancourt, Lisansky 
& Chang, 1982). Despite differences in country of origin, Mexican Central 
and Cuban Americans reported similar attitudes toward the family indicat-
ing that familism is a core characteristic in the Hispanic culture (Marín, 
Sabogal, Otero-Sabogal, Vanoss Marín, Perez-Stable, 1987). Three basic 

114    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
dimensions of familism include familial obligations, perceived support 
from the family, and family as referents.
Another common value across Hispanic groups is an acceptance of pow-
er differences (referred to by Hofstede as power distance). That is, Hispan-
ic groups tend to accept differences among individuals in terms of power 
(Hofstede, 1980). This value is related to a respect for titles and hierarchy. 
Indeed research has shown that a more authoritarian management style 
has a stronger negative effect on employees’ organizational commitment 
when these individuals are from the United States and thus generally ex-
hibit low power distance; nevertheless, when individuals accept power dif-
ferences, lack of participation does not have the same detrimental effect on 
their level of organizational commitment (Brockner et al., 2001).
In addition, the Latin American countries tended to score high on un-
certainty avoidance (Hofstede, 1980), thus Hispanics prefer more rules, 
procedures, and overall structure in their workplace. They also have a 
present orientation and accept traditional gender roles (Marin & Marin, 
1991), and Hispanics value simpatia, a word that emphasizes social behavior 
that focuses on harmony in relationships (Triandis, Marin, Lisansky, & Be-
tancourt, 1984). Overall, it appears that the Hispanic culture has a strong 
emphasis on relations and acceptance of hierarchy and traditional gender 
roles as well as an emphasis on the present (Guerrero & Posthuma, 2014). 
However, as Guerrero and Posthuma (2014) argue, there are important 
differences among Hispanic nationalities on values, where some countries 
may be higher or lower on a given value (for example, Colombia is lower 
on power distances) and thus researchers have cautioned against assuming 
that these commonalities apply to all groups (Triandis, 1994; Stone-Rome-
ro, Stone & Salas, 2003). Other factors that may affect the extent to which 
one can make generalizations about the behavior of Hispanic employees, 
include gender, education, socioeconomic status, and religion (Blancero 
& Stone, 2014). Nevertheless, there is a common set of values that tends to 
differentiate Hispanics from other ethnic groups. These values in turn can 
provide insight into how Hispanic employees may perceive and respond to 
different forms of supervision and leadership, perceive justice differently, 
behave in teams differently, and be motivated by different job factors.
The Role of Acculturation and Ethnic Identity
While these cultural values are important considerations for supervi-
sors and managers working with Hispanic employees, it is critical to take 
into account individuals’ degree of acculturation as well as their ethnic 
identity. The process of acculturation involves a change in people’s activi-
ties, thinking patterns, values, and self-identification (Berry, 1997). Thus 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    115
for Hispanics born outside of the United States, as they spend time in the 
mainstream U.S. culture, they may change their values and identification 
to be more reflective of the U.S. culture. Researchers have proposed two 
different models of acculturation and according to Phinney (1996) one 
model proposes a linear model whereby as individuals develop stronger 
ties with the mainstream culture, their ethnic ties tend to weaken. A second 
model proposes that individuals can have strong or weak ties and identi-
fications with both their ethnic culture as well as the mainstream culture. 
With either model we expect the degree of acculturation to have an effect 
on an individual’s values, attitudes, and ultimately their behavior. Indeed, 
Berry (1997) noted that without measuring acculturation, researchers may 
arrive at inappropriate conclusions regarding the effect of ethnicity. Thus, 
Hispanic employees with low levels of acculturation may exhibit more of 
the values typically related to Hispanic culture, e.g., collectivism, familial-
ism, power distance, which as we outline in this chapter and they may affect 
their job characteristic preferences, their preferred leadership style, and 
how they behave in teams.
In contrast, Hispanic employees with high levels of acculturation or a 
weak ethnic identity may have similar preferences as their Anglo-American 
counterparts. For example, Guerrero and Posthuma (2014) noted that gen-
der roles expectations within the Hispanic community are affected by ac-
culturation, with low acculturation associated with more traditional gender 
role expectations. Thus, it may be misleading for researchers to assume 
that Hispanic employee research participants will exhibit traditional gen-
der role values.
It is important to note that “Hispanic” does not constitute a race, but 
rather a distinct ethnic group (Stone, Johnson, Stone-Romero, & Hartman, 
2006). The reality is that some Hispanics may identify as White, some iden-
tify as Black and some may identify as having a mixed race (Gallegos & 
Ferdman, 2007). In contrast, ethnicity has been defined as the “subjective 
symbolic or emblematic use of any aspect of culture [by a group], in order 
to differentiate themselves from other groups” (DeVos, 1975). As a result, 
we know that individuals vary in the extent to which they ascribe identities 
to themselves, such as ethnicity. These categorizations provide a basis for an 
individual’s self-concept, and next we discuss the role of social identities in 
the self-concept.
Social identity theory proposes that through the process of self-catego-
rization (Tajfel & Turner, 1979; Turner & Oakes, 1986), individuals assign 
membership within social categories, such as gender and ethnicity, to them-
selves and to others. Thus, social identity consists of those social groups 
with which an individual identifies. These identities are indeed tied to val-
ues (as noted elsewhere), attitudes, and needs, which then can translate to 
behaviors (Folger, Konovsky, & Cropanzano, 1992; Markus & Wurf, 1987). 

116    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
The extent to which social identities guide behaviors and attitudes will de-
pend upon the centrality and the salience of that identity within a given 
context. Individuals vary in their ethnic identity centrality, which is the im-
portance they place on their ethnic identities (Ethier & Deaux, 1990). Thus 
an individual with a central career identity may be more willing to exert 
more effort at work than those who may have more salient family identities 
(Lobel & St. Clair, 1992). Ethnicity is one of the potential self-identities that 
an individual can ascribe to themselves that will then affect their attitudes, 
perceptions, and behavior. Given the complexity involved in ethnic iden-
tity, Phinney (1996) recommends that researchers measure and confirm 
the values of an ethnic group, assessing differences within the group and as-
sessing how these values affect attitudes and behaviors. These ideas are con-
sistent with early critiques of social demography research (e.g., Lawrence, 
1997), which noted the importance of researchers confirming that when 
they ascribed individuals a particular social identity, such as Hispanic, these 
individuals indeed included this social category within their social identity. 
For example, in a study of U.S. Hispanic business professionals’ perceptions 
of discrimination, DelCampo, Jacobson, Van Buren, and Blancero (2010) 
found that immigrants had higher levels of Hispanic identity as compared 
to U.S.-born Hispanics.
With these cultural values and the concepts of identity and acculturation 
as a backdrop, we will explore several topics central to Hispanics in the 
workplace; mainly, some key findings related to leadership, teams and col-
laboration in groups, and motivation.
LEADING HISPANIC EMPLOYEES
Leadership involves behaviors that are contextually and culturally en-
dorsed. Inevitably, the cultural context will influence followers’ expecta-
tions of leadership behaviors (Bass, 1991, 1997). As such, it is essential to 
consider the collectivistic nature of employees’ countries of origin in order 
to understand why Hispanics may value, and often expect a leadership style 
that emphasizes concern for the individual. One can look to initial research 
on paternalism, a leadership style that is prevalent in Latin American coun-
tries (Martínez, 2003; 2005; Elvira & Dávila, 2005; Pellegrini & Scandura, 
2006; Uhl-Bien, Tierney, Graen & Wakabayashi, 1990). Paternalism is a 
leadership style that combines decision-making control with benevolence 
and concern for individuals’ welfare (Martínez, 2003, 2005); it relies on 
social bonds based on reciprocity and stresses workers’ expectations (Dávi-
la & Elvira, 2012). However, this merging of care with control makes this 
form of leadership difficult for Western scholars to understand, such that 
paternalism is often viewed as an anachronism (Padavic & Earnest, 1994), 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    117
with Americans typically regarding it as a system where employees become 
dependent upon the organization (Uhl-Bien et al., 1990).
A collectivistic society, where mutual obligations are embedded within 
society, is conducive to paternalism (Jackson, 2015), such that subordinates 
may expect leaders to be aware of and involved in their lives, thus providing 
care and protection. In contrast, in an individualistic society, this may be 
viewed as an invasion of privacy. (Aycan, 2006; Jackson, 2015). Pellegrini, 
Scandura and Jayaraman (2010) noted that from a leadership perspective, 
while paternal benevolence may correspond to “individualized consider-
ation” (e.g., Bass, 1985), it consists of a longer-term, relational aspect that 
extends to subordinates’ personal lives.
A discussion of the historical roots of paternalism within the colonial 
hacienda system helps to frame paternalism in Latin America (Martínez, 
2003, 2005). Hacienda studies discuss the evolution of an agricultural mod-
el into a commercial model, describing the management style of the hacen-
dados, the owners, as paternalistic (e.g., Diaz-Saenz & Witherspoon, 2004; 
Guerra, 1988). Although the hacienda system (the basis of the agrarian 
sector of contemporary Latin America) began its decline during the 19th 
century, it continued well into the 20th century. Over time this seemingly 
feudal hacienda system evolved to include elements of free enterprise and 
capitalism, where workers typically had rights, freedom, compensation, and 
perquisites (Gibson, 1964; Miller, 1990). Many of the late 19th century tex-
tile mills were established in haciendas and as a result, paternalistic rela-
tions between mill owners and employees had deep roots (Boyer, 2000). 
As Mexico’s hacienda agricultural model began to evolve, several “benev-
olent” paternalistic practices continued, providing for a number of basic 
needs for workers and, often, their families.
A similar evolution, driven by the need to meet the competitive demands 
of a global market, is illustrated in recent studies of contemporary organiza-
tions in Latin America. In a recent review of the psychological, sociological, 
and historical explanations underlying leadership styles in Latin America, 
Davila and Elvira (2012) argued that humanistic leadership (emphasizing 
compassion) is typical in Latin America. This leadership approach includes 
an interest in workers beyond the employment relationship.
One example of leadership research within the Latin American context 
is a recent comparative study of management and delegation where Liber-
man (2014) found that as expected, delegation was higher in the United 
States compared to Chile, while paternalism was higher in Chile. However 
in the United States, paternalism had a stronger relationship with job sat-
isfaction and organizational commitment than did delegation. Liberman 
noted that nearly one-quarter of his U.S. sample was Hispanic and consid-
ers that this demographic is likely related to the strong, unexpected positive 
relationships between paternalism and job attitudes in the U.S. context. 

118    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
Similarly, in a recent qualitative case study of a Mexican-owned multina-
tional corporation, Brumley (2014) found a “hybrid organizational logic,” 
which is characterized by paternalism within a competitive work culture 
that evolved in response to global forces. The paternalistic work culture was 
characterized by deference, loyalty, and traditional work and family roles.
In yet another study, Darío Rodríguez and Ríos (2009) argue that while 
Chile finds its labor relations in a transitional state, moving to a more formal-
istic, industrialized, Western form, human resource management practices 
should consider that paternalism is present as an employee expectation. 
Furthermore, the researchers argue that despite an organization’s modern-
ized appearance, paternalism can still pervade administrative activities and 
practices. Finally, it is important to reinforce that while some dimensions 
of followers’ leadership expectations may vary across Latin American coun-
tries, recent studies support the idea that the region still shares elements 
of paternalism. In a detailed analysis of the Latin American region for the 
GLOBE Project, Castaño et al., (2015) argue that their results suggest that 
in Latin America, charismatic/value-based and team-oriented leadership 
is desirable. Furthermore, they state that these leadership behaviors may 
be indicative of “paternalism theory” where charismatic corresponds to 
person-centered and team-oriented to a relational style.
As is apparent in the contemporary organizational studies discussed pre-
viously, in response to a global competitive landscape, the organizational 
culture, structures and practices in Latin American organizations have often 
imported Western management practices (e.g., Davila & Elvira, 2012; Liber-
man, 2014). Similarly, within the U.S. context, it is necessary to consider that 
while individuals who are immigrant or first-generation may be more com-
fortable with and potentially expect a more paternalistic style of leadership 
(e.g., Martínez, 2003; Martínez, 2005), it is important to consider accultura-
tion. As individuals adopt more U.S. individualistic values, they may perceive 
this type of leadership as anachronistic, irrelevant, and ineffective.
ORGANIZATIONAL JUSTICE AND FAIRNESS PERCEPTIONS
Related to employees’ expectations of leaders, exploratory research in Mex-
ico also suggests that Hispanics may differ in what matters to them as related 
to organizational justice, which consists of distributive justice, the fairness 
of the distribution of outcomes (Greenberg, 1990); procedural justice, or 
the perceived fairness of the policies and procedures used to make the out-
come decisions (Greenberg, 1990); and interactional justice, the perceived 
interpersonal treatment that an individual receives during the enactment 
of organizational procedures (Bies & Moag, 1986). Studies in a variety of 
empirical studies within the U.S. context suggest that procedural justice is 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    119
related to organizational commitment (Brockner et al., 2001; Brockner, Ty-
ler, & Cooper-Schneider, 1992; Folger & Konovsky, 1989; McFarlin & Swee-
ney, 1992). As an example, perceptions of procedural justice increase when 
employees have a greater voice or participate more in decisions (Lind & Ty-
ler, 1988). Thus procedural justice has been shown to affect organizational-
level outcomes. As far as interactional justice, it is a significant predictor of 
job satisfaction and organizational citizenship behaviors (Moorman, 1991). 
Nevertheless, interactional justice in the United States is often not distin-
guishable from procedural justice. Indeed as noted by Cropanzano, Prehar, 
and Chen (2002), while initial research treated them as separate concepts, 
more recent research has viewed them as part of the process used to make 
decisions, hence the high correlation between them. Nevertheless, they ar-
gue that social exchange theory helps distinguish them and their research 
shows that they have different correlates; procedural justice was related to 
trust in upper management and performance appraisal system satisfaction, 
whereas, interactional justice was related to the quality of the manager.
Interestingly, initial research in Mexico found that interactional jus-
tice, not procedural, related to affective commitment (Gomez & Kirkman, 
2005). Moreover, in the Mexican context, distributive justice was related to 
normative commitment (i.e., a reflection that employees stay because they 
feel they ought to) as well as affective commitment. While this type of re-
search needs to be confirmed in a larger, ideally comparative study, it makes 
sense that in a relational culture, an employee’s emotional and normative 
attachment is highly influenced by the level of interactional justice (Gómez 
& Kirkman, 2005).
The concept of psychological contract fairness is another dimension 
of employees’ perception of fair treatment. Psychological contracts have 
been defined as the individual’s beliefs about mutual obligations between 
the employee and employer. These include the employees’ expectations 
of what the organization has promised and what it expect from employees 
in return (Rousseau, 1995). In a longitudinal study of Hispanic business 
professionals, DelCampo & Blancero (2008) found a negative relationship 
between individuals’ psychological contract fairness and perceptions of dis-
crimination and a positive relationship between psychological contract fair-
ness and autonomous status. In a later study, DelCampo, Rogers & Jacobson 
(2010) found a positive relationship between perceived discrimination and 
psychological contract breach, and this relationship was stronger for those 
with a higher level of Hispanic identity.
Volpone (2012) argues that organizations’ failure to consider Hispanics’ 
cultural values may shed light on why Hispanics’ perceptions and behaviors 
in the workplace, such as turnover, differ from other racioethnic groups’ 
perceptions and behaviors. Furthermore, she argues that a supportive 
diversity climate that incorporates Hispanic cultural values (collectivism, 

120    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
power-distance, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, time orientation, trust 
confianza, ethnic pride) relates to improved retention through the fulfill-
ment of psychological contracts. In contrast, when employees perceive that 
the organization does not honor their psychological contract, known as 
a psychological contract breach (e.g., Bal, De Lange, Jansen, & Van Der 
Velde, 2008; Deery, Iverson, & Walsh, 2006), they often experience negative 
outcomes, such as decreased organizational commitment, higher levels of 
intentions to quit, and higher levels of turnover.
An important element within a discussion of psychological contract ful-
fillment and breach is how and when employees form their psychological 
contract perceptions. Several theorists have argued that in large part hu-
man resource management (HRM) practices determine psychological con-
tracts (Conway & Briner, 2005; Guzzo, Noonan, & Elron, 1994; Rousseau, 
1995; Rousseau & Greller, 1994). More recent work has drawn from signal-
ing theory (Spence, 1973; 1974) to argue that these HRM practices sub-
stantially determine psychological contracts (Suazo, Martínez, & Sandoval, 
2009; Suazo, Martínez & Sandoval, 2011). For example, recruitment and 
selection practices, such as on-site job interviews, realistic job previews, job 
shadowing, and generous training and development programs may convey 
particular signals, such that prospective employees perceive that the organi-
zation devotes a generous amount of resources to employees’ skill develop-
ment and thus creates a long-term employment relationship.
We build on Volpone’s (2012) argument that in managing psychological 
contracts, organizations need to consider Hispanics cultural values by not-
ing that managers should also pay special attention to treating employees 
with respect and consideration, realizing it is the treatment more so than 
the procedures themselves that will result in committed employees. This is 
in alignment with Gomez and Kirkman’s (2005) finding that interactional 
justice strongly affects organizational commitment in Mexican employees. 
Similarly, the importance of distributive justice is tied to the paternalistic 
leadership emphasis noted earlier (Gómez & Kirkman, 2005). Thus when 
there is distributive justice, employees are more committed to the organiza-
tion as they perceive that the organization is taking care of them. Similarly, 
when the managers in an organization display interactional justice, organi-
zational commitment increases with Hispanic employees. As with our other 
conclusions, it is important to note that the importance of interactional 
and distributive components will be critical to those Hispanics who are not 
highly acculturated to the U.S. culture. For those who have assimilated into 
the U.S. culture and who may identify strongly with the mainstream cul-
ture, procedural justice will be a more important driver to their commit-
ment to the organization.
Another factor that may strongly affect the relationship between leaders and 
employees of different ethnic groups is the tendency to attribute performance 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    121
to either internal or external factors. As noted earlier, there is a body of re-
search suggesting that individuals of different cultures make significantly dif-
ferent causal attributions (e.g., Chiang & Birtch, 2007; Markus & Kitayama, 
1991). In our discussion of cultural values, it was noted that due to collectivis-
tic values, Hispanics tend to view the world in greater interdependent terms. 
Research supports that collectivists with this interdependent view make more 
external attributions, thus taking into account the context, the environment, 
even luck, in attributing why someone may have or may not have performed 
well (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). In contrast, individuals with a more indi-
vidualistic orientation, tend to make internal attributions (e.g., effort, ability, 
skill). Martinko, Moss, and Harvey (2006) found that these differences in at-
tributional tendencies can lead to lower quality relationships between leaders 
and members. Thus managers should be aware that Hispanic employees who 
are high in collectivism will consider the situation when attributing causation. 
If the manager is from an individualistic culture (such as the United States), 
the employee’s attribution may conflict with the manager’s tendency to make 
internal attributions, leading to significant conflict between managers and 
employees. Typically, research has supported a positive relationship between 
perceived supervisor support and perceived organizational support, such that 
employees view supervisors as acting on behalf of the organization. Drawing 
from Yan and Hunt (2005), who argue that collectivists attribute failure and 
success to group efforts rather than the efforts of an individual supervisor, 
Rhoades Shannock, Masuda, and Arboleda (2012) propose that their findings 
suggest that followers’ cultural differences may influence the degree to which 
they attribute leaders’ actions to the organization.
All in all, this body of research indicates that for those employees who 
identify with Hispanic cultural values, the focus within employment rela-
tionships and leadership should be much more relational in nature than is 
typical for the United States, individualistic-oriented context.
WORKING WITH OTHERS
According to Guerrero and Posthuma’s (2014) review on Hispanic research, 
Hispanic employees place more value on interpersonal exchanges, thus 
leading to a sense of obligation toward friends in the organization. Sanchez-
Burks, Nisbitt, and Ybarra (2000) note that compared to Anglo Americans, 
Mexican Americans viewed workgroups with a socioemotional orientation 
more favorably. Similarly, Gomez, Kirkman and Shapiro (2000) note that col-
lectivists, such as Hispanics, value maintenance, relationship-oriented contri-
butions more, while individualists value task contributions more.
When working in a team environment, Hispanic cultural values may also 
impact perceptions and behaviors that can affect the team culture and thus 

122    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
outcomes. Previously, we introduced organizational justice as an area where 
values could have a strong impact. A team environment often requires the 
distribution of rewards among team members and in a strong team envi-
ronment, team members are often involved in allocating the distribution of 
rewards. This distribution can be affected by the collectivistic orientation. 
For example, research shows that Mexicans allow the distribution of re-
wards in teams to be affected by the status of the team member in terms of 
the individual’s in-group status (Gómez, Kirkman, & Shapiro, 2000). They 
are more generous with in-group members regardless of their performance 
and this could influence reward distributions. Hispanic team members 
may take into account the status of a team member, whether they are part 
of their in-group or out-group, before deciding how generous to be with 
their rewards. Unintentionally, this may lead to a distributive justice issue 
with other team members and could potentially create conflict. Thus when 
implementing teams, reward/evaluation criteria should be spelled out in 
great detail such that it is clear what criteria should be taken into account 
when rewarding team members.
Nevertheless, when working in teams, conflict will arise and again, the col-
lectivist mentality of Hispanics may lead to the use of different conflict resolu-
tions strategies than their Anglo, more individualistic counterparts. Research 
with a Mexican sample noted that due to the level of collectivism, Mexicans 
appear to have a preference for both the use of social influence and negotiat-
ing when confronting a conflict (Gomez & Taylor, 2012). Gomez and Taylor 
(2012) found that when confronting a conflict with a coworker, Mexicans, 
compared to U.S. participants, had a preference for both the use of social 
influence and negotiating and that collectivism appeared to explain these 
preferences. Thus, even how Hispanic employees confront conflict with a 
team member may reflect their collectivistic values. They will try to use social 
influence and work through others to deal with conflict. Similarly, it appears 
that they will engage in negotiation to try to resolve conflict.
MOTIVATION
Assuming that job attributes are related to job satisfaction or increased mo-
tivation, cultural values should affect what Hispanics seek in employers. For 
example Stone et al. (2006) found that both Hispanics and non-Hispanics 
who held collectivist values rated relationships with coworkers as well as 
workplace diversity highly. In addition, those high on familialism rated time 
off from work higher. Finally, workers with higher power distance gave high-
er ratings to good company reputation and promotion opportunities. It is 
clear that Hispanic’s cultural values drive their job preferences and prefer-
ences for their employer’s policies.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    123
Similarly, Gomez (2003) examined the relationship between accultura-
tion, collectivism, and job attribute preferences. She found that levels of 
acculturation were related to collectivistic values; those Hispanics who were 
least acculturated held significantly higher levels of collectivism than those 
that were highly acculturated. The most acculturated Hispanics were simi-
lar in values to their Anglo American counterparts. Additionally she found 
that those with strong collectivistic values placed greater importance on 
contextual job attributes, such as working conditions and human relations. 
In contrast, those with stronger individualistic values had a stronger pref-
erence for task-related job attributes such as responsibility and autonomy. 
According to Gomez (2003), for collectivists the job characteristics such as 
affiliation and supervisor support may very well be more important than 
variety, autonomy, and task significance. Similarly, according to Hofstede 
(1980) collectivistic cultures placed greater emphasis on having training 
opportunities and good working conditions, while individualistic cultures 
placed emphasis on having freedom to perform the job according to the 
individual’s preferences and having challenging work that gives a sense of 
accomplishment.
Indeed different studies have explored Hispanics’ job attribute preferenc-
es. Dornbusch and Edwards (1991) found that Hispanics value role clarity, 
which is in alignment with Hofstede’s finding that Latin American countries 
display higher levels of uncertainty avoidance (1980). Stone et al. (2006) 
noted Hispanics’ preference for mentoring opportunities and opportunities 
to help others. Furthermore, Del Campo et al. (2011) found that Hispanic 
immigrants were significantly more likely to seek out mentors as opposed to 
their U.S.-born counterparts, while the latter were more likely to join affinity 
groups at work. The researchers note that immigrants may not want to en-
gage in overt, public actions that might suggest that they are not assimilating, 
such as joining an affinity group, but instead they may be more willing to 
seek out a mentor, which is more discreet and consistent with a motivation to 
maintain a particular appearance. Blancero, DelCampo, and Marron (2007) 
argue that U.S.-born Hispanics may believe that workplace support from af-
finity groups is more important than any concerns about maintaining an out-
ward appearance about assimilation or ethnic identity.
Given that Hispanics, regardless of country of origin, are high on fa-
milialism (Marín et al., 1987), this strong identification and attachment 
with members of the same family will likely impact how Hispanic employees 
perceive their interface between family and work. For example, within the 
Hispanic culture, high familialism can mean that perceived obligations to 
one’s family may extend beyond the nuclear family to the extended family. 
Additionally, applying a collectivistic, generalized social exchange (Ekeh, 
1974) view to this obligation would mean a reciprocal obligation for the 
extended family to, in turn, provide assistance with familial obligations and 

124    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
support. As a result, this is an important dimension for understanding His-
panic employees’ work attitudes and behaviors.
Taylor, DelCampo and Blancero (2009) found that individuals who ex-
perience low work-to-family conflict and high facilitation in the direction 
of work-to-family are more likely to report their perception of the psycho-
logical contract to be fair. They also found a direct relationship between 
the availability of formal workplace supports, such as formal work–family 
policies, supervisor support, a work climate for family, job characteristics, 
and psychological contract fairness. Beutell & Schneer (2014) found that 
Hispanic women, as compared to men, reported the highest work-to-family 
conflict and work-family synergy (WFS) levels, However they found that job 
resources, such as job autonomy, schedule flexibility, supervisor and worker 
support, are negatively related to work-to-family conflict for Hispanic wom-
en but not Hispanic men. This suggests that these resources help Hispanic 
women to manage and decrease this conflict. Beutell and Scheer argue that 
gender role ideology and the increased demands that Hispanic women face 
from work and home may explain these findings; Hispanic men do not face 
the same gender role expectations and thus these resources are not help-
ful. It is important to note that the researchers did not measure cultural val-
ues, ethnic identity nor whether the individuals were born within or outside 
of the United States, thus they are assuming that respondents possessed 
traditional gender roles regardless of their level of acculturation.
Finally, in their study of working female students at community colleg-
es in the United States and Mexico, Zhang, Gowan and Trevino (2014) 
found support for their prediction that country of origin would be re-
lated to career and parental role commitment, such that those born in 
Mexico would have greater career role commitment and lower parental 
role commitment than those born in the United States. Zhang and col-
leagues reason that first, a familialism orientation suggests that work may 
be integral to one’s family role, which is supported by Yang, Chen, Choi 
and Zhou (2000), who found that collectivists (Mexicans/Hispanics) view 
work as a means of providing for family; whereas individualists (i.e., U.S. 
born/non-Hispanic whites) view the work and family domains as compet-
ing demands. Additionally, Zhang and colleagues argue that commitment 
to family does not need to interfere with commitment to work, particu-
larly since Mexican nationals reported less compartmentalization between 
work and life activities as compared to individuals in the United States. 
Furthermore, Marin et al. (1987) previously argued that social support 
from the extended family, e.g., assisting with childcare obligations, may 
foster work/family enrichment, while DelCampo et al. (2011) suggest that 
Hispanics may view fulfilling work responsibilities as a primary channel to 
contribute to work and family.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    125
THE IMPORTANCE OF SOCIAL IDENTITY 
AND ACCULTURATION
A recurring theme in this chapter is that in order for managers to better 
understand their Hispanic employees’ job attitudes, motivation, preference 
for leadership style, job or employer preferences, and job attribute pref-
erences, they need to consider their employees’ degree of acculturation 
and ethnic identity. For example, the importance of the tie between values 
and job attribute preferences cannot be overlooked, because as noted from 
the beginning of this chapter, Hispanic’s cultural values may change with 
the level of acculturation and social identity. Thus as Hispanic employees 
become more acculturated, their preferences may no longer differ, or not 
differ as much, from their majority counterpart employees. Nevertheless, 
for less acculturated Hispanics, it appears that the contextual factors of the 
job as well as time off, role clarity, and relationships are key factors for job 
satisfaction, leadership, teamwork, and motivation.
IMPLICATIONS FOR LEADERSHIP PRACTICE
As management research has gradually considered how demographic 
trends and the growth of ethnic groups within the workforce might affect 
workplace attitudes and behaviors, it is essential to consider how cultural 
values affect preference for leadership styles, perceptions of justice, and 
how these relationships are further impacted by acculturation and self-
identity. Indeed this chapter points to some important managerial implica-
tions. In terms of leadership style, an emphasis on a relational style takes 
into account the employees’ lives beyond work. Indeed, the emphasis on 
familialism would support an interest in the employees’ families. Such a re-
lational approach should affect the emphasis on interactional justice as well 
as distributive justice so that employees perceive that they are taken care of 
as well as receiving fair treatment.
It is important for supervisors and HR managers to understand the 
mechanisms by which the organization and individual managers create 
psychological contracts and that managers be aware of the messages that 
different elements of their HR practices, such as compensation and benefit 
policies (Suazo, Martínez, & Sandoval, 2009, 2011), can emit. One area to 
consider is the signaling value of HR practices and how the cultural value 
of familialism suggest that first, employees will perceive human resource 
management practices that assist them to meet family obligations (one 
dimension of familialism) as supportive organizational practices. Second, 
Hispanic employees who are high on familialism may view their work-life 
boundaries differently and perhaps more permeable, such that based upon 

126    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
the importance of a family situation, they may be more comfortable with 
allowing family to interfere with work. Thus what may appear to an indi-
vidualist as out of the question, a request to leave work early for a family 
obligation may seem perfectly reasonable to a collectivist or an Hispanic 
employee high on familialism.
Additionally, Hispanic employees will be attracted to companies that 
focus on extrinsic job factors such as reputation and colleagues. In fact, 
Hispanics will value an organizational culture that allows for flexibility and 
values diversity, because familialism often creates individual conflict. This is 
not to be confused or misunderstood as a lack of interest in work. Research 
noted in this chapter has shown that for Hispanics, high familialism leads 
to a central role, viewing work and careers as critical in providing for their 
family. Furthermore, managers should not view family-related requests for 
time off as indicators of a low organizational commitment. When familial-
ism is strong, employees will value mangers’ efforts to support and facilitate 
their familial obligations. A social exchange perspective suggests that em-
ployees will reciprocate in their future job attitudes and performance.
Hispanic cultural values may lead to conflicts between Hispanic employ-
ees and their managers. Due to their collectivistic values they may tend 
to make external attributions that may lead to conflicts if their managers 
hold individualistic values and thus emphasize internal attributions. Fur-
thermore, in working with others, Hispanics may tend to treat members 
of their in-group, i.e., close friends, differently. Thus in working in teams, 
very specific guidelines should be given in terms of how a company or a 
manager expects group rewards to be distributed, if the team members are 
involved in the distribution of these.
While we have previously noted the importance of considering Hispanic 
employees’ levels of acculturation and social identity, it is also important 
to consider the salience of that identity at work. For example, Avery and 
McKay (2006) propose that when organizations publicize their sponsorship 
of minority causes, this will only impact minorities’ perceptions that the 
organization values diversity only if this (minority) identity is salient. Ad-
ditionally, Friedman and Craig (2004) found that social identity motivates 
minority employees to join network groups, such that those with greater 
group racial/ethnic identity are more likely to join. Furthermore, they 
also determined that minorities perform cost-benefit analyses and will join 
when the benefits of career advancement outweigh any potential negative 
effects of joining, such as backlash or stigma. As previously noted, for His-
panics considering whether or not to join an organization, organizational 
culture and a climate of inclusion may be key issues.
One way to create a climate of inclusion may come from a recent concept 
tied to organizational citizenship behavior, which is the potential of ethnic 
citizenship behaviors (Martínez, Randel, & Ramirez, 2011). These helping 

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    127
behaviors are similar to organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs), discre-
tionary behaviors that are not formal job duties and which do not directly 
result in a reward (Organ, 1998; Organ, Podsakoff, & MacKenzie, 2006), yet 
they are empirically distinct. OCBs, such as helping fellow employees are 
regarded and performing job duties with extra care (Moorman, Blakely, & 
Niehoff, 1998), inevitably contribute to organizations’ long-term success by 
adding to the organization’s bottom line (Konovsky & Pugh, 1994; Organ & 
Ryan, 1995). Ethnic citizenship behaviors are targeted toward one’s ethnic 
group and include helping to recruit job candidates, orienting or mentor-
ing fellow employees, and joining an employee interest/affinity group. The 
importance of these cooperative behaviors should be considered within the 
context of the value of employee affinity groups, which are designed to pro-
vide employees an avenue for working with and supporting similar others.
This idea is supported by Guerrero and Posthuma’s review, (2014) where 
the researchers note that Hispanics indeed perceive receiving greater so-
cial support from Hispanic, rather than Anglo, coworkers. Similar to OCBs, 
these behaviors are likely beneficial for organizational functioning, particu-
larly when these behaviors are extended to minority employees. Bolino, 
Turnley, and Bloodgood (2002) propose that OCBs facilitate the develop-
ment of structural, relational and cognitive connections among employ-
ees, and that in part this is represented by trust, mutual identification and 
shared norms and perceived obligations. This proposition supports the 
idea that helping behaviors that are directed at one’ ethnic group can 
lead to positive outcomes for both the employees and the organization. 
For example, minority employees often experience social isolation and less 
psychosocial support in cross-race mentoring relationships than majority 
employees (Ibarra, 1995; Thomas, 1990). Thus ethnic citizenship behaviors 
may help other ethnic minority members through supporting their organi-
zational socialization and integration.
Initial analyses suggest that when ethnic identity is important (or cen-
tral), individuals will enact helping behaviors toward similar others (Mar-
tínez et al., 2011). This underscores the idea that if an ethnic identity is not 
important and central to one’s self-concept, it will not motivate helping 
behaviors to individuals of one’s ethnic group. However in a recent analysis 
(Martínez & Gómez, 2016), we found that while possessing a central (and 
important) ethnic identity is strongly related to enacting ECBs. This rela-
tionship occurs entirely through the mediation of this identity’s salience. 
In other words, when ethnic identity is highly salient and likely to be in-
voked in a particular situation or context (Hogg, Terry, & White, 1995), 
individuals are much more likely to enact these helping behaviors. This 
suggests that while ethnic identity may be central and important, when it is 
not salient in the work context, individuals will not likely enact ECBs. The 
more that a company encourages employees’ unique identities to flourish 

128    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
and the more this identity leads to ECBs, the more likely it will result in a 
self-supporting climate of inclusion.
In closing, the U.S. workforce demographic changes that are unfolding 
at the beginning of the 21st century highlight the growing presence and 
influence of Hispanics across organizations. These changes suggest the 
importance of organizations learning about the Hispanics’ cultural values 
and how these influence perceptions and preferences for leadership styles, 
justice, team work, and helping others, as well as job factors. Moreover, 
given the diversity in levels of acculturation and identity among Hispanic 
employees, managers must understand the level to which their employees 
identify with the Hispanic culture or the mainstream culture. To identify 
their employees’ levels of acculturation/identity, managers can begin to 
understand the degree to which these employees listen to television, radio, 
and other such media outlets in their native tongue, Spanish. Some ac-
culturation measures indeed consider the degree to which an individual 
listens to music, news, and television shows in Spanish, as well as the degree 
to which they use the Spanish language among their friends and family. 
In alignment with paternalistic leadership, managers may need to delve 
deeper into the lives of their employees to understand them and their pref-
erences. While some managers may perceive that the uniqueness of the 
Hispanic culture may pose particular management challenges, we suggest 
that developing a familiarity with Hispanic employees and their cultural 
values is essential to developing organizational practices and programs and 
in carrying out decisions that can better integrate Hispanic employees and 
create more positive and productive workplaces.
REFERENCES
Aguinis, H., & Joo, H. (2014). Research on Hispanics benefits the field of manage-
ment. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 29, 604–615.
Avery, D. R., & McKay, P. F.  Target practice:  An organizational impression manage-
ment approach to attracting minority and female job applicants. Personnel 
Psychology, 59, 157–187.
Aycan, Z. (2001). Paternalistic leadership. In C. L. Cooper (Ed.), Wiley encyclopedia 
of management. Retrieved July 19, 2016, from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/9781118785317.weom060156/abstract
Bal, P. M., De Lange, A. H., Jansen, P. G. W., & Van Der Velde, M. E. G. (2008). 
Psychological contract breach and job attitudes: A meta-analysis of age as a 
moderator. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 72, 143–158.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York, NY: The 
Free Press.
Bass, B. M. (1991). From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to 
share the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18(3), 19–31.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    129
Bass, B. M. (1997). Does the transactional–transformational leadership paradigm 
transcend organizational and national boundaries?  American Psychologist, 
52(2), 130–139.
Berry, J. W. (1997). Immigration, acculturation, and adaptation. Applied Psyhology, 
46, 5–34.
Betancourt, H., & Weiner, B. (1982). Attributions for achievement-related events, 
expectancy, and sentiments: A study of success and failure in Chile and the 
United States. Journal of Cross Cultural Psychology, 13, 362–374.
Beutell, N. J., & Schneer, J. A. (2014). Work-family conflict and synergy among His-
panics. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 29, 705–735.
Bies, R., & Moag, J. (1986). Interactional justice: Communication criteria of fair-
ness. Research on Negotiation in Organizations, 1, 43–55.
Blancero, D. M., & DelCampo, R. G. (2012). Hispanics at work: A collection of research, 
theory and application. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science.
Blancero, D. M., DelCampo, R. G., & Marron, G. F. (2007). Perception of fairness 
in psychological contracts by Hispanic business professionals: An empirical 
study in the United States. International Journal of Management, 24, 364–375.
Blancero, D. M., & Stone, D. (2014). Introduction to Hispanic and Latin American 
work issues. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 29(6).
Bolino, M. C., Turnley, W. H., & Bloodgood, J. M. (2002). Citizenship behavior 
and the creation of social capital in organizations.  Academy of Management 
Review, 27, 505–522.
Boyer, C. R. (2000). The threads of class at La Virgen: Misrepresentation and iden-
tity at a Mexican textile mill, 1918–1935. The American Historical Review, 105, 
1576–1598.
Brockner, J., Ackerman, G., Greenberg, J., Gelfand, M. J., Francesco, A. M., Chen, Z. 
X., . . . Shapiro, D. L. (2001). Culture and procedural justice: The moderating 
influence of power distance on reactions to voice. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 37, 300–315.
Brockner, J., Tyler T. R., & Cooper-Schneider, R. (1992). The influence of prior 
commitment to an institution on reactions to perceived unfairness: The high-
er they are, the harder they fall. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 241–261.
Brumley, K. M. (2014). The gendered ideal worker narrative professional women’s 
and men’s work experiences in the new economy at a Mexican company. Gen-
der & Society, 28, 799–823.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012, February 3). The employment situation—January 2012 
[News Release USDL-12-0163]. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.
Castaño, N., de Luque, M. F. S., Wernsing, T., Ogliastri, E., Shemueli, R. G., Fuchs, 
R. M., & Robles-Flores, J. A. (2015). El jefe: Differences in expected leader-
ship behaviors across Latin American countries. Journal of World Business, 50, 
584–597.
Chiang, F. F., & Birtch, T. (2007). The transferability of management practices: 
Examining cross-national differences in reward preferences. Human Rela-
tions, 60, 1293–1330.
Choi, I., Nisbett, R.E., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). Causal attribution across cultures: 
Variation and universality. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 47–63.

130    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
Conway, N., & Briner, R. B. (2005). Understanding psychological contracts at work: A 
critical evaluation of theory and research. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Cox, T. H., Lobel, S. A., & McLeod, P. L. (1991). Effects of ethnic group cultural 
differences on cooperative and competitive behavior on a group task. Academy 
of Management Journal, 34, 827–847.
Cropanzano, R., Prehar, C. A., & Chen, P. Y. (2002). Using social exchange theory 
to distinguish procedural from interactional justice. Group and Organizational 
Management, 27, 324–351.
Darío Rodríguez, M., & René Ríos, F. (2009). Paternalism at a crossroads: Labor 
relations in Chile in transition. Employee Relations, 3, 322–333.
Dávila, A., & Elvira, M. M. (2005). Culture and human resource management in 
Latin America. In A. Davila & M. Elvira, Managing human resources in Latin 
America (pp. 3–24). London, England: Routledge.
Dávila, A., & Elvira, M. M. (2012). Humanistic leadership: Lessons from Latin Amer-
ica. Journal of World Business, 47, 548–554.
Deery, S. J., Iverson, R. D., & Walsh, J. T. (2006). Toward a better understanding of 
psychological contract breach: A study of customer service employees. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 91, 166–175.
Delcampo, R. G., & Blancero, D. M. (2008). Perceptions of psychological contract 
fairness of Hispanic professionals. Cross Cultural Management: An International 
Journal, 15, 300–315.
DelCampo, R. G., Blancero, D. M., & Boudwin, K. M. (2008). Hispanic professionals 
after 11th September: A move toward “American” identification. Cross Cul-
tural Management: An International Journal, 15, 20–29.
DelCampo, R. G., Jacobson, K. J., Van Buren III, H. J., & Blancero, D. M. (2011). 
Comparing immigrant and U.S. born Hispanic business professionals: In-
sights on discrimination. Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal, 
18(3), 327–350.
DelCampo, R. G., Rogers, K. M., & Jacobson, K. J. (2010). Psychological contract 
breach, perceived discrimination, and ethnic identification in Hispanic busi-
ness professionals. Journal of Managerial Issues, 220–238.
DeVos, G. (1975). Ethnic pluralism: Conflict and accommodation. In G. DeVo 
& L. Romanucci-Ross (Eds.), Ethnic identity: Cultural continuities and change 
(pp. 5–41). Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield.
Diaz-Saenz, H. R., & Witherspoon, P. D. (2004). Possessing a “sense of community”: 
A study of employee perceptions in selected organizations in Mexico. Interna-
tional and Multicultural Organizational Communication, 145–169.
Dornbusch, R., & Edwards, S. (1991). The macroeconomics of populism. In The 
Macroeconomics of populism in Latin America (pp. 7–13). Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Earley, P. C. (1989). Social loafing and collectivism: A comparison of the United 
States and the People’s Republic of China. Administrative Science Quarterly, 34, 
565–581.
Ekeh, P. P. (1974). Social exchange theory: The two traditions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    131
Elvira, M. M., & Dávila, A. (2005). Emergent directions for human resource man-
agement research in Latin America. The International Journal of Human Re-
source Management, 16, 2265–2282.
Ethier, K., & Deaux, K. (1990). Hispanics in ivy: Assessing identity and perceived 
threat. Sex Roles, 22, 427–440.
Folger, R., & Konovsky, M. (1989). Effects of procedural and distributive justice on 
reactions to pay raises. Academy of Management Journal, 32, 115–130.
Folger, R., Konovsky, M. A., & Cropanzano, R. (1992). A due process metaphor for 
performance appraisal. Research in Organizational Behavior, 14, 129–129.
Friedman, R. A., & Craig, K. M. (2004). Predicting joining and participating in mi-
nority employee network groups. Industrial Relations, 43, 793–816.
Gallegos, P. V., & Ferdman, B. M. (2007). Identity orientations of Latinos in the 
United States: Implications for leaders and organizations. The Business Journal 
of Hispanic Research, 1, 26–41.
Gibson, C. (1964). The Aztecs under Spanish rule: A history of the Indians of the valley of 
Mexico, 1519–1810. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gómez, C. (2003). The relationship between acculturation, individualism/collectiv-
ism, and job attribute preferences for Hispanic MBAs. Journal of Management 
Studies, 40, 1089–1105.
Gómez, C., & Kirkman, B. L. (2005, July). Organizational justice: Its applicability and 
predictive power on employee commitment in Mexico. Paper presented at the Acad-
emy of International Business conference, Quebec City, Canada.
Gómez, C., Kirkman, B. L., & Shapiro, D. L. (2000). The impact of collectivism and 
in-group/out-group membership on evaluation generosity. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 43, 1097–2007.
Gómez, C., & Taylor, K. (2012, August). Cultural differences in conflict resolution strate-
gies: A U.S.-Mexico comparison. Paper presented at the Academy of Manage-
ment Annual Meeting, Boston, MA.
Greenberg, J. (1990). Organizational justice: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Jour-
nal of Management, 16, 399–432.
Guerra, F. X. (1988). Mexico: Del antiguo régimen a la revolución. México: Fondo de 
cultura economica.
Guerrero, L., & A. Posthuma, R. (2014). Perceptions and behaviors of Hispanic 
workers: A review. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 29, 616–643.
Guzzo, R. A., Noonan, K. A., & Elron, E. (1994). Expatriate managers and the psy-
chological contract. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 617–626.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related val-
ues. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE.
Hogg, M. A., Terry, D. J., & White, K. M. (1995). A tale of two theories: A criti-
cal comparison of identity theory with social identity theory. Social Psychology 
Quarterly, 58, 255–269.
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (Eds.). (2004). 
Culture, leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. SAGE 
Publications.
Ibarra, H. (1995). Race, opportunity, and diversity of social circles in managerial 
networks. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 673–703.

132    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
Jackson, T. (2015). Is paternalistic leadership bad? A view from the other side of 
the fence. Cross-cultural Management Studies. Retrieved July 15, 2016, from 
https://terencejackson.net/2015/02/05/is-paternalistic-leadership-bad-a 
-view-from-the-other-side-of-the-fence/
Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. (1994). Citizenship behavior and social ex-
change. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 656–669.
Liberman, L. (2014). The impact of a paternalistic style of management and delega-
tion of authority on job satisfaction and organizational commitment in Chile 
and the U.S. Innovar, 24, 187–196.
Lind, E. A., & Tyler, T. R. (1988). The social psychology of procedural justice. New York, 
NY: Plenum.
Lobel, S. A., & Clair, L. S. (1992). Effects of family responsibilities, gender, and 
career identity salience on performance outcomes. Academy of Management 
Journal, 35, 1057–1069.
Marin, G., & Marin, B. V. (1991). Research with Hispanic populations: Applied social 
research methods. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Marin, G., Sabogal, F., Marin, B. V., Otero-Sabogal, R., & Perez-Stable, E. J. (1987). 
Development of a short acculturation scale for Hispanics. Hispanic Journal of 
Behavioral Sciences, 9, 183–205.
Marin, G., & Triandis, H. C. (1985). Allocentrism as an important characteristic of 
the behavior of Latin Americans and Hispanics. In R. Diaz-Guerrero (Ed.), 
Cross-cultural and national studies in social psychology, 69, 80. Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands: North Holland.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, 
emotion and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224–253.
Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A social psychological 
perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 38, 299–337.
Martínez, P. G. (2003). Paternalism as a positive form of leader-subordinate ex-
change: Evidence from Mexico. Management Research: Journal of the Iberoameri-
can Academy of Management, 1, 227–242.
Martinez, P. G. (2005). Paternalism as a positive form of leadership in the Latin 
American context: Leader benevolence, decision-making control and human 
resource management practices. Managing Human Resources in Latin America: 
An Agenda for International Leaders, 75–93.
Martínez, P. G., & Gómez, C. G. (2016, August). Ethnic identity salience & citizenship 
behaviors: Helping similar others. Paper presented at the Academy of Manage-
ment annual meeting, Anaheim, CA.
Martínez, P. G., Randel, A., & Ramirez, R. R.  (2011, August). An empirical test of the 
ethnic citizenship behaviors construct and its relationship with organizational citizen-
ship behaviors and ethnic identity. Presented at the Academy of Management 
Annual Meetings, Gender and Diversity Division Publishing Workshop, San 
Antonio, TX.
Martinko, M. J., Moss, S., & Harvey, P. (2006, August). The effects of culture and at-
tribution styles on leader–member relationships. Presented at the 2006 Academy of 
Management conference. Atlanta, GA.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    133
McFarlin, D., & Sweeney, P. (1992). Distributive and procedural justice as predictors 
of satisfaction with personal and organizational outcomes. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 35, 626–637.
Miller, S. (1990). Mexican junkers and capitalist haciendas, 1810–1910: The arable 
estate and the transition to capitalism between the insurgency and the revolu-
tion. Journal of Latin American Studies, 22, 229–263.
Moorman, R.H. (1991). Relationship between organizational justice and organi-
zational citizenship behaviors: Do fairness perceptions influence employee 
citizenship? Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 845–855.
Moorman, R. H., Blakely, G. L., & Niehoff, B. P. (1998). Does perceived organiza-
tional support mediate the relationship between procedural justice and orga-
nizational citizenship behavior? Academy of Management Journal, 41, 351–357.
Newman, L. S. (1991). Why are traits inferred spontaneously? A developmental ap-
proach. Social Cognition, 9, 221.
Organ, D. W., & Foegen, J. H. (1998). Are managers losing control? Business Hori-
zons, 41(2), 1–5.
Organ, D. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & MacKenzie, S. B. (2006). Organizational citizenship 
behavior: Its nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Organ, D. W., & Ryan, K. (1995). A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispo-
sitional predictors of organizational citizenship behavior.  Personnel Psychol-
ogy, 48, 775–802.
Padavic, I., & Earnest, W. R. (1994). Paternalism as a component of managerial 
strategy. The Social Science Journal, 31, 389–405.
Pellegrini, E. K., & Scandura, T. A. (2006). Leader–member exchange (LMX), pa-
ternalism, and delegation in the Turkish business culture: An empirical inves-
tigation. Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 264–279.
Pellegrini, E. K., Scandura, T. A., & Jayaraman, V. (2010). Cross-cultural generaliz-
ability of paternalistic leadership: An expansion of leader–member exchange 
theory. Group & Organization Management, 35, 391– 420.
Phinney, J. S. (1996). When we talk about American ethnic groups, what do we 
mean? American Psychologist, 51, 918.
Rhoades Shanock, L., Masuda, A. D., & Arboleda, M. B. (2012). Supervisor and 
organizational support perceptions in Hispanics versus non-Hispanics. In D. 
M. Blancero & R. G. DelCampo (Eds.), Hispanics at work: A collection of research, 
theory and application (pp. 85–109). New York, NY: Nova Science.
Rousseau, D. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations: Understanding written and 
unwritten agreements. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Rousseau, D. M., & Greller, M. (1994). Human resource practices: Administrative 
contract makers. Human Resource Management, 33, 385–401.
Sanchez-Burks, J., Nisbett, R.E. and Ybarra, O. (2000). Cultural styles, relationship 
schemas, and prejudice against out-groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 79(2), 174–189.
Shanock, L., Masuda, A., & Arboleda, M. (2012). Supervisor and organizational sup-
port perceptions in Hispanics versus non-Hispanics. In D. M. Blancero & R. 
G. DelCampo (Eds.), Hispanics at work: A collection of research, theory, and ap-
plication. (pp. 85–109). Hauppauge, NY: Nova.

134    C. GOMEZ and P. G. MARTÍNEZ
Stone, D. L., Johnson, R. D., Stone-Romero, E. F., & Hartman, M. (2006). A com-
parative study of Hispanic-American and Anglo-American cultural values and 
job choice preferences. Management Research: Journal of the Iberoamerican Acad-
emy of Management, 4, 7–21.
Stone-Romero, E. F., Stone, D. L., & Salas, E. (2003). The role of culture on work-
related scripts and role taking in organizations. Applied Psychology: An Interna-
tional Review, 52, 328–362.
Suazo, M., Martínez, P. G., & Sandoval, R. (2009). Creating psychological and legal 
contracts through human resource practices: A signaling theory perspective. 
Human Resource Management Review, 19, 154–166.
Suazo, M., Martínez, P.G & Sandoval, R. (2011). Creating psychological and legal 
contracts through HRM practices: A strength of signals perspective. Employee 
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 23, 187–204.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. The 
Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, 33(47), 74.
Taylor, B. L., DelCampo, R. G., & Blancero, D. M. (2009). Work–family conflict/fa-
cilitation and the role of workplace supports for U.S. Hispanic professionals. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 643–664.
Thomas, R. R. (1990). From affirmative action to affirming diversity. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, 68(2), 107–117.
Triandis, H. C. (1994). Culture and social behavior. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Triandis, H., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M., Asai, M., & Lucca, N. (1988). Individu-
alism and collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives on self-in-group relation-
ships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 323–338.
Triandis, H. C., Marin, G., Betancourt, H., Lisansky, J., & Chang, B. (1982). Dimen-
sions of familialism among Hispanic and mainstream Navy recruits. (Technical Re-
port No. 14). Champaign, IL: University of Illinois, Department of Psychology.
Triandis, H. C., Marin, G., Lisansky, J., & Betancourt, H. (1984). Simpatia as a cultur-
al script of Hispanics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1363–1375.
Turner, J. C., & Oakes, P. J. (1986). The significance of the social identity concept 
for social psychology with reference to individualism, interactionism and so-
cial influence. British Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 237–252.
Uhl-Bien, M., Tierney, P. S., Graen, G. B., & Wakabayashi, M. (1990). Company 
paternalism and the hidden-investment process identification of the “right 
type” for line managers in leading Japanese organizations. Group & Organiza-
tion Management, 15, 414–430.
United States Census Bureau. (2014). Annual estimates of the resident population by sex, 
age, race, and Hispanic origin for the United States and States: April 1, 2010 to July 
1, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2016, from https://factfinder.census.gov/
faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk
Volpone, S. D. (2012). Es muy importante! Integrating Hispanics’ cultural values 
in the workplace to influence the retention of Hispanic employees. In D. M. 
Blancero & R. G. DelCampo (Eds.), Hispanics at work: A collection of research, 
theory, and application. (pp. 39–64). Hauppauge, NY: Nova.
Yan, J. & Hunt, J. (2005). A cross cultural perspective on perceived leadership effec-
tiveness. International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 5, 49–66.

Managing the Hispanic Workforce    135
Yang, N., Chen, C.C., Choi, J., & Zou, Y. (2000). Sources of work-family conflict: A 
Sino–U.S. comparison of the effects of work and family demands. Academy of 
Management Journal, 43, 113–123.
Zhang, L., A. Gowan, M., & Treviño, M. (2014). Cross-cultural correlates of career 
and parental role commitment. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 29, 736–754.

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 137–158
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
137
CHAPTER 5
LEADING WOMEN
Unique Challenges and Suggestions 
for Moving Forward
Caren Goldberg
Bowie State University
Lucy Gilson and Sarah Nesci
University of Connecticut
ABSTRACT
The number of women graduating from college and entering the workforce 
continues to rise, and while research has examined women as leaders, much 
less attention has been given to leading women. In this chapter, we aim to 
start a conversation that looks to flip the conventional leadership discourse, 
by suggesting that an important component of effective leadership is under-
standing how to lead women. It is through this lens that we emphasize the 
importance of recognizing some of the differences and adaptations that lead-
ers must make to effectively lead women. Specifically, we discuss some of the 
unique challenges faced by women employees, with an eye toward uncovering 
ways in which traditional leadership paradigms might need to shift in order 
to meet the needs of an increasingly heterogeneous workforce. We note, too, 

138    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
that while our primary focus is on women employees, some of these chal-
lenges parallel those experienced by racial-ethnic minority employees; thus, 
throughout the chapter we refer to the research on both groups. At the end 
of each section we offer a set of recommendations grounded in research and 
current events that we hope will add to the academic/practitioner conversa-
tion on how to more effectively lead women.
It is 2017, so we are happy to report that organizations have made great 
strides in the recruitment and selection of women and minorities. In the 
50 years since the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission began 
tracking data, women’s labor force participation rate has increased from 
31.5% to 48.7%. Similarly, the labor force participation rate for African 
Americans has risen from 8.2% in to 14% over the same period. However, 
despite these gains in overall employment, less attention has been given to 
strategies that aim to retain, promote and facilitate the career progression 
of women and minorities. An example of this was recently highlighted in 
the mainstream media with Ursula Burns, CEO of Xerox, announcing that 
when the company splits by the end of 2016, she will no longer be at the 
helm, a role she has held since 2009. It is worth noting here, Catalyst (2016) 
reports that when she steps down, the number of women CEO’s in the For-
tune 500 will drop from 23 to 22, the number Black Fortune 500 CEO’s 
will drop from five to four, and the sum total of Black women CEOs in the 
Fortune 500 will drop to zero, just as it was prior to 2009.
While much has been written about leadership, leadership styles, and 
the topic of women as leaders, much less is known about how to lead wom-
en. The scarcity of women and minorities in higher level positions suggests 
that traditional notions of what constitutes good leadership might not be 
working in the expected ways for women and/or minorities. Decades of re-
search on leadership suggest that while there are individual differences in 
leadership ability (Gardner, Lowe, Moss, Mahoney & Cogliser, 2010), much 
of what constitutes “good leadership” is subordinate-specific. For example, 
the leader–member exchange (LMX) literature emphasizes that leader-
ship is a function of the dyadic relationships between leaders and follow-
ers (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995; Graen & Scandura, 1987). More specifically, 
LMX theory proposes that leaders vary their styles based on who they are 
leading (subordinates), or in other words, subordinates can influence how 
leaders behave. The argument that leadership is based on the relationship 
and that subordinates can affect the leadership process further suggests 
that leadership is not unidirectional and that who is being led needs to be 
considered. Within this stream of literature, researchers have posited that 
compared to White male followers, women and minority followers experi-
ence greater difficulty establishing and maintaining high quality relation-
ships with their (predominantly White and male) supervisors (Goldberg & 
McKay, 2015; Scandura & Lakau, 1996).

Leading Women    139
Decades of research supports the notion that leadership does not oc-
cur in a vacuum and thus leaders who consider the specific needs of their 
followers are deemed more effective than those who do not. For example, 
Bass’s (1985) model of transformational leadership (and subsequent varia-
tions of it), which has been among the most popular individual-difference 
models of leadership in the past 30 years, emphasizes the importance of 
“individualized consideration” in overall leadership effectiveness. Like 
LMX, individualized consideration emphasizes the unique interactions 
that supervisors have with their subordinates. However, whereas LMX fo-
cuses on the dyad as the unit of observation, transformational leadership 
emphasizes the leaders’ ability to see each follower as unique. Thus, wheth-
er one favors the dyadic approach or the individual difference perspec-
tive on effective leadership, it is clear that being able to understand and 
respond to the unique challenges faced by one’s followers is an important 
component of effective leadership. It is through this lens that we emphasize 
the importance of recognizing some of the differences and adaptations that 
leaders must make, to effectively lead women. That is, to the extent that 
women face obstacles that are substantively different from those of their 
White and/or male counterparts, leaders who view their employees as indi-
viduals are apt to better perceive these differences and act accordingly. As a 
race-based example, consider the number of videos of unarmed Black men 
and women being treated as “guilty” by police officers in what appear to be 
routine traffic stops that have recently been posted on social media. These 
posts, in conjunction with the Black Lives Matter movement, cannot be 
isolated from the organizational experience of people of color. In support 
of this point, a recent PBS Newshour article (Downs, 2016) underscored the 
need for leaders to consider the impact of such events on Black employees. 
As noted in the article:
According to Monnica Williams, clinical psychologist and director of the Cen-
ter for Mental Health Disparities at the University of Louisville, graphic vid-
eos (which she calls vicarious trauma) combined with lived experiences of rac-
ism, can create severe psychological problems reminiscent of post-traumatic 
stress syndrome.
Thus, while it may feel like just another day at the office for White employ-
ees, leaders need to be sensitive to the impact that these events may have 
on their Black employees.
In this chapter, we will discuss some of the unique challenges faced 
by women and minority employees with an eye toward uncovering ways 
in which traditional leadership paradigms need to shift in order to meet 
the needs of the increasingly heterogeneous workforce. We begin with an 
overview of some of the research on diversity; we next discuss how leaders’ 
speech patterns may affect how words are perceived by women; and move 

140    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
to a discussion of the role of technology in leadership and followership. We 
close by offering a set of recommendations grounded in research and cur-
rent events, which we hope will add to the academic/practitioner conversa-
tion on how to more effectively lead women.
UNIQUE CHALLENGES FACED BY WOMEN EMPLOYEES
The Role of Stereotypes 
As measures of diversity, sex and race have the longest and most thor-
oughly documented history (Williams & O’Reilly, 1998). Race and sex are 
both highly visible individual differences that, for the most part, enable 
one to make quick assessments on these characteristics after a very brief 
encounter. Demography research suggests that categories that are most 
visible and therefore easily accessible and salient across situations trigger 
immediate social categorization of oneself and others. In support of this, 
researchers have found that individuals use sex more than any other imme-
diately apparent features in social categorization (Stangor, Lynch, Duan, & 
Glass, 1992). In addition, individuals working in groups or organizations of 
differing proportions of men and women have been found to report having 
different work experiences (Ely, 1994; Tsui et al., 1992). Consequently, sex 
remains a key segregating variable not only because it is easily detectable, 
but also because of the readily observable social differentiations associated 
with it as a category (Blau, 1977; Milliken & Martin, 1996).
Research on person perception suggests that competence and warmth 
are two primary attributes people use for categorizing others into groups 
(Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 2002; Wojciske, 2005). Notably, Whites are of-
ten perceived as higher in competence than Blacks (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 
2007; Fiske, Xu, Cuddy, & Glick, 1999; Fiske et al., 2002; Major & O’Brien, 
2005), while women are generally perceived as higher in warmth. Decades 
of research suggests that women are frequently perceived as less suitable for 
leadership positions, as such roles are typically deemed as requiring more 
masculine, agentic traits (e.g., dominant, aggressive, self-confident; Eagly, 
Wood, & Diekman, 2000). While the effects of negative stereotypes may 
be particularly pronounced early in a relationship between leader and fol-
lower, they also are difficult to overcome. For instance, even when a woman 
or minority subordinate counters the negative competence stereotype—
that is, they do well on a task or in a specific job—perceivers tend to re-
call stereotype-consistent information more readily than information that 
is inconsistent with or unrelated to a stereotype (Brewer & Miller, 1984). 
Consequently, the impact of initial expectations of competence may have 
a lasting effect and thus affect subsequent promotion opportunities often 

Leading Women    141
masking actual performance. For example, Jones and King (2016) recently 
noted that managers frequently assume they need to “protect” women from 
risky and/or more challenging work assignments, even when there are no 
differences in men’s and women’s interest in pursuing such assignments. 
The result of these acts of “benevolent sexism” are that women are less 
prepared to take on future leadership roles and are less apt to receive the 
constructive criticism, feedback, encouragement, mentoring, and support 
they need to improve their work performance and grow in leadership roles.
In addition to the effects that negative stereotypes have on leaders’ 
perceptions of women and minorities, these stereotypes also can impact 
the women and minority employees themselves. Berger, Rosenholtz, and 
Zelditch (1980) noted that members of low-status groups tend to internal-
ize the lower expectations that others have of them. Thus, a vicious cycle 
begins: Leaders’ low expectations decrease followers’ confidence; lack of 
confidence, in turn, results in fewer contributions to the group and de-
creased desire to stay at the organization. Work by Sabat, Goldberg, and 
King (2016) recently found that after controlling for new hires’ initial self-
efficacy, managers’ efficacy beliefs in them had a significant effect on the 
new hires’ later self-efficacy, which was related to turnover outcomes. This 
study suggested that the “leaky pipeline” (higher turnover among women 
and minorities) is partly attributable to a Pygmalion effect, whereby lead-
ers’ expectations of subordinates’ competence influence subordinates’ own 
sense of competence and ultimately their desire to stay at the organiza-
tion. These findings are consistent with leader–member-exchange (LMX) 
research, which points to additional means through which stereotypes in-
fluence superior-subordinate work relationships. For example, Goldberg, 
McKay, and Zhang (2009) found that role clarity mediates the link between 
subordinates’ initial perceptions of LMX and leaders’ subsequent percep-
tions of LMX for Black newcomers, but not for White newcomers. This 
suggests that there may be fundamental differences in the ways in which de-
mographically dissimilar dyads perceive the subordinate’s role (and hence 
subsequent leader perceptions of how well the individual fulfills it), which 
may be overcome through role-clarifying efforts, such as the provision of 
constructive feedback, encouragement, and mentoring.
Suggestion for Moving Forward
Given the effects that stereotypes can have on the retention and career 
advancement of women and minorities, we offer several suggestions to miti-
gate these effects. While each of these suggestions addresses a different HR 
functions, all share the common thread of helping to build the female or 

142    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
minority employee’s efficacy expectations (beliefs in their ability to do the 
job well), rather than chip away at them.
•	 Train leaders to be aware of stereotypes. Currently, the term “im-
plicit bias” (Devine, Forscher, Austin, & Cox, 2012) is receiving a 
great deal of media attention, and many well-known companies 
(i.e., Google) are running diversity training programs to help 
employees become aware of their biases and blind spots. Train-
ing everyone is a good step, but more specific training needs to 
be targeted at organizational leaders. Many employers’ appraisal 
systems “call out” a particular manager for not having promoted 
a substantive number of women or minority subordinates. There-
fore, we suggest that training provide a broader message about the 
pervasiveness of stereotypes as a means of curbing defensiveness or 
denial on the part of individual managers, which might undermine 
effectiveness. For example, training aimed at openly discussing the 
stereotypes that exist with regard to women and minorities coupled 
with an understanding of the fact that stereotyping is a natural 
human tendency is less likely to lead to a defensive reaction on the 
part of leaders. It is important to allow managers time to reflect 
on their stereotypes or assumptions and in particular the instances 
where particular female and/or minority employees did not fit with 
the stereotype. Recollection and reflection may allow leaders to feel 
more comfortable discussing their own experiences and help them 
to identify possible pitfalls before they occur.
•	 Train and reinforce organizational decision makers to value the 
aspects of leadership that are more commonly associated with un-
derrepresented groups. A great deal of empirical research supports 
the notion that “men fit cultural construals of leadership better 
than women do and thus have better access to leader roles and face 
fewer challenges in becoming successful in them” (Koenig, Eagly, 
Mitchell, & Ristikari, 2011, p. 637). Thus, rather than putting the 
onus on women to behave in what is traditioanlly considered to be a 
more masculine manner (e.g., dominant, assertive, self-confident), 
perhaps the burden should be shifted to emphasize the importance 
of feminine qualities in grooming employees for leadership roles 
(e.g., warmth, consideration, democratic decision making).
•	 Conduct employee training in positive error climates so they see 
mistakes as natural rather than as reflections of incompetence. 
Psychological safety research (Edmondson, 1999) finds that when 
climates allow individuals to take risks and try new things, employee 
creativity and performance is enhanced (Shalley & Gilson, 2004). In 
a similar vein, women and minority employees face a vexing prob-

Leading Women    143
lem and a vicious cycle when it comes to asking for help and seeking 
feedback, which are both ultimately related to creativity and perfor-
mance. Employees need feedback to improve performance. How-
ever, there are differences in how requests for help are perceived. 
For example, when men ask for help, they are often perceived as 
trustworthy, because they are demonstrating a willingness to show 
their vulnerabilities. In contrast, women and minorities asking for 
help may serve to reinforce the negative competence stereotypes 
that they don’t really know how to do their jobs without the help of 
others, stereotypes that are often attributed to employees who are 
considered to be different from oneself or from diverse race-ethnic 
groups (Steele, 1997). Employee training that occurs in a climate in 
which errors are expressly expected and indicated to be a natural 
part of learning (Baumgartner & Seifried, 2014), in other words “a 
psychologically safe work environment” (Edmondson, 1999), should 
help to alleviate the threat experienced by members of groups that 
are stereotyped as low in competence.
•	 Encourage leaders to establish rapport with subordinates early in the 
relationship so that they feel comfortable clarifying their roles. As 
with the previous recommendation, the emphasis here is on creating 
an environment where employees feel less reticent to actively seek 
clarification for fear of retribution (Edmondson, 1999) or confirma-
tion of negative competence stereotypes (Roberson & Kulik, 2007). 
The earlier a leader establishes this rapport with a follower, the 
more trust there should be in the relationship allowing for feedback 
seeking, feedback giving and constructive criticism. In a similar vein, 
research on virtual teams finds that meeting at least once face-to-
face allows team members to develop trust, foster stronger working 
relationships, and perform better on complex ambiguous tasks 
(Martins, Gilson, & Maynard, 2014 for a review). As noted elsewhere, 
this information is critical to the employee’s performance and de-
velopment, which in turn should affect that individual’s subsequent 
promotion opportunities and retention within an organization.
Token Status
The effects of stereotypes are likely particularly pronounced in organiza-
tions where only a few token women or minorities are promoted. Kanter 
(1977) contended that being in an extreme minority (less than 15%) rel-
egates one to token status. Because of their small numbers, token employ-
ees are more visible to leaders, which (a) makes group stereotypes more 
salient and (b) subjects them to greater pressures to perform their work 

144    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
to higher standards. Given that women and minorities are, in general, ac-
corded lower status in society (Berger et al., 1980), their token status in an 
organization is apt to evoke particularly negative stereotypes (Fairhurst & 
Snavely, 1983a, 1983b).
In certain fields, women and/or minorities are in short supply, and this 
is apt to affect leaders’ ability to hire more than a token number of indi-
viduals from underrepresented groups. For example, the racial divide in 
employment in STEM fields partly reflects the fact that Blacks and Hispanics 
are less likely than their White counterparts to pursue degrees in science, 
technology, math, or engineering. While average group investments in hu-
man capital may account for some of the disparities in employment, this is 
an overly simplistic view of investment/return ratios. In particular, it ignores 
the fact that the same investment made by individuals of different groups is 
not likely to yield the same return. Research suggests that Blacks and His-
panics with bachelor’s and graduate level degrees have significantly lower 
odds of employment in high-tech jobs (Gatchair, 2013). This creates some-
thing of a vicious cycle. Given that their human capital investments are not 
likely to yield as high of a return, there is less incentive to make investments 
upfront, and because fewer investments are made, they yield lower returns.
Suggestions for Moving Forward
To minimize the likelihood of tokenizing women or minorities, we of-
fer suggestions aimed at both increasing the numbers of individuals from 
underrepresented groups as well as creating more inclusive environments 
for those individuals. The key here is to move away from the “promote one 
and say done,” mentality that may result in the token woman or minority 
feeling isolated, or worse, questioning whether their membership in the 
underrepresented category was the sole basis for having been promoted.
•	 Hire women and minorities in larger numbers. While employee 
selection is somewhat outside the scope of this chapter, it seems 
obvious that organizations that do not recruit and/or retain enough 
individuals from underrepresented groups to maintain a talent pool 
for subsequent promotions, will face greater challenges in effectively 
leading these individuals. In fields where there is an abundant sup-
ply, such as business where men and women claim an almost equal 
percentage of bachelor’s degrees awarded annually, this should be 
a fairly straightforward task. In other areas, where there is a paucity 
of women and minority graduates this may involve more systemic 
efforts, such as scholarships aimed at increasing the number of 
individuals from underrepresented groups and consciously mentor-

Leading Women    145
ing individuals once they are in these programs to encourage them 
to stay and complete their program of study. However such mentor-
ing programs while often well-intentioned can also be controversial 
and receive a great deal of backlash. The University of Connecticut 
recently opened a learning community to Black male students. This 
dorm was supported (financially) by Black male alumni who wanted 
to give back to the university by mentoring and supporting young 
Black men, a population with one of the lowest graduation rates at 
many universities. While many saw this as a step forward, others criti-
cized it as a form of segregation because dorm space had been cre-
ated for Black males. Other programs such as Microsoft’s scholarship 
program for Black high school students who plan to pursue college 
degrees in engineering, information systems, or computer science, 
and the PhD Project supported by KPMG, which helps minority stu-
dents navigate the path to getting a doctoral degree in business, have 
been welcomed in their respective domains.
•	 Promote cohorts of women and minorities at various levels. In larger 
organizations, particularly those in industries that have a reason-
able representation of women and minorities, it is wise to consider 
promoting multiple women and minorities at the same time. The 
presence of similar others serves to reduce one’s perception of being 
the token minority/woman. In addition, it is an effective means of 
getting voice, particularly at higher levels of the organization where 
the representation of other women and minorities gets thinner. For 
example, Landsbaum (2016) recently highlighted an example from 
underrepresented women in the Obama administration:
Female staffers adopted a meeting strategy they called “amplifica-
tion”: When a woman made a key point, other women would repeat 
it, giving credit to its author. This forced the men in the room to 
recognize the contribution and denied them the chance to claim the 
idea as their own.
•	 Affinity groups are another means of minimizing the isolation 
that can be experienced by individuals who belong to underrep-
resented groups. Even the most effective leadership may not fully 
guard against a woman or minority employee’s perceived isolation, 
particularly in organizations or industries where there remains a 
large imbalance. While we certainly encourage leaders to adopt 
the practice of promoting women and minorities in cohorts, such 
a policy may not be practical in smaller organizations where there 
aren’t a sufficient number of openings to promote employees in 
groups or in fields where there aren’t enough women or minorities 
at any given level (for example, many engineering fields) to expect 

146    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
them to be promoted in cohorts. In such situations, affinity groups 
may be particularly effective. Broadly speaking, affinity or network 
groups provide a forum for employees of similar backgrounds who 
are typically underrepresented in the organization to get together 
socially and share ideas outside of their work group. By creating a 
venue for employees from underrepresented groups to meet, affin-
ity groups provide an atmosphere of inclusion to employees who 
might otherwise feel marginalized. Although the leader may not 
necessarily be a part of the affinity group (unless the individual is 
also a member of the underrepresented group), advocating for the 
creation of such groups or encouraging employees to participate in 
them if they already exist may go a long way in signaling an under-
standing to female or minority followers that the leader recognizes 
the employee may be experiencing feelings of isolation. For ex-
ample, companies like ESPN have active women’s leadership forums 
dedicated to promoting “diversity, inclusion and wellness” (https://
espncareers.com/working-here/diversity-inclusion-wellness) in an 
industry that has traditionally been male-dominated. Tauriac, Kim, 
Sarinana, and Kahn (2013) also point out that affinity groups pro-
vide fertile ground for generating ideas about how to improve the 
organizational environment that may subsequently be shared with 
other groups as well as senior leadership, which is usually comprised 
of White males described as “pale, male, and stale” a term coined 
in the 1940s, but rose to prominence in 1992 when NASA adminis-
trator Daniel Goldin declared that the agency was too “pale, male, 
and stale.” Affinity groups may increase inclusiveness in multiple 
ways. For example, a lone female engineer may feel more comfort-
able sharing ideas about improving the experience of women in 
the workplace in a group of other female engineers than with her 
leader. Likewise, given the psychological toll that police brutality 
toward Black civilians may have on Black employees that may go 
unnoticed by a Black employee’s leader, an affinity group might 
provide a more comfortable space for Black employees to discuss 
how such events affect them personally.
When looking at the aforementioned recommendations holistically, one 
of the themes that starts to emerge is that successfully leading women and 
minorities requires that some conscious choices be made by leadership. In 
other words, the “if you build it they will come” mentality is not working. 
Leaders need to connect with their subordinates and be clear on what their 
needs are individually and collectively. Toward this end, an area of research 
that emphasizes the criticality of building connections and strengthening 
relationships is communication. In the next section, we will discuss the role 

Leading Women    147
of communication in leading women. This is not an exhaustive review on 
communication and there is a chapter in this book that covers this topic in 
more depth. However, in order to do justice to our topic and to transition 
to the role of technology in leading women, the topic of communication 
must first be addressed.
THE ROLE OF SPEECH PATTERNS IN LEADING WOMEN, 
AND WOMEN AS LEADERS
While men and women have differences that they are born with, which 
while no longer impossible are very hard to change (i.e., chromosomes, 
reproductive organs, and hormones), research suggests that communica-
tion styles are learned (Tannen, 1990, 1994). Deborah Tannen notes in a 
recent article “The Power of Talk: Who Gets Heard and Why” (2016) that 
people learn conversational rituals starting on the playground. In other 
words, women learn very early on and long before they are considering ca-
reer choices, leadership style and how they want to be led, or who they want 
to lead them; the more they use inclusive pronouns like “we” as opposed to 
pronouns like “I” and “me,” the more friends they will have.
Gendered Speech Patterns
While girls and boys develop different communication patterns from a 
very young age, the choice of words and their associated thought processes 
clearly transition into workplace communication. Here, research consis-
tently finds that women talk in a more inclusive manner, seeking to en-
gage and share through using terms like “we” more often than men, who 
are prone to speak in a more declarative manner where the goal is to win 
or solve a problem (Tannen, 1995). The flip side of this equation is that 
women who are looking to move up the corporate ladder and ensure that 
their voices get heard at work, often experience trouble building credibility 
because of the way they speak (Dominic, 2010). Note the example used ear-
lier from the Obama cabinet: the women had to “band together” to ensure 
that their voices were heard (Landsbaum, 2016).
Women in the Obama cabinet came up with a successful strategy to get 
their voices heard; however, research suggests that the content of women’s 
messages is more highly scrutinized than the content of men’s messages. 
For example, small talk or polite conversation about unimportant and/or 
uncontroversial matters that is social in nature has been found to benefit 
men but not women. Research by Shaughnessy, Mislin, and Jones (2015) 
found that when men use small talk, they get up to an 8% boost in the 

148    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
overall impression others have of them with regard to trust, which can re-
sult in a positive foundation for future relationships. No such effects (posi-
tive or negative) were found for women who engage or use small talk. Tak-
en together this could mean that assertive language can hurt women and 
small talk does not help—not a promising picture!
The question of whether women should change the way they talk in the 
workplace is one which, according to Evans (2016), is tightly coupled with 
issues related to power. Because assertive speech patterns are negatively re-
ceived, women have been found to ask a lot of “tag-questions,” questions 
that are framed so that the person being asked feels like he or she has equal 
or more authority than the person doing the asking (Dominic, 2010). For 
example, a female employee in a work group is more likely to say something 
like, “We should probably report this missing bank statement to account-
ing, shouldn’t we?” In contrast, a male counterpart in the same work group 
might phrase the same request as, “Amy, can you send this missing state-
ment over to accounting?” In the latter question, the choice of sentence 
structure makes the male appear to have the power in the conversation 
because he is not asking for input.
Gender and Filler Words
Along with these tag questions, female speech patterns include more fill-
er words that are used as either compliments or apologies (Tannen, 1994). 
According to linguist Janet Holmes (1995), women compliment other wom-
en more than they compliment men and more than men compliment men. 
This research supports the idea that men talk to accomplish something 
whereas women talk to build rapport. If a female coworker asked another 
to give her feedback on a presentation, the response would likely include 
some form of compliment along with constructive feedback. Therefore, 
while the employee will hear of things she needs to improve upon, she also 
will get praise for how eloquently she spoke or the great points she made. 
In contrast, a male coworker who asked for input would be more likely to 
see this question as an opportunity to give criticism that he will perceive as 
helpful to his coworker and a means to help her present better the next 
time. These types of linguistic patterns can cause tension in the workplace 
between male and female coworkers when the expected response differs 
from the actual response. Apologies such as saying “sorry” even when there 
is nothing to apologize for also are commonly used by females, especially in 
phone and email conversations (Tannen, 1994). This type of filler is consid-
ered a way to restore a power balance to the conversation by women. Men 
however say “I’m sorry” less because they have learned that one-upping 
their partner is a means of achieving or maintaining a position of power in 

Leading Women    149
the conversation. The consequence of filler words is that women are often 
taken less seriously as leaders because they do not create a power position 
through their speech.
Gendered Speech Patterns
The relationship between power and leadership is well established and 
both are further connected to credibility. Two recently labeled phenom-
ena “manterrupting” and “bropropriating” (Bennet, 2015) are being at-
tributed to making it harder for women to be seen as credible in leadership 
positions. Manterrupting is defined by Bennet as “unnecessary interrup-
tion of a woman by a man.” This common male communication pattern is 
a problem that reaches outside the borders of the office. Researchers from 
George Washington University conducted a study in which 20 male and 20 
female volunteers engaged in one short conversation with a male volunteer 
and one short conversation with a female volunteer. The results showed 
that the male volunteers interrupted their female counterparts an average 
of 2.1 times per conversation, while females interrupted their male coun-
terparts an average of one time per conversation (Hancock & Rubin, 2014).
The term bropropriating refers to “taking a woman’s idea and getting 
credit for it.” In her 1995 book Talking 9 to 5, Tannen provides multiple 
examples of how ideas raised by women are ultimately credited to men. She 
suggests that part of the reason for this is the question-tagging discussed 
previously. That is because women end sentences with a question or seek in-
put as a way of gaining buy-in for their ideas, listeners may be less apt to give 
them credit for originating the idea. Bropropriating has significant implica-
tions for women’s ability to move up in the ranks. Specifically, as ideas are 
not properly being attributed to the women who create them, these women 
may be perceived as less capable of contributing to upper level positions 
where such input is more often demanded.
Manterrupting and bropropriating are both newer terms that resonate 
with many Millennials entering the workforce for the first time. A similar 
trend within the Millennial generation is known as, “vocal fry.” Vocal fry, 
also known as laryngealization or popcorning, is when the vocal cords com-
press and form a large vibrating mass that produces a low rattling sound 
when air passes through. When individuals use this speech pattern their 
voice drops at the end of sentences and a guttural sound ensues. While 
hard to describe, a video clip of vocal fry can be heard online (https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=YEqVgtLQ7qM). Vocal fry has been popularized by 
celebrities such as Kim Kardashian (Katz, 2014). A study done on the effects 
of vocal fry on women in the labor market found that women who exhibit 
vocal fry are perceived as less competent, less educated, less trustworthy and 

150    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
even less attractive than others in their mock interviews (Anderson, Klofs-
tad, Mayew, & Venkatachalam, 2014). These findings suggest that while this 
is a popular trend, it may be hindering the employment and advancement 
opportunities of younger women.
In addition to vocal fry, general pitch and tone of voice affect the way 
that men and women are perceived in the workplace. Specifically, men 
speak louder than women and have lower voice tones that carry further and 
are easier to hear than are higher pitched tones. Therefore, while it might 
be more “natural” for men to speak louder and use more direct statements, 
when women try to employ these very same tactics their communicated 
message is less favorably received (Tannen, 1994). Instead of being consid-
ered assertive and knowledgeable, they are labeled “bossy” and worse their 
audience does not take them seriously. (Tannen, 1994).
Suggestions for Moving the Conversation Forward
While we cannot offer suggestions to change the biological attributes of 
speech, we do offer suggestions aimed at both improving the way women 
communicate as leaders and to their leaders. Because communication is 
learned through socialization, certain types of speech patterns that are in-
hibiting female growth and advancement can be unlearned. More mascu-
line styles of language can be taught in their place and recognizing the 
differences in speech patterns can be used to the advantage of women.
•	 Understand the difference between assertive and aggressive communi-
cation. It behooves organizations to ensure that HR managers, leaders, 
and employees are all clear on the difference between assertive and 
aggressive communication. The dictionary definition states that aggres-
sion is a communication method that while expressing one’s needs and 
desires does not take in to account the welfare of others. In contrast, 
assertive communication means expressing oneself effectively, standing 
up for a point of view while also respecting the rights and beliefs of oth-
ers. The critical difference here is the respect for the beliefs of others. 
Because as a society we are still less accustomed to seeing women speak 
up, assertive communication is often labeled as aggressive, which really 
does a huge disservice to the communicator.
•	 Provide vocal training on projection and pitch. Theater students 
spend a great deal of time learning how to project their voices, change 
the timber or pitch of their monologue, and where to place emphasis 
for effect. Why can we not offer the same training to female leaders? 
Given that we know certain voice tones are more easily heard, organi-
zations might want to invest in this sort of training for their employees.

Leading Women    151
•	 Train both men and women on taking and giving credit for ideas 
and suggestions. As we saw in the Obama cabinet example, aware-
ness is often the first step.
The previous section focused on the importance of communication for 
leaders as well as leading others. However, the focus has been on what is 
now considered a traditional or even old-school communication modality: 
face-to-face talking. With the increase in technological capabilities, a great 
deal of communication today takes place via technology, and the topic of 
virtual teams and leading virtual teams has received a great deal of research 
attention over the last 15 years (see Martins et al., 2004; Gilson et al., 2014 
for reviews). Accordingly, we close our chapter with a section in which we 
discuss the effects of technology on women as leaders and how technology 
can and is being used to lead others.
THE INFLUENCE OF TECHNOLOGY ON WOMEN LEADERS 
AND LEADING WOMEN
As work continues to become increasingly more geographically dispersed 
and reliance on technology assisted communication increases, we now turn 
our attention to the implications of this trend on women at work. The Mil-
lennial generation is believed to place a greater value on work-life balance 
(Carless & Wintle, 2007), and telework or flexible work arrangements allow 
for scheduling latitude and mobility that should align with their expecta-
tions of balance and outside of work responsibilities. In addition, the Mil-
lennial generation has grown up with technology so using it to commu-
nicate has become an expectation. Although the percentages have been 
shifting regarding family-role expectations, women still bear a much larger 
portion of the responsibility when it comes to caring for family and home 
life. This has led many to believe that virtual teams and telework should 
provide a great number of benefits to women. And indeed they do, in par-
ticular when it comes to scheduling and times at which work can be con-
ducted. No longer is it necessary to physically be present in a specific loca-
tion to work. In fact, work can often follow the employee or leader and be 
conducted 24/7 from virtually any location. However, technology is not the 
panacea that it was once hoped to be.
Being “Camera Ready” for Work
With an increased reliance on technology, there is also an increased ex-
pectation that employees will be always available and while they may not 

152    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
be physically present at the same place, they can always be reached or seen 
via technology. As we see frequently in the media, women are judged more 
harshly based on their physical appearance and technological presence. 
For example, whereas a manager may not think negatively of a male em-
ployee who participates in a video conference looking somewhat unkempt 
(i.e., having not shaved or wearing a baseball cap to disguise unclean hair), 
a woman who participates in a video conference without makeup is apt to be 
perceived in a negative light. Similarly, a male supervisor or subordinate who 
has a child with him while taking a conference call is apt to be regarded posi-
tively as, “He is helping take care of his family.” In contrast, a woman in the 
same scenario will most likely be perceived as not giving her full attention to 
work. Therefore, while technology can be beneficial for women because it 
allows them to have more control over when and where they work, a double 
standard is emerging when it comes to being “camera ready” for work.
Leading Virtual Teams
One of the more encouraging findings with regard to developing female 
leaders comes from the research on leading virtual teams. In contrast to tra-
ditional face-to-face scenarios where masculine agentic characteristics signal 
the potential for leadership development, in a virtual environment, trans-
formational leadership appears to arise from personality and (more impor-
tantly here) specific facets of leader communication (Balthazard, Waldman, 
& Warren, 2009). Specifically, a study by Ruggieri (2009) found that leaders 
of virtual teams who focused on relationships rather than task-based factors 
were perceived as more intelligent, creative, and original. Thus, rather than 
considering traditionally feminine communication characteristics such as 
relationship-building and inclusiveness as indicative of low leadership poten-
tial, as had traditionally been the case, within virtual teams these character-
istics are rated as indicative of high leadership potential. The literature on 
leadership competencies needed in virtual teams (Malholtra, Majchrzak, & 
Rosen, 2007; Switzer, 2000) consistently lists characteristics such as enabling 
others, ensuring other members feel understood and appreciated, listening 
and including others as some of the most important qualities. In part, this is 
because members of virtual teams often feel isolated and that they don’t really 
know who they are working with. Early research on virtual teams consistently 
found that while they were successful on simple additive tasks, once the task 
became more complex or ambiguous virtual teams were no longer as suc-
cessful as their face-to-face counterparts (Martins et al., 2004). One sugges-
tion for this finding was that virtual team members did not feel connected 
to one another, so when there was uncertainty no one was willing to show 
the necessary levels of vulnerability. Therefore, leaders who include everyone 

Leading Women    153
and make them feel a part of the team are more successful in a leaner com-
munication environment. Hence, a less agentic communication style lends 
itself better to leading virtual teams. This finding is very similar to the work 
on LMX described in the opening of this chapter that highlighted the impor-
tance of individual consideration in building the strong relationships neces-
sary to successfully lead women.
Technology and Anonymity
A potential advantage of working virtually or using technology to commu-
nicate has always been positioned as some level of anonymity. Being somewhat 
obscured from others should dampen several of the issues detailed as challeng-
es encountered by women in face-to-face communication. Interestingly how-
ever, research by Gilson et al. (2013) found that one of the first things members 
of virtual teams try to do is ascertain who they are communicating with. In a 
study of college students across universities, the research team found that on 
receiving their team assignments the first thing the students did was to log into 
as many other electronic sources (i.e., Facebook, LinkedIn) as possible to “put 
a face to the name.” When pressed as to why it mattered whether Chris from 
the University of XYZ was male or female, the answer was consistently that they 
needed to know who they were talking to so as to make talking easier! This re-
sponse ties closely to research on demographic diversity and self-categorization 
theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Self-categorization theory states that individu-
als seek to place themselves and others into groups based upon characteristics 
that are the most salient or easily observable. These groups are then used as 
the basis to promote a positive self-identity and categorize the self and like oth-
ers as in-group members and those who are different as out-group members 
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986). What this suggests is that even when using technology 
our stereotypes and biases about working with others who are different from 
oneselves may persist. Further research is needed to determine whether virtual 
communication might weaken such effects. For example, much of the research 
on implicit biases relies on visual stimuli (i.e., subjects react to the presentation 
of a White/ Black or male/female photograph). If team members are aware 
of others’ demographics but not visually prompted with this information, per-
haps the effects and attributions might diminish.
Suggestions for Moving Forward
•	 When it comes to leading teams using technology the results for 
women are mixed. There is a lot that is positive, but some hurdles 
still exist that need to be considered moving forward.

154    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
•	 Ensure technology and task needs match. There is a wide range 
of technology available to organizations, teams, and individuals. 
However, employees and leaders are somewhat reluctant to change; 
hence, we tend to rely on the same technology for almost every 
task. Understanding the media-richness theory (Daft & Lengel, 
1984) might be important here. Media richness theory discusses the 
extent to which a technology enables synchronous collaboration. 
For example, videoconferencing is relatively high in media richness 
and synchronicity, whereas email is low on both dimensions. Other 
technologies such as the telephone, websites, instant messaging, 
file- and application-sharing, all range with regard to their richness. 
Leaders need to be trained to think carefully about what technology 
they use and why because the unexpected consequences of certain 
technologies for women might be higher than expected. There 
are times when a rich media that allows team members to see each 
other is appropriate and necessary, but Skype video is not always 
necessary and awareness of what other options are available and 
what tasks they are best suited for is a useful leadership tool.
•	 Develop virtual team leadership training. While it appears women 
are already doing well in the sphere of virtual team leadership, as 
more and more teams rely on technology to communicate it will be 
beneficial to train leaders on the skills needed to lead virtual teams. 
What is interesting here is that leading virtual teams appears to be 
less about demonstrating task-relevant knowledge and more about 
individualized consideration and ensuring that other team mem-
bers feel connected to each other. Communication frequency, tone, 
and modeling the way through encouragement as well as building 
on the suggestions of others are all important steps.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, most current theories on leadership advocate for treating 
each subordinate or dyad as unique. In practice, however, organizations 
have often adopted a one-size-fits-all approach. In this chapter we have out-
lined some of the particular challenges faced by women and minority em-
ployees in an effort to help leaders recognize them and respond according-
ly. In addition, we provide several recommendations for mangers who are 
looking for ways to more effectively lead women and minority employees.

Leading Women    155
REFERENCES
Anderson, R. C., Klofstad, C. A., Mayew, W. J., & Venkatachalam, M. (2014). Vocal 
fry may undermine the success of young women in the labor market. PLoS 
ONE 9(5), e97506. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0097506
Balthazard, P. A., Waldman, D. A., & Warren, J. E. (2009). Predictors of the emer-
gence of transformational leadership in virtual decision teams. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 20(5), 651–663.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance. New York, NY: Free Press.
Baumgartner, A., & Seifried, J. (2014). Error climate and how individuals deal with 
errors in the workplace. In C. Harteis, A. Rausch, & J. Seifried (Eds.). Dis-
courses on professional learning: On the boundary between learning and working. 
Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.
Bennet, J. (2015, January 14). How not to be “manterrupted” in meetings. Time.
Berger, J., Rosenholtz, S. J., & Zelditch, M. (1980). Status organizing processes. An-
nual Review of Sociology, 6, 479–508.
Blau, P. (1977). Inequality and heterogeneity: A primitive theory of social structure. New 
York, NY: Free Press.
Brewer, M. B., & Miller, N. (1984). Beyond the contact hypothesis: Theoretical per-
spectives on desegregation. In N. Miller & M. B. Brewer (Eds.), Groups in 
contact: The psychology of desegregation (pp. 281–302). Orlando, FL: Academic 
Press.
Carless, S. A., & Wintle, J. (2007). Applicant attraction: The role of recruiter func-
tion, work-life balance policies and career salience. International Journal of Se-
lection and Assessment, 15(4), 394–404.
Catalyst. (2016). Women CEOs of the S&P 500. Retrieved from http://www.catalyst.
org/knowledge/women-ceos-sp-500
Cuddy, A. J. C., Fiske, S. T., & Glick. P. (2007). The BIAS map: Behaviors from in-
tergroup affect and stereotypes. Journal Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 
631–648.
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1984). Information richness: A new approach to mana-
gerial behavior and organization design. Research in Organizational Behavior, 
6, 191–233.
Devine, P. G., Forscher, P. S., Austin, A. J., & Cox, W. T. (2012). Long-term reduc-
tion in implicit race bias: A prejudice habit-breaking intervention. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1267–1278.
Dominic, L. (2010). Snips and snails and puppy dog tails: Does what we’re made of 
make a difference in the courtroom? The Jury Expert, 22(5), 15–22.
Downs, K. (2016). When Black death goes viral, it can trigger PTSD-like trauma. Re-
trieved November 30, 2016, from http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/
black-pain-gone-viral-racism-graphic-videos-can-create-ptsd-like-trauma/
Eagly, A. H., Wood, W., & Diekman, A. (2000). Social role theory of sex differences 
and similarities: A current appraisal. In T. Eckes & H. M. Trautner (Eds.). The 
developmental social psychology of gender (pp. 123–174). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 350–383.

156    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
Ely, R. J. (1994). The effects of organizational demographics and the dynamics of 
relationships among professional women. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, 
203–238.
Evans, D., (2016). Should women change the way they talk in the workplace? New 
York Magazine. Retrieved from http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/06/womens-
speech-patterns-coaching.html
Fairhurst, G. T., & Snavely, B. K. (1983a). Majority and token minority group re-
lationships: Power acquisition and communication. Academy of Management 
Review, 8, 292–300.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Snavely, B. K. (1983b). A test of the social isolation of male to-
kens. Academy of Management Journal, 26, 353–361.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) ste-
reotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived 
status and competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 878–902.
Fiske, S. T., Xu, J., Cuddy, A. J. C., & Glick, P. (1999). (Dis)respecting versus (dis)
liking: Status and interdependence predict ambivalent stereotypes of compe-
tence and warmth. Journal of Social Issues, 55, 473–489.
Gardner, W. L., Lowe, K. B., Moss, T. W., Mahoney, K. T., & Cogliser, C. C. (2010). 
Scholarly leadership of the study of leadership: A review of The Leader-
ship Quarterly’s second decade, 2000–2009. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(6), 
922–958.
Gatchair, S. (2013). Race/ethnicity and education effects on employment in high 
technology industries and occupations in the U.S., 1992–2002. Review of Black 
Political Economy, 40, 357–370.
Gilson, L. L., Maynard, M. T., & Bergiel, E. B. (2013). Virtual team effectiveness: An 
experiential activity. Small Group Research, 44(4), 412–427.
Gilson, L. L., Maynard, M. T., Jones Young, N. C., Vartiainen, M., & Hakonen, M. (2015, 
July). Virtual teams research: 10 years, 10 themes, and 10 opportunities. Retrieved 
from http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0149206314559946
Goldberg, C. B., McKay, P. F., & Zhang, L. (2009, August). A second chance to make 
a first impression? A longitudinal examination of changes in Black and White new-
comers’ leader–member exchange and career future. Presented at the Academy of 
Management Conference, Chicago, IL.
Goldberg, C., & McKay, P. (2015). Diversity and LMX development. In T. Bauer 
& B. Erdogan (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of leader–member exchange. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press.
Graen, G. B., & Scandrua, T. A. (1987). Toward a psychology of dyadic organiz-
ing. In L. L. Cummings & B. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 
9, 175–208.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 
25 years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quar-
terly, 6, 219–247.
Hancock, A. B., & Rubin, B. A. (2014). Influence of communication partner’s gen-
der on language. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 34(1), 46–64.
Holmes, J. (1995). Women, men, and politeness. London, England: Longmann.

Leading Women    157
Jones, K., & King, E. (2016). Stop protecting women from challenging work. 
Harvard Business Review. Retrieved November 30, 2016, from https://hbr.
org/2016/09/stop-protecting-women-from-challenging-work.
Kanter, R. M. (1977). Some effects of proportions on group life: Skewed sex rations 
and responses to token women. American Journal of Sociology, 82, 965–990.
Katz, E.T. (2014). Vocal fry, made famous by Kim Kardashian, is making young wom-
en ‘less hirable.’ Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2014/10/31/vocal-fry_n_6082220.html
Koenig, A. M., Eagly, A. H., Mitchell, A. A., & Ristikari, T. (2011). Are leader stereo-
types masculine? A meta-analysis of three research paradigms. Psychological 
Bulletin, 137(4), 616–642. doi:10.1037/a0023557
Landsbaum, C. (2016). Obama’s female staffers came up with a genius strategy to 
make sure their voices were heard. New York Magazine. Retrieved November 
30, 2016, from http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/09/heres-how-obamas-fe-
male-staffers-made-their-voices-heard.html.
Major, B., & O’Brien, L. T. (2005). The social psychology of stigma. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 56, 393–421.
Malholtra, A., Majchrzak, A., & Rosen, B. (2007). Leading virtual teams. Academy of 
Management Perspectives, 21, 60–70.
Martins, L. L., Gilson, L. L., & Maynard, M. T. (2004) Virtual teams: What do we 
know and where do we go from here? Journal of Management, 30(6), 805–835. 
Maynard, M. T., & Gilson, L. L. (2014). The role of shared mental model develop-
ment in understanding virtual team effectiveness. Group & Organization Man-
agement, 39(1), 3–32.
Milliken, F., & Martins, L. (1996). Searching for common threads: Understanding 
the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 21, 402–433.
Roberson, L., & Kulik, C. T. (2007). Stereotype threat at work. Academy of Manage-
ment Perspectives, 21(2), 24–40.
Ruggieri, S. (2009). Leadership in virtual teams: A comparison of transformational 
and transactional leaders. Social Behavior & Personality: An International Jour-
nal, 37(8), 1017–1021.
Sabat, I., Goldberg, C., & King, E. (2016, April). Pygmalion in the pipeline: How man-
agers’ perceptions influence minority turnover. Presented at the Society for Indus-
trial/Organizational Psychologists Conference, Anaheim, CA.
Scandura, T. A., & Lankau, M. J. (1996). Developing diverse leaders: A leader–mem-
ber exchange approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 72, 243–263.
Shalley, C. E., & Gilson, L. L. (2004). What leaders need to know: A review of so-
cial and contextual factors that can foster or hinder creativity. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 15(1), 33–53.
Shaughnessy, B., Mislin, A., & Jones, A. (2015, August). Skillful small talk: How the 
ability to chat and dyad gender composition affects the negotiation process. Presented 
at Academy of Management (AOM) Conference, Vancouver, CA.
Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B. (1992). Categorization of individuals on 
the basis of multiple social features. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
62, 207–218.

158    C. GOLDBERG, L. GILSON, and S. NESCI
Steele, C. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and 
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629.
Switzer, J. S. (2000). Virtual teams: profiles of successful leaders (Unpublished doctor-
al dissertation). Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA. ProQuest Dissertations 
9983697
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. 
In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (2nd ed., 
pp. 7–24). Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall.
Tannen, D. (1990). You just don’t understand: Women and men in conversation. New 
York, NY: Morrow.
Tannen, D. (1995). The power of talk: Who gets heard and why. Harvard Business 
Review, 73(5), 138–148.
Tauriac, J. J., Kim, G., Sariñana, S. L., Tawa, J., & Kahn, V. D. (2013): Utilizing affin-
ity groups to enhance intergroup dialogue workshops for racially and ethni-
cally diverse students, The Journal for Specialists in Group Work. doi:10.1080/01
933922.2013.800176
Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. (1992). Being different: Relational demog-
raphy and organizational attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 
549–579.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.). African Americans in the 
workplace. Retrieved November 30, 2016, from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/
statistics/reports/american_experiences/african_americans.cfm
Williams, K. Y., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1998). Demography and diversity in organiza-
tions: A review of 40 years of research. Research in Organizational Behavior, 20, 
77–140.
Wojciske, B. (2005). Morality and competence in person- and self-perception. Euro-
pean Review of Social Psychology, 16, 155–188.

SECTION II
AGE AND GENERATIONS

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 161–189
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
161
CHAPTER 6
THE LEADER–MEMBER 
EXCHANGE (LMX) APPROACH 
TO AGE DIVERSITY
Jacqueline H. Stephenson
University of the West Indies
ABSTRACT
This chapter examines the age diversity (specifically as it relates to older 
workers) and the extent to which it can be impacted by the unique dyadic 
approach of leader–member exchange. One of the primary reasons older 
workers sometimes encounter difficulties in obtaining and retaining employ-
ment is the perpetuation of discrimination of older workers (via stereotypes). 
Invariably, this has led to older workers being considered as a homogeneous 
group, rather than individuals with varying levels of skills and competence, 
who are still able to contribute to the workplace. Organizational leaders have 
a key role in affecting this environment. Rather than focusing solely on the 
leader and their efficacy, LMX requires the active participation of both par-
ties. According to the LMX, where there are higher levels of support from 
managers, there are likely to be higher levels of productivity, innovation, and 
job satisfaction. Thus, in order for the benefits of age diversity to be realized, 
leaders need to foster relationships with older employees that value contribu-

162    J. H. STEPHENSON
tions and in which they are respected. LMX theory acknowledges the het-
erogeneous nature of older workers and facilitates the development of an 
environment of trust, equitable treatment, and enhanced productivity. As it 
relates to age diversity and the aging population, there is a paucity of extant 
literature considering LMX as an effective leadership approach. This chapter 
offers a framework for academic discussion, as well as key considerations and 
guidance for human resource practitioners in relation to LMX practices they 
could adopt to realize the benefits of age diversity.
Diversity is one of the key issues that human resource practitioners face in 
today’s contemporary organizations (Hertel, van der Heijden, de Lange, & 
Deller, 2013a), which has been attributed to globalization, increased levels 
of migration and technological advancements. Employees may be regarded 
as diverse because of differences in their sex, race/ethnicity, and age (inter 
alia), which are ostensibly immutable characteristics. These are referred to 
as elements of surface level diversity (Phillips & Loyd, 2006) and are obvious 
and observable (Harrison, Price, & Bell, 1998). On the other hand, personal 
characteristics such as an employee’s attitudes, beliefs, values, skills, educa-
tion level, and social status are typically less visible and are categorized as 
deep level diversity traits (Phillips & Loyd, 2006). These traits are embedded 
in the employee and as such are typically conveyed to others through social 
encounters and interpretations of the employee’s verbal and nonverbal be-
havior (Harrison, Price & Bell, 1998). This chapter examines the surface 
level trait of age diversity particularly as it relates to older workers. Age di-
versity has been defined as the extent to which age related characteristics 
are objectively different with employees within an organization (Harrison & 
Klein, 2007; Van Dick, Van Knippenberg, Hägele, Guillaume, & Brodbeck, 
2008). In this chapter, older workers are defined as workers aged 50 and 
over, which is consistent with the classification used in previous research in 
this area (Kirton & Greene, 2006; Loretto & White, 2006; MacNicol, 2007; 
Whiting, 2005). This group should be an important consideration for or-
ganizations because the average age of employees is increasing as people 
remain employed for longer periods, and older workers comprise a larger 
proportion of the population. Organizations that are aware of the demo-
graphic shifts and are prepared to make the requisite changes to ensure 
continued high levels of productivity and positive employer/employee re-
lationships are likely to enhance their relevance and their market presence.
This chapter explores older workers within organizations and the extent 
to which the consideration of an aging labor force, when contemplating 
human resource and leadership strategies, is likely to impact organizations. 
The leadership concept in focus is the leader–member exchange (LMX) 
with its unique focus on the nature and quality of the leader–member 
(supervisor-subordinate, employer-employee) dyad. The overarching con-
cept of LMX is that within organizations employees are not homogeneous, 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    163
consequently the most effective way to lead/manage them should reflect 
a heterogeneous approach. Arguably, where older workers present a man-
agement challenge, LMX may be useful in effectively managing employees 
in this age group. This group of employees may have some commonali-
ties, but there will also be differences. In this chapter, the importance of 
examining the effective management of older workers is first examined. 
This will be followed by an examination of the extant literature as it relates 
to the challenges facing older workers in contemporary organizations. An 
overview of the concept of diversity will then be then examined, followed 
by an examination of the challenges of age diversity as well as its potential 
benefits. The contribution of the LMX approach to effectively managing 
employees will then be reviewed. The chapter ends with a review of the 
future directions for age diversity and LMX and key recommendations for 
supervisors and HR practitioners. It is important to examine the issues in 
this chapter because it broadens the research agenda for LMX and diver-
sity, particularly as it relates to age where there is a paucity of research in 
the published literature. It also affords employers greater clarity in under-
standing their responsibilities for establishing diverse and nondiscrimina-
tory workplace practices in relation to older workers. Furthermore, it offers 
employers insight into specific aspects of employment practice where age 
diversity and nondiscrimination of older workers could be facilitated.
CHALLENGES FACING OLDER WORKERS
It has been predicted that the labor pool of the future is likely to comprise 
a significant proportion of older workers (Duncan & Loretto, 2004; Encel, 
2001, Posthuma & Campion, 2009). This is in part as a result of projected 
demographic and societal changes including declining birth rates, longer 
periods being spent in education by young adults, and an expected extend-
ed lifespan (Loretto & White, 2006; McNair, 2006; Warnes & John, 2005). 
Notwithstanding, older workers continue to face challenges in finding and 
retaining employment, and age discrimination is said to be one of the pri-
mary reasons for this (Loretto & White, 2006).
Stereotypes are rife about older workers, both positive and negative, 
though not all are supported by relevant evidence. It has been argued that 
stereotypes are used when managers are unable to apply more compre-
hensive and analytical methods (Chiu, Chan, Snape, & Redman, 2001; 
McGregor & Gray, 2002). Some negative stereotypes include the belief 
that older workers are slow to learn, resistant to change, prone to absen-
teeism (Chiu et al., 2001; Redman and Snape, 2002), less skilled and of 
less economic worth than employees of other ages (Finklestein & Burke, 
1998), more costly to hire but less beneficial to the workplace (Kidwell, 

164    J. H. STEPHENSON
2002; Steinberg, Walley, Tyman, & Donald, 1998), and less adaptable, less 
trainable and less willing to accept new technology (Lyon & Pollard, 1997). 
In the organizational context, willingness by managers to accept negative 
stereotypes can affect the ability of an older worker to find and retain gain-
ful employment (Renskin, 2000). Conversely, positive stereotypes also exist 
suggesting that older workers are productive and hardworking, trustworthy, 
experienced, loyal, and have low turnover rates (McGregor, 2001; Taylor & 
Walker, 2003); are trainable (Bushko & Raynor, 1999; Salthouse & Maurer, 
1996); possess greater problem solving skills and are more creative (Ran-
zijn, 2002); work better in teams, have good interpersonal skills, and are 
more conscientious (Lyon & Pollard, 1997).
It is important to note that despite positive qualities attributed to older 
workers, it appears that within organizations the negative stereotypes have 
a greater influence on employment practices (Arrowsmith & McGoldrick, 
1996). Employers seem slow to acknowledge that older workers may be dis-
similar (Claes & Heymans, 2008). However, as with any category older work-
ers are a heterogeneous group, therefore generalized stereotypical views 
will not be applicable to all older workers, nor should they be relied upon 
to indicate competence or ability (McGoldrick & Arrowsmith, 1993) partic-
ularly in the absence of supporting evidence. In this respect, it has been ar-
gued that the physical and mental changes that accompany aging are rarely 
at a level that interfere with routine information processing, analysis, and 
retrieval (Patrickson, 2002), and as a consequence workplace performance 
does not always decline as age increases (McEvoy & Cascio, 1989). Indeed, 
older workers can still be productive within the workplace and capable of 
making a valid contribution to the workplace. On the other hand, it must 
be acknowledged that some older workers are affected by declines in cog-
nition as they age. In fact, it has been contended that memory and speed 
of learning can decline with age (Kirasic, Allen, Dobson, & Binder 1996); 
however, these declines may be mediated by an employee’s level of educa-
tion and exposure to new learning situations (Warr, 1993; Williams & Klug, 
1996). This suggests that rather than subscribing to discriminatory policies 
and practices based on assumptions about aging, organizations should treat 
older workers as distinct individuals who (like all others) should be assessed 
on merit rather than judged on the basis of preconceived ideas.
Nonetheless, this discussion should not be taken to mean that stereo-
types are the only reason for the perpetuation of age discrimination against 
older workers. Indeed, there are additional reasons why older workers 
may be treated less favorably in the employment context, such as lack of 
knowledge by organizations as to how to effectively manage older work-
ers or where managers’ actions are based on fear of the unknown. It has 
been argued that employers generally do not have a good understanding 
of the issues surrounding older workers (Ranzijn, 2002), and perhaps as a 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    165
consequence employment decisions may be made that could either directly 
or indirectly affect older workers. Additionally, where discrimination is in-
stitutionalized in a workplace (for example an established and accepted 
organizational practice of only hiring new employees who are under the 
age of 40), prejudicial patterns of employment practice may be followed 
without question as a result of expectations within the workplace (Renskin, 
2000). Furthermore, the widespread existence of age discrimination in so-
ciety (Levy & Banaji, 2002; McGregor, 2001) makes it more challenging for 
changes to be made to attitudes and practices within the workplace context.
In many developed and an increasing number of developing countries, 
antiage discrimination legislation has been enacted, and its utility is the ex-
tent to which it is effective in reducing or removing discriminatory barriers 
to employment for older workers or job seekers (Loretto, 2010). However, 
on its own legislation is unlikely to eliminate engrained accepted stereo-
types and discriminatory practices as it relates to older workers. The per-
petuation of discrimination of older workers within organizations has led 
to older workers being considered as a homogeneous group rather than 
individuals with varying levels of skills and competence who are still able to 
contribute to the workplace (Duncan, 2003). In turn, this has resulted in 
the perpetuation of age discrimination within organizations, which may be 
evidenced by lack of job prospects for older applicants and the failure of 
older employees to access training opportunities (Loretto & White, 2006; 
Metcalf & Meadows, 2006). Further, it has been suggested that continuous 
use of discriminatory practices could have a multiplier effect in many areas 
of the economy and thus the wider society. This effect could be manifested 
in an absence or deceleration of economic growth, reduced tax revenues 
and increases in public expenditures, for example in relation to increased 
income support required (McGuire & Robertson, 2007; Neumark, 2009). 
In the next section we examine the current state of older workers.
THE CURRENT STATE OF OLDER WORKERS
As indicated, older workers may experience discrimination in a variety of 
ways and in relation to different aspects of employment. There are three 
key areas as it relates to older workers in employment: recruitment and 
selection, training, and compulsory redundancy. Although other practices 
may also be important, these particular practices have arguably the most im-
portant impact on older workers in employment. Focusing on these three 
key practices in turn, what follows is a brief explanation of the challenges 
of the HR practice and relevant statistical data for the United Kingdom and 
the United States.

166    J. H. STEPHENSON
Recruitment
This is the stage of recruitment that older workers appear to have the 
greatest difficulty in securing employment because of the existence of age 
discrimination (Neumark, 1999; Stoney & Roberts, 2003; Wood, Harcourt, 
& Harcourt, 2004). Discrimination at this stage of the recruitment and se-
lection process could be both direct and indirect and not easily identifi-
able as such. Moreover, because of the asymmetry of selection information 
(Dickens, 2007), it is not always possible to determine whether employment 
decisions are made according to legitimate criteria or whether age discrimi-
nation played a role in the final choices made.
In Tables 6.1 and 6.2, the employment and unemployment rates of Brit-
ish workers from 2004–2015 categorized according to age are shown. These 
tables give an indication of the employment levels of older workers as com-
pared to workers of other ages within the United Kingdom.
Table 6.1 of older workers aged 50 to 64 indicates an incremental in-
crease in the employment rate over the period 2004 to 2008 after which 
during 2009 and 2010 there is a marginal decline. There is a further decline 
(by 6%) in 2011 from the 2010 level. The period that followed (2011–2015) 
saw incremental increases in the employment rate for older workers.
Statistics for the United Kingdom in relation to the unemployment 
rate of workers categorized according to their age are shown in Table 6.2. 
This table of older workers aged 50 to 64 indicates the largest rate of 
TABLE 6.1  Employment Rate of British Workers (% by age)
Year
All 
workers
Age
18–24
25–34
35–49
50–64
2004
60.0
66.9
79.7
82.2
70.0
2005
60.1
65.6
80.2
82.4
70.4
2006
60.1
65.4
80.2
82.3
71.2
2007
60.0
59.4
80.3
82.3
71.2
2008
60.0
63.9
80.4
82.4
71.9
2009
58.7
59.6
78.4
81.6
71.4
2010
58.3
58.3
78.3
81.0
71.2
2011
58.2
57.5
78.2
81.1
65.1
2012
58.3
57.1
78.1
81.5
65.5
2013
58.8
57.1
79.4
81.9
67.4
2014
59.4
60.1
80.4
83.3
68.7
2015
60.1
60.1
80.7
83.3
69.4
Source: U.K. Office for National Statistics–Labour Market Information (http://
www.statistics.gov.uk/CCI/nscl.asp?ID=6584)

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    167
unemployment during 2011 and the lowest unemployment rate in 2008. 
During the overall period under consideration (2004–2015), there are in-
cremental fluctuations in both directions by less than 1% for older workers.
Statistics for the United States of the employment rate of workers cat-
egorized according to their age are shown in Table 6.3. In relation to older 
workers (aged 45 to 54 and 55 to 64), these statistics indicate some incre-
mental fluctuations. As relates to workers aged 45–54 from 2004 to 2007, 
the employment rate increases and then decreases in 2008 until 2010. 
There is a marginal increase in 2011, and these increases continue until 
2015 although the rates do not achieve the 2004 level of employment. For 
those workers aged 55 to 64, there is an increase in the employment rate 
from 2004 to 2008 that then declines in 2009 until 2012, and where incre-
mental increases continue until 2015 at which time it exceeds the 2004 
employment levels.
Statistics for the United States in relation to the unemployment rate of 
workers categorized according to their age are shown in Table 6.4. In rela-
tion to older workers (aged 45–54 and 55–64), these statistics indicate some 
incremental fluctuations. Across the board (i.e., from 45 to 64 years), the 
lowest rate was shown to be in 2006 and the highest rate of unemployment 
was seen during 2010. As it relates to workers aged 45–54, from 2004 to 
2006, the unemployment rate decreased, and then increased in 2007 until 
2010. This is followed by a decreasing rate from 2011 through to 2015, at 
which time the unemployment rate was 0.1% lower than the rate in 2004. 
TABLE 6.2  Unemployment Rate of British Workers (% by age)
Year
All 
workers
Age
18–24
25–34
35–49
50–64
2004
4.8
10.2
4.5
3.2
2.9
2005
4.7
10.8
4.4
3.1
2.8
2006
5.5
12.5
5.1
3.7
3.2
2007
5.2
12.1
4.7
3.4
3.1
2008
5.4
13.1
4.9
3.7
3.3
2009
7.9
17.2
7.7
5.5
4.6
2010
7.9
17.8
7.9
5.6
4.8
2011
8.3
20.1
8.1
5.4
5.1
2012
8.1
19.1
7.8
5.5
4.9
2013
7.8
18.9
7.1
5.5
4.8
2014
6.1
16.1
5.9
4.3
4.2
2015
5.9
14.8
5.2
4.1
3.6
Source: U.K. Office for National Statistics–Labour Market Information (http://www.
statistics.gov.uk/CCI/nscl.asp?ID=6584)

168    J. H. STEPHENSON
For those workers aged 55 to 64, there was a decrease in the unemployment 
rate from 2004 to 2006, which is then followed by an increase from 2007 to 
2010. During 2011 through to 2015, the unemployment rate declines and 
in 2015, the unemployment rate was equal to that of 2004.
TABLE 6.3  Employment Rate of U.S. Workers (% by age)
Year
All ages
Age
18–19
20–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
2004
62.3
48.6
67.9
79.0
80.0
78.7
59.9
2005
62.7
48.5
68.0
78.5
80.5
78.9
60.8
2006
63.1
49.0
68.5
79.2
80.9
79.4
61.8
2007
63.0
46.7
68.4
79.5
80.9
79.4
61.8
2008
62.2
45.1
66.8
78.5
80.2
78.5
62.1
2009
59.3
39.3
62.2
74.5
77.0
75.8
60.6
2010
58.5
37.2
60.3
73.9
76.5
74.9
60.3
2011
58.4
36.9
60.8
73.8
76.6
75.0
60.0
2012
58.6
37.2
61.5
74.9
77.1
75.2
60.6
2013
58.6
37.9
61.7
75.2
77.4
75.2
60.9
2014
59.0
38.8
62.9
75.9
78.3
76.0
61.4
2015
59.3
40.0
63.8
77.2
78.7
76.6
61.5
Source: U.S. Department of Labor–Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://www.bls.gov/bls/
employment.htm)
TABLE 6.4  Unemployment Rate of U.S. Workers (% by age)
Year
All ages
Age
18–19
20–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
2004
5.5
15.0
9.4
4.6
4.4
3.8
3.8
2005
5.1
14.9
8.8
5.1
3.9
3.5
3.3
2006
4.6
14.1
8.2
4.7
3.6
3.1
3.0
2007
4.6
14.5
8.2
4.7
3.4
3.2
3.1
2008
5.8
16.8
10.2
5.8
4.6
4.1
3.7
2009
9.3
23.4
14.7
9.9
7.9
7.2
6.6
2010
9.6
24.2
15.5
10.1
8.1
7.7
7.1
2011
8.9
22.9
14.6
9.5
7.3
7.1
6.6
2012
8.1
22.3
13.3
8.3
6.6
6.2
5.9
2013
7.4
21.0
12.8
7.4
5.9
5.8
5.3
2014
6.2
18.5
11.2
6.5
4.7
4.4
4.3
2015
5.3
16.2
9.7
4.5
4.1
3.7
3.8
Source: U.S. Department of Labor–Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://www.bls.gov/bls/
employment.htm)

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    169
Taken at face value, these statistics appear to be favorable in relation to 
employment opportunities available to older workers. However this does not 
necessarily indicate the existence of age diversity and inclusion or the ab-
sence of age discrimination. Indeed, as suggested by the literature, these em-
ployment rates could be indicative of the retention of older workers rather 
than an increase in the number of older recruits (Loretto & White, 2006; 
McNair, Flynn, Owen, Humphreys, & Woodfield, 2004; Warnes & John, 
2005). The unavailability of specific recruitment statistics means that it is not 
possible to conclusively attribute any changes in the employment rate to the 
failure by organizations to hire older workers. Furthermore, over this period 
the economic climate was affected by recessionary pressures where there 
were widespread business contractions and closures. Such environmental 
factors would be likely to have an impact on the employment rates as well as 
the recruitment and selection of older employees (Elsby, Hobijn, & Sahin, 
2010; Sahin, Song, & Hobijn, 2010). Therefore the possible influence of 
other factors makes it more challenging to determine the extent to which 
age discrimination plays a role in the employment of older workers.
Training
Training support may be offered by workplaces in various forms, but is 
typically offered with a view of enhancing the skills of workers and increas-
ing their competence and efficiency in fulfilling their duties and by exten-
sion improving the productivity of the business (Barron, John, Berger, & 
Black, 1993). As it relates to off-the-job training, because of the investment 
required by organizations to support such training, there is a commensu-
rate expectation of a good return on the investment made (Hirsch, 2000). 
Notwithstanding the potential benefits of training to an employer, research 
suggests that relative to younger workers, the older workers are given rel-
atively less, limited, or no support within workplaces in relation to train-
ing (Farr, Tesluk, & Klein, 1998; Mirvis & Hall, 1996). This can occur for 
a variety of reasons including stereotypical misconceptions; for example, 
where workplaces accept the view that older workers have limited capacity 
to change and learn and are unlikely to benefit from training (Benning-
ton & Wein, 2000; Chiu et al., 2001). This is not a universally applicable 
perspective; however, research suggests that highly skilled workers, who 
are arguably less likely to have difficulty seeking employment, are those 
more likely to receive job-related training (Martin, 1994; Urwin, 2006). It 
is important for employees to be trained in order to maintain and update 
their skills and to enhance their employability as well as the likelihood of 
being retained by an employer (Mitton & Hull, 2006; Smedley & Whitten, 
2006). Where older workers are denied training or encounter age-related 

170    J. H. STEPHENSON
challenges when seeking access to training, this could result in a decline in 
job prospects and could negatively affect their longevity within the organi-
zation as productive employees.
Redundancies
As it relates to redundancies, older workers appear to be inequitably tar-
geted for redundancies, indeed when compared to other age groups they 
appear more vulnerable to selection (Patrickson & Razijn, 2003). Such a 
decision could potentially signal the end of their participation in the labor 
force, since when displaced older workers are less likely to be re-employed 
(Redman & Snape, 2002; Taylor & Walker, 1997). Moreover, it has been 
found that the possibilities of becoming re-employed are inversely related 
to age, thus the length of time that older persons spend as unemployed is 
comparatively longer than a younger job seeker (Brewington & Nassar-Mc-
Millan, 2000; Heywood, Ho, & Wei, 1999). This unemployment will affect 
the worker personally, but could also have an extended effect on the society 
and economy where, for example, welfare payments and income support 
become necessary.
In the previous sections, context was provided for this chapter by out-
lining the projected increase in the number of older workers in the labor 
force and the challenges that they face. It is imperative that older workers 
are managed effectively so that they are motivated, engaged, and produc-
tive rather than feeling marginalized or discriminated against and demo-
tivated. The leadership style that is adopted by organizational managers 
should be such that the individual, the team, and the organization benefit 
from their skills and experience. In the sections that follow, the LMX ap-
proach is discussed in relation to age diversity, specifically with respect to its 
impact on older workers within LMX dyads.
MANAGING AGE DIVERSITY IN ORGANIZATIONS
An alternative approach to homogeneity or equality of treatment is to find 
a way to value and utilize the differences among employees. This approach 
is referred to as managing diversity, where organizations are encouraged 
to strengthen their workforce and enhance their competitive advantage by 
employing people who are different from each other. This approach chal-
lenges the equal treatment model suggesting that people do not necessarily 
wish to be treated the same in every aspect of their working life, but by offer-
ing different working arrangements or benefits, managers facilitating the 
diversity approach may realize greater benefits within their organizations 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    171
relative to those pursuing an equality approach (Liff & Wajcman, 1996). 
Managing diversity encourages a focus on inclusivity and the embracing of 
the skills and talents of all different types of employees (Thomas, 1990). 
This may involve changing workplace policies and practices such that there 
are no exclusions (intentional or unintentional) according to an employ-
ee’s immutable characteristics (for example, age). Kandola and Fullerton 
(1998) suggest that successful diversity initiatives include retraining and 
re-education of staff, particularly the key organizational decision makers, 
but also the operational staff to ensuring transparency and fairness in the 
organization’s decision-making processes, which will require eliminating 
age criteria from the selection process.
The business case motive for pursuing age diversity advances the view 
that business benefits are likely to result from inclusive and nondiscrimi-
natory practices. The business case is the subject of much debate (Hay-
les & Mendez, 1997), and according to Taylor and Walker (1998, p. 69) 
“Concern about remaining competitive is the single most important fac-
tor influencing orientations towards older workers.” It has been further as-
serted (Kirton & Greene, 2006) that the business case rationale is closely 
associated with managing diversity rather than the attainment of equality. 
Where workplaces engage with managing diversity policies, they may pur-
sue employment practices that are inclusive irrespective of difference (for 
example age) as a means of achieving a competitive advantage. Within the 
context of anticipated demographic change where older workers are ex-
pected to comprise a greater proportion of the labor force, the effective use 
of a diverse workforce, including employees of diverse ages, could prove 
beneficial to organizations (Claes & Heymans, 2008; Duncan, 2003).
There are some workplaces that exemplify good practice in relation to 
older workers, which suggests it is possible for employers to engage in non-
discrimination practices on the basis of age while also having a workplace 
that is efficient and competitive. The best types of organizations for older 
workers are said to be within health care, education, and consultancy firms 
(Deems & Deems, 2009). Health-care employers appear to be proactive 
in recruiting workers over 50 and providing them with a range of health 
benefits that are useful to them. Educational institutions also appear to be 
good employers for older people and actively recruit older workers perhaps 
because of their experience. Similarly, financial institutions hire and em-
ploy older workers with a view of ensuring that their employees reflect the 
backgrounds of their client base. Finally, consulting companies also engage 
older workers in order to benefit from their experience and knowledge.
The American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) has developed an 
international award program that recognizes and awards employers across 
the globe for having the best policies for older workers. Several British organi-
zations have been awarded including Centrica, Marks and Spencer Plc., and 

172    J. H. STEPHENSON
the Co-operative Group; some American-based awardees include, National 
Institutes of Health, YMCA (Greater Rochester), West Virginia University, 
and Michelin North America. International organizations have also been 
included such as Hana Bank (Korea), Welcia Kanto (Japan), Brammertz 
Carpentry (Germany) and West Pack Financial Group (Australia). The age 
diverse practices of these organizations include promoting age diversity; 
providing courses to employees, and educating them about age diversity and 
the benefits of hiring older workers; changing HR policies and practices to 
promote the recruitment and retention of older employees; and facilitating 
lifelong learning and training access. The experiences of these companies 
also indicate that the culture within organizations and the commitment to 
nondiscrimination by managers are also important determinants in whether 
older workers will successfully obtain and retain employment.
Consistent with extant research on organizational diversity, there is an 
absence of conclusive evidence of the definitive benefits that arise from di-
versity. Instead, the evidence seems to suggest that the organizational ben-
efits may be context specific. Organizational age diversity offers a unique 
opportunity for businesses because they can harness the benefits of the in-
sight of different generations and capitalize on the unique attributes each 
age group brings to the table (Kirton & Greene, 2006). Furthermore, age 
diversity could provide the workplace with resources that will enhance com-
petitiveness both locally and globally (Schneider, 2000). The business case 
approach to age diversity does not necessarily equate to focusing solely on 
profit optimization, but could extend to preserving and extending the posi-
tive image of an employer; maintaining and extending the customer base; 
enhanced organizational performance; enhanced creativity and innova-
tion; international awareness; better decision making and problem solving; 
flexibility; a better work environment; and employee satisfaction (Allard, 
2002; Cornelius, Gooch, & Todd, 2001; Kulik & Roberson, 2008; Singh, 
Kumra, & Vinnicombe, 2002). Relatedly, diverse age groups also have dif-
ferent levels of knowledge and experience that they can contribute to the 
organization (Richard, 2000). In addition, employees can benefit from age 
diversity in the workplace, not only from mentors, but because interaction 
with different age groups can enhance the level of job satisfaction as well 
as the approach to workplace challenges where they arise (Hayles & Men-
dez, 1997). Such diversity in the workplace is also likely to contribute to 
increased adaptability and flexibility, which are essential skills to enhance 
organizational efficiency (see D’Netto & Sohal, 1999; Matthews, 1998). 
Indeed, the successful inclusion of workers of all ages is likely to reduce 
the potency of ageism and by extension the perpetuation of inaccurate ste-
reotypes (Stoney & Roberts, 2003), which in turn contribute to improved 
employee retention, increased productivity, reduced absenteeism, better 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    173
morale, an expanded marketplace, and improved services rendered to cus-
tomers (Subelianai & Tsogas 2005; TUC, 2008).
Notwithstanding the possible advantages to organizations of engaging 
in diversity initiatives, the business case approach to diversity is not without 
its challenges. Key corporate decision makers will generally require quan-
tifiable evidence before funds are disbursed or organizational practices 
are changed. Therefore, unless decision makers within the workplace can 
be convinced by quantitative data illustrating that it would be feasible to 
engage and retain older workers, they are unlikely to do so actively and 
purposefully (Noon, 2007). Competitive pressures to stay ahead may be 
considered a determinant in whether age diversity practices are pursued, 
particularly if the age of an employee is perceived negatively. Subelianai 
and Tsogas (2005) argue that heterogeneity within the workforce is desir-
able as it contributes to knowledge based innovation, while conceding that 
homogeneity may be preferred where the goal is to complete routine activi-
ties. Notwithstanding the primary goal of organizations, it is important for 
HR managers to recognize that “Labor cannot be treated in the same way 
as other commodities because skills and efforts cannot be separated from 
the needs of their embodied owners” (Weller, 2007, p. 420) and failure to 
realize this could result in organizational inefficiencies.
As we have seen, organizational diversity is somewhat challenging and 
there still remains some debate among diversity scholars about whether 
and the conditions under which organizations realize the benefits of di-
versity (Pitts & Wise, 2010). Notwithstanding, there is some evidence that 
diversity is beneficial to organizations, but these benefits may be moderated 
by time, task interdependence, task complexity, organizational culture, and 
climate (Roberge & van Dick, 2010). Specifically as it relates to the orga-
nization’s diversity climate, this refers to perceptions that employees share 
about the organization’s policies and practices on diversity; these percep-
tions in turn impact the employees’ behavior and attitudes (McKay et al. 
2007). These diversity climate perceptions are impacted by actions taken 
by organizations to promote diversity; whether and the extent to which ef-
forts are made to increase the representation of diverse groups within the 
organization (e.g., older workers, if underrepresented); whether there is 
inclusion of diverse employees at all levels of the organization (including 
decision making); and the extent to which there is a culture of equity and 
a balance of power across all social groups represented within the organi-
zation (Kossek & Zonia, 1993). According to Gonzalez and Denisi (2009, 
p. 25), a diversity climate can influence the way in which employees “ex-
press and manage diversity-related tensions, and productivity is enhanced 
when people believe that cultural differences drive diverse knowledge and 
insight, but not when people assume that diversity is only valuable to gain 
niche markets or to avoid blatant discrimination or lawsuits.” Thus, the 

174    J. H. STEPHENSON
affects of diversity are contingent on the organizational environment (Fer-
ris, Frink, & Galang, 1993), and arguably one of these contextual elements 
or environmental factors include the leadership strategy that is adopted by 
organizations.
LEADER–MEMBER EXCHANGE (LMX) AND AGE DIVERSITY
The Role of LMX in Contemporary Organizations
Leader–member exchange is an emerging leadership concept that ex-
plores the relationship between leaders and members (managers/employ-
ees, supervisors/subordinates), also referred to as the dyad. Rather than 
simply focusing on the traits of effective leaders and the outcomes that 
their traits are likely to engender, the central theme of leader–member 
exchange theory is that different relationships exist among leaders and 
employees, and the quality of these relationships (including the extent to 
which they are reciprocal) will have an impact on the quality of the em-
ployee’s and by extension organizational outcomes (Avolio, Walumbwa, 
& Weber, 2009; Brouer, Duke, Treadway, & Ferris, 2009; Dulebohn, Bom-
mer, Liden, Brouer, & Ferris, 2012). Thus, according to the LMX strategy 
where there are higher levels of support for employees by managers there 
are likely to be higher levels of productivity, innovation, and job satisfac-
tion (Stewart & Johnson, 2009). As aforementioned, older workers can be 
beneficial to organizations as they are loyal, have lower turnover rates, are 
more productive, and work better in teams (Lyon & Pollard, 1997; Taylor & 
Walker, 2003). However, simply employing workers of diverse ages or creat-
ing dyads with members of different ages without fostering a relationship 
with them where their contribution is valued and they are respected, may 
erode the realization of any potential benefits of diversity. The adoption of 
the LMX approach may be one means of circumventing this. LMX suggests 
that differentiation of treatment of high and low performing employees 
may be necessary for the benefits of LMX to be realized by the organization 
and its members (Stewart & Johnson, 2009). The theory acknowledges the 
heterogeneous nature of older workers and facilitates the development of 
an environment of trust, equitable treatment, and enhanced productivity 
(Stewart & Johnson, 2009).
In LMX, both the manager and the employee have an important role to 
play, and the application of the theory is ineffective without the active involve-
ment of both participants. Further, within LMX the interaction must be on-
going and dynamic (Van Breukelen, Schyns & Le Blanc, 2006). The quality 
of the relationship is also an essential component particularly as it relates to 
communication. According to previous research in this area, while similarity 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    175
in the members of the dyad seems to affect outcomes as it relates to deep 
level characteristics including attitudes and values (Hiller & Day, 2003), this 
has not been reflected in the assessment of surface level characteristics in-
cluding age, education, and gender (Schriesheim, Castro, & Cogliser, 1999).
The LMX dyads that are regarded as most successful are those in which 
there is a reciprocal influence (Avolio et al., 2009); indeed, both parties to 
the dyad must contribute to the relationship in order to foster the devel-
opment of a high quality relationship (van Breukelen et al., 2012). There 
are several factors that are used to assess the quality of an LMX dyad, these 
include loyalty, contributions, trust, respect, liking, attitude, ability, benevo-
lence, integrity, communication, interaction, support, and rewards (Avo-
lio et al., 2009; Brower et al., 2000; Graen & Uhl Bien, 1995; Schriesheim 
et al., 1999). Indeed, as the dyad is formed and the relationship between 
the supervisor and the subordinate develops, these characteristics are as-
sessed by both the parties to the dyad (Brower et al., 2000). Where these 
attributes are present, the LMX relationship is said to be of high quality; 
however, where these attributes are absent or negligible, the LMX relation-
ship is regarded as low quality. According to Van Breukelen et al. (2006), 
leaders may offer discretion, latitude, information, influence on decisions, 
support, attention, feedback, respect, recognition and rewards, attractive 
work assignments, and career opportunities. Whereas subordinates can of-
fer some of these but they may also show loyalty, commitment, and greater 
levels of effort. High-quality relationships are those that offer the most ben-
efits to the parties in the dyad, the work team, and the overall organization.
The outcomes of high-quality relationships include job satisfaction, or-
ganizational commitment, intention to stay, and organizational citizenship 
behaviors (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). Conversely, low-
quality relationships are aligned with high rates of turnover, low job satisfac-
tion, and poor organizational commitment (Uhl Bien, 1995). Accordingly, 
low quality LMX relationship are also associated with short time limits al-
lowed for co-operative exchanges (i.e., the resulting outcomes are expected 
to be immediate/short term (Breukelen, Schyns, & Le Blanc, 2006). While 
these differential results may be regarded as attributable to discrimination, 
this is an essential component of LMX and arguably an important point of 
difference in the LMX theory of leadership. As traditional leadership strate-
gies focus on leader traits where the role of the leader is assessed in rela-
tion to the extent to which it affects employees’ behavior, team and orga-
nizational outcomes, the focus is on the equal value of the exchange in the 
leader–employee relationship (“high equivalence”) and effort concentrated 
on self-centered goals (“high self-interest”; Uhl Bien & Maslyn, 2003). This 
suggests that any benefits that are derived from low-quality relationships 
are likely to be beneficial only to the supervisors/subordinates within that 
dyad. Conversely, with high-quality relationships, the scope of the exchange 

176    J. H. STEPHENSON
is much broader in focus and consequently there is a greater multiplier ef-
fect of benefits across the organization serving wider stakeholder interests. 
Along with its unique dyad consideration, the LMX approach to leadership 
is also valued for its exploration of the reciprocal nature of the dyad. Both 
members of the dyad influence the relationship and are mutually depen-
dent on each other in their employment relationship. There is also continu-
ous evaluation by both parties of their characteristics and likely behavior in 
different situations. Notwithstanding this, and perhaps as a consequence of 
the power asymmetry, dependence is greater for subordinates in the dyad 
than for the supervisors (cf. Dulebohn et al., 2012).
Rather than examining the antecedents and outcomes that are associated 
with effective leadership, LMX theorists consider the antecedents and out-
comes for both the leaders and followers. Based on a meta-analysis of extant 
LMX research, Dulebohn et al. (2012) developed a framework of LMX an-
tecedents and consequences (see Figure 6.1) in which they suggest that the 
characteristics of followers and leaders, along with the nature of their inter-
personal relationship have an impact on the quality of the dyadic relation-
ship as well as on the extent to which the consequences were realized. This 
model also suggests that there may be some moderating factors that impact 
Follower characteristics
Competence
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Locus of control
Consequences
Turnover
Turnover intentions
Organizational citizenship
behavior
Job performance
Organizational commitment
Job satisfaction
Organiztional justice
Empowerment
Perceptions of politics
Role ambiguity
Role conﬂict
LMX
Moderator
Cultural variables
Leader characteristics
Supervisor’s expectations
of followers
Contingent reward behavior
Transformational leadership
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Interpersonal relationship
Perceived similarity
Affect/Liking
Ingratiation
Self-promotion
Assertiveness
Leader trust
Figure 6.1  Leader–member exchange antecedents and consequences theoretical 
framework. (Source: Dulebohn et al., 2012)

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    177
the quality of the relationship and the outcomes achieved, which may in-
clude the cultural context. This is consistent with the concept of age diversity, 
which also considers that moderating factors may be influential on the extent 
to which organizations benefit from managing diversity in practice.
As indicated, managers develop different relationships with each of their 
employees (Colella & Varma, 2001). In earlier iterations of the LMX theory 
(Liden, Wayne, & Stillwell, 1993), employees were regarded as either being 
a part of the in-group or the out-group. Those members in the in-group 
experienced high-quality relationships (Colella & Varma, 2001). Current 
LMX theorists suggest that leaders should value all subordinates and make 
decisions that are objective, fair and free from bias, and make efforts to 
develop high-quality relationships (Van Breukelen et al., 2006). Notwith-
standing, it must be noted that one characteristic of a high-quality LMX 
relationship is favorability/liking, this delineates the subjective nature and 
quality of the dyadic relationship.
From our analysis, we have identified several attributes of high- and 
low-quality relationships. There are some other key factors that are also 
taken into consideration in the LMX strategy. These include the level of 
performance by subordinates that would typically contribute to a good rela-
tionship between managers and employees; however, this is not without ex-
ception because employees who have already developed a high-quality rela-
tionship with supervisors based on other factors are still positively assessed 
even if their performance is not outstanding (i.e., not high performers). 
This is in contrast to that which obtains with employees with low quality re-
lationships, whose performance is assessed according to their performance 
(Duarte, Goodson, & Klich, 1993).
Age Diversity and the Organizational Impact of LMX
The statistics presented in Tables 6.1 through 6.4 indicate the age com-
position of the labor force in the United Kingdom and the United States 
where the younger age groups (18 to 24 year olds) represent the lowest 
rates of employment and the highest rates of unemployment across the 
board (2004–2015) relative to all other age groups represented in the work-
place. An age diverse labor force should also translate to age diverse work-
places. It has been argued that because of their different life stages (and 
perspectives), people of diverse ages may find it challenging to work to-
gether. According to Sullivan, Forret, Carraher, and Mainiero (2009), baby 
boomers (ages 52 to 70) “value extrinsic measures of success, are willing 
to work to get rewards, and value independent thinking”; Generation X 
workers (ages 33 to 51) are “accustomed to change, are highly mobile, are 
loyal to work groups and bosses, and believe rewards should be based on 

178    J. H. STEPHENSON
merit and dislike hierarchies”; and Generation Y workers (ages 14 to 32) 
are “technologically savvy, impatient and reliant on technology.” Moreover, 
Baldwin and Strebler (2007) argue that notwithstanding one’s age, the ex-
tent to which an employee is engaged within the context of work affects 
that person’s attitude at work. They further suggest that while older people 
are motivated by the attainment of fair rewards and realization of orga-
nizational objectives, younger people pursue personal development and 
thrive on completing challenging tasks. Many of today’s contemporary or-
ganizations have members of various generations working together, either 
as colleagues or in a manager/employee relationship (Bell & Narz, 2007) 
as organizations reflect the previously described demographic changes in 
society. Organizations must therefore ensure that their managers are suf-
ficiently skilled or capable of effectively managing these employees so that 
they are actively engaged and performing optimally, and the LMX strategy 
provides a feasible alternative for doing so.
Similarities between the manager and the employee also appear to be 
important in determining the quality of the LMX relationship. Similarities 
as it relates to demography (age, sex, gender, education), and similar val-
ues, attitudes, and perceptions of similarities impact the quality of the dyad-
ic relationship (Van Breukelen et al., 2012). Similarities (real or perceived) 
are likely to affect the extent to which managers and employees are likely to 
view other’s contribution or their likelihood of adding value to the relation-
ship, the team, or the organization, and the extent to which the contribu-
tions made are considered valuable (Van Breukelen et al., 2012; Brouer et 
al., 2009; Colella & Varma, 2001). Arguably, this suggests that subordinates 
who are demographically dissimilar from the supervisor (e.g., age, race) 
are more likely to face even greater challenges in developing a high-quality 
dyadic relationship (Brouer et al., 2009). As suggested by the “similarity 
attraction paradigm,” similarity between individuals increases their liking 
for each other and affects interactions and behavior as a result (Colella & 
Varma, 2001).
Indeed, it has been found that the adoption of age diverse management 
policies results in negative organizational outcomes including poor com-
munication and a challenging decision making process (Knight et al. 1999; 
Zenger & Lawrence, 1989). The negative outcomes of age diverse groups 
may be attributed to intergroup bias (Wegge, Roth, Neubach, & Schmidt, 
2008) as managers and employees accept the negative stereotypes that ex-
ist about older employees, whether or not those stereotypes are relevant or 
applicable in the specific team or to the specific individual under consider-
ation (Ellwart, Bundgens & Rack, 2013). To change people’s perceptions 
and accepted stereotypes may be possible through training and re-educa-
tion; however, this is not likely to result in immediate changes. Organiza-
tions will also need to follow this up with the adoption of fair and equitable 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    179
policies and practices, which are visibly supported by all organizational 
members but particularly management staff and senior executives. Moni-
toring and training will also be beneficial to the extent that it is translated 
into everyday practice (Ellwart et al., 2013; Newton, 2006). This may include 
promoting “understanding the experiences and mindsets” of older workers 
(Baldwin & Strebler, 2007, p. 9). The business case argument in support of 
valuing older workers is related to how they can contribute to the organiza-
tion, for example through their knowledge, experience, and skills.
In short, an increased number of older employees is likely to require 
some changes in management and leadership strategies and practices. Old-
er workers have higher performance outcomes when there is congruence 
between their needs and the job requirements, they also value organiza-
tional citizenship behaviors (helping others in the workplace setting and 
sharing the benefit of their experiences; Hertel et al., 2013b). Managers 
therefore need to be aware of the conditions in which older workers thrive 
and perform at optimum levels and are motivated to continue doing so. 
This is consistent with the assertion by Hertel et al. (2013a, p. 730) that 
“Managers in organizations need to know more about age related differ-
ences in order to adapt their HRM strategies and leadership styles in an 
effective and sustainable way.” Indeed, understanding the “comparative 
demographic characteristics of dyad or group members who interact regu-
larly” might enable a better understanding of how differences in age diver-
sity in work teams, or between a superior and a subordinate, might affect an 
employee’s attitude and work behavior (Hertel et al., 2013a, p. 735).
Demographic dissimilarity has an adverse effect on LMX relationships 
(Turban & Jones, 1988). As it relates to age, accepted stereotypes may engen-
der expectations of poor performance, and this may translate to low-quality 
relationships with older workers. Research (Scandura & Lankau, 1996) sug-
gests that dyads will typically have an age differential with the projections of 
older workers comprising greater percentages of the workforce. Although 
culture has been proposed as a possible mediator (Dulebohn et al., 2012), 
this has not been conclusively supported by extant research. Graen and 
Scandura (1987) propose a triad model of LMX development consisting of 
role-taking, role-making and role-routinization. This framework would be 
useful to managers and employees desirous of engaging in an LMX dyad. 
The initial role-taking phase is characterized by the supervisor assessing the 
competence and performance of the subordinate, while the subordinate 
simultaneously assesses the behavior of the supervisor. At this stage, mutual 
respect “for the other’s ability and potential contribution” (Scandura & 
Lankau, 1996) is a key determinant of whether the relationship will be ef-
fective and progress toward a high-quality relationship. Where age dissimi-
larity is present in the dyad, one party may not respect the other as a result 
of the individual’s age, and the relationship may be stymied by decisions 

180    J. H. STEPHENSON
made as a result of preconceived notions about the person’s age and abili-
ties. The next phase is that of role-making where there is mutual influence 
exerted on the other’s attitudes and behavior. This occurs where there is 
mutual respect that leads to mutual trust and support by the supervisor 
for the subordinate’s activities. According to Scandura and Lankau (1996, 
p. 247), “The role-making stage of LMX development is critical when the 
parties of the dyad are demographically different.” In diverse dyads, it must 
be recognized that even one violation of trust may destroy the relationship 
since it may reinforce negative stereotypes and expectations of discrimina-
tory practice; for example, if the supervisor fails to support a proposal made 
by the subordinate or if the subordinate is unproductive or inefficient in 
his role. The final stage is role-routinization; the LMX relationship matures 
during this stage and a sense of interdependence and “mutual obligation” 
develops based on the respect and trust fostered in the previous phases and 
the relationship becomes normalized. At this stage of the dyad relationship 
development, any diversity issues that may have arisen have been resolved 
and are not expected to have an adverse effect on the relationship.
Having considered the specific attributes that may contribute to the 
quality of the dyadic relationship including the supervisor’s/subordinate’s 
characteristics and personal traits, subordinates may use tactics such as self-
promotion, ingratiation, and other political skills in order to develop high-
quality relationships with their supervisor (Brouer et al., 2006; Dulebohn et 
al., 2012). Individuals who are likely to engage in such activity are socially 
aware of the organizational environment and a supervisor’s character, and 
as such can better understand the behavior needed so as to develop a more 
effective dyadic relationship. This may require improving his or her efforts 
to enhance performance at work, recognizing those skills and attitudes that 
are valued by the supervisor and working toward developing those, and 
ensuring that from the perspective of the supervisor, the individual is an 
indispensable members of the staff. These tactics are beneficial to those 
who are demographically dissimilar to overcome the challenges that an age 
differential may present. As indicated by Brouer et al. (2009), “Political skill 
allows subordinates who are dissimilar to their supervisors to circumvent 
the negative consequences and relationship unfavorable” and develop high 
quality LMX relationships. Thus, as mentioned previously, in the LMX dyad 
there is reciprocal influence between the supervisor and the subordinate, 
thus engaging in ingratiation behavior could make the supervisor regard 
the employee in a more favorable light. This approach has been found to 
be more effective for demographically dissimilar subordinates in influenc-
ing the quality of LMX relationships (Colella & Varma, 2001), and arguably 
would be more necessary for them as they face the inevitable challenges.

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    181
CONCLUSION
Organizations are becoming more diverse, and in this chapter the focus has 
been on older workers who as a result of demographic changes are becom-
ing more commonplace within contemporary organizations. As we have 
seen from the statistics presented, organizations will increasingly consist of 
mixed age dyads or older age dyads. While it might be convenient to as-
sume that Generation Y workers have a greater propensity to discriminate 
against older workers or accept prevailing stereotypes against older workers, 
this has not been conclusively found to be accurate to the extent that older 
managers and older workers have also been found to discriminate against 
older workers and older managers as well. The examination of effectively 
managing age-diverse employees is timely for academics and practitioners 
to understand the nuances of the LMX relationship between managers and 
older workers and the implications for theory and practice. Within LMX, 
high-quality relationship are desired and characterized by loyalty, contribu-
tions, trust, respect, liking, attitude, ability, benevolence, integrity, commu-
nication, interaction, support, and rewards (Avolio et al., 2009; Brower et al., 
2000). Understanding the dynamics of this interaction will invariably con-
tribute to the understanding of how high-quality and effective dyads can be 
developed. Both leaders and employees should be aware of their biases and 
potential subjectivity when interacting with and developing relationships 
with employees. For older workers who have consistently experienced chal-
lenges with recruitment, training and development, and redundancy this 
emerging leadership model is a useful tool that may be used to examine and 
further understand the dynamics of the dyad and the factors that contribute 
to high-quality relationships. The impact of age is becoming increasingly im-
portant, and age is one of the more recently recognized grounds within leg-
islation to be prohibited by antidiscrimination law. Within an organization, 
it is quite important not simply to treat employees fairly but to go beyond 
the equality required by law and embrace their differences and the potential 
benefits that diversity could add to the organization.
FURTHER RESEARCH
As an emerging area of research, further empirical studies are needed to 
conclusively identify the antecedents and outcomes of effective LMX. Spe-
cifically, as it relates to age diversity and the aging population (and work-
force) there is a paucity of such literature. Therefore this chapter offers a 
framework for discussion as well as highlights key considerations and guid-
ance for human resource practitioners as to the LMX practices that they 
could adopt, along with realizing the benefits of age diversity including 

182    J. H. STEPHENSON
improvements in team performance, culture, organizational environment, 
values, and accepted norms within the economic sector or industry of the 
organization. The number of contextual factors that directly and indirectly 
impact the response of age diverse dyads to the LMX style could also be 
an area that could be explored by further empirical research. The nature 
of these factors may impact the extent to which age diverse employees re-
spond to different leadership styles, and may influence the relationship 
outcomes and the extent to which the efficiency and productivity of older 
workers are impacted. The dyadic interactions may be further examined 
along with the possible multiplier effects of LMX and age diversity on the 
organization. Finally, contemporary organizational leaders may not possess 
the requisite skills for the development of high-quality dyadic relationships, 
and as a consequence future research could examine the extent to which 
professional development programs could positively impact the develop-
ment of desirable high quality LMX relationships.
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ORGANIZATIONS
Developing high-quality relationships necessitates engagement and com-
mitment by both parties to the dyad. Organizational leaders need to aban-
don any prevailing negative perceptions about limitations associated with 
older employees and consider the benefits that such workers could facili-
tate. Leadership can be a moderator for the extent to which organizations 
realize the benefits of age diversity in their organization, and adopting 
the LMX approach could be a catalyst for highly functioning employees 
and by extension productive organizations. In practical terms, Hertel et 
al. (2013a) has suggested some tips for the effective management of di-
verse groups (dyads) and these include avoid age discrimination; provide 
training and support for age diversity; consider having age diverse teams 
(dyads); and balance the needs and expectations of both supervisors and 
subordinates in age diverse dyads. As has been discussed, accepted stereo-
types may cause subjective assumptions about the skills and abilities of older 
supervisors or subordinates, but the LMX leadership strategy provides an 
opportunity for both parties to the dyad to engage in a differentiated/het-
erogeneous approach when engaging in dyadic relationships with older 
dyadic partners (Riach, 2009). In addition to this, organizations must also 
give consideration to their environment and the development of an organi-
zational culture where each employee’s contribution is valued and there is 
mutual respect between organizational members. The dyadic nature of the 
leader–member exchange allows leaders and members to become familiar 
with each other instead of relying on stereotypes to determine the potential 
productivity or usefulness of employees or leaders. The dyadic approach 

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    183
also allows managers to become familiar with the strengths and limitations 
of their employees and the work environment and culture that would be 
more likely to promote high levels of motivation, engagement and commit-
ment, and optimal employee efficiency.
REFERENCES
Allard, M. (2002). Theoretical underpinnings of diversity. In C. Harvey & M. Al-
lard (Eds.), Understanding and managing diversity. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Arrowsmith, J., & McGoldrick, A. E. (1996). Bridging the theory and practice divide 
through collaborative research: The case of ageism in employment (Working paper). 
British Academy of Management Conference, Lancaster, England.
Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Weber, T. J. (2009). Leadership: Current theories, 
research, and future directions. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 421–449.
Baldwin, S., & Strebler, M. (2007). Managing an age diverse workforce: Research and 
practice in the run-up to the employment equality (age) regulations. Brighton, Eng-
land: Institute for Employment Studies.
Barron, J. M., John, M., Berger, M.C., & Black, D. A. (1993). Do workers pay for on the 
job training? Working paper, No E-169-93 University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
KY.
Bell, N. S., & Narz, M. (2007). Meeting the challenges of age diversity in the work-
place. The CPA Journal, 77(2), 56.
Bennington, L., & Wein, R. (2000). Anti-discrimination legislation in Australia: 
Fair, effective, efficient or irrelevant? International Journal of Manpower, 21(1), 
21–33.
Brewington, J. O., & Nassar-McMillan, S. (2000). Older adults: Work-related issues 
and implications for counseling. Career Development Quarterly, 49(1), 2–15.
Brouer, R. L., Duke, A., Treadway, D. C., & Ferris, G. R. (2009). The moderating 
effect of political skill on the demographic dissimilarity: Leader–member ex-
change quality relationship. The Leadership Quarterly, 20(2), 61–69.
Bushko, D., & Raynor, M. (1999). More on the aging worker: Who are they and how 
can they stay vital? Journal of Management Consulting, 10(3), 68–69.
Chiu, W.C. K, Chan, W., Snape, E., & Redman, T. (2001). Age stereotypes and dis-
criminatory attitudes towards older workers: An east-west comparison. Human 
Relations, 54(5), 629–661.
Claes, R., & Heymans, M. (2008). HR professionals’ view on work motivation and 
retention of older workers: A focus group study. Career Development Interna-
tional, 13(2), 95–111.
Colella, A., & Varma, A. (2001). The impact of subordinate disability on leader–
member exchange relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 
304–315.
Cornelius, N., Gooch, L., & Todd, S. (2001). Managing difference fairly: an inte-
grated ‘partnership’ approach. In M. Noon & E. Ogbonna (Eds.), Equality, 
diversity and disadvantage in employment. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave.

184    J. H. STEPHENSON
Deems, R., & Deems, T. (2009). Make job loss work for you: Get over it and get your career 
back on track. Indianapolis, IN: Jist.
Dickens, L. (2007). The road is long: Thirty years of equality legislation in Britain. 
British Journal of Industrial Relations, 45(3), 463–494.
D’Netto, B., & Sohal, A. S. (1999). Human resources practices and workforce di-
versity: an empirical assessment. International Journal of Manpower, 20(8), 
530–547.
Duarte, N. T., Goodson, J. R., & Klich, N. R. (1993). How do I like thee? Let me ap-
praise the ways. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14(3), 239–249.
Dulebohn, J. H., Bommer, W. H., Liden, R. C., Brouer, R. L., & Ferris, G. R. (2012). 
A meta-analysis of antecedents and consequences of leader–member ex-
change integrating the past with an eye toward the future. Journal of Manage-
ment, 38(6), 1715–1759.
Duncan, C. (2003). Assessing anti-ageism routes to older worker re-engagement. 
Work, Employment and Society, 17(1), 101–120.
Duncan, C., & Loretto, W. (2004). Never the right age? Gender and age-based dis-
crimination in employment. Gender, Work and Organization, 11(1), 95–115.
Ellwart, T., Bündgens, S., & Rack, O. (2013). Managing knowledge exchange and 
identification in age diverse teams. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 28(7/8), 
950–972.
Elsby, M. W., Hobijn, B., & Sahin, A. (2010). The labor market in the great recession. 
Working Paper No. 15979. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Encel, S. (2001). Age discrimination in Australia: Law and practice. In Z. Hornstein, 
S. Encel, M. Gunderson, & D. Neumark (2001). Outlawing age discrimination. 
Bristol, England: Policy.
Farr, J. L., Tesluk, P. E., & Klein, S. R. (1998). Organizational structure of the work-
place and the older worker. In K. W. Schaie & C. Schooler (Eds.), Impact of 
work on older adults (pp. 143–206). New York, NY: Springer.
Ferris, G. R., Frink, D. D., & Galang, M. C. (1993). Diversity in the workplace: The 
human resources management challenges. Human Resource Planning, 16(1), 
41–51.
Finkelstein L. M., & Burke, M. J. (1998). Age stereotyping at work: The role of rater 
and contextual factors on evaluations of job applicants. Journal of General Psy-
chology, 125(4), 317–345.
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-Analytic review of leader–member ex-
change theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
82(6), 827–844.
Gonzalez, J. A., & Denisi, A. S. (2009). Cross-level effects of demography and diver-
sity climate on organizational attachment and firm effectiveness. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 30(1), 21–40.
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. (1987). Toward a psychology of dyadic organizing. In 
L. Cummings & B. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 9, pp. 
175–208). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 
25 years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    185
Harrison, D. A., & Klein, K. J. (2007). What’s the difference? Diversity constructs 
as separation, variety, or disparity in organizations. Academy of Management 
Review, 32(4), 1199–1228.
Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., & Bell, M. P. (1998). Beyond relational demography: 
Time and the effects of surface-and deep-level diversity on work group cohe-
sion. Academy of Management Journal, 41(1), 96–107.
Hayles, R., & Mendez, R.A. (1997). The diversity directive. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Hertel, G., van der Heijden, B., de Lange, A., & Deller, J. (2013a). Facilitating age 
diversity in organizations—Part I: Challenging popular misbeliefs. Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, 28(7/8), 729–740.
Hertel, G., van der Heijden, B., de Lange, A., & Deller, J. (2013b). Facilitating age 
diversity in organizations—Part II: Managing perceptions and interactions. 
Journal of Managerial Psychology, 28(7/8), 857–866.
Heywood, J. S., Ho, L. S., & Wei, X. (1999). The determinants of hiring older work-
ers: Evidence from Hong Kong. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(3), 
444–459.
Hiller, N. J., & Day, D. V. (2003) LMX and teamwork: The challenges and oppor-
tunities of diversity. In G. B. Graen (Ed.), Dealing with diversity (pp. 29–57). 
Greenwich, CT: Information Age.
Hirsch, D. (2000). Life after 50. York, England: York Publishing Services.
Hornstein, Z., Encel, S., Gunderson, M., & Neumark, D. (2001). Outlawing age dis-
crimination foreign lessons:UK choices. Bristol, England: Policy Press.
Kandola, R. S., & Fullerton, J. (1998). Diversity in action: Managing the mosaic (2nd 
ed.). Wimbledon, England: CIPD.
Kidwell, R. (2002). Helping older workers cope with continuous quality improve-
ment. Journal of Management Development, 22(10), 190–205.
Kirasic, K. C., Allen, G. L., Dobson, S. H., & Binder, K. S. (1996). Aging, cognitive 
resources, and declarative learning. Psychology Aging, 11, 58–70.
Kirton, G., & Greene, A. (2006). The dynamics of managing diversity (2nd ed.). Ox-
ford, England: Elsevier Butterworth Heinemann.
Knight, D., Pearce, C. L., Smith, K. G., Olian, J. D., Sims, H. P., Smith, K. A., & Flood, 
P. (1999). Top management team diversity, group process, and strategic con-
sensus. Strategic Management Journal, 445–465.
Kossek, E. E., & Zonia, S. C. (1993). Assessing diversity climate: A field study of 
reactions to employer efforts to promote diversity. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 14(1), 61–81.
Kulik, C. T., & Roberson, L. (2008). Common goals and golden opportunities: 
Evaluations of diversity education in academic and organizational settings. 
Academy of Management Learning and Education, 7, 309–331.
Levy, B. R., & Banaji, M. R. (2002). Implicit ageism. In T. D. Nelson (Ed.) Ageism: Ste-
reotyping and prejudice against older persons (pp. 49–75). Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press.
Liden, R. C., Wayne, S. J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early de-
velopment of leader-member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(4), 
662.

186    J. H. STEPHENSON
Liff, S., & Wajcman, J. (1996). Sameness and difference revisited: Which way for-
ward for equal opportunity initiatives. Journal of Management Studies, 33(1), 
79–94.
Loretto, W. (2010). Work and retirement in an ageing world: The case of older 
workers in the UK. Contemporary Social Science: Journal of the Academy of Social 
Sciences, 5(3), 279–294.
Loretto, W., & White, P. (2006). Employers’ attitudes, practices and policies towards 
older workers. Human Resource Management Journal, 16(3), 313–330.
Lyon, P., & Pollard, D. (1997). Perceptions of the older employee: Is anything really 
changing? Personnel Review, 26(3), 245–257.
MacNicol, J. (2007). The American experience of age discrimination legislation. In 
W. Loretto, S. Vickerstaff, & P. White (Eds.), The future for older workers: New 
perspectives (pp. 27–41). Bristol, England: Policy Press.
Martin, S. (1994). Outsider within the station house: The impact of race and gender 
on black women police. Social Problems, 41, 383–400.
Mathews, A. (1998). Diversity: A principie of human resource management. Public 
Personnel Management, 27(2), 175–185.
McEvoy, G. M., & Cascio, W. F. (1989). Cumulative evidence of the relationship 
between employee age and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 
11–17.
McGoldrick, A. E., & Arrowsmith, J. (1993). Recruitment advertising: Discrimina-
tion on the basis of age. Employee Relations, 15(5), 54–65.
McGregor, J. (2001). Employment of the older worker. Palmerston North, New Zealand: 
Massey University.
McGregor, J., & Gray, L. (2002). Stereotypes and older workers: The New Zealand 
experience. Social Policy Journal of New Zealand, 18, 163–177.
McGuire, S., & Roberson, M. (2007, June). Assessing the potential impact of the introduc-
tion of age discrimination legislation in UK firms from an HRM and JKM perspective. 
Proceedings of Organizational Learning, Knowledge and Capabilities Con-
ference (OLKC), Learning Fusion. Ontario, Canada.
McKay, P. F., Avery, D. R., Tonidandel, S., Morris, M. A., Hernandez, M., & Hebl, 
M. R. (2007). Racial differences in employee retention: Are diversity climate 
perceptions the key? Personnel Psychology, 60(1), 35–62.
McNair, S. (2006). How different is the older labor market? Attitudes to work and 
retirement among older people in Britain. Social Policy and Society, 5(4), 
485–494.
McNair, S., Flynn, M., Owen, L., Humphreys, C., & Woodfield, S. (2004). Changing 
work in later life: A study of job transitions. Guildford, England: University of 
Surrey.
Metcalf, H., & Meadows, P. (2006). Survey of employers’ policies, practices and preferences 
relating to age. Research Report No. 325. DTI Employment Relations Research 
Series, No. 49. Leeds, England: Department for Work and Pensions.
Mirvis, P., & Hall, D. T. (1996). Psychological success and the boundaryless career. 
In M. B. Arthur & D. M. Rousseau (Eds.), The boundaryless career (pp. 237–
255). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Mitton, L., & Hull, C. (2006). The information, advice and guidance needs of older 
workers. Social Policy and Society, 5(4), 541–550.

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    187
Neumark, D. (1999). The employment effects of recent minimum wage increases: Evidence 
from a pre-specified research design. Working Paper 7171. Cambridge, MA: Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Neumark, D. (2009). The age discrimination in employment act and the challenge 
of population aging. Research on Aging, 31(1), 41–68.
Newton, B. (2006). Training an age-diverse workforce. Industrial and Commercial 
Training, 38(2), 93–97.
Noon, M. (2007). The fatal flaws of diversity and the business case for ethnic minori-
ties. Work Employment and Society, 21(4), 773–784.
Patrickson, M. (2002, July). Early retirement: Choosing whether to stay or go. Paper pre-
sented to the IFSAM/ANZAM World Conference, Brisbane, Australia.
Patrickson, M., & Ranzijn, R. (2003). Employability of older workers. Equal Opportu-
nities International, 22(5), 50–63.
Phillips, K. W., & Loyd, D. L. (2006). When surface and deep-level diversity collide: 
The effects on dissenting group members. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 99(2), 143–160.
Pitts, D. W., & Wise, L. R. (2010). Workforce diversity in the new millennium: Pros-
pects for research. Review of Public Personnel Administration, 30(1), 44–69.
Posthuma, R. A., & Campion, M. A. (2008). Age stereotypes in the workplace: Com-
mon stereotypes, moderators, and future research directions. Journal of Man-
agement, 35(1), 158–188.
Ranzijn, R. (2002). Towards a positive psychology of ageing: Potentials and barriers. 
Australian Psychologist, 37(2), 79–85.
Redman, T., & Snape, E. (2002). Ageism in teaching: Stereotypical beliefs and 
discriminatory attitudes: Towards the over-50s. Work, Employment and Society, 
16(2), 355–371.
Renskin, B. F. (2000). The proximate causes of employment discrimination. Contem-
porary Sociology, 29, 319–328.
Riach, K. (2009). Managing “difference”: Understanding age diversity in practice. 
Human Resource Management Journal, 19(3), 319–335.
Richard, O. C. (2000). Racial diversity, business strategy, and firm performance: A 
resource-based view. Academy of Management Journal, 43(2), 164–177.
Roberge, M. É., & van Dick, R. (2010). Recognizing the benefits of diversity: When 
and how does diversity increase group performance? Human Resource Manage-
ment Review, 20(4), 295–308.
Sahin, A., Song, J., & Hobijn, B. (2010). The unemployment gender gap during the 
2007 recession. Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 16(2), 1–7.
Salthouse, T. M., & Maurer, T. J. (1996). Aging, job performance, and career devel-
opment. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), The handbook of aging (pp. 353–
364). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Scandura, T. A., & Lankau, M. J. (1996). Developing diverse leaders: A leader–mem-
ber exchange approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 7(2), 243–263.
Schneider, B. (2000). The psychological life of organizations. In N. M. Ashkanasy, C. 
P. M. Wilderon & M. F. Petersom (Eds.), Handbook of organizational culture and 
climate. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

188    J. H. STEPHENSON
Schriesheim, C. A., Castro, S. L., & Cogliser, C. C. (1999). Leader–member ex-
change (LMX) research: A comprehensive review of theory, measurement, 
and data-analytic practices. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(1), 63–113.
Singh, V., Kumra, S., & Vinnicombe, S. (2002). Gender and impression manage-
ment: Playing the promotion game, Journal of Business Ethics, 37(1), 77–89.
Smedley, K., & Whitten, H. (2006). Age matters: Employing, motivating and managing 
older employees. Hampshire, England: Gower.
Steinberg, M., Walley, L., Tyman, R., & Donald, K. (1998). Too old to work? In M. 
Patrickson, & L. Hartmann (Eds.), Managing an ageing workforce (pp. 53–68). 
Warriewood, Australia: Woodslane.
Stewart, M. M., & Johnson, O. E. (2009). Leader–member exchange as a mod-
erator of the relationship between work group diversity and team perfor-
mance. Group & Organization Management, 34(5), 507–535.
Stoney, C., & Roberts, M. (2003). The case of older workers at Tesco: An examination of 
attitudes, assumptions and attributes. Working Paper No. 53. Carleton University 
School of Public Policy and Administration, Ontario, Canada.
Subeliani, D., & Tsogas. G. (2005). Managing diversity in the Netherlands: A case 
study of Rabobank. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 16(5), 
831–851.
Sullivan, S. E., Forret, M. L., Carraher, S. M., & Mainiero, L. A. (2009). Using the 
kaleidoscope career model to examine generational differences in work at-
titudes. Career Development International, 14(3), 284–302.
Taylor, P., & Walker, A. (1998). Policies and practices towards older workers: A 
framework for comparative research. Human Resource Management Journal, 
8(3), 61–76.
Taylor, P., & Walker, A. (2003). Age discrimination in the labor market and policy 
responses: The situation in the United Kingdom. The Geneva Papers on Risk 
and Insurance, 28, 612–624.
Thomas, R. R. (1990). From affirmative action to affirming diversity. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, 68(2), 107–117.
Trade Union Congress. (2008). Talent not tokenism: The business benefits of workforce 
diversity. London, England: Author.
Uhl-Bien, M., & Maslyn, J. M. (2003). Reciprocity in manager–subordinate relation-
ships: Components, configurations, and outcomes. Journal of Management, 
29(4), 511–532.
Urwin, P. (2006). Age discrimination: Legislation and human capital accumulation. 
Employee Relations, 28(1), 87–97.
Van Breukelen, W., Schyns, B., & Le Blanc, P. (2006). Leader–member exchange 
theory and research: Accomplishments and future challenges. Leadership, 
2(3), 295–316.
Van Dick, R., Van Knippenberg, D., Hägele, S., Guillaume, Y. R., & Brodbeck, F. 
C. (2008). Group diversity and group identification: The moderating role of 
diversity beliefs. Human Relations, 61(10), 1463–1492.
Warnes, T., & John, A. (2005). Facts and misconceptions about demography and the work-
force. Retrieved May 25, 2015, from https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/238746964_Facts_and_Misunderstandings_about_Demography_and_
the_Workforce

The Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Approach to Age Diversity    189
Warr, P. (1993). In what circumstances does job performance vary with age. Euro-
pean Work and Organizational Psychologist, 3(3), 237–249.
Wegge, J., Roth, C., Neubach, B., Schmidt, K. H., & Kanfer, R. (2008). Age and gen-
der diversity as determinants of performance and health in a public organiza-
tion: The role of task complexity and group size. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
93(6), 1301–1313.
Weller, S. A. (2007). Discrimination, labor markets and the labor market prospects 
of older workers: What can a legal case teach us? Work, Employment and Society, 
21(3), 417–437.
Whiting, E.c(2005). The labor market participation of older people. Labour Market 
Trends, 113(7), 285–296.
Williams, J. D., & Klug, M. G. (1996, July/September). Aging and cognition: Meth-
odological differences in outcome. Experimental Aging Research, 219–244.
Wood, G., Harcourt, M., & Harcourt, S. (2004). The effects of age discrimination 
legislation on workplace practice: A New Zealand case study. Industrial Rela-
tions Journal, 35(4), 359–371.
Zenger, T. R., & Lawrence, B. S. (1989). Organizational demography: The differ-
ential effects of age and tenure distributions on technical communication. 
Academy of Management Journal, 32(2), 353–376.

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 191–220
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
191
CHAPTER 7
LEADER–MEMBER RELATIONS 
IN AN AGING WORKFORCE
Barbara A. Fritzsche and Ghada Baz
University of Central Florida
ABSTRACT
While researchers and practitioners increasingly recognize the importance of 
creating and maintaining high quality leader–member exchange (LMX) in 
supporting organizational performance and workers’ well-being, a new chal-
lenge emerges with the aging of the global workforce. This chapter aims to 
examine challenges brought by the aging workforce while focusing on the 
role of leader, both young and old, in developing high quality interaction 
with older subordinates. First, we will examine current literature in leader-
ship behaviors and outcomes as a function of age; second, we will present 
research that has examined the LMX relationship as a function of age, with 
a focus on research that examines LMX when the supervisor is younger than 
the subordinate; third, we will provide an overview of research on age-related 
stereotypes, workplace ageism, and the job performance, turnover, and job 
attitudes of older workers to inform leaders about the challenges and op-
portunities associated with an aging workforce; and finally, we will present 
research-based ideas for building high-quality, leader–member relationships 
with older subordinates.

192    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Older workers are the fastest growing segment of the U.S. workforce (Benz, 
Sedensky, Tompson, & Agiesta, 2013). Currently there are more than 44 
million people aged 50 plus in the U.S. workforce. By 2020, 38% of the 
workforce is expected to be 55 years old or more with fully 22% of the work-
force aged 65 or older (AARP, 2013). This demographic shift is not limited 
to the U.S. workforce but reflects a trend in many nations around the world 
(Chand & Tung, 2014). For example, in 2014 the old-age dependency ratio 
(the extent to which a country relies on older workers) was already 42% 
in Japan and 34% in Italy (The World Bank Group, 2016). As birth rates 
decline and people live longer, healthier lives, people want and need to 
work longer. Moreover, organizations are finding that they must find ways 
to retain older workers as valuable contributors to their success. In fact, 
72% of human resource professionals polled stated that the loss of older 
workers is “a problem” or “a potential problem” for their organizations, cit-
ing a loss from both “basic” (writing, grammar, and spelling skills) and “ap-
plied” (professionalism and work ethic) skills gaps between younger and 
older workers. Despite widespread knowledge of the aging workforce and 
the potential problems associated with losing valuable older workers, many 
organizations report that they have not taken systematic steps to proactively 
address the problem (Minton-Eversole, 2012).
The extent to which leaders develop strong LMX relations appears to 
be central to solving this problem because LMX provides the social and 
emotional context in which employees feel valued and inspired to per-
form. In a recent study (Gottfredson & Aguinis, 2016) of 3,327 primary 
studies that were previously examined in 35 meta analyses, LMX was found 
to be the most central mediator of the relationship between several leader-
ship behaviors and subordinate performance. Specifically, the relationship 
between the use of rewards for performance (i.e., contingent rewards) and 
subordinate behavior could be explained by the quality of LMX relation-
ships. The relationship between transformational leadership (how leaders 
inspire subordinates to perform above and beyond previous levels) and 
subordinate performance could be explained by LMX. Moreover, LMX 
mediated the relation between the Ohio State leadership behaviors (ini-
tiating structure and consideration) with subordinate performance. Spe-
cifically, a strong LMX relationship provides subordinates with the social 
and emotional context in which they can succeed. The authors reasoned 
that by showing concern and respect for subordinates the leaders com-
municate to their subordinates that they are valued, which strengthens the 
LMX relationship. When leaders provide an initiating structure through 
organizing work and roles, subordinates perceive that their leaders want 
them to be successful, which strengthens LMX. Gottfredson and Aguinis 
(2016) concluded:

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    193
If leaders want to serve as catalysts for high levels of follower performance, 
our results suggest that they need to focus on one particular follower percep-
tion: LMX, or the improve follower performance, namely: their followers’ 
perception of their relationship with them. In short, our results simplify what 
leaders need to focus on in an effort to improve follower performance, name-
ly the followers’ perceptions of their relationship with their leader.
This chapter focuses on the challenges brought by an increasingly old-
er workforce with an emphasis on what leaders both young and old need 
to know in order to develop strong relationships with older subordinates. 
First, we will discuss what we know about leadership behaviors and out-
comes as a function of age. In other words, as our workforce ages more 
leaders will be older and supervising both younger and older subordinates. 
What can we expect from an older leader as compared to a younger leader? 
Second, we will present research that has examined the leader–member 
exchange (LMX) relationship as a function of age. Until recently, most 
leaders were older than their subordinates. In fact, commonly accepted age 
norms suggest that older people are expected to hold jobs higher on the or-
ganizational chart than younger workers (Shore & Goldberg, 2005). Thus, 
the vast majority of LMX studies conducted describe the leader–member 
exchange relationship between an older supervisor paired with younger 
subordinates. In recent times, an unprecedented number of older workers 
are being supervised by younger leaders due to reorganizations and merg-
ers and the sheer number of older people in the workforce. The focus of 
this section will be on research that examines LMX when the supervisor is 
younger than the subordinate. Third, because the literature is surprisingly 
sparse linking LMX to age, we will discuss what is known about age-related 
stereotypes as they relate to workplace ageism and the empirical literature 
on the job performance, turnover, and job attitudes of older workers. This 
literature will bring to light the challenges and opportunities that leaders 
face in developing good leader–member relationships in an increasingly 
aging workplace. This will bring us to our fourth section where suggestions 
will be presented for building high-quality leader–member relationships 
with older subordinates.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT OLDER LEADERS?
As the workforce ages, more older people will become leaders supervising 
both younger and older workers (Sonnenfeld, 1991). Yet, despite this real-
ity age has been the focus of only a few empirical studies on leadership in 
general (Walter & Scheibe, 2013) and LMX theory in particular (e.g., Epi-
tropaki & Martin, 1999; Smith & Harrington, 1994; Vecchio, 1993). To help 
guide empirical research and make sense out of conflicting findings on the 

194    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
links between leaders’ chronological age and leadership behaviors and out-
comes, Walter and Scheibe (2013) have offered a conceptual model (Fig-
ure 7.1) that draws upon research on the emotional basis for leadership.
According to Walter and Scheibe (2013), well-documented emotional 
changes occur with age and mediate the relationship between age and leader-
ship. Three emotional abilities relevant to leadership performance include 
emotion recognition, understanding, and regulation (Joseph & Newman, 
2010). Emotion recognition is the ability to accurately identify the emotions 
of others, whereas emotion understanding is the comprehension of the signs 
of emotions, their causes, and how to regulate them. These two abilities help 
leaders identify subordinates’ problems and meet their emotional needs 
through how they give direction, support, and feedback. Emotion regulation 
is the ability to control one’s emotional experience and the expression of emo-
tion, which has been linked to high-quality LMX relations with subordinates.
Lifespan development research on aging suggests that aging tends to 
bring declines in emotion recognition but heightened emotion under-
standing and regulation, suggesting that age can have positive and negative 
effects on leader outcomes. In addition to age-related changes in emotional 
abilities, aging has also been associated with greater positivity maintenance 
and positivity bias (the motivation to experience positive and avoid nega-
tive feelings). Whereas positivity bias is not always beneficial to leadership, 
research suggests (e.g., Newcombe & Ashkanasy, 2002) that positive leaders 
generally have better LMX relationships.
To help explain when older leaders will likely have better leadership out-
comes, Walter and Scheibe (2013) suggest that functional age, psychosocial 
Figure 7.1  Walter and Scheibe’s (2013) conceptual model.

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    195
age, cognitive demands, and emotional demands moderate the relation-
ship. Specifically, leaders’ emotional abilities are negatively impacted when 
they have fewer physical and cognitive resources (a lower functional age), 
and their positivity maintenance is negatively impacted when they feel or 
are perceived as older (a higher psychosocial age). In other words, higher 
functional and lower psychosocial age can provide a buffer to the effects 
of chronological age on leader outcomes. Likewise, highly cognitively de-
manding situations (requiring high fluid intelligence) and highly emotion-
ally demanding situations (requiring an accurate assessment of highly nega-
tive information) will likely result in poorer outcomes for older leaders. Yet, 
older leaders are likely to outperform younger leaders in low cognitively 
and emotionally demanding situations where their superior crystallized in-
telligence and positivity maintenance will benefit them.
Walter and Scheibe (2013) provide a much needed link between the life-
span development literature on how emotional functioning changes with 
age and its potential effect on leadership behavior and outcomes. Their 
model addresses the direct effect of age by suggesting that older and young-
er people are expected to have different leadership styles and strengths. 
Beyond the direct effects of age, it is also important to understand the ef-
fects of the relative age of a leader to the subordinate on their LMX rela-
tionship. In other words, what can be expected in terms of the quality of the 
relationship between a supervisor and a subordinate when there are large 
age differences between them, particularly when a younger leader is paired 
with an older subordinate? The next section summarizes that literature.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT LMX AND AGE?
Tsui and colleagues (e.g., Tsui, Egan, & O’Reilly, 1992; Tsui & O’Reilly, 
1989) argued that demographic differences between supervisors and sub-
ordinates affect work outcomes beyond the direct effects of demographic 
characteristics. Termed relational demography, demographic differences (age 
or other demographic differences such as sex or ethnic background) in 
dyadic relationships is predicted to lead supervisors to perceive lower ef-
fectiveness and attraction to subordinates, which results in lower quality 
exchange relationships and categorizations in the outgroup. At the same 
time, subordinates also categorize supervisors, which further influences 
the exchange relationship. According to relational demography theory, 
problems emerge when those who are in supervisory roles have different 
demographic characteristics than their subordinates. Thus, poor LMX rela-
tionships among age-different supervisor-subordinate dyads are expected. 
Research has shown a host of negative outcomes such as increased employ-
ee turnover and lower job performance, job satisfaction, commitment, and 

196    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
attachment attributed to lower quality LMX relationships in age-different 
dyads. The negative outcomes have been linked to poorer communication, 
greater misunderstandings between supervisor and subordinates, and more 
social distance between them. For example, poorer task-oriented commu-
nication results in more role ambiguity leading to poorer performance 
(Green, Anderson, & Shivers, 1996).
Whereas the relational demography perspective is commonly cited, 
other ideas have been proposed to explain how age differences can affect 
LMX. Vecchio (1993) argued that age differences could be positively, nega-
tively, or curvilinearly related to work outcomes depending on the impact 
of status congruence, similarity attraction, social competition, and loyalty 
and commitment. Some of these ideas are consistent with the relational 
demography perspective but others are not.
From a status congruence perspective, positive outcomes occur when all 
variables related to higher status in an organization are aligned (or congru-
ent) with each other. Thus congruence exists when those who have the 
higher positions in the workplace are also those who have the most experi-
ence, expertise, pay, tenure, and age. When younger people supervise older 
subordinates, older subordinates view this as violating implicit career time-
tables (Lawrence, 1987, 1988). Career timetables theory suggests that oc-
cupations have age-related norms and older people should occupy higher 
positions in organizations. Those who are promoted with their age group 
are considered on time; those who are promoted ahead of schedule are 
considered to be on the “fast track”; and those who are promoted later than 
others are considered “dead wood.” This suggests that younger supervisors 
may evaluate older subordinates negatively and prefer to hire and supervise 
younger subordinates. Older subordinates may feel as though they are en-
titled to greater input into decisions due to their age seniority. As a result, 
younger supervisors may experience difficulties supervising older subordi-
nates. Thus, from this perspective the most positive outcomes are expected 
when there are age-related differences between supervisors and subordi-
nates under the condition when the supervisor is older.
The similarity attraction hypothesis suggests that supervisor-subordinate 
dyads will have the best outcomes when there are little to no age differences 
between them. This idea is consistent with the work of Tsui and suggests 
that similarity breeds attraction and perceptions of effectiveness as values, 
generational experiences, and attitudes are likely to be more similar among 
demographically similar individuals. According to self-categorization theo-
ry, the need to think positively of ourselves leads us to prefer and have posi-
tive evaluations of similar others. This idea comes from the work of Byrne 
(1971) and was originally applied to similarity in attitudes, but now has 
been applied to similarity in demographics (Riordan, 2000).

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    197
In contrast, the social competition approach suggests the opposite of the 
similarity attraction hypothesis. Specifically, social competition is expected 
to be greatest between similarly aged supervisors and subordinates, leading 
to lower evaluations of each other. Finally, because higher age is associated 
with greater loyalty and commitment, this last perspective would argue that 
older subordinates would be most valued by younger supervisors.
Given the competing ideas about the nature of the effects of age-diverse 
LMX relationships, it is no surprise that the empirical tests of these relation-
ships find inconsistent results. In an early study of relational demography 
and LMX, for example, Epitropaki and Martin (1999) found that when 
there was a large age difference between a supervisor and subordinate and 
poor LMX, the subordinate reported poor well-being. Yet, when LMX was 
high a large age difference between the supervisor and subordinate did not 
result in poor outcomes. These results suggest that a large age difference 
between the supervisor and subordinate does not necessarily lead to a poor 
LMX relationship, which is good news for a rapidly demographically chang-
ing workforce.
Several studies have shown support for a relational demography perspec-
tive that age differences in either direction matter. For example, Shore, 
Cleveland, and Goldberg (2003) found that when there was greater age 
similarity between the supervisor and subordinate the subordinate felt 
as though he or she had the best career future. Older subordinates ex-
perienced negative outcomes when their supervisors were either older or 
younger than they were. Specifically, younger supervisors offered fewer de-
velopmental opportunities to them and older supervisors gave them low 
performance evaluations.
Also finding support for the relational demography perspective, Malan-
gwasira (2013) focused his efforts on examining the mediating effect of 
LMX on the relationship between various demographic characteristics (in-
cluding age) and job satisfaction. Job satisfaction (the affective state under-
lying job attitudes) was expected to be linked to LMX as leader–member 
relations are among the most salient relationships at work. If trust, liking, 
and respect are low between the leader and the follower, this can have a 
large impact on experienced satisfaction at work. Malangwasira found that 
as age differences between supervisor-subordinate dyads increased LMX 
decreased, which then negatively impacted job satisfaction in a sample of 
manufacturing employees.
The bulk of the work on LMX and demographic variables has been con-
ducted in Western cultures, yet LMX relationships may differ by culture. In 
a study of demographically diverse dyads in Malaysia, Bakar, Jian, Fairhurst, 
and Connaughton (2011) examined the relationship between LMX and 
performance outcomes. According to the Global Leadership and Organi-
zational Behavior Effectiveness study (GLOBE; Kennedy, 2002), Malaysian 

198    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
employees tend to prefer to work as a group and highly value interpersonal 
communication and relationships. They found that higher quality LMX re-
lationships were related to both in-role and extra-role measures of job per-
formance when there was greater demographic similarity (including age) 
between the supervisor and subordinate. Interestingly, the effects for age 
differences specifically were found for measures of extra-role performance, 
but not for measures of in-role performance.
In an initial attempt to understand the cultural links between age and 
the quality of LMX relationships, Gellert and Schalk (2012) studied re-
spect, cooperation, and autonomy as linked to the quality of age-diverse 
LMX relationships. They defined respect as “a social exchange of positive 
attitudes between employees of different ages . . . related to the mutual re-
spect of ‘others competencies.’” (p. 46). Cooperation was conceptualized 
as an emotional aspect of respect and autonomy “includes freedom, inde-
pendence, and discretion in the individual task” (p. 47). They argued that 
age leads to better perceptions of LMX relationships when age is culturally 
linked to respect, cooperation, and autonomy. In other words, when cul-
tures automatically ascribe respect to older individuals and where age ste-
reotypes of incompetence are lower, one would expect LMX relationships 
among age diverse dyads to be more positive. They found that older work-
ers were more satisfied with their jobs when they had higher autonomy and 
better quality LMX relationships with their supervisors. Thus across several 
studies evidence has been found that age differences lead to poor LMX 
relations, which can lead to poor in-role and extra-role job performance 
and job satisfaction.
Looking for ways to combat age differences in the technology sector, 
Van der Heijden et al. (2010) examined the role of LMX and age-related 
supervisory practices such as providing training to update skills. They rea-
soned that to help increase employability, supervisors can promote growth 
and prevent obsolescence of older workers by encouraging training and de-
velopment programs and helping with career plans, mentoring, and social 
networking. Yet, they found that subordinate expertise was high when LMX 
was high regardless of the age-related supervisory practices. In other words, 
having a good quality LMX relationship was all that was needed suggesting 
the critical importance of LMX for older subordinates.
Providing some context to the relational demography findings, Haeger 
and Lingham (2013) qualitatively examined interviews from 12 supervi-
sors under the age of 36 and 13 subordinates who were at least 20 years 
older than their supervisors. Their major finding was that young supervi-
sors reported task-oriented supervision, but older subordinates expected 
relationship-oriented supervision. Haeger and Lingham called the per-
ceptual collisions that they found, generational normative collisions that lead 
to strained interactions within the age-diverse dyads. The generational 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    199
normative collisions centered on (a) leader style, (b) types of tasks, and 
(c) relationships. Specifically, older subordinates expected leaders who fo-
cused on coaching, development, and close, personal relationships. Older 
subordinates expected leaders to listen, give them voice in decisions, and 
offer support with personal matters. Yet, younger supervisors reported be-
ing very task centered, valued obedience, and did not see a value in getting 
involved in conflict in the workplace unless it was directly impeding task 
performance. Older subordinates valued quality over quantity of work com-
pleted and resented some uses of technology, whereas younger supervisors 
valued quantity of work completed (multitasking) over quality and resented 
older subordinates for not embracing technology. This study gives organi-
zations some clues as to what issues they may need to address to improve 
the quality of LMX relationships in age-different dyads. These issues may 
represent generational differences that may change over time (and may 
not be generalizable, given the small sample size) suggesting that the key 
contribution of this study is the idea that an open dialog with older subor-
dinates and younger supervisors can reveal leadership patterns that may be 
leading to poor LMX relations that require change.
Haeger and Lingham’s (2013) study suggests that subordinates’ evalua-
tion of the supervisor is critical to understanding the quality of LMX rela-
tionships. Yet, most research on LMX and age has focused on downward 
evaluations of older subordinates. In contrast, Collins, Hair, and Rocco 
(2009) focused on studying upward expectancy effects (also known as re-
verse Pygmalion effects) by examining subordinates’ perceptions of their 
supervisors’ leadership behaviors and how that influenced leader behavior. 
Due to violations in workplace status norms, older subordinates may believe 
that younger supervisors are less effective leaders. They may perceive that 
younger supervisors have less wisdom and experience, have less upward 
influence, provide less support, and are less cooperative. Low expectations 
of leadership performance can elicit poorer supervisory performance and 
poorer LMX relationships with subordinates. Collins et al. studied em-
ployees who were in one of four different categories: a younger (age 39 or 
younger) subordinate with an older supervisor (age 50 and older), an older 
subordinate with a younger supervisor, or where the individuals in the dyad 
were in the same age group. They found that older workers with younger 
supervisors expected less effective leadership behaviors and reported poor-
er leadership from their supervisors than did workers from any other age 
pairing, thereby confirming the idea that lower expectations elicit less ef-
fective leadership performance.
Looking beyond the dyad, Nishii and Mayer (2009) focused on LMX at 
the group level, examining it as a moderator between diversity and turn-
over. Their idea was that group performance can be improved if leaders es-
tablish high-quality relationships with subordinates of various demographic 

200    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
backgrounds. Uniformly high-quality LMX relationships help establish 
norms of equality, and inclusion thereby encourages group members to 
share power and establish high-quality relationships with each other. In 
other words, leaders who demonstrate acceptance of diversity through 
high LMX relationships with diverse subordinates will encourage accep-
tance and high-quality relationships among coworkers, which is expected to 
result in better group functioning and, ultimately less turnover. They argue 
that high-quality LMX relationships offer power to subordinates, which af-
fects them and their status in the group. Using a large sample of supermar-
ket employees, Nishii and Mayer (2009) averaged age, race, and gender 
diversity to create an overall measure of diversity rather than looking at age 
separately from the other demographic variables. Thus, their results can-
not be interpreted as indicative of age differences alone, but their findings 
included age diversity and were strong. The three-way interaction between 
diversity, LMX mean (average level of LMX within a group), and LMX dif-
ferentiation (level of dispersion in the quality of LMX within the group) 
suggested that groups were harmed the most when the leader established 
high-quality LMX relationships with most but not all subordinates. Their 
study generally establishes the importance of leadership that is inclusive 
of people of various demographic characteristics, including older workers.
In summary, surprisingly few studies have been done that directly exam-
ine LMX and age. Yet, from the studies that have been done the data sug-
gest that (a) age differences between supervisor and subordinate matter, 
(b) high-quality LMX relationships are linked to better in- and extra-role 
performance outcomes and positive job attitudes of older subordinates, (c) 
there is a reciprocal relationship in which high-quality LMX relationships 
are linked to better leadership performance, and (d) having uniformly 
high LMX relationships with diverse subordinates is important for creat-
ing a climate of inclusion. The larger literature on LMX and this smaller 
literature on age and LMX clearly informs leaders of the importance of 
building strong relationships with subordinates that communicate trust, re-
spect, and inclusion. Yet, what is lacking in this literature is how to create 
such relationships. In other words, what special challenges do older work-
ers face that leaders should be cognizant of to help develop good quality 
LMX relationships?
WHAT DO LEADERS NEED TO KNOW  
ABOUT AGING AND AGEISM?
A comprehensive review of the literature on aging at work and workplace 
ageism is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, this section will pro-
vide the reader with an overview of common stereotypes about the older 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    201
worker focusing on myths and realities of working with older subordinates 
with the hope that awareness will be a good start toward improving LMX 
relationships between age-diverse supervisor-subordinate dyads.
Before addressing the stereotypes of older workers, it is important to dis-
cuss how stereotyping fits into LMX relationships. LMX is posited to emerge 
from a series of social exchanges between supervisors and subordinates. Ac-
cording to the role episode model (Graen & Scandura, 1987), LMX devel-
ops through three stages: role-taking, role-making, and role-routinization. 
Success in role-taking, when supervisors and subordinates first interact and 
determine whether each person is going to contribute meaningfully to the 
relationship is critical to the establishment of high-quality LMX relations. 
It is in this first stage where surface demographic characteristics (such as 
age) matter the most as individuals do not have much information about 
each other as they begin their relationship. Over time as people learn more 
about each other, surface-level characteristics become less important in 
determining the quality of relationships than do deep-level characteristics 
(such as attitudes; Harrison, Price, & Bell, 1998). Yet, the initial interactions 
often based on surface-level characteristics and influenced by stereotypes 
determine the quality of role-taking that ultimately impacts role-making 
and role-routinization. Thus stereotypes can have a significant impact on 
the quality of LMX.
According to the stereotype content model (Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 
2002; Fiske, Cuddy, & Glick, 2007), there are two primary dimensions of ste-
reotype content: competence and warmth. These content dimensions com-
bine to form three basic forms of prejudice: paternalistic (when one is viewed 
as low on competence but high on warmth), envious (when one is viewed as 
high on competence but low on warmth), and contemptuous (when one is 
viewed as low on competence and warmth); high competence and warmth is 
typically reserved for one’s in-groups (Cuddy & Fiske, 2002).
Across many studies, older workers have been viewed as warm but in-
competent (Kroon, Van Selm, ter Hoeven, & Vliegenthart, 2016; Ng & 
Feldman, 2012) thereby commonly experiencing paternalistic forms of 
prejudice (Krings, Sczesny, & Kluge, 2011). The negative stereotypes asso-
ciated with age mean that older workers are perceived as less flexible, less 
interested in technology, less trainable, less active, less willing to change, 
and less motivated (e.g., Ng & Feldman, 2012; Perry et al., 2017). There 
are also positive stereotypes associated with older adults that impact how 
they are treated in the workplace. Specifically, older adults are positively 
stereotyped as friendly, warm, and dependable (Gordon & Arvey, 2004). 
The combination of the negative and positive stereotypes of older adults 
suggests that they are paternalistically thought of as “doddering but dear” 
(Cuddy & Fiske, 2002).

202    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Whether age stereotypes matter often depends on whether older work-
ers are in an age-salient situation (Marcus & Fritzsche, 2015). This idea has 
its roots in social identity theory in that we have ‘‘situational selves’’: our cat-
egory membership changes depending on which of the many social catego-
ries we belong to is made salient (Fiske, 1998; Pettigrew, 1981). When age is 
made salient, people are characterized as ‘‘old’’ or ‘‘young” and other social 
group characteristics are ignored (Kruse & Schmitt, 2006). As expected, 
when age-based stereotypes are negative, older workers in age salient situa-
tions are likely to be discriminated against. Age can be made more salient 
by asking people to compare older and younger workers (e.g., Cleveland, 
Festa, & Montgomery, 1988) or by varying the age diversity of the workplace 
(where age is more salient when there are fewer older workers). Recently, 
Reeves, Fritzsche, Dhanani, and Marcus (2015) showed that older workers 
perceived more age discrimination when they occupied jobs dominated by 
younger workers and when they had younger supervisors. Older workers 
reported that having colleagues who were typically much younger made 
them feel ‘‘behind schedule.’’ Casper, Rothermund, and Wentura (2011) 
found that when age-relevant stereotypes were emphasized, age became 
more salient. Diekman and Hirnisey (2007) found that older adults re-
ceived the lowest hireability evaluations relative to younger adults when ap-
plying for jobs in dynamic as opposed to stable companies, suggesting that 
age was made salient by activating the “inadaptability” stereotype. Thus, 
age becomes salient when a context is created in which older workers are 
a numerical minority in a particular job or by comparing older workers 
to jobs that require characteristics stereotypically associated with younger 
workers (Perry & Finkelstein, 1999). And when the context makes negative 
stereotypes regarding old age (incompetence, inadaptability) salient, older 
workers are most likely to be impacted.
As suggested, older worker stereotypes can have harmful effects. As Des-
mette and Gaillard (2008) point out, a large literature shows that “from the 
moment they are categorized as ‘older workers,’ individuals become poten-
tial targets for prejudice and discrimination related to aging” (p. 169). Old-
er workers are often denied job opportunities, training and development 
opportunities, the opportunity to advance, and even voice in decision mak-
ing. It is true that age is related to a decline in physical and mental abilities 
(e.g., Schieber & Kline, 1982; Laux, 1995; Salthouse, 1992), but the decline 
is gradual and greatly overestimated by stereotypes. Moreover, older work-
ers have been shown to be capable of compensating for their diminished 
capacities with a greater level of experience (Avolio, Waldman, McDaniel, 
1990). They engage in more organizational citizenship behaviors, have 
better attendance at work, and are less likely to engage in counterproduc-
tive behavior than younger workers (Ng & Feldman, 2008) thus making 
them valuable contributors to the workplace. In other words, systematic 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    203
stereotyping and prejudice (i.e., ageism) can often explain why older work-
ers are seen as less competent, trainable, and motivated. The result is that 
once people are labeled as older workers they become members of a stig-
matized group. Social identity theory suggests that if older workers feel de-
valued by this social identity they are likely to cope with that by withdrawing 
from the workforce (Tajfel & Turner, 1979). In addition to being subject to 
age stereotyping from others, older workers themselves may self-identify as 
an older worker, which can also have detrimental effects. Again, the most 
likely consequence of self-identifying as an older worker is withdrawal from 
work or the workplace as a way to avoid age-related stigmatization (Des-
mette & Gaillard, 2008).
To improve their self-image, social identity theory suggests that individu-
als use cognitive or behavioral strategies to move themselves out of the stig-
matized group or change the image of the entire group so that the group it-
self is no longer a stigmatized group. Retiring is one way that older workers 
move themselves out of the stigmatized group. Alternatively, older workers 
can withdraw by psychologically disengaging at work. More positive cop-
ing mechanisms include reigniting commitment to work in order to refute 
age stereotypes, redefining aging to be more positive, or competing with 
younger workers to try to change the image of older workers.
A key variable in which strategy is chosen is whether younger workers are 
open to the idea of valuing older workers regardless of age (termed inter-
group permeability). In their study of 352 private sector workers aged 50-59, 
Desmette and Gaillard (2008) found that intergroup impermeability and 
cognitive identification with the older worker group predicted early retire-
ment intentions, psychological disengagement from work, and intergenera-
tional competition. In other words, separatism led to negative work-related 
attitudes and intentions. The key implication for leaders interested in retain-
ing engaged older workers is to create a common group identity through 
the relationships that they develop with their subordinates and those that 
they foster between their subordinates. Workers of various age groups need 
to identify as part of a larger group with superordinate goals and have a com-
mon organizational identity rather than an age-based identity.
It can be challenging for leaders to create a common organizational 
identity that discourages age-based categorization processes that lead 
to negative age-discrimination climates. Yet negative age-discrimination 
climates can lead to poorer company performance. Kunze, Boehm, and 
Bruch (2013) suggest a relatively simple solution; use diversity-friendly HR 
policies and create top leaders who do not have negative age stereotypes. 
Specifically, as Kunze et al. describe, social exchange theory (Blau, 1964) 
suggests that organizational success depends on employees perceiving a fair 
and mutual exchange relationship. Using data from 147 companies, they 
found that organizational age diversity led to a negative age discrimination 

204    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
climate, which led to poorer company performance. They reasoned that as 
people in organizations perceive the emergence of age-based subgroups 
and age-based practices, a climate of age discrimination emerges through 
socialization and contagion, which leads workers to feel as though they are 
treated unfairly and makes them less engaged and committed to the suc-
cess of the organization. Thus they found that poorer age climates were 
associated with poorer organization performance. Importantly, however, 
this relationship was moderated by leaders’ personal age stereotypes and 
diversity-friendly HR practices. When top leaders did not have high nega-
tive age stereotypes and when organizations had diversity-friendly HR prac-
tices, the relation between age diversity and company performance was 
not significant. Once again this research highlights the important role of 
leaders in creating an age-friendly work environment. However this study 
was conducted at the organization level rather than the individual level, so 
details about how leaders interact with their subordinates to effect change 
were not included.
From a different line of research focused on what older workers do to 
successfully age at work more specific strategies can be offered to leaders 
interested in developing strong LMX relationships with their older sub-
ordinates. There are large individual differences in the rate of cognitive 
and physical declines associated with age (Hansson, DeKoekkoek, Neece, 
& Patterson, 1997), and when cognitive and physical declines impact job 
performance there are often relatively simple adjustments to the work en-
vironment that leaders can make to accommodate older workers. For ex-
ample, leaders can provide equal access to training throughout the work 
life of all employees while paying attention to the specific needs of old-
er employees such as more time to complete training. This may include 
the creation of training programs to update existing skills or acquire new 
skills as well as the adaptation of a variety of instructional methods to meet 
age-diverse trainees’ needs. While training leads to improved productivity 
and performance of employees in general, it also serves as a form of ac-
knowledgement that has a motivational effect, especially for older workers 
(Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013). Older workers themselves compensate 
for losses, as described by the theory of selective optimization with com-
pensation (SOC; Baltes & Baltes, 1990). SOC is a life span developmen-
tal model that has been linked to successful aging (e.g., Freund & Baltes, 
1998). According to SOC, people are aware of age-related declines and at-
tempt to conserve their waning abilities through selection, optimization, or 
compensation (Freund & Baltes, 2002). Selection is when older individuals 
make decisions that allow them to minimize resource losses. For example, 
aging might require a person to search for new goals or reconstruct their 
goal hierarchy in the face of failure. Compensation means that older work-
ers reduce the effects of age-related losses through reliance on resources 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    205
that they have in abundance; for example, by relying on technology or their 
wealth of job-related experience. Optimization is the process of garnering 
resource gains through personal development; for example, by returning 
to school or seeking training. Overall, using SOC strategies has been relat-
ed to subjective indicators of aging well such as satisfaction with aging, lack 
of agitation, absence of emotional and social loneliness, with compensation 
and optimization found to be the most important predictors of successful 
aging (Freund & Baltes, 1998; 1999). Freund and Baltes (2002) also found 
that middle-aged individuals used the most SOC strategies compared with 
individuals in both young adulthood and late adulthood, which suggests 
that middle-aged people have less need to explore many different path-
ways in their lives and careers than younger people and age-related declines 
in physical and cognitive resources affect the expression of SOC strategies 
into old age.
More recent work has focused on how SOC strategies apply specifically 
at work and to workplace outcomes (e.g., Yeung & Fung, 2009). Zacher 
and Frese (2011), for example, examined the relation between use of SOC 
strategies and occupational future time perspective, the perception of how 
much time one has left at work and beliefs about how many new goals and 
opportunities one has left. Not surprisingly, as people age both aspects of 
occupational future time perspective decrease. More interestingly when 
work is more complex (requiring high-level skills and is mentally demand-
ing) and offers high control over decisions at work, older workers are able 
to maintain a focus on opportunities. Zacher and Frese found that use of 
SOC strategies were particularly helpful for older workers who were in less 
complex, low control jobs where the SOC strategies helped refocus work-
ers on future opportunities at work when the jobs themselves were not de-
signed to provide many opportunities to grow and learn. Zacher and Frese 
argue that “Employees who use SOC strategies adapt more successfully to 
various changes in personal resources and work-related demands, and en-
gage more often in autonomous goal setting, goal adaptation to external 
circumstances, and goal pursuit” (p. 307). This enhances workers percep-
tion of future opportunities at work, which they found to be important for 
successful aging at work. These findings are consistent with those of Yeung 
and Fung (2009) who examined the use of SOC strategies in a sample of 
salespeople. They found that the use of SOC strategies was not especially 
helpful for younger workers nor were they especially helpful for older work-
ers when their job tasks were perceived to be highly difficult. However, use 
of SOC strategies was associated with better sales performance for older 
workers when the task was perceived as low or moderate in difficulty. Like 
Zacher and Frese’s (2011) findings, this study suggests that SOC strategies 
can be especially useful for successful aging at work when the job itself is 
not enriched.

206    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Perhaps using SOC strategies helps older workers maintain or increase 
physical or cognitive resources. The idea of increasing physical and cogni-
tive resources as we age runs counter to the idea that the aging process 
is characterized only by loss (Lerner & Gignac, 1992) and that the series 
of cognitive, physical, and social losses results in increasing levels of stress 
(Labouvie-Vief, 1985). This research demonstrates that older workers can 
remain active and productive within the workplace and actively engage in 
cognitive and physical resource management and coping behaviors (Hob-
foll, 1988). Leaders can support older employees in their pursuit of better 
fitting work by providing equal opportunities to progress within the orga-
nization regardless of age and by relocating employees as a response to 
performance constraints to maintain proper job fit through lateral career 
moves. The expected benefits of such practices include increased perfor-
mance, intrinsic job motivation, and prevention of health issues resulting 
from unfitness for work, and assuring employment until retirement age 
(Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013).
In addition to the SOC model, another important contribution from 
life-span development theory that can impact leaders’ perceptions of subor-
dinates is socioemotional selectivity theory (Carstensen, 1995). According 
to socioemotional selectivity theory, people select goals depending on their 
perceptions of time. Older individuals are more likely to adopt a shorter 
time frame for goals due to seeing time as more limited (a “time till death” 
perspective) than do younger people. From a goal orientation perspective, 
older individuals are therefore more likely to take a mastery-avoidance goal 
orientation in which they focus on not losing their skills, not performing 
worse than before, and not stagnating. In fact, one study (de Lange, Van 
Yperen, Van der Heijden, & Bal, 2010) found that the prototypical goal 
orientation of older workers in their study of 450 employees over age 65 
was a mastery-avoidance goal orientation. Understanding goal orientation 
is important, as mastery-approach more than mastery-avoidance goals have 
been linked to work engagement (the extent to which one experiences vig-
or, dedication, and absorption) and the meaning of work, which are both 
strongly linked to positive well-being and performance at work. In de Lange 
et al.’s study, as expected older workers with more of a mastery-approach 
(with a focus on intrapersonal standards of competence) scored highest 
on measures of work engagement and the social and personal meaning 
of work. Whereas those with more of a mastery-avoidance goal orientation 
scored lower on work engagement and social and personal meaning of 
work. Luckily, a good deal of research on goal orientation suggests that 
goal orientation is heavily influenced by situational factors (Payne, Young-
court, & Beaubie, 2007). Thus de Lange et al. suggest that leaders can help 
older workers stay focused on mastery-approach goals through emphasiz-
ing progress and improvement and accepting errors as part of the learning 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    207
process. Leaders can also lengthen the time horizons that they discuss with 
their older subordinates by investing in their training and development to 
develop new skills that can be applied to future work.
Another important aspect to older workers’ motivation is how age itself 
is perceived (Kooij, de Lange, Jansen, & Dikkers, 2008). There are different 
ways to conceptualize age and the different ways that people view age have 
different consequences for work motivation. Aging occurs in biological, so-
cial, and psychological functioning over time, and people with the same 
chronological age experience different rates of aging regarding health and 
job performance. Aging generally has a negative impact on motivation to 
work, but the nature of the impact varies according to how aging is concep-
tualized. For example, as people age functionally their self-efficacy tends to 
decrease, which leads people to want to avoid new and demanding tasks. 
Subjective age refers to how an individual acts, feels, and looks. As people 
age subjectively, others tend to stereotype them and therefore they are pro-
vided fewer developmental opportunities. Fewer developmental opportu-
nities creates a self-fulfilling prophecy by leading older workers to actually 
have outdated skills.
The personal beliefs that older workers hold regarding how others per-
ceive their age group impacts their ability to interact successfully with other 
age groups. Recent research suggests very different implications for suc-
cessful aging of thinking of older adults as envied seniors with high social 
status versus pitied seniors with low social status. When older people believe 
that their age group has lower social status and others view them in age-
stereotypical ways, they are more likely to suffer from anxiety, tension, and 
miscommunication and to believe they are targets of age discrimination 
(Vauclair, Lima, Abrams, Swift, & Bratt, 2016). Vauclair et al. also found 
that social norms that encourage people to be unprejudiced toward older 
people are associated with less perceived age discrimination. Thus even if 
personal attitudes are negative, institutions and societies can inhibit age 
prejudice through creating a social climate where age prejudice is discour-
aged. Clearly leaders’ relations with individual subordinates can go a long 
way toward promoting a positive age climate at work.
It is hoped that this section helps leaders understand the stereotypes of 
older workers and the realities of working with older workers. As people age, 
their work experience and job attitudes tends to improve while they experi-
ence gradual losses in some cognitive and physical abilities. Research shows 
that stereotypes tend to exaggerate the cognitive and physical declines asso-
ciated with aging, and thus older workers tend to be impacted negatively by 
the stigma associated with being identified as an “older worker.” Moreover, 
life-span theories suggest that aging brings with it changes in strategies in 
how work is approached, goal orientation, and motivation. If understood, 
leaders can use this information to develop strong LMX relationships 

208    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
through creating superordinate goals, providing support for use of SOC 
strategies, and providing opportunities that are more likely to lead older 
subordinates to adopt a mastery-approach achievement motivation.
CONNECTING WITH OLDER WORKERS
While older workers typically have higher job satisfaction than younger 
workers (Ghazzawi, 2011), it is important to note the risks associated with 
age differences between leaders and members on LMX and job satisfaction 
(Malangwasira, 2013). Recall that he found that as the age difference be-
tween the leader and the follower increased LMX quality decreased, which 
negatively affected job satisfaction. Job satisfaction is important as it has 
been linked to prosocial behavior at work, less counterproductive behavior, 
and other withdrawal behaviors (Bateman & Organ, 1983). Moreover, re-
search suggests that once older workers self-identify as “older,” their job at-
titudes decline leading to thoughts about withdrawal and retirement. What 
appears to combat this issue is to create an organizational climate that does 
not use age to distinguish between employees thereby supporting positive 
attitudes toward work (Desmette & Gaillard, 2008).
It is important to note that creating high-quality LMX relationships with 
all subordinates should be a priority for leaders. If leaders have different 
LMX relationships with followers and the reason for that is ambiguous or 
potentially attributable to demographic (or other non-work-related) char-
acteristics such as age, this can create feelings of exclusion and powerless-
ness. If differentiation in LMX quality within a group is due to differences 
in subordinate needs or the leader is focused on developing the strongest 
relationships with top performers, it may not be as harmful to the success of 
demographically-different others or the overall group performance (Nishii 
& Mayer, 2009). Moreover, the well-being of the leaders themselves can be 
negatively affected by differentiation of LMX quality within their groups 
(Bernerth & Hirschfeld, 2016). To avoid unfair distribution of LMX among 
subordinates, leaders should be encouraged by senior leadership (and giv-
en the tools and support) to get to know everyone with whom they work on 
a personal level, remove barriers for all employees, and refrain from using 
language that excludes some employees.
Changing demographic trends have reshaped workforce norms. Employ-
ees of all ages can now be found in all career stages and as a result younger 
supervisors with relatively older subordinates are becoming increasingly 
common (Burlacu, 2013). As today’s workplace adjusts with this new norm, 
it is not uncommon for older subordinates to have lower expectations of 
their younger supervisors, which can negatively impact subordinates’ rat-
ing of their supervisors’ performance and also lead to poorer leadership 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    209
behavior from their supervisors (Collins, Hair, Rocco, 2009). One the bright 
side, Collins, Hair, and Rocco suggest that developing high-quality LMX 
relationships with older subordinates helps mitigate the impact of errone-
ous age-related expectations. Perhaps the first step for younger leaders is 
educating them on this research to prepare them for possible hurdles and 
equip them with solutions. Likewise, older employees should be trained on 
reverse Pygmalion effects, which is if they have lower expectations of their 
younger supervisors this can lead to poorer leadership behavior from their 
supervisors. Clearly, research suggests that older employees can support 
positive LMX relationships through their own behaviors and expectations 
of younger supervisors.
To complement leaders’ efforts to develop high-quality LMX relation-
ships in an aging workforce, organizations should consider how to more 
broadly support successful aging at work. These efforts will provide indi-
vidual leaders with tools and ideas for supporting their older subordinates. 
Moreover, older workers may trust and respect their leaders’ LMX efforts 
if the larger organization climate is supportive of an age-diverse workforce. 
Workforce age management (Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013; Boehm, 
Kunze, & Bruch, 2014) has been shown empirically to increase organiza-
tional performance. It is a set of measures taken to mitigate the conse-
quences of aging and allow workers to stay productive in spite of age-related 
declines (Ciutiene & Railaite, 2015). Boehm, Schröder, and Kunze (2013) 
suggest strategies such as focusing on recruiting, training and lifelong 
learning, career management and redeployment, flexible working times 
and alternative work arrangements, health management and workplace ac-
commodations, performance measurement and remuneration, and transi-
tion to retirement activities.
A practical model for age management is the Balanced Scorecard de-
veloped by Voelpel and Streb (2010). In this model, the researchers iden-
tified five organizational action fields to manage the aging workforce. 
Those action fields included a managerial mindset toward older workers 
through which their capabilities are fostered and trusted, new knowledge 
management processes to harness the knowledge of older workers while 
taking their physical capabilities into consideration, health management 
practices to address safety and ergonomics, adaptation of inclusive human 
resource management practices, and work environment and physical tools. 
Similarly, Boehm, Schröder, and Kunze (2013) encourage leaders to foster 
employees’ long-term health and work ability by paying close attention to 
safe working conditions, health promotion programs, workplace accommo-
dations and ergonomics, psychological health programs, and a health ori-
ented culture within the organization. Health management and workplace 
accommodation practices can lessen performance differences between 
younger and older employees and reduce early retirement decisions as 

210    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
employees maintain productivity and the ability to work. Improved health 
can also reduce absenteeism and shorten recovery times.
Organizations can train and encourage SOC (selective optimization with 
compensation) strategies for life management (Freund & Baltes, 1998). Re-
call that the SOC model includes selecting domains to pursue, the optimi-
zation and allocation of internal and external resources to achieve goals, 
and the development of processes to compensate for possible loss of goal-
related resources in order to maintain functionality in targeted domains. 
Aging people who reported using life management strategies consistent 
with the SOC model also reported indicators of successful aging such as sat-
isfaction with one’s own aging, positive emotions, and the absence of loneli-
ness (Freund & Baltes, 1998). Organizations can encourage employees to 
pursue SOC related life management strategies through employee training 
programs that explain the different applications of the model at work and 
in the employee’s personal life.
As employees age their work-life balance needs and expectations may 
change. Major, Fletcher, Davis, and Germano (2008) found significant di-
rect effects of LMX and coworker support on work interference with family 
and indirect effects of work–family culture on work interference with family. 
These findings shed light on the importance of LMX in creating a climate 
where employees feel supported in pursuing a healthy work-life balance. 
This becomes increasingly important as older workers often have elder care 
and childcare responsibilities (“the sandwich” generation; Hammer & Neal, 
2008). The caregiving role especially impacts older working women. Flexible 
work hours is a common request of older workers that leaders may have the 
option to accommodate (Remery, Henkens, Schippers, & Ekamper, 2003). 
Allowing older employees flexible work schedules compliant with their 
changing needs and preferences as they age includes offering part-time em-
ployment, flexible starting times, working from home, job sharing, and sab-
batical systems. Boehm, Schröder, and Kunze (2013) suggest that companies 
using such practices stand to benefit from increased employee motivation 
and performance, better utilization of labor resources, and improved work-
life balance and employee health. In all cases communication is clearly key as 
the needs of employees change over time. Once leadership confirms that ide-
al conditions are made possible for older employees, an important practice 
to overcome age-related biases is to implement fair methods of performance 
evaluation and remuneration. Leaders can achieve fair and nondiscrimina-
tory assessment and rewarding of employees through defining or redefin-
ing performance standards and using standardized evaluation systems that 
reduce age bias. Seeking information from a variety of sources through 360 
degree evaluation for instance can also lessen the negative impact of age bias 
if present, and a pay-for-performance philosophy allows leaders to effectively 
reward performance gains (Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013).

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    211
Nilsson (2016) relates social aging to social inclusion, expectations, and 
a sense of identity and belonging within different positions and groups 
through the different phases of life. As such, older employees’ social aging 
experience can play a major role in their decision of whether to extend 
their working life or to retire. Nilsson found that the attitude of managers 
and organizations toward older employees along with family, leisure, and 
surrounding society to be influencing factors in an employee’s social ag-
ing experience. Doyle, McKee, and Sherriff (2012) also encouraged social 
engagement and emphasized the importance of social activity along with 
physical activity as factors supporting successful aging. The workplace can 
be isolating to older workers or enriching to their social lives. As part of 
these efforts, leaders can encourage their employees to volunteer in their 
areas of interest and ensure their work assignments allow the time for en-
gaging in volunteer activities. Leaders may also encourage their employees 
to participate in causes sponsored by the organization through corporate 
social responsibility initiatives. It has been shown that older employees can 
protect their psychological well-being and slow down the rate of mental 
health decline by engaging in low-level volunteering along with their full-
time work (Hao, 2008).
There is a variety of nontraditional ways in which older workers can con-
tribute to organizations given they have the appropriate experience. With 
their knowledge of the organization or the industry, they may be able to of-
fer consulting and mentoring roles to younger workers. Boehm, Schröder, 
and Kunze (2013) suggest recruiting older candidates for job openings to 
benefit from customer orientation through fit with age of a company’s old-
er customer groups. They also propose regular career talks and workshops 
for employees to ensure clear communication and understanding of man-
agement expectations and employee career goals. For employees who have 
no ambition or possibility for promotion, companies may offer alternative 
career models. For instance, in addition to lateral career moves, companies 
can also offer project work assignments and downshifting to less stressful 
but more fulfilling career roles such as coaching and mentoring that allow 
older employees to continue contributing to a company’s success through 
sharing their experience with less seasoned employees.
While recruiting for vacant positions, leaders can avoid potential age-based 
discrimination by providing equal or special access to jobs for older employ-
ees and eliminate direct or indirect discrimination based on the age of appli-
cants. This can be accomplished through creating age-neutral job advertise-
ments and descriptions, avoiding negative age-related stereotypes among HR 
personnel and hiring managers, and focusing on experience in interviews. 
Beyond the obvious benefits of enlarging the hiring pool, these recruitment 
practices lead to a diverse workforce, which in turn prevents groupthink and 
enhances problem solving (Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013).

212    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Numerous studies (as summarized by Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, & Ba-
chrack, 2000) have found that in order for organizations to thrive, they must 
have employees who engage in organizational citizenship behaviors support-
ing the social and contextual milieu of work. Older workers make great can-
didates for furthering the organization’s social support and organizational 
citizenship climate since they have the experience and the willingness to give 
back, as suggested by Erikson’s stages of psychosocial development particu-
larly the stage of generativity versus stagnation during which old adults aim to 
contribute to society and guide the next generation (Erikson, 1980), which 
makes such roles a great opportunity for both the organization and older 
workers (Paullin & Whetzel, 2012). Based on the contingency theories of 
leadership that focus on situationally contingent traits and behaviors (Jago, 
1982), organizations also stand to benefit from placing older workers in lead-
ership positions. This possibility opens the door for a variety of opportunities 
for older workers to engage in task forces or lead projects that can benefit 
from their strong ability to regulate emotions and maintain positivity.
Most importantly, engaging an older workforce requires a personalized 
approach between leaders and their subordinates. Leaders can tailor work-
place retention strategies by understanding the worker’s ability to physically 
and cognitively complete the work that needs to be done, the individual’s 
personal financial situation after retirement, the individual’s family situa-
tion, the individual’s and family member’s health, and the individual’s feel-
ings about being valued at work. As previously mentioned in this chapter, 
older workers themselves question their value so a really simple retention 
strategy is for leaders to make it very clear to older workers that they are 
personally valued by asking them to stay and giving them recognition and 
rewards (Paullin & Whetzel, 2012).
Finally, when the time comes for older employees to retire, a smooth 
transition to retirement can be attained through providing employees with 
different forms of gradual transition such as partial or phased retirement, 
trial retirements, or retirement with call-back arrangements. Companies 
may also make retirement workshops and counseling activities available to 
their employees to prepare them for retirement as they age. Such gradual 
retirement prevents sudden loss of knowledge within the company and al-
lows ample time for knowledge transfer to job successors. Keeping contact 
with retiring employees also allows companies to turn to them when special 
projects that require their skills arise (Boehm, Schröder, & Kunze, 2013).
CONCLUSION
The purpose of this chapter has been to summarize the literature on LMX 
in an aging workforce. As noted, there are surprisingly few studies that 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    213
directly examine LMX and age. Yet there is a large and growing literature 
on successful aging at work and on workplace ageism from which implica-
tions for LMX relations can be drawn. In conclusion, we present a few ideas 
for future research that may help answer some lingering questions about 
age and LMX.
Globally the workplace is aging but not every older worker is the same. 
Older workers come with diverse experience, capabilities, and social and 
personal needs. Moreover, older workers are diverse in terms of other de-
mographic characteristics. An older, White, male worker will likely have dif-
ferent experiences than an older, Black, female worker. Intersectionality 
poses an important challenge when researchers attempt to answer ques-
tions regarding LMX-age relationships, because age cannot be studied in 
isolation from other intersecting demographic characteristics (Marcus & 
Fritzsche, 2015, 2016).
The relational norm of age (Van der Heijden et al., 2010) clearly also 
needs to be examined. What is “old” depends on context. Age-typing of 
jobs (Reeves, Fritzsche, Dhanani, & Marcus, 2015) suggests that a young 
supervisor is normal in certain jobs thereby possibly eliminating the po-
tential negative effects of age differences in supervisor-subordinate LMX 
relationships. Furthermore, as people move in and out of careers and or-
ganizations, it is important to understand the impact on LMX relations 
by a young, external leader versus a young leader promoted from within 
the organization. And, we need to better understand the extent that gen-
erational differences in attitudes and experiences impact LMX relations 
in age-diverse dyads, as only one qualitative study was found on this topic.
Regarding work on age stereotyping as it applies directly to LMX rela-
tions, research suggests that age stereotypes are likely to impact the role-
taking phase of LMX relations (as described in the role episode model; 
Graen & Scandura, 1987). Yet, little work has been done to understand how 
initial age stereotyping then impacts the subsequent role-making and role-
routinization stages of LMX relations when leaders and members know 
more deep level characteristics of each other. Does the initial age stereo-
typing set the tone of the LMX relationship or are age stereotypes easily 
overcome as leaders and subordinates develop deeper relationships?
Truxillo and Burlacu (2016) offer several additional questions worth 
pursuing about the relation between LMX and age. For example, they rec-
ommend that research examine whether age-related personality changes 
prepare people for their roles as leaders and followers, what the expecta-
tions are from different age groups as they assume leadership roles, and if 
the ability of older individuals to regulate their emotions prepares them 
for leadership. As workers age, they experience changes in their motiva-
tion, goals, and career aspirations. Truxillo and Burlacu suggest that future 
research explore whether such changes in motivation impact the quality of 

214    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
LMX over time; how the aspirations of younger leaders impact their follow-
ers, and the LMX quality; and whether differences in career goals between 
leaders and members impact leader–member relationships.
All in all, the aging workforce in the United States and around the globe 
is bringing about exciting opportunities for researchers and organizational 
leaders alike. Worldwide, governments are dependent on workers staying in 
the workforce beyond traditional retirement ages. Organizations are expe-
riencing shortfalls in available new entrants to the workforce and due to liv-
ing longer lives, individuals often want and need to work beyond traditional 
retirement ages (Hannon, 2013), yet organizations are finding it difficult 
to retain valuable older workers (Paullin & Whetzel, 2012). Because LMX 
provides the social and emotional context in which employees feel valued 
and inspired to perform, the extent to which leaders develop strong LMX 
relations appears to be central to solving this problem (Gottfredson & Agui-
nis, 2016). Both leaders and members can benefit from understanding the 
challenges older workers face in the workplace and the solutions offered 
by current literature to mitigate the negative impact of those challenges. 
Building high-quality LMX relations certainly has the potential to help 
people successfully age at work thereby improving workplace outcomes for 
individuals, organizations, and ultimately societies as a whole.
REFERENCES
AARP (2013), AARP workforce profiles: Selected characteristics of us workers and non-work-
ers aged 40+. Washington, DC: Author.
Abu Bakar, H., Jian, G., Fairhurst, G., & Connaughton, S. L. (2011, May). The inter-
active effect of leader–member exchange agreement and relational demography on per-
formance ratings. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International 
Communication Association, Boston, MA.
Avolio, B. J., Waldman, D. A., & McDaniel, M. A. (1990). Age and work perfor-
mance in nonmanagerial jobs: The effects of experience and occupational 
type. Academy of Management Journal, 33(2), 407–422.
Bakar, H. A., Jian, G., Fairhurst, G. T., & Connaughton, S. L. (2011). The interactive 
effect of leader–member exchange agreement and relational demography on 
performance ratings. Conference Papers: International Communication Associa-
tion, 1–44.
Baltes, P. B., & Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on successful aging: 
The model of selective optimization with compensation. Successful Aging: Per-
spectives From the Behavioral Sciences, 1(1), 1–34.
Bateman, T. S., & Organ, D. W. (1983). Job satisfaction and the good soldier: The 
relationship between affect and employee “citizenship.” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 26(4), 587–595.
Benz, J. K., Sedensky, M., Tompson, T. N., & Agiesta, J. (2013). Working longer: 
Older Americans’ attitudes on work and retirement. Chicago, IL: The Associated 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    215
Press–NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. Retrieved from http://www.
apnorc.org/projects/Pages/working-longer-older-americans-attitudes-on-
work-and-retirement.aspx
Bernerth, J. B., & Hirschfeld, R. R. (2016). The subjective well-being of group lead-
ers as explained by the quality of leader–member exchange. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 27(4), 697–710. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2016.04.003
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction.
Boehm, S. A., Kunze, F., & Bruch, H. (2014). Spotlight on age-diversity climate: The 
impact of age-inclusive HR practices on firm-level outcomes. Personnel Psychol-
ogy, 67(3), 667–704.
Böehm, S. A., Schröder, H. S., & Kunze, F. (2013). Comparative age management: 
Theoretical perspective and practical implications. In J. Field, R. J. Burke, 
& C. L. Cooper (Eds.), The SAGE handbook on work, aging, and society (pp. 
211–237). Thousand Oakes, CA: SAGE.
Burlacu, G. (2013). Supervisor–subordinate directional age differences and em-
ployee reactions to formal performance feedback: Examining mediating and 
moderating mechanisms in a Chinese sample. (Dissertations and Theses, 
Portland State University, 2013).
Byrne, D. E. (1971). The attraction paradigm (Vol. 2). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socioemotional selectiv-
ity. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4(5), 151–156.
Casper, C., Rothermund, K., & Wentura, D. (2011). The activation of specific fac-
ets of age stereotypes depends on individuating information. Social Cognition, 
29(4), 393.
Chand, M., & Tung, R. L. (2014). The aging of the world’s population and its effects 
on global business. The Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(4), 409–429.
Ciutiene, R., & Railaite, R. (2015). Challenges of managing an aging workforce. 
Engineering Economics, 26(4), 391–397.
Cleveland, J. N., Festa, R. M., & Montgomery, L. (1988). Applicant pool composi-
tion and job perceptions: Impact on decisions regarding an older applicant. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 32(1), 112–125.
Collins, M., Hair, J., & Rocco, T. (2009). The older-worker-younger-supervisor dyad: 
A test of the reverse pygmalion effect. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 
20(1), 21–41.
Cuddy, A. J., & Fiske, S. T. (2002). Doddering, but dear: Process, content, and func-
tion in stereotyping of elderly people. In T. D.Nelson (Ed.), Ageism (pp. 3–26). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
de Lange, A. H., Van Yperen, N. W., Van der Heijden, B. I., & Bal, P. M. (2010). 
Dominant achievement goals of older workers and their relationship with 
motivation-related outcomes. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 77(1), 118–125.
Desmette, D., & Gaillard, M. (2008). When a “worker” becomes an “older worker”: 
The effects of age-related social identity on attitudes towards retirement and 
work. Career Development International, 13(2), 168–185.
Diekman, A. B., & Hirnisey, L. (2007). The effect of context on the silver ceiling: 
A role congruity perspective on prejudiced responses. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin. 33, 1353–1366.

216    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Doyle, Y., McKee, M., & Sherriff, M. (2012). A model of successful aging in British 
populations. European Journal of Public Health, 22(1), 71–76.
Epitropaki, O., & Martin, R. (1999). The impact of relational demography on the 
quality of leader–member exchanges and employees’ work attitudes and well-
being. Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 72(2), 237–240.
Erikson, E. H. (1980). On the generational cycle: An address. The International Jour-
nal of Psychoanalysis, 61(2), 213–224.
Fiske, S. T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T. Gilbert, S. 
T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 357–
411). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) ste-
reotype content: competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived 
status and competition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6), 878.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., & Glick, P. (2007). Universal dimensions of social cogni-
tion: Warmth and competence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2), 77–83.
Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (1998). Selection, optimization, and compensation as 
strategies of life management: correlations with subjective indicators of suc-
cessful aging. Psychology and Aging, 13(4), 531.
Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (2002). Life-management strategies of selection, opti-
mization and compensation: Measurement by self-report and construct valid-
ity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(4), 642.
Freund, A. M., Li, K. Z. H., & Baltes, P. B. (1999). Successful development and 
aging: The role of selection, optimization, and compensation. In J. Brandt-
städter & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Action & self-development: Theory and research 
through the life span (pp. 401–434). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gellert, F. J., & Schalk, R. (2011). The influence of age on perceptions of relation-
ship quality and performance in care service work teams. Employee Relations, 
34(1), 44–60.
Gellert, F. J., & Schalk, R. (2012). Age-related attitudes: the influence on relation-
ships and performance at work. Journal of Health Organization and Manage-
ment, 26(1), 98–117.
Ghazzawi, I. (2011). Does age matter in job satisfaction? The case of U.S. informa-
tion technology professionals. Journal of Organizational Culture, Communica-
tions and Conflict, 15(1), 25.
Gordon, R. A., & Arvey, R. D. (2004). Age bias in laboratory and field settings: A 
meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(3), 468–492.
Gottfredson, R. K., & Aguinis, H. (2016). Leadership behaviors and follower per-
formance: Deductive and inductive examination of theoretical rationales 
and underlying mechanisms. Journal of Organizational Behavior. doi:10.1002/
job.2152.
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. A. (1987). Toward and psychology of dyadic organiz-
ing. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior 
(Vol. 9, pp. 175–208). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Green, S. G., Anderson, S. E., & Shivers, S. L. (1996). Demographic and organiza-
tional influences on leader–member exchange and related work attitudes. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 66(2), 203–214.

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    217
Haeger, D. L., & Lingham, T. (2013). Intergenerational collisions and leadership 
in the 21st century. Journal of Intergenerational Relationships, 11(3), 286–303.
Hammer, L. B., & Neal, M. B. (2008). Working sandwiched-generation caregivers: 
Prevalence, characteristics, and outcomes. The Psychologist-Manager Journal, 
11(1), 93–112.
Hannon, K. (2013, January 25). Why older workers can’t be ignored. Forbes. Re-
trieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/kerryhannon/2013/01/25/why 
-older-workers-cant-be-ignored/#3975afcf8b7b
Hansson, R. O., DeKoekkoek, P. D., Neece, W. M., & Patterson, D. W. (1997). Suc-
cessful aging at work: Annual review, 1992–1996: The older worker and transi-
tions to retirement. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 51(2), 202–233.
Hao, Y. (2008). Productive activities and psychological well-being among older 
adults. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sci-
ences, 63(2), S64–S72. doi:10.1093/geronb/63.2.S64
Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., & Bell, M. P. (1998). Beyond relational demography: 
Time and the effects of surface–and deep-level diversity on work group cohe-
sion. Academy of Management Journal, 41(1), 96–107.
Hobfoll, S. E. (1988). The ecology of stress. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Jago, A. G. (1982). Leadership: Perspectives in theory and research. Management 
Science, 28(3), 315–336.
Joseph, D. L., & Newman, D. A. (2010). Emotional intelligence: An integrative me-
ta-analysis and cascading model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(1), 54.
Kennedy, J. C. (2002). Leadership in Malaysia: Traditional values, international out-
look. The Academy of Management Executive, 16(3), 15–26.
Knottnerus, J. D. (1997). The theory of structural ritualization. Advances in Group 
Processes, 14, 257–279.
Kooij, D., de Lange, A., Jansen, P., & Dikkers, J. (2008). Older workers’ motivation 
to continue to work: Five meanings of age: A conceptual review. Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, 23(4), 364–394.
Krings, F., Sczesny, S., & Kluge, A. (2011). Stereotypical inferences as mediators of 
age discrimination: The role of competence and warmth. British Journal of 
Management, 22(2), 187–201.
Kroon, A. C., van Selm, M., ter Hoeven, C., & Vliegenthart, R. (2016). Dealing with 
an aging workforce: Locating threats and opportunities in corporate media. 
Educational Gerontology, 42(12), 818–834.
Kruse, A., & Schmitt, E. (2006). A multidimensional scale for the measurement of 
agreement with age stereotypes and the salience of age in social interaction. 
Ageing and Society, 26(03), 393–411.
Kunze, F., Boehm, S., & Bruch, H. (2013). Organizational performance conse-
quences of age diversity: Inspecting the role of diversity-friendly HR policies 
and top managers’ negative age stereotypes. Journal of Management Studies, 
(3), 413–442.
Labouvie-Vief, G. (1985). Intelligence and cognition. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie 
(Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of aging (Vol. 2, pp. 500–530). New York, NY: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Laux, L. (1995). Aging techniques: Research techniques in human engineering. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

218    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Lawrence, B. S. (1987). An organizational theory of age effects. Research in the Sociol-
ogy of Organizations, 5, 37–71.
Lawrence, B. S. (1988). New wrinkles in the theory of age: Demography, norms, 
and performance ratings. Academy Of Management Journal, 31(2), 309–337. 
doi:10.2307/256550
Lerner, M. J., & Gignac, M. A. (1992). Is it coping or is it growth? A cognitive-
affective model of contentment in the elderly. In L. Montada, S. Filipp, & 
M. J. Lerner (Eds.), Life crises and experience of loss in adulthood (pp. 321–337). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Major, D. A., Fletcher, T. D., Davis, D. D., & Germano, L. M. (2008). The influence 
of work–family culture and workplace relationships on work interference with 
family: A multilevel model. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29(7), 881–897.
Malangwasira, T. E. (2013). Demographic differences between a leader and follow-
ers tend to inhibit leader-follower exchange levels and job satisfaction. Journal 
of Organizational Culture, Communication and Conflict, 17(2), 63.
Marcus, J., & Fritzsche, B. A. (2015). One size doesn’t fit all: Toward a theory on 
the intersectional salience of ageism at work. Organizational Psychology Review, 
5(2), 168–188.
Marcus, J., & Fritzsche, B. A. (2016). The cultural anchors of age discrimination 
in the workplace: A multilevel framework. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2(2), 
217–229.
Minton-Eversole, T. (2012, April 9). Concerns grow over workforce retirements and skills 
gaps. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/hr-topics/
talent-acquisition/Pages/WorkforceRetirementandSkillGaps.aspx
Newcombe, M. J., & Ashkanasy, N. M. (2002). The role of affect and affective con-
gruence in perceptions of leaders: An experimental study. The Leadership 
Quarterly, 13(5), 601–614.
Ng, T. W., & Feldman, D. C. (2008). Can you get a better deal elsewhere? The ef-
fects of psychological contract replicability on organizational commitment 
over time. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73(2), 268–277.
Ng, T. W., & Feldman, D. C. (2012). Evaluating six common stereotypes about older 
workers with meta-analytical data. Personnel Psychology, 65(4), 821–858.
Nilsson, K. (2016). Conceptualization of aging in relation to factors of importance 
for extending working life: A review. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 
44(5), 490–505. doi:10.1177/1403494816636265
Nishii, L. H., & Mayer, D. M. (2009). Do inclusive leaders help to reduce turnover 
in diverse groups? The moderating role of leader–member exchange in the 
diversity to turnover relationship. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(6), 1412.
Paullin, C., & Whetzel, D. L. (2012). Retention strategies and older workers. In 
W. C. Borman & J. W. Hedge (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of work and aging 
(pp. 392–418). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Payne, S. C., Youngcourt, S. S., & Beaubien, J. M. (2007). A meta-analytic exami-
nation of the goal orientation nomological net. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
92(1), 128–150.
Perry, E. L., & Finkelstein, L. M. (1999). Toward a broader view of age discrimina-
tion in employment-related decisions: A joint consideration of organizational 

Leader–Member Relations in an Aging Workforce    219
factors and cognitive processes. Human Resource Management Review, 9(1), 
21–49.
Perry, E. L., Golom, F. D., Catenacci, L., Ingraham, M. E., Covais, E. M., & Molina, 
J. J. (2016). Talkin’ ’bout your generation: The impact of applicant age and 
generation on hiring-related perceptions and outcomes. Work, Aging and Re-
tirement, 3(2), 186–199.
Pettigrew, T. F. (1981). Extending the stereotype concept. In D. L. Hamilton (Ed.), 
Cognitive processes in stereotyping and intergroup behavior (pp. 303–332). Hills-
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G. (2000). Organiza-
tional citizenship behaviors: A critical review of the theoretical and empirical 
literature and suggestions for future research. Journal of Management, 26(3), 
513–563.
Reeves, M., Fritzsche, B., Dhanani, L., & Marcus, J. (2015, April). A survivor’s guide 
to age discrimination. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Philadelphia, PA.
Remery, C., Henkens, K., Schippers, J., & Ekamper, P. (2003). Managing an aging 
workforce and a tight labor market: Views held by Dutch employers. Popula-
tion Research and Policy Review, 22(1), 21–40.
Riordan, C. M. (2000). Relational demography within groups: Past developments, 
contradictions, and new directions. In Research in personnel and human resourc-
es management (pp. 131–173). Bingley, England: Emerald Group.
Salthouse, T. A. (1992). Why do adult age differences increase with task complexity? 
Developmental Psychology, 28(5), 90.
Schieber, F., & Kline, D. W. (1982). Age and the discrimination of visual successive-
ness. Experimental Aging Research, 8(3), 159–161.
Shore, L. M., Cleveland, J. N., & Goldberg, C. B. (2003). Work attitudes and deci-
sions as a function of manager age and employee age. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 88(3), 529.
 Shore, L. M., & Goldberg, C. B. (2005). Age discrimination in the workplace. In R. 
L. Dipboye & A. Colella  (Eds.), Discrimination at work: The psychological  and 
organizational bases (pp. 203–225). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Smith, W. J., & Harrington, K. V. (1994). Younger supervisor-older subordinate dy-
ads: A relationship of cooperation or resistance? (Part 1). Psychological Reports, 
74(3), 803–812. doi:10.2466/pr0.1994.74.3.803
Sonnenfeld, J. A. (1991). The hero’s farewell: What happens when CEOs retire. New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. The 
Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, 33(47), 74.
The World Bank Group. (n.d.). Age dependency ratio (% of working–age population). 
Retrieved November 07, 2016, from http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SP.POP.DPND
Truxillo, D. M., & Burlacu, G. (2016). Does age matter to LMX and its outcomes? A 
review and future research directions. In T. N. Bauer, B. Erdogan, T. N. Bauer, 
B. Erdogan (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of leader–member exchange (pp. 397–
411). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

220    B. A. FRITZSCHE and G. BAZ
Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A., III. (1992). Being different: Relational 
demography and organizational attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 
37, 549–579.
Tsui, A. S., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1989). Beyond simple demographic effects: The im-
portance of relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of 
Management Journal, 32(2), 402–423.
Van der Heijden, B. I., Scholarios, D., Van Der Schoot, E., Jedrzejowicz, P., Bozio-
nelos, N., Epitropaki, O., . . . , Indic@ tor Study Group. (2010). Supervisor-
subordinate age dissimilarity and performance ratings: The buffering effects 
of supervisory relationship and practice. The International Journal of Aging and 
Human Development, 71(3), 231–258.
Vauclair, C. M., Lima, M. L., Abrams, D., Swift, H. J., & Bratt, C. (2016). What do 
older people think that others think of them, and does it matter? The role 
of meta-perceptions and social norms in the prediction of perceived age dis-
crimination. Psychology and Aging, 31(7), 699.
Vecchio, R. P. (1993). The impact of differences in subordinate and supervi-
sor age on attitudes and performance. Psychology and Aging, 8(1), 112–119. 
doi:10.1037/0882-7974.8.1.112
Voelpel, S. C., & Streb, C. K. (2010). A balanced scorecard for managing the aging 
workforce. Organizational Dynamics, 39(1), 84–90.
Walter, F., & Scheibe, S. (2013). A literature review and emotion-based model of age 
and leadership: New directions for the trait approach. The Leadership Quar-
terly, 24(6), 882–901.
Yeung, D. Y., & Fung, H. H. (2009). Aging and work: How do SOC strategies contrib-
ute to job performance across adulthood? Psychology and Aging, 24(4), 927.
Zacher, H., & Frese, M. (2011). Maintaining a focus on opportunities at work: The 
interplay between age, job complexity, and the use of selection, optimiza-
tion, and compensation strategies. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 32(2), 
291–318.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 221–242
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
221
CHAPTER 8
SOME OF MY BEST FRIENDS 
AT WORK ARE MILLENNIALS
Leader–Member Exchange in the Face 
of Evolving Generational Diversity 
in the Workplace
Daniel P. Gullifor, Lori L. Tribble, and Claudia C. Cogliser
Texas Tech University
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this study is to explore leader–member exchange across 
baby boomer, Generation X, and Millennial generations. A total of 132 U.S. 
employees were interviewed with 22 leaders and 22 followers of each gen-
eration. These interviews were coded for patterns of action and interaction. 
Our analyses produced seven themes. We found that Gen X workers believe 
work is less important than both baby boomers and Millennials. Differences 
between generations were found in perceptions regarding leader–member 
exchange (LMX) and its four dimensions: affect, loyalty, contribution, and 
professional respect. Gen Xers were intent upon their followers following 
directions and simply doing what they are told. Baby boomers and Millenni-
als exhibited more interest in a follower’s exhibition of independence and 

222    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
the individual’s ability to give and receive feedback. Our data showed little 
evidence from the Millennial transcripts that supports entitled/narcissistic 
tendencies. We found little evidence of ill will toward Millennials from the 
baby boomers, but some evidence from the Gen Xers. Baby boomers were 
more willing to work with Millennials than Gen Xers were, stating excite-
ment for the opportunity to learn from those who are young and eager to 
have more experiences. Many baby boomers also preferred to have younger 
leaders. We believe this is the first study of LMX across multiple generations, 
and we offer that understanding the characteristics of the Millennial genera-
tion and how they lead and wish to be led is a critical step in managing the 
way business is conducted in today’s fast-paced and digital environment such 
that all generations may thrive at work.
What we’ve seen is that every single generation enters the workforce and feels like 
they’re a unique generation, and the generation that’s one or two ahead of them looks 
back and says, “Who are these weird, strange kids coming into the workforce with 
their attitudes of entitlement and not wanting to fit in?” . . . It’s a cycle that’s been 
repeated every 10 to 15 years for the last 50 years.
—Laszlo Bock 
Head of human resources at Google (quoted in Manjoo, 2016)
Recently, the Millennial generation has moved ahead of the baby boomers 
as the nation’s largest living generation, and this generation’s population 
is expected to peak in 2036 at 82.1 million (Fry, 2016; Pew Research Cen-
ter, 2010). This expansion of the Millennial generation and its impact on 
the world is demonstrated by the fact that by the year 2025, Millennials 
will comprise 75% of the U.S. workforce. Echoing the public’s fascination 
with the meteoric rises of prominent c-suite Millennials such as Mark Zuck-
erberg of Facebook, Ben Silbermann and Evan Sharp of Pinterest, Kevin 
Systrom and Mike Krieger of Instagram, and Drew Houston and Arash Fer-
dowsi of Dropbox, most employees born after 1980 will begin their careers 
with bosses who are Millennials just like themselves (Watkins & Neal, 2015).
While much has been reported in the popular media regarding Millen-
nials and their sense of entitlement and narcissistic tendencies (Manjoo, 
2016), little scholarly work explores this growing generation’s attitudes and 
behaviors about leadership and leader-follower dynamics. The purpose of 
our qualitative study is to explore Millennials and leader-follower relations 
from a diversity perspective. Specifically, our focus is on how Millennials 
may differ from the generations who entered the workforce before them in 
their understanding of leader-follower relations as well as an exploration of 
perceptions that previous generations may hold about Millennials as either 
leaders or followers.

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    223
The leader–member exchange (LMX) model of leadership (Graen & 
Scandura, 1987; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) is particularly fruitful for explor-
ing generational diversity in the workplace because of its explicit focus on 
leader–follower relationships and the quality of the relationship that de-
velops through the dyadic role-taking, role-making, and role-routinization 
processes (Graen & Scandura, 1987). LMX theory proposes that social ex-
changes not only form the basis for leader-follower relationships to develop 
(e.g., Cropanzano & Mitchell, 2005), but also acknowledges that these per-
ceptions are not always shared (e.g., Sin, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2009).
Research regarding the similarity of leaders and followers within the 
dyad and its impact on relationship quality has been equivocal. Some stud-
ies (e.g., Turban & Jones, 1988) have found that similarity is related to high-
er LMX, while others have found no effects despite similar ratings of LMX 
(e.g., Matkin & Barbuto, 2012). To our knowledge, there is no study that 
explores LMX and its processes explicitly across multiple generations with 
a specific emphasis on Millennials.
We ground our research on LMX and generational differences in so-
cial identity theory (Ashforth & Mael, 1989), which posits that individuals 
will engage in behaviors that are congruent with salient aspects of their 
identities, and with higher levels of organizational identification they will 
behave in ways that benefit the organization and its members (e.g., Ash-
ford & Barton, 2007). Unlike other generations Millennials are “digital na-
tives,” a term coined by Mark Prensky (2001) to refer to the first generation 
to grow up surrounded by and immersed in the tools and toys of digital 
technology. Although the Gen Xers and baby boomers who were not born 
into the language of computers, video games, and the Internet may adopt 
the technology of the digital world (therefore making them “digital immi-
grants”), their feet may still be rooted in aspects of their own generation. 
For example, digital immigrant behavior would be calling a colleague into 
your office to view something interesting outside of your window, rather 
than just Snapchatting a video of this through your mobile device.
There are a number of intended contributions of our research. First, we 
seek to establish whether perceptions of the dimensions of LMX (e.g., af-
fect, loyalty, contribution, and professional respect) (Liden & Maslyn, 
1998) remain consistent across generations. By taking this parsimonious 
approach we attempt to not only ascertain if generational differences in 
perceptions regarding LMX relationships exist, but to also explore what 
some of these specific distinctions might be. These insights could have ex-
tensive theoretical and practical implications. Should the dimensions of 
LMX take on different meanings across generations, the theory’s ability to 
make explanations and understand complex phenomena would be altered. 
We would also see shifts such as differing needs for loyalty from the dyadic 

224    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
partner in the leader-follower dynamic, which would lead to alternative at-
titudes and behaviors in the workplace.
Second, we explore the relationships of generational differences with 
the LMX dimensions and revisit existing boundary conditions of LMX. 
Bacharach (1989) discusses the importance of the articulation of the as-
sumptions made by theory (e.g., time, value, space) so as to avoid, among 
other outcomes, overgeneralization and misapplication of the theory. 
While work has been done to reveal the boundaries of LMX (Dulebohn, 
Bommer, Liden, Brouer, & Ferris, 2012), these boundary conditions have 
not been approached with regard to the potentially differing dimensions 
produced by generational differences. These differences may influence the 
boundaries of LMX and thus its applicability across generations.
Finally, as more Millennials enter the workforce most do so by assum-
ing managerial positions (Watkins & Neal, 2015). As such, there is a need 
to examine the cross-generational differences and their impact on leader-
follower interactions (Lyons & Kuron, 2014). Understanding both the de-
velopment and the outcomes of the LMX relationship that is composed of 
individuals from differing generations will provide insights into the theo-
retical underpinnings of LMX that will guide its continued development.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Drawing from the specific management literature on LMX and the broader 
sociology, psychology, government, and management research streams on 
generations, we propose the following research questions to direct our ex-
ploration. Due to space limitations, we have not fully outlined the literature 
and theory from which these questions derived but have included citations 
to specific work that has help guide our development of these questions. 
Specifically, we ask:
•	 Will the four dimensions of LMX be consistent across different 
generations? Do the values of Millennials play a role in how they 
view the LMX dimensions? (Chou, 2012; Graen & Grace, 2015; Har-
rison & Klein, 2007; Twenge, Campbell, Hoffman, & Lance, 2010; 
Twenge, Konrath, Foster, Campbell, & Bushman, 2008)
•	 Does technology play a differential role in LMX development for 
Millennials than for other generations? Does LMX development 
rely on face-to-face communication with Millennials in a similar 
fashion as it does with Generation X and Baby Boomer leaders and 
followers or is it less relevant? (Balda & Mora, 2011)
•	 Do narcissism and entitlement play a role in LMX development with 
a Millennial leader or follower? Are narcissism and entitlement truly 

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    225
part of the Millennial’s interpretation of leadership, or are those 
factors more of an urban myth? (Galvin, Lange, & Ashforth, 2015; 
Horvath & Morf, 2009; Kernis & Sun, 1994; Westerman, Bergman, 
Bergman, & Daly, 2012).
•	 Do cross-generational LMX relationships develop differently than 
within-generational LMX relationships? If so, how (e.g., time, qual-
ity, etc.)? Can managers develop LMX across generations and not 
alienate other generational groups? (Graen & Schiemann, 2012; 
Randolph-Seng et al., in press; Sin, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2009).
•	 Does LMX need to develop at a more rapid pace in the organization 
for Millennials to be content? (Campione, 2015; Twenge et al., 2010).
METHOD AND PARTICIPANTS
The present study was guided by descriptive phenomenology (Porter, 1998) 
to capture the “essence” of an individual’s experience relevant to a particu-
lar phenomenon. By this process, it is thought that the researcher would be 
able to capture a participant’s consciousness of the phenomenon of inter-
est (e.g., phenomena of being a Millennial follower who is supervised by a 
baby boomer). The methodological guidelines and analysis techniques of 
descriptive phenomenology developed by Porter (1998) produce two dis-
tinct aspects of the phenomena of interest, (a) lived experience and (b) 
life world context, which is the focus of the present study. Lived experience 
data reflect what the participant thinks about and “does” (intentions) with 
the experience. Life world context refers to data reflecting participants’ 
perceptions of their social environment including both micro and macro 
levels. For example, family members, friends, leadership, followers, and co-
workers’ comments, reactions, and behaviors as well as broader messages/
assumptions in culture (e.g., media, holidays) about leader-follower rela-
tions are all considered life world context data. Following Gioia, Corley, and 
Hamilton (2013), we wanted to explore “concepts” of leader-follower rela-
tionships across generations—“a more general, less well-specified notion 
capturing qualities that describe or explain a phenomenon of theoretical 
interest” (Gioia et al., 2013, p. 16).
The study included 132 individuals; the sample was 48.24% male. Demo-
graphic characteristics of the informants across leader/follower and gener-
ation are identified in Table 8.1. Participants were recruited through snow-
ball sampling (Miles & Huberman, 1994) by graduate business students in 
a large southwestern university as part of a class assignment.

226    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
PROCEDURE
Twenty-two MBA students in a summer term graduate organizational behav-
ior class each conducted structured interviews of six currently working par-
ticipants over a two-week period for a team class project on organizational 
behavior across generations. Each student completed six, 27-question inter-
views of both a leader (who supervised at least three people) and a follower 
from the Millennial generation (born during or after 1980), Generation 
X (born between 1965 and 1979), and the baby boomer generation (born 
between 1946 and 1964) as part of the course project. The six interviews 
were transcribed by each student and compiled with the transcriptions of 
their three to five person teams. A paper was completed by each team that 
compared and contrasted the interview results of the Millennial, Genera-
tion X, and baby boomer leaders and followers.
The interview protocol used for the assignment was originally crafted by 
the author team before the class and is provided in Table 8.2.
DATA ANALYSES
Upon completion of the class and submission of grades, these 132 narra-
tives were then read and analyzed by the first and second author separately 
for patterns of action and interaction (Strauss & Corbin, 1994). To facilitate 
the data analysis process, the authors employed the R-based qualitative data 
TABLE 8.1  Participants and Demographics
Generation
Employee
(Nonsupervisory)
Leader
(Supervises > 3 people)
Baby Boomer (born 
between 1946 and 1964)
n = 44
Males = 52.27%
Mean age = 57.64 years
Boomer Employee
n = 22
Males = 45.45%
Mean age = 57.64 years
Boomer Leader
n = 22
Males = 59.09%
Mean age = 57.63 years
Generation X (born 
between 1965 and 1979)
n = 44
Males = 42.45%
Mean age = 42.95 years
Generation X Employee
n = 22
Males = 38.10%
Mean age = 42.77 years
Generation X Leader
n = 22
Males = 52.38%
Mean age = 43.14 years
Millennial (born after 1980)
n = 44
Males = 50.00%
Mean age = 26.09 years
Millennial Employee
n = 22
Males = 42.86%
Mean age = 24.41 years
Millennial Leader
n = 22
Males = 57.14%
Mean age = 27.77 years
Note: N = 132, Males = 48.24%, Mean age = 42.06 years

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    227
TABLE 8.2  Interview Questions
1.	In what type of industry are you employed?
2.	What is your dream job (that is feasible)? Is this it? What are some responsibilities you 
have in your current job?
3.	Tell me about a time you were particularly motivated at work? What motivated you 
specifically in this particular instance? Were you more or less successful in this instance?
4.	Tell me about a time when you felt overwhelmed at work. How did you handle this 
scenario? What would you change about how you handled it?
5.	Tell me about a time when you felt bored at work. How did you handle this scenario? 
What would you change about how you handled it?
6.	On a scale of 1–10, how important is work to you when asked to define who you are as 
a person. What other spheres of life rank ahead of work? What other spheres rank 
behind work?
7.	Tell me about your worst leader or boss with whom you were involved. What didn’t you 
like about this leader? How did this leader make you feel about both yourself and 
your work? How soon did you know you didn’t like this leader?
8.	Tell me about your best leader or boss. What did you like about this leader? How did 
this leader make you feel about both yourself and your work? How soon did you know 
you liked this leader?
9.	Have you ever taken a job or left a job based on your relationship with a leader or boss?
10.	 How has the development and advancement of technology and social media affected 
your relationships at work or school, especially with your leader or boss, both during 
work and non-work times?
11.	 If you could choose your leader or boss, would you select a leader that is younger than 
you, the same age as you, or older than you? Why would you make this selection?
12.	 If you could select the people who work for you, would you select people that are 
younger than you, the same age as you, or older than you? Why would you make this 
selection?
13.	 Describe the ideal leader.
14.	 Describe the ideal follower.
15.	 Do you think a leader should suppress their emotions and moods to be effective? Why 
or why not?
16.	 What do you think is the biggest challenge in leading a diverse workforce? What can 
leaders do to address this challenge?
17.	 What do you think satisfies people on the job the most?
18.	 Why do people quit jobs most often?
19.	 If you make a bad first impression in an interview, what would you try to do to change it?
20.	 Do you think that impression management is important at work? Would employees 
react positively, negatively, or neutral to impression management by their boss? 
[Impression management is a set of behaviors that people use to protect their self-
image or change the way they are seen by others (or both)]
21.	 Do you think it is important for employees to participate in setting their own goals? 
Why or why not?
(continued)

228    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
analysis (RQDA; Huang, 2012). Consistent with descriptive phenomenol-
ogy, the interview guide contained enough questions so that the partici-
pant had the opportunity to more fully share his or her experiences thus 
minimizing the researcher “imposing” preconceived ideas/parameters on 
participants. Additionally, following this same line of thinking, the first and 
second authors “bracketed” (i.e., set aside knowledge and experiences with 
the phenomena of interest; Porter, 1995).
Despite the considerable attention garnered by generational differenc-
es, the support for differences observed between generations is indistinct. 
Accordingly, we adopted an inductive approach that would allow for the 
emergence of themes within the data. Previous studies that had adopted 
an inductive approach have often received criticism, particularly for their 
perceived lack of rigor. In an attempt to ameliorate this concern, we elected 
to adopt the guidelines presented by Gioia, Corley, and Hamilton (2013) to 
ensure our analysis was exposed to an appropriate level of rigor.
Initial coding was completed independently by two of the authors. This 
initial coding, or 1st order coding (Gioia et al., 2013), was completed in a 
manner that did not attempt to categorize or abstract to theoretical explana-
tion. Rather, this first order coding, which as noted by Gioia and colleagues 
(2013) was a similar process to Strauss and Corbin’s (1994) “open-coding,” 
allowed for the emergence of terms, concepts, and codes that would serve 
as the foundation on which the data structure would be built. The rheto-
ric used in the development of codes emerged from those used by the re-
spondents of the interviewees. This ensured a level of purity in regards to 
the data set, which is necessary given that the first order codes provide the 
basis for the subsequent analysis. In order to achieve consistency and agree-
ment regarding these first order codes, meetings between the two coders 
were held on a weekly basis to reconcile any discrepancies in the produced 
codes. In the case of any competing beliefs regarding the codes produced, 
discussion was held until a consensus was reached.
This first order coding process resulted in hundreds of initial codes. This 
large number is not unusual given the study’s inductive nature. As Gioia 
TABLE 8.2  Interview Questions (continued)
22.	 Is punishment an effective way to encourage learning at work? Why or why not?
23.	 Do you think that paying someone to do something reduces their intrinsic motivation? 
[Intrinsic motivation is when someone works on a task because they find it interesting 
and gain satisfaction from the task itself.]
24.	 Is it a good idea for a boss to seek feedback from their employees? Why or why not?
25.	 How can you keep a team from procrastinating on the start of a project?
26.	 What year were you born?
27.	 What is your gender?

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    229
and colleagues (2013) note, Gioia is fond of stating “You gotta get lost be-
fore you can get found” (Gioia, 2004). Once these first order codes had 
been created and agreed upon, the two independent coders came together 
to share notes and codes to achieve somewhat more abstract categoriza-
tions or second order codes. These second order codes were the first step 
up a ladder of abstraction to gain a more complete understanding of the 
role generational differences played in leader-follower dynamics. The au-
thors began to make sense of the large number of first order codes by show-
ing both similarities and differences in responses as well as initial attempts 
at translating from respondent terminology to researcher terminology.
Once these second order codes were in place, all three authors came 
together to complete the abstraction process to facilitate the discussion of 
the theoretical implications of the findings. This was done by reviewing the 
data structure of both first order and second order codes to identify themes 
and how they related to and were explained by our phenomena of—LMX. 
While this study produced various findings, it is the findings of the greatest 
consequence to LMX and its closely related topics to which we turn our 
attention. The final set of seven themes that emerged from our analyses 
include the following: work as identity, loyalty, respect and merit, leader 
emotions, follower relations, technology, and cross-generational relations.
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
Our findings reveal both similarities and differences across the seven 
themes we identified, some of which contradict those of previous research. 
This section provides our discussion of the themes we discovered as we 
compared and contrasted these across generations and in relation to extant 
research. We have summarized the key findings in Table 8.3.
It has been suggested that work in itself may not be as important to Mil-
lennials as it has been to older generations (Campione, 2015; Twenge, 
Campbell, Hoffman, & Lance, 2010). However, our analysis revealed that 
of the three generations, it is actually Generation X that rated work the 
lowest in terms of defining themselves. To reach this conclusion, all three 
generations were asked, “On a scale of 1 to 10, how important is work to you 
when asked to define who you are as a person? What other spheres of life 
rank ahead of work? What other spheres rank behind work?” Baby boomers 
generally ranked work as either first or second in its importance in defining 
themselves. Millennials mostly ranked work as third or fourth highest in 
importance. However, Generation X bosses on average rated work as fifth 
highest in importance, while Generation X employees mostly rated work as 
one of the least important aspects of their lives in defining themselves. It 
would seem that Gen Xers generally identify less with work than both baby 

230    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
boomers and Millennials. These results seem to challenge previous studies’ 
suggestions (e.g., Twenge et al., 2010; Wey Smola & Sutton, 2002) that Mil-
lennials are not as invested in their work as preceding generations.
This particular difference between the generations may be more related 
to age than to generational culture, however. For example, baby boomers 
are older and may have different components of their life that contribute 
TABLE 8.3  Summary of Key Findings
Baby-Boomer
Generation X
Millennials
Leader
•	 Loyalty important
•	 Loyalty important
•	 Loyalty not required
•	 Prefer receptive 
followers
•	 Prefer cooperative 
followers
•	 Prefer receptive 
followers
•	 Technology burden 
to work–family 
domain divide
•	 Technology burden 
to work–family 
domain divide
•	 Technology 
indifferent to work-
family domain divide
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Rated work highest 
in importance of 
defining themselves
•	 Rated work 5th 
highest in importance 
of defining themselves
•	 Rated work 4th 
highest in importance 
of defining themselves
•	 Leaders should 
suppress emotions at 
work
•	 Undecided on 
suppression of 
emotion at work
•	 Leaders should 
suppress emotions at 
work
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No leader age 
preference
•	 Older leader age 
preference
•	 Strong older leader 
age preference
Follower
•	 Loyalty important
•	 Loyalty not required
•	 Loyalty not required
•	 Prefer receptive 
followers
•	 Prefer receptive 
followers
•	 Prefer receptive 
followers
•	 Technology burden 
to work–family 
domain divide
•	 Technology burden 
to work–family 
domain divide
•	 Technology 
indifferent to work–
family domain divide
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Merit and respect
•	 Rated work 2nd 
highest in importance 
of defining themselves
•	 Rated work lowest 
in importance of 
defining themselves
•	 Rated work 3rd 
highest in importance 
of defining themselves
•	 Leaders should 
suppress emotions at 
work
•	 Undecided on 
suppression of 
emotions at work
•	 Leaders should 
suppress emotions at 
work
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No follower age 
preference
•	 No leader age 
preference
•	 Older leader age 
preference
•	 Strong older leader 
age preference
*	 Trust served as a proxy for loyalty

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    231
to their identity than they did earlier in their life. Baby boomers are more 
likely to have mostly grown children and be characterized as “empty nest-
ers,” such that their time commitment and identity are no longer derived 
so powerfully from their family. Whereas, Millennials are younger and may 
not have children at all, so their career plays a more prominent role in their 
identification process. These described lifestyles of baby boomers and Mil-
lennials contrast sharply to many Gen Xers who are at a stage in life where 
family duties (i.e., raising children and teenagers) are more demanding 
and may be a more integral part of their life. Therefore, they do not iden-
tify themselves in terms of what they do at work.
These differences between generations continue to show themselves, es-
pecially when we consider LMX and its four dimensions: loyalty (mutual 
obligation and loyalty), professional respect (respecting each other’s capa-
bilities), contribution (going above and beyond the job description), and 
affect (friendship and liking) (Liden & Maslyn, 1998). Our findings suggest 
that some of these LMX dimensions may not be as important to one gen-
eration as they are to others.
The loyalty dimension seems to hold true for the baby boomers in our 
sample. When describing their best leader experience, baby boomers often 
spoke of the trust that existed in their relationships. For example, one baby 
boomer leader said his/her best leader or direct supervisor “trusted my 
judgment and allowed me to make decisions.” While one baby boomer fol-
lower said, “My best boss was one that left me alone and trusted me to do 
my job correctly.” The importance of loyalty and trust partially transcended 
into the Generation Xers as well. For example, one Generation X leader 
was quoted as saying, “My best leader has been someone who has trusted 
and respected my knowledge and background.” Interestingly, however, trust 
and loyalty were not nearly as prominent in the interviews of both Genera-
tion X followers and Millennial leaders and followers. This would suggest 
that perhaps the loyalty dimension of LMX is not as critical for younger 
generations and thus may not serve as a prerequisite to the establishment 
of a high quality LMX relationship across all generations, particularly those 
involving Millennials.
The professional respect dimension seemed to hold true for all genera-
tions. All participants seemed to understand the importance of experience 
and the merit of a leader. When asked to describe their ideal leader, many 
participants across all generations mentioned experience and/or some 
type of merit. For example, one baby boomer leader said he/she wanted 
“someone who is skilled and experienced in the field”; while a baby boomer 
follower said, “The ideal leader is someone who knows their job and their 
responsibilities.” Gen Xers were similar in their responses with one boss 
reporting that he/she desires “someone who is intelligent”; while an em-
ployee noted, “My ideal leader is knowledgeable and hardworking.” Finally 

232    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
the Millennials were similar with a leader and follower agreeing that their 
ideal leader is “knowledgeable” and “experienced.” According to our find-
ings, the LMX dimension of professional respect transcends all generations 
and is still important even with younger generations.
The affect dimension and the contribution it makes to the LMX relation-
ship was found to vary across generations. When asked if leaders should sup-
press their emotions, most baby boomers and Millennials agreed that leaders 
needed to suppress emotions in the workplace. However, Gen Xers were not 
in agreement and fairly split on this issue. Therefore, the role affect would 
play in LMX would appear to vary across generations and influence the lead-
er-follower dynamics in the workplace. As noted previously, this divergence 
seen in Gen Xers could be attributed to age and life stage rather than genera-
tional values. Borrowing from the work-family literature, spillover theory (Ed-
wards & Rothbard, 2000) could explain part of this variance. Hill, Ferris, and 
Martinson (2003) relate spillover theory to ecology such that work and family 
are their own separates ecosystems situated next to each other in a larger 
mesosystem. Accordingly, due to increasing demands in each ecosystem, the 
boundaries become progressively permeable where emotions and their pres-
ence becomes expected in each domain. Indeed, the increased spillover at 
certain life stages may be affecting the LMX development of Gen Xers in 
different ways than it does baby boomers and Millennials.
Another area of dissent between the three generations that emerged was 
regarding feedback and the amount of control exhibited over followers by 
leaders. In particular, Gen Xers were intent upon their followers following 
directions and simply doing what they are told. Whereas, baby boomers and 
Millennials exhibited more interest in a follower’s exhibition of indepen-
dence and their ability to give and receive feedback. For example, when 
asked about the ideal follower, Generation Xers said the ideal follower fol-
lows directions; listens to instructions, reads the complete email, and un-
derstands their responsibilities; and follows commands. The baby boomers 
and Millennials seemed to be more in agreement with each other on this 
element. Several baby boomers reported that the ideal follower is capable 
of working independently; is one who obeys their leader, but also if there is 
a concern can go to the leader and discuss it; and it is also someone who lis-
tens first and is not afraid to speak up and ask questions on what the leader 
says. Millennials were similar thematically and described the ideal follower 
as someone who can follow, but is also not afraid to put forth suggestions, 
questions, or comments; someone who respectfully challenges their supe-
riors, are vocal with questions and concerns; and is a smart, constructive 
thinker not a blind follower. The ideal follower is clearly different for the 
generations, and these different conceptualizations have an effect on how 
LMX is developed between a leader and a follower and how social exchange 
may develop after the initial transaction relationship is established.

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    233
LMX development relies on face-to-face communication and communi-
cating through technology may hinder LMX development (Balda & Mora, 
2011). This may be true for older generations due to the greater adjust-
ments they need to make in the wake of technological advancement and 
adjustment. However Millennials are “digital natives.” They have grown up 
in a world where texting in order to communicate is a normal and even 
preferred method of communication. Our findings suggest that technol-
ogy is so integrated into Millennials’ lives that they either see technology 
and social media as helpful in the workplace, or as not affecting work at all. 
They do not view texting after hours or having a social media presence as 
blurring the boundaries between work and home at all. For example, one 
Millennial boss said,
I keep my social media presence very professional, so if I am added by a co-
worker or boss, and consider them a friend, I generally accept. Because I man-
age the company Facebook and website, I am required to be on the [web]sites 
during work hours. At first, I found it strange as being on social media during 
work hours is generally discouraged, but I was able to adjust. Technological 
advancements have allowed for communication at all hours—it has become 
normal to receive a work-related text at 11:00 P.M. or a work call at 6:00 A.M. 
(especially with clients spanning different time zones).
While one Millennial employee stated, “I don’t know that my work relation-
ships have been greatly affected by technology or social media, other than 
that it is easier to keep in touch and get (and give) immediate feedback on 
issues in the workplace.”
However for Gen Xers and baby boomers, technology and social me-
dia seemed to be more problematic. More specifically, both credited the 
advancements in technology for excessively increasing accessibility to the 
point of blurring the boundaries between work and home life. Gen Xers 
commented that, “You never get down time. Text and calls are a require-
ment to work at our company to stay in touch with our transferees and 
company 24/7.” Another complained that he “cannot seem to get away 
from email/work.” While yet another Gen Xer explained, “I don’t like the 
intrusion of privacy—I don’t want my coworkers to be my friends on social 
media, but they friend me anyway and then I have to choose, which is un-
comfortable.” Baby boomers generally shared the same sentiment as Gen 
Xers with one stating, “I am not friends with anyone I work with and espe-
cially my boss on social media.” Another said, “Technology has changed my 
work a lot and relationship with my boss; it is hard to maintain boundaries 
between work and leisure. Given when I am outside work, because of tech-
nology it follows me whenever I go.” Perhaps this baby boomer explained 
the feelings of these generations the best, stating,

234    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
Communication can be perceived as more but it’s less effective. Texting and 
email are diluting the art of conversation, and verbal communication is less. 
Nonverbal communication causes misunderstanding and creates issues that 
aren’t there. It also means you are never in a position to switch off out of work, 
as its connectivity 24/7. I spend less face to face time with my boss now than 
I ever have.
Previous researchers that have stressed the importance of face-to-face 
communication in the development of LMX were correct. However, this 
new generation of workers demonstrate a preference to work autono-
mously. Furthermore, they view social media as an appropriate and of-
ten preferred medium for contact with direct reports and team members 
(Espinosa, Ukleja, & Rusch, 2010). While that has been less relevant for 
previous generations, all workers today are facing an increasing need to 
be “digitally literate” and to stay up to date with emerging technologies 
(Palfrey & Gasser, 2008). Some of the Millennials’ need for immediate and 
constant feedback may be provided by the “constantly on” aspect of so-
cial media (Sujansky & Ferri-Reed, 2009) substituting for the relationship 
building that occurred face-to-face previously. Accordingly we suggest that 
while we do not question the importance of communication universally, 
the method of communication may best be decided on a more individual 
basis to achieve optimal results.
Previous research has suggested that Millennials are entitled and narcis-
sistic (Bergman, Westerman, Daly, 2010; Campione, 2015; Twenge et al. 
2010). Additionally, as indicated by the introductory quote by Laszlo Bock, 
older generations harbor a certain level of disdain for younger genera-
tions due to a sense of entitlement. However, in the interviews we collected 
we found very little evidence from the Millennial transcripts that supports 
their supposed entitled/narcissistic tendencies. Regarding the ill-feelings 
toward Millennials, the results were mixed. We found little indication of 
this irritation with the Millennials from the baby boomer transcripts. How-
ever, we did find some evidence from the Generation X transcripts. A few 
Gen Xers did suggest that Millennials are more entitled than previous gen-
erations. One said, “The younger group has a strong sense of entitlement 
and acts as if everything is owed to them. They don’t seem to be willing 
to work for their success. They seem to think it just magically appears.” 
Another Gen Xer stated, “The younger leaders want to be a VP within 6 
months and not work for it. They expect things in life to be given to them 
and do not appreciate anything.”
This displeasure with the Millennials from the Generation Xers could 
be the result of any number of circumstances. However, we posit that this 
may be what came to be known in the discussion among authors as “middle 
child syndrome.” While little work has been done in the management field 
to explore this phenomenon, it has been discussed in tangential fields. For 

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    235
example, Sulloway (2001) adopts a Darwinian approach to show how the 
middle child is often neglected due to parental motivations for supplying 
the eldest with resources due to their tendency to reproduce earlier and the 
youngest due to their vulnerability to threats of disease, predators, and the 
like. This leaves the middle child neglected and more inclined to harbor 
resentment toward the older and younger siblings for receiving attention 
and advantages that they did not. Sulloway also notes the work of Hertwig, 
Davis, & Sulloway (2002) and the further support they provide by highlight-
ing that the oldest and youngest experience at least some period of time 
where they are the only child. Whereas, the middle child is always shar-
ing and may never truly attain the resource advantage that the oldest and 
youngest are assured to enjoy.
It is this analogy of the middle child that we think may explain some 
of the Gen Xers disdain for Millennials and not so publicly due to hier-
archical repercussions, baby boomers. For the longest time, baby boom-
ers received the attention and resources of society. How would the world 
handle the influx of the largest, potentially most successful, generation 
ever? This type of attention was paid to the baby boomer generation just 
long enough until the Millennial generation became the fixture of the 
public’s eye. Today, the Millennial generation and the challenges of engag-
ing with the Millennial generation are ubiquitously dispersed throughout 
the popular media. Additionally, the middle child Gen Xers have yet to re-
ceive the “hand-me-downs” from the baby boomers due to their elongated 
stay in the workforce and unforeseen economic conditions. This leaves 
Generation X indefinitely stuck sharing resources and attention with both 
an older and a younger generation.
Despite Generation X’s contempt for Millennials, baby boomers seem to 
be very willing to work with Millennials. In fact, baby boomers seem excited 
for the opportunity to learn from people who are young and eager to have 
more experiences. When asked what age leader they would choose, many 
baby boomers stated that they would choose younger leaders. For example, 
this baby boomer boss said, “I would choose a boss that is younger than me 
because they are so engaged in the new technology they keep pushing me 
to go beyond what I would normally consider my limits.” While another 
said, “Younger leaders are more open to suggestions and seem to be more 
positive.” The baby boomer employees felt similarly stating, “I work with a 
whole office that is younger than me. This has been the most positive work 
experience in my life.” Another one chose a younger leader and stated, “I 
say this because my current boss that I love is younger and he has allowed 
me to run with my creative ideas and is constantly pushing me to new levels. 
This doesn’t seem to happen much later in a teacher’s career.”

236    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
LIMITATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
While our study makes important contributions to the literature, is it not 
without limitations that need to be addressed. First, we note that our study 
is cross-sectional in nature. Thus we cannot determine whether the differ-
ences or similarities in perspectives are due to our respondents’ ages, stage 
in their career, or their generation, and causal inferences cannot be made. 
If we were able to track our respondents across time, we could understand 
more fully the elements that contribute to generational preferences with-
out the potential confound of age, career stage, or generation.
Second, our sample was drawn from employees in the southwestern 
United States. Future research should employ samples that represent ad-
ditional regions of the United States as well as studies that explore national 
culture to determine if the differences and similarities we found hold more 
broadly. A broader, more inclusive sample would provide additional in-
sights to the generalizability of generational differences and the influence 
they have on LMX.
Research on generational differences, specifically with an emphasis on 
Millennials, is still in its nascent stage and the research questions in this 
study are exploratory in nature. We encourage future work to be more 
directive and build on the themes that we explore to understand causes, 
consequences, and mediating or moderating conditions that demonstrate 
generational differences.
The number of generation-specific results in our study indicate that re-
search on LMX should take generational differences into account, particu-
larly when exploring dyads that cross generations (e.g., Millennial leader 
and Generation X follower). Longitudinal research of LMX dyads would 
allow causal conclusions to be made and to see whether patterns across 
generations are a result of age, career stage, or generation.
Generation Z (also known as post-Millennials, the iGeneration, or the 
Homeland Generation) is the demographic cohort that immediately fol-
lows the Millennials. This generation is just beginning its entry into the 
workplace and is thus ripe for emerging research in this domain. While 
there is still some debate about when the first babies of Generation Z actu-
ally arrived, consensus among demographers places this generation’s emer-
gence around the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s yielding the oldest of this 
cohort just now beginning life in their 20s (Williams, 2015). What may dis-
tinguish Generation Z from the Millennials is not just technology—clearly 
Millennials are tech savvy. But Generation Z members have come of age 
in a multicultural world where smartphones and communicating with 140 
characters and videos that disappear after viewing are the norm. The addi-
tion of Generation Z to leader–member dyads provides an additional layer 
of research on leader-follower relationships in this millennium.

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    237
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS
As the workforce steadily ages and younger generations continue to flood 
the job market, the workplace is going to continue to become increasingly 
diverse. Not only are baby boomers extending their stay, but Millennials 
and even Gen Zers are not only entering the workforce, but moving into 
more influential roles at an increasing pace. As such, the workplace and 
the relationships within it are becoming more intertwined. These multigen-
erational relationships foster not only challenges, but also opportunities. 
Here, we address how some of these challenges and opportunities may pres-
ent themselves in the workplace. While it is not our intention to present a 
comprehensive discussion of every finding, we want to provide an overview 
of some of the more prominent implications likely to be encountered and 
discuss them in the context of various themes we identified.
Among the observed differences across generations is the desire for loy-
alty and commitment from the organization and individuals within it. Baby 
boomers expressed a specific desire for loyalty and reciprocity from the 
organization that did not seem as paramount for Gen Xers or Millennials. 
This can become a challenge if the environment becomes increasingly vola-
tile. In this case, significant changes would need to be made that may alter 
both the explicit and implicit agreements between individuals and their 
organization. To mitigate the potential harm from a perceived breach of 
loyalty, organizations and individuals should be prepared to honor commit-
ments made to everyone, but particularly to baby boomers.
The expressed desire for loyalty made by baby boomers at least partially 
stems from the importance work plays in their ability to answer the ques-
tion, Who am I? Work and their relationship to it has endured for years and 
their investment continues to grow, particularly as retirement approaches 
and they begin to look at their accomplishments and the impact they have 
made. For other generations work, while still important, is not as critical 
to how they define themselves. Both Millennials and Gen Xers have alter-
native contributories to who they are such as social lives and family lives, 
respectively. Rather than demanding these individuals reprioritize the vari-
ous aspects of their lives, we suggest fostering a sense of empathy for these 
individuals in the form of more flexible work hours or personalization of 
work spaces, which may cultivate appreciation and enhanced commitment.
Previous research has shown face-to-face communication to be necessary 
for the development of high quality leader-follower relationships. However, 
our findings suggest this may not be universally true. While we agree the 
need for communication is present across all generations, we question its 
need to be face-to-face particularly for Millennials. Due to their familiarity 
with technology and its constant presence, communicating through various 
technologically based alternatives (i.e., Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, etc.) is 

238    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
actually preferred. Communication in this form allows Millennials to feel 
connected. Feeling disconnected is an uncomfortable feeling for an indi-
vidual who for most of their life has been connected to critical information 
at all times. Technology facilitates this connectedness and keeps Millennials 
in the know while maintaining their independence by not having a physical 
person standing over their shoulders all the time.
Contrary to the comfort and desire for communication felt by Millenni-
als, constant communications through technology can be a major source 
of anxiety and stress, especially for baby boomers and Gen Xers. While Mil-
lennials have an implicit desire for connectedness, baby boomers and Gen 
Xers have a desire to disconnect, particularly outside of working hours. Be-
cause communication outside of work hours is more feasible due to tech-
nology, Millennials generally have no problem communicating outside of 
normal working hours. However, many Gen Xers and baby boomers felt 
overwhelmed and stressed when work impeded on their nonwork hours. 
As such, this can cause problems for intergenerational dyads with one per-
son feeling overwhelmed with work communication or the other person 
feeling anxious due to not receiving enough communication and feeling 
disconnected. While we do not advocate for either increasing or decreasing 
communication outside of work, we do advocate for the explicit discussion 
of expectations concerning the degree of communication. This should ad-
dress expectations regarding the use of technology as a communication 
tool and communication outside of normal working hours. This facilitates 
a better understanding of the nature of the communication within the dyad 
and its impact on both recipients.
In addition to setting expectations regarding communication, leaders 
and followers must communicate regarding their general expectations for 
each other. More specifically, the role of the follower within an LMX dyad 
must be addressed. Baby boomers and Millennials had similar conceptions 
of the role of followers and agreed they should be involved and participa-
tive. However, Gen Xers believed followers should be more obedient and 
not challenge the status quo particularly when that status quo is set by the 
leader. This divergence in follower expectations among the generations 
can have harmful repercussions in cross-generational leader-follower rela-
tionships. With the proliferation of intergenerational dyads, it seems to be 
of utmost importance that the structure and expectations of each party be 
made explicit. Clear expectations allow for both parties to agree upon a re-
lationship structure that may facilitate a better fit and the ability to perform 
in their respective roles.
While this study revealed many differences across generations, a con-
stant and ubiquitously essential theme across all three generations was the 
presence of respect and the importance placed on merit within the LMX 
relationship. Both leaders and followers’ ability and respect for each other 

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    239
professionally are critical for the achievement of a high quality relation-
ship. The positive outcomes discussed previously in a relationship that is 
not characterized by professional respect is one that is set up to fail regard-
less of whether its parties come from the same or different generations. 
Mutual respect is the necessary characterization of beneficial relationships 
in any generation.
CONCLUSION
Millennials may be misunderstood. But as the largest generation in the workforce, 
they have a significant influence. It’s only a matter of time before they begin redefin-
ing leadership and other workplace trends.
—Morgan, 2015
As an author team of one boomer and two Millennials, we agree that the 
leadership field can advance only when those who study it are willing to 
accept its dynamic nature. Understanding the unique characteristics of the 
Millennial generation and how they lead and wish to be led is a critical step 
in managing not only the way business is conducted in today’s fast-paced 
and digital environment, but also how all generations may thrive at work as 
they impact the global economy.
REFERENCES
Ashford, S. J., & Barton, M. A. (2007). Identity-based issue selling. In C. A. Bartel, S. 
Blader, & A. Wrzesniewski (Eds.), Identity and the modern organization (pp. 223–
244). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity and the organization. Academy of 
Management Review, 14, 20–39.
Bacharach, S. B. (1989). Organizational theories: Some criteria for evaluation. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 14(4), 496–515.
Balda, J. B., & Mora, F. (2011). The networked, millennial generation. Journal of 
Leadership Studies, 5(3), 13–24.
Bergman, J. Z., Westerman, J. W., & Daly, J. P. (2010). Narcissism in management 
education. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 9(1), 119–131.
Campione, W. A. (2015). Corporate offerings: Why aren’t millennials staying? The 
Journal of Applied Business and Economics, 17(4), 60–75.
Chou, S. Y. (2012). Millennials in the workplace: A conceptual analysis of millenni-
als’ leadership and followership styles. International Journal of Human Resource 
Studies, 2(2), 72–83.
Cropanzano, R., & Mitchell, M.S. (2005). Social exchange theory: An interdisciplin-
ary review. Journal of Management, 31(6), 874–900.

240    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
Dulebohn, J. H., Bommer, W. H., Liden, R. C., Brouer, R. L., & Ferris, G. R. (2012). 
A meta-analysis of antecedents and consequences of leader–member ex-
change integrating the past with an eye toward the future. Journal of Manage-
ment, 38(6), 1715–1759.
Edwards, J. R., & Rothbard, N. P. (2000). Mechanisms linking work and family: Clari-
fying the relationship between work and family constructs. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 25(1), 178–199.
Espinoza, C., Ukleja, M., & Rusch, C. (2010). Managing millennials: Discover the core 
competencies for managing today’s workforce. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Fry, R. (2016). Millennials overtake baby boomers as America’s largest genera-
tion. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/04/25/Millennials-overtake-baby-boomers/
Galvin, B. M., Lange, D., & Ashforth, B. E. (2015). Narcissistic organizational iden-
tification: Seeing oneself as central to the organization’s identity. Academy of 
Management Review, 40(2), 163–181.
Gioia, D. A. (2004). A renaissance self: Prompting personal and professional revital-
ization. In P. J. Frost & R. E. Stablein (Eds.), Renewing research practice: scholars’ 
journeys (pp. 97–114). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gioia, D. A., Corley, K. G., & Hamilton, A. L. (2013). Seeking qualitative rigor in 
inductive research: Notes on the Gioia methodology. Organizational Research 
Methods, 16(1) 15–31.
Graen, G., & Grace, M. (2015). Positive industrial and organizational psychology: 
Designing for tech-savvy, optimistic, and purposeful millennial professionals’ 
company cultures. Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 8(3), 395–408.
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. A. (1987). Toward a psychology of dyadic organizing. 
Research in Organizational Behavior, 9, 175–208.
Graen, G. B., & Schiemann, W. A. (2012). Leadership-motivated excellence theory: 
An extension of LMX. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 28(5), 452–469.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 
25 years: Applying a multilevel multidomain perspective. The Leadership Quar-
terly, 6(2), 219–247.
Harrison, D. A., & Klein, K. J. (2007). What’s the difference? Diversity constructs 
as separation, variety, or disparity in organizations.  Academy of Management 
Review, 32(4), 1199–1228.
Hertwig, R., Davis, J. N., & Sulloway, F. J. (2002). Parental investment: how an equity 
motive can produce inequality. Psychological Bulletin, 128(5), 728–745.
Hill, E. J., Ferris, M., & Märtinson, V. (2003). Does it matter where you work? A com-
parison of how three work venues (traditional office, virtual office, and home 
office) influence aspects of work and personal/family life. Journal of Vocational 
Behavior, 63(2), 220–241.
Horvath, S., & Morf, C.C. (2009). Narcissistic defensiveness: Hypervigilance and 
avoidance of worthlessness. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 
1252–1258.
Huang, R. (2012). RQDA: R-based qualitative data analysis. R package version 0.2-3. 
Available at http://rqda.r-forge.r-project.org/

Some of My Best Friends at Work Are Millennials    241
Kernis, M. H., & Sun, C. (1994). Narcissism and reactions to interpersonal feed-
back. Journal of Research in Personality, 28, 4–13.
Liden, R. C., & Maslyn, J. M. (1998). Multidimensionafity of leader–member ex-
change: An empirical assessment through scale development. Journal of Man-
agement, 24(1), 43–72.
Lyons, S., & Kuron, L. (2014). Generational differences in the workplace: A review 
of the evidence and directions for future research. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 35(S1), S139–S157.
Manjoo, F. (2016, May 15). Corporate America chases the mythical millennial. The 
New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/26/ 
technology/corporate-america-chases-the-mythical-millennial.html
Matkin, G. S., & Barbuto, J. E. 2012. Demographic similarity/difference, intercul-
tural sensitivity, and leader–member exchange: A multilevel analysis. Journal 
of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 19(3), 294–302.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. (1994). Qualitative data analysis, 2. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE.
Morgan, H. (2015, June 22). What kind of leaders are millennials? U.S. News & 
World Report. Retrieved from http://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/
outside-voices-careers/2015/07/22/what-kind-of-leaders-are-Millennials
Palfrey, J., & Gasser, U. (2008). Born digital: Understanding the first generation of digital 
natives. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pew Research Center. (2010). Millennials: Confident. Connected. Open to change. Re- 
trieved from http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/02/24/Millennials-confident 
-connected-open-to-change/.
Porter, E. J. (1995). The life-world context of older widows: The context of lived 
experience. Journal of Women & Aging, 7, 31–46.
Porter, E. J. (1998). On being inspired by Husserl’s phenomenology: Reflections 
on Omery’s exposition of phenomenology as a method of nursing research. 
Advances in Nursing Science, 21, 16–28.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On The Horizon, 9(5), 1–6.
Randolph-Seng, B., Cogliser, C. C., Randolph, A. F., Scandura, T. A., Miller, C. D., & 
Smith-Genthôs, R. (in press). Diversity in leadership: Race in leader–member 
exchanges. Leadership & Organizational Development Journal.
Sin, H., Nahrgang, J. D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2009). Understanding why they don’t 
see eye to eye: An examination of leader–member exchange (LMX) agree-
ment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 1048–1057.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1994). Grounded theory methodology: An overview. In 
Denzin & Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE.
Sujansky, J. G., & Ferri-Reed, J. (2009). Don’t be so touchy! The secrets for giving feedback to 
millennials. Retrieved from http://ehstoday.com/safety/management/touchy 
-feedback-millennials-1009
Sulloway, F. J. (2001). Birth order, sibling competition, and human behavior. In Con-
ceptual challenges in evolutionary psychology (pp. 39–83). Dordrecht, the Neth-
erlands: Springer.
Turban, D. B., & Jones, A.P. (1988). Supervisor-subordinate similarity: Types, effects, 
and mechanisms. Journal of Applied Psychology, 73(2), 228–234.

242    D. P. GUIILFOR, L. L. TRIBBLE, and C. C. COGLISER
Twenge, J. M., Campbell, S.M., Hoffman, B.J., Lance, C.E. (2010). Generational 
differences in work values: Leisure and extrinsic values increasing, social and 
intrinsic values decreasing. Journal of Management, 36(5), 1117–1142.
Twenge, J. M., Konrath, S., Foster, J. D., Campbell, W. K., & Bushman, B. J. (2008). 
Egos inflating over time: A cross-temporal meta–analysis of the narcissistic 
personality inventory. Journal of Personality, 76(4), 875-901.
Watkins, M., & Neal, P. J. (2015). Millennial in training. Workforce, 94(1), 36–48.
Westerman, J., Bergman, J., Bergman, S., & Daly, J. (2012). How narcissistic are busi-
ness students? An empirical examination of narcissism in millennial students 
and its implications. Journal of Management Education, 36(1), 5–32.
Wey Smola, K., & Sutton, C. D. (2002). Generational differences: Revisiting genera-
tional work values for the new millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
23(4), 363–382.
Williams, A. (2015). Move over millennials, here comes generation Z. Retrieved from 
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/20/fashion/move-over-millennials-
here-comes-generation-z.html

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 243–278
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
243
CHAPTER 9
MYTHS AND 
MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT 
LEADING GENERATIONS
Setting the Record Straight
Cort W. Rudolph
Saint Louis University
Hannes Zacher
University of Leipzig  
and Queensland University of Technology
ABSTRACT
In this chapter, we argue that the most common myths regarding generations 
and generational differences at work are both incorrect and indeed potential-
ly dangerous when blindly accepted as doctrine. To address this concern and 
with an eye toward the role of age in various leadership processes, we offer 
an alternative life span perspective on leadership that better addresses age-re-
lated changes in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. This framework 
serves to shape evidence-based practical recommendations regarding leading 

244    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
older workers and age-diverse work groups. Our hope here is to redirect at-
tention away from generations as a unit of understanding age-related changes 
at work and toward demonstrable, actionable, and relevant issues regarding 
aging as a continuous and lifelong process.
The idea of generational differences in work attitudes, motivations, and be-
haviors has recently become a “hot topic” in the popular management and 
leadership press (e.g., Baldonado, 2008; Eisner, 2005; Kapoor & Solomon, 
2011) and among organizational researchers (e.g., Costanza & Finkelstein, 
2015; Rudolph & Zacher, 2016). While the term generation can be used in 
multiple ways (e.g., to describe genealogical lineage or single birth cohorts, 
see Baltes & Reinert, 1969), sociological conceptualizations of generations 
as facilitators for social change ascribe additional meaning to this concept. 
From this perspective, generations are considered an important mecha-
nism by which such broadly defined changes are transmitted and codified. 
For example, from a classically social-constructivist standpoint Mannheim 
(1952) suggested that generations comprises groups of individuals of simi-
lar ages who share common experiences (see Rudolph & Zacher, 2016, for 
a review of similar definitions). Thus as most typically understood, genera-
tion defines a group of similarly aged people who have experienced com-
mon social or historical events by virtue of birth-year proximity. The notion 
of “generational differences” as understood in the popular management 
and leadership press suggests that there are demonstrable disparities be-
tween members of such generations who are tied to such common experi-
ences; it is argued that such experiences have a commensurate influence 
on work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors (Rudolph & Zacher, 2016).
A great deal of attention has been paid to the notion that generational 
differences exist and must be actively managed in the workplace. More-
over, considering collections of recommended leadership practices, it is 
relatively easy to find references to the need to treat employees of different 
ages in line with the idea that generational differences exist and serve as 
important drivers of work processes and outcomes. As such, leadership best 
practices recommendations have suggested that generational differences at 
work must be proactively addressed by leaders (e.g., Anderson, Buchko, & 
Buchko, 2016; Caraher, 2014; Espinoza & Ukleja, 2016; Gilbert, 2011; Kaup-
pinen, 2016; Tulgan, 2016).
Consistent with past scholarship, we use the term leadership to refer to 
various processes that are applied to achieve shared goals by structuring 
tasks and influencing group processes. Thus, leadership may refer to a vari-
ety of ways in which a leader influences follower behavior to focus on specif-
ic goals or outcomes (Bass, 1990; Yukl, 1998). Among the numerous mod-
els of leadership, we take a leader–member exchange perspective (LMX, 
Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) that considers how social exchanges between 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    245
leaders and followers emerge and develop over time. LMX theorists have 
posited that the quality of such exchange relationships is in part dictated by 
the way in which formal roles are defined and negotiated. Given that much 
of our understanding of generational differences at work is based upon 
(incorrect) assumptions regarding how members of various generational 
groups approach their work roles, LMX provides a good framework for 
understanding and rectifying phenomena associated with leadership and 
generations.
Despite all of the attention and effort toward establishing practical rec-
ommendations for leading members of different generations at work, there 
is little to no empirical evidence suggesting that such generational differ-
ences actually exist or that they meaningfully influence work outcomes (see 
Costanza, Badger, Fraser, Severt, & Gade, 2012 for a quantitative meta-an-
alytic review and Stassen, Anseel, & Levecque, 2016 for a systematic quali-
tative review). The scant evidence that does exist is based upon research 
that has employed inappropriate methods for drawing valid conclusions 
about generational differences (e.g., Davis, Pawlowski, & Houston, 2006; 
Dilworth & Kingsbury, 2005; Hess & Jepsen, 2009). This leaves us with a 
problem: organizational practitioners are realizing that there are differ-
ences between employees from different age groups that can have an influ-
ence on the effectiveness of a wide variety of human resources management 
processes (e.g., Kooij et al., 2012). However, best practices regarding the 
management of such processes are often based upon untenable notions 
regarding generational differences (i.e., the incorrect assumption that they 
exist) and a misguided belief in the need for differentiated approaches to 
leading generations (e.g., the dubious suggestion that members of various 
generations must be led differently, Crampton & Hodge, 2006).
Considering this problem, the goals of this chapter are threefold. First, 
we outline and debunk several common myths and misconceptions about 
generations at work. The purpose of this discussion is to “set the record 
straight” regarding the idea of generational differences at work. Second, 
we introduce the life span developmental perspective (Baltes, 1987) and 
discuss a life span approach to leadership that specifically addresses the 
process of leading workers of different ages. In doing so, we argue that this 
approach is more suitable for managing and leading an increasingly aging 
and age-diverse workforce than the model of generational differences. Fi-
nally, we argue that leadership best practice recommendations should be 
based on this life span perspective and a notable body of literature that 
more appropriately considers the role of age and aging in work processes. 
To this end, we integrate several ideas into a set of updated leadership best-
practice guidelines for applying this life span approach to leading members 
of an aging and age-diverse workforce.

246    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
COMMON MYTHS AND MISCONCEPTIONS REGARDING 
GENERATIONS AT WORK
The first goal of this chapter is to outline the prevailing “folklore” regard-
ing generations at work. In considering this literature, three core myths 
emerge (summarized in Table 9.1), including:
•	 Myth 1: Generational differences affect work attitudes, motivations, 
and behaviors.
•	 Myth 2: Generational group membership matters more than age-
related changes or contemporaneous contextual influences for 
predicting work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors.
•	 Myth 3: Actively managing generational differences (i.e., applying 
differentiated strategies for leading members of generational groups) 
can alleviate differences in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors.
In the following, we will directly address each of these myths, outline evi-
dence for their origins, and in turn dispel misconceptions regarding how 
generations operate (or more precisely, do not operate) in work contexts. 
This section serves to “set the stage” for a discussion of a differentiated life 
span approach to leadership.
GENERATIONAL MYTH 1
The first myth regarding generations at work is that there is “real” (i.e., val-
id and empirically demonstrable) variability between members of different 
TABLE 9.1  Summary of Generational Myths and Reality
Generational Myth
Reality
Myth 1: Generational differences affect 
work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors.
Reality: Generations and generational 
differences have no tangible impact on 
such workplace outcomes.
Myth 2: Generational group membership 
matters more than age-related changes or 
contemporaneous contextual influences 
for predicting work attitudes, motivations, 
and behaviors.
Reality: Aging (i.e., ontogenesis) and 
context (i.e., sociogenesis) will always 
matter more than generational group 
membership for explaining individual 
behavior.
Myth 3: Actively managing generational 
differences (i.e., applying differentiated 
strategies for leading members of 
generational groups) can alleviate 
differences in work attitudes, motivations, 
and behaviors.
Reality: Because generational differences 
do not exist, efforts towards their 
management are both futile and 
dangerous.

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    247
generational groups that is manifested in differences in work attitudes 
(e.g., job satisfaction, work commitment), motivations (e.g., work engage-
ment), and behaviors (e.g., task performance). The origins of this myth are 
complex, however the more general notion of generational differences can 
be traced throughout time (see Reeve, 2013, for a historical review). Re-
cent empirical evidence suggests that there may be relatively enduring and 
longstanding negative perceptions of emerging adults in general (e.g., Trz-
esniewski & Donnellan, 2014), which may explain the pervasiveness of this 
phenomenon. Comparative reviews of the historical rhetoric characterizing 
various generations (e.g., Wesner & Miller, 2008) reach similar conclusions.
Generational thinking as a general, sociologically grounded mode for 
understanding social order and change is persistent and cyclical. If it were a 
public health concern, considering references to generational differences 
at large would lead one to conclude that we have been suffering nothing 
short of a chronic and persistent epidemic for much of recorded history. 
Indeed, as early as 700 BC Homer’s Iliad cautioned against the reckless-
ness of youth, suggesting, “Thou dost know the faults to which the young 
are ever prone; the will is quick to act, the judgment weak” (Bryant, 1870, 
p. 368). These sentiments are reflected in far more contemporary works as 
well. For example, referencing social change that accompanied the postwar 
baby boom, Wolfe (1976) cautioned against the rise of the “me genera-
tion,” while Lasch (1979) warned of the rise of a “culture of narcissism.” 
Nearly identical sentiments characterizing the members of contemporane-
ous younger generational cohorts are offered by Twenge (2014).
Given this broader focus on generations and generational differences in 
general attitudes, motivations, and behaviors, it is perhaps not surprising 
that at some point this idea became manifest in the literature on work and 
organizational psychology, and management and organizational behavior. 
While it is difficult to exactly pinpoint the source of the emergence of these 
ideas in this literature, some early accounts can be found in Administrative 
Science Quarterly (e.g., Diamant, 1960, describes generational differences 
with respect to political leadership; Wallace, 1967 describes generational 
differences in the context of educational achievement). Similarly, Paul and 
Schooler (1970) and DeSalvia and Gemmil (1971) report on “generation 
gaps” in values that influence management outcomes in the Academy of 
Management Journal. A more recent work by Smola and Sutton (2002) like-
wise has been influential in shaping the study of generational differences 
via cross-temporal methodologies.
While it is clear that there have been (relatively) longstanding arguments 
made for the influence of generational differences on work attitudes, mo-
tivations, and behaviors, what evidence do we have to support such conclu-
sions? The short answer to this question is almost none. Expanding upon 
this, a recent meta-analysis of generational differences in work attitudes 

248    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
by Costanza and colleagues (2012, p. 375) concluded that “meaningful 
differences among generations probably do not exist . . . differences that 
appear to exist are likely attributable to factors other than generational 
membership.” There are two considerations that contribute to the conclu-
sion that meaningful generational differences are unlikely to exist. First, in 
general the methods for studying generational differences are insufficient 
to unequivocally conclude whether or not such differences exist (Rudolph, 
2015). Second, existing research has often ignored other far more tenable 
explanations for age-related differences in work outcomes (i.e., ontogen-
esis, See Rudolph & Zacher, 2016; Zacher, 2015).
Insufficient Methods
As a means to better understand these methodological shortcomings, it is 
perhaps helpful to consider what a prototypical design for a generational dif-
ferences study in the work and organizational psychology and management 
and organizational behavior domains looks like. This design typically pos-
sesses three rather undesirable qualities. First, studies on generational differ-
ences at work most often adopt cross-sectional designs (e.g., Jurkiewicz, 2000; 
Lyons, Duxbury, & Higgins, 2007). That is to say, data are collected from a 
sample of respondents at one point in time. For example, a sample of work-
ers of different chronological ages (and, hence, memberships in different 
generational groups) could be administered a survey designed to assess work 
attitudes such as organizational commitment or job satisfaction.
Second, some data bifurcation procedure is applied to split respondents 
into generational groups that define broader groupings of birth cohorts 
(e.g., 1946 to 1964 for baby boomers, 1965 to 1980 for Generation X, etc.). 
Of note, even within Western cultures, there is no single agreed upon 
scheme for grouping individuals into such artificial birth cohort clusters 
(see Figure 9.1 of Costanza et al., 2012 for a visual representation of such 
discrepant operationalizations). Even if there were agreement here, this ap-
proach would still be plagued by additional statistical and methodological 
concerns that bear further consideration as well.
Finally, group-based comparisons are made on the basis of these artificial 
birth cohort clusters that now represent generational groupings, and con-
clusions are drawn regarding generational differences to the extent that 
mean differences among such groupings are observed (e.g., cohort group 
X is found to have statistically significantly higher/lower work attitudes as 
compared to cohort group Y). Let us now consider a critique of these three 
particularly concerning methodological features in more detail.

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    249
Age, Period, and Cohort Dependence in Cross- 
Sectional Designs
The first methodological concern to consider is the common use of 
cross-sectional designs for studying generations. Because data are collected 
at only one time point in such designs, there are necessary conflations of 
three conceptually important variables: age, period, and cohort. Age refers 
to one’s chronological age (e.g., 32 years old), period refers to contempo-
raneous time (e.g., 2016), and cohort refers to one’s birth year (e.g., 1984). 
In any single time point design, these three factors are linearly dependent 
and perfectly confounded with one another, as knowing two of the three 
values determines the third. For example, for data collected in 2016 from 
cohorts of people born in 1984, 1994, and 2004 we know that their ages 
(respectively) are 32, 22, and 12. This example underscores a simple math-
ematical law (see Glenn, 2005):
iage = jperiod – kcohort
What this implies is that cross-sectional designs cannot separate age, peri-
od, and cohort effects in statistically appropriate ways. Because one cannot 
Recognize Differences in Age-Related 
Abilities
• Recognize changes in physical and cognitive
 capacities associated with aging.
• Account for such changes when assigning work
 tasks to maintain the motivation and 
 performance of younger and older workers.
Acknowledge Dynamics in Personality
and Differences in Age-Related Needs
and Motivations
• Understand how changes and reorganizations
 in personality over time have implications for a
 variety of work processes.
• Recognize differences in age-related needs
 and motivations.
Understand Age-Related Differences
in Various Life Situations
• Offer formal support for the positive integration
 of work and non-work roles for workers of all ages.
• Enact policies that afford the latitude to self-
 manage where and when work tasks are
 completed.
Design Work Systems to Optimally
Integrate Age-Related Dynamics
• Champion the design of work systems to
 optimally integrate age-related dynamics.
• Promote complete task designs that promote
 work performance and well-being across the
 work lifespan.
Leading Aging Workers
and an Age-Diverse
Workforce
Lifespan-Based Best
Practices
Figure 9.1  Summary of life span-based best practices for leading aging workers 
and an age-diverse workforce

250    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
unequivocally separate these effects in cross-sectional designs, drawing any 
conclusions regarding the influence of one effect in isolation is perfectly 
confounded by the influence of the other two. While other methodolo-
gies can be applied to study generational effects (e.g., cohort-sequential 
designs, see Baltes, Reese, & Nesselroade, 1977), no single methodology, 
and hence no single study—no matter how sophisticated—can neatly 
(i.e., independently) estimate parameters for all three effects. Moreover, 
while more recent cross-temporal methodologies have been proposed to 
better understand cohort effects (e.g., Gentile, Wood, Twenge, Hoffman, 
& Campbell, 2015), such approaches still unreasonably conflate cohort and 
period effects (see Rudolph & Zacher, 2016, for a more thorough review 
of these methodologies and a critique of various approaches that have ad-
dressed this age-period-cohort problem).
Artificial Bifurcation of Data
The second methodological concern has to do with the operationalization 
of generations as broader groupings of birth cohorts (i.e., single birth years). 
Even if we could assume that there was some validity to the practice of broad-
ly grouping individuals into generational groups (again, there is no agreed 
upon generational typology to be found in the literature, see Costanza et 
al., 2012), this practice would still suffer on statistical grounds. Specifically, 
this operationalization of generations in the prototypical design necessitates 
the bifurcation and re-aggregation of a continuous birth cohort variable 
(i.e., birth year) into broader generational categories. The composition (cf. 
Chan, 1998) of such generational groupings has never been adequately ad-
dressed theoretically or statistically. More pragmatically, there is a great deal 
of information lost when artificially splitting and recombining data in this 
way (e.g., MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002). Unfortunately, the 
consequence is a loss of statistical power (i.e., the ability to detect the pres-
ence of an age effect, typically). What this means is that it becomes more dif-
ficult to demonstrate statistically meaningful effects of age-related variables 
in such analyses; a recent Monte Carlo simulation study concerning the bias-
ing effect of this phenomena estimated that as much as 36.80% of statistically 
significant age effects may be “missed” (i.e., incorrectly rejected) if one were 
to bifurcate age into generational groupings (Rudolph, 2015).
Fallacious From Grouped Data
The final methodological concern has to do with problems inherent in 
the conclusions that one may draw from grouped data, such as those one 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    251
would have in the prototypical operationalization of generations. These 
problems can be broadly defined in terms of either atomistic or ecologi-
cal fallacies (Klein & Kozlowski, 2000). Most generally, these faults derive 
from a failure to recognize that variables defined or measured at one level 
(e.g., group or individual) may tap into different constructs than a corre-
sponding construct construed at another level of analysis. The atomistic fal-
lacy occurs when one draws inferences regarding variability across groups 
based on individual level data (Klein & Kozlowski, 2000). More generally, it 
refers to the error of drawing conclusions regarding variability across units 
(e.g., generational groups) defined at a higher level of analysis based on 
data collected from units that exist at a lower level of analysis (e.g., chrono-
logical age). This is a problematic issue for the study of generations under 
the prototypical methodology, because it is well known that associations be-
tween variables at the individual level may differ from associations between 
similar variables measured at the group level (e.g., Ostroff, 1993).
The second potential fault in the conclusions one may draw from this 
prototypical conceptualization of generations, the ecological fallacy, occurs 
when one draws inferences regarding phenomena at the individual level 
(i.e., regarding relationship between individual-level variables) on the ba-
sis of group level data (Klein & Kozlowski, 2000). Ecological fallacies are 
likewise concerning to the study of generations, because relations between 
variables at the group level are likely to differ from relationships between 
similar variables at the individual level of analysis. Ecological fallacies oc-
cur whenever data from units at a higher level of analysis are used to draw 
inferences regarding variability among units at a lower level of analysis. This 
happens when individuals are characterized on the basis of conclusions 
drawn from their group membership. Considering criticisms of genera-
tional thinking, the operation of this fallacy in thinking about generations 
has been characterized as “cohort determinism” (e.g., Walker, 1993) and 
is particularly insidious when considering how dubious conclusions drawn 
from this literature are applied to craft policies and practices within organi-
zations and beyond (e.g., Hershatter & Epstein, 2010; Twenge, 2013).
Ignoring More Tenable Explanations
With respect to the second factor that has contributed to the conclu-
sion that meaningful generational differences are unlikely to exist, exist-
ing research has often ignored other far more tenable explanations for 
age-related differences (e.g., bio-psycho-social development processes) in 
favor of generation based explanations (Myth 2). In addition to ignoring 
obviously developmental influences, it is very important to realize that the 
common understanding and operationalization of generations is achieved 

252    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
by collapsing across all individual differences (e.g., race, culture, gender, 
personality, and really, all other sources of between-person variation in-
cluding age), suggesting that such artificially created generational groups 
matter “most.” This phenomenon is a manifestation of what sociologists 
have deemed the “cohort trap” (Walker, 1993). The idea of cohort traps de-
scribes the observation that people place an unwarranted amount of weight 
upon the role that generations play in various psychosocial manifestations 
of attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. This overemphasis can be further 
explained by cognitive perspectives of social judgment and decision mak-
ing (e.g., Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Macrae, Milne, & Bodenhausen, 1994). 
From an information processing and sense-making perspective it is far eas-
ier (i.e., more cognitively efficient) to group individuals by generational 
cohort and to ascribe differences to groups of individuals on the basis of co-
hort membership, than to consider continuous age as a factor influencing 
others’ work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors (e.g., Oakes & Turner, 
1990). That is to say, from a cognitive perspective ecological fallacies in 
thinking about generations are to be expected, as this mode of thinking 
about and constructing our understanding of age is simplified and thus 
far more resource-efficient. Criticism of this reductionist view is echoed by 
Thomas, Hardy, Cutcher, and Ainsworth (2014, p. 1576):
The reduction of individual differences to generational categories posits the 
idea that regardless of, for example, gender, ethnicity, race, sexuality and 
place of birth, people born within 20 years of each other all demonstrate the 
same attitudes, values, and preferences. Clearly, this is a highly spurious asser-
tion and it is far more likely that within-group differences would outweigh any 
definitive differences between generations. As such, it is too simplistic—and 
insensitive—to attribute a fixed set of assumptions to an extremely diverse set 
of individuals. The reductive nature of generational difference, which sug-
gests little variation among particular age cohorts while ignoring the impor-
tance of other forms of social identity that intersect with age as well as the 
significance of sociocultural and historical settings, does not seem a viable 
basis for either the study or the management of contemporary organizations.
Beyond skewed judgments and overgeneralizations, this process has the po-
tential to drive unintended effects at the dyadic level of abstraction (e.g., self-
fulfilling prophecies, see Merton, 1948; Snyder, Tanke, & Berscheid, 1977), 
which has distinct implications for leadership practice and in particular lead-
er–member exchanges. For example, research concerning Pygmalion effects 
has shown that there are complex reciprocal dyadic relationships between 
leader and subordinate expectations that manifest over time and predict the 
quality of leader–member exchanges (e.g., Liden, Wayne, & Stilwell, 1993). 
In this context, Pygmalion effects may manifest when, for example, a leader 
develops certain expectations about a subordinate on the basis of assumed 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    253
qualities that are defined by their generational group membership. Such 
expectations influence the leader’s actions toward their subordinate to be 
in line with these expectations. The leader’s actions are subsequently inter-
preted by the subordinate, who over time internalizes these expectations and 
translates them into their own behavior.
In summary, the first myth regarding generations—that they exist and 
affect work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors—is easily dispelled by con-
sidering various lines of evidence that speak to the contrary. Indeed, the 
evidence that does exist is generally based on studies that have adopted 
insufficient and flawed methodologies, meaning that conclusions regard-
ing generational differences are equivocal at best. Moreover, the myth of 
generational differences is propagated, in part, because it is simply easier 
to reduce complicated processes (i.e., aging) into easier to understand and 
define units (i.e., generations). This reductionist view of age may drive del-
eterious and unintended consequences if applied by leaders in organiza-
tional contexts.
GENERATIONAL MYTH 2
The second myth regarding generations at work is that generational group 
membership matters more than age-related changes or contemporaneous 
contextual influences for predicting work attitudes, motivations, and behav-
iors. To understand the basis of this myth, it is helpful to better understand 
the foundational research that has contributed to the idea that there are co-
hort differences in other meaningful life outcomes. Sociological research 
concerning contextual influences on human development across the life 
course has demonstrated evidence for reciprocal relationships between in-
dividual developmental processes and intergenerational stability. For ex-
ample, Elder’s (1994) work suggests that human development is mutually 
influenced by both biological factors (e.g., losses in physical strength) as 
well as sociocultural factors (e.g., intergenerational relationships, distribu-
tions of resources at a societal level).
Likewise, research on psychological life span development has also of-
fered some evidence for birth cohort-based influences on psychologically 
relevant outcomes (however, without grouping birth cohorts into synthet-
ic generational categories). For example, cohort effects have been dem-
onstrated for certain developmental outcomes, such as cognitive abili-
ties (Baltes, 1968; Riley, Johnson, & Foner, 1972; Schaie, 1965). Indeed, 
Schaie’s (1994, 1996, 2013) research concerning patterns of adult cogni-
tive development demonstrates that fluid cognitive abilities (e.g., working 
memory, processing speed), typically decrease with age; however, there are 
notable improvements in such abilities across consecutive birth cohorts 

254    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
(Gerstorf, Ram, Hoppmann, Willis, & Schaie, 2011; Schaie, 2013). More 
contemporary cross-temporal evidence likewise supports this conclusion 
(e.g., Pietschnig & Voracek, 2015).
While evidence from these works suggests that there may be cohort ef-
fects (i.e., effects of successive birth years, not effects of groups contain-
ing artificially clustered birth years) for certain developmental processes 
(e.g., cognitive development), emerging evidence suggests that for many 
claims made regarding generational differences, the effect of aging (i.e., the 
long term, unfolding bio-psycho-social process of development) overrides 
that of any generational effect. For example, despite strong evidence to 
the contrary (e.g., Arnett, 2013; Bianchi, 2014; Trzesniewski, Donnellan, 
& Robins, 2008), the “rise of narcissism” is a commonly cited generational 
difference (e.g., Twenge, Konrath, Foster, Campbell, & Bushman, 2008). 
However, more recent works have suggested that age is a better predictor 
of one’s level of narcissism than generational membership. Indeed, at the 
person level narcissism tends to decline with age sometime after the transi-
tion from adolescence to young adulthood (see Roberts, Edmonds, & Gri-
jvala, 2010). This underscores an important point: While cohort effects on 
development have been noted in the literature for certain outcomes, their 
influence on any given individual is by no means determined by their pres-
ence or absence among other members of any given cohort. Any conclu-
sion that speaks contrary to this (i.e., ascribing characteristics that define a 
cohort to an individual member thereof) is representative of an ecological 
fallacy. In terms of absolute magnitude of effect size, the influence of aging 
(i.e., time) on an individual’s developmental trajectory will outweigh that 
of cohort influences.
In summary, the myth that generational differences matter more than 
the influence of the aging processes can be redressed on numerous 
grounds, including a great deal of research concerning human develop-
ment that speaks to the relative influence of aging effects versus the in-
fluence of cohort effects. While theoretically interesting, the presence of 
cohort effects by no means determines the trajectory of any individual’s 
developmental course. Thus, the broader ascription of assumed charac-
teristics of a cohort to any individual member of that cohort represents an 
ecological fallacy or a “cohort trap.”
GENERATIONAL MYTH 3
The third myth regarding generations at work suggests that actively man-
aging generational differences (i.e., applying differentiated strategies for 
leading members of different generational groups) can alleviate differ-
ences in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. This myth is especially 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    255
manifest in the management and leadership best-practices literature on 
generations at work, and prescribes that there is something intrinsically 
different about members of such groups that necessitates a differentiated 
approach to leadership. What is particularly troubling about this myth and 
its manifestations in such best-practices literature is the recommendation 
to actively treat members of generational groups differently at work and 
even to afford different resources (e.g., flexible work options, Eversole, 
Venneberg, & Crowder, 2012; tailored performance feedback, Meister 
& Willyerd, 2010) on the basis of assumed differences in needs between 
generational groups. As such groups are typically construed around age 
brackets (i.e., groupings of birth cohorts), this advice tacitly suggests that 
people should be treated differently on the basis their age. Of note, if such 
advice were offered for any other protected group (e.g., race or sex) in 
the workplace, one might assume prima facie evidence for discrimination 
on the basis of many best practices for managing and leading generations. 
This idea has led to the conclusion that in some ways the propagation of 
generational myths is little more than a thinly veiled guise for overt ageism 
(e.g., Rudolph & Zacher, 2016).
Of course, this third myth is also a corollary to the other two myths pre-
sented here, in that it assumes that generational differences do exist and 
are manifest as differences in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. 
To recapitulate our previous point, generational differences do not have 
an appreciable influence on such work processes and outcome variables. 
While this assertion largely negates the premise of Myth 3, what still bears 
consideration herein is the perception that such differences matter. In-
deed, as suggested by Fineman (2014, p. 1720):
The trouble with generational typologies is that the odd grain of truth is de-
veloped into an undisputed fact about essentially heterogeneous population 
groups, but stereotyped by their birth date. And once a generational typology 
takes hold (reinforced by the popular media, marketing, and quasi-scientific 
usage) then it is hard to dislodge; it is taken as an undisputed fact. Granted 
that offspring represent a new generation in a family’s lineage, and each gen-
eration is exposed to certain, possibly unique, societal events and techno-
logical happenings. But thereafter the imprint of the times is blurred within 
and across generational cohorts. Generation oversimplifies organizational dy-
namics, and more so as non-traditional careers thrive and workforces become 
more ethnically, racially and gender diverse. The evidence that conflict at 
work can be boiled down to generational difference is shaky, to say the least.
Regardless of empirical evidence to the contrary, the idea that generational 
differences matter is still prevalent and understood to be true by many. 
That said, what are the implications of this mythology to leadership prac-
tice and the dynamics and quality of leader–member exchanges? We will 

256    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
consider two important psychologically relevant consequences associated 
with this here: reinforcing identification and stereotyping processes, and 
fortifying in-group/out-group distinctions.
Reinforcing Identification and Stereotyping Processes
As discussed earlier, self-fulfilling prophecies such as Pygmalion effects 
may manifest from the application of generational thinking and particular-
ly so in leader–member dyads. Additionally, subordinates’ knowledge that 
their leader endorses generational thinking may be a catalyst for and signal 
to employees to “behave as you ought” (Skinner, 1974) in line with these 
expectations. This general idea can be couched among stereotype threat 
phenomena (e.g., Steele & Aronson, 1995). Most generally, stereotype 
threat refers to a situation in which one is made to feel at risk of conform-
ing to stereotypes that define their social group. Research has cautioned 
that generational thinking may lead to the emergence of such stereotype 
threats (e.g., Cadiz, Truxillo, & Fraccaroli, 2015; Perry, Golom, & McCar-
thy, 2015). More directly, research concerning age-based stereotype threats 
demonstrates that cognitive task performance diminishes among older 
adults who face evaluative comparisons with younger adults; however, en-
gaging in high-quality, positive intergenerational exchanges mitigates this 
effect to some extent (Abrams, Eller, & Bryant, 2006). Moreover, hinting 
at the possibility for intervention, this protective effect of positive inter-
generational contact against diminished performance may be experienced 
via merely thinking about such positive interactions rather than directly 
engaging in them (e.g., Abrams et al., 2008). Additionally, research by von 
Hippel, Kalokerinos, and Henry (2013) has suggested that experiencing 
age-related stereotype threats among older workers is related to more nega-
tive job attitudes and poorer well-being as well as increased intentions to 
resign and retire.
A related line of research that bears consideration here can be found in 
the literature on age metastereotyping: employees’ beliefs regarding the 
stereotypes that outgroup members hold about their own group (see Fin-
kelstein, King, & Voyles, 2015 for a review). To the extent that stereotypes 
that define one’s generational group are perceived to be held by one’s lead-
er (e.g., if the leader construes ingroup/outgroup distinctions along the 
lines of such overgeneralizations), the influence of age metastereotyping 
may be particularly pronounced. Using a stigma consciousness framework, 
recent work by Ryan, King, and Finkelstein (2015) suggests that the chronic 
awareness of age metastereotypes in the workplace may drive negative af-
fective, attitudinal, and behavioral outcomes. In general, given that these 
stereotyping processes are likely to be derived from dyadic interactions and 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    257
supported by leaders’ generational thinking, these ideas have direct impli-
cations for understanding the quality of leader–member exchanges.
Fortifying In-Group/Out-Group Distinctions
A focal premise of leader–member exchange perspectives is that unique 
exchange relationships develop between leaders and their subordinates, 
and that over time an in-group/out-group continuum emerges that cor-
responds to and indexes the quality of these exchange relationships. As 
suggested, adopting generational thinking may drive in-group/out-group 
dictions that fall along generational lines (see Tonks, Dickenson, & Nelson, 
2009) and precipitate interage and intergenerational conflicts (e.g., re-
source conflicts, see Rudolph & Zacher, 2015). Recent work by North and 
Fiske (2013) has suggested that resource-based dilemmas are an important 
indicator of interage stereotyping processes.
Beyond these psychological implications at the individual level, for or-
ganizations the myth of generations has implications for liabilities and bot-
tom-line productivity. First, buying into the myth of generations opens up 
the possibility of covert ageism (Rudolph & Zacher, 2015). Indeed, recent 
thinking on this issue posits strong links between ageism and intergenera-
tional conflicts (e.g., North & Fiske, 2012). Second, given that there is no 
evidence to support generational differences at work, any efforts guided 
toward managing and leading generations are little more than a waste of 
time and resources. While some strategic management scholarship has 
(wrongly) suggested that recognizing and actively managing generations 
represents a competitive advantage (e.g., Elliot, 2011; Glass, 2007), the 
irony is that the collected evidence (or, perhaps more accurately, the lack 
of evidence) suggests that such efforts are actually a disadvantage in terms 
of lost time and effort and the potential for degradations in the quality of 
leader–member relationships.
In summary, the evidence and arguments offered to resolve the first two 
myths presented here beg the premise of the third. Given that available evi-
dence does not strongly support the presence of generational differences 
in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors, consequent efforts to manage 
generations are at best a futile waste of time and resources and at worst a 
potential liability to organizations that adopt such practices.
A LIFE SPAN APPROACH TO LEADERSHIP
To reiterate a core argument offered here, little evidence supports the 
presence of generational differences in work attitudes, motivations, and 

258    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
behaviors. That said, research is increasingly recognizing that there are age-
related influences in various leadership processes (e.g., Day, 2011; Riggio & 
Mumford, 2011; Rosing & Jungman, 2016; Rudolph & Zacher, 2015; Walter 
& Scheibe, 2013; Zacher, Clark, Anderson, & Ayoko, 2015) that should be 
recognized. Where does this leave us? If the generationally based model 
is not a valid representation of reality, and if the further propagation of 
generational myths has a potentially negative impact of work processes, is 
there a more valid, nuanced perspective for understanding the role of age 
in leadership processes?
To address these questions, we next introduce the life span developmen-
tal perspective (Baltes, 1987) and outline its advantages compared to the 
model of generations (see also Rudolph & Zacher, 2016) for understand-
ing age-related differences at work. Our focus here is on how leaders can 
best address these age-related differences among their followers by adopt-
ing a life span (i.e., rather than a generational) approach to leadership 
(Zacher et al., 2015). Generally, this life span approach recognizes that fol-
lowers’ work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors can either remain stable 
or change continuously with age (and, in the latter case, manifest as age-
related differences at any given point in time), but do not differ based on 
their generational group membership.
We begin by outlining the fundamental propositions of the life span devel-
opmental perspective, including the notions of historical and sociocultural 
embeddedness as well as normative age-graded, normative history-graded, 
and idiosyncratic influences on development. We then summarize empirical 
findings based on the life span developmental perspective from research on 
work and aging that are relevant to the leadership context (e.g., Hertel & 
Zacher, in press; Rudolph, 2016). Based on this review, we suggest leadership 
behaviors and best practices that may be most appropriate when leading fol-
lowers of different ages. We will also discuss the increasingly important issue 
of leading age-diverse work teams. Finally, we describe various lines of re-
search that inform our understanding of how age differences between lead-
ers and followers may influence leadership behaviors and success.
The Life Span Developmental Perspective
Developmental researchers proposed the life span perspective in the 
1970s and 1980s to overcome problems of life-stage models of human de-
velopment, which similar to the generational approach, inappropriately 
separate an individual’s life span into multiple discrete phases at more or 
less arbitrary (and historically influenced) cut-off ages (e.g., the “midlife” 
stage between 40 and 60 years). In contrast, the life span developmental 
perspective examines intraindividual stability, continuous changes, and 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    259
plasticity (i.e., intraindividual modifiability) in individuals’ experiences 
and behavior across the entire life span, as well as interindividual differ-
ences in these intraindividual trajectories (Baltes, 1987; Baltes, Reese, & 
Lipsitt, 1980; Baltes, Reuter-Lorenz, & Rosler, 2006).
Baltes (1987) outlined seven theoretical propositions that characterize 
the life span developmental perspective. First, individual development is 
conceived as a lifelong process (from conception until death) that involves 
phases of stability, continuous changes, and idiosyncratic elements that 
emerge at certain time points. Second, development is multidirectional, 
meaning that characteristics can increase or decrease, remain stable, or 
follow nonlinear patterns with age. Third, development entails experi-
ences of gains and losses at all ages, but losses are thought to increasingly 
outweigh gains with increasing age. Fourth, an individual’s development 
is modifiable by individual and contextual influences, and this plasticity 
can occur at any point in the life span. Fifth, development is influenced by 
historical, evolutionary, and sociocultural factors. Sixth, development is the 
result of the interplay of normative age-graded influences, normative his-
tory-graded influences, and nonnormative idiosyncratic influences. Finally, 
Baltes (1987) explicitly characterized the field of life span development as 
multidisciplinary.
Propositions five (historical and sociocultural embeddedness) and six 
(multiple influences on development) are particularly important for our 
discussion of generations. With proposition five, the life span perspective 
acknowledges that individual development is not only influenced by biolog-
ical factors, but also by historical and sociocultural conditions such as cer-
tain historical time periods, structural factors (e.g., economic conditions, 
access to high-quality education and medical care) and interactions among 
these biological and contextual factors. For instance, as noted earlier, early 
research found evidence for successive birth cohort effects on cognitive 
abilities and personality characteristics (Elder, 1974; Elder & Liker, 1982; 
Nesselroade & Baltes, 1974; Schaie, 1994, 2013), which may be explained 
by improvements in education, health and medical care, and increasing 
complexity in work and home environments over time (Baltes, 1987). With 
proposition six, the life span perspective similarly acknowledges the exis-
tence of multiple influences on development. Specifically, normative age-
graded influences include biological and environmental influences that 
most people encounter as they age (e.g., maturation, age of school entry). 
History-graded influences include factors that impact most people living 
during a certain historical period (e.g., the Great Depression). Finally, non-
normative influences include factors that are unique to each individual 
(e.g., job loss, severe illness).
While life span researchers accept that at the individual level, historical 
and sociocultural contexts can influence development (and thus typically 

260    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
include individuals’ birth years in their models), they do not make assump-
tions about broader categories of individuals based on a range of artificially 
clustered birth years (i.e., as generations are commonly defined and opera-
tionalized) or shared generational effects. That is to say, even though the 
life span perspective suggests that history-graded effects are “normative,” 
life span theorists do not make assumptions about group-level effects on 
collective experiences and behaviors.
The life span perspective has several additional advantages when com-
pared to other theoretical models of human development. First, the ex-
plicit recognition of intra and interindividual change processes means that 
the life span perspective is inherently multilevel. The life span perspective 
is thus particularly well suited for understanding other inherently multi-
level phenomena, such as leadership (see Zacher et al., 2015). Likewise, 
the life span perspective is inherently multidisciplinary, recognizing that 
no one particular field of study or school of thought can fully understand 
or explain the totality of human development. Finally, the life span per-
spective is inherently contextualized—and particularly so in more recent 
conceptualizations (e.g., Charles, 2010; Ford & Lerner, 1992; Salmela-Aro, 
2009). That is to say, the life span perspective recognizes that development 
co-occurs along with various constraints and facilitators that are imposed by 
one’s environment and via person-environment interactions. These com-
plex networks of constraining and facilitating factors have been well elabo-
rated, both theoretically and empirically, via what Bronfenbrenner referred 
to as “ecological developmental systems” (e.g., Bronfenbrenner, 1979). Of 
particular note to leadership and the LMX perspective, Salmela-Aro (2009) 
emphasizes that people regulate their development via exercises in “co-
agency” (i.e., relational agency), which suggests that other people play im-
portant roles in defining one’s goal-setting context and also channeling 
people’s personal goals.
Empirical Findings Relevant for Leadership Processes
The life span developmental perspective has stimulated a large body of 
empirical work both inside and outside the work context (for reviews, see 
Baltes, Rudolph, & Bal, 2012; Baltes et al., 2006; Hertel & Zacher, in press; 
Rudolph, 2016; Truxillo, Cadiz, & Hammer, 2015). In the following, we sum-
marize empirical evidence that is particularly relevant for our discussion of 
the role of age in leadership and leader–member exchange processes.
First, with regard to abilities research has shown that physical strength 
and fluid cognitive abilities (e.g., fast information processing, working 
memory, and abstract reasoning) tend to decline with age (i.e., these chang-
es represent age-related losses). In contrast, crystallized cognitive abilities 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    261
(e.g., general and domain-specific knowledge, vocabulary, and experiential 
judgment) remain stable or even increase with age (i.e., age-related gains; 
Baltes, Staudinger, & Lindenberger, 1999; Salthouse, 2012). These pat-
terns of gains and losses have been noted as important determinants of 
a variety of work outcomes, including motivation and performance (see 
Kanfer & Ackerman, 2004). Second, personality characteristics undergo a 
reorganization with age, which can be explained by biophysiological pro-
cesses and socialization influences (e.g., career entry; Roberts & Jackson, 
2008; Roberts & Wood, 2006). Specifically, conscientiousness, agreeable-
ness, and social dominance (a facet of extraversion) on average tend to 
increase with age, whereas neuroticism and openness to experience slightly 
decrease with age (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008; Roberts, Walton, & Viecht-
bauer, 2006). Meta-analytic evidence offered by Roberts and DelVecchio 
(2000) concluded that while personality is reasonably stable across adult-
hood, there is evidence to suggest certain dynamic qualities in personality 
particularly may surround life course transitions (e.g., from school to work; 
work to retirement).
Third, individuals’ goal priorities tend to change with age with young 
people focusing more strongly on gains and growth-related goals and older 
people focusing more strongly on maintenance and loss-prevention goals 
(Ebner, Freund, & Baltes, 2006). Likewise, goal content tends to change 
across time. For example, Carstensen (1995) notes shifts in goal content 
priorities from knowledge acquisition to emotion regulation with advanc-
ing age. Similar conclusions are reached by Brandtstädter and Renner 
(1990) with respect to coping strategies applied in service of goal pursuit.
Fourth, with regard to socioemotional experience, young people, pre-
sumably due to their open-ended future time perspective, prioritize in-
strumental goals that help maximize future outcomes such as knowledge 
acquisition (which may involve the experience of negative emotions). In 
contrast, older people, presumably due to their more constrained future 
time perspective, prioritize goals that maximize more immediate positive 
emotional experiences and experiences of momentary meaningfulness 
such as emotion regulation and helping others (Carstensen, Isaacowitz, 
& Charles, 1999). There is evidence that certain emotional competencies 
such as emotion regulation skills, show improvements with age (Charles & 
Carstensen, 2010; Doerwald, Scheibe, Zacher, & Van Yperen, 2016). More-
over, research suggests that older people have stronger generativity mo-
tives. Generativity refers to a set of motives that include the concern for 
establishing and guiding future generations and for leaving a lasting legacy 
(e.g., by influencing others and society, see McAdams & de St Aubin, 1992).
Finally, while internal resources, demands, and barriers change with age, 
the life contexts in which individuals act change as well. For instance, older 
people are more likely to have caregiving responsibilities for aging parents, 

262    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
grandchildren, or even adult children still living at home (Parkinson, 2002; 
Zacher, Rudolph, & Reinicke, in press). Szinovacz, DeViney, and Davey 
(2001) report that older workers with dependent care responsibilities are 
less likely to retire and withdraw from the labor force than those without. 
Likewise, as many as 20% of older workers who expect to engage in post-
retirement bridge employment anticipate doing so in order to help support 
dependents as caregivers (EBRI, 2004).
While this discussion has focused on age-related changes (i.e., general 
developmental patterns) in person characteristics (i.e., abilities, personal-
ity, motivations, affect), there are also notable age-related correlates with 
work outcomes that likewise bear some consideration in this discussion. 
For example, research has suggested that older workers are typically health-
ier than individuals of the same age in the general population (i.e., the 
so-called “healthy worker effect,” Monson, 1986). Similarly, there is some 
evidence for positive relationships between age and job attitudes (e.g., job 
satisfaction, Ng & Feldman, 2010). Finally, age and objective work perfor-
mance (i.e., task performance) are positively correlated (Waldman & Avo-
lio, 1986), suggesting that accrued experience, wisdom, and the compilation 
of job knowledge over time transfer into improved productivity (e.g., Beier 
& Ackerman, 2005). Moreover, meta-analyses suggest that older workers on 
average tend to engage in more organizational citizenship (e.g., helping 
others and the organization) and less counterproductive work behaviors 
than young workers (Ng & Feldman, 2008). Of note, each of these find-
ings underscores an antithetical argument to common stereotypes of older 
workers (e.g., that they are unhealthy, dissatisfied, and poor performing 
relative to younger workers, see Posthuma & Campion, 2009 for a review).
Leading Followers of Different Ages  
and Age-Diverse Teams
Our life span approach to leadership suggests that leadership processes 
are more likely to be successful if leaders adapt their behavior to their follow-
ers’ age-related abilities and needs, including both strengths and weakness-
es in these factors. In other words, our approach adopts a leader-follower fit 
perspective to the role of age in the work context (Perry, Dokko, & Golom, 
2012). With regard to age-related changes in physical and cognitive abilities 
as well as personality characteristics, leaders should assign appropriate tasks 
to their followers and provide support in the form of workplace accom-
modations. Moreover, the previous review suggests that younger workers 
may benefit more from task-oriented leadership behaviors such as initiat-
ing structure and mentoring, which help them achieve their instrumental 
career goals (e.g., Ayree, Wyatt, & Stone, 1996). In contrast, older workers 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    263
are more likely to flourish if leaders engage in relationship-oriented behav-
ior such as individualized consideration (e.g., Vecchio & Boatright, 2002) 
to meet their maintenance and loss-prevention needs and to enhance their 
experience of positive effect. Moreover, to meet older workers’ needs for 
meaningful work, leaders should afford older workers autonomy to use 
their knowledge and skills for the benefit of others and the organization 
(Kooij, De Lange, Jansen, Kanfer, & Dikkers, 2011; Kooij, Tims, & Kanfer, 
2015). Indeed, recent scholarship concerning age-conscious job design has 
adopted such a life span perspective (e.g., Truxillo, Cadiz, Rineer, Zani-
boni, & Fraccaroli, 2012). Finally, leaders need to take their followers’ life 
contexts, including responsibilities at home, into account (Kossek, Pichler, 
Bodner, & Hammer, 2011).
In the context of demographic changes, the issue of leading age-diverse 
teams is becoming an increasingly important concern for organizations. With 
regard to individuals working in age-diverse teams, it is important that leaders 
show individualized consideration for followers of different ages to support 
their workability and occupational well-being (Rosing & Jungmann, 2016). 
Moreover, it is important that leaders are neither prejudiced against younger 
nor older workers and encourage participation of workers of all ages. Finally, 
research has shown that a transformational leadership style (e.g., communi-
cating a vision, being an inspiring role model) is most effective when leading 
age diverse teams as this style facilitates the constructive exchange of differ-
ent perspectives and reduces emotional conflict by focusing all followers on 
the same higher-order goals (Kearney & Gebert, 2009). Likewise, research 
concerning team age diversity and productivity suggests that transformation-
al leadership may positively augment the effects of team-level age diversity 
on productive energy (i.e., teams’ collective experience of positive affective 
arousal, shared cognitive activation in pursuit of team goals, and collective 
efforts to achieve such goals; Kunze & Bruch, 2010).
Age Differences Between Leaders and Followers
Researchers in the field of work and aging have suggested that it is 
important to take age differences between leaders and followers into ac-
count (Perry et al., 2012; Zacher et al., 2015). Both leaders’ and followers’ 
abilities and motives change with age, and may impact their motivation to 
lead, follow, and cooperate. For instance, as leaders get older their goal 
priorities also shift from more instrumental, future-oriented motivations 
(e.g., task achievement, own career development) to more socioemotional, 
present-oriented motivations (e.g., consideration for others, mentoring). 
Thus, leadership success may depend on the fit between age-related differ-
ences (or similarities) between the characteristics of leaders and followers. 

264    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
For example, invoking the idea of contextual status cues that dictate age-
appropriate leadership behaviors, Buengeler, Homan, and Voelpel (2016) 
demonstrate that younger leaders are more effective at using contingent 
reward versus participative leadership styles for reducing follower turnover.
Moreover, research suggests that followers compare leaders to idealized, 
prototypical mental representations of younger and older leaders. Leader-
ship categorization theory suggests that leaders who—based on their per-
sonal characteristics or behaviors—fulfill implicit assumptions held by their 
followers about effective leaders are perceived and rated as more effective, 
whereas leaders whose characteristics and behaviors do not meet expec-
tations are perceived and rated as less effective (Lord, Foti, & DeVader, 
1984). Followers’ implicit assumptions may differ based on their leaders’ 
age and their own age-related stereotypes and expectations. For instance, 
experimental research shows that followers perceive older leaders as more 
effective in times of war and conflict, and more generally, in situations when 
stability is more important than change (Spisak, 2012; Spisak, Grabo, Arvey, 
& van Vugt, 2014). Moreover, research based on leadership categorization 
and implicit leadership theories has shown that only those older leaders 
with high (compared to low) levels of generativity motives and legacy be-
liefs are rated as effective leaders by their followers, whereas these moti-
vations did not impact follower ratings of young leaders (Zacher, Rosing, 
Henning, & Frese, 2011).
Another theoretical perspective, the relational demography approach, 
suggests that age differences between leaders and followers may influence 
leadership success because followers evaluate leaders based on implicit or-
ganizational age norms and career timetables (e.g., Lawrence, 1984, 1988, 
1996). Specifically, age norms are defined by expectations, beliefs, and gen-
eralized observations regarding “when,” in terms of an age-appropriateness 
principle, one should assume certain roles within an organization. With 
respect to leadership roles, most normative expectations suggest a verti-
cal age arrangement such that leaders are chronologically older than their 
subordinates. In more traditional organizations and industries, leaders are 
expected to be older and more experienced than their followers, as they 
have worked their way through an established career timetable with increas-
ingly higher levels of responsibility and authority (e.g., Tsui, Xin, & Egan, 
1995). This arrangement is said to encompass status congruence with respect 
to organizational age norms. Relatively younger leaders do not meet these 
implicit expectations (i.e., reflecting status incongruence) and their older fol-
lowers may react negatively to such authority arrangements (e.g., Perry, Ku-
lik, & Zhou, 1999; Shore, Cleveland, & Goldberg, 2003). Moreover, based 
on social comparison processes relatively older followers may also be less 
satisfied and perform poorly on the job because they feel “behind time” 
with respect to such age norms and are disappointed about not having been 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    265
promoted into a leadership role themselves (Lawrence, 1988). In contrast, 
leaders who meet shared expectations and norms are generally evaluated 
and treated more positively by their followers (Lawrence, 1988). Beyond 
the effect of status incongruence, age similarity between leaders and their 
subordinates may also signal feelings that one is “behind” time. For exam-
ple, Pelled and Xin (2000) demonstrated that age similarity between lead-
ers and their followers had negative effects on leader–member exchange 
quality and follower trust in their leader.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEADING AGING WORKERS 
AND AN AGE-DIVERSE WORKFORCE
With these ideas in mind, how do we apply the life span model of leader-
ship to actual leadership practice? Let us next consider several updated 
best-practice recommendations for leading aging workers and an age-
diverse workforce. These best practices are organized around common 
themes that can be derived directly from our life span approach to leader-
ship and are supported by empirical research evidence (see Figure 9.1 for 
a graphical summary).
Recognize Differences in Age-Related Abilities
Leaders must recognize differences in age-related abilities (e.g., chang-
es in physical and cognitive capacities) and take these into account when 
assigning tasks to maintain motivation and performance of younger and 
older workers (cf. Kanfer & Ackerman, 2004). To this end, work tasks may 
be designed to optimally engage workers’ abilities at specific points across 
their life span. In particular, collaborative work tasks can be designed to 
take advantage of older workers’ accrued experience, relevant domain spe-
cific knowledge, and emotional competencies. For example, accrued expe-
riences of older workers are associated with increased capacities to recog-
nize and react to irregularities in work procedures, and some have argued 
that the identification of such exceptions is a function of both intuition and 
tacit (i.e., experientially derived) knowledge that comes from long-term 
work experience (e.g., Torff & Sternberg, 1998). As younger workers may 
rely more on learned knowledge that is taught during educational and/or 
job-training activities, pairing older and younger employees may represent 
an optimal “mix” of tacit and more explicit formal knowledge in collabora-
tive work environments. This notion has distinct implications for the design 
of team work and leadership in age-diverse workgroups.

266    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Acknowledge Dynamics in Personality and Differences 
in Age-Related Needs and Motivations
Leadership practices must acknowledge that changes and reorganizations 
in personality over time have implications for a variety of work processes, 
including the design of work systems (e.g., Rudolph, Toomey, & Baltes, in 
press). Leadership must likewise acknowledge differences in age-related 
needs and motivations (e.g., generativity; Zacher et al., 2011). One way of ac-
complishing this would be to engage generativity needs among older leaders 
via provision of mentoring to (younger) followers. Research has suggested 
that optimizing generativity motives among older workers may be especially 
important for easing transitions from work and career roles to retirement 
and leisure roles (e.g., Calo, 2005; Lindbo & Schultz, 1998). Such practices 
have direct positive benefits for knowledge transfer and retention processes 
within organizations (e.g., Harvey, 2012). Likewise, such practices may bene-
fit younger workers by fulfilling specific growth needs (e.g., Rudolph, Baltes, 
& Zabel, 2013; Thrasher, Zabel, Wynne, & Baltes, 2016).
Understand Age-Related Differences in Various Life 
Situations
Leadership must understand age-related differences in life/career-
stage/work situations (e.g., caregiving, approaching retirement, etc.). One 
directly actionable way in which this principle can be leveraged is through 
formal provisions that directly support positive integrations of work and 
nonwork roles (e.g., work and family roles). Recent research suggests that 
workers of all ages benefit from flexible HR policies that afford individuals 
the latitude to self-manage where and when they complete assigned work 
tasks (e.g., Rudolph & Baltes, 2016). This is important to note as different 
age-relevant patterns of work and nonwork conflict have been noted in the 
literature (e.g., Allen & Finkelstein, 2014).
Design Work Systems to Optimally Integrate Age-
Related Dynamics
Finally, leadership must champion the design of work systems to opti-
mally integrate age-related dynamics (e.g., Zacher, Hacker, & Frese, 2016). 
With respect to traditional job design elements, Truxillo and colleagues 
(2012) have outlined several principles for ideally designing jobs to pro-
mote job satisfaction, engagement, and performance across the work life 
span. Considering more elemental aspects of job design, Zacher et al. 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    267
(2016) outline a life span-based action regulation framework that empha-
sizes optimal complete task designs that are in line with core principles of 
action regulation theory and promote work performance and well-being. 
Finally, emerging evidence suggests that affording individuals autonomy 
to self-initiate changes to their jobs via either collaboratively negotiated ar-
rangements with their leader (idiosyncratic deals, see Bal & Jansen, 2015) 
or through more general provisions for job crafting (e.g., Kooij et al., 2015) 
may be particularly beneficial to older workers.
CONCLUSIONS
Considered against the arguments and evidence offered and reviewed 
here, it is clear that the most common myths regarding generations are 
both incorrect and indeed potentially dangerous when blindly accepted 
as doctrine. Generational differences do not affect work attitudes, moti-
vations, and behaviors. Generational group membership does not matter 
more than age-related changes or contemporaneous contextual influences 
for predicting work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. Finally, actively 
managing generational differences (i.e., applying differentiated strategies 
for leading members of generational groups) does nothing to alleviate dif-
ferences in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. As we have suggest-
ed, leadership best practices must be refocused and aligned with the life 
span recommendations offered here.
Overall, this chapter contributes to an emerging literature that acknowl-
edges the limited utility of generational thinking for understanding work 
attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. Additionally, this work contributes to 
emerging scholarship concerning the role of age in various leadership pro-
cesses, including exchanges between leaders and followers. In addition to 
our review and critique of various generational myths, we offer an alterna-
tive life span perspective on leadership that better addresses age-related 
changes in work attitudes, motivations, and behaviors. This framework 
serves to shape evidence-based practical recommendations regarding lead-
ing older workers and age-diverse work groups. Our hope is this chapter 
will help redirect attention away from generations as a unit of understand-
ing age-related changes at work and toward demonstrable, actionable, and 
relevant issues regarding aging as a continuous and lifelong process.
REFERENCES
Abrams, D., Crisp, R. J., Marques, S., Fagg, E., Bedford, L., & Provias, D. (2008). 
Threat inoculation: Experienced and imagined intergenerational contact 

268    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
prevents stereotype threat effects on older people’s math performance. Psy-
chology and Aging, 23, 934–939. doi:10.1037/a0014293
Abrams, D., Eller, A., & Bryant, J. (2006). An age apart: The effects of intergen-
erational contact and stereotype threat on performance and intergroup bias. 
Psychology and Aging, 21, 691–702. doi:10.1037/0882-7974.21.4.691
Allen, T. D., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2014). Work-family conflict among members of 
full-time dual-earner couples: An examination of family life stage, gender, 
and age. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 19, 376–384. doi:10.1037/
a0036941
Anderson, E., Buchko, A. A., & Buchko, K. J. (2016). Giving negative feedback to 
millennials: How can managers criticize the “most praised” generation. Man-
agement Research Review, 39, 692–705. doi:10.1108/MRR-05-2015-0118
Arnett, J. J. (2013). The evidence for generation we and against generation me. 
Emerging Adulthood, 1, 5–10. doi:10.1177/2167696812466842 
Aryee, S., Wyatt, T., & Stone, R. (1996). Early career outcomes of graduate employ-
ees: The effect of mentoring and ingratiation. Journal of Management Studies, 
33, 95–118. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6486.1996.tb00800.x
Bal, P. M., & Jansen, P. G. (2015). Idiosyncratic deals for older workers: Increased het-
erogeneity among older workers enhance the need for I-deals. In P. M. Bal, D. 
T. Kooi, & D. Rousseau (Eds.), Aging workers and the employee-employer relation-
ship (pp. 129–144). New York, NY: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08007-9_8 
Baldonado, A. M. (2008). 25 ways to motivate generation Y: A pocket-book guide. New 
York, NY: iUniverse.
Baltes, B. B., Rudolph, C. W., & Bal, A. C. (2012). A review of aging theories and 
modern work perspectives. In J. W. Hedge & W. C. Borman (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of work and aging (pp. 117–136). New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195385052.013.0069
Baltes, P. B. (1968). Longitudinal and cross-sectional sequences in the study of age and 
generation effects. Human Development, 11, 145–171. doi:10.1159/000270604
Baltes, P. B. (1987). Theoretical propositions of life-span developmental psychol-
ogy: On the dynamics between growth and decline. Developmental Psychology, 
23, 611–626. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.23.5.611
Baltes, P. B., Reese, H. W., & Lipsitt, L. P. (1980). Life-span developmental psy-
chology. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 65–110. doi:10.1146/annurev.
ps.31.020180.000433 
Baltes, P. B., Reese, H. W., & Nesselroade, J. R. (1977). Life-span developmental psychol-
ogy: Introduction to research methods. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. doi:10.4324/ 
9781315799704 
Baltes, P. B., & Reinert, G. (1969). Cohort effects in cognitive development of chil-
dren as revealed by cross-sectional sequences. Developmental Psychology, 1, 169–
177. doi:10.1037/h0026997
Baltes, P. B., Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., & Rösler, F. (Eds.). (2006). Life span development 
and the brain: The perspective of biocultural co-constructivism. Cambridge, Eng-
land: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/cbo9780511499722 
Baltes, P. B., Staudinger, U. M., & Lindenberger, U. (1999). Life span psychology: 
Theory and application to intellectual functioning. Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy, 50, 471–507. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.471 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    269
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. Amer-
ican Psychologist, 54, 462–479. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.54.7.462
Bass, B. M. (1990). Bass and Stogdill’s handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and man-
agerial applications. New York, NY: Free Press.
Beier, M. E., & Ackerman, P. L. (2005). Age, ability, and the role of prior knowledge 
on the acquisition of new domain knowledge: Promising results in a real-world 
learning environment. Psychology and Aging, 20, 341–355. doi:10.1037/0882 
-7974.20.2.341
Bianchi, E. C. (2014). Entering adulthood in a recession tempers later narcissism. 
Psychological Science, 25, 1429–1437. doi:10.1177/0956797614532818
Brandtstädter, J., & Renner, G. (1990). Tenacious goal pursuit and flexible goal ad-
justment: Explication and age-related analysis of assimilative and accommo-
dative strategies of coping. Psychology and Aging, 5, 58–67. doi:10.1037/0882 
-7974.5.1.58
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature 
and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryant, W. C. (1870). The Iliad of Homer: Translated into English blank verse (Vol. 2). 
Houghton, Mifflin.
Buengeler, C., Homan, A. C., & Voelpel, S. C. (2016). The challenge of being a 
young manager: The effects of contingent reward and participative leader-
ship on team-level turnover depend on leader age. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior. doi:10.10 02/job.2101
Cadiz, D. M., Truxillo, D. M., & Fraccaroli, F. (2015). What are the benefits of focus-
ing on generation-based differences and at what cost? Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 8, 356–362. doi:10.1017/iop.2015.49
Calo, T. J. (2005). The generativity track: A transitional approach to retirement. 
Public Personnel Management, 34, 301–312. doi:10.1177/009102600503400402 
Caraher, L. (2014). Millennials & management: The essential guide to making it work at 
work. Brookline, MA: Bibliomotion.
Carstensen, L. L. (1995). Evidence for a life-span theory of socioemotional selec-
tivity. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 151–156. doi:10.1111/1467 
-8721.ep11512261
Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking time seriously: 
A theory of socioemotional selectivity. American Psychologist, 54, 165–181. 
doi:10.1037/0003-066x.54.3.165 
Chan, D. (1998). Functional relations among constructs in the same content do-
main at different levels of analysis: A typology of composition models. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 83, 234–246. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.83.2.234
Charles, S. T. (2010). Strength and vulnerability integration: A model of emo-
tional well-being across adulthood. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 1068–1091. 
doi:10.1037/a0021232
Charles, S. T., & Carstensen, L. L. (2010). Social and emotional aging. Annual Re-
view of Psychology, 61, 383–409. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100448
Costanza, D. P., Badger, J. M., Fraser, R. L., Severt, J. B., & Gade, P. A. (2012). Gene-
rational differences in work-related attitudes: A meta-analysis. Journal of Busi-
ness and Psychology, 27, 375–394. doi:10.1007/s10869-012-9259-4

270    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Costanza, D. P., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2015). Generationally based differences in the 
workplace: Is there a there there? Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 8, 
308–323. doi:10.1017/iop.2015.15
Crampton, S. M., & Hodge, J. W. (2006). The supervisor and generational differ-
ences. Allied Academies International Conference: Academy of Organizational Cul-
ture, Communications, and Conflict Proceedings, 11(2), 19–22.
Davis, J. B., Pawlowski, S. D., & Houston, A. (2006). Work commitments of baby 
boomers and gen-Xers in the IT profession: Generational differences or 
myth? E-Journal of Computer Information Systems, 46, 43–49. doi:10.1080/08874
417.2006.11645897
Day, D. V. (2011). Integrative perspectives on longitudinal investigations of leader 
development: From childhood through adulthood. Leadership Quarterly, 22, 
561–571. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.04.012
DeSalvia, D. N., & Gemmill, G. R. (1971). An exploratory study of the personal value 
systems of college students and managers. Academy of Management Journal, 14, 
227–238. doi:10.2307/255309
Diamant, A. (1960). The relevance of comparative politics to the study of compara-
tive administration. Administrative Science Quarterly, 5, 87–112. doi:10.2307/ 
2390826
Dilworth, J. E. L., & Kingsbury, N. (2005). Home-to-job spillover for generation X, 
boomers, and matures: A comparison. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 26, 
267–281. doi:10.1007/ s10834-005-3525-9
Doerwald, F., Scheibe, S., Zacher, H., & Van Yperen, N. W. (2016). Emotional compe-
tencies across adulthood: State of knowledge and implications for the work con-
text. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2(2), 159–216. doi:10.1093/workar/waw013
Ebner, N. C., Freund, A. M., & Baltes, P. B. (2006). Developmental changes in per-
sonal goal orientation from young to late adulthood: From striving for gains 
to maintenance and prevention of losses. Psychology and Aging, 21, 664–678. 
doi:10.1037/0882-7974.21.4.664
Eisner, S. P. (2005). Managing generation Y. SAM Advanced Management Journal, 70, 
4–15. doi:10.1109/emr.2011.5876168
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1974). Children of the great depression: Social change in life experience. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1994). Time, human agency, and social change: Perspectives on the 
life course. Social Psychology Quarterly, 57, 4–15. doi:10.2307/2786971
Elder, G. H., Jr., & Liker, J. K. (1982). Hard times in women’s lives: Historical influ-
ences across 40 years. Journal of Sociology, 88, 241–269. doi:10.1086/227670 
Elliott, S. (2011). Ties to tattoos: Turning generational differences into a competitive advan-
tage. Dallas, TX: Brown Books.
Employee Benefits Research Institute (EBRI). (2004, April). Will Americans ever be-
come savers? The 14th retirement confidence survey. EBRI Issue Brief No. 268. Wash-
ington, DC. Retrieved from https://www.ebri.org/publications/ib/index 
.cfm?fa=ibDisp&content_id=496
Espinoza, C., & Ukleja, M. (2016). Managing the millennials: Discover the core competen-
cies for managing today’s workforce. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Eversole, B. A., Venneberg, D. L., & Crowder, C. L. (2012). Creating a flex-
ible organizational culture to attract and retain talented workers across 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    271
generations. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 14, 607–625. doi:0.1177/ 
1523422312455612 
Fineman, S. (2014). Age matters. Organization Studies, 35, 1719–1723. doi:10.1177/ 
0170840614553771
Finkelstein, L. M., King, E. B., & Voyles, E. C. (2015). Age metastereotyping and 
cross-age workplace interactions: A meta view of age stereotypes at work. Work, 
Aging and Retirement, 1, 26–40. doi:10.1093/workar/wau002
Ford, D. H., & Lerner, R. M. (1992). Developmental systems theory: An integrative ap-
proach. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Gentile, B., Wood, L. A., Twenge, J. M., Hoffman, B. J., & Campbell, W. K. (2015). 
The problem of generational change: Why cross-sectional designs are in-
adequate for investigating generational differences. In C. E. Lance & R. J. 
Vandenberg (Eds.), More statistical myths and methodological urban legends. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Gerstorf, D., Ram, N., Hoppmann, C., Willis, S. L., & Schaie, K. W. (2011). Cohort 
differences in cognitive aging and terminal decline in the Seattle longitudinal 
study. Developmental Psychology, 47, 1026–1041. doi:10.1037/a0023426
Gilbert, J. (2011). The millennials: A new generation of employees, a new set of en-
gagement policies. Ivey Business Journal, 75(5), 26–28. Retrieved from http://
iveybusinessjournal.com/publication/the-millennials-a-new-generation-of-
employees-a-new-set-of-engagement-policies/
Glass, A. (2007). Understanding generational differences for competitive success. In-
dustrial and Commercial Training, 39, 98–103. doi:10.1108/00197850710732424
Glenn, N. D. (2005). Cohort analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 
25 years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quar-
terly, 6, 219–247. doi:10.1016/1048-9843(95)90036-5
Harvey, J. F. (2012). Managing organizational memory with intergenerational knowl-
edge transfer. Journal of Knowledge Management, 16, 400–417. doi:10.1108/ 
13673271211238733
Hershatter, A., & Epstein, M. (2010). Millennials and the world of work: An orga-
nization and management perspective. Journal of Business and Psychology, 25, 
211–223. doi:10.1007/s10869-010-9160-y
Hertel, G., & Zacher, H. (in press). Managing the aging workforce. In C. Viswes-
varan, N. Anderson, D. S. Ones, & H. K. Sinangil (Eds.), The SAGE handbook 
of industrial, work, & organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 3). New York, NY: 
SAGE.
Hess, J., & Jepsen, D. M. (2009). Career stage and generational differences in 
psychological contracts. Career Development International, 14, 261–283. 
doi:10.1108/13620430910966433
Jurkiewicz, C. (2000). Generation X and the public employee. Public Personnel Man-
agement, 29, 55–74. doi:10.1177/009102600002900105
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (2004). Aging, adult development, and work moti-
vation. Academy of Management Review, 29, 440–458. doi:10.5465/AMR.2004 
.13670969

272    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Kapoor, C., & Solomon, N. (2011). Understanding and managing generational dif-
ferences in the workplace. Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes, 3, 308–
318. doi:10.1108/17554211111162435
Kauppinen, M. (2016, May). Leading millennials: What every manager needs to 
know. Training. Retrieved from https://trainingmag.com/leading-millennials 
-what-every-manager-needs-know
Kearney, E., & Gebert, D. (2009). Managing diversity and enhancing team out-
comes: The promise of transformational leadership. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 94, 77–89. doi:10.1037/a0013077
Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. J. (2000). From micro to meso: Critical steps in concep-
tualizing and conducting multilevel research. Organizational Research Methods, 
3, 211–236. doi:10.1177/109442810033001
Kooij, D. T. A. M., De Lange, A. H., Jansen, P. G. W., Kanfer, R., & Dikkers, J. S. E. 
(2011). Age and work-related motives: Results of a meta-analysis. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 32, 197–225. doi:10.1002/job.665
Kooij, D. T. A. M., Guest, D. E., Clinton, M., Knight, T., Jansen, P. G., & Dikkers, J. 
S. (2012). How the impact of HR practices on employee wellbeing and per-
formance changes with age. Human Resources Management Journal, 23, 18–35. 
doi:10.1111/1748-8583.12000
Kooij, D. T. A. M., Tims, M., & Kanfer, R. (2015). Successful aging at work: The role 
of job crafting. In P. M. Bal, D. T. A. M. Kooij, & D. M. Rousseau (Eds.). Ag-
ing workers and the employee–employer relationship (pp. 145–161). New York, NY: 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08007-9_9 
Kossek, E. E., Pichler, S., Bodner, T., & Hammer, L. B. (2011). Workplace social sup-
port and work–family conflict: A meta-analysis clarifying the influence of gen-
eral and work–family-specific supervisor and organizational support. Personnel 
Psychology, 64, 289–313. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2011.01211.x
Kunze, F., & Bruch, H. (2010). Age-based faultlines and perceived productive en-
ergy: The moderation of transformational leadership. Small Group Research, 
41, 593–620. doi:10.1177/1046496410366307
Lasch, C. (1979). The culture of narcissism: American life in an age of diminishing expecta-
tions. New York, NY: Warner Books.
Lawrence, B. S. (1984). Age grading: The implicit organizational timetable. Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, 5, 23–35. doi:10.1002/job.4030050104
Lawrence, B. S. (1988). New wrinkles in the theory of age: Demography, norms, 
and performance ratings. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 309–337. 
doi:10.2307/256550
Lawrence, B. S. (1996). Organizational age norms: Why is it so hard to know one when 
you see one? The Gerontologist, 36, 209–220. doi:10.1093/geront/36.2.209
Liden, R. C., Wayne, S. J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early 
development of leader–member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 
662–674. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.78.4.662 
Lindbo, T. L., & Shultz, K. S. (1998). The role of organizational culture and men-
toring in mature worker socialization toward retirement. Public Productivity & 
Management Review, 22, 49–59. doi:10.2307/3380589 
Lord, R. G., Foti, R. J., & DeVader, C. L. (1984). A test of leadership categoriza-
tion theory: Internal structure, information processing, and leadership 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    273
perceptions. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 34, 343–378. 
doi:10.1016/0030-5073(84)90043-6 
Lyons, S., Duxbury, L., & Higgins, C. (2007). An empirical assessment of genera-
tional differences in basic human values. Psychological Reports, 101, 39–352. 
doi:10.2466/pr0.101.2.339-352
MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., & Rucker, D. D. (2002). On the prac-
tice of dichotomization of quantitative variables. Psychological Methods, 7, 19–
40. doi:10.1037/1082-989X.7.1.19
Macrae, C. N., Milne, A. B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (1994). Stereotypes as energy-
saving devices: A peek inside the cognitive toolbox. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 66, 37–47. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.66.1.37
Mannheim, K. (1952). The problem of generations. In K. Mannheim (Ed.), Essays 
on the sociology of knowledge (pp. 276–322). London, England: Routledge.
McAdams, D. P., & de St Aubin, E. D. (1992). A theory of generativity and its as-
sessment through self-report, behavioral acts, and narrative themes in 
autobiography. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 1003–1015. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.62.6.1003
Meister, J. C., & Willyerd, K. (2010). Mentoring millennials. Harvard Business Review, 
88(5), 68–72. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/
Merton, R. K. (1948). The self-fulfilling prophecy. Antioch Review, 8, 193–210. 
doi:10.2307/4609267 
Monson, R. R. (1986). Observations on the healthy worker effect. Journal of Occupa-
tional Medicine, 28, 425–433. doi:10.1097/00043764-198606000-00009 
Nesselroade, J. R., & Baltes, P. B. (1974). Adolescent personality development and 
historical change: 1970-72. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Devel-
opment, 39(1), 1–80. doi:10.2307/1165824 
Ng, T. W., & Feldman, D. C. (2008). The relationship of age to ten dimen-
sions of job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 329–423. 
doi:10.1037/0021-9010.93.2.392
Ng, T. W., & Feldman, D. C. (2010). The relationships of age with job attitudes: 
A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 63, 677–718. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570 
.2010.01184.x
North, M. S., & Fiske, S. T. (2012). An inconvenienced youth? Ageism and its poten-
tial intergenerational roots. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 982–997. doi:10.1037/
a0027843
North, M. S., & Fiske, S. T. (2013). A prescriptive intergenerational-tension ageism 
scale: Succession, identity, and consumption (SIC). Psychological Assessment, 
25, 706–713. doi:10.1037/a0032367
Oakes, P. J., & Turner, J. C. (1990). Is limited information processing capacity the 
cause of social stereotyping? European Review of Social Psychology, 1, 111–135. 
doi:10.1080/14792779108401859
Ostroff, C. (1993). Comparing correlations based on individual level and aggregate 
data. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 569–582. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.4.569
Parkinson, D. (2002). Voices of experience: Mature workers in the future workforce. New 
York, NY: The Conference Board.

274    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Paul, R. J., & Schooler, R. D. (1970). An analysis of performance standards and 
generation conflict in academia. Academy of Management Journal, 13, 212–216. 
doi:10.2307/255109
Pelled, L. H., & Xin, K. R. (2000). Relational demography and relationship 
quality in two cultures. Organization Studies, 21, 1077–1094. doi:10.1177/ 
0170840600216003
Perry, E. L., Dokko, G., & Golom, F. (2012). The aging worker and person-environ-
ment fit. In J. W. Hedge & W. C. Borman (Eds.), Oxford handbook of work and 
aging (pp. 187–212). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780195385052.013.0084 
Perry, E. L., Golom, F. D., & McCarthy, J. A. (2015). Generational differences: Let’s 
not throw the baby boomer out with the bathwater. Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 8, 376–382. doi:10.1017/iop.2015.53
Perry, E. L., Kulik, C. T., & Zhou, J. (1999). A closer look at the effects of subordi-
nate–supervisor age differences. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 341–357. 
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-1379(199905)20:3<341::AID-JOB915>3.0.CO;2-D
Pietschnig, J., & Voracek, M. (2015). One century of global IQ gains: A formal meta-
analysis of the Flynn effect (1909–2013). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
10, 282–306. doi:10.1177/1745691615577701
Posthuma, R. A., & Campion, M. A. (2009). Age stereotypes in the workplace: Com-
mon stereotypes, moderators, and future research directions. Journal of Man-
agement, 35, 158–188. doi:10.1177/0149206308318617
Reeve, E. (2013, May). Every every every generation has been the me me me genera-
tion. Atlantic Wire. Retrieved from http://www.thewire.com
Riggio, R. E., & Mumford, M. D. (2011). Introduction to the special issue: Longi-
tudinal studies of leadership development. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 453–
456. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2011.04.002
Riley, M. W., Johnson, M. E., & Foner, A. (1972). Aging and society (Vol. 3): A sociology 
of age stratification. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personal-
ity traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal stud-
ies. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 3–25. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.126.1.3
Roberts, B. W., Edmonds, G., & Grijalva, E. (2010). It is developmental me, not gen-
eration me: Developmental changes are more important than generational 
changes in narcissism: Commentary on Trzesniewski & Donnellan (2010). 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 97–102. doi:10.1177/1745691609357019
Roberts, B. W., & Jackson, J. J. (2008). Sociogenomic personality psychology. Journal 
of Personality, 76, 1523–1544. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00530.x
Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. (2008). Personality trait change in adulthood. Current Di-
rections in Psychological Science, 17, 31–35. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00543.x 
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level 
change in personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitu-
dinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 1–25. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.1.1
Roberts, B. W., & Wood, D. (2006). Personality development in the context of 
the neo-socioanalytic model of personality. In D. K. Mroczek & T. D. Little 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality development (pp.11–39). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
doi:10.4324/9781315805610.ch2 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    275
Rosing, K., & Jungmann, F. (2016). Leadership and aging. In N. Pachana (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of geropsychology (pp. 1–8). New York, NY: Springer. doi:10.1007/ 
978-981-287-080-3_23-1 
Rudolph, C. W. (2015). A note on the folly of cross-sectional operationalizations of 
generations. Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 8, 362–366. doi:10.1017/
iop.2015.50 
Rudolph, C. W. (2016). Life span developmental perspectives on working: A litera-
ture review of motivational theories. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2, 130–158. 
doi:10.1093/workar/waw012
Rudolph, C. W., & Baltes, B. B. (2016). Age and health jointly moderate the influ-
ence of flexible work arrangements on work engagement: Evidence from two 
empirical studies. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 22, 40–58.
Rudolph, C. W., Baltes, B. B., & Zabel, K. L. (2013). Age and work motives. In R. 
Burke, C. L. Cooper & J. Field (Eds.), SAGE handbook on aging, work, and society 
(pp. 118–139). London, England: SAGE. doi:10.4135/9781446269916.n7 
Rudolph, C. W., Toomey, E., & Baltes, B. B. (2017). Considering age diversity in 
recruitment and selection: An expanded work life span view of age manage-
ment. In J. McCarthy & E. Parry (Eds.), Handbook of age diversity and work 
(pp. 607–638). London, England: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Rudolph, C. W., & Zacher, H. (2015). Intergenerational perceptions and conflicts 
in multi-age and multigenerational work environments. In L. M. Finkelstein, 
D. M. Truxillo, F. Fraccaroli, & R. Kanfer (Eds.), Facing the challenges of a multi-
age workforce: A use-inspired approach (pp. 253–282). New York, NY: Routledge. 
doi:10.4324/9780203776322
Rudolph, C. W., & Zacher, H. (2016). Considering generations from a life span 
development perspective. Work, Aging and Retirement, 0, 1–17. doi:10.1093/
workar/waw019
Ryan, K. M., King, E. B., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2015). Younger workers’ metastereo-
types, workplace mood, attitudes, and behaviors. Journal of Managerial Psychol-
ogy, 30, 54–70. doi:10.1108/JMP-07-2014-0215
Salmela-Aro, K. (2009). Personal goals and well-being during critical life transitions: 
The four C’s—Channelling, choice, co-agency and compensation. Advances in 
Life Course Research, 14, 63–73. doi:10.1016/j.alcr.2009.03.003
Salthouse, T. A. (2012). Consequences of age-related cognitive declines. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 63, 201–226. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100328
Schaie, K. W. (1965). A general model for the study of developmental problems. 
Psychological Bulletin, 64, 92–107. doi:10.1037/ h0022371
Schaie, K. W. (1994). The course of adult intellectual development. American Psy-
chologist, 49, 304–313. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.49.4.304
Schaie, K. W. (1996). Intellectual development in adulthood. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Schaie, K. W. (2013). Developmental influences on adult intelligence: The Seattle longitu-
dinal study (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Shore, L. M., Cleveland, J. N., & Goldberg, C. B. (2003). Work attitudes and deci-
sions as a function of manager age and employee age. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 88, 529–537. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.88.3.529
Skinner, B. F. (1974). Walden two. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.

276    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Smola, K., & Sutton, C. D. (2002). Generational differences: Revisiting generational 
work values for the new millennium. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23, 
363–382. doi:10.1002/job.147
Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception and interper-
sonal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 656–666. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.656
Spisak, B. R. (2012). The general age of leadership: Older-looking presidential can-
didates win elections during war. PLoS ONE, 7, e36945. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0036945
Spisak, B. R., Grabo, A. E., Arvey, R. D., & van Vugt, M. (2014). The age of explora-
tion and exploitation: Younger-looking leaders endorsed for change and old-
er-looking leaders endorsed for stability. The Leadership Quarterly, 25, 805–816. 
doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2014.06.001 
Stassen, L., Anseel, F., & Levecque, K. (2016). Generational differences in the work-
place: A systematic analysis of a myth. Gedrag & Organisatie, 29, 44–46.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test per-
formance of African Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 
797–811. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.69.5.797
Szinovacz, M., DeViney, S., and Davey, A. (2001). Influences of family obligations 
and relationships on retirement: Variations by gender, race, and marital status. 
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 56, s20–s27. doi:10.1093/geronb/56.1.s20 
Thrasher, G. R., Zabel, K., Wynne, K., & Baltes, B. B. (2016). The importance of 
workplace motives in understanding work-family issues for older workers. 
Work, Aging and Retirement, 2, 1–11. doi:10.1093/workar/wav021
Thomas, R., Hardy, C., Cutcher, L., & Ainsworth, S. (2014). What’s age got to do 
with it? On the critical analysis of age and organizations. Organization Studies, 
35, 1569–1584. doi:10.1177/0170840614554363
Tonks, G., Dickenson, K., & Nelson, L. (2009). Misconceptions and realities: The 
working relationships of older workers and younger managers. Research and 
Practice in Human Resource Management, 17(2), 36–54.
Torff, B., & Sternberg, R.J. (1998). Changing mind, changing world: Practical intel-
ligence and tacit knowledge in adult learning. In M. C. Smith & T. Pourchot 
(Eds.), Adult learning and development: Perspectives from educational psychology 
(pp. 109–126). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Truxillo, D. M., Cadiz, D. M., & Hammer, L. B. (2015). Supporting the aging work-
force: A review and recommendations for workplace intervention research. 
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 2, 351–
381. doi:10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-032414-111435 
Truxillo, D. M., Cadiz, D. M., Rineer, J. R., Zaniboni, S., & Fraccaroli, F. (2012). A 
life span perspective on job design: Fitting the job and the worker to promote 
job satisfaction, engagement, and performance. Organizational Psychology Re-
view, 2, 340–360. doi:10.1177/2041386612454043
Trzesniewski, K. H., & Donnellan, M. B. (2014). “Young people these days . . . ”: 
Evidence for negative perceptions of emerging adults. Emerging Adulthood, 2, 
211–226. doi:10.1177/2167696814522620
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Robins, R. W. (2008). Do today’s young 
people really think they are so extraordinary? An examination of secular 

Myths and Misconceptions About Leading Generations    277
trends in narcissism and self-enhancement. Psychological Science, 19, 181–188. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02065.x 
Tsui, A. S., Xin, K. R., & Egan, T. D. (1995). Relational demography: The missing link 
in vertical dyad linkage. In S. E. Jackson & M. N. Ruderman (Eds.), Diversity in 
work teams: Research paradigms for a changing workplace (pp. 97–129). Washing-
ton, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10189-004 
Tulgan, B. (2016). Not everyone gets a trophy: How to manage the millennials (2nd ed.). 
Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781119215073 
Twenge, J. M. (2013). Teaching generation me. Teaching of Psychology, 40, 66–69. 
doi:10.1177/0098628312465870
Twenge, J. M. (2014). Generation me, revised and updated: Why today’s young Americans 
are more confident, assertive, entitled—and more miserable than ever before. New 
York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Twenge, J. M., Konrath, S., Foster, J. D., Campbell, W. K., & Bushman, B. J. (2008). 
Egos inflating over time: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of the narcissistic 
personality inventory. Journal of Personality, 76, 875–902. doi:10.1111/j.1467 
-6494.2008.00507.x
Vecchio, R. P., & Boatwright, K. J. (2002). Preferences for idealized styles of su-
pervision. The Leadership Quarterly, 13, 327–342. doi:10.1016/S1048-9843 
(02)00118-2
von Hippel, C., Kalokerinos, E. K., & Henry, J. D. (2013). Stereotype threat among 
older employees: Relationship with job attitudes and turnover intentions. Psy-
chology and Aging, 28, 17–27. doi:10.1037/a0029825
Waldman, D. A., & Avolio, B. J. (1986). A meta-analysis of age differences in job perfor-
mance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 33–38. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.71.1.33
Walker, A. (1993). Intergenerational relations and welfare restructuring: The so-
cial construction of an intergenerational problem. In V. L. Bengtson & W.A. 
Achenbaum (Eds.), The changing contract across generations (pp. 141–165). 
New York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Wallace, W. L. (1967). Faculty and fraternities: Organizational influences on stu-
dent achievement. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 228–255. doi:10.2307/ 
2391080
Walter, F., & Scheibe, S. (2013). A literature review and emotion-based model of age 
and leadership: New directions for the trait approach. Leadership Quarterly, 
24, 882–901. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.10.003 
Wesner, M. S., & Miller, T. (2008). Boomers and millennials have much in common. 
Leadership and Organization Development Journal, 26, 89–96.
Wolfe, T. (1976, August). The me decade and the third great awakening. New York Mag-
azine, 23, 26–40. Retrieved from http://nymag.com/news/features/45938/
Yukl, G. (1998). Leadership in organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Zacher, H. (2015). Using life span developmental theory and methods as a viable 
alternative to the study of generational differences at work. Industrial and Or-
ganizational Psychology, 8(03), 342–346.
Zacher, H., Clark, M., Anderson, E. C., & Ayoko, O. B. (2015). A life span perspec-
tive on leadership. In P. M. Bal, D. T. Kooij, & D. M. Rousseau (Eds.), Ag-
ing workers and the employee-employer relationship (pp. 87–104). New York, NY: 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08007-9_6 

278    C. W. RUDOLPH and H. ZACHER
Zacher, H., Hacker, W., & Frese, M. (2016). Action regulation across the adult life 
span (ARAL): A metatheory of work and aging. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2, 
286–306. doi:10.1093/workar/waw015
Zacher, H., Rosing, K., Henning, T., & Frese, M. (2011). Establishing the next gener-
ation at work: Leader generativity as a moderator of the relationships between 
leader age, leader–member exchange, and leadership success. Psychology and 
Aging, 26, 241–252. doi:10.1037/a0021429
Zacher, H., Rudolph, C. W., & Reinicke, C. (in press). Caregiving and organization-
al support. In L. Calvano & R. Burke (Eds.), The sandwich generation: Caring for 
oneself and others at home and work. Northhampton, MA: Edward Elger.

SECTION III
EMERGING TRENDS

This page intentionally left blank.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 281–302
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
281
CHAPTER 10
LMX AND AUTISM
Effective Working Relationships
Amy E. Hurley-Hanson and Cristina M. Giannantonio
Chapman University
ABSTRACT
It is predicted that over the next decade close to half a million people with 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) will reach adulthood (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2015). Relatively little is known about the work and 
career experiences of individuals with ASD including how ASD may impact 
the development of effective working relationships between leaders and em-
ployees with ASD. Leader member exchange theory (LMX) with its focus 
on leader–member relationships (Scandura, 2015) may contribute greatly to 
creating effective working relationships between leaders and their employ-
ees with ASD.
One of the most challenging issues confronting organizations in the 21st 
century is how diversity may impact the development of effective working 
relationships. Having a diverse workforce was predicted to be one of the top 
workplace trends organizations focused on in 2016, according to a survey 
by the Society of Industrial and Organizational Psychologists (SIOP). SIOP 

282    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
is working with businesses to develop strategies that will result in a more 
diverse workforce and reward individuals who are able to develop effective 
working relationships with diverse teams (Brooks, 2016).
It is predicted that over the next decade, close to half a million people 
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) will reach adulthood (CDC, 2015). 
Relatively little is known about the work and career experiences of indi-
viduals with ASD including how ASD may impact the development of ef-
fective working relationships. It is imperative to research the issues asso-
ciated with the transition of individuals with ASD into the world of work 
(Taylor, & Seltzer, 2011) and to gain a better understanding of their career 
and work experiences (Griffiths, Giannantonio, Hurley-Hanson & Cardi-
nal, 2016). Adults with disabilities may have career experiences that differ 
from the mainstream populations who have been commonly studied in the 
management literature (Heslin, Bell & Fletcher, 2012; Zikic & Hall, 2009). 
Similarly, it is important to understand the work experiences of individuals 
with disabilities and the relationships between leaders and employees with 
ASD. Leader member exchange theory (LMX) with its focus on leader–
member relationships (Scandura, 2015) may contribute greatly to creating 
effective working relationships between leaders and employees with ASD. 
Examining the relationships between leaders and employees with ASD has 
the potential to contribute to research on LMX and to improve workplace 
diversity and inclusion initiatives.
AUTISM AND EMPLOYMENT
According to Autism Speaks (2016), autism spectrum disorder and autism 
are both general terms for a group of complex disorders of brain develop-
ment. These disorders are characterized, in varying degrees, by difficulties 
in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication, and repetitive 
behaviors. The World Health Organization (2013) refers to ASD as “neu-
rodevelopmental impairments in communication and social interaction 
and unusual ways of perceiving and processing information” (2013, p. 7). 
Individuals with ASD often have difficulty understanding the thoughts, 
intentions, and emotions of others (Bruggink, Goei, & Koot, 2016) and 
they often have difficulty regulating their own emotions (Samson, Huber, 
& Gross, 2012).
Autism statistics from the CDC (2015) are startling and the statistics have 
implications for organizations and the changing workforce. It is estimated 
that 1 in 68 children are on the autism spectrum, with autism four to five 
times more common in boys (1 in 42) than in girls (1 in 189). The number 
of people affected by ASD is estimated to be in the tens of millions world-
wide with 3.5 million in the United States (Autism Speaks, 2016). There 

LMX and Autism    283
are few reliable statistics on the number of individuals with ASD who are 
currently working or planning to enter the workforce. Given that occupa-
tional choices are one way in which individuals define themselves, finding 
and maintaining employment is critical for adults with ASD to become en-
gaged and active citizens who experience a positive quality of life and feel-
ings of dignity and self-worth. The experience of working and developing 
a work identity—the process of defining who one is in relation to work—is 
a psychological process that is a key part of the experience of adulthood 
(Dutton, Roberts, & Bednar, 2010; Gini, 1998; Kira & Balkin, 2014; Saay-
man & Crafford, 2011; Sveningsson & Alvesson, 2003). Working should ide-
ally provide adults with an environment where they can have a sense of 
accomplishment and connection with other people (Krieger, Kinebanian, 
Prodinger, & Heigl, 2012; Saayman & Crafford, 2011; Scott, Falkmer, Gir-
dler, & Falkmer, 2015).
There is anecdotal evidence that individuals with autism can be fully in-
tegrated and engaged in work organizations. Recently, several high-profile 
companies have announced efforts to hire individuals with autism as part of 
their diversity initiatives. SAP and Specialisterne are two well-known firms 
developing programs to hire people with ASD (Holland, 2016). However, 
research has found that many employers are concerned that prospective 
employees with ASD are not qualified for jobs at their firms and that the 
costs of hiring and training them may reduce profitability (Bruyère, 2000; 
Dixon, Kruse, & Van Horn, 2003, Domzal, Houtenville, & Sharma, 2008). 
Although not specific to ASD, research has also found that negative stereo-
types of employees with disabilities affect corporate hiring and promotion 
decisions (Ren, Paetzold, & Colella, 2008; Stone & Colella, 1996).
It is important that research on autism in the workplace is included in di-
versity and inclusion research (Shore et al., 2011). However, following high 
school many people with ASD struggle to find employment, to complete 
academic courses, and to live independently. Finding meaningful employ-
ment is particularly difficult for these young adults. For example, the U.S. 
Department of Labor reports that the unemployment rate for people with 
disabilities is more than 40% higher than that of the general population.
Organizations that act responsibly by providing meaningful employ-
ment for individuals with ASD can contribute to the greater good of soci-
ety. Research showing the value that individuals with ASD can contribute 
to an organization will help to create employment opportunities for this 
underemployed yet growing segment of the labor market. Employers are 
increasingly including disability in their definitions of diversity (Shore et 
al., 2009) and some employers pride themselves on their inclusion of adults 
with disabilities in their workforce (Boekhorst, 2015; Donnelly, 2015; Brite, 
Nunes & Souza, 2015; Dwertmann & Boehm, 2016; Gerber & Price, 2003). 
It has been found that larger companies have better track records for ADA 

284    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
accommodations than smaller firms (Gerber & Price, 2003). Identifying 
companies with strong inclusion and accommodation practices may help 
adults with ASD to self-select into these potential workplaces.
The leaders of Winston Capital Management believe the highly devel-
oped analytical skills of some people with autism can give their organiza-
tion a valuable competitive advantage. Similarly, Goldman Sachs has been 
actively recruiting individuals with ASD for internships since 2003, which 
has resulted in permanent employment contracts for some (Tickle, 2009). 
In 2015, Microsoft created a pilot program to focus on hiring individuals 
with autism. According to Mary Ellen Smith, vice president of worldwide 
operations,
People with autism bring strengths that we need at Microsoft, each individual 
is different, some have an amazing ability to retain information, think at a 
level of detail and depth, or excel in math or code. It’s a talent pool that we 
want to continue to bring to Microsoft! (Autism Speaks, 2016)
Similarly, Walgreens has championed autistic employees exemplified by 
their South Carolina distribution center that employs several employees 
with disabilities such as autism (Autism Speaks, 2016).
THE COSTS OF AUTISM
Research suggests that the work and life outcomes for young adults with 
ASD are poor when compared with the general population. For example, 
research suggests that 70% of these young adults will be unable to live inde-
pendently. In fact 85% of young adults with ASD still live with their parents, 
siblings, or other relatives (Buescher, Cidav, Knapp, & Mandell, 2014). If 
they are not able to be employed and live independently, the services they 
will require will place a financial toll on society. Supporting an individual 
with ASD may exceed $2 million over the course of their lifetime (Buescher 
et al., 2014). The cost of autism support services in the United States ex-
ceeds $236 billion dollars annually (Buescher et al., 2014). This number 
is expected to rise to $1 trillion by 2025 (Leigh & Du, 2015). There are 
additional costs that are difficult to measure, such as lost income for both 
the individual with autism and their parents and caregivers. The unem-
ployment rate for individuals with autism is estimated at 85% (National 
Autistic Society, 2016). Previous research suggests that 35% of young adults 
with autism have never held a job, been members of the labor force, nor 
attended educational programs after high school (Cidav, Marcus & Man-
dell, 2012; Shattuck, Narendorf, Cooper, Sterzing, Wagner, & Taylor, 2012). 
Even among those individuals who have secured employment, their career 

LMX and Autism    285
path may involve multiple movements in and out of the labor market. The 
cost of these adults not working contributes to the financial toll on their 
families as well as society.
There is relatively little research on the work experiences of young adults 
with ASD. It is very difficult to track individuals with ASD once they leave 
high school. There is little coordination among the agencies providing 
transition services to assist young adults and their families with career plan-
ning, job search, and placement activities (Pellicano, Dinsmore, & Char-
man, 2014). For young adults with ASD, the transition period from high 
school to the world of work with myriad new tasks and experiences can be 
particularly difficult. Over the next decade about half a million people with 
ASD will reach adulthood. Many of these young adults will be exiting their 
school districts and losing the services they have been provided in the past. 
While some young adults with ASD will enroll in postsecondary education 
programs, others will be searching for jobs and looking to enter the work-
force. Most will continue to need some type of support to reach their edu-
cational and occupational goals (Griffiths, Giannantonio, Hurley-Hanson, 
& Cardinal, 2016).
LEADERSHIP AND AUTISM
There is little research that has examined the challenges and opportuni-
ties of leading, managing, and working with individuals with ASD. Since 
individuals with ASD may display highly variable levels of intellectual abili-
ties and emotional capabilities, the types of jobs that they will be able to 
obtain over their careers will be influenced by their skill levels and need 
for support (Nicholas, Attridge, Zwaigenbaum, & Clark, 2014). Moreover, 
these varying levels of intellectual and emotional skills would seem to be 
important variables that will have profound influences on the types of rela-
tionships individuals with ASD will form with their managers, supervisors, 
and coworkers.
There are some unique challenges that employees with ASD may pres-
ent at work. Organizations will need to be proactive and prepared to deal 
with these challenges in order to benefit from the contributions employees 
with ASD can make in the workplace. Employers should be aware that some 
of the obstacles employees with ASD may face at work include difficulties 
in communication, balancing multiple demands, adapting to change, and 
heightened sensitivity to sensory stimuli (Baldwin, Costley, & Warren, 2014; 
Higgins, Koch, Boughfman, & Vierstra, 2008; Hendricks, 2010; Hurlbutt & 
Chalmers, 2004; Mynatt, Gibbons, & Hughes, 2014).
As organizations prepare for the wave of people with ASD who are about 
to enter the workforce, researchers must ask whether current theories of 

286    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
leadership are broad enough to be applicable to the work experiences of 
individuals with ASD. It is hypothesized that managers will not be able to 
develop relationships with subordinates with ASD in the same way that they 
form relationships with their employees without ASD. Impairments in so-
cial interactions and communications may require managers to develop 
even more individualized ways of communicating and forming relation-
ships with employees with ASD. Given the social nature of most jobs, many 
of the difficulties with career attainment and success for adults with ASD 
are related to social concerns, rather than to actual job performance (Hig-
gins et al., 2008; Scott, Falkmer, Girdler, & Falkmer, 2015).
Some of these challenges may be reduced with workplace accommoda-
tions, but access to accommodations depends on whether the individual 
discloses their condition (Santuzzi, Waltz, Rupp, & Finkelstein, 2014). ASD 
has been called an “invisible disability” because in some cases it cannot 
be readily observed by others (Richards, 2012). Adults with invisible dis-
abilities have the option to reveal or to conceal their disability from others 
(Clair, Beatty, & MacLean, 2005). There are both positive and negative con-
sequences with revealing invisible disabilities in the workplace (Chaudoir 
& Fisher, 2010; DeJordy, 2008; Ragins, 2008). Disclosure has the potential 
to help with acceptance at work and may make it easier for supervisors and 
peers to separate the work from the person (Davidson & Henderson, 2010; 
Gerber & Price, 2003; Meister, Jehn, & Thatcher, 2014). Disclosure may 
also pave the way for training supervisors and peers about the needs of em-
ployees with ASD (Wilczynski, Trammell, & Clarke, 2013). Adults with ASD 
need to weigh the potential pitfalls of disclosing their diagnosis against the 
potential gains. High functioning adults with ASD may not be perceived as 
having a disability by their coworkers. Atypical behaviors may be incorrect-
ly attributed to personality quirks rather than to neurological differences 
(Patton, 2009).
Certain aspects of the workplace have been cited repeatedly for fostering 
positive reception of disclosure. A supportive organization that enforces 
strong antidiscrimination policies can encourage disclosure (Chaudoir & 
Fischer, 2010; Clair et al., 2005; Ragins, 2008). A company culture that ac-
tively promotes diversity may also be important (Gerber & Price, 2003). 
Having a positive, trusting relationship with a manager or having a manag-
er that is known to have the same disorder could also impact an employee’s 
decision to disclose (Chaudoir & Fischer, 2010; Clair et al., 2005; Ragins, 
2008). The presence of coworkers who are known to have ASD and who 
have been accepted could also signal that a workplace is safe for disclosure 
(Clair et al., 2005; Ragins, 2008).
There have been a limited number of empirical studies on the most effec-
tive ways of managing and building relationships with individuals with ASD 
in the workplace. In part, this may be explained by the fact that individuals 

LMX and Autism    287
with ASD may need highly variable levels of support in order to succeed 
in the workplace. Several leadership theories may offer insights into man-
aging and building effective relationships between a leader/manager and 
his or her subordinates with ASD. Building on Parr and Hunter’s (2014) 
examination of three leadership theories to investigate which leadership 
behaviors would produce the best outcomes for employees with ASD, this 
chapter will examine five leadership theories to investigate which leader-
ship behaviors would result in developing effective working relationships 
with employees with ASD.
TWO-FACTOR THEORY
The two-factor theory of leadership may be beneficial for managing em-
ployees with ASD as it calls for leaders to coach, provide encouragement, set 
goals for tasks, and coordinate work activities for their employees (Judge, 
Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004; Tracy, 1987). Leaders who exhibit high levels of con-
sideration and initiating structure behaviors may provide followers with 
ASD the type of support needed to be successful in the workplace. Lead-
ers high in consideration behaviors are likely to both support employees 
who are faced with difficult tasks and will attempt to lower the employees’ 
anxiety. They would be expected to also mentor and coach their employees 
toward goal completion. Leaders high in initiating structure are likely to 
set goals and clarify the work activities of their followers. Employees with 
ASD may need leaders high in both factors. These employees will need the 
support and mentoring of their leaders to help them with anxiety regard-
ing difficult tasks. These employees will also need a leader to be clear about 
the employee’s goals and job duties. Research suggests that for employees 
with ASD it is important for leaders to clearly describe performance ex-
pectations and job duties, to provide clear instructions, and to maintain 
consistency in the workplace (Hagner & Cooney, 2005; Hurlbutt & Chalm-
ers, 2004). Thus, both consideration and initiating structure seem to be 
appropriate for effectively leading employees with ASD, and it is expected 
that leaders displaying these behaviors would elicit positive outcomes from 
this population.
PATH-GOAL THEORY
Path-goal theory (House, 1971) describes leadership that motivates follow-
ers by showing them the path toward completing their goals and by remov-
ing obstacles in the way of goal completion and barriers to performance. 
This is particularly important when managing employees with ASD who 

288    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
might face an increased number of obstacles and barriers to performance. 
Path-goal theory also emphasizes the importance of rewarding goal com-
pletion. Path-goal theory calls for leaders to provide direct communication 
and clear instructions to their employees that may be beneficial to employ-
ees with ASD because this reduces ambiguity and uncertainty related to 
expectations regarding job performance. It will be important for managers 
to identify the obstacles that might obstruct the performance of employees 
with ASD, especially if the individual with ASD is not aware of the obstacles 
and barriers hindering performance.
Path-goal theory identifies four leadership behaviors: directive, achieve-
ment oriented, participative, and supportive. When choosing which leader-
ship behavior to utilize with their followers, leaders should consider which be-
haviors might be more effective with their employees with ASD. For example, 
directive behavior might be well suited for managing employees with ASD as 
the leader tells followers what is expected of them and how to perform their 
job, especially when the job is ambiguous. Achievement oriented behavior 
with its emphasis on setting challenging goals and high performance expec-
tations might be appropriate with individuals who are very high functioning, 
but less appropriate with individuals who require significant levels of support. 
Supportive behavior would be expected to be effective with employees with 
ASD especially when those employees experience distressing situations in the 
workplace. Research is needed to determine if and when participative behav-
ior would be appropriate with employees with ASD.
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Transformational leadership occurs when a leader uses emotional value 
based messages in an attempt to motivate employees to go above and be-
yond what they think they can accomplish. Value-based messages are often 
ambiguous and employees with ASD who view concepts in concrete terms 
may not respond well to ambiguous appeals (Hurlbutt & Chalmers, 2004). 
People with ASD often have difficulty understanding abstract concepts re-
lated to their jobs (Hillier et al., 2007). Transformational leaders often call 
for employees to extend or expand their work productivity to help trans-
form the organization. These demands may lead to sensory overload and 
increased levels of stress and anxiety for employees with ASD (Parr & Hunt-
er, 2014; Parr, Hunter, & Ligon, 2013).
Transformational leadership suggests that leaders utilize inspirational 
motivation, idealized influence, intellectual stimulation, and individualized 
consideration to motivate employees (Bass & Avolio, 1993). Thus, trans-
formational leaders may attempt to inspire and motivate followers, serve 
as an ideal role model, challenge followers to be innovative and creative, 

LMX and Autism    289
and demonstrate concern for the needs and feelings of their followers. 
When utilizing these strategies with their followers, leaders should consider 
which strategies might be more effective with their employees with ASD. 
For example, employees with ASD might respond favorably to intellectual 
stimulation because they admire the leader’s intellect and having the op-
portunity to be recognized for using their own intellectual abilities to solve 
problems. Individualized consideration, with its emphasis on demonstrat-
ing concern for the needs and feelings of the follower, might also be effec-
tive with employees with ASD as the leader would be attuned to employees’ 
feelings of anxiety, being overwhelmed, and uncomfortable with change 
and ambiguity (Kirby, Paradise, & King, 1992). Inspirational motivation 
and idealized influence with their emphasis on emotional appeals and vi-
sionary goals may be less effective for motivating employees with ASD given 
challenges with recognizing and responding to social cues and adapting to 
change (Parr, Hunter, & Ligon, 2013; Simic, 1998). Leaders may need to 
be specific in identifying the behaviors they want their followers to exhibit 
and the goals they should achieve. Leaders might also consider using ratio-
nal means of persuasion instead of emotional persuasion (e.g., explaining 
why the change is necessary) as meaningfulness appears to clarify ambigu-
ity (Kirby, Paradise & King, 1992). It should be recognized that change in 
general, and specifically these four strategies, have the potential to create 
ambiguity for followers with ASD and the resulting anxiety it evokes may in-
terfere with effective working relationships (Parr, Hunter, & Ligon, 2013).
Ambiguity is one of the most common outcomes when transformations 
are occurring in organizations. Mindfulness has been researched as a tool 
to help employees handle ambiguity in the workplace (Gärtner 2013; Gon-
do, Patterson, & Palacios, 2013). A recent study found that mindfulness 
was positively related to transformational leadership. The study of transfor-
mational leaders found that they felt the concept of mindfulness was very 
important to the success of their transformation effort. The leaders found 
their own mindfulness made their followers accept them more and allowed 
the leaders to be more aware and cognizant of the concerns of their em-
ployees. The leaders also found that mindfulness helped the firm’s employ-
ees to deal with the ambiguity resulting from the ongoing transformation 
(Wylson & Chesley, 2016). Additionally, mindfulness may also be useful in 
helping employees with ASD handle ambiguity even if they are not in the 
midst of a transformation.
AUTHENTIC LEADERSHIP THEORY
Authentic leadership theory may offer managers guidance in building rela-
tionships with employees with ASD. Authentic leadership calls for leaders to 

290    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
have high moral standards, demonstrate honesty, consider the views of all 
involved, and show concern for their followers. Parr and Hunter (2014) hy-
pothesized that authentic leadership would lead to more positive outcomes 
for employees with ASD than transformational or two-factor leadership. It 
may be important for managers of employees with ASD to display high lev-
els of honesty as these employees often interpret things literally. Parr and 
Hunter’s (2014) study supported the notion that leadership behaviors had 
a large effect on employees with ASD, and that individuals, including those 
on the spectrum, have different needs and preferences for their leaders.
INDIVIDUALIZED LEADERSHIP
Individualized leadership calls for leaders and their followers to create in-
dividualized relationships with each other independent of others in the 
workplace (Dansereau, Yammarino, & Markham, 1995). Leaders’ expecta-
tions of their followers are based on the person’s unique characteristics 
and needs rather than comparing them to other employees (Dansereau et 
al., 1995). This theory may be appropriate for employees with ASD as the 
leader would be able to identify the strengths and needs of their follow-
ers on an individualized basis and create a unique relationship with each 
of their followers. Individualized leadership recognizes the importance of 
leader–member relations, a concept expanded on in the leader–member 
exchange theory.
LMX AND AUTISM
Leader–member exchange theory (LMX) may be one of the most useful 
leadership theories for understanding the individualized relationships 
that leaders create with their subordinates. It has long been recognized 
that leaders do not treat all employees equally (Dansereau, Graen & Haga, 
1975). LMX theory explicitly examines the relationships that develop be-
tween leaders and their followers. LMX theory posits that leaders have 
different exchanges with their followers and that they form relationships 
characterized by trust and respect with some, but not all, members of a 
team. Research on LMX has shown that leader–member relationships can 
be seen as a continuum from low to high quality relationships between 
leaders and their employees (Graen, & Uhl-Bien, 1995; Loi, Mao, & Ngo, 
2009). High quality LMX relationships involve mutual trust and respect 
based on employees performing additional tasks assigned by their supervi-
sors. In contrast, in low-quality LMX relationships employees perform only 
the work they are required to do (Loi, Chan & Lam, 2014). Over time, 

LMX and Autism    291
employees in high quality LMX relationships become members of the in-
group, while employees in low quality relationships become members of 
the out-group. Since not all employees will be part of the in-group with 
high level LMX relationships (Gran & Uhl-Bien, 1995), it is important to 
understand how LMX relationships develop and the implications for em-
ployees with ASD. There are three steps in LMX relationship development 
(Graen & Scandura, 1987). These steps are role-taking, role-making, and 
role-routinization. While LMX shows great potential for managing employ-
ees with ASD, it is important to examine how employees with ASD may 
respond in each step of the LMX relationship development model.
In the first step, role-taking, leaders offer their employees extra work as a 
way to assess their commitment to the leader. Employees need to interpret 
the offer of extra work as a test and positively indicate their willingness to 
take on the extra work, thus being assessed favorably by the leader. Lead-
ers will evaluate a worker’s commitment based on their responses to extra 
assignments (Loi, Chan & Lam, 2014). The number of tests given by the 
leader will vary. Research has found that the more testing episodes that 
occur the more likely it is that supervisors and subordinates will share the 
same evaluation of their relationship quality (Loi, Chan & Lam, 2014).
Employees with ASD may not perceive the offer of extra work as a “test” 
nor understand the implications of saying no to taking on extra tasks. While 
this may be true for employees in general, especially newer, naive employ-
ees, this step may be particularly challenging for employees with ASD as this 
step requires them to pick up subtle cues and hidden messages from their 
bosses and managers. Leaders may need diversity and inclusion training to 
help them understand that employees with ASD may have trouble under-
standing the importance of the offer of extra work and the implications of 
turning down such a request. Additionally, employees with ASD, who may 
prefer clear and unambiguous work directions, may become stressed and 
anxious if their work routine is changed through the addition of tasks out-
side the scope of their job description.
Moreover, because the leader’s test leads to the important decision of 
who is part of the in-group and who is part of the out-group, employees with 
ASD may be unfairly classified into the out-group if they do not go beyond 
their job descriptions and take on extra work. Over time, this may contrib-
ute to the leader’s decision to keep them in the out-group and not allow 
them to move into the in-group, which has been shown to increase produc-
tivity and satisfaction. In this step of LMX relationship development, it be-
comes important for leaders to explain that they are offering the employee 
the opportunity to learn new skills that will help them in the future or that 
taking on this assignment may lead to future career success.
In the second step, role-making, leaders and subordinates achieve mu-
tual expectations of each other’s roles. The follower role becomes more 

292    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
transparent. Employees will expect and trust that they will be rewarded for 
the tasks they are completing (Sin, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2009). This 
second step of LMX theory may work effectively with employees with ASD. 
Employees will see that the duties requested by their supervisor are part of 
their job requirements. Once the reciprocal relationship is achieved, em-
ployees with ASD are expected to appreciate the stability of knowing what 
to expect from their leader if they perform the requested duties. However, 
any changes from the expectations by the leader may cause an employee 
with ASD to lose trust in the leader and the LMX relationship will fail to 
motivate the employee.
The third step in LMX role development is role routinization. In this 
step, the roles of the leader and the member become stable (Graen & Scan-
dura, 1987). The two parties develop patterns of behavior that are now 
routine and the parties know what to expect from the relationship. This is 
an important step in LMX for employees with ASD as they need to feel that 
their leader understands their needs. In this final step, leaders will have 
achieved the goal of employees bypassing their own self-interests and be-
coming committed to the mission of the organization (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 
1991). This may be a step toward transformational leadership.
Employees with ASD could have high level relationships with their lead-
ers if the leaders understand how the three steps of the LMX process may 
need to be modified to accommodate employees with ASD. It may be im-
portant to educate employees with ASD about the three steps of relation-
ship development in LMX. Employees should be concerned with manag-
ing the relationship by demonstrating that they are dependable. Leaders 
should be concerned with managing the relationship by demonstrating 
their trustworthiness.
Research on the quality of LMX relationships has found that leaders and 
members often do not view the quality of the relationship equally (Graen & 
Schiemann, 1978). Agreement has been shown to be higher the longer the 
relationship exists (Sin, Nahrgang, & Morgeson, 2009). Essentially, when the 
role-taking step is longer, leaders and followers tend to agree more on the 
quality of their relationship. This may be problematic for employees with 
ASD as the consistent testing of their commitment by additional assignments 
may lead some employees with ASD to view the relationship poorly and to 
experience anxiety. For LMX to work with autism it is important that leaders 
consistently obtain feedback about their followers’ perceptions of the rela-
tionship. Leaders may need to be trained on how to create high quality rela-
tionships with employees with ASD since LMX may lead to some of the most 
important outcomes for employees with ASD. For example, employees with 
high LMX relationships have been found to have improved career devel-
opment within their organizations (Tangirala, Green, & Ramanuja, 2007). 
Little research has focused on understanding how a more diverse workforce 

LMX and Autism    293
may affect the development of leader–member exchanges and associated 
outcomes (Mourino-Ruiz, 2010). This could be an important component 
of diversity and inclusion training for organizations that are committed to 
creating positive work relationships for their employees.
CONSIDERATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR ORGANIZATIONS AND LEADERS
One of the most challenging issues confronting organizations in the 21st 
century is how diversity may impact the development of effective working 
relationships. Organizations and leaders who are committed to developing 
effective working relationships with their employees with ASD are encour-
aged to consider the following recommendations. These include develop-
ing diversity and inclusion training for coworkers, managers, and supervi-
sors; understanding the costs of accommodating employees with ASD, as 
well as the benefits; encouraging leaders to develop empathy; developing 
mentoring programs for employees with ASD; and examining all of the 
company’s human resource programs and policies. A 2014 study of firms 
hiring employees with disabilities found nine practices that were imple-
mented by a majority of the firms (Erikson, von Schrader, Bruyere & Von 
Looy, 2014). These nine practices were (a) requiring subcontractors to ad-
here to disability nondiscrimination requirements, (b) providing training 
on disability awareness and nondiscrimination, (c) including people with 
disabilities in the diversity and inclusion plan, (d) allowing extended leave 
as an accommodation, (e) having relationships with community organiza-
tions, (f) having a return to work/disability management program, (g) des-
ignating a specific person or office for accommodations, (h) establishing a 
grievance procedure for reasonable accommodations, and (i) offering flex-
ible work arrangements. The study also found three practices that received 
very high ratings of effectiveness but which were only implemented by a few 
organizations. These three practices were formalizing the decision-making 
process for the case-by-case provision of accommodations, establishing a 
disability-focused network (employee resource/affinity group), and creat-
ing a fund for accommodations.
One of the key issues that organizations will need to consider if they wish 
to hire and retain employees with ASD is the need to develop diversity and 
inclusion training for coworkers, managers, and supervisors. Accommoda-
tion efforts should include training for all members of the organization 
to encourage more awareness and sensitivity around issues of disability in 
the workplace (Neely & Hunter, 2014). These efforts should include an 
emphasis on understanding the specific needs of employees with ASD such 
as the need for more frequent and more explicit feedback than managers 

294    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
are used to providing their subordinates. In general, adults with ASD tend 
to prefer work environments where the instructions and expectations are 
clearly defined (Lorenz, Frischling, Caudros, & Heinitz., 2016; Wilczynski 
et al., 2013). Putting performance expectations, work assignments, and 
deadlines in writing may be helpful. The freedom to focus on one task at a 
time rather than multitasking may also be helpful for employees with ASD 
(Lorenz et al., 2016). Being placed in a job that is a good fit and in a struc-
tured environment contributes to job satisfaction and positive outcomes at 
work for adults with ASD (Scott et al., 2015; Wilczynski et al., 2013).
Additionally, organizations that wish to initiate or expand programs to 
hire more individuals with ASD will need to have a realistic understanding 
of both the costs and the benefits of accommodating individuals with ASD. 
Research suggests that adults with ASD may be highly skilled at visual and 
technical tasks (Baldwin, Costley, & Warren, 2014) and have positive quali-
ties like “honesty, efficiency, precision, consistency, low absenteeism, and a 
disinterest in ‘office politics’” (Baldwin et al., 2014, p. 2440; Richards, 2012). 
Companies must balance these benefits with the costs of accommodation.
Leaders who wish to develop effective relationships with their followers 
will also need to become more empathetic. Empathetic leaders may be able 
to develop more effective individualized relationships with their employees 
with ASD. Traditional leadership research has often included the need for 
leaders to empathize with their employees. Empathy is defined as a person’s 
“ability to comprehend another’s feelings” (Salovey & Mayer, 1990, p. 194). 
Wolff, Pescosolido, and Druskat (2002) found that higher levels of empathy 
predicted better performance for leaders. For those managing employees 
with ASD, empathy would seem to be an important component of effective 
leadership, allowing leaders to understand and see problems from the per-
spective of an employee with ASD. In a recent study, 66% of respondents 
with ASD said that they would like to have more support in the workplace, 
including more understanding and respect (Baldwin et al., 2014).
Many organizations that have successfully employed those with ASD 
stress the importance of providing a mentor, champion, or job coach for 
that employee (Autism Speaks, 2016). A mentor could provide both ca-
reer support and psychosocial support (Kram, 1988). Adults with ASD may 
find mentors inside the workplace through formal mentoring programs or 
develop informal mentoring relationships with a supervisor or coworker. 
Mentors and job coaches may be available through autism-specific support 
agencies and organizations. At SAP, individuals with ASD are given men-
tors and team buddies. Team buddies are current SAP employees who are 
willing to team up with a new hire with ASD. SAP also takes advantage of 
outside agencies that can provide job and/or life skill coaches for the indi-
vidual (Holland, 2016).

LMX and Autism    295
Finally, it is recommended that organizations examine all of their com-
pany’s human resource programs and policies. For example, in order to 
attract, select, and retain qualified applicants with ASD, companies must 
examine their recruitment and selection processes, policies, and practices. 
It is important to be precise in writing job descriptions because applicants 
with ASD likely will interpret words and phrases literally. In addition, orga-
nizations must question the emphasis that is put on communication skills 
to determine the required level of competency for various jobs. During the 
interview, managers must be aware that individuals with ASD may not dem-
onstrate the types of nonverbal behaviors (e.g., eye contact and body lan-
guage) that are traditionally recommended to job candidates to create a 
positive impression in the interview. Employees with ASD may struggle with 
the informal, “small talk” portion of an interview and interviewers may need 
training to recognize differences in candidates’ verbal response patterns. 
SAP, a company well-known for hiring people with ASD, has an innovative 
interview process for applicants with ASD. They have the applicants come to 
their office and work on LEGO Mindstorm projects that increase in difficul-
ty as the day progresses. The second half of the day they participate in team 
projects. Once hired, employees participate in a five-week training program. 
The training program was developed by Specialisterne, one of the premiere 
organizations that hires individuals with ASD (Holland, 2016).
Once hired, managers must be very clear about job tasks, expected per-
formance standards, and the deadlines for completing them. This has im-
plications for the performance appraisal and management process. Perfor-
mance feedback is important for all employees. With employees with ASD, 
how the performance feedback is delivered becomes important. It has been 
found that immediate feedback was important and effective for individuals 
with disabilities (Barbetta, Heward, Bradley, & Miller, 1994). An interest-
ing stream of research has begun examining the effectiveness of delivering 
feedback to individuals with ASD covertly through earbud speakers. This 
way of delivering feedback is called covert audio coaching. A study by Ben-
nett, Brady, Scott, Dukes, and Frain (2010) found that covert audio coach-
ing produced improvements in the participant’s job skills and that the skills 
were maintained over time. Covert audio coaching has many similarities 
to side-by-side job coaching but may offer long term advantages. One diffi-
culty with side-by-side job coaching is how and when to reduce the presence 
of the coach from the workplace. Covert audio coaching has an advantage 
in that as an employee performs better there are less verbal prompts from 
the coach. It may also be advantageous to have a process where employees 
with ASD start out with a side-by-side coach and eventually move to a covert 
audio coaching situation. One limitation of covert audio coaching is that it 
is only possible with individuals who have excellent attention and receptive 
language skills (Bennett, Ramasamy, & Honsberger, 2013).

296    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
In addition, training and development may help employees with ASD 
understand their current job and what is required for advancement in the 
organization. Managers also should be willing to make minor adjustments 
for qualified employees who may be over-sensitive to workplace stimuli 
(e.g., bright lights, background noise, etc.). Finally, managers should not 
force employees with ASD into unnecessary teamwork or social gatherings 
without their consent (Tickle, 2009). In addition, coworkers of employees 
with ASD should receive training. At SAP, there is a large effort to train cur-
rent employees on the benefits of working with individuals with ASD and 
how they can help make the program a success (Holland, 2016).
CONCLUSION
Considering the fact that that over the next decade, close to half a million 
people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) will reach adulthood (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015), organizations can expect a large 
increase in the number of potential employees with ASD. In the future, or-
ganizations may choose to include individuals with ASD in their workforce 
for a number of reasons. Some of these may be altruistic reasons. They will 
also have to respond to legal pressures such as nondiscrimination laws and 
community pressure from ASD support agencies. However, organizations 
have to also recognize the benefits that may accrue to them from hiring 
people with ASD. There is research showing that employees with disabilities 
have lower absentee rates and lower turnover rates than employees without 
disabilities. Some individuals with autism enjoy repetitive tasks and look for-
ward to jobs where they can do the same task over and over. This may help 
reduce the need for job enrichment and job enlargement efforts necessary 
for organizations to motivate employees in routine jobs. There are also fed-
eral tax breaks and various state tax breaks for organizations that hire in-
dividuals with ASD. Finally, there are positive reputational effects that may 
occur for organizations that hire employees with ASD. Organizations that 
act responsibly by providing meaningful employment for individuals with 
ASD can contribute to the greater good of society.
While this chapter focused on leaders and managers building relation-
ships with their subordinates with ASD, it should also be recognized that 
very little is known about the leadership behaviors of managers with ASD. 
This relationship would call for training for both employees and leaders. 
Leaders with ASD would need to become aware of how their behaviors may 
affect their followers. Employees would need to be trained on understand-
ing why the leader acts or speaks in a certain manner. In this situation, the 
power differential may be reversed with employees having to learn how 
to manage the relationship with a leader with ASD. LMX with its focus on 

LMX and Autism    297
leader–member relationships (Scandura, 2015) may contribute greatly to 
understanding the benefits and challenges of leader–member relationships 
when both individuals have ASD.
REFERENCES
Autism Speaks. (2016). What is autism? Retrieved April 2016 from https://www 
.autismspeaks.org
Baldwin, S., Costley, D., & Warren, A. (2014). Employment activities and experi-
ences of adults with high-functioning autism and asperger’s disorder. Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 44, 2440–2449.
Barbetta, P. M., Heward, W. L., Bradley, D. M., & Miller, A. D. (1994). Effects of im-
mediate and delayed error correction on the acquisition and maintenance 
of sight words by students with developmental disabilities. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 27, 177–178. doi:10.1901/jaba.1994.27-177.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership: A response to cri-
tiques. In M. M. Chemers, & R. Ayman (Eds.), Leadership theory and research: 
Perspectives and directions (pp. 49–80). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Bennett, K., Brady, M. P., Scott, J., Dukes, C., & Frain, M. (2010). The effects of 
covert audio coaching on the job performance of supported employ-
ees. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 25(3) 173–185. 
doi:10.1177/1088357610371636
Bennett, K. D., Ramasamy, R., & Honsberger, T. (2013). The effects of covert audio 
coaching on teaching clerical skills to adolescents with autism spectrum dis-
order. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 43, 585–593. doi:10.1007/
s10803-012-1597-6
Boekhorst, J. A. (2015). The role of authentic leadership in fostering workplace 
inclusión: A social information processing perspective. Human Resource Man-
agement. 54(2), 241–264.
Brite, R., Nunes, F., & Souza, D. (2015). Labor inclusion of individuals with disabili-
ties: Managers’ conceptions as a contributing factor. Work, 50(4), 553–561.
Brooks, C. (2016, February 29). 10 workplace trends you’ll see in 2016. Business 
News Daily. Retrieved from http://www.businessnewsdaily.com/7616-top-
workplace-trends.html
Bruggink, M., Goei, S. L., & Koot, H. M. (2016). Teachers’ capacities to meet stu-
dents’ additional support needs in mainstream primary education. Teachers 
and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 22(4), 448–460.
Bruyère, S. (2000). Disability employment policies and practices in private and federal sec-
tor organizations. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Extension Division.
Buescher, A. V. S., Cidav, Z., Knapp, M., & Mandell, D. S. (2014). Costs of autism 
spectrum disorders in the United Kingdom and the United States. JAMA Pe-
diatric, 8(168), 721–728.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Autism spectrum disorder: Data and 
statistics. Retrieved March 2016 from www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html

298    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
Chaudoir, S. R., & Fisher, J. D. (2010). The disclosure processes model: Understand-
ing disclosure decision-making and post-disclosure outcomes among people 
living with a concealable stigmatized identity. Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 
236–256.
Cidav, Z., Marcus, S. C., & Mandell, D. S. (2012). Implications of childhood autism 
for parental employment and earnings. Pediatrics, 129, 617–623.
Clair, J. A., Beatty, J. E., & Maclean, T. L. (2005). Out of sight but not out of mind: 
Managing invisible social identities in the workplace. The Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 30(1), 78–95.
Dansereau, F., Graen, G. B., & Haga, W. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach 
to leadership in formal organizations. Organizational Behavior and Human Per-
formance, 13, 46–78.
Dansereau, F., Yammarino, F. J., & Markham, S. E. (1995). Leadership: The multi-le-
vel approaches. Leadership Quarterly, 6, 251–263.
Davidson, J., & Henderson, V. L. (2010). Travel in parallel with us for a while: Sen-
sory geographies of autism. The Canadian Geographer, 54(4), 462–475.
DeJordy, R. (2008). Just passing through stigma, passing, and identity decoupling in 
the work place. Group & Organization Management, 33(5), 504–531.
Dixon, K. A., Kruse, D., & Van Horn, C. E. (2003). Restricted access: A survey of employ-
ers about people with disabilities and lowering barriers to work. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Heldrich Center for Workforce Development, Rutgers University.
Domzal, C., Houtenville, A., & Sharma, R. (2008). Survey of employer perspectives on the 
employment of people with disabilities: Technical report. McLean, VA: CESSI.
Donnelly, R. (2015) Tensions and challenges in the management of diversity and 
inclusion in IT services multinationals in India. Human Resource Management, 
54(2), 199–215. doi: 10.1002/hrm.21654.
Dutton, J. E., Roberts, L. M., & Bednar, J. (2010). Pathways for positive identity 
construction at work: Four types of positive identity and the building of social 
resources. Academy of Management Review, 35(2), 265–293.
Dwertmann, D. J. G., & Boehm, S. A. (2016). Status matters: The asymmetric effects 
of supervisor-subordinate disability incongruence and climate for inclusion. 
Academy of Management Journal, 59(1), 44–64. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.
org/10.5465/amj.2014.0093
Erickson, W. A., von Schrader, S., Bruyère, S. M., & Van Looy, S. A. (2014). The 
employment environment: Employer perspectives, policies, and practices re-
garding the employment of persons with disabilities. Rehabilitation Counseling 
Bulletin, 57(4), 195–208.
Gärtner, C. (2013). Enhancing readiness for change by enhancing mindfulness. 
Journal of Change Management, 13(1), 52–68.
Gerber, P. J., & Price, L. A. (2003). Persons with learning disabilities in the work-
place: What we know so far in the Americans with Disabilities Act era. Learn-
ing Disabilities Research & Practice, 18(2), 132–136.
Gini, A. (1998). Work, identity and self: How we are formed by the work we do. Jour-
nal of Business Ethics, 17(7), 707–714.
Goleman, D. (2006). Emotional intelligence (10th ed.). New York, NY: Bantam Dell.

LMX and Autism    299
Gondo, M., Patterson, K. D. W., & Palacios, S. T. (2013). Mindfulness and the de-
velopment of a readiness for change. Journal of Change Management, 13(1), 
36–51.
Graen G. B., & Scandura T. A. (1987). Toward a psychology of dyadic organizing. 
Research in Organizational Behavior, 9, 175–208.
Graen, G. B., & Schiemann, W. (1978). Leader–member agreement: A vertical dyad 
linkage approach. Journal of Applied Psychology, 63(2), 206–212.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1991). The transformation of professionals into self-
managing and partially self-designing contributors: Toward a theory of lead-
ership-making. Management Department Faculty Publications. Retrieved from 
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/managementfacpub/16
Graen G. B, & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995) Relationship-based approach to leadership: De-
velopment of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 
years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 
6(2), 219–247.
Griffiths, A. J., Giannantonio, C. M., Hurley-Hanson, A. E., & Cardinal, D. 
(2016). Autism in the workplace: Assessing the transition needs of young 
adults with autism spectrum disorder Journal of Business and Management, 
22(1), 5–22.
Hagner, D., & Cooney, B. F. (2005). “I do that for everybody”: Supervising employees 
with autism. Focus on Autism & Other Developmental Disabilities, 20(2), 91–97.
Hendricks, D. (2010). Employment and adults with autism spectrum disorders: 
Challenges and strategies for success. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 32, 
125–134.
Heslin, P. A., Bell, M. P., & Fletcher, P. O. (2012). The devil without and within: A 
conceptual model of social cognitive processes whereby discrimination leads 
stigmatized minorities to become discouraged workers. Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, 33(6), 840–862.
Higgins, K. K., Koch, L. C., Boughfman, E. M., & Vierstra, C. (2008). School-to-work 
transition and asperger syndrome. Work, 31(3), 291–298.
Hillier, A., Campbell, H., Mastriani, K., Izzo, M. V., Kool-Tucker, A., Cherry, L., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2007). Two-year evaluation of a vocational support pro-
gram for adults on the autism spectrum. Career Development for Exceptional In-
dividuals, 30, 35–47.
Holland, R. (2016, July 11). The benefits of recruiting employees with cognitive dis-
abilities. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/hbsworkingknowl-
edge/2016/07/11/the-benefits-of-recruiting-employees-with-autism-spec-
trum-disorder/#728781502f7f
House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness, Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 16(3), 321–339.
Hurlbutt, K., & Chalmers, L. (2004). Employment and adults with asperger syn-
drome. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 19(4), 215–222.
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Ilies, R. (2004). The forgotten ones? The validity of 
consideration and initiating structure in leadership research. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 89(1), 36–51.

300    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
Kira, M., & Balkin, D. B. (2014). Interactions between work and identities: Thriving, 
withering, or redefining the self? Human Resource Management Review, 24(2), 
131–14.
Kirby, P. C., Paradise, L. V., & King, M. I. (1992). Extraordinary leaders in education: 
Understanding transformational leadership. Journal of Educational Research, 
85(5), 303–311.
Kram, K. E. (1988). Mentoring at work. Developmental relationships in organizational life. 
Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Krieger, B., Kinebanian, A., Prodinger, B., & Heigl, F. (2012). Becoming a member 
of the workforce: Perceptions of adults with Asperger syndrome. Work, 43(2), 
141–157.
Leigh, J. P., & Du, J. J. (2015). Brief report: Forecasting the economic burden of au-
tism in 2015 and 2025 in the United States. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 45(12), 4135–4139.
Loi, R., Chan, K. W., & Lam, L. W. (2014), Leader–member exchange, organization-
al identification, and job satisfaction: A social identity perspective. Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 87, 42–61. doi:10.1111/joop.12028
Loi, R., Mao, Y., & Ngo, H. (2009), Linking leader–member exchange and em-
ployee work outcomes: The mediating role of organizational social and 
economic exchange. Management and Organization Review, 5, 401–422. 
doi:10.1111/j.1740-8784.2009.00149.x
Lorenz, T., Frischling, C., Cuadros, R., & Heinitz, K. (2016). Autism and overcoming 
job barriers: Comparing job-related barriers and possible solutions in and outside of 
autism-specific employment. Retrieved from http://journals.plos.org/plosone/
article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0147040
Meister, A., Jehn, K. A., & Thatcher, S. M. (2014). Feeling misidentified: The con-
sequences of internal identity asymmetries for individuals at work. Academy of 
Management Review, 39(4), 488–512.
Mouriño-Ruiz, E. L. (2010). Leader–member exchange (LMX): The impact of 
leader-employee relationships in the 21st century workplace: Implications for 
research on Latinos in the workforce. The Business Journal of Hispanic Research, 
4(1), 35–42.
Mynatt, B. S., Gibbons, M. M., & Hughes, A. (2014). Career development for college 
students with asperger’s syndrome. Journal of Career Development, 41, 185–198.
National Autistic Society. (2016). Facts and statistics. Retrieved April 2016 from www.
autism.org.uk
Neely, B. H., & Hunter, S. T. (2014). In a discussion on invisible disabilities, let us 
not lose sight of employees on the autism spectrum. Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 7(2), 274–277.
Nicholas, D. B., Attridge, M., Zwaigenbaum, L., & Clark, M. (2014). Vocational su-
pport approaches in autism spectrum disorder: A synthesis review of the lite-
rature. Autism, 19(2), 235–245.
Parr, A. D., & Hunter, S. T. (2014). Enhancing work outcomes of employees with 
autism spectrum disorder through leadership: Leadership for employees with 
autism spectrum disorder. Autism, 18(5), 545–554.

LMX and Autism    301
Parr, A. D., Hunter, S. T., & Ligon, G. S. (2013). Questioning universal applicability 
of transformational leadership: Examining employees with autism spectrum 
disorder. Leadership Quarterly, 24(4), 608–622.
Patton, E. (2009). When diagnosis does not always mean disability: The challenge 
of employees with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Journal of 
Workplace and Behavioral Health, 24, 326–343.
Pellicano, E., Dinsmore, A., & Charman, T. (2014). What should autism research 
focus upon? Community views and priorities from the United Kingdom. Au-
tism, 18, 756–770.
Ragins, B. R. (2008). Disclosure disconnects: Antecedents and consequences of 
disclosing invisible stigmas across life domains. The Academy of Management 
Review, 33(1), 194–215.
Ren, L. R., Paetzold, R. L., & Colella, A. (2008). A meta-analysis of experimental 
studies on the effects of disability on human resource judgments. Human Re-
source Management Review, 18, 191–203.
Richards, J. (2012). Examining the exclusion of employees with asperger syndrome 
from the workplace, Personnel Review, 41(5), 630–646.
Saayman, T., & Crafford, A. (2011). Negotiating work identity. SA Journal of Indus-
trial Psychology, 37(1), 1–12. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/sajip.
v37i1.963
Salovey, P., & Mayer, J. D. (1990). Emotional intelligence. Imagination, Cognition and 
Personality, 9(3), 185–211.
Samson, A. C., Huber, O., & Gross, J. J. (2012). Emotion regulation in asperger’s 
syndrome and high-functioning autism. Emotion, 12(4), 659–665.
Santuzzi, A. M., Waltz, P. R., Rupp, D., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2014). Invisible disabili-
ties: Unique challenges for employees and organizations. Journal of Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice, 7(2), 204–219.
Scandura, T. A. (2015). Essentials of organizational behavior: An evidence-based approach. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Scott, M., Falkmer, M., Girdler, S., & Falkmer, T. (2015). Viewpoints on factors for 
successful employment for adults with autism spectrum disorder. Retrieved from 
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0139281
Shattuck, P. T., Narendorf, S. C., Cooper, B., Sterzing, P. R., Wagner, M., & Taylor, 
J. L. (2012). Postsecondary education and employment among youth with an 
autism spectrum disorder. Pediatrics, 129(6), 1042–9.
Shore, L. M., Chung-Herrera, B. G., Dean, M. A., Ehrhart, K. H., Jung, D. I., Randel, 
A. E., & Singh, G. (2009). Diversity in organizations: Where are we now and 
where are we going? Human Resource Management Review, 19, 117–133.
Shore, L. M., Randel, A. E., Chung, B. G., Dean, M. A., Ehrhart, K. H., & Singh, G. 
(2011). Inclusion and diversity in work groups: A review and model for future 
research. Journal of Management, 37(4), 1262–1289. 0149206310385943.
Simic, I. (1998). Transformational leadership–the key to successful management of 
transformational organizational changes. Facta Universitas, 1(6), 49–55.
Sin, H. P., Nahrgang, J.D., & Morgeson, F. P. (2009). Understanding why they don’t 
see eye to eye: An examination of leader–member exchange (LMX) agree-
ment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(4), 1048–1057.

302    A. E. HURLEY-HANSON and C. M. GIANNANTONIO
Sveningsson, S., & Alvesson, M. (2003). Managing managerial identities: Organiza-
tional fragmentation, discourse and identity. Human Relations, 56(10). doi:10
.1177/0018726703561000.1
Stone, D., & Collla, A. (1996). A model of factors affecting the treatment of disabled 
individuals in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 21(2), 352–401.
Tangirala, S., Green, S. G., & Ramanujam, R. (2007). In the shadow of the boss’s 
boss: Effects of supervisors’ upward exchange relationships on employees. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(2), 309–320.
Taylor, J. L., & Seltzer, M. M. (2011). Employment and post-secondary educational 
activities for young adults with autism spectrum disorders during the transi-
tion to adulthood. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 41(5), 566–74. 
doi:10.1007/s10803-010-1070-3
Tickle, L. (2009). Employing adults with autism: Don’t write them off. The 
Guardian. Retrieved from www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/17/
employing-adults-with-autism
Tracy, L. (1987). Consideration and initiating structure: Are they basic dimensions 
of leader behavior? Social Behavior and Personality, 15(1), 21–33.
Wilczynski, S. M., Trammell, B., & Clarke, L. S. (2013). Improving employment out-
comes among adolescents and adults on the autism spectrum. Psychology in the 
Schools, 50(9), 876–887.
Wolff, S. B., Pescosolido, A. T., & Druskat, V. U. (2002). Emotional intelligence as 
the basis of leadership emergence in self-managing work teams. Leadership 
Quarterly, 13, 505–522.
World Health Organization. (2013). Autism spectrum disorders and other developmen-
tal disorders: From raising awareness to building capacity. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author.
Wylson, A., & Chesley, J. A. (2016). The benefits of mindfulness in leading transfor-
mational change: Managing ambiguity. Graziadio Business Review, 19(1).
Zikic, J., & Hall, D. T. (2009). Toward a more complex view of career exploration. 
The Career Development Quarterly, 58(2), 181–191.

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 303–326
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
303
CHAPTER 11
TRANS FORMATIONAL
LMX, Cisgenderism, and Building 
Inclusive Workplaces
Manuel J. Tejeda
Barry University and Alliance for GLBTQ Youth
ABSTRACT
Conversations about gender identity and expression have become complex, 
thought-provoking, and prevalent dialogues in contemporary organizational 
dialogues. Partly responses to legal challenges and partly policy change to im-
prove inclusivity, gender nonconformity have become a central issue in dia-
logues about and responses regarding corporate diversity. While there should 
be no doubt that transgender individuals experience the fiercest brunt from 
violations of cisnormativity, other individuals whose sexual anatomy or gender 
expression transgress the binary essentialist paradigm experience marginaliza-
tion as well. The purpose of this chapter is to explore the ways in which the 
workplace—as both a social and physical environment—is designed to main-
tain gender essentialism, reinforcing stereotypical representations that restrain 
gender identity and expression. The chapter first reviews some of the terminol-
ogy around gender identity and expression focusing predominantly on trans-
gender issues in the workplace. The chapter next describes how the organiza-

304    M. J. TEJEDA
tional environment aligns to favor cisnormativity and marginalizes those with 
nonbinary gender or expression by reviewing the current state of empirical and 
theoretical work on the topic. The chapter then explores the role of leader–
member relationships as both a reinforcement of and ultimately a mechanism 
for dismantling the coded privilege within the workplace and thus promoting 
inclusivity. Finally, the chapter concludes with recommendations and consider-
ations for organizations and leaders to address workplace cisnormativity.
While contemporary public discourse has increased attention to transgen-
der issues in modern society, acceptance of transgender individuals re-
mains a challenge. Gender identity and expression have become prevalent 
and thought-provoking topics in organizations today. As gender scholars 
have noted, organizations are not only imbued within a gender binary so-
cial structure, but they are also active agents in securing that sexual dual-
ity is consistently reinforced. The interpersonal and interactional aspects 
of organizations actively reward cisnormativity, the presumption that indi-
viduals’ performative gender expression is aligned with their sexual assign-
ment. Indeed, organizations are coded social systems designed to promote 
the privilege of the historically powerful and masculine archetype of the 
straight White cisgender male. Social interactions—from the interpersonal 
to the procedural—that comprise the rational and goal-oriented activities 
of an organization are often complicit in promoting a power hierarchy that 
maintains that straight White cisgender male archetype as the paragon of 
the desirable manager to the exclusion or disfavoring of other groups.
Unlike other forms of inequality based on gender and sexuality where 
overt or even violent expressions of discrimination have become rarified, 
transgender persons remain targets of interpersonal and institutional dis-
crimination. Current estimates suggest that there are at least some 700,000 
trans-identified individuals in the United States (Gates, 2011). And these 
individuals experience significant challenges in society generally, and the 
workplace specifically, if not the fiercest of modern discrimination.
In the 2016 U.S. Trans Survey, 6,400 participants exposed some stagger-
ing inequities against transgender individuals (National Center for Trans-
gender Equality, 2016). Transgender youth in grades K–12, for example, 
reported significant experiences with verbal harassment, physical assault, 
and sexual violence. Adults experienced household incomes below $10,000 
per year at rates four times greater than the national average and equally 
alarming rates of homelessness, housing insecurity, and violent experiences 
accessing public accommodations. Nearly half of respondents reported at-
tempting suicide.
Data on transgender individuals in the workplace expose some equally 
serious issues. A stunning 90% of the 2016 U.S. Trans Survey sample re-
ported workplace discrimination with overt mistreatment. Burns and Kre-
hely (2011) also report that 26% of their sample reported losing their 

Trans Formational    305
employment as a result of being transgender or gender nonconforming. 
Furthermore, in their aggregation of samples they found between 8% and 
17% of sample participants reported being not only overlooked for a pro-
motion, but also overtly informed that they received negative job evalua-
tions because of gender nonconformity. Up to 41% percent experienced 
verbal violence in their workplaces or had their workstations vandalized. 
Unable to continue in their work environments, almost 20% sought em-
ployment in the underground economy involving illicit drug sales or sex 
work. Even still, nearly three-quarters of individuals who underwent gender 
transition reported feeling more comfortable at work despite continued 
mistreatment, underscoring the dramatic normative forces in play.
Grant et al. (2011) note that transgender individuals represent one of 
the most vulnerable segments of the current adult population. Moreover, 
gender role violations are among the most likely of transgressive behav-
iors to experience significant and severe backlash (Rudman & Fairchild, 
2004). The presentation of counternormative behavior attracts immediate 
attention from workplace colleagues that range from gossip to more overt 
actions of disapproval, and culminates in the most serious of dangers in-
cluding interpersonal violence. This is particularly true for men who fail to 
present with normative role expectations, but impacts all persons who vio-
late binary normativity. Gender conformity is a performative stance that sig-
nals to surrounding actors an individual’s compliance with a binary gender 
classification; that is, that individuals are participating in a social schema 
with a compulsory gender binary. Violations of that performance, as Burns 
and Krehely (2011) reported, are often immediate and severe.
The workplace climate remains an important area of research regarding 
gender and gender nonconformity (Ruggs et al., 2013). Yet, there remains 
significant shortfalls in our understanding of workplace challenges faced by 
individuals who fail to conform to a gender structure that meets the binary 
expectations of most organizational leaders and other authorities (Grant 
et al., 2011).
Indeed, conforming to normative binary gender roles promotes a social 
safety and offers some refuge from a stigmatized status (Becker, 1963). This 
is, of course, advantageous in the relatively conservative work environment. 
Individuals who avoid any ostracism on the basis of their gender noncon-
formity succeed also in avoiding a host of other adverse outcomes including 
physical abuse and dehumanization (Crocker, Major, & Steele, 1998)
TRANSGENDER IN THE WORKPLACE
Reflecting on workplace issues related to transgender discrimination is 
a current managerial imperative for several reasons. First and foremost, 

306    M. J. TEJEDA
discrimination against individuals who are gender nonconforming or trans-
gender (hereafter transgenders) is not only malignant but has proven to be 
metastatic. Substantive research evidence has accumulated attesting to the 
negative experiences of transgenders in workplace settings and—as like 
in the general population—ranges from avoidance to bullying and overt 
harassment to denial of promotion and termination (Levitt & Ippolito, 
2014; Dispenza, Watson, Chung, & Brack, 2012; Budge, Tebbe & Howard, 
2010). Some experiences shockingly included verbal and organizationally 
sanctioned challenges to the authenticity of an individual’s gender identity 
(Schilt & Connell, 2007). These experiences materialized from a variety of 
sources surrounding transgenders including clients, supervisors, and co-
workers. The consequences were severe.
Second, all forms of workplace discrimination have interpersonal as well as 
dynamic, systemic effects. The impact of minute aggressions promotes cultures 
of exclusion that become increasingly intolerant of diversity and ultimately 
lead to distilling homogenous workplace (Shore, Randel, Chung, Ehrhart, & 
Singh, 2011). While such systemic discrimination is illegal in the most Western 
societies, legal action is typically a last step toward remedy by transgenders. 
Meanwhile, the normative effects of culture, not only through interpersonal 
behavior but also through the construction of policy and expectations, can 
inculcate a recalcitrant system of bigotry whether in the forms of racism, mi-
sogyny, heterosexism, transphobia, or any other form of discrimination.
Third, transgenders are a vulnerable population. Not only do all gender 
nonconforming individuals face unrestrained—even socially sanctioned—
discrimination, but such individuals have few legal protections. In the 
United States, recent rulings by the Equal Employment Opportunity Com-
mission such as Macy versus Holder (2012), found on appeal that “discrimi-
nation based on gender identity, change of sex, and/or transgender status 
is cognizable under Title VII” and is a form of sex discrimination. This of-
fers some protection at the federal level in the United States, but narrowly 
applies to mainly government employees. Broader protections are not avail-
able, though there has been legislation proposed such as the Employment 
Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) that at this time is still pending passage in 
the U.S. House of Representatives.
At state and local levels, legal protections against employment discrimi-
nation toward transgenders is a patchwork. The states of California, Colo-
rado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Mas-
sachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode 
Island, Vermont, Washington, and the District of Columbia all have codi-
fied protections, but these protections vary. Maine’s covers access to credit 
and education; while Nevada’s bans discrimination in employment as well 
as housing, hospitals, state services and places of business. Finally, many 

Trans Formational    307
municipalities have responded to offer legal protections where state laws do 
not exist or do not offer comprehensive protections. The lack of legal re-
course also promotes a permissive climate toward discriminatory behavior.
THEORETICAL OVERVIEW
Our models from gender theory and queer theory provide context—and 
even predict—discrimination against transgenders. Essentialists concep-
tions of gender have noted that the emergence of gender-based form of 
oppression emerge from challenges to the socially constructed normative 
sexual behavior. Scholars have noted that gender goes beyond the classi-
fication of sex roles into areas such as milieu stability power differentials 
(Hawkesworth, 2006). Table 11.1 provides an overview of terminology em-
ployed in this article that also has entered use in many organizations.
TABLE 11.1  Transgender Terminology and Definitions for This 
Chapter
Term
Definition
Binarism/Binarist
The systemic or interpersonal ideology that insists on stable 
opposites to construct special reality. Binarist refers to an 
individual espousing this approach.
Bigender
Bigender refers to individuals who experience exactly two 
gender identities, which while typically male and female may 
also include nonbinary identities.
Cis
Cis is a Latin prefix meaning “one the same side of.” This term 
is sometimes written in prefix form as cis- or as a single word 
without the dash as an adjective. 
Cisgender
Cisgender is an umbrella term to describe persons whose 
birth-assigned bodies and gender identity are congruent.
Cis-male/cisman
Cis-male or Cis man refers to a male whose birth-assigned 
body is congruent with his gender identity and expresses 
culturally normative masculinity. 
Cis-woman/cisfemale
Cis-woman or cisfemale refers to a female whose birth-
assigned body is congruent with her gender identity and 
expresses culturally normative femininity.
Cissexism
This terms refers to a systemic or interpersonal ideology 
that disparages individuals whose gender identities do not 
confirm to normative expectations of the gender binary.
Cisgenderism
This is a more expansive term than cissexism describing 
systemic or personal ideology that denigrates the feminine 
as well persons whose identities challenge normative 
expectations of gender.
(continued)

308    M. J. TEJEDA
TABLE 11.1  Transgender Terminology and Definitions for This 
Chapter (continued)
Term
Definition
Gender Binary
This term refers to the classification of sex and gender into 
the distinct, disconnected and opposite forms of masculine 
and feminine. 
Gender Identity
A person’s internal sense of one’s gender. 
Gender Expression
The culturally-fluid, external manifestations of gender that 
can include appearance, dress, mannerisms and body 
characteristics. 
Gender Fluid
This refers to gender identity where an individual may 
identify across a gender spectrum over time including being 
genderless. 
Gender Non-Conforming
Individuals whose expression of their gender violates the 
socially normative and binary expectations of gender. 
Genderqueer
This is often a catchall category for all nonbinary gender 
identities that are not exclusively feminine or masculine. An 
alternative term for genderqueer is gender-expansive. 
Sexual Orientation
An individual’s enduring affectional, physical, and romantic 
attraction to another gender. 
Trans
Trans is a Latin prefix meaning “on the opposite side of.”
Transgender
This is another umbrella term for persons whose gender 
identity and/or expression differs from the normative 
expressions derived from their birth-assigned gender.
Note this term is sometimes written as trans*, with the 
asterisk denoting a wild card for all variations. Leaders in 
the transgender community have criticized the presence 
of the asterisk noting that it is redundant, unnecessary and 
unwelcome, commenting that the asterisk has other uses 
inconsistent with the wildcard. 
Transition
The process of altering one’s birth-sex. It is not a “sex 
change.” The process includes social, medical, legal as well 
as personal steps toward an individual’s authentic gender. 
Transphobia
The term refers to the dislike, prejudice and aversion to 
transgender persons. Although commonly used in society, 
the term cissexism more accurately describes this bias. 
Trans man
A gender identity that may be held by an individual who 
rejects a birth-assigned female gender and identifies/
expresses as male. 
Trans woman
A gender identity that may be held by an individual who 
rejects a birth-assigned male gender and identifies/expresses 
as female. 
Special note: Trans and gender fluid terminology is constantly progressing and evolving. 
This is not an exhaustive list: its purpose is only to offer readers unfamiliar with the area 
of gender and sexuality some vocabulary related to this chapter. The terminology here is 
sourced from a variety of experts and journals.

Trans Formational    309
Gender Theory
Gender is a critical component toward organizing relationships, offering 
rules of normative behavior as well as promoting meaning and context to 
interpersonal interactions (Harding, 1986). Other theorists have extended 
that thinking and suggested that gender is an epistemology for understand-
ing how culture defines not only identities but also socially constructs a nar-
rative of belongingness (Hausman, 2001). Social structures are built and re-
inforced to empower an essentialist social system that attributes personal and 
interpersonal characteristics to sexual anatomy. As noted by Stryker (1994),
Bodies are rendered meaningful only through some culturally and histori-
cally specific mode of grasping their physicality that transforms the flesh into 
a useful artifact. ... Gendering is the initial step in this transformation, insepa-
rable from the process of forming an identity by means of which we’re fitted 
to a system of exchange in a heterosexual economy. (p. 249)
The gendering of our world is cemented into our social systems by asser-
tions that binary gendering is an outcome of nature (Garfinkel, 1967). As a 
result, failure to conform to gender expectations destabilizes relationships 
whether between a person and a peer or a person and an organization. As 
Scott (1986) comments,
Gender is a constitutive element of social relationships based on perceived 
differences between the sexes, and, gender is a primary way of signifying re-
lationships of power. . . . Changes in the organization of social relationships 
always correspond to changes m representations of power. (p. 1067)
Indeed, she adds that this element of gender becomes a powerful orga-
nizing force through social institutions (religious, educational, legal, politi-
cal and even scientific) such that challenging gender binary assertion will 
result in unequivocal opposition.
Individuals with essentialist views of gender in the workplace, particu-
larly those in positions of power such as supervisors, will be inclined to resist 
or pathologize attempts to recognize gender nonconformity because it vio-
lates the binary interpretation of their social reality (Foucault, 1994). The 
workplace contains not only the cultural tools of conformity but even the 
physical devices to support the conformity. While these devices include bath-
rooms, they include the social behaviors such as recognizing gender using 
“sir” or “madam,” the use of gendered pronouns, and persistently catego-
rizing by gender (Maccoby, 1988). Sadjadi (2013), for example, notes how 
medical providers subtly advocate for gender conformity and even police 
interventions that might lead to nonbinary ambiguities during body modi-
fication. The process is not overt. It is embedded within the technologies 

310    M. J. TEJEDA
employed by the medical practitioner, and the outcomes are deemed suc-
cessful if clear sexuality is assigned to trans or intersex individuals.
Indeed, as Weingberg and Cleveland (2017) describe elsewhere in this 
volume, the process of gendered communication is deeply embedded in 
organizations and across all person-organization interactions. They iden-
tify gender as a deep-level construct firmly entrenched within organizations 
and enacted in all social situations. These behavioral and communication 
codes serve to legitimize gendered role interactions and maintain a rig-
id separation of the masculine and feminine. While they further serve to 
buttress the male-centered power structure, they equally serve to establish 
binary-centered role expectations.
Gender theory offers further insights into additional consequences faced 
by transgenders should they also choose to medically transition. The power 
structure of the workplace inherently privileges the masculine. As such, gen-
der theory would generally propose (a) that there will be benefits to achiev-
ing perceived gender conformity, and (b) that individuals who experience a 
male-to-female transition would encounter greater adversity or consequences 
than individuals who experience female-to-male transitions. Indeed, Schilt 
and Connell (2007) colleagues of the same posttransition gender were more 
likely to mentor transgenders post transition. In other words, once individu-
als aligned their bodies medically to a gender binary, they were more like-
ly to receive the benefits of mentoring from other employees of the same 
sex. As to the second consequence, Schilt (2006) found that female-to-male 
transgender individuals received higher performance ratings after transition. 
Moreover, Schilt and Wiswall (2008) reported that male-to-female transgen-
der employees reported a decrease in pay after transition.
Queer Theory
Like gender theory, queer theory explores the architecture of social 
privilege and power as it is based in heteronormative gender identity and 
binary-normative compliance (Gamson & Moon, 2004; Herek, 2004; Seid-
man, 1996). Queer theory represents a direct challenge to an essentialist 
construction about gender roles and sexual orientation bound to biologi-
cally-centered gender-binary heteronormative schema (Kimmel, 1996). It is 
an attempt to expose the cultural demands of identity (particularly sexual 
identity) as social constructions that serve to promote oppression (Jagose, 
1996). However, it is important to note carefully that transgenders are not 
necessarily violating heteronormativity, nor does disregarding the gender 
binary imply a violation of identity, especially as one to resist oppression. 
Rather, it is the social contraption that enforces identity, and it is that con-
traption that is opposed by any type of sexual nonconformity.

Trans Formational    311
Discrimination based on sex is a well-understood and elaborated con-
cept in the research literature that penalizes all genders (Uhlmann & Co-
hen, 2005; Cialdini & Trost, 1998). As Schein (2001) noted, the attribu-
tions assigned to women, for example, are divergent from the role qualities 
society assigns to managerial success such as assertiveness, leadership, and 
dominance. As an example, Carli (2001) found that women expressing a 
dominant and assertive communication style—a stereotypically gender in-
consistent behavior—were viewed as less influential by males than women 
who tempered their communication styles with displays of warmth, a stereo-
typically gender-consistent behavior.
Butler (1999), for example, suggests that identity can be understood as 
“tenuously constituted in time” through a “stylized repetition of acts” that 
seek to “approximate the ideal of a substantial ground of identity,” which 
moves various dimensions off the ground of a “substantial model of iden-
tity” toward a “constituted social temporality” (p. 179). That is, identity is 
a performative act learned by individuals and sanctioned by culture. It is 
an act of performance that validates the socially expected roles dictated by 
society as well as organizations. And as Landström (2007) notes, through 
this lens we are able to question the binary exclusivity of such labels as “mas-
culine” and “feminine” regardless of where that binary emerges, whether it 
be the society or the workplace.
Indeed, as a partial verification of both the social enforcement of role 
expectations and the impact of performativity, Schilt (2010) found that 
some transmen gain the social privilege of male sexuality. While transwom-
en gained the marginalization associated with female gender expression, 
some transmen gained acceptance and with it the dominance, influence 
and privilege of the male gender.
Longstanding social forces rooted in essentialist culture are both ubiq-
uitous and unrelenting. Through its effect, heterosexuality continues to be 
the undisputed norm. And the anticipation of heterosexuality reinforces the 
social requirement of the gender binary. The expectation of heterosexual 
behavior buttresses the social need for fixed identities like man/woman and 
husband/wife and the performances of these roles in a manner that appeases 
society. Violations of these categories are stigmatized (Becker, 1963) because 
they violate a form of social trust between individuals. Or differently said, 
anticipated categories like the performance of husband/wife are betrayed.
The workplace—as it is gender coded—is also heteronormatively coded. 
Photos of spouses are presumed to be opposite gendered; families are pre-
sumed to be biologically-based or matrimonially bound; honeymoon stories 
and pictures, binary pronouns (whether in speech, policy, or advertising), all 
bolster normative conformity. Transgressive performances (such as two male 
partners kissing on their honeymoon) are socially sanctioned oftentimes 

312    M. J. TEJEDA
with a policy restricting any such performances including heterosexual ones 
(Gedro & Mizzi, 2014; Seidmen, 1996; Tejeda, 2004, 2006).
Queer theory would suggest that transgenders perform in ways that chal-
lenge not only the overarching binary role expectations of society, but also 
challenge the systemic structure that craves individuals who belong to clear 
and distinct categories whether they are biological, social or otherwise. The 
response to such transgressions will be swift, protean, and multipronged. As 
Bornstein (1994) described, transgenders are “gender outlaws” and their 
“mere presence is often enough to make people sick” (p. 72). And indeed, 
in a sample of 139 transgender employees, Brewster, Velez, DeBlaere, and 
Moradi (2012) employed a grounded theory framework to determine the 
scope of hostilities toward transgenders. The findings suggest a uniform 
and universal constellation of hostile sources impacting the workplace ex-
perience. As expected by theory, hostilities emerged at the interpersonal 
level with similar reports of experienced bigotry by other researchers. How-
ever, this research also exposed the systemic level hostilities (such as bath-
room use policies), while others were related to gendered expectations of 
dress and personal appearance (Herman, 2013).
CISGENDERISM
The term cisgender refers to individuals whose assigned sex (that is birth sex) 
aligns with their gender identity (Schilt & Westbrook, 2009). And there are 
derivative terms such as cismale to describe one whose birth sex is male and 
whose gender identity is also male. Walls and Costello (2010) extended the 
use to identify a social privilege that is gained by experiencing the align-
ment of birth sex and gender identity. As they noted, cisgender privilege is 
the “set of unearned advantages that individuals who identify as the gender 
they were assigned at birth accrue solely due to having a cisgender iden-
tity” (p. 83). These advantages range from the social to the political to the 
economic. Most prominently perhaps is that “cisgender individuals don’t 
live with the fear of being targeted for violence, humiliation, and exclusion 
based on gender identity, nor do they face interrogation about what their 
bodies look like” (p.83). These privileges both go unnoticed and facilitate 
daily interactions.
Like heterosexism, cisgenderism refers to the aggregation of these privi-
leges in a manner that denigrates and pathologizes any individual who is 
gender nonconforming. As Lennon and Mistler (2014) note, this aggrega-
tion results in a rigid hierarchy of gender conforming behaviors that has 
the intent of subordinating violators and enforcing coded gender norms. It 
extends the term transphobia by focusing on oppression as well as aversion.

Trans Formational    313
Understanding trans inclusivity in the workplace requires an under-
standing of how the workplace is cisgender coded. And promoting inclusiv-
ity through mechanisms such as leadership, as will be addressed later in this 
chapter, requires an understanding of cisgender privilege.
The Cisgender Workplace
As with gender and heterosexism, the workplace is intimately and stub-
bornly coded to support cisgender privilege. The workplace is neither a 
neutral nor barrier free environment to transgenders, and their experience 
has already been documented in the research, as noted earlier in this chap-
ter. However, the nature of privilege is poorly documented in the research 
literature though clearly scholarship has begun to address it (Lennon & 
Mistler, 2014; Yarovsky, 2016). Moreover, Schilt (2010) documents how 
transgender (particularly trans men) can conditionally attain cisgender 
privileges usually held by birth-assigned males. Nevertheless, while privi-
lege acquisition may be partially socially fluid, its presence can be observed.
Table 11.2 identifies some examples of cisgender privilege in the work-
place. Perhaps the most notable of these cisgender privileges, or at least the 
most commonly discussed, is access to bathrooms without the potential for 
fear and ridicule. Cisgender individuals rarely if ever question the dangers 
around using a public bathroom. Yet, by no means the only form. An ex-
ample of how language frames these observations is an offensive term like 
“she was born a man”; people are actually born as babies, not adults.
TABLE 11.2  Some Workplace Examples of Cisgender Privilege
1.	The use of workplace restroom without fear, intimidation or, in some cases, arrest.
2.	The use changing room facilities for jobs requiring uniform or clothes rotations 
during the day (cf. operating room nurse).
3.	Freedom from being asked about genitalia or gender confirmation surgery, privately 
or publicly.
4.	Freedom for being required to have your authentic gender externally validated as a 
function of how well you “pass.”
5.	Your identity is not questioned in the context of a pathology.
6.	Your identity is not confounded with your suitability to do a job.
7.	You have no concerns self-identifying your gender on job applications or on hiring 
documents.
8.	You can readily identify potential role models and mentors.
9.	You do not experience justifications about colleagues’ behaviors as a context of your 
gender identity (you are not told that you made a colleague panic).
10.	 Your name and/or use of pronouns is not questioned.
11.	 You are able to present legal identification without concern.
12.	 Gender exclusive spaces and events are accessible without question (for example 
professional women’s networking groups or men’s corporate team sport). 

314    M. J. TEJEDA
LEADERSHIP AND INCLUSIVITY
Management research on diversity has almost focused exclusively on 
mitigating risks. Shore et al. (2009) note that the research on diversity is 
dominated by addressing the problems that must be allayed, such as dis-
crimination, tokenism, and bias. Nevertheless, as the research on diversity 
has developed more attention has centered on addressing organizational 
mechanisms that promote valuing diversity instead of simple managing it, 
(Gonzalez & DeNisi, 2009) and the concept of inclusion has been consis-
tently overlooked in the research. Yet, as Riordan (2014) alludes, diversity 
is irrelevant without inclusivity.
Inclusivity has entered other social sciences such as psychology (cf. 
Brewer, 1991) and social work (Mor Barak, 2000), but only recently in the 
organizational literature. Pelled, Ledford, and Mohrman (1999) offered a 
definition of inclusion as “the degree to which an employee is accepted and 
treated as an insider by others in a work system” (p. 1014), whereas Miller 
(1998) defined inclusion as the degree to which diverse individuals “are 
allowed to participate and are enabled to contribute fully” (p. 151). More 
recently, though, in an attempt to build a measurement instrument for in-
clusivity, Roberson (2006) argued that inclusion refers to “the removal of 
obstacles to the full participation and contribution of employees in organi-
zations” (p. 217). Roberson eventually defined inclusion as
the way an organization configures its systems and structures to value and 
leverage the potential, and to limit the disadvantages, of differences. Accord-
ingly, inclusion in organizations would be characterized by different perspec-
tives and by structures, policies, and practices to recognize and use these per-
spectives, (p. 221)
But the terminology addressing the removal of obstacles, and leveraging 
potential and configuring systems, inherently suggests leadership as a ve-
hicle for promoting inclusivity.
Recently, Shore and colleagues (2011) drew attention to the lack of re-
search on inclusivity in the organizational literature. They noted that the 
concept of inclusivity can not only advance our understanding of diversity, 
but also advances our management practices by offering a more support-
ive paradigm that supports embracing diversity as a managerial objective. 
Like Acquavita, Pittman, Gibbons, and Castellanos-Brown (2009) suggest, 
perceptions of inclusivity can lead to positive workplace outcomes like job 
satisfaction. Moreover, other work outcomes such as loyalty, cooperation, 
and trustworthiness among group members enhance the security of indi-
vidual members (Brewer, 2007). These set of outcomes are important also 
in the context of leadership as well as how interpersonal roles in organiza-
tions are developed.

Trans Formational    315
The diversity literature has been enriched by a significant amount of 
attention to the role of identification in creating in-groups and out-groups 
(Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Whereas these represent symbolic categories of 
attachment to specific groups (ie, Roccas & Brewer, 2002), they are also part 
of social identities reflecting belongingness. As Shore and her colleagues 
(2011) note, “Belongingness and uniqueness is an underlying theme in 
the inclusion literature as well as in some of the diversity literature that 
is focused on the individual within the group” (p. 1264). These are also 
important elements of trust and the treatment of individuals as insiders to 
the work groups, and the local power structure represents interpersonal 
elements that leaders can address in their interactions with subordinates.
As mentioned, Shore et al. (2011) proposed a framework describing the 
psychological consequences of promoting inclusivity. The framework is par-
ticularly illustrative in understanding both the research on diversity as well 
as how it is addressed in organization. The model identifies two principle 
axes: value in uniqueness and value in belongingness (Figure 11.1). When 
organizations fail to value both uniqueness and belongingness, individu-
als are not integrated into the social fabric of the organization; individuals 
are treated as outsiders and they feel excluded. When organizations place 
low value in uniqueness but high value in belonging ness, individuals ex-
perience pressures to assimilate. The organizational culture expresses role 
expectations, specifically the expectation of conformity. When organiza-
tions place high value on uniqueness but low value in belongingness, in-
dividual exceptionality is seen as valuable to the organizational culture, 
but these individuals are not treated as insiders. This quadrant—called dif-
ferentiation—is particularly relevant to marginalized populations. In this 
organizational circumstance, minorities are valued but never included. 
Assimilation
Individual is treated as
insiders but they must conform
to social norms downplaying
their uniqueness.
Exclusion
Individual is not treated as 
an insider; but there are 
no insiders.
Belongingness
Value in
Uniqueness
Low
Low
High
High
Inclusion
Individual is treated as 
an insider and uniqueness 
is valued/encouraged.
Differentiation
Individuals is not treated as
an insider but their uniqueness
in perceived as valuable 
to success .
Figure 11.1  Inclusion framework. (Source: Shore et al., 2011)

316    M. J. TEJEDA
Marginalized populations would feel isolated. Finally, when organizations 
place high value on both uniqueness and belongingness, they create cul-
tures of inclusivity where individuals feel treated as insiders of a group, and 
their uniqueness is not just respected but perhaps celebrated. More impor-
tantly, though, their uniqueness is not an obstacle for fully participating in 
their workplace or establishing relationships that promote high opportu-
nity such as the leader–member exchange (LMX) construct.
Indeed, Shore and colleagues (2011) noted that one of the outcomes of 
inclusive leadership and inclusive practices would be high-quality relations 
with group members and supervisors in addition to other benefits such 
as job satisfaction, organizational citizenship, organizational commitment, 
and career opportunities. However, it seems that these hypothesized rela-
tionships could be promoted as effectively through the LMX construct. In 
fact, the LMX construct has already accumulated the evidence that these 
same outcomes are the consequence of high-quality relationships.
LMX AND INCLUSIVITY
Leader–member exchange is a prominent leadership theory that under-
stands leader effectiveness through the quality of the exchange relation-
ship between leader and follower. Over the last four decades, research on 
LMX has been positively related to an significant set of employee outcomes 
including organizational commitment, organizational citizenship behavior, 
performance ratings, productivity, job satisfaction, procedural and distribu-
tive justice, and perhaps most importantly autonomy, emotional support, 
and trust (Dansereau, Graen & Haga, 1975; Dunegan, Duchon, & Uhl-Bi-
en, 1992; Graen & Cashman, 1975; Liden & Graen, 1980; Scandura, Graen, 
& Novak, 1986; Scandura & Pellegrini, 2008; Schreisheim, Neider & Scan-
dura, 1998; Schyns & Day, 2010).
The history of LMX research exposes how the construct has become 
increasingly relevant and more sophisticated in understanding its role in 
diversity (Scandura & Lankau, 1996). Early research and theoretical devel-
opment of the LMX construct focused on the development of trusted as-
sistants who gained (termed in-group) distinct advantages in their working 
relationship to the leader when compared to the out-group (Graen & Uhl-
Bien, 1995). Subsequent research by Graen and Uhl-Bien (1995) exposed 
a “leader-making” process where key subordinates received an investiture 
from their leader in the form of affective support that furthered their own 
ambitions of leadership.
LMX is unique among the leadership theories because it co-occurs with 
trust and is rooted in social exchange. LMX is not only embedded in the 
dyadic relationship, but is itself a mechanism for affecting change within 

Trans Formational    317
and among subordinates, particularly those that belong to the set of trusted 
followers. Indeed, Scandura and Pellegrini (2008) reported positive asso-
ciations between LMX and identification-based trust. This type of trust is 
particularly interesting in that the concept aligns with affective trust (see 
Lewicki, Wiethoff & Tomlinson, 2005); that is, this type of trust promotes 
mutual understanding and appreciation in the dyad. High-quality LMX 
partnerships (and by extension all the partnerships dyads shared with the 
common leader) exist in a space of high maturity, trust, and obligation 
(Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). Members can promote a mutually supportive 
climate that provides the affective benefits of loyalty, encouragement, and 
empowerment while also offering functional career benefits.
LMX has been conceptualized as developing over three important stages 
(Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995; Danserau, Graen & Haga, 1974), each of which 
may have different implications for nonbinary individuals in the workplace. 
In the role-taking stage (the first of these stages), a new member joins a 
group and the leader engages in an overall assessment of their subordi-
nate’s fit and capacity to enter a high-quality relationship. More important-
ly, in this stage the new relationship emerges as the leader and subordi-
nate develop an understanding of each other’s views and desires respect. 
Cisnormativity may present some specific challenges in this area. Both the 
prevalence of stereotyping, as well as powerful binarism compounded by 
gender role expectations, may become daunting to the development of a 
high-quality relationship.
The second of these stages in the LMX relationship involves role-mak-
ing, that is trust must be developed between the supervisor and subordi-
nate. Again, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the frailty of the novel 
trust relationship will be complicated by stereotyping and other forms of 
confirmation bias against gender nonconfirming individuals. Because trust 
is extraordinarily critical for strengthening and committing to high-LMX 
relationships, authentic conversations about the cisnormativity will be espe-
cially serious in forging the new relationship. Moreover, violations of trust 
will likely be easy to commit for reasons that range from genuine ignorance 
about the experiences of transgenders to an overt bias against challenging 
cis-supremacy in the workplace. Dyadic relationships that reach this stage 
are likely to be working through their understanding of discriminatory be-
havior and their experiences with them. Trust as well as perseverance will 
likely be factors in fostering LMX.
The third and final stage of LMX is role-routinization. At this stage, a mu-
tual obligation between the supervisor and subordinate has crystalized. Ar-
rival at this stage implies that role-making has succeeded. More importantly, 
though, any pertinent issues about cisnormativity and gender nonconformity 
have likely been addressed. It seems reasonable to suggest that dyadic part-
nerships that arrive at this stage have likely already addressed the negative 

318    M. J. TEJEDA
categorizations and stereotyping. The role-routinization stage would likely be 
a period of relative stability, and the consequences of exposing and addressing 
cisnormativity have all likely been addressed. While acknowledging and ad-
dressing cisnormative barriers may continue to strain and challenge the dyad-
ic relationship, trust should be sufficiently strong and stable enough that the 
relationship has a far less chance of becoming unstable or decompensating.
Certainly, then, a central hypothesis of this chapter is that LMX will posi-
tively moderate the implementation of inclusive policies and strategies in 
organizations. The mechanism of trust that is embedded in the LMX con-
struct can be an effective facilitator of inclusivity. Thus, LMX can become 
an avenue—through the relationship linkages—for promoting expansive 
and permanent change.
LMX, TRANS INCLUSIVITY, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Inclusivity is a process, and LMX brings, bluntly, nothing unique toward 
creating transgender specific inclusivity. But as a mechanism that embold-
ens the presence of trust in the workplace, LMX has the potential for be-
ing a powerful vehicle for promoting inclusivity generally and transgender 
inclusivity specifically. First of all, the construction of a trans-inclusive space 
will not occur through dictates alone, but they are an obvious and impor-
tant start. Table 11.3 provides a brief list of opportunities to create trans-
inclusive organizations that maximize the potential of their employees and 
stakeholders. However, one can certainly argue that an immediate supervi-
sor is a particularly critical player in promoting inclusivity and mitigating 
organizational effects of discrimination, particularly to sexually marginal-
ized individuals (Tejeda, 2008).
While LMX has no bearing, per se, on the writing of such policy, LMX 
may play an important role in its implementation. Supervisors have the op-
portunity to leverage their trust networks to facilitate implementation. As 
the group leader, an immediate supervisor shapes not only the local group 
TABLE 11.3  Basic Elements of a Trans Inclusive Workplace
1.	Develop, adopt and promote clear, conspicuous and explicit policies that promote a 
safe environment for transgenders.
2.	Reinforce organizational values that promote inclusion.
3.	Recognize that inclusion is a process.
4.	Empower the community of organizational allies through personal networks.
5.	Identify cisgender spaces and re-orient them to promote inclusive spaces based on 
identity rather than birth-assignment.
6.	Promote inclusive language in forms, pronouns and policy document.
7.	Protect confidentiality.
8.	Train employees on issues and inclusivity.

Trans Formational    319
culture, but also filters the organizational impact of organizational policies 
(Erdogan, Liden & Kramer, 2006). LMX quality influences not just the per-
ception of role fulfillment, but the execution of the implied psychological 
contract of work (Henderson, Wayne, Shore, Bommer, and Tetrick, 2008). 
Psychological contract theory (Rousseau, 1995) denotes the structure and 
arrangements of the beliefs around fulfilling the employee-employer ex-
change agreement. These beliefs range from pre-employment factors to 
specific in-job experiences including socialization practices (Aselage & 
Eisenberger, 2003; Dabos, 2004).
At its core, LMX shapes how employees evaluate their success at work 
through the supervisory relationship and as a result are motivated to materi-
alize the expectations of high achievement. And there trust is a primary psy-
chological factor. LMX is grounded in the concept of differential treatment 
of direct reports while also operating at multiple levels (Henderson et al., 
2008). This is an advantage of the LMX theory in promoting changes, such 
as inclusivity, through the direct exchange of behavior and the supportive 
psychological mechanisms like trust that build safe spaces for inclusivity.
Furthermore, the loyalty and professional respect cultivated by high-
LMX relationships can serve as a means to subdue concerns about imple-
menting new policies promoting inclusivity. As Wayne, Shore, and Liden 
(1997) noted, although LMX has been positively related to perceptions of 
organizations being supportive, future research attention can certainly ex-
plore these conjectures more fully.
One last point of conjecture about LMX is as a vital mechanism promot-
ing inclusivity and specifically a climate supportive of transgenders. The 
construction of trust, loyalty, and respect, which are all outcomes of high-
LMX relationships, is also a relevant mechanism in suppressing aggression 
and advancing a climate of safety in the workplace. While little research 
has looked at safety and LMX, some research has addressed retaliation and 
LMX (Townsend, Phllips, & Elkins, 2000). Indeed, managers who are abu-
sive have little capacity to build and maintain LMX relationships. As Tep-
per (2000) observed, subordinates experiencing abusive supervision expe-
rience workplaces that are significantly less supportive while also reporting 
increases in psychological distress and work-family conflicts. Furthermore, 
individuals who are targets of abusive supervision tend to report passive or 
avoidant coping strategies reducing their engagement of both their super-
visor and ostensibly the workplace itself (Tepper, Moss, & Duffy, 2014; Tep-
per, Moss, Lockhart, & Carr, 2007).
It is equally important to underscore the issue of safety and the possibil-
ity that LMX may serve an important function in solidifying a climate of se-
curity and respect, because vulnerable populations (like transgenders) rou-
tinely, consistently, and emphatically note clinical, consulting, and research 
venues where safety is a paramount concern. Truly inclusive workplaces 

320    M. J. TEJEDA
must not only address the issue of safety, but become committed to insti-
tutionalizing a climate of security as well as patrolling its success. No work-
place can be inclusive without the elimination of all forms of interpersonal 
violence. While again conjecture, there is evidence that LMX can become 
an important variable for promoting climates of safety.
Recommendations
Leaders are in critical positions to promote those changes at the orga-
nizational level. At the individual and group levels, leaders can leverage 
the trust they cultivate and invest in their followers to expose their support 
of inclusivity. While leaders may not necessarily have the legitimate power 
required to enact organizational changes in support of inclusivity, they are 
competent and capable advocates for it. Demonstrating that advocacy—
and competency and genuineness in that advocacy—supports the valuing 
of belongingness and the valuing of uniqueness.
The evolution toward implementing policies that are supportive of trans-
genders and gender nonconfirming individuals presents a set of unique chal-
lenges that have straightforward implications and solutions. Policies promot-
ing transgender inclusivity also challenge the nexus of gender stereotyping, 
heterosexism, and the organizational role expectations that link them. In ad-
dition, they expose not only individual resistance toward and discomfort with 
gender role ambiguity, but also organizational social structures that support 
the discomfort and limit the genuine expression of a person’s authentic self.
One cannot underestimate the importance of legitimizing with an orga-
nization that discrimination against transgenders or on the basis of any gen-
der nonconformity is unacceptable. Even in jurisdictions where such dis-
crimination is illegal, organizations can still offer their affirmations against 
discrimination by codifying them into policy. Equally, organizations can 
offer aspirational and practical statements about their inclusivity and in-
voke the terminology of belonging and uniqueness as valuable and central 
elements of their organizational culture. A public commitment to inclusive 
values is essential to promoting inclusivity.
In addition, organizations should consider the revocation of policies that 
serve to police gender-centered behavioral expectations, such as policies on 
the choice of bathrooms. Some establishments have succeeded in creating 
full gender-inclusive restroom facilities. While the challenge may be more 
complicated in other facilities that have locker rooms or areas where nudity 
may occur, policies that entrust employees with their personal judgment 
regarding the expression of their authentic selves will promote inclusivity 
far better than statements that lead toward segregation and concern about 
gender expression.

Trans Formational    321
Organizations should be equally encouraged to expand access to ben-
efits. While marriage equality has now eliminated the restriction of spousal 
benefits in many parts of the world, it is not a universal privilege. Orga-
nizations involving themselves in jurisdictions where such equality is not 
present can demonstrate their incisive practices by promoting these ben-
efits regardless of location. Furthermore, the continued expanded access 
to benefits such as bereavement leave, employer-provided supplemental 
life insurance for partners, adoption assistance, joint/survivor annuity for 
partners, retirements benefits, and even access to employee discounts are 
continuing affirmations of inclusivity.
But to promote specific inclusivity for the entire community, organiza-
tions are encouraged to enact health insurance coverage that focuses spe-
cifically on the health needs of transgenders. Specifically, organizations 
would be encouraged to promote policies that have blanket coverage with 
no exclusions from care based on gender nonconformity. Furthermore, or-
ganizations can examine their policies to ensure they are consistent with 
the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) Stan-
dards of Care, while also including appropriate mental health benefits, 
pharmaceutical benefits, and reconstructive surgery benefits associated 
with sex reassignment and other services around sex transition.
Finally, opportunities for continued training, merit access, and dialogue 
should be obvious and present. These would include the formation of a 
diversity council with a clear and specific charge to examine issues around 
trans inclusivity. Moreover, organizations can offer not only continued 
training on matters related to gender nonconformity, but also embed that 
training during the socialization at the time of hire. Involvement in con-
tinued training should be equally required of individuals at all levels. And 
for organizations wanting to demonstrate a full commitment, linking merit 
and pay increases to the documented participation in diversity seminars 
broadly and seminars on trans inclusivity and gender conformity more spe-
cifically, in essence, organizations desiring to maximize their obvious sup-
port for inclusivity, will demonstrate an overall leveraging of their resources 
to sustain an accountable and measureable commitment to diversity.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
History has already documented the progressive stance of businesses re-
garding inclusivity. On the question of sexual diversity, Fortune 500 busi-
nesses were part of the vanguard that adopted protections for gay and 
lesbian employees in the early 1970s. The same remains true today. The 
number of employers with transgender inclusive policies continues to ex-
pand. The Human Rights Campaign’s annual Corporate Equality Index 

322    M. J. TEJEDA
(2016) identified 511 large employees with trans*1 inclusive policies, nearly 
10 times more employers that had such policies than in 2009. Moreover, 
there is a growing demand that managers and other administrative profes-
sionals be reasonably literate on transgender discrimination.
A critical assertion of this chapter is that LMX can be an important and pos-
sibly overlooked mechanism for promoting and supporting inclusivity. LMX 
may prove to be an important relational variable to reduce inclusivity resis-
tance as well as shape workplace environments that leverage the benefits in 
diversity. Besides, there’s little downside risk in cultivating high-quality LMX 
relationships. The benefits secured by high-quality LMX relations worth every 
effort to promoting that managers adopt the skills needed to engage in high-
quality relationships. The climate of trust cultivated by LMX is not just vital for 
inclusivity it must be a hallmark of effective leadership.
NOTE
	
1.	 This term is sometimes written as trans* with the asterisk denoting a wild 
card for all variations. Leaders in the transgender community have criticized 
the presence of the asterisk noting that it is redundant, unnecessary, and un-
welcome, commenting that the asterisk has other uses inconsistent with the 
wildcard.
REFERENCES
Acquavita, S. P., Pittman, J., Gibbons, M., & Castellanos-Brown, K. (2009). Personal 
and organizational diversity factors’ impact on social workers’ job satisfaction: 
Results from a national Internet-based survey. Administration in Social Work, 
33, 151–166.
Aselage, J., & Eisenberger, R. (2003). Perceived organizational support and psycho-
logical contracts: A theoretical integration. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
24(5), 491–509.
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. 1989. Social identity theory and the organization. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 14, 20–39.
Becker, H. S. (1963). Outsiders: Studies in the sociology of deviance. Chicago, IL: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Bornstein, K. (1994). Gender outlaw: On men, women, and the rest of us. New York, NY: 
Routledge.
Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: On being the same and different at the same 
time. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 475–482.
Brewer, M. B. (2007). The importance of being we: Human nature and intergroup 
relations. American Psychologist, 62, 728–738.
Brewster, M. E., Velez, B., DeBlaere, C., & Moradi, B. (2012). Transgender individu-
als’ workplace experiences: The applicability of sexual minority measures and 
models. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 59, 60–70.

Trans Formational    323
Budge, S. L., Tebbe, E. N., & Howard, K. A. S. (2010). The work experiences of 
transgender individuals: Negotiating the transition and career decision-mak-
ing processes. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57, 377–393.
Burns, C., & Krehely, J. (2011). Gay and transgender people face high rates of workplace 
discrimination and harassment. Retrieved October 1, 2016, from https://cdn.
americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/issues/2011/06/pdf/workplace 
_discrimination.pdf
Butler, J. (1999). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity (10th ed.). New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Carli, L. L. (2001). Gender and social influence. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 725–741.
Cialdini, R. B., & Trost, M. R. (1998). Social influence: Social norms, conformity, 
and compliance. In D. Gilbert & S. Fiske, (1998). Handbook of social psychology 
(Vol. 2, pp. 151–192). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Crocker, J., Major, B., & Steele, C. (1998). Social stigma. In D. Gilbert & S. Fiske, 
Handbook of social psychology, (Vol. 2, pp 504–553). Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Dabos, G. E., & Rousseau, D. M. (2004). Mutuality and reciprocity in the psychologi-
cal contracts of employees and employers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(1), 
52–72.
Dansereau, F., Graen, G. B., & Haga, W. J. 1975. A vertical dyad linkage approach 
to leadership within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of 
the role making process. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 
46–78.
Dispenza, F., Watson, L. B., Chung, Y. B., & Brack, G. (2012). Experience of career-
related discrimination for female-to-male transgender persons: A qualitative 
study. The Career Development Quarterly, 60, 65–81.
Dunegan, K. J., Duchon, D., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1992). Examining the link between 
leader–member exchange and subordinate performance: The role of task 
analyzability and variety as moderators. Journal of Management, 18, 59–76.
Erdogan, B., Liden, R. C., & Kraimer, M. L. (2006). Justice and leader–member 
exchange: The moderating role of organizational culture. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 49, 395–406.
Foucault, M. (1994). An archaeology of the human sciences. New York, NY: Vintage 
Books.
Gamson, J., & Moon, D. (2004). The sociology of sexualities: Queer and beyond. 
Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 47–64.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gates, G. J. (2011, April). How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender? 
Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute at UCLA School of Law. Retrieved 
August 15, 2016, from http://​williamsinstitut​e.​law.​ucla.​edu/​wp-content/​up-
loads/​Gates-How-Many-People-LGBT-Apr-2011.​pdf
Gedro, J., & Mizzi, R. (2014). Feminist theory and queer theory: Implications for 
HRD research and practice. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 6(4), 
445–456.
Gonzalez, J. A., & DeNisi, A. S. (2009). Cross-level effects of demography and diver-
sity climate on organizational attachment and firm effectiveness. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 30(1), 21–40.

324    M. J. TEJEDA
Graen, G. B., & Cashman, J. (1975). A role-making model of leadership in formal 
organization: A developmental approach. In J. G. Hunt & L. L. Larson (Eds.), 
Leadership frontiers. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader–member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 
25 years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quar-
terly, 6(2), 219–247.
Grant, J. M., Mottet, L. A., Tanis, J., Harrison, J., Herman, J. L., & Keisling, M. 
(2011). Injustice at every turn: A report of the national transgender discrimination 
survey. Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality and Na-
tional Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Harding, S. (1986). The science question in feminism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hausman, B. L. (2001). Recent transgender theory. Feminist Studies, 27, 465–490
Hawkesworth, M. (2006).Gender as an analytic category. In M. Hawkesworth (Ed.), 
Feminist inquiry: From political conviction to methodological innovation (pp. 145–
175). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Henderson, D. J., Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., Bommer, W. H., & Tetrick, L. E. (2008). 
Leader–member exchange, differentiation, and psychological contract fulfill-
ment: A multilevel examination. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(6), 1208–1219.
Herek, G. M. (2004). Beyond “homophobia”: Thinking about sexual stigma and prej-
udice in the twenty-first century. Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 1(2), 6–24.
Herman, J. L. (2013). Gendered restrooms and minority stress: The public regula-
tion of gender and its impact on transgender people’s lives. Journal of Public 
Management & Social Policy, 19, 65–80.
Jagose, A. (1996). Queer theory. Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne University Press.
Kimmel, M. (1996). Manhood in America: A cultural history. New York, NY: Free Press.
Landström, C. (2007). Queering feminist technology studies, Feminist Theory, 8(1), 
7–26.
Lennon, E., & Mistler, B.J. (2014). “Cisgenderism.” Transgender Studies Quarterly, 
1(1/2), 63–64. doi:10.1215/23289252-2400136
Levitt, H. M., & Ippolito, M. R. (2014). Being transgender: Navigating minor-
ity stressors and developing authentic self-presentation. Psychology of Women 
Quarterly, 38, 46–64. doi: 10.1177/0361684313501644
Lewicki, R. J., Wiethoff, C., & Tomlinson, E. C. (2005). What is the role of trust in 
organizational justice? In J. Greenberg & J. A. Colquitt (Eds.), Handbook of 
organizational justice (pp. 247–270). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Liden, R., & Graen, G.B. (1980). Generalizability of the vertical dyad linkage model 
of leadership. Academy of Management Journal, 23, 451–465.
Maccoby, E. E. (1988). Gender as a social category. Developmental Psychology, 24, 
755–765.
Miller, F. A. (1998). Strategic culture change: The door to achieving high perfor-
mance and inclusion. Public Personnel Management, 27, 151–160.
Mor Barak, M. E. (2000). Beyond affirmative action: Toward a model of diversity 
and organizational inclusion. Administration in Social Work, 23(3/4), 47–68.
National Center for Transgender Equality. (2016). National transgender discrimina-
tion survey. Retrieved on August 14, 2016, from http://www.transequality.org/
issues/national-transgender-discrimination-survey

Trans Formational    325
Pelled, L. H., Ledford, G. E., & Mohrman, S. A. 1999. Demographic dissimilarity 
and workplace inclusion. Journal of Management Studies, 36, 1013–1031.
Riordan, C. M. (2014, June 5). Diversity is useless without inclusivity. Harvard Busi-
ness Review. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2014/06/diversity-is-useless 
-without-inclusivity/
Roberson, Q. M. (2006). Disentangling the meanings of diversity and inclusion in 
organizations. Group and Organization Management, 31, 212–236
Roccas, S., & Brewer, M. B. 2002. Social identity complexity. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 6, 88–106.
Rousseau, D. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations: Understanding written and 
unwritten agreements. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Rudman, L. A., & Fairchild, K. (2004). Reactions to counterstereotypic behavior: 
The role of backlash in cultural stereotype maintenance. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 87, 157–176.
Ruggs, E. N., Law, C., Cox, C., Roehling, M. V., Wiener, R. L., Hebl, M. R., & Bar-
ron, L. (2013). Gone fishing: I-O psychologists’ missed opportunities to un-
derstand marginalized employees’ experiences with discrimination. Indus-
trial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and Practice, 6, 39–60. 
doi:10.1111/iops.12007
Sadjadi, S. (2013). The endocrinologist’s office-puberty suppression: Saving chil-
dren from a natural disaster? Journal of Medical Humanities, 34, 255–260.
Scandura, T. A., Graen, G. B., & Novak, M. A. (1986). When managers decide not to 
decide autocratically. An investigation of leader–member exchange and deci-
sion influence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 579–584.
Scandura, T. A., & Lankau, M. J. (1996). Developing diverse leaders: A leader–mem-
ber exchange approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 7(2), 243–263.
Scandura, T. A., & Pellegrini, E. K. (2008). Trust and leader–member exchange: A 
closer look at relational vulnerability. Journal of Leadership and Organization 
Studies, 15, 101–100.
Schein, V. E. (2001). A global look at psychological barriers to women’s progress in 
management. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 675–688.
Schilt, K. (2006). Making gender visible: Transmen as “outsiders-within” in the 
workplace. Gender & Society, 20(4), 465–90.
Schilt, K. (2010). Just one of the guys? Transgender men and the persistence of gender in-
equality. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Schilt, K., & Connell, C. (2007). Do workplace gender transitions make gender 
trouble? Gender, Work & Organization, 14, 596–618. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0432 
.2007.00373.x
Schilt, K., & Westbrook, L. (2009). Doing gender, doing heteronormativity: Gender 
normals, transgender people, and the social maintenance of heterosexuality. 
Gender & Society, 23(4), 440–464. doi:10.1177/0891243209340034.
Schilt, K., & Wiswall, M. (2008). Before and after: Gender transitions, human capi-
tal, and workplace experiences. Contributions in Economic Analysis & Policy, 
8(1), 1862–1862
Schriesheim, C. A., Neider, L. L., & Scandura, T. A. (1998). Delegation and leader–
member exchange: Main effects, moderators, and measurement issues. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 41, 298–318.

326    M. J. TEJEDA
Schyns, B., & Day, D. (2010). Critique and review of leader–member exchange the-
ory: Issues of agreement, consensus, and excellence. European Journal of Work 
and Organizational Psychology, 19(1), 1–29.
Scott, J. W. (1986). Gender: A useful category of historical analysis. The American 
Historical Review, 91, 1053–1075.
Seidmen, S. (1996). Queer theory sociology. Oxford, England: Wiley-Blackwell.
Shore, L. M., Chung, B., Dean, M. A., Ehrhart, K. H., Jung, D., Randel, A., & Singh, 
G. (2009). Diversity and inclusiveness: Where are we now and where are we 
going? Human Resource Management Review, 19, 117–133.
Shore, L. M., Randel, A. E, Chung, B. G., Ehrhart, K. H., & Singh, G. (2011). Inclu-
sion and diversity in work groups: A review and model for future research. 
Journal of Management, 37, 1262–1289. DOI: 10.1177/0149206310385943
Stryker, S. (1994). My words to Victor Frankenstein above the village of Chamounix: 
Performing transgender rage. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 1, 
237–254.
Tejeda, M. J. (2004). Egalitarianism and self-esteem as correlates of hate ideation 
against gay men and lesbians. Journal of Multicultural Nursing and Health, 
10(1), 42–50.
Tejeda, M. J. (2006). Non-discrimination policies and sexual identity disclosure: Do 
they make a difference in employee outcomes? Employee Rights and Responsi-
bilities Journal, 18, 45–59.
Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of Management 
Journal, 43(2), 178–190.
Tepper, B. J., Moss, S. E., & Duffy, M. K. (2011). Predictors of abusive supervision: 
Supervisor perceptions of deep-level dissimilarity, relationship conflict, and 
subordinate performance. Academy of Management Journal, 54(2), 279–294.
Tepper, B. J., Moss, S. E., Lockhart, D. E., & Carr, J. C. (2007). Abusive supervision, 
upward maintenance communication, and subordinates’ psychological dis-
tress. Academy of Management Journal, 50(5), 1169–1180.
Townsend, J., Phillips, J. S., & Elkins, T. J. Employee retaliation: The neglected con-
sequence of poor leader–member relations. Journal of Occupational Health Psy-
chology, 5, 457–463.
Uhlmann, E. L., & Cohen, G. L. (2005). Constructed criteria: Redefining merit to 
justify discrimination. Psychological Science, 16, 474–480
Walls, N. E., & Costello, K. (2010). Head ladies center for teacup chain: Exploring 
cisgender privilege in a (predominately) gay male context. In S. Anderson & 
V. Middleton, Explorations in diversity: Examining privilege and oppression in a 
multicultural society (pp. 81–94). Florence, KY: Brooks Cole.
Wayne, S., Shore, L. M., & Liden, R. C. (1997). Perceived organizational support 
and leader–member exchange: A social exchange perspective. Academy of 
Management Journal, 40, 82–111. doi:10.2307/257021
Weinberg, F. J., & Cleveland, A. O. (2017). Gender as a deep-level, communicated, 
and interactional construct: Implications for leaders, subordinates, and team-
mates. In T. A. Scandura & E. Mouriño (Eds.), Leading diversity in the 21st 
century (pp. 27–54). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Yarovsky, J. E. (2016). Cisgendered organizations: Trans women and inequality in 
the workplace. Sociological Forum, 1–22. doi:10.1111/socf.12291

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 327–356
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
327
CHAPTER 12
SOCIAL MEDIA, INNOVATION, 
AND DIVERSITY IN THE 
21ST CENTURY
Pamela McCauley
University of Central Florida
Edwin Nassiff
InfoSec Intelligence, LLC
ABSTRACT
Due to dynamic changes in technology and accessibility, collaboration is 
evolving such that it no longer demands that a person or group be physically 
present to have a meeting, share research, thoughts, or ideas. As a result, 
teams focused on innovation and collaboration have broader opportuni-
ties to engage stakeholders and enhance diversity to support organizational 
goals. This chapter provides an in-depth look at the scientific communities’ 
response to social media tools, the criticality of innovation, and how a so-
cial media platform can be used to promote innovation, diversity, and col-
laboration. Specific details are provided about the ongoing development of 
Algonite as a social media platform to connect scientists for the purpose of 
innovation and diversity.

328    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
WHY INNOVATION IS SO CRITICAL IN THE CURRENT 
SCIENTIFIC GLOBAL COMMUNITY
Innovation is essential in all phases of scientific development, particularly 
in the creation and diffusion of technologies, which are essential for finan-
cial development and welfare throughout all economies. Various kinds of 
innovation play a role at different stages. True innovation is also a product 
of collaboration, team effort, and representation from all stakeholders on 
the innovation team.
In the context of global competition, there are cumulative societal diffi-
culties in regards to the scientific, environmental, demographic, social, and 
financial sustainability. Nations need to urgently improve their innovative 
capacity and should promote a culture of development that enables and mo-
tivates all people, research organizations, firms, the entire public sector, and 
other actors of society to actively promote innovation in science. Innovation 
is not just the subject of the moment, the future of science depends on it.
According to Gerschenkron (1962), the differences in a nation’s ability 
to innovate, develop, and adjust to their specific situations was the main 
reason for differences in per capita income among nations, and the ability 
to utilize the innovations of others is of essence. However, innovative activi-
ties emanating beyond “knowledge-intensive” sectors can offer consider-
able opportunities for success. Examples consist of the effective exports of 
fish from Uganda, wine from Argentina and Chile, and medicinal plants 
from India. In the initial phases, innovation adoption with small develop-
ments is rewarding and successful (Acemoglu, Aghion, & Zilibotti, 2006). 
Innovations in established countries like Korea, China’s Taipei and Hong 
Kong, and Singapore began with an initial phase of advancement based 
upon technology know-how and by maintaining a strong focus on structure 
innovation capacity, which led to more innovations.
Innovation matters even in the most underdeveloped countries with 
backward economies. Their adoption of foreign innovations has had high 
rewards since innovation adoption requires adjustment to regional finan-
cial, technological or ecological conditions. This can cause the advance-
ment and build-up of innovation capabilities. There is proof that domestic 
innovation played a larger role than importing knowledge when the emerg-
ing Asian economies began to explode (Ang & Madsen, 2011).
What Innovation Means in Science
According to the Frascati Manual of the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD, 2013), scientific and technological in-
novation encompasses the transformation of an idea into a new or improved 

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    329
saleable product, an operational process in industry or commerce, or into 
a new approach in social service. Thus, it consists of those scientific, tech-
nical, commercial, and financial steps that are necessary for the successful 
development and marketing of new or improved manufactured products, 
the commercial use of new or improved processes and equipment, or the 
introduction of a new approach to a social service (Semolic, 2008).
The term innovation can have different significances in various contexts, 
and the one chosen will depend upon the particular goals of measurement 
or analysis. Scientific and technological innovation may be thought of as the 
change of an idea into a new or enhanced product presented on the market, 
into a new or improved functional procedure utilized in industry and com-
merce, or into a brand-new method for a social service (Semolic, 2008).
The use of innovation in science can offer numerous insights over the 
technological management of any economic activity, market, or particular 
organization, and their performance on innovation can assist in shaping 
tactical decisions. For example, policymakers may see a declining innovative 
capacity in some sectors or markets, which may indicate the need to develop 
brand-new policies. For example, these policies may lead to the improvement 
of educational facilities for certain technological fields that are closely associ-
ated to how an innovation in science can be enhanced (Semolic, 2008).
In addition, organizations enhancing their innovation in science might 
depend on designating more resources for research and advancement 
(R&D), participating in research study alliances along with other organiza-
tions, promoting first-mover research, or contracting out nonresearch ac-
tivities. Preferences in all of those elements can be informed by analyses of 
innovative capability over time. Comparisons of the stages of innovativeness 
between markets or between companies in any sector can also offer indica-
tions of sound technological management (Semolic, 2008).
Why Diversity Matters in Development
Today, most managers agree that organizations benefit from a diverse 
workforce; however, the idea can be hard to quantify or prove particularly 
when it pertains to determining how diversity affects an organization’s abil-
ity to innovate. However, new research provides engaging evidence that 
diversity opens innovation and drives market development, a finding that 
should enhance management’s interests in ensuring diversity at various lev-
els of the organization.
Decades of research by organizational researchers, sociologists, psycholo-
gists, financial experts, and demographers reveal that socially varied groups 
(that is, those with a diversity of race, ethnic culture, gender, and sexual ori-
entation) are more innovative than homogeneous groups (Phillips, 2014). 

330    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
A study by Fan (2011) addressed the importance of diversity in innovation. 
In an empirical study conducted by Ron Burt of the University of Chicago, 
it was found that individuals with more diverse sources of information con-
sistently created better ideas. (Figure 12.1).
On the graph, the vertical axis shows management evaluations of a series 
of employee concepts connected to supply-chain management. The hori-
zontal axis measures the level of diversity in a worker’s internal connection. 
As you move to the right, the concepts become less diverse, which results in 
a lower level of ratings of the concepts. The study also suggests that the lack 
of diversity in connections is representative of the lack of diversity in their 
daily interactions, which negatively impacts the level of innovation. Finally, 
the chart illustrates that greater diversity of connections means the develop-
ment and presentation of better quality ideas and concepts, which is a basic 
component of innovation (Fan, 2011).
We found that many companies today are becoming more deliberate 
about leveraging diversity to stimulate innovation. For example, the U.S. 
based multinational retailer Walmart continues to develop a diverse world-
wide workforce by engaging world-class skills through innovative tech-
niques, such as their Women in Retail initiative and their Junior Military 
Officer hiring program through community and school outreach efforts. 
This is clearly an example of the sensitivity and efforts of this company to 
engage, support, and promote diversity within their organization.
How Collaboration and Connecting With Others 
Facilitates Innovation and Diversity
Collaboration is an increasingly common mode to organize work with-
in and between companies (Chen, Rainie, & Wellman, 2012). Current 
Figure 12.1  Proof that diversity drives innovation (Fan, 2011).

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    331
advances in information and communication technologies (ICTs) make it 
possible for people to engage in collaborative work by linking and working 
together much more efficiently and effectively with their coworkers and 
clients. Thus, collaboration has made it possible to facilitate innovation. 
Collaborating workers can communicate quickly and frequently through 
space and time utilizing various types of ICTs, while allowing organizations 
to be more versatile and team based, as well as utilizing a flatter, decentral-
ized structure (Gladwell, 2000).
Such networks hold the promise that ICTs will lead to better sharing 
and usage of information, and for that reason individuals and teams will 
be more effective in accomplishing innovative tasks (Barta, Kleiner, & Neu-
mann, 2012; Burt, 2010; Wu, Lin, Aral, & Brynjolfsson, 2009). This quality 
of collaboration is especially essential given the fact that innovation is criti-
cal to attaining competitive advantages and organizational sustainability. 
Furthermore, collaboration applies to virtually every industry ranging from 
scientific research to entertainment productions to entrepreneurial ven-
tures (Taylor & Greve, 2006; Wuchty, Jones, & Uzzi, 2007).
In Williams & O’Reilly’s (1998) 40-year evaluation of diversity, it was 
observed that diversity of knowledge works best in idea generation and 
workgroup efficiency. It was shown that greater cognitive diversity created 
more efficiency from an informational and decision-making perspective 
(Taylor & Greve, 2006). For example, when specific team members had var-
ied backgrounds, skills, capabilities, information, and understanding, they 
were most likely to look for solutions and options that helped to connect 
disconnected ideas that may not have been previously connected. This in 
turn generated more innovation (Guimera, Uzzi, Spiro, & Amaral, 2005)).
How Social Media Is Changing the Way We Connect 
and Collaborate
Social media is an umbrella term used to refer to a group of online and 
electronic tools that may include blogs, social networking websites, and 
video sharing websites (CDC, 2012).
Social networks have actually significantly changed how we receive in-
formation, connect with others, and monitor a situation and share infor-
mation. Prior technologies included landline telephones, regular mail 
service, and more recently electronic mail, Skype, and other information 
based electronic modes of communication. However today, we are migrat-
ing to more advanced technologies such as text messaging, mobile phones, 
earphones, and online video chats as well as other resources found on the 
web. The next wave of connectivity will emphasize access for larger groups 
for the purposes of professional networking and personal communications 

332    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
as well as discovery and innovation. Through these means of social media, 
the approach, expectations, and intention of electronic communications is 
being redefined.
Such a redefinition has actually had an enormous impact. The whole 
paradigm of social media has changed the fundamental guidelines of com-
munication, especially between organizations and their audiences. The 
one-way communication methods of the past (i.e., business-to-customer 
and business-to-business) have actually been replaced by a more dynamic 
multidimensional interaction model. This social media model promotes 
exchange of information between organizations/individuals and their au-
diences by inviting involvement. In turn, this leads to broader user engage-
ment; however, the full impact of this engagement is not yet fully under-
stood. What is understood is that there is a broad interest in connecting to 
these social media sites among individuals and organizations, and that the 
sites that are most successful provide fast access along with a collaborative 
platform that is intuitively organized and easily distributes information.
According to Perrin (2015), 65% of American adults have friends and 
other connections such as followers on their social network accounts. The 
nature of connecting with multiple individuals and sites can produce syn-
ergism within a social media environment. This is because individuals’ con-
nections can grow not only on their own network, but through links to oth-
er sites and individuals as well as other resources such as automatic feeds.
THE RISE OF SOCIAL MEDIA
The Internet and Social Networking
It is estimated that there are 3.6 billion Internet connections worldwide 
(Stats, 2016) and 2.3 billion social media users (Smith, 2016). In terms of 
information passed through the Internet, Cisco predicts there will be 1,000 
exabytes or one zettabyte of Internet global IP traffic by the end of 2016 
and 2.3 zettabytes by 2020 (Cisco, 2016). In terms of online activities, social 
networking clearly surpasses the use of email, news, and online shopping 
as reasons why people use the Internet (Ribia-García, Elichc-Qucsada, Rus-
Casas, & Aguilar-Pena, 2016).
Cheung, Lee, and Chan (2015) revealed that people spend much more 
time on social networking than any other online activities. In fact, much 
of their privacy information is revealed when a social network requires the 
user to create a social profile including such personal information as photo-
graphs, current status, and personal preferences or experiences (Cheung, 
Lee, & Chan, 2015).

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    333
Why People Use Social Networking
Research performed on 405 social networking sites indicated that social 
influence was the greatest reason why people use social media, and that 
has an overriding effect in terms of disclosing any of their privacy infor-
mation (Cheung, Lee, & Chan, 2015). In another study, it was indicated 
that 93% of students connected to the Internet have one or more active 
accounts in social networks. Not only did the students use their social net-
works for gaining information, but also used them for building an identity 
and establishing personal and professional relationships. In essence, social 
networking was used to establish and reinforce relationships and to feel a 
part of a community or a group (Ribia-García, Elichc-Qucsada, Rus-Casas, 
& Aguilar-Pena, 2016).
Over the years, researchers have attempted to build theoretical models 
to explain how networks have the ability to impact both individual and or-
ganizational capabilities (Sherif, Munasinghe, & Sharma, 2012). The term 
“social capital” is used to mean all of the resources and benefits bestowed 
to an individual or group of individuals when linked in a durable network 
with institutionalized relationships of shared acquaintance and recognition 
(Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). Social capital leads to knowledge sharing 
and helps facilitate the creation of new knowledge (Sherif, Munasinghe, & 
Sharma, 2012).
There are three recognized dimensions of social capital: structure, rela-
tionship, and cognition (Sherif, Munasinghe, & Sharma, 2012). The struc-
ture dimension refers to the information channel that connects individuals 
or groups on a network, as well as the extent to which members are linked 
to others in the group (Sherif, Munasinghe, & Sharma, 2012).
The second dimension of social capital is relational and it refers to the 
resources embedded in relationships that are usually developed over time, 
such as the trust and the trustworthiness of all of its members. A strong 
relational membership between members enhances the evolution of social 
norms, which can engender obligations and responsibilities as well as co-
operation in transforming and exploiting new knowledge (Sherif, Munas-
inghe, & Sharma, 2012).
The last dimension of social capital is cognition, i.e., the shared mean-
ings that develop among network members that result through social inter-
action. Shared meanings lead to knowledge transfer, understanding, and 
assimilation of knowledge (Sherif, Munasinghe, & Sharma, 2012).
Social capital can be simply stated as the relationship between people 
and the outcomes of those relationships. It is an element of social life that 
may be used to explain the logical behavior of people in most any society 
(Sander & Lee, 2014).

334    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
Community Networking
Community networking links people with diverse members and has 
three common aspects: residential commonality, performance of daily 
activities of “like-minded” individuals, and a sense of being included in a 
larger social entity. These technology mediated networks create a sense of 
community. An online virtual community represents a group who has com-
mon interests without actual residential proximity (Chewar, McCrickhard, 
& Carroll, 2005).
Although there are many uses of social networking, two types of com-
munity networks exist for learning, working, and sharing knowledge. One 
is the community of practice (a tightly knit network engaged in a shared 
practice where members personally know each other) and the other being 
a network of practice (members are geographically dispersed, loosely knit, 
but are still engaged in a shared practice; Wasko, Faraj, & Teigland, 2004). 
As with a community of practice, members of a network of practice may not 
personally know each other, but are generally engaged in the sharing of 
knowledge via electronic means for a purpose that focuses on the interests 
of a given community (Wasko, Faraj, & Teigland, 2004).
Community networks are technology mediated and contain a set of com-
mon characteristics that include multiusers, persistent contexts of activity, 
linkage between the real world and the virtual world, and real-time com-
munications. These characteristics lead to a user network where members 
are free to identify themselves as opposed to maintaining anonymity, par-
ticipation is preserved over the long run, a sense of membership exists, and 
a greater level of trust ensues (Mynatt, 1997).
In the research performed by Sherif, Munasinghe, and Sharma (2012), 
two types of networks affecting researchers were studied, which included 
electronic open networks as well as closed networks, and the researchers 
concluded that there are significant social capital benefits to be gained 
when relationships are built. The more competency that network partici-
pants displayed in different contexts, the more likely they would accumu-
late more social capital to exploit. Furthermore, the interaction of people 
with dissimilar backgrounds, expertise, and status did facilitate the acquisi-
tion and assimilation of new knowledge.
Social Media and the Scientist
Scientists are often perceived as not being the most social individuals in 
the world, and in many cases, the scientific community has been reluctant 
to engage the social media environment for interaction. As this stereotype 
suggests, many scientists would prefer to be in their laboratories trying to 

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    335
make the next huge discovery than using social media where virtual chats 
with unknown individuals often occur. However, this landscape is changing.
Social media networking websites like Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn 
with all of its 24/7 interactions can seem daunting for the unexposed scien-
tist or any other type of professional. Nonetheless, online communities are 
best for people to reflect and become more deliberate prior to comment-
ing on any position. Social networks likewise offer extroverts a channel for 
real-time intercommunication globally. Regardless of the personality type, 
career consultants recommend that postdocs use online networking tools 
to exchange scientific ideas, make connections, and advance their careers 
(Tachibana, 2014).
Through the web, social network tools present a powerful method for 
scientists to enhance their expert profile and act as a public voice for sci-
ence. Although the kind of online discussions and shared content can dif-
fer widely, scientists are progressively using social networks as a way to share 
journal posts, post updates from conferences and meetings, market their 
thoughts and scientific opinions, and distribute information about profes-
sional opportunities and future events.
Google is a powerful tool that has now also become a verb. Google 
searches now symbolize an approach for finding extensive details regard-
ing virtually any subject, location, or individual. This includes from people 
in all ages, backgrounds, and socioeconomic status; information that previ-
ously required hours or days to collect is available within seconds. Converse-
ly, the inability to identify useful information on a subject can be viewed 
negatively. Subsequently, in today’s technology driven world, the absence of 
an online presence can impact or limit a scientist’s exposure.
Social websites promote engagement with online scientific colleagues, 
which can motivate and provide paths to those with interest but who have 
insufficient expertise to acquire adequate expertise to contribute suffi-
ciently. This includes collaborations between professional scientists. Social 
media provides a single click-through access to available online scientific 
objects, which makes it easier to gather references into the user’s individual 
space or stream (Lackes, 2009)
Generally, scientists have stacks of papers, procedures, and notes that 
they circulate as web documents. In fact, many social networking websites 
were designed as a document management system that enabled scientists 
and students to quickly upload those documents, organize them, and 
browse and share them. Scientists can develop groups, and invite other sci-
entists in their line of research to create a common depository of works and 
concepts that can be accessed from anywhere by group members.
However, some scientists remain unconvinced of such openness, espe-
cially in the hyper-competitive fields of biomedical science where patents, 
tenure, and promotion can depend upon being the first to publish a new 

336    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
discovery. From that point of view, social networking can appear dangerous 
because utilizing blogs and social networks for vital work is perceived as an 
open invitation to have online lab notepads vandalized, or even worse have 
innovative concepts stolen and released by a competitor (Horrobin, 2001). 
However, secured networking tools can offer the benefits of collaboration 
while still protecting a scientist’s idea. With greater interaction among sci-
entists, one would expect the greater distribution of new knowledge. Sci-
ence would become more of a partnership where scientific socials media 
would assist in and enhance the way scientists work together.
WHY INNOVATION MATTERS
Innovation Defined
Kao (2007) defines innovation ‘‘as the ability of individuals, companies, 
and entire nations to continuously create their desired future. Innovation 
depends on harvesting knowledge from a range of disciplines besides sci-
ence and technology, among them design, social science, and the arts.” Kao 
adds that innovation is manifested by more than just products, services, and 
experiences, as a unique and creative process can also be considered an inno-
vation. Innovation is a team activity as the work of entrepreneurs, scientists, 
software experts, and various like-minded individuals contributes to innova-
tion. It also includes those individuals who know how to realize and illustrate 
the value of ideas to the end user. Innovation flows from shifts in mindset that 
can generate new business models, recognize new opportunities, and weave 
innovations throughout the fabric of society. It is about new ways of doing 
and seeing things as much as it is about the breakthrough idea.
What Does Innovation at Work Look Like
Innovation begins with creativity. In the world of organizations such as 
universities, corporations, small businesses, or government agencies, the lack 
of creativity leads to stagnation and leaves an organization unable to perform 
and respond to the dynamic needs of its stakeholders (Serrat, 2009).
More evidence of the importance of innovation is that this process does 
not happen in a vacuum and needs reliable methods and structures along 
with encouragement and incentives for a willingness to think outside of the 
box. Creativity flourishes in organizations that motivate workers through 
open concepts and environments. Those that do not flourish generally sup-
press creativity through rigid rules and provide little or no opportunity for 
any organizational modifications (Serrat, 2009).

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    337
In our observation and review of the literature, we have found that when 
people are faced with a problem, their instinct is to fix it with the least dis-
ruptive solution. This means they may analyze and evaluate the situation 
by applying logic until they are confident that they know and understand 
enough of the problem to formulate a viable solution. The process of at-
taining most solutions is better realized when the solution is developed by 
a group or team. In other words, a collaborative solution is generally better 
than any individual solution.
Most managers today are not lacking in ideas, information, or theories, 
and display extraordinary knowledge and competence. They are competent 
specialists utilizing traditional business or technical thinking. Business think-
ing is based upon deep research, logical facts, and formulas. Inductive and 
deductive reasoning are favored tools as we try to find precedent or proof to 
base decisions on. Business thinkers are typically quick to make choices while 
searching for the best answer among the least favorable responses. Business 
thinking has to do with eliminating obscurity and driving results.
However, often what is needed is innovative thinking, which often is not 
dependent on past experiences or recognized facts. It envisions a desired 
future state and determines ways to get there, and requires being instinctive 
and open to new and different possibilities. Rather than relying on previous 
correct answers or wrong answers, the goal is to discover better methods and 
explore multiple possibilities. In this situation, ambiguity is a benefit, not 
an issue. It enables you to ask: Exactly what if? Innovative thinking is an im-
portant addition to conventional business thinking. It enables individuals to 
bring new ideas and energy to their role as a leader and to resolve their chal-
lenges. It likewise leads the way to bringing more innovation into a company.
IMPACT OF INNOVATION ON BUSINESSES, 
COMMUNITIES, AND INDIVIDUALS
The United States economy for the last few centuries has benefited from 
research and innovation that have provided a competitive edge in many 
industries. Without innovation, no development would be possible. One 
of the factors that has continuously pushed the American system forward 
is strength of mind that both promoted and demanded innovation at the 
same time. People have used their imaginative abilities to create things that 
would benefit society and which have grown to a point where new innova-
tions are nearly elementary.
In the globalized age, individual innovation in the workplace is the foun-
dation of high performance (Carmeli, Meitar, & Weisberg, 2006; Janssen, 
Van de Vliert, & West, 2004). It has actually been considered a crucial source 

338    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
of most organization’s innovation that advances organizational competitive-
ness and promotes long-term achievement (Hill, Ball, & Schilling, 2008).
A crucial factor in interjecting innovation into any organization is a 
consciousness need to transform knowing the benefits innovation can 
bring. In order for innovation to be achievable, individuals and organiza-
tions must continue to believe and maintain an open mind and receptive 
environment that is welcoming to varied issues and perspectives. When 
companies and innovators believe they have achieved most everything 
they need, they cease improving. The impact can quickly spread to com-
munities, states, and nations. In the worst case, without innovation the 
economy can become stagnant, businesses will not grow, and communi-
ties as a whole suffer.
Types of Innovation
Innovation is more than just new products and flashy designs. They 
include:
•	 Product innovation: new and better products that an organization 
provides to customers
•	 Service innovation: new and better service offerings and delivery of 
those services to customers
•	 Process innovation: better ways of doing things that save time and/
or money
•	 Business model innovation: improving the way an organization cre-
ates, delivers, and extracts value for customers
•	 Organizational innovation: improving the way one manages and 
engages employees
•	 Brand and communication innovation: new and better ways of rep-
resenting an organization (Australian Psychological Society, 2012)
Wang and Ahmed (2004) defined organizational development as 
the “public capability to present brand-new items to market or opening 
brand-new markets through innovative procedures and behavior.” Inno-
vation is not a quick-fix solution to the challenges of an organization. 
While it is true that organizations need to innovate to stay profitable and 
current, developing an innovation process requires time, dedication, and 
incremental shifts in the culture. Leaders must be genuinely committed 
in their efforts to drive innovation at all levels and be cognizant of how 
their own behavior and actions influence and shape the desired corporate 
innovation culture.

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    339
Diversity and Innovation
Diversity is the key to creativity. Not just diversity in your workforce, but in your 
personal life, the teams you form, and the managers whom you hire and promote.
—Jeffrey Baumgartner
In the fast-moving business world of today, the competence to take deci-
sions rapidly that everybody agrees with is admired. However, business board-
rooms and teams of similar thinkers can act quickly, but oftentimes lack the 
diversity of opinions, perspectives, and backgrounds, and do not regularly get 
the best results. While there is a sense of fulfillment when everybody agrees, 
there is a good deal to be said regarding diversity of ideas and constructive 
disputes. According to a McKinsey & Company report, U.S. public businesses 
with executive board diversity (Figure 12.2) have a 95% better chance to reap 
a greater return on equity (Barta, Kleiner, & Neumann, 2012).
Many organizations are likely missing opportunities for the development 
of creative ideas, innovation, and success due to the fact that they are made 
up of individuals who think similarly. The bottom line is diversity drives 
innovation and creativity from every aspect and in all kinds of businesses 
including startups, marketing agencies, and Fortune 500 companies.
Figure 12.2  Is there a payoff from top-team-diversity?

340    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
Diversity also develops a better understanding of an organization’s client 
base, specifically in areas such as marketing where the objective is to reach, 
connect, and secure a diverse audience or customer base. The present soci-
ety represents new levels of diversity in the workplace, home, and commu-
nity. It is now common to see baby boomers sitting at the very same table 
with fresh-out-of-school Millennials who have totally diverse skillsets, expec-
tations, and experiences. For an organization seeking to secure loyalty from 
these diverse groups, it is essential to have a broad range of diverse minds, 
experiences, and cultures to successfully reach these varied audiences.
How Social Media Can Support Innovation
Social media tools can be used as the bond that brings together incom-
plete knowledge, deficient groups, inadequate concepts, and insufficient 
capability. The social network can be used as a community of individuals 
with common interests. Ultimately, it is an instrument that can be used to 
link diverse individuals and information.
Social networking can incubate new ideas that would otherwise have 
been abandoned or neglected. Just as easily as social network tools can pro-
pel innovation, they can also be an obstacle when participants succeed in 
making the less active majority feel that innovation is not appropriate for 
them. Thus, it must be approached in a manner that considers these risk 
factors as well. Social media systems today have been used in positive ways 
to achieve the following:
•	 To allow people to have discussions
•	 To build a community
•	 To ease information exchange
•	 To help people enlighten themselves
•	 To link people to others who share their passion
•	 To make innovative ideas noticeable and obtainable
•	 To make it possible for knowledge sharing
•	 To power partnerships on idea development
•	 To bring out insights and techniques that people can use to develop 
concepts
The better individuals and organizations utilize and gain confidence in so-
cial media, the better and stronger their organization’s innovative poten-
tial. This is a result of a more engaged team of workers, a developed sense 
of community, and a more prepared organization that can be positioned to 
engage effectively in open innovation.

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    341
To comprehend how social networks are affecting product innovation, 
Kalypso surveyed more than 90 product and service companies (Kenly & 
Poston, 2016). The objective of their research was to better comprehend 
how the worlds of social media and product innovation are coming togeth-
er to offer new business value in the form of social product innovation. 
Research surveys indicate that:
•	 Over half of surveyed companies are utilizing social media in prod-
uct innovation at some level.
•	 Although most of responding companies have taken some action, 
most of them have only used social media for a small number of 
their product innovation efforts.
Those using social media for product innovation gained organizational 
advantages consisting of more and better product ideas and requirements 
at a much faster item adoption rate, lower product development and prod-
uct costs, and a faster time to market. Table 12.1 provides a summary of the 
average improvement in these key areas of innovation for companies using 
social media in this study.
WHY DIVERSITY MATTERS
What is Diversity?
“Diversity is the presence of people from a wide range of backgrounds and 
possessing different traits. Differences in age, race, ethnic origin, culture, 
physical abilities, religion and sexual orientation are just some possible con-
tributors to diversity” (Kokemuller, 2016). True diversity includes a regard 
for and an appreciation of differences in gender, ethnicity, and age as well 
as special needs, national origin, sexual preference, faith, and education. It 
TABLE 12.1  Tangible Benefits of Social Media 
in the Front End of Innovation
Metric
Average Improvement
Faster time to market
16%
Faster product adoption
20%
Higher market share
6%
Improved product revenue
5%
Lower product cost
12%
Lower product development cost
15%
Source: Kenly & Poston, 2016

342    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
also extends to include diverse viewpoints, job experiences, lifestyles, and cul-
tures. Diversity is a “big concept” in business and in society that is a driver and 
a source of innovation. Diversity implies more than just acknowledging and 
enduring differences, it is a mindset of practices that involve:
•	 Acknowledging that personal, cultural, and institutionalized dis-
crimination develops and sustains opportunities for some while 
producing and sustaining disadvantages for others
•	 Appreciating and understanding human connections, cultures, and 
the natural environment
•	 Appreciating the fact that diversity is a way of understanding
•	 Building collaborations across differences to enable everyone to 
work together and do away with all forms of discrimination
•	 Practicing mutual respect for experiences, values, and qualities that 
are different from our own
Impact of Diversity on Business
A number of essential advantages are recognized in a well-managed di-
verse workplace. Offices where staff members represent the basic composi-
tion of the community population are generally better received by custom-
ers and the public. In addition, many times diverse work groups have more 
and better concepts because they emanate from more comprehensive back-
grounds and experiences. Ethnicity and multiculturalism typically assist busi-
nesses that operate worldwide to better understand international markets.
Years of study by organizational scientists, sociologists, psychologists, de-
mographers, and economic experts show that socially diverse groups (that 
is, those with a diversity of race, gender, ethnic, culture, and sexual prefer-
ence) are more ingenious than homogeneous groups (Phillips, 2014).
It appears apparent that a group of people with diverse specific expertise 
would be better than a homogeneous group at fixing difficult, nonroutine 
problems. It is less apparent that social diversity works in the same way; nev-
ertheless, according to Phillips (2014), science shows that it does. Not only 
do people with different backgrounds bring new information, they engage 
with people who are different from them or a different work group, and 
they are motivated to better prepare, to consider different perspectives, 
and to anticipate that reaching agreement will take effort (Phillips, 2014).
In Germany, scientists studied 28 teams with a varieties of diversity distinc-
tiveness and discovered that highly diverse groups performed much better 
on highly intricate tasks than homogeneous groups. The authors speculated 
that this outcome was connected to the diverse group’s broader diversity of 
perception and increased creativity, (Higgs, Plewnia, & Ploch, 2005).

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    343
Another study discovered that simple exposure to numerous cultures 
boosted creativity. It also revealed that substantial multicultural experiences 
were positively connected to creativity that supported cognitive processes 
such as retrieval of exceptional understanding, recruiting of ideas from un-
familiar cultures, expansion, and creative efficiency like remote association, 
insight learning, and idea generation, (Leung, Maddux, Galinsky, & Chiu, 
2008). Finally, recent research by McKinsey & Company makes it obvious that 
companies with more diverse labor forces perform much better financially 
(Hunt, Layton, & Prince, 2015). These are some of their specific findings:
•	 Companies in the top quartile for racial and ethnic diversity are 
35% more likely to have financial returns above their respective na-
tional industry medians. Companies in the top quartile for gender 
diversity are 15% more likely to have financial returns above their 
respective national industry medians (Figure 12.3).
•	 Companies in the bottom quartile both for gender, ethnicity, and 
race are statistically less likely to achieve above-average financial 
returns than the average companies who are bottom-quartile com-
panies.
•	 In the United States, there is a linear relationship between racial 
and ethnic diversity and better financial performance. For every 
10% increase in racial and ethnic diversity on the senior-executive 
team, earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) rise 0.8%.
Figure 12.3  Diversity’s dividend. (Source: Hunt, Layton, & Prince, 2015)

344    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
•	 Racial and ethnic diversity has a stronger impact on financial per-
formance in the United States than gender diversity. This may be 
attributed to previous efforts to increase women’s representation in 
top levels of business that have yielded some positive results.
•	 In the United Kingdom, greater gender diversity on the senior-ex-
ecutive team corresponded to the highest performance; i.e., a 10% 
increase in gender diversity corresponded to a rise of 3.5% in EBIT.
•	 While certain industries performed better on gender diversity and 
other industries on ethnic and racial diversity, no industry or com-
pany was in the top quartile on both dimensions.
•	 The unequal performance of companies in the same industry and 
the same country implied that diversity is a competitive differen-
tiator that shifted market share toward more diverse companies 
(Hunt, Layton, & Prince, 2015).
The Ability to Impact Customers on a Global Level
Cultural diversity in the workplace has increased in conjunction with 
the rise of world globalization. “Cultural diversity is when differences in 
race, ethnicity, language, nationality, religion, and sexual orientation are 
represented within a community” (Amadeo, 2016) There is a new age of 
diversity management today. Globalization has transformed many things 
including politics, the economy, and societies, which have significantly in-
fluenced demographics within communities and workplaces. Workforces 
today are more diverse with minorities making up as much as 40% of the 
United States labor force in 2009. In addition, heads of state, such as Barack 
Obama, Nicolas Sarkozy, Angela Merkel, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf indicate 
a manifestation of transformation in leadership perceptions. A multicul-
tural, worldwide workforce, including leadership is leading to new ways of 
thinking about diversity and inclusion efforts. Nations have varied levels of 
ethnicity (Figure 12.4).
The general population today understands that cultural backgrounds 
have a considerable impact on how consumers express their service expe-
riences. Different cultural influences normally equate to various expecta-
tions resulting in differences of experiences encountered. With more and 
more people traveling abroad organizations are experiencing difficulties in 
accommodating these foreign cultural influences. With this diversity in cli-
ents comes various perceptions and expectations of exactly what makes up 
good service. Because of this, it is necessary for organizations to understand 
the fundamental distinctions among cultures and have a better consider-
ation of specific needs in their services or product offerings. Consequently, 
organizations should offer more customized global services.

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    345
Workers who emigrate from various cultures have different experiences 
that can be useful in providing an organization with a reliable and large 
knowledge base. Al-Jenaibi (2011) studied the effect and range of cultural 
diversity in organizations in the United Arab Emirates. The study showed 
that the majority of the workers agreed group work with culturally diverse 
people helped “to overcome cultural differences through shared experi-
ences when working within a team” (Al-Jenaibi, 2011).
Research studies conducted on 13 leading law firms in the United King-
dom found that all of them have faced demand-side diversity pressure. 
When bidding for potential private sector customers, the law firms reported 
that they received requests for details about their diversity policies and ef-
forts. This practice is becoming more common as customer interest in di-
versity is moving past the recruitment process and continuing even when a 
firm is retained (Braithwaite, 2010).
Leading companies know it’s essential to consistently maintain diversity as a 
top business imperative over a period of, at minimum, five years before diver-
sity can gain traction and become part of the way those companies do busi-
ness. True diversity is not just about the mix that constitutes the workforce, 
it’s also about a company’s customers and business partners. (Andrade, 2014)
Diversity of Thought: Better Product Development
New product development is the transformation of a market’s need into 
a set of product technology characteristics that are built into a product that 
eventually becomes available for sale (Higgs, Plewnia, & Ploch, 2005).
Figure 12.4  Level of ethnic diversity in countries. (Source: Harvard Institute for 
Economic Research, Washington Post, 2015)

346    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
To enhance their innovativeness and competitiveness, organizations of-
ten assemble new product development (NPD) teams that are made up 
of interdisciplinary and cross-functional employees. The combined un-
derstanding and abilities of team members from various functional back-
grounds will have a variety of individual ideas, views, and experiences that 
will increase a team’s creativity and innovativeness (Gebert, Boerner, & Ke-
arney, 2010). Diverse staff members who bring a broader range of thoughts 
and points of view can produce greater innovativeness than a homoge-
neous group. For that reason, greater diversity within NPD teams can result 
in greater innovativeness (Amabile T., 1998; Milliken & Matins, 1996).
When groups interrelate among members, every member benefits from 
ideas or arguments that are shared and the group becomes more productive. 
Through interaction and consultation, their innovative output will normally 
avoid problems requiring diverse solutions. Innovation is not a product of ev-
eryone’s understanding, but an outcome of interactions between everybody. 
Communication acts as a crucial facilitator to enhance creativity and stimu-
late individuals to share concepts from different point of views.
In literature that examined cognitive ability (intelligence) and cross-
functional knowledge, it was shown to have a direct effect on NPD effi-
ciency. Hall and Ellis (2010) presented three dimensions of knowledge that 
directly influenced NPD efficiency: supplier knowledge, technical knowl-
edge, and supply market knowledge. Knowledge is crucial for cross-func-
tional integration, which helps with communication, information process-
ing, knowledge transfers, and provides a platform of interaction through 
diverse functions (Hall & Ellis, 2010).
HOW TO PROMOTE AND DIVERSIFY IN AN 
ORGANIZATION
Activities that promote internal diversity provide an organization with the op-
portunity to broaden its cultural horizons, expand its customer or member-
ship base and become a better reflection of the communities it serves. Suc-
cessful activities that promote diversity in organizations focus on education, 
participation and communication. (McQuerrey, 2016)
Additionally, cultural change is necessary for sustainable diversity within 
any organization. Strategies for advancing diversity include:
•	 Effective interaction: Managers and supervisors are often the ones on 
the front line when it comes to executing new policies and proce-
dures. Those in management positions should determine essential 
messages and recognize effective channels that can be used to receive 

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    347
the communication of diversity. It should flow from the highest levels 
of leadership to human resources to line managers at every level of 
the organization. Effective interaction should be predetermined to 
make sure the right messages are sent out to the right individuals.
•	 Include diversity in the framework of organizational policy: Diversity 
needs to be woven into the fundamental policies of the organiza-
tion. This should include recruitment and promotion policies and 
practices.
•	 Create leadership commitment: Just as the management of organi-
zations are concerned about safety programs, they should also assert 
and actively encourage diversity in their organizations. As pointed 
out earlier, this will help ensure success and effectiveness, which 
is necessary to derive all the benefits of diversity. Organizational 
managements can accomplish this by crafting policies that com-
mand equal and reasonable treatment of workers based on ethnic 
background and gender. They must also serve as good examples by 
considering and promoting diversity in all of their actions.
It’s very important that diversity efforts are strengthened by the CEO 
and vigorously supported by other leaders. One cannot underestimate the 
effect of staff involvement. Engaging staff members at all levels is the most 
efficient way to collaborate and communicate the significance of diversity.
HOW SOCIAL MEDIA CAN SUPPORT DIVERSITY
We utilize social networks as the forefront of voicing our viewpoints, shar-
ing information about our lives, and coming together to converse about 
issues as a community. However what about the issue of diversity? Can we 
actually speak about diversity on social networks? With the record speed 
and the ability to broadcast, tweet, and share our written thoughts and ideas 
just as fast as we can say them, individuals align themselves with their tech-
nological devices for hours ready to defend ideas, opinions, and beliefs.
Is social media, therefore, a good channel to discuss diversity? Yes, it is. 
Social media is a great avenue to discuss and support diversity since it gives 
a chance for thousands and even millions of people to be part of a conversa-
tion that can change individual perspectives and even alter their lives. More 
specifically, social media can support diversity in the following ways:
•	 Support is now observable. Individuals support diverse people, con-
cepts, and things they like on sites like Digg and Reddit.
•	 Learn more from each other. Social media enable people to learn 
from each other. Anybody can search for and find diverse information 

348    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
and answers to most any question. There are countless videos avail-
able on YouTube, Facebook, and other social media to teach people 
anything from how to cook to how to be successful in business.
•	 Crowd sourced wisdom. People share their wisdom, knowledge, and 
experiences on social media. Quora is a platform where anyone can 
ask any question in the world and anticipate a sensible response.
•	 Innovation and inspiration are given free rein. People share diverse, 
innovative ideas and inspirations through social media. Pinterest, 
for instance, has redefined the digital catalog/portfolio.
•	 Enhanced positive reception of the unique and handmade. Social 
media enables people to still have a healthy respect for the special 
and the handmade. Etsy, for instance, has empowered many diverse 
entrepreneurs and infuses a diverse culture with an amazing rich-
ness of creativity and innovations.
•	 Anyone can contribute. What better way can social media support 
diversity than the ability for anyone to contribute to issues and ideas 
and freely express their views and opinions? When people make use of 
social media to have discussions, everyone is instantly invited since it is 
public. Not everyone will be open minded and ready to have a natural 
conversation. It is necessary to approach discussion in a way not to 
mock others, but to inform and pay attention to others’ perspectives. 
Overall, people have to be cautious with how they approach conversa-
tions of diversity and the platforms they use in exploring them.
It is good to have these discussions, but it is essential to comprehend that 
change and new ways of thinking will not come through mocking others, 
but through listening to other perspectives, asking questions, and aspiring 
to understand others’ points of view.
Social media and the Internet create exceptional possibilities for estab-
lishing and expanding diversity efforts for one basic reason: They do not 
inherently discriminate. People from essentially every age and every walk of 
life around the world can be found online making use of numerous social 
networking platforms. The ways that businesses are leveraging this tool as a 
way to reach their clients demonstrates the numerous possibilities.
The statistics of social networking alone provide a concrete case for the 
possible reach of various online platforms. Facebook reports more than 1.79 
billion monthly active users (Statista, 2016). In addition, LinkedIn has more 
than 450 million members with 25% who are active monthly (Yeung, 2016).
According to YouTube statistics (YouTube, 2016):
•	 There are more than a billion users who represent almost one-third 
of all people on the Internet. Everyday people spend hundreds of 
millions of hours on YouTube and generate billions of views.

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    349
•	 YouTube has launched local versions in more than 88 countries and 
is presented in a total of 76 different languages (covering 95% of 
the Internet population).
Since social networking drives outcomes for diversity activities, smart 
businesses are investing money and time into it. They are using it for staff 
member recruitment and retention, internal interactions, client satisfac-
tion, and sales outreach.
INTRODUCTION TO ALGONITE  
(ALGORITHM THAT UNITES)
What is Algonite?
Algonite is currently in development as a niche social media tool for 
the virtual collaboration community of STEM professionals. It can foster 
research, discovery, innovation, and product development. The secure 
platform intelligently matches collaborators based on collaboration style, 
desired level of engagement, technical focus areas, and desired outcomes 
of collaboration. In essence, it provides a social network for innovation, 
research, and patent production.
A Newly Developing Product to Promote Collaboration
In recent years, scientists have become highly engaged in social media 
sites for the purpose of connecting, collaborating, and disseminating scien-
tific information or perspectives. Presently 4.5 million scientists are signed 
up for ResearchGate and another 10,000 arrive daily (Van Noordan, 2014). 
While this pales in comparison to the 1.3 billion users of Facebook, Re-
searchGate is a site specifically for researchers.
Algonite is open to researchers, STEM professionals, and anyone seek-
ing collaborations for technical purposes. While multiple social media tools 
and collaboration environments exist today, there does not currently ex-
ist a site that provides a matching feature, the opportunity to give techni-
cal ideas while ensuring secure collaboration, and the use of the virtual 
research community that includes a mobile app for video chats between 
collaborators.
Algonite facilitates the collaborative process by providing an accessible, 
easy to use platform for advancing the collaborative process in a secure envi-
ronment and allowing consistent access for collaborators. This compatibility 

350    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
pairing and infrastructure feature allows a higher likelihood of success for 
all collaborative endeavors (Barta, Mancha, & Ashcraft, 2014).
A secondary benefit of Algonite is to provide scientists with relevant and 
current information on commercially available R&D innovation as well 
as product development opportunities with private companies, investors, 
and federal agencies. There are free postings for desired collaborations, 
innovations, R&D, funding, and commercialization opportunities, which 
are tailored and disseminated to users. By providing users with productive 
team structures and targeted funding opportunities, Algonite offers sec-
ondary benefits as it address this disparity and key components of innova-
tive pathways.
PROVIDES AN APPROACH THAT PROMOTES DIVERSITY 
THROUGH THE ONLINE SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM
Algonite is compatible with existing social media sites and allows a user 
to sign up by linking his/her Algonite profile with existing social media 
sites (e.g., ResearchGate or LinkedIn). However, unlike existing network-
ing sites for scientists such as LOOP, academia.edu, ResearchGate, and 
LinkedIn, Algonite is able to automatically populate a researcher’s profile 
with additional information when a user completes registration using the 
PARSA (Personalized Algorithm for Research and Scholarly Activity) data 
collection model.
To initiate the PARSA profile development approach, a user completes a 
personal technical profile in PARSA (e.g., name, institution, etc.) and up-
loads a representative set of publications from the last 5 years and a current 
curriculum vita or resume. PARSA then searches the text for patterns and 
self-generates a technical user profile. Upon creation of the PARSA user 
profile process, the individual is presented with the output and allowed to 
edit any details. Finally, the user will be required to do a final review and 
approve the profile before it is incorporated and released to the site.
How Does It Work?
Algonite’s innovation is built around the PARSA algorithm where users 
have the benefit of a system that efficiently matches researchers with de-
sired competencies, expertise, and personal profiles that are expected to be 
compatible for the purpose of applicable collaborations.
Algonite is not just another social media site; however, it utilizes the ben-
efits of this powerful medium to connect scientists and innovators based 
on professional, technical, and personal characteristics with a focus on 

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    351
identifying and matching STEM collaborators for essential partnerships 
and facilitating the collaborative process. This is accomplished through 
the use of an algorithm to make “high-probability” matches using select 
sources of information. The objective is to identify individuals who focus on 
a particular innovation or project and who have the necessary professional 
backgrounds, technical experience, and personality profiles for a collabora-
tive team effort. The soundness of the algorithm will be a key rating point 
in the establishment and engagement of the collaboration process.
After collaborative exchanges in Algonite, the system allows users to en-
gage in a rating poll to provide their opinions of the success and outcomes 
of their collaborations. Open-ended responses are collected from users 
about the quality of the PARSA match, the value of the current collabora-
tive activity, and key outcomes that have resulted from their collaborative 
endeavors. Additionally, future versions of Algonite will offer incentivized 
quarterly survey completions to seek longitudinal feedback on the quantity 
and quality of the collaborations.
The structure of Algonite is compatible with existing social media sites 
allowing a user to sign up by linking their Algonite profile with existing so-
cial media sites (i.e., ResearchGate or LinkedIn). However, unlike existing 
networking sites for scientists such as LOOP, academia.edu, ResearchGate, 
and LinkedIn, Algonite is able to automatically populate a researcher pro-
file with additional information when a user completes registration using 
the PARSA data collection model.
To initiate the PARSA profile development approach, a user completes a 
personal technical profile in PARSA (e.g., name, institution, etc.) and uploads 
a representative set of publications from the last 5 years and a current cur-
riculum vita or résumé. PARSA then uses a deterministic approach to search 
the text for patterns that will self-generate a user’s technical profile. Upon 
creation of the PARSA user profile, the user is allowed to edit any aspect of 
the details. Finally, the user is required to do a final review and approve the 
profile before it is officially incorporated and released on the website.
THE FUTURE OF INNOVATION AND DIVERSITY  
ARE GOING TO BE CONTINUOUSLY IMPACTED 
BY TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEDIA
Due to the dynamic changes in technology throughout the world, collabo-
ration will evolve such that collaboration will no longer demand a physi-
cal presence in order to have a meeting or to share research, thoughts, or 
ideas. Additionally, the identification of collaborators will also change to 
allow more rapid formation of teams to address global challenges facing 
our engineering and scientific communities.

352    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
As communicated to the principal investigator during customer discov-
ery for Algonite, there is a “window of opportunity” open to address this 
need. Algonite could be the platform that answers this opportunity by intel-
ligently connecting STEM professionals worldwide
In an era of growing open-access of resources and at the same time grow-
ing security concerns, the need for a tool that allows access to individuals 
worldwide for sharing of information in a secure environment is increasing-
ly necessary. According to a review of the scientific and business literature, 
the development of a social media system that connects researchers and 
seeks to establish diverse teams for STEM related innovations has not yet 
been accomplished. The development of such an innovation is challenging 
due to the interdisciplinary nature of the requirements and the dynamic 
nature of human interaction.
To accomplish this goal will require technical expertise not only in com-
puting, but also an understanding of social science about team behaviors 
and the innovation process. However, Algonite has a plan to accomplish 
this daunting task. The concept for this research social media site with intel-
ligent algorithms, data mining, and membership profiles can facilitate the 
development of high-probability collaborative teams. In achieving this goal, 
Algonite intends to lead the way as a dynamic and adaptable platform that 
engages the global STEM community.
CONCLUSION
Social media present a game-changing opportunity for individuals and or-
ganizations who become skilled at how to take advantage of it. However, 
taking advantage of social media’s diversity necessitates more than just hav-
ing a Facebook account with a loyal base of friends.
Social media can be much more than a channel where likeminded individu-
als connect, it can be a game changer for individuals, organizations, and com-
munities. It can promote conversations, enlighten people, and facilitate goals 
that lead to innovation while creating communities that are both inclusive and 
diverse. However, this will not happen automatically or without planned initia-
tives to promote these objectives. Algonite represents a promising technique to 
support the realization of global collaborations in order to support innovation, 
diversity, and inclusion while positively impacting the global society.
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., & Zilibotti, F. (2006). Distance to frontier, selection, and 
economic growth. Journal of European Econonmic Association, 4(1), 37–74.

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    353
Al-Jenaibi, B. (2011). The scope and impact of workplace diversity in the United 
Arab Emirates: An initial study. Journal for Communication and Culture, 1(2), 
49–81.
Amabile, T. (1998). How to kill creativity. Harvard Business Review, 76(5), 76–87.
Amadeo, K. (2016, September). Cultural diversity in the work place. Retrieved from 
https://www.thebalance.com/cultural-diversity-3306201
Andrade, S. (2014, June). 6 advantages to workplace diversity. Retrieved from https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/20140606233540-35065017-6-advantages-to-work-
place-diversity
Ang, J., & Madsen, J. (2011). Can second-generation endogenous growth models 
explain the productivity trends and knowledge production in the Asian mira-
cle economics? The Review of Economic Statistics, 93(4), 1360–1373.
Australian Psychological Society. (2012). Innovation in organisations. Illuminations, 
6–10. Retrieved from http://www.inventium.com.au/wp-content/uploads/ 
2013/03/Innovation-in-Organisations-APS-Shelley-Logan.pdf
Barta, T., Kleiner, M., & Neumann, T. (2012, April). Is there a payoff from top-team 
diversity? Retrieved from http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/
organization/our-insights/is-there-a-payoff-from-top-team-diversity
Barta, T., Mancha, C., & Ashcraft, C. (2014). What is the impact of gender diversity 
on technology business performance? Research Summary. Retrieved from https://
www.ncwit.org/sites/default/files/resources/impactgenderdiversitytechbusi-
nessperformance_print.pdf
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (1992). An invitation to reflexive sociology. Chicago, IL: 
The University of Chicago Press.
Braithwaite, J. (2010). The stategic use of demand-side diversity pressure in the 
solicitors’ profession. Journal and Law and Society, 37(3).
Burt, R. S. (2010). Neighbor networks: Competitive advantage local and personal. New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Carmeli, A., Meitar, R., & Weisberg, J. (2006). Self-leadership skills and innovative 
behavior at work. International Journal of Manpower, 27(1), 75–90.
CDC. (2012). CDC’s guide to writing for social media. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.
gov/socialmedia/Tools/guidelines/pdf/GuidetoWritingforSocialMedia.pdf
Chen, W., Rainie, L., & Wellman, B. (2012). Networked work. In H. Rainie & B. 
Wellman (Eds.), Networked: The new social operating system (pp. 171–196). Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Research paper (PDF): The Effects of Diversity and Network Ties on Innovations: 
The Emergence of a New Scientific Field. Available from: https://www.re-
searchgate.net/publication/273740564_The_Effects_of_Diversity_and_Net-
work_Ties_on_Innovations_The_Emergence_of_a_New_Scientific_Field [ac-
cessed Apr 6, 2017].
Cheung, C., Lee, Z. W., & Chan, T. K. (2015). Self-disclosure in social networking 
sites : The role of perceived cost, perceived benefits and social influence. In-
ternet Research, 25(2), 279–299.
Chewar, C. M., McCrickhard, S., & Carroll, J. M. (2005). Analyzing the social capital 
value chain in community network interfaces. Internet Research, 15(3), 262–280.

354    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
Cisco. (2016). The zettabyte era: Trends and analysis. Retrieved September 20, 2016, 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visu-
al-networking-index-vni/vni-hyperconnectivity-wp.html
Fan, D. (2011). Proof that diversity drives innovation. Retrieved from http://www.di-
versityinc.com/diversity-management/proof-that-diversity-drives-innovation/
Gebert, D., Boerner, S., & Kearney, E. (2010). Cross-functionality and innovation 
in new product development teams: A dilemmatic structure and its conse-
quences for the management of diversity. European Journal Of Work And Orga-
nizational Psychology, 15(4), 431–458.
Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic backwardness in historical perspective. Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press.
Gladwell, M. (2000). Designs for working. Retrieved from http://gladwell.com/
designs-for-working/
Guimera, R., Uzzi, B., Spiro, A., & Amaral, L. (2005). Team assembly mechanisms 
determine collaboration network structure and team performance. Science, 
308, 697–702.
Hall, D., & Ellis, S. (2010, May). Core and overlapping knowledge, cross-functional inte-
gration, and process. POMS 21st Annual Conference, Vancouver, Canada.
Higgs, M., Plewnia, U., & Ploch, J. (2005). Influence of team composition and task 
complexity on team performance. Team Performance Management, 11(7/8), 
227–250.
Hill, H., Ball, D., & Schilling, S. (2008). Unpacking pedagogical content knowl-
edge: Conceptualizing and measuring teachers’ topic specific knowledge of 
students. Journal for Research in Mathematical Education, 39(4), 372–400.
Horrobin, D. (2001). Something rotten at the core of science? Trends in Pharmaco-
logical Sciences, 22(2), 51–52.
Hunt, V., Layton, D., & Prince, S. (2015, January). Why diversity matters. Re-
trieved from http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/
our-insights/why-diversity-matters
Janssen, O., Van de Vliert, E., & West, M. (2004). The bright and dark sides of indi-
vidual and group innovation: A special issue introduction. Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, 25, 129–145.
Kao, J. (2007). Innovation nation: How America is losing its innovation edge, why it mat-
ters, and what we can do to get it back. New York, NY: Free Press.
Kenly, A., & Poston, B. (2016). Social media and product innovation. Retrieved 2016, 
from http://viewpoints.io/uploads/files/Kalypso_Social_Media_and_Prod-
uct_Innovation_1.pdf
Kokemuller, N. (2016). What is diversity and how does it impact work? Retrieved from 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/diversity-impact-work-15985.html
Lackes, R. (2009, January). Social networks as an approach to the enhancement of 
collaboration among scientists. International Journal of Web Based Communities, 
5, 577–592.
Leung , A., Maddux, W., Galinsky, A., & Chiu, C.-y. (2008). Multicultural experience 
enhances creativity: The when and how. American Psychologist, 63(3), 169-180.
McQuerrey, L. (2016). Activities to promote diversity in organizations. Retrieved from 
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/activities-promote-diversity-organiza-
tions-20563.html

Social Media, Innovation, and Diversity in the 21st Century    355
Milliken, F., & Matins, L. (1996). Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in 
organizational groups. Academy of Management Review, 21(2), 402–433.
Mynatt, E. A. (1997). Design for network communities. In proceedings of the ACM 
conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 210–217). New York, NY: 
ACM Press.
OECD. (2013). Glossary of statistical term (F. Manual, Ed.). Retrieved from https://
stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=2314
Perrin, A. (2015, October). Social media usage: 2005–2015. Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/08/social-networking-usage-2005-2015/
Phillips, K. (2014, October). How diversity makes us smarter. Retrieved from https://
www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-diversity-makes-us-smarter/
Ribia-García, D., Elichc-Qucsada, C., Rus-Casas, C, & Aguilar-Pena, J. D. (2016). The 
social media networking tools for the promotion of the entrepreneurship. In 
2016 technologies applied to electronics teaching (TAEE; pp. 1–6). Seville, Spain: 
IEEE.
Sander, T., & Lee, T. (2014). A concept to measure social capital in social net-
work sites. International Journal of Future Computer and Communications, 3(2), 
105–107.
Semolic, B. (2008). PM research journal:Project overload. Retrieved from http://www.
ipma.world/assets/rs-PM-Research08.pdf
Serrat, O. (2009, September). Harnessing creativity and innovation in the workplace. Re-
trieved from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/27596/
harnessing-creativity-and-innovation-workplace.pdf
Sherif, K., Munasinghe, M., & Sharma, C. (2012). The combinative effect of elec-
tronic open networks and closed interpersonal networks on knowledge cre-
ation in academic communities. VINE, 42(2), 277–294. doi:http://dx.doi.
org.ezproxy.net.ucf.edu/10.1108/03055721211227291
Smith, K. (2016, 03 07). Marketing: 96 amazing social media statistics and facts 
for 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2016, from https://www.brandwatch.
com/2016/03/96-amazing-social-media-statistics-and-facts-for-2016/
Statista. (2016). The statistics portal. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/
Stats, I. W. (2016, June 30). Internet users in the world by regions. Retrieved September 
19, 2016, from http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm
Tachibana, C. (2014, Febuary). A scientist’s guide to social media. Retrieved from 
https://www.sciencemag.org/careers/features/2014/02/scientists-guide 
-social-media
Taylor, A., & Greve, H. (2006). Superman or the fantastic four? Knowledge combi-
nation and experience in innovative teams. Academy of Management Journal, 
49(4), 723–740.
Van Noorden, R. (2014). Scientists and the social network. Nature, 512(7513), 
126–129.
Wang, C. L., & Ahmed, P. K. (2004). The development and validation of the or-
ganisational innovativeness construct using confirmatory factor analysis. Eu-
ropean Journal of Innovation Management, 71(4), 303–313.

356    P. McCAULEY and E. NASSIFF
Wasko, M. M., Faraj, S., & Teigland, R. (2004, December). Collective action and 
knowledge contribution in electronic networks of practice. Journal of the As-
sociation for Information Systems, 5(11–12), 493–513.
Williams, K., & O’Reilly, C. (1998). Demography and diversity in organizations: A review 
of 40 years of research. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/298960487_Demography_and_diversity_in_organizations_A_review_
of_40_years_of_research
Wu, L., Lin, C., Aral, S., & Brynjolfsson, E. (2009). The value of social network. Re-
trieved from http://smallblue.research.ibm.com/projects/snvalue/
Wuchty, S., Jones, B., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in production 
of knowledge. Retrieved from http://science.sciencemag.org/content/316/ 
5827/1036
Yeung, K. (2016, August). LinkedIn now has 450 million members, but the number of month-
ly visitors is still flat. Retrieved from http://venturebeat.com/2016/08/04/
linkedin-now-has-450-million-members-but-the-number-of-monthly-visitors-is-
still-flat/?utm_source=tuicool&utm_medium=referral
YouTube. (2016). Press statistics. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/yt/
press/statistics.html

Leading Diversity in the 21st Century, pages 357–367
Copyright © 2017 by Information Age Publishing
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
357
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Vincent Bagire is an associate professor in the department of Business Ad-
ministration at Makerere University Business School, Kampala–Uganda. He 
holds a PhD in Strategic Management from the University of Nairobi. He 
has been a faculty member for twenty years and involved in both academic 
and administrative roles. He is currently the Deputy Dean in the Faculty of 
Graduate Studies and Research. His teaching and research areas are man-
agement, strategy, organizational theory and corporate strategy. He has 
published on management practices and strategic management in the Afri-
can context. He is currently engaged in studies on practical experiences of 
management and strategy as practice in the public and civil society sectors 
with particular interest on NGOs operating in the less developed econo-
mies. He is also involved in several community based activities in the urban 
and rural settings of Uganda. Vincent is an Alumni of the Africa Academy 
of Management faculty development workshop, a former Global Represen-
tative for Africa of the Business Policy and Strategy division of the Academy 
of Management and currently a member of the Research committee of the 
same division.
Ghada Baz (MBA, Georgia State University) is an instructor of manage-
ment at the College of Business Administration and a doctoral student in 
the Industrial and Organizational Psychology program at the University of 
Central Florida. She is also a partner at OpenPublic Networks, an Orlando, 
FL, based consulting firm assisting startup, small, and medium businesses 
in establishing their professional presence through technology, telecom-
munication, branding, and consulting services. Baz is a member of the 

358    ﻿About the Contributors
Small Business Development Center’s Business Advisory Council, and is a 
certified Project Management Professional (PMP) with international expe-
rience in the management consulting industry, mainly with Ernst & Young.
Cynthia A. Bulley is a senior lecturer in marketing and organizational re-
search with the Central University, Ghana. She has had a varied career in 
industry and academia. She has facilitated workshops and training program 
for organizations in Ghana. Her considerable research, teaching and con-
sulting activities focus on the application of marketing practices and orga-
nization capacity building. She is interested in organizational management, 
experiential marketing and international business.
A. O’Shea Cleveland is a doctor of veterinary medicine candidate at the 
Louisiana State University. She received her degree in women’s studies 
from the University of Maryland with a concentration in gender and sexu-
ality. Her research specializations include gender, diversity, and communi-
cation. She has published, and has conducted numerous seminars on the 
topics of gendered communication and communication diversity.
Claudia C. Cogliser is Associate Dean for Student Affairs in the Graduate 
School and Associate Professor of Management in the Rawls College of Busi-
ness at Texas Tech University. She received her PhD from the University of 
Miami, and previously held faculty positions at the University of Oklahoma 
and Oregon State University. Claudia teaches courses in organizational be-
havior, leadership, and research methods and was inducted into the Texas 
Tech Teaching Academy in 2013. Her research interests include leader-fol-
lower relationships, entrepreneurial orientation, scale development, and 
multi-level analysis. With over 30 publications, Claudia’s research appears 
in scholarly outlets such as The Leadership Quarterly, Journal of Management, 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, Orga-
nizational Research Methods, and Educational and Psychological Measurement. 
In 2013 she received the Texas Tech Chancellor’s Distinguished Teaching 
Award and the President’s Excellence in Teaching Award. Claudia serves on 
the editorial boards of The Leadership Quarterly and Group and Organi-
zational Management. She is a member of AOM, APA, SMA, and SIOP, and 
serves currently as the treasurer of SMA.
Nancy DiTomaso is Distinguished Professor of Management and Global 
Business at Rutgers Business School—Newark and New Brunswick. Her re-
search addresses issues of diversity, culture, and inequality. Her PhD is from 
the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Her 2013 book, The American Non-
dilemma: Racial Inequality without Racism (Russell Sage) won the C. Wright 
Mills Award from the Society for the Study of Social Problems; the Inequal-
ity, Poverty, and Mobility Section Distinguished Book Award from the Amer-

About the Contributors﻿    359
ican Sociological Association (ASA); received Honorable Mention for the 
Max Weber Award for Best Book given by the Organizations, Occupations, 
and Work Section of the ASA; and was Runner Up for the George R. Terry 
Award given by the Academy of Management for the Best Book in Manage-
ment over a two-year period. Professor DiTomaso won the 2016 Sage Award 
for Lifetime Scholarly Achievement in Gender and Diversity given by the 
Academy of Management Division on Gender and Diversity.
Barbara A. Fritzsche (PhD, University of South Florida) is Associate Chair 
of the Department of Psychology and Director of the MS Program in In-
dustrial and Organizational Psychology at the University of Central Florida. 
Her research interests include workplace diversity, successful aging at work, 
and employee health and wellness. She serves on the editorial board of the 
Journal of Organizational Behavior and has recently published papers in Work, 
Aging, and Retirement, Organizational Psychology Review, Human Resource Man-
agement Review, and Journal of Managerial Psychology.
Bella L. Galperin holds a PhD, Concordia University (Canada) and is Profes-
sor of Management/Senior Associate Director of TECO Energy Center for 
Leadership, University of Tampa. Research interests include international 
organizational behavior, leadership, and workplace deviance. Published in 
a variety of journals including, the Journal of Business Ethics, International 
Journal of Human Resource Management, Journal of Applied Social Psy-
chology, Leadership Quarterly, and International Business Review, as well 
as edited volumes. She recently co-authored a book on leadership in Africa 
and the African diaspora.
Cristina M. Giannantonio is an Associate Professor of Management in the 
Argyros School of Business and Economics at Chapman University. She is 
an Associate at the Thompson Policy Institute on Disability and Autism at 
Chapman University. She served as the president of the Chapman University 
Faculty Senate in 2015–2016. She received her PhD from the Smith School 
of Business at the University of Maryland, College Park, MD. Dr. Giannanto-
nio’s research interests include extreme leadership, image norms, and high 
tech entrepreneurial careers. Her research has been published in academic 
journals, including the Journal of Management, Personnel Psychology, and The 
Journal of Business Leadership. She was the co-editor of the Journal of Business 
and Management from 2005–2016. In 2012 Drs. Giannantonio and Hurley-
Hanson’s Academy of Management symposium Staying Hungry, Staying 
Foolish: Academic Reflections of the Life and Career of Steve Jobs was des-
ignated an AOM Showcase Symposium. Dr. Giannantonio and Dr. Hurley-
Hanson’s book Extreme Leadership: Leaders, Teams and Situations Outside the 
Norm was published by Edward Elgar Publishing in 2014. The book is part 
of the New Horizons in Leadership Studies series. Extreme Leadership was se-

360    ﻿About the Contributors
lected as a finalist for the 2014 Outstanding Leadership Book Award by the 
Department of Leadership Studies at the University of San Diego.
Lucy Gilson (PhD, Georgia Institute of Technology) is a Professor and the 
Management Department Head at the University of Connecticut. Her re-
search examines teams in different organizational settings performing a 
diverse range of jobs to understand how creativity, empowerment, leader-
ship, and virtual communication influence effectiveness. She is the Senior 
Associate Editor of Group and Organization Management, and her work has 
been published in the Academy of Management Journal, Journal of Manage-
ment, Leadership Quarterly, and other top international journals. Professor 
Gilson has consulted with multinational companies as well as state and na-
tional agencies in the areas of leadership, women and leadership, manag-
ing virtual teams, managing change, and leading for creativity.
Caren Goldberg (PhD, Georgia State University) is an Associate Professor 
at Bowie State University, whose research focuses on diversity and sexual 
harassment. Her work has been published in a variety of management and 
women’s studies journals, including Journal of Applied Psychology, Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, Human Relations, Human Resource Management, Jour-
nal of Business and Psychology, Group and Organization Management, Sex Roles, 
and Psychology of Women Quarterly. She is currently serving as Treasurer of 
the Gender and Diversity in Organizations Division of the Academy of Man-
agement and is on the editorial boards of several journals. Dr. Goldberg has 
testified in over a dozen employment law matters. 
Carolina Gomez is a full professor at Florida International University. Her 
research interests within organizational behavior lie in motivation and the 
factors that affect critical constructs such as organizational commitment 
and organizational citizenship behaviors. In addition, she does research on 
control and coordination in MNCs. Finally, she has looked at how country 
institutions affect levels of entrepreneurship across countries. Her papers 
have been published in journals such as Academy of Management Journal, 
Strategic Management Journal, Group and Organization Management, Journal of 
Business Ethics, International Journal of Human Resource Management, Journal 
of Management Studies, Journal of World Business, Journal of Business Research, 
and the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. In the private sector, Dr. 
Gómez worked with Nortel and subsequently, completed a leadership de-
velopment program within General Electric Capital.
Daniel P. Gullifor is a PhD student in the Rawls College of Business at Texas 
Tech University. He obtained his Bachelor of Science and Master of Busi-
ness Administration from the Foster College of Business Administration 
at Bradley University. He conducts research in the field of organizational 

About the Contributors﻿    361
behavior and human resource management. Specifically, he studies leader-
ship, the leader’s relationship with her or his self, and how the dynamics of 
this relationship affects their leadership ability.
Courtney A. Henderson holds an MA in Literature (University of Toledo); 
an MS in Linguistics (University of Hawaii at Manoa), a Higher Educa-
tion Professionals Certification from Harvard and is working on an EdD in 
Higher Education Administration and Leadership. She has taught at the 
University of Miami, Barry University and Pharos University. She also served 
as the Director of the Writing Center with the international study abroad 
program Semester at Sea. She gave seven presentations during the voyage 
as both a professor and Writing Center Director. Henderson earned grants 
to create a Hawaiian/English book and game to help with Hawaiian lan-
guage revitalization and it was distributed at Hawaiian language immersion 
preschools on Oahu. Henderson has also presented at conferences around 
the world speaking on linguistics, leadership, writing and literature. Hen-
derson is currently a mentor for undergraduate students and an Academic 
Advisor at Berkeley College.
Amy E. Hurley-Hanson is an Associate Professor of Management in the 
George L. Argyros School of Business and Economics at Chapman Univer-
sity. She is an Associate at the Thompson Policy Institute on Disability and 
Autism at Chapman University. She received her PhD in Management from 
the Stern School of Business at New York University. She is the co-editor 
of the recent book Extreme Leadership: Leaders, Teams and Situations Outside 
the Norm. She was the co-editor of the Journal of Business and Management 
from 2005–2016. Dr. Hurley-Hanson was chosen as an Ascendant Scholar in 
2000 by the Western Academy of Management. In 2008 Drs. Hurley-Hanson 
and Giannantonio received the Best Symposium Award from the Manage-
ment and Education Division of the Academy of Management. Her areas 
of research are organizational decision making, image norms, high tech 
entrepreneurial careers and the application of behavioral decision theory 
to strategic aspects of executive succession. Her work on these topics has 
appeared in numerous journals including the Journal of Vocational Behavior, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Women in Management Review, Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior, Group and Organization Management, Journal of Leadership 
and Organization Development, Organizational Dynamics, and the Journal of Psy-
chology. She was selected as a Research Fellow at the Center for Leadership 
and Career Studies at the Goizueta Business School of Emory University.
Terri R. Lituchy has her PhD in International Organizational Behavior 
from University of Arizona. Dr. Lituchy is the PIMSA Distinguished Chair 
at CETYS Universidad in Mexico. Dr. Lituchy taught on Semester at Sea 
spring 2016. She has also taught around the world including: United States, 

362    ﻿About the Contributors
Mexico, Canada, Trinidad, Barbados, Argentina, France, UK, Czech Repub-
lic, Japan, China, Thailand, and Malaysia. She teaches courses on Organi-
zational Behavior, Cross-Cultural Management, International Negotiations, 
and Women in International Business to name a few. Terri’s research in-
terests are in cross-cultural management and international organizational 
behavior. Dr. Lituchy’s current project, LEAD: Leadership Effectiveness 
and Motivation in Africa, the Caribbean and the Diaspora has received 
many awards as well as grants from SAMS, the SHRM Foundation, Emer-
ald Publishing, McMaster University, University of the West Indies, Concor-
dia University, and SSHRC; and has been published as LEAD: Leadership 
Effectiveness in Africa and the African Diaspora (2016). Terri has published 
several other books on Successful Professional Women of the Americas (Elgar 
Publishing, 2006), Gender and the Dysfunctional Workplace (Elgar, 2012) and 
Management in Africa (Routledge, 2014), and LEAD: Leadership Effectiveness 
in Africa and the African Diaspora (Palgrave, 2016). Dr. Lituchy has over 35 
published journal articles and many research awards and grants. In her 
spare time, Terri enjoys traveling, photography, bird watching, and learn-
ing about other cultures.
Patricia G. Martínez is an associate professor at the College of Business Ad-
ministration at Loyola Marymount University. Her work has been published 
in Human Resources Management Review, Personnel Review, Employee Responsi-
bilities and Rights Journal, Nonprofit Management and Leadership, Management 
Research and the Business Journal of Hispanic Research and she contributed 
to Managing Human Resources in Latin America: An Agenda for International 
Leaders. She received her doctoral degree from the University of California, 
Irvine. Professor Martínez’s research interests link human resources man-
agement research with organizational behavior topics particularly in the ar-
eas of paternalism as a leadership style, how human resource management 
practices can lead to the creation of psychological and legal contracts, and 
whether “overqualification,” possessing experience or education beyond 
job requirements, affects applicants’ likelihood of being selected for job 
interviews and hiring.
Pamela McCauley, PhD, CPE is an ergonomics and biomechanics expert, 
an internationally acclaimed keynote speaker, a Professor and Director of 
the Ergonomics Laboratory in the Department of Industrial Engineering 
and Management Systems at the University of Central Florida where she 
leads the Human Factors and Ergonomics in Disaster Management Re-
search Team. She previously held the position of Martin Luther King, Jr. 
Visiting Associate Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology.
She is the author of over 80 technical papers, book chapters, confer-
ence proceedings and the best-selling ergonomics textbook, Ergonomics: 

About the Contributors﻿    363
Foundational Principles, Applications, and Technologies. Many of her leader-
ship, diversity, innovation and STEM education related keynote talks draw 
from her research-based book: Transforming Your STEM Career Through 
Leadership and Innovation: Inspiration and Strategies for Women, which exam-
ines the growing need for leadership and innovation, particularly among 
women and STEM professionals.
Her newest book, The Essentials of Engineering Leadership and Innovation, 
is underpinned by years of applied experience in engineering settings, 
and is designed to develop and prepare engineers as leaders to accept the 
technical and managerial challenges that they will face as professionals. To 
inspire students, particularly minorities and females, to consider careers 
in STEM she authored, Winners Don’t Quit . . . Today They Call Me Doctor, in 
which she shares her challenging yet inspirational journey to engineering 
success despite financial, academic, and personal difficulties.
Dr. McCauley has the distinction of being a 2012 U.S. Fulbright Scholar 
Specialist Program Awardee for her U.S.–New Zealand Human Engineer-
ing and Mobile Technology in High Consequence Emergency Management 
Research Program. Due to her extensive expertise in biomechanics, human 
factors, and ergonomic design, Dr. McCauley is a highly sought Certified 
Professional Ergonomist (CPE) and Expert Witness.
Lemayon L. Melyoki holds a PhD, University of Twente (Netherlands) and 
is a lecturer at the University of Dar es Salaam Business School and a mem-
ber of the Institute of Directors of Tanzania. His current research interests 
include corporate governance and leadership and entrepreneurial ecosys-
tems. Lemayon has also recently been involved in governance issues of the 
petroleum sector in Tanzania and has informed various legislations, which 
stimulated efforts to transform the Tanzanian National Oil Company. His 
recent article on the governance of the petroleum sector in Tanzania has 
been accepted for publication in the Journal of Extractive Industries and Soci-
ety. In addition, Lemayon is currently the Operations Research Advisor for 
a USAID-funded Project focusing on Public Sector Systems Strengthening 
representing the Urban Institute based in the United States.
Elham Metwally is an Adjunct Assistant Professor in the School of Business, 
the American University in Cairo. She earned her doctorate of business 
administration degree from Maastricht School of Management in the Neth-
erlands, and her dissertation explored “The effect of managing change 
through information technology to achieving strategic competitiveness for 
private banks in Egypt.” She earned her MBA and her bachelor degree in 
Economics from the American University in Cairo. Elham is a founding 
member of the Africa Academy of Management, an affiliate of the Academy 
of Management, and was the Co-chair of the Africa Academy of Manage-
ment 2016 Conference in Nairobi, Kenya. She serves on the editorial re-

364    ﻿About the Contributors
view board of the Africa Journal of Management, and she is a member of the 
Academy of Management in USA, the European Academy of Management 
(EURAM), the European Institute for Advanced Studies in Management 
(EIASM), the Middle East Council for Small Business & Entrepreneurship 
(MCSBE), and Holland Alumni Network in the Netherlands Organization 
for International Cooperation in Higher Education (NUFFIC). She is an 
active participant in the Academy of Management annual conferences. She 
has several publications and her research and teaching interests include 
strategic management, organizational behavior, human resources manage-
ment, organizational development, banking, entrepreneurship and small 
businesses. Her current research interests include research on Leadership 
effectiveness, motivation, and culture in Africa, diversity management, in-
formal settlements, and human resources management in North Africa. 
She has published a number of book chapters, a book review, and authored 
and co-authored several articles that appear in several journals and books 
including the Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, Journal of Interna-
tional Finance and Economics, the International Journal of Strategic Manage-
ment, among others. Elham made more than a dozen years of experience 
in the realm of banking, namely in the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking 
Corporation (HSBC), and she had and extensive managerial experience 
of around twenty years in an educational setting where she worked as the 
Director of Scholarships at the American University in Cairo.
Edwin Mouriño-Ruiz (PhD, Barry University) is a Assistant Professor of Man-
agement and Human Resources in the School of Business at Rollins College. 
He has both Air Force and Corporate Industry experience. He is a gradu-
ate of the Department of Defense (DOD) school of diversity, Defense Equal 
Opportunity Management Institute (DEOMI). His current research interests 
center on leadership, diversity (in particular Latino growing workforce), hu-
man capital trends and its implications for organizations, leaders, and human 
resources. His book, The Perfect Human Capital Storm: Workplace Challenges and 
Opportunities in the 21st Century was published by CreateSpace in 2014.
Clive M. Mukanzi holds a PhD, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kenya. Dr. Mukanzi is lecturer at the College of Human Resource 
Management Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology. His 
research interests include Human resource management, organizational be-
havior, leadership, culture and motivation. Dr. Mukanzi has presented his 
research work at various professional workshops and conferences in multiple 
countries. His current research is on responsible leadership in mission driven 
organization in Africa and establishment.
Sarah Nesci is an undergraduate student at the University of Connecticut. 
She is a senior studying Business Management and Communication. Sarah 

About the Contributors﻿    365
is researching how gender effects communication styles and leadership for 
her Honor’s Senior Thesis. This will be her first published work.
Edwin Nassiff is co-founder of InfoSec Intelligence, LLC, an information 
technology security consulting company, an adjunct professor in the Com-
puter Science department of the University of Central Florida (UCF), a 
mentor in UCF’s I-Corps program which trains and assists start-up ventures, 
and is a member of Florida Angel NEXUS, an organization that helps power 
angel investment groups statewide. He has a BS in Math, MS in Computer 
Science, and a PhD in Information Systems and served in numerous senior 
IT management positions for the U.S. Department of Defense as well as the 
Lockheed Martin Corporation.
Noble Osei-Bonsu is a highly self-motivated individual and a team player. 
He holds MPhil degree in Psychology from the University of Ghana, Legon, 
with a specialization in Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Current-
ly, he is a senior lecturer in the Department of Human Resource Manage-
ment, Central Business School, Ghana. His research interests and publica-
tions focus on downsizing, organizational justice and career guidance.
Catrina Palmer is a doctoral student in the Management and Global Busi-
ness department at Rutgers Business School–Newark and New Brunswick. 
She is majoring in Organizational Behavior and pursuing a minor in So-
cial Psychology. Her research interest include diversity, inequality, and net-
works. She received her Bachelor of Business Administration and Master of 
Business Administration with a concentration in Human Resources Man-
agement at Kent State University with honors.
Betty Jane Punnett holds a PhD, New York University and is Professor Emer-
ita, University of the West Indies (Cave Hill). Research on the impact of cul-
ture on management, particularly the Caribbean. Published extensively in 
international journals, books and encyclopedias. Recently authored Man-
agement: A Developing Country Perspective, co-authored book on leadership 
in Africa and the African diaspora. An active member of AOM, AIB, and 
AFAM, and founding editor of AIB Insights.
Cort Rudolph is an assistant professor of industrial and organizational psy-
chology at Saint Louis University. He received his BA from DePaul Univer-
sity and his MA and PhD from Wayne State University. Rudolph’s research 
program focuses rather broadly on issues related to aging at work, including 
issues of aging and occupational health and well-being, and applications of 
lifespan development models to further the understanding of work, aging, 
and retirement. His research is published in journals such as the, Journal 
of Occupational Health Psychology, Human Resources Management Review, and 

366    ﻿About the Contributors
the Journal of Gerontology. He currently serves on the editorial boards of the 
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, Journal of Vocational Be-
havior, and Work, Aging and Retirement.
Thomas Senaji holds a PhD, Kenya Methodist University (Kenya) and is a 
Senior Lecturer in Strategy and Knowledge Management and the coordi-
nator of doctoral and postgraduate studies at Kenya Methodist University. 
He is an adjunct professor at Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture & 
Technology and Africa Nazarene University. Dr. Senaji has over 35 publi-
cations comprising refereed journal articles, conference proceedings, and 
workshops. His current research focuses on leadership, organizational de-
velopment and change and spirituality in Africa. He is also an international 
consultant on broadband communications.
Terri A. Scandura (PhD, University of Cincinnati) is a Professor of Man-
agement in the School of Business Administration at the University of Mi-
ami. From 2007-2012, she served as the Dean of the Graduate School. Her 
current research interests center on leadership, leader–member exchange, 
and mentorship. Her book, Essentials of Organizational Behavior: An Evidence-
Based Approach was published by SAGE Publications in 2016.
Jacqueline H. Stephenson, PhD is a lecturer with the University of the West 
Indies, based in the Department of Management Studies. Dr. Stephenson 
read for a doctoral degree in Human Resource Management at the Uni-
versity of Nottingham, U.K. and her research interests include fairness and 
equality at work, age discrimination, diversity, inclusion within organisa-
tions and discrimination in the Caribbean.
Manuel J. Tejeda is a professor of management and psychology at Barry Uni-
versity in Miami, Florida. He has served in numerous administrative roles 
and currently serves as the executive director for the Barry Institute for Com-
munity and Economic Development which focuses on capacity building and 
entrepreneurship education in underserved neighborhoods and nations. 
He has served on several editorial boards as well as grant review boards for 
national governmental institutes. His research on leadership, spirituality, di-
versity and social justice has been features in numerous journals and techni-
cal reports. He has served on healthy workplace initiatives and international 
development activities. Dr. Tejeda is also the recent president of Alliance for 
GLBTQ youth, that is focused in youth in Miami-Dade County and is the 
largest and most comprehensive provider of mental health services and care 
coordination for LGBTQ youth in the Southern United States.
Lori L. Tribble is a PhD student in the Rawls College of Business at Texas 
Tech University. She obtained her Bachelor of Science at the University of 

About the Contributors﻿    367
Georgia. She received her MEd and MBA from Georgia Southern Universi-
ty. She conducts research in organizational behavior and strategic manage-
ment. Her research interests include authentic leadership, ethical leader-
ship, leader–member exchange, family business, and organizational ethics. 
Frankie J. Weinberg is an associate professor of management and holds 
the Chase Minority Entrepreneurship Distinguished Professorship in the 
College of Business at Loyola University, New Orleans. He received his PhD 
from the University of Georgia. His scholarly interests include dyadic and 
team-level interactions at work, including mentoring, leadership, commu-
nication, and social networks as well as team and organizational diversity.
Hannes Zacher is a professor of work and organizational psychology at the 
University of Leipzig in Germany. He received his MS from the Technical 
University of Braunschweig and his PhD from the University of Giessen. In 
his research program, Hannes investigates aging at work, career develop-
ment, and occupational well-being; proactivity, innovation, leadership, and 
entrepreneurship; and pro-environmental employee behavior and organi-
zational climate. His research is published in journals such as the Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, Journal of Management, and Psychology and Aging. He 
is an associate editor of the Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psy-
chology and currently serves on the editorial boards of the Journal of Occupa-
tional Health Psychology, Journal of Vocational Behavior, Group & Organization 
Management, and Work, Aging and Retirement. He is a research fellow at the 
Sloan Center on Aging & Work at Boston College, an adjunct researcher at 
the Research Center for Innovation and Strategic Human Resource Man-
agement at Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, and an adjunct 
professor at Queensland University of Technology.

