
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE
This book develops a new paradigm in the ﬁeld of leadership studies, referred to
as the “leadership-as-practice” (L-A-P) movement. Its essence is its conception of
leadership as occurring as a practice rather than residing in the traits or behaviors
of particular individuals. A practice is a coordinative eﬀort among participants
who choose through their own rules to achieve a distinctive outcome. It also
tends to encompass routines as well as problem-solving or coping skills, often
tacit, that are shared by a community. Accordingly, leadership-as-practice is less
about what one person thinks or does and more about what people may
accomplish together. It is thus concerned with how leadership emerges and
unfolds through day-to-day experience. The social and material contingencies
impacting the leadership constellation—the people who are eﬀecting leadership at
any given time—do not reside outside of leadership but are very much embedded
within it. To ﬁnd leadership, then, we must look to the practice within which it
is occurring.
The leadership-as-practice approach resonates with a number of closely related
traditions, such as collective, shared, distributed, and relational leadership, that
converge on leadership processes. These approaches share a line of inquiry that
acknowledges leadership as a social phenomenon. The new focus opens up a
plethora of research opportunities encouraging the study of social processes
beyond inﬂuence, such as inter-subjective agency, shared sensemaking, dialogue,
and co-construction of responsibilities.
Joseph A. Raelin holds the Asa S. Knowles Chair of Practice-Oriented Education
at Northeastern University, USA.

ROUTLEDGE STUDIES IN LEADERSHIP RESEARCH
1. Executive Team Leadership for the 21st Century
Richard L. Nolan
2. Leadership-as-Practice
Theory and application
Edited by Joseph A. Raelin

LEADERSHIP-AS-
PRACTICE
Theory and Application
Edited by Joseph A. Raelin
Add Add
Add
Add
Add
AddAdd Add
Add
Add
Add

First published 2016
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Taylor & Francis
The right of the editor to be identiﬁed as the author of the editorial material,
and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance
with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent
to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Leadership-as-practice : theory and application / edited by Joseph A. Raelin.
pages cm. – (Routledge studies in leadership research ; 2)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Leadership–Study and teaching. 2. Organizational behavior. I. Raelin, Joseph
A., 1948- editor.
HD57.7.L431645 2016
658.4'092–dc23
2015029509
ISBN: 978-1-138-92485-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-92486-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-68412-3 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Taylor & Francis Books

CONTENTS
List of illustrations
vii
List of contributors
ix
1 Introduction to Leadership-as-Practice:
Theory and Application
1
Joseph A. Raelin
PART I
Background
19
2 Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain:
Comparative elements
21
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat
3 The philosophical basis of leadership-as-practice from a
hermeneutical perspective
50
Ann L. Cunliﬀe and Paul Hibbert
4 Democratic roots: Feeding the multiple dimensions of
leadership-as-practice
70
Philip A. Woods

PART II
Embodied nature
89
5 Leadership as identity: A practice-based exploration
91
Brigid J. Carroll
6 Who’s leading the way? Investigating the contributions of
materiality to leadership-as-practice
110
Viviane Sergi
7 Turning leadership inside-out and back-to-front:
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
132
John Shotter
PART III
Social interactions
157
8 Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
159
Barbara Simpson
9 Developing leadership as dialogic practice
178
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted
10 Conversational travel and the identiﬁcation of
leadership phenomena
198
Caroline Ramsey
PART IV
Application
221
11 Gendered relationships and the problem of diversity in
leadership-as-practice
223
Jackie Ford
12 Methodologies to discover and challenge leadership-as-practice
242
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry and Brad Jackson
13 Doing leadership-as-practice development
262
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James
Index
284
vi
Contents

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Figures
2.1
A comparative framework of leadership-as-practice
22
2.2
A second example of relational leadership
30
2.3
A conceptual comparison between relational leadership and
leadership-as-practice
36
4.1
Trialectic process
71
4.2
Aﬃnities
76
12.1 The activity system of a community of leadership practice
257
13.1 Leadership-as-practice development and collaborative
leadership learning groups
270
Tables
2.1
Comparison between three leadership approaches by
unit of analysis
37
3.1
Three problematics
53
3.2
The philosophical underpinnings of leadership-as-practice
55
6.1
Producing leadership during the team meeting
124
8.1
Comparison of three diﬀerent practice perspectives
of leadership
173
12.1 An integrated approach to process theorization
250

Boxes
2.1
The leadership styles approach
26
2.2
A ﬁrst example of relational leadership
29
2.3
A ﬁrst example of leadership-as-practice
33
2.4
A second example of leadership-as-practice
34
2.5
An example of strategy-as-practice
40
2.6
Coordination-as-practice—example
41
4.1
Multiple distributions framework
84
viii
List of illustrations

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Joseph A. Raelin holds the Asa S. Knowles Chair of Practice-Oriented Educa-
tion at Northeastern University where he is also Professor of Management and
Organization Development in the D’Amore-McKim School of Business. Joe’s
recent work has focused on collective leadership and collaborative learning and
the merger between the two. He is a proliﬁc writer and among his books are the
classics: The Clash of Cultures: Managers Managing Professionals, Work-Based Learning:
Bridging Knowledge and Action in the Workplace, and Creating Leaderful Organizations:
How to Bring Out Leadership in Everyone.
Brigid J. Carroll is an Associate Professor in the Department of Management
and International Studies and Research Director of the New Zealand Leadership
Institute both at the University of Auckland. Her research interests closely focus
on identity, discourse, and power in leadership and the development of leadership
practice. She is also involved in the development and design of leadership devel-
opment interventions and programs in organizations across New Zealand. In this
way, along with the Institute, she tries to intentionally live a theory/practice
relationship.
Lucia Crevani is senior lecturer at Mälardalen University in Västerås, Sweden.
Her research is focused on the study of leadership, entrepreneurship, project
management, and gender and ethnicity as social processes taking place in and
between organizations. Her work has been published in international journals as
Scandinavian Journal of Management, Service Business, Ephemera: Theory & Politics in
Organization, and Project Management Journal. She is also co-organizer of the
After Method workshops, a series of workshops focusing on the methodological
challenges of studying a world of change.

Ann L. Cunliﬀe is 50th Anniversary Professor of Organization Studies at the
University of Bradford, UK, and Visiting Professor at Escola de Administraçâo da
Fundaçâo Getulio Vargas, Brazil. Ann’s current research addresses how leaders
shape responsive and ethical organizations and she publishes on qualitative
research methods and reﬂexivity. Her recent publications include A Very Short,
Fairly Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book about Management (2014) and articles in
Organizational Research Methods, Human Relations, the Journal of Business Ethics, and
the Journal of Management Inquiry. She is Co Editor-in-Chief of Management
Learning, and organizes the biennial Qualitative Research in Management and
Organization Conference.
David Denyer is Professor of Leadership and Organizational Change and
Director of Research at Cranﬁeld School of Management. His research interests
include complexity leadership, organizational change and resilience, evidence-
based management, and new approaches to leadership development. David helps
senior leaders in a wide range of organizations to establish strategic direction and
deliver sustained performance improvement. He has published a large number of
important and highly cited articles and book chapters. His latest edited book is on
Managing Change in Extreme Contexts (Routledge).
Nada Endrissat is a lecturer at Bern Business School, Switzerland. She has a Ph.D.
in Management from Basel University and has spent research visits at HEC
Montreal and MGSM Sydney. Her current research interests include processes of
(creative) projects, aesthetic practices, and the interplay between branding and
identity construction. Her research has been published in Leadership and is forth-
coming in Organization Studies and the Journal of Business Research special issue on
creative industries.
Jackie Ford is Professor of Leadership and Organization Studies at the University
of Bradford, with former Professorial roles since 2008 at the Universities of Leeds
and Bradford. Her research interests include the exploration of working lives,
with a particular interest in studying leadership, gender, ethics, and management
practices through critical, post-structural lenses. She has co-authored a mono-
graph entitled Leadership as identity: Constructions and deconstructions (Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008); co-edited Making public services management critical (Routledge,
2010); co-edited a textbook entitled Leadership: Contemporary critical perspectives
(Sage, 2015); and has published in a range of journals including British Journal of
Management, Human Relations, Journal of Management Studies, Leadership, Management
Learning, Organization, Sociology, and Work Employment and Society.
Kenneth J. Gergen is a Senior Research Professor in Psychology at Swarthmore
College, and the President of the Board of the Taos Institute. He is also the
Associate Editor of Theory and Psychology, a position in which he has also served
x
List of contributors

for the American Psychologist. He is internationally known for his contributions to
social constructionist theory, technology and cultural change, and relational
practices. Among his most notable books are Realities and Relationships, The Satu-
rated Self, An Invitation to Social Construction, and Relational Being: Beyond Self and
Community. Gergen has received numerous awards for his work, including honorary
degrees in both the US and Europe.
Lone Hersted (M.A.) is a lecturer and Ph.D. fellow at the Department of
Learning and Philosophy at the University of Aalborg (Denmark). Her teaching
and research is concerned with leadership, organizational development, coaching,
and creative change processes. At Aalborg she is coordinator and lecturer for the
Masters program in Organisational Coaching and Learning. Lone has also worked
as a consultant since 2003 and was earlier educated at the Nordic Theatre School.
Among her publications, she is the co-author of the books, Behind the scenes of
artistic creativity, Relationelle perspektiver på Ledelse, and Relational leading: Practices for
dialogically based collaboration.
Paul Hibbert is Professor of Management at the University of St Andrews
School of Management, Associate Editor of Management Learning and Associate
Editor of Management Teaching Review. Paul’s recent work has focused on colla-
borative and relational processes of organizing and learning. His work appears in a
wide range of international journals, such as: Academy of Management Learning and
Education, Journal of Business Ethics, Journal of Management Education, Management
Learning, Organizational Research Methods, and Organization Studies.
Brad Jackson is the Head of School of Government and Professor of Public and
Community Leadership at Victoria University of Wellington. Prior to this he was
the Fletcher Building Education Trust Chair in Leadership and Co-Director of
the New Zealand Leadership Institute at The University of Auckland Business
School. He is a former co-editor of the journal, Leadership, the former Vice-Chair
of the International Leadership Association, a Fellow of the Australian and New
Zealand Academy of Management, the Leadership Trust, and the Lancaster
Leadership Centre.
Stephen Kempster is Professor of Leadership Learning and Development and
Director of the Lancaster Leadership Centre at Lancaster University Management
School. With a Ph.D. in leadership learning, Steve has published articles, chapters,
and books that explore leadership learning, entrepreneurial leadership develop-
ment, purpose, and responsibility in leadership. His work on research methods
includes examining critical realism and developing grounded theory and auto-
ethnography. Journals he has published in include: International Journal of Manage-
ment Reviews, Leadership Quarterly, Management Learning, and Leadership. Steve has
List of contributors
xi

been a Board Director of the International Leadership Association and is on the
Editorial Boards of Management Learning and Leadership.
Ken Parry is Professor of Leadership Studies at Deakin University. He is a
Fellow of four professional academies. He was Founding Director of the Centre
for the Study of Leadership, a joint venture with private industry, and Founding
Editor of the journal of the Australian and New Zealand Academy of Management.
He has won awards for qualitative and quantitative research, and is a regular
keynote speaker at industry conferences.
Caroline Ramsey is a senior lecturer and director of the Doctor of Business
Administration program at the University of Liverpool, UK. Most of her writing
in management learning and organizational studies has been about practice-based
learning, but research projects have included developing practices for the man-
agement of innovation, judgment, and conversations within and across organizational
boundaries. It is this interest in talk and conversation that has led Caroline to
research leadership as a relational process worked out in the day-to-day practice
of organizing.
Viviane Sergi is assistant professor at the Management and Technology depart-
ment at ESG UQAM, Canada. She is a member of the Strategy as Practice Study
Group (GéPS) at HEC Montréal. Her research interests include leadership,
materiality, project organizing, performativity, and methodological issues related
to qualitative research. Her work has been published in Academy of Management
Annals, Human Relations, Scandinavian Journal of Management, Qualitative Research in
Organizations and Management, and in the International Journal of Managing Projects in
Business.
John Shotter is Emeritus Professor of Communication in the Department of
Communication, University of New Hampshire, and a Research Associate,
Centre for Philosophy of Natural & Social Science (CPNSS), London School of
Economics, London, UK, and also a Visiting Professor at the Open University
and Leeds University Business Schools. His long-term interest has been, and still
is, in the social conditions conducive to people having a voice in determining the
conditions of their own lives, that is, in the development of participatory
democracies and civil societies. He is the author of: Social Accountability and Self-
hood, Cultural Politics of Everyday Life, Conversational Realities: The Construction of
Life through Language, Conversational Realities Revisited: Life, Language, Body, and
Word, Social Construction on the Edge, and Getting It: Withness-Thinking and the
Dialogical … in Practice.
Barbara Simpson is Professor of Leadership and Organisational Dynamics at
Strathclyde Business School in Glasgow. Her Ph.D. in Management, which was
xii
List of contributors

awarded by the University of Auckland in 1998, marked a sea change from her
earlier career as a physics-trained geothermal scientist, traces of which nevertheless
remain evident in her work today as she brings the principles of action, ﬂow, and
movement to bear on the processes of creativity, innovation, leadership, and
change. Her current research is deeply informed by the philosophies of the
American Pragmatists, especially George Herbert Mead’s thinking on process and
temporality. She has published in a variety of journals including Organization
Studies, Human Relations, Organization, R&D Management, and Journal of Management
Inquiry.
Kim Turnbull James is Professor of Leadership and Executive Learning at
Cranﬁeld School of Management. Her research interests include new approaches
to leadership development, collaborative learning for leadership, organization
politics, and the impact of group and organization dynamics in organizational
leadership. Kim is on the editorial boards of Management Learning and Leadership,
international journals in this ﬁeld, and her latest edited books are Leadership Per-
spectives: Knowledge into Action and Leadership Learning: Knowledge into Action, both
with Palgrave. Executive coaching, consulting to teams, and leadership development
are all part of Kim’s portfolio.
Philip A. Woods is Professor of Educational Policy, Democracy and Leadership
at the University of Hertfordshire, UK, and Chair of the British Educational
Leadership, Management and Administration Society (BELMAS). Author of over
120 publications, his work particularly focuses on distributed and democratic
leadership, governance, equity, and change towards more democratic and holistic
learning environments. Awards include best conference paper at the International
Philosophy of Management Conference in Oxford, published in 2010 as ‘The
Geography of Reﬂective Leadership: The inner life of democratic learning com-
munities’ (co-authored with Dr Glenys Woods) in Philosophy of Management. His
books include Transforming education policy: Shaping a democratic future.
List of contributors
xiii


1
INTRODUCTION TO
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE
Theory and application
Joseph A. Raelin
Overview
Welcome to our research volume on Leadership-as-Practice, a new movement in
leadership research and practice destined to shake the foundations of the very
meaning of leadership in the worlds of both theory and application. Its essence is
its conception of leadership as occurring as a practice rather than residing in the
traits or behaviors of particular individuals. The book seeks to assemble what we
know about the leadership-as-practice (L-A-P) movement and extend its con-
ceptualization through a number of critical themes that have not been suﬃciently
explored or, in some cases, not explored at all.
The editor and authors of this volume sincerely hope that this work will pro-
vide an indispensable resource for scholars working in the more progressive
domains of leadership studies. As an authoritative text on leadership as a social,
material, and jointly accomplished process, it seeks to oﬀer greater insights into
the realities of leadership than texts focusing on the role of individual leaders. In
this way we hope to create momentum for a new movement in the ﬁeld of lea-
dership that is ripe for a more critical perspective that incorporates the emerging
practice view. We refer to our approach as a movement because we are observing
some of the attributes of social mobilization from social movement theory (see, e.g.,
James & van Seters, 2014). In particular, those of us working in the broadly
deﬁned practice domain have formed a collective identity that has assumed a
normative orientation for changing the conventional view of leadership. In the
end, we hope that our collective eﬀorts will continue across time as other
adherents join us to advance our agenda of change.
In the current volume, we seek to present an integrated and coherent thematic
assemblage of chapters that build on one another and ﬁll out a needed

conceptualization in leadership-as-practice. In places, readers will notice that
authors approach our movement from somewhat diﬀerent perspectives, but it is
thought that any exposition of contentions and variations (some of which will be
referred to below) will only serve to enrich the movement by encouraging con-
tinuing research and development in a spirit of transparency. Among the themes
that we will explore are:

The distinctions between L-A-P and other collective and relational perspec-
tives of leadership as well as between L-A-P and other “as-practice”
approaches;

The historical, philosophical, critical, and ideological foundations of L-A-P
that make it exigent in understanding the contemporary organization and
workforce;

The complex site where activity and its representation embodied in leader-
ship practices intersect;

The artifacts, symbols, material, and language games that establish identity
and achieve leadership in L-A-P;

The nature of agency including the inter-active and trans-active agency
underlying L-A-P;

The dialogic patterns that produce sustainable collective practices;

The methodologies that in attempting to capture L-A-P change the tools,
methods, and technologies underlying the study of leadership and leadership
development; and

The change in leadership development when conceived as a practice rather
than as a psychological parameter within the consciousness and behavior of
particular individuals.
Finally, we hope you will ﬁnd that the selected authors of this book are among the
most prominent and highly cited progressive scholars in the world undertaking
critical studies in the ﬁeld of leadership. What is also compelling about these
authors is that none of them is merely a transcriber of thoughts, rather each is
actively involved in the practice world through their own empirical studies,
although most indicate a preference for qualitative ethnographies over a priori
theory construction and quantitative testing. The chapters thus combine the
authors’ applications with theory. As the editor, it will be my pleasure to intro-
duce these chapters later in this Introduction. At this point, I will provide a brief
introduction to leadership-as-practice to orient the reader to this emerging and
what we hope you will ﬁnd exciting movement in leadership research and prac-
tice. Following a preamble to the “practice view,” I will cover some of the basic
parameters of the L-A-P movement: its prior traditions, the problem of structure
and agency in L-A-P, its enumerated activities, and end with its development
orientation, research, and ideology.
2
Joseph A. Raelin

Introducing the “practice view”
The foundation of the leadership-as-practice approach is its underlying belief that
leadership occurs as a practice rather than from the traits or behaviors of indivi-
duals. A practice is a coordinative eﬀort among participants who choose through their
own rules to achieve a distinctive outcome. Accordingly, leadership-as-practice is
less about what one person thinks or does and more about what people may
accomplish together. It is thus concerned with how leadership emerges and unfolds
through day-to-day experience. The social and material-discursive contingencies
impacting the leadership constellation—the people who are eﬀecting leadership at any
given time—do not reside outside of leadership but are very much embedded within it.
To ﬁnd leadership, then, we must look to the practice within which it is occurring.
The practice view may consequently upend our traditional views of leadership
because it does not rely on the attributes of individuals, nor does it focus on the
dyadic relationship between leaders and followers, which historically has been the
starting point for any discussion of leadership. Rather, it depicts immanent col-
lective action emerging from mutual, discursive, sometimes recurring and some-
times evolving patterns in the moment and over time among those engaged in
the practice. This deﬁnition suggests an ecumenical approach to practice because
at times it refers to routine activities; at other times, it suggests a more perpetually
unfolding dynamic. Perhaps the simplest way to account for this diﬀerence is to
compare the concepts of practices and practice.
Practices, as per the deﬁnition of Pickering (1995), refer to speciﬁc sequences of
activities that may repeatedly recur, whereas practice refers to emergent entanglements
that tend to extend or transform meaning over time. In Chapter 8 of this volume,
Simpson links practices to an inter-actional mode of activity in which pre-formed
entities—be they people or discourses or institutions—vie for inﬂuence over other
“inter-actors.” Practice, on the other hand, is associated with a more trans-actional
mode characterized by a continual ﬂow of processes where material-discursive
engagements produce meaning that is emergent and mutual. Practices, therefore, as
Crevani and Endrissat point out (Chapter 2, this volume) rely on an entitative ontology
of subject‑object or subject‑subject relations in which individuals may be viewed within
ﬁelds of relationships. Practice, on the other hand, is processual and thus considered
more situated and recursive. Another way to diﬀerentiate these two forms of activity is
to use the philosophical language employed by Cunliﬀe and Hibbert (Chapter 3, this
volume) in which practices may be considered objectivist or subjectivist, depending on
whether the practices in question are studied as objects separate from the people
engaged in them or whether they are subject to the intentions and interpretations of the
actors who experience them. Practice, meanwhile, may be considered intersubjective in
character because it is interwoven not between people but “within” the dynamic
unfolding of their becoming (see Shotter, Chapter 7, this volume).
When we associate leadership with practice, we think of it as not only material-
discursive but shared or collective (Bolden, Petrov & Gosling, 2008; Pearce &
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
3

Conger, 2003; Spillane, 2006). The parties to the practice engage in semiotic,
often dialogical, exchange, and in some cases for those genuinely committed to
one another, they display an interest in listening to one another, in reﬂecting on
new perspectives, and in entertaining the prospect of changing direction based on
what they learn (Raelin, 2013). Gronn (2002) refers to the engagement as a
conjoint agency characterized by reciprocal dependence. In eﬀect, the parties
look to coordinate with one another to advance their individual or mutual pro-
jects. In the integrated professional services realm, for example, individual con-
tributors may seek to work inter-professionally in aligning their thoughts and
actions with others to interpret problems of practice and to respond to those
interpretations (Edwards, 2005).
The activity of leadership is at times orderly; at other times, it will be irregular
and provisional. As people within an enterprise work together, they may develop
a sense of mastery not only in accomplishing the daily mundane work of the
organization but in surmounting unexpected challenges and disruptions. At times,
the practices become so obvious that they are no longer questioned and begin to
represent an objectiﬁed context for members of a community (Endrissat & von
Arx, 2013). At this point, actions become pre-determined until system pertur-
bance pulls people out of their contextual patterns. Unfamiliar stakeholders may
be invited to contribute their knowledge. New or forgotten resources may be
solicited to add to the knowledge base. Eventually, familiar routines may be
broken or familiar relations may even end in unresolved conﬂict as new struc-
tures, material, and relations become salient. Activity may resume, however, as partici-
pants decide whether or not to continue the eﬀort. A casual observer to the action may
see the activity as an organized eﬀort leading to a planned conclusion, but if paying
close attention, it may actually resemble a jazz improvisation in which, as Hatch
explains (Hatch, 1999: 85): “The directions [the tune] will take are only decided in
the moment of playing and will be redetermined each time the tune is played.”
The practice of leadership is not dependent on any one person to mobilize
action on behalf of everybody else. The eﬀort is intrinsically collective.
However, in the process of engagement, leadership may emanate from the actions
of particular individuals who, often because of historical reasons, may be able to
suggest meaning with a high degree of insight, such as by extracting or providing
critical cues, by suggesting behavioral patterns, or by transmitting cultural norms
to minimize the range of choices available (Dawkins, 1989; Pye, 1993). These
“meaning makers” may be serving in managerial roles, but anyone within the
team can be responsible provided they have astute awareness of the perspectives,
reasoning patterns, and narratives of others (Jordan, Andersson & Ringnér, 2013).
Prior traditions
Although characterized here as a movement, the leadership-as-practice approach
resonates with a number of closely related traditions, such as collective, shared,
4
Joseph A. Raelin

distributed, and relational leadership. What these approaches have in common is
their push for a line of inquiry that diﬀerentiates from a focus on traits, behaviors,
abilities, or competencies in a way to gain a deeper knowledge of leadership as a social
phenomenon. On the other hand, leadership-as-practice is able to release leader-
ship from a role-driven, entitative inﬂuence relationship that is still characteristic of
many of the aforementioned perspectives. Nor does it pre-establish the occupants
of leadership roles. Heeding the warning from Alvesson and Sveningsson (2003)
that the sheer act of naming someone a leader may in some cases over-emphasize
and in other cases undermine reports of leadership practice as it is occurring, L-A-P
pursues and seeks to understand leadership activity wherever and however it appears.
Agency and structure
Leadership becomes evident when agency appears as a constraint to structure. At
times, it may even transform it. Using such resources as self-consciousness or
deliberation, agents can use individual and collective reﬂexivity to overturn the
historical contexts and expectations imposed on people and institutions (Archer,
2000; Blumer, 1969; Gherardi, 2000; Giddens, 1984; Herepath, 2014; Rose,
1998). Although agency may be exhibited during normal everyday routines, it
often takes place during moments of crisis or indeterminacy or when there is
inadequate knowledge about what to do. Yet, in this liminal space, someone may
have a “felt sense” about how to proceed (Gendlin, 1964). He or she may pro-
pose an idea or a thought or demonstrate a particular approach. The initiative
may not prevail but it may spur other members of the group to demonstrate
“their own way out.” In due course, as people build on each other’s moves, a
collaborative endeavor may ensue that might re-orient the practice toward a
resolution, temporary though it may be. So leadership would emerge not neces-
sarily out of individual intentionality but within the ﬂow in its intra-action when
a project would become other than what it was before (Barad, 2003).
As an agentic relationship among parties to an activity, L-A-P is not necessarily
focused on the initiator or even on the recipient of the activity. Others often
become involved. By focusing only on the initiator, we promote a fallacy that
one party is active and the others passive, the latter awaiting the fateful message
that will abruptly thrust them into action. But people tend to already be in
motion and are not necessarily static until activated by others.
Practice theory thus has a connection to the social but not through rational pur-
pose and markets nor through the norms of culture. Rather it situates the social
through shared or collective symbolic structures of knowledge that establish social
order. In this process that arises from everyday actions and interactions rather than from
mental capacities or texts, patterns of bodily behavior are established via certain
routinized ways of understanding and knowing (Reckwitz, 2002). Leadership is
consequently embodied through language and through other semiotic manifesta-
tions and in conjunction with the material, structural, and aesthetic resources
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
5

within the actual workings of practice rather than through individual a priori
intentions. Leadership as a practice becomes ecumenical as anyone may participate
in leadership as he or she engages in agentic activity. Practice becomes the engine
of collaborative agency (Raelin, 2014). Participants (to the activity) constitute but
are also constituted by the discursive and intersubjective practices of participants
within a nexus of activity (Davies, 1991). During the activity, leadership might
ensue as people decide what to do and how to do it. As Crevani, Lindgren and
Packendorﬀ(2010) explain, it is a matter of constructing and reconstructing
positions and issues as those engaged produce the boundaries of their own action.
The activities of leadership-as-practice
Constructing positions and issues, as cited above, form some of the speciﬁc
activities that animate the parties engaged in leadership-as-practice. In addition to
the construction of issues would be a corresponding co-construction of responsi-
bilities for particular tasks and of identities shared by interacting actors. Besides
Crevani et al. (2010), other authors from such ﬁelds as organizational discourse,
innovation, and complex systems, suggest other unique practices that speak to the
task activity of leadership, in other words, getting the job done (Carroll &
Simpson, 2012; Goldstein, Hazy & Lichtenstein 2010; Hazy & Uhl-Bien, 2014).
Augmenting these are those from the aﬀective dimension that are designed to
support and sustain team or organizational members while performing their work.
These are often referred as maintenance, socioemotional, or reﬂective functions
(Bales, 1950; Marsick, 1990). Here, then, are seven additional activities to be
found in leadership-as-practice (Raelin, 2014):
1.
scanning—identifying resources, such as information or technology, that can
contribute
to
new
or
existing
programs
through
simpliﬁcation
or
sensemaking;
2.
signaling—mobilizing and catalyzing the attention of others to a program or
project through such means as imitating, building on, modifying, ordering,
or synthesizing prior or existing elements;
3.
weaving—creating webs of interaction across existing and new networks by
building trust between individuals and units or by creating shared meanings
to particular views or cognitive frames;
4.
stabilizing—oﬀering feedback to converge activity and evaluate eﬀectiveness,
leading, in turn, to structural and behavioral changes and learning;
5.
inviting—encouraging those who have held back to participate through
their ideas, their energy, and their humanity;
6.
unleashing—making sure that everyone who wishes to has had a chance to
contribute, without fear of repercussion, even if their contribution might
create discrepancy or ambiguity in the face of decision-making convergence;
and
6
Joseph A. Raelin

7.
reﬂecting—triggering thoughtfulness within the self and with others to
ponder the meaning of past, current, and future experience to learn how to
meet mutual needs and interests.
Leadership development
The conduct of leadership may be mundane or what Chia and Holt (2006) refer to
as “non-deliberate practical coping” rather than “planned, intentional action” (p. 643).
In the day-to-day practice of leadership, much activity may therefore be unspo-
ken or unconscious (Chia & MacKay, 2007). In thinking about how to develop
leadership, we may need to ﬁnd ways to bring more of the unconscious and unre-
ﬂective into the conscious and explicit domain. We also need to study instances of
failure, dissonance, crisis, obstruction, or even surprise that spur interventions
(Carroll, Levy & Richmond, 2008). Leadership development thus requires an
acute immersion into the practices that are embedded within social relations and
between people, objects, and their institutions. It needs to be a learning associated
with lived experience that occurs within speciﬁc historical, cultural, and local
contexts (Nicolini, Gherardi & Yanov, 2003). Using such models as cognitive
apprenticeships (Lave, 1988), understudy (Dreyfus, 2001), communities of prac-
tice (Wenger, 1998), or reﬂective communities (Bohm, 1985), learners would
observe and experiment with their own collective tacit processes in action.
There are also development approaches from what we might refer to as the
“action modalities” or interventions that have as their commonality a commit-
ment to work with people where they are as they engage with one another on
mutual problems, and oﬀering them a means of collective reﬂection on their
experience so as to expand and even create knowledge while at the same time
serving to improve practice (Raelin, 2009). Among these modalities would be such
strategies as action learning, action research, action science, cooperative inquiry,
cultural-historical activity theory, developmental action inquiry, and participatory
(critical) research. They each tend to adopt a dialectic epistemology that sees
knowledge as arising from a contested interaction among a community of
inquirers rather than from a single source of expertise. It is thus not representa-
tional. It arises from local interactive engagement that is emergent before the
need for representation (Bakhtin 1986; Chia & Holt 2006; Schatzki 1997). In the
case of action learning, for example, managers are not sent away to training,
rather the learning experience is brought to them as they are in the midst of
engaging with their colleagues on their own problems (Marquardt, 1999; Yorks,
O’Neill & Marsick, 1999; Boshyk, 2002; Raelin, 2008; Pedler, 2011).
Leadership development in a practice world would also recognize the experiential
and embodied nature of leadership and adjust its methods accordingly. In addition, as
pointed out by Denis, Langley and Rouleau (2010), learning about leadership would
require the examination of four other qualities—that leadership be considered:
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
7

1.
dynamic (leadership at one time can aﬀect subsequent leadership actions);
2.
collective (leadership depends on a constellation of complementary co-leaders
in interaction);
3.
situated (leadership is found in speciﬁc contexts and is both a cause and
consequence of immanent activity); and
4.
dialectic (negotiated practices can produce conﬂicted outcomes).
Research
L-A-P oﬀers researchers the opportunity to study leadership at multiple interact-
ing levels beyond the individual level of analysis. For example, it would be
interested in probing into interpersonal and intercultural relationships inclusive of
the material artifacts, the technologies, the physical arrangements, the language,
the emotions, and the rituals, each brought out to understand the meaning of the
practice in question. The methodological preference would be for more process-
oriented studies and those that consider cultural, historical, and political condi-
tions embedded within the leadership relationship (Knights & Willmott, 1992;
Wood, 2005). Process-oriented dynamics would be rich in power dynamics and
human relations and would privilege emergence and ambiguity over control and
rationality, and thus would resist closure on the familiar categories of leadership
that are often individualistic and directive. At the same time a process approach,
in which leadership is seen as a continuous social ﬂow, would of necessity require
slowing down the action suﬃciently to study the discernible practices and interac-
tions. Further, L-A-P methodology would be interested in the collective beliefs and
co-constructions that arise to guide subsequent individual and collective action.
The research of leadership under a L-A-P lens, then, would take advantage of
more narrative forms of inquiry, such as ethnographies using thick description
that attempt to capture the dialogical and practice activity concurrently in process
(Weick, 1989). The role of the researcher would not so much be to inquire from
outside the activity but rather to provide tools to encourage the observed to
become inquirers themselves (Clot, 1999; Jarzabkowski & Whittington, 2008).
These tools would not serve merely as mirrors for “looking in” to the activity but
actually constitute the activity in all its rich dialogic interaction (Tsoukas, 1998).
Ideology
Along with the focus on the activities of leadership, it is important to distinguish
whether there are values within a movement such as L-A-P that guide the quality,
relevance, and outcomes of its practices. We also might submit that compared with
other models of leadership that emphasize individual sovereignty, linearity, inﬂu-
ence, and agreement, L-A-P emphasizes collective engagement, divergence,
intersubjectivity, and ambiguity. L-A-P privileges the value of social interactions,
8
Joseph A. Raelin

but it would be trivial to point to such interactions ideologically without a corre-
sponding emphasis on reﬂective emancipatory processes to scrutinize their taken-
for-granted assumptions and meanings. We might also argue in the tradition of
Spicer, Alvesson and Kärreman (2009) that a practice approach to leadership
engage in critical dialogue in which we seek to question the language and practices
that bear the imprint of social domination. Indeed, L-A-P potentially represents an
alternative critical discourse to the mainstream personality approach to leadership which
tends to incarnate the individual leader as a beacon of prosperity and moral rectitude.
On the other hand, in our era of so-called “post-bureaucracy” and “post-
heroic” leadership, characterized by ﬂexible peer decision-making processes, less
routinization, enhanced discretion, and distributed authority, recentralization may
ensue because of a focus on visibility, predictability, and accountability (Heck-
scher, 1994). As managers make greater use of sophisticated methods of unob-
trusive appraisal using such means as electronic surveillance and monitoring, there
is a chance of a resumption of the iron cage of standard bureaucracy, character-
ized by individual responsibility and vertical accountability (Hales, 2002;
Heydebrand, 1989; Hodgson, 2004).
Popular accounts of executive misdeeds notwithstanding, hierarchical decision
making is still dominant, and albeit the emerging concerns with global warming
and other non-sustainable practices, the ultimate aim of such decision making is
on productivity. We also must recognize that participatory spaces are imbued
with power relations that in some cases cause suppression of voices and self-
muting among those disenfranchised from the dominant discourse, thus thwarting
critical review (Cleaver, 2007; Kesby, 2005). Nevertheless, by focusing our
attention on the group in practice, we encourage the formation of community
within which members through social critique may have a better chance to resist
oppression and other forms of inequitable social arrangements compared with
conditions of sole individual intervention (Crevani et al., 2010; Raelin, 2014).
Further, the practice approach may, in the end, be more critical than critical lea-
dership studies (see, e.g., Collinson, 2011) because it does not take as its starting
point a critique of the ultimate hegemonic relation—the leader-follower dyad.
Rather, in double-loop tradition, it challenges the very assumption of the neces-
sity of this relationship in the ontology of leadership (Argyris & Schön, 1974).
Not requiring pre-speciﬁed outcomes, practice can actually precede agency while
focusing on a process that can be inclusive of participants’ own communal,
shared, and exploratory discourses.
The chapters of this volume
The volume is presented in four parts and 13 chapters in total. The chapters are
dedicated to speciﬁc themes carefully selected to present a new movement—in
this case, of leadership-as-practice. The editor, Joe Raelin, has already provided
the current introductory chapter to orient readers to the emerging L-A-P ﬁeld,
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
9

distinguishing it from the individualist paradigm while oﬀering its intrinsic
features. To follow are three chapters that constitute Part I representing the
background to the movement.
In Chapter 2, Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat provide a comparative expla-
nation of the leadership-as-practice movement to help frame the book as well as
to enable prospective researchers to understand the promise and challenge of
conducting research from a L-A-P perspective. After digesting this chapter,
readers will have obtained a thorough orientation to the ﬁeld, including a per-
spective on how leadership itself is viewed when conceived from a practice point
of view; in particular, the authors advance it as providing direction for organizing
processes and as re-orienting the ﬂow of practice through collaborative agency.
Their take-oﬀpoint is to distinguish between two very diﬀerent ontological
positions in leadership studies: an entitative vs. a relational approach; the ﬁrst
giving priority to social states and pre-existing entities, whereas the second giving
priority to unfolding relations and processes. From here, they draw comparisons
between the leadership-as-practice movement and both the leadership styles and
the relational leadership approaches, focusing on the unit of analysis that produces
the necessary knowledge about leadership. They then compare L-A-P with two
other so-called “as-practice” approaches: strategy-as-practice and coordination-as-
practice. They show in the second instances that the diﬀerence is based on the
social accomplishments on which each of the approaches focus.
The next foundation chapter looks at leadership-as-practice from the philoso-
phical tradition of phenomenology, and especially from “Hermeneutics.”
According to Ann Cunliﬀe and Paul Hibbert, hermeneutic inquiry as a con-
testation to standard scientiﬁc inquiry is receptive to multiple interpretations of
text to include an interrogation of ways of being, that is, what it means “to be.”
This form of inquiry is fundamental to our understanding of practice because it
incorporates a range of unique dynamics, such as grounding, detaching, and
composing, which are contextualized and make sense only within speciﬁc spaces
of intelligibility. From Gadamer, for example, we learn that intersubjective
inquiry occurs through both diachronic (between ourselves and text) and syn-
chronic (between ourselves and another) dimensions. Ultimately, many of our
L-A-P traditions are thought to fall within an intersubjective “problematic” such
that practice is interwoven between people in which meanings, actions, and
interpretations shift in and through time and across relationships.
Chapter 4, written by Philip Woods, continues the focus on the need for
philosophical grounding of the L-A-P movement by examining the vital question
of whether leadership, and leadership-as-practice in particular, should pay parti-
cular attention to their “Democratic Roots.” His answer is that as an emergent
social process, it must do so because leadership needs to honor the individual’s
development of his or her human capabilities to its full holistic extent. Each
individual, furthermore, needs to be counted in this consideration, not just the
senior-most leaders. Leadership-as-practice accordingly observes a philosophy of
10
Joseph A. Raelin

co-development because of its consideration of co-dependent parties interacting
to create their own practice and meaning which they share through dialogue.
They engage freely not as directed by an authority or by rule as in the instance of
what Woods refers to as performative governance. Woods acknowledges that
L-A-P, however, must be analyzed across multiple distributions, such as in its
structures and practices. Leadership-as-practice qualiﬁes contingently as a demo-
cratic process as long as it promotes a critical reﬂection by participants in actively
understanding their selves and of others in the practice of everyday relationships.
Part II of the volume considers the embodied nature of L-A-P, suggesting that
it is not cognition in its isolated condition located within the mind of a prime
instigator, call him or her the leader, that mobilizes leadership. Rather, leadership
occurs from an interaction with the environment through both individual and
collective sensorimotor processing.
Brigid Carroll in her “Leadership as Identity” unveils at the outset of her
chapter the critical distinction between talking about leadership and doing lea-
dership. When equated, there is always the tendency for the subject to create a
fantasy leadership identity. This is because those designated leaders have a need to
represent themselves with coherence and distinctiveness although they may be
involved in work that is often ﬂuid, precarious, and ﬁlled with contradiction and
fragmentation. Identity is accordingly seen as a mediator between the self and the
surrounding social structure that is created as actants use and move through
organizational spaces. It is not a quality existing prior to the context in which it is
organized. According to Carroll, in spaces, such as the IT environment that she
employs in her case example, leadership identity is established through the arti-
facts, conversations, and routines on which participants rely in responding to and
reacting to the choices they are making in accomplishing their work.
In the second chapter of Part II, Viviane Sergi in “Who’s Leading the Way?”
explores some of the undiscovered elements of leadership practice, looking in
particular at how the design of material elements contributes to the achievement
of leadership, deﬁned in terms of directing, shaping, and ordering activities. She
joins the authors of this volume in challenging the individual paradigm of lea-
dership by focusing on three speciﬁc orientations: leadership’s processual dynam-
ics which occur in situ, unfolding over time; its collective orientation that emerges
from its view as an interactional joint performance; and its mundane character
that speaks to its occurrence in banal situations and interactions. Viviane prods the
leadership-as-practice movement to not overlook how materiality intervenes in
agency to co-generate leadership. In a case study of a software development
project, she illustrates how a key document generated direction, shape, and order
during key moments in the project’s life and also stabilized what had been
negotiated during prior times and what options might be available in the project’s
subsequent development.
In the last chapter of this Part, John Shotter delves further into the herme-
neutical nature of the leadership relationship (introduced in Chapter 3 by Cunliﬀe
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
11

and Hibbert) by, in his words, “Turning Leadership Inside-Out and Back-to-
Front!” In this provocative account, John oﬀers an alternative to familiar Cartesian-
Newtonian forms of thought. Using primarily a philosophical line of reasoning,
he argues that we need to discover not only what we are before our representa-
tions but also what “kind of world we take it for granted that we are living in.”
We need to become more aware of our “before-the-fact” common sense that
characterizes our spontaneous activities as a social group. What John accomplishes
in this chapter is to give us a special and deep insight into the world of practice to
help us “notice” our connectedness with others as well as, as he calls it, “the
othernesses” around us. The process is hermeneutical in that no preconceived
framework is available; rather, each particularity in the situation stands on its own
while being linked with other particularities. John’s account reminds us that to
ﬁnd and study leadership, we need to conduct more than scientiﬁc explorations.
We need to mount philosophically structured inquiries into how leadership may
emerge in each successive episode in practice.
In Part III of the volume, the social interactions that underlie the practices of
leadership are fully developed in three chapters. The authors are careful to dis-
tinguish the nature of the interaction that occurs in leadership practice as an
activity which is more than an exchange between individuals; it is often an in-
the-moment intra-action out of which dynamic unfolding may be some form of
leadership agency. Barbara Simpson in her chapter seeking to ﬁnd this “Agency”
in L-A-P invokes a framework from the collaborative work of Dewey and
Bentley. The framework distinguishes three modes of inquiry: self-action, inter-
action, and trans-action and each mode invokes a distinct orientation to leader-
ship: the leader-practitioner, leadership as a set of practices, and leadership in the
ﬂow of practice. By clarifying the focus of each mode, Barbara argues against
their conﬂation as their means of inquiry are largely incommensurable. In the
self-action mode, agency tends to reside in the free will of individual leaders; in
the inter-action mode, agency is distributed among entities engaged in discrete
predictable practices. It is in the trans-action mode that we may ﬁnd leadership-
as-practice as a perpetually unfolding dynamic in which it is the action itself that
re-orients the ﬂow of practice towards new directions.
Ken Gergen and Lone Hersted in their chapter continue to reﬁne our under-
standing of the transactional nature of leadership-as-practice by characterizing
leadership as a “Dialogic Practice.” They join other post-structuralist critics who
have begun to question the entitative approach to leadership and organization
behavior based on ﬁxed attributes or structures. Rather, the authors take a rela-
tional view enriched through the medium of dialogue to consider leadership as an
emergent outcome of interlocking practices. As they explain at the outset of their
chapter, “there are no leaders independent of the relational patterns of which
they are a part.” At the outset, the authors become very technical about the
mechanics of dialogue, examining it as the basis for coordinated action rather than
as a representation of the speaker’s mind. They show that the meaning of any
12
Joseph A. Raelin

utterance, for example, depends on its functioning within a relational matrix.
Unfortunately, the outcome of relational leading may lead to degenerative as well
as generative scenarios. Our understanding of this dynamic allows us to structure
leadership development activities and rehearsals to oﬀset some of the ill-eﬀects of
degeneration, such as animosity, silence, or even severance of the relationship.
The chapter illustrates some prospective interventions in dialogic training, using
skilled facilitation and what is called the “polyphonic” reﬂecting team. These
vehicles take advantage of the practice approach to coordinated action potentially
resulting in productive leadership relationships.
Caroline Ramsey concludes our coverage of social interactions with a novel
chapter on what she refers to as “Conversational Travel,” in which she advocates
conversational dynamics as the most propitious method to discern the emergence
of leadership as a practice. However, rather than have the conversation analyst
preconceive the occurrence of leadership within the leader-follower relation, she
proposes that conversational travel can identify leadership without the need to
identify speciﬁc individual roles. In particular, she proposes building a new
vocabulary of leadership moments through three shifts in conversational analysis.
First, she would have us treat talk as invitational rather than as only constitutive.
Second, she recommends that we enhance the chance for leadership through
an act + supplement discourse that allows for enhanced mutual activity. Third,
she recommends reliance on improv theatre as a means to construct a performa-
tive approach to conversation. Using several case extracts, she demonstrates how
the intra-action among the players can lead to a change of trajectory that con-
stitutes leadership in the moment—a leadership that arises from the social process
rather than from the recognition of individual performers.
The authors in the last section of this volume, Part IV, dedicate themselves to a
series of critical applications of the L-A-P approach. The L-A-P movement
requires, in particular, an accounting of its treatment of the subject of diversity in
organizations as well as its manner of study and method. It also likely requires an
alternative consideration of the very application of leadership development. Jackie
Ford begins this coverage by critically assessing the treatment of “gendered rela-
tionships” in L-A-P. It has not been clear yet that L-A-P has shed the traditional
“phallocentric” view of the world unless its scholars show a sensitivity towards
concerns about power in the form of knowledge, language, and subjectivity. By
focusing on gender, Jackie exposes the myth of the self-determining, autonomous
individual that L-A-P seeks to decenter with its focus on practice. But Jackie warns us
that a practice-oriented approach still needs to contend with the political dimension
that may reproduce scripted lives without attention to emancipatory discourses.
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson in their chapter focus on the
subject of methodology and undertake the diﬃcult task of describing how to
conduct studies of leadership-as-practice given that the practice of leadership is in
continual emergence and shaped by antecedents and ongoing recursive interac-
tions. Further, it poses additional dilemmas to researchers who rely on theory to
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
13

develop their methodology. The authors respond that theory is important in
L-A-P research, but more as an outcome than as an antecedent. Relevant
research needs to begin with what they refer to as ontological thinking along
with imaginative techniques to provide the necessary rigor to describe, illuminate,
and help explain leadership practice. In particular, the authors call for pursuing
holistic methodologies and multiple techniques to produce triangulation and sti-
mulate theory illumination. They contend that the processual nature of leader-
ship-as-practice, in particular, lends itself to qualitative methodologies. Illustrated
in the chapter are narrative and conversational analysis, content analysis, critical
incidents, ethnographies and autoethnographies, and activity theory.
In our last chapter, Chapter 13, David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James argue
that although most leadership development programs address the topic of leader-
ship, they tend to focus almost inclusively on the individual leader in position.
Even when there is strategic attention to leadership, the authors contend the
focus is traditionally on leader competencies or personal development that is often
detached from the very site in which the skills and competencies are to be
applied. They then describe some speciﬁc interventions that incorporate what
they refer to as an alternative “leadership-as-practice development” or LaPD.
Their examples make full use of collaborative leadership learning groups that
achieve learning in practice through three forms of knowledge: knowledge that
learners bring, knowledge available through public sources, and knowledge that is
collaboratively constructed and developed. Although they are fervent spokes-
persons for LaPD, they caution against dispensing with any attention to individual
development because any transition from hierarchical organization and traditional
leadership comes with emotional costs that need to be addressed.
References
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). Managers doing leadership: The extra-ordinarization
of the mundane. Human Relations, 56(12), 1435–1459.
Archer, M. S. (2000). Being human—The problem of agency. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Argyris, C., & Schön, D. A. (1974). Theory in practice: Increasing professional eﬀectiveness. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (V.W. McGee trans.). Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
Bales, R. F. (1950). A set of categories for the analysis of small group interaction. American
Sociological Review, 15, 257–263.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter
comes to matter. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801–831.
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bohm, D. (1985). Unfolding meaning. Loveland, CO: Foundation House.
Bolden, R., Petrov, G., & Gosling, J. (2008). Developing collective leadership in higher
education—Final Report. London: Leadership Foundation for Higher Education.
14
Joseph A. Raelin

Boshyk, Y. (Ed.) (2002). Action learning worldwide: Experiences of leadership and organizational
development. New York: Palgrave.
Carroll, B., & Simpson, B. (2012). Capturing sociality in the movement between frames:
An illustration from leadership development. Human Relations, 65, 1283–1309.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Chia, R., & Holt, R. (2006). Strategy as practical coping: A Heideggerian perspective.
Organization Studies, 27(5), 635–655.
Chia, R., & MacKay, B. (2007). Post-processual challenges for the emerging strategy-as-
practice perspective: Discovering strategy in the logic of practice. Human Relations, 60(1),
217–242.
Cleaver, F. (2007). Understanding agency in collective action. Journal of Human Development,
8(2), 223–244.
Clot, Y. (1999). La fonction psychologique du travail. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Collinson, D. (2011). Critical leadership studies. In A. Bryman, D. Collinson, K. Grint, B.
Jackson, & M. Uhl-Bien (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Leadership (pp. 181–194). London: Sage.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interaction. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26, 77–86.
Davies, B. (1991). The concept of agency: A feminist poststructuralist analysis. Social Analysis:
The International Journal of Social and Cultural Practice, 30, 42–53.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The selﬁsh gene (2nd edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Rouleau, L. (2010). The practice of leadership in the messy
world of organizations. Leadership, 6(1), 67–88.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2001). On the internet. London: Routledge.
Edwards, A. (2005). Relational agency: Learning to be a resourceful practitioner. International
Journal of Educational Research, 43, 168–182.
Endrissat, N., & von Arx, W. (2013). Leadership practices and context: Two sides of the
same coin. Leadership, 9(2), 278–304.
Gendlin, E. T. (1964). A theory of personality change. In P. Worchel & D. Byrne (Eds.),
Personality change (pp. 100–148). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Gherardi, S. (2000). Practice-based theorizing on learning and knowledge in organizations.
Organization, 7, 211–223.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of a theory of structuration. Berkeley and
Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Goldstein, J. A., Hazy, J. K., & Lichtenstein, B. (2010). Complexity and the nexus of leader-
ship: Leveraging nonlinear science to create ecologies of innovation. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Gronn, P. (2002). Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 13(4), 423–
451.
Hales, C. (2002). ‘Bureaucracy-lite’ and continuities in managerial work. British Journal of
Management, 13(1), 51–66.
Hatch, M. J. (1999). Exploring the empty spaces of organizing: How improvisational jazz
helps redescribe organizational structure. Organization Studies, 20(1), 75–100.
Hazy, J. K., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2014). Changing the rules: The implications of complexity
science for leadership research and practice. In D. V. Day (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of
leadership and organizations (pp. 709–732). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heckscher, C. (1994). Deﬁning the post-bureaucratic type. In C. Heckscher & A. Donnellon
(Eds.), The post-bureaucratic organization (pp. 14–62). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
15

Herepath, A. (2014). In the loop: A realist approach to structure and agency in the practice
of strategy. Organization Studies, 35(6), 857–879.
Heydebrand, R. (1989). New organizational forms. Work and Occupations, 16(3), 323–357.
Hodgson, D. E. (2004). Project work: The legacy of bureaucratic control in the post-
bureaucratic organization. Organization, 11(1), 81–100.
James, P., & van Seters, P. (2014). Global social movements and global civil society: A
critical overview. In P. James & P. van Seters (Eds.), Globalization and politics, vol 2:
Global social movements and global civil society (pp. vii–xxx). London: Sage.
Jarzabkowski, P., & Whittington, R. (2008). A strategy-as-practice approach to strategy
research and education. Journal of Management Inquiry, 17(4), 282–286.
Jordan, T., Andersson, P., & Ringnér, H. (2013). The spectrum of responses to complex
societal issues: Reﬂections on seven years of empirical inquiry. Integral Review, 9(1), 34–70.
Kesby, M. (2005). Retheorising empowerment through participation as a performance in
space: Beyond tyranny to transformation. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society,
30(4), 2037–2065.
Knights, D., & Willmott, H. (1992). Conceptualizing leadership processes: A study of
senior managers in a ﬁnancial services company. Journal of Management Studies, 29(6),
761–782.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Marquardt, M. J. (1999). Action learning in action. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black.
Marsick, V. J. (1990). Action learning and reﬂection in the workplace. In J. Mezirow (Ed.),
Fostering critical reﬂection in adulthood (pp. 23–46). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Nicolini, D., Gherardi, S., & Yanow, D. (2003). Introduction in knowing in organizations.
Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). Shared leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of
leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pedler, M. (Ed.) (2011). Action learning in practice (4th edition). Farnham: Gower.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, & science. Chicago, IL and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Pye, A. (1993). “Organizing as explaining” and the doing of managing: An integrative
appreciation of processes of organizing. Journal of Management Inquiry, 2(2), 157–168.
Raelin, J. A. (2008). Work-based Learning: Bridging knowledge and action in the workplace. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Raelin, J. A. (2009). Seeking conceptual clarity in the action modalities. Action Learning:
Research and Practice, 6(1), 17–24.
Raelin, J. A. (2013). The manager as facilitator of dialogue. Organization, 20(6), 818–839.
Raelin, J. A. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership, Online First, 25 November 2014.
Reckwitz, A. (2002). Toward a theory of social practices: A development in culturalist
theorizing. European Journal of Social Theory, 5(2), 243–263.
Rose, N. (1998). Inventing ourselves: Psychology, power, and personhood. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schatzki, T. R. (1997). Practices and actions: A Wittgensteinian critique of Bourdieu and
Giddens. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 27(3), 283–308.
Spicer, A., Alvesson, M., & Kärreman, D. (2009). Critical performativity: The unﬁnished
business of critical management studies. Human Relations, 62(4), 537‑560.
Spillane, J. P. (2006). Distributed leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
16
Joseph A. Raelin

Tsoukas, H. (1998). The word and the world: A critique of representationalism in
management research. International Journal of Public Administration, 21(5), 781–817.
Weick, K. E. (1989). Theory construction as disciplined imagination. Academy of Management
Review, 14(4), 516–531.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wood, M. (2005). The fallacy of misplaced leadership. Journal of Management Studies, 42(6),
1101–1121.
Yorks, L., O’Neil, J. & Marsick, V. J. (Eds.) (1999). Advances in developing human resources:
Action learning: Successful strategies for individual, team and organizational development. San
Francisco: Berrett Koehler.
Introduction to leadership-as-practice
17


PART I
Background


2
MAPPING THE LEADERSHIP-AS-
PRACTICE TERRAIN
Comparative elements
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat
Introduction
Inspired by the practice turn in organization and social theory (Schatzki, Knorr-
Cetina & von Savigny, 2001), there has been increasing recognition of the value
of theorizing about and studying leadership from a practice perspective (Denis,
Langley & Rouleau, 2005, 2010; Carroll, Levy & Richmond, 2008; Crevani,
Lindgren & Packendorﬀ, 2010; Raelin, 2011; Endrissat & von Arx, 2013). The
resulting notion of “leadership-as-practice” gives rise to high expectations but
may also cause misunderstandings among leadership scholars and practitioners
alike. To recognize its potential we believe it is important to bring to the fore
some of its underlying assumptions and outline its similarities and diﬀerences to
other relatively close concepts. Hence, this chapter provides an introduction to
the leadership-as-practice perspective by means of two central comparisons (see
Figure 2.1): First, we probe into leadership studies and consider the similarities
and diﬀerences of a leadership-as-practice perspective with related leadership
approaches such as the leadership style approach (and the subsequent situational
leadership and contingency models) and the relational leadership approach. We
highlight the consequences of doing research from each one of these three per-
spectives, mainly with respect to the underlying understanding of reality (ontol-
ogy) and, consequently, the “unit of analysis” (i.e. what is studied and focused on
to produce knowledge about leadership). We include examples of typical research
questions and exemplary studies in each of the three domains to support our
reasoning. Naturally, the comparison is not complete by considering just two
other approaches. However, the two seem most relevant because they share sev-
eral similarities with the leadership-as-practice approach that need closer exam-
ination to deﬁne the speciﬁc contribution of leadership-as-practice. The style (and

the situational/contingency) approach is widely known, entitative in character,
but with a similar focus on leadership actions to the practice approach. By making the
diﬀerences between the two approaches explicit, we hope to inspire the broad
range of scholars familiar with the style approach to consider the practice perspective
as a potential alternative that allows them to enrich understanding of the accom-
plishments of leadership. The relational approach, on the other hand, is the closest
to the practice approach, and this is sometimes even used synonymously. How-
ever, diﬀerences exist and we believe that it is important to make them explicit to
better understand the critical contribution of leadership-as-practice.
In the second comparison we look outside leadership studies and focus instead
on the “as-practice” approach, outlining the similarities and diﬀerences between
leadership-as-practice and other practice approaches in organization studies,
namely strategy-as-practice and coordination-as-practice. As we will show,
although the underlying assumptions are the same, they diﬀer with respect to the
social accomplishment on which they focus, that is the consequences of organizing
processes that they try to explain and understand. Because of space restrictions,
we had to limit our comparison to those organizational phenomena that we
consider most relevant for deﬁning leadership-as-practice. Both coordination and
strategy work share similarities with leadership that sometimes make it diﬃcult to
distinguish among them. We hope that the focus on “social accomplishment”
will help the reader to better understand what the unique contribution of each of
these organizational constructs is.
The overall aim of these comparisons is to “map the terrain” of a leadership-as-
practice perspective and to sketch its boundaries in relation to other constructs
and approaches to make more explicit its particular potential and promise. We
FIGURE 2.1 A comparative framework of leadership-as-practice
22
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1FIGURE
2.1
FIGURE
2.1

believe that too often these comparisons are not explicitly discussed, and that they
are especially useful for researchers and students who are new to the ﬁeld and
who take an interest in understanding the consequences of doing research from a
leadership-as-practice perspective.
Before developing our comparisons, we want to provide the reader with a
deﬁnition of what leadership-as-practice means to us. We will go back to such a
deﬁnition during the chapter and ﬁll in more details, but to start with we can say
that “leadership” in leadership-as-practice is about producing direction for
organizing processes (Crevani, 2011; Packendorﬀ, Crevani & Lindgren, 2014),
re-orientation of the ﬂow of practice (see Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume), and
emergent co-construction through collaborative agency (Raelin, 2014).
One important distinction that we need to introduce at this point is one
between entitative and relational ontologies—a distinction that maps onto other distinctions
as weak and strong process studies (Langley & Tsoukas, 2010), practice as a perspective
versus practice as a philosophy (Orlikowski, 2010), or leadership as a set of practices
versus leadership in the ﬂow of practice as described by Barbara Simpson (Chapter 8,
this volume). Although there is no complete overlap between such distinctions,
they are related to each other. For the purpose of this chapter, we will refer to the
distinction between entitative and relational ontology as well as between practices and
practice. Put brieﬂy, an entitative approach gives ontological priority to entities or
social states that pre-exist relations and processes. A relational approach gives ontolo-
gical priority to unfolding relations; they are what “makes the world”—people and
other entities are made and remade in such unfolding processes as we become in
relations (cf. Dachler & Hosking, 1995). Such a distinction between entitative and
relational mirrors the diﬀerence between the concept of practices and practice (see
Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume; Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume). Practices may
describe routinized sequences of activities or building blocks of organizing. If
practices are thought of as mobilized by actors, then this view resembles an enti-
tative approach. This means that even processual approaches focusing on the
doings and practicing (such as leadership-as-practice as well as relational leader-
ship) may be entitative in character. We will refer to this approach as entitative-soft
(to diﬀerentiate it from individual-centric entitative approaches as advocated in
the leadership style approach). Practice, on the other hand, may be understood as
an unfolding emergent dynamic and thus follows a relational ontology. We will
come back to these distinctions as we compare the diﬀerent approaches.
Leadership styles, relational leadership, and leadership-as-practice:
The “unit of analysis”
To highlight what is speciﬁc to leadership-as-practice (e.g. Crevani et al. 2010,
Crevani, 2011; Denis et al., 2010; Endrissat & von Arx, 2013), we have chosen
two other leadership approaches to compare it with: leadership styles and rela-
tional leadership. The leadership styles approach represents one of the “classical”
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
23

leadership approaches, but, contrary to other approaches deﬁning leadership as a
property of the individual (i.e. the leadership trait approach), the style approach
focuses on what leaders do, their behaviors (cf. Grint, 2005). Thus, the idea of a
recurring pattern of behavior at ﬁrst sight may be considered similar to leadership-
as-practice. It is all the more so if looking at the situational leadership and con-
tingency approaches, evolutions of the style approach in which the importance of
the context is foregrounded. For the purpose of comparison we focus on the style
approach as the one that introduced patterns of behaviors as relevant for doing lea-
dership. We believe that taking the step from a style (or the following above
mentioned approaches) to a practice approach may be natural just because of the
attention paid to patterns in what is done. Relational leadership, on the other
hand, is chosen because of its many similarities with a leadership-as-practice per-
spective. In fact, some of the authors of chapters in this book have themselves
written other texts under the “relational leadership” label, hence the need for
discussing what diﬀerence exists between the two. There are also other approa-
ches that are close to leadership-as-practice, for instance the growing body of
literature on shared leadership (cf. Pearce & Conger, 2003; Döös, Backström,
Melin & Wilhelmson, 2012), which highlights the collective nature of leadership.
In this chapter we focus on relational leadership as it, along with leadership-as-
practice, shares many of the underlying assumptions about the nature of reality
and about how to produce knowledge about the phenomenon of leadership.
We compare the leadership style, the relational, and leadership-as-practice
approaches with respect to their “unit of analysis.” By unit of analysis, we refer to
what produces knowledge about the phenomenon of leadership. We use “unit of
analysis” well aware that it suggests the idea that such a unit can be singled out
and studied separately, an assumption based on a non-relational ontology that we
do not advocate. However, we hold on to this notion to reach those scholars
unfamiliar with relational perspectives.
Leadership style: A leader-centered approach
The general discourse around leadership still tends to grant primacy to the notion
of the single, heroic, masculine leader as a norm for modern and eﬀective lea-
dership (e.g. Alvesson & Sveningsson, 2003; Crevani et al., 2010; O’Reilly &
Reed, 2010; Holgersson, 2013). This resonates well with the general develop-
ment in the ﬁeld of leadership studies, which has traditionally been leader-
centered, that is focused on individual leaders and their traits, abilities, and actions
(Wood, 2005), placing the abstract phenomenon of “leadership” into distinct
individuals who are detached from their cultural context (Barker, 2001). Similar
to the traits and skills approach, the leadership style approach (cf. Blake & Mouton,
1964, 1978; Eagly & Johnson, 1990) has a long tradition in the leadership ﬁeld
and represents one of the “foundations of modern leadership research and theory”
(Schedlitzki & Edwards, 2014: 24). The idea is that the leader’s behavior is crucial
24
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

for leadership and that certain behaviors are better than others. Classical examples
include the Boys Club Experiment (Lewin, Lippitt & White, 1939), the Ohio
(Stogdill & Coons, 1957) and Michigan (Katz & Kahn, 1951; Likert, 1961) State Stu-
dies, as well as the Managerial Grid by Blake and Mouton (1964, 1978). The studies
typically involved the comparison of either task versus people or directive versus
participative leadership styles (Wright, 1996). The unit of analysis is thus a per-
son’s unique leadership style, his or her routinized, relatively stable patterns of
leadership behavior, which supposedly leads to superior performance outcomes.
Despite some scholars pointing out that leadership styles vary across hierarchical
levels in organizations (e.g. Oshagbemi & Gill, 2004), the leadership styles
approach generally tends to advocate a single best way of leading, and does not
consider situational variance in theory. Yet, empirical research was never able to
conﬁrm a universal style for all situations (Northouse, 2007) and the assumption
led to criticism and the development of situational and contingency leadership
approaches. In these approaches, the possible inﬂuence of the context on which
style is most eﬀective is studied—an enterprise that is not void of diﬃculties
(Graeﬀ, 1997). Still, the idea that the situation in which leadership is enacted is
important for leadership has rooted itself in the literature and compares to the
assumptions on which leadership-as-practice relies.
The fundamental diﬀerence compared with the leadership-as-practice approach
is that the underlying ontology is based on a classical entitative perspective: the
individual actors act in isolation and are separated from the world on which they
act. They are seen as autonomous, independent selves ordered in a subject‑object
relation (Hosking, 2011). This understanding of reality assumes rationality and
linearity from intention to intervention. Leadership is about inﬂuencing people to
follow a course of action that is set by the leaders—inﬂuence stems from one
individual and aﬀects others. Studies focus on formal leaders, their patterns of
behavior, and the eﬀects of their styles. Typical research questions include
exploration of the leader’s typical leadership behavior and the assessment about
which leadership style is the most eﬀective (in a particular situation, across cul-
tures, etc.). The method of choice in this approach is the standardized ques-
tionnaire (see below). These assumptions diﬀer from a leadership-as-practice
approach in which individuals are not foregrounded as they are not seen as the
primary source of leadership. Rather than focusing on patterns of individual
behavior, leadership-as-practice emphasizes the patterns of connected actions. Hence,
despite both approaches focusing on the “doings” rather than on innate characteristics,
they provide very diﬀerent accounts and analysis of such doings.
To more clearly illustrate the diﬀerences between the approaches, we present
brief examples of what such approaches result in. Below, we therefore provide
one example of a leadership styles questionnaire that outlines the typical
empirical approach in analyzing a person’s leadership style—for example, whether
his or her leadership style is focused on task accomplishment or relationships (see
Box 2.1).
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
25

BOX 2.1 THE LEADERSHIP STYLES APPROACH
The following statements are typical examples of items in a leadership style
questionnaire (Northouse, 2010). For each item the respondent is asked to
think of how often s/he engages in the described behavior on a scale from
“never” to “always.”
1.
Tells group members what they are supposed to do.
2.
Acts friendly with members of the group.
3.
Sets standards of performance for group members.
4.
Helps others in the group feel comfortable.
(Northouse, 2010, p. 85)
The respondent’s reaction to the statements provides information on whether
his/her leadership behavior is task or relationship oriented.
To conclude, the leadership styles approach focuses on the leader’s typical
(routinized) behavior and is therefore leader-centered with an emphasis on the
practitioner. The behaviors can be measured according to deﬁnite scales. The
leadership style approach is, in other words, strongly entitative and in this respect
fundamentally diﬀerent from leadership-as-practice.
Relational leadership: A focus on “becoming” in relationships
Having examined an entitative construct, we now turn our attention to a con-
struct that has the potential for being a relational (ontology) construct: relational
leadership. This is a broad construct that is currently used both in entitative and
relational ways, depending on the scholar and his or her understanding of “rela-
tional.” Uhl-Bien (2006), and subsequently Uhl-Bien and Ospina (2012), provide
a collection of research contributions that range from seminal work stemming
from relational constructionism (cf. Dachler & Hosking, 1995) to LMX approa-
ches to leadership (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995), that represent relational and enti-
tative ontologies, respectively (the latter focusing on individuals in relation rather
than on relations shaping individuals and realities). The challenge is that proces-
sual approaches may have an entitative character when it comes to the ontology,
which means that some of the contributions studying relational leadership as a
process are entitative rather than relational.
Following a process perspective (both weak and strong), the “unit of analysis”
in relational leadership is the emergent relational dynamic that is often found in
the form of local, momentary interaction. Talk and language are foregrounded
when studying how leadership is co-constructed in interactions and how this
construction shapes further interactions and developments. In fact, the emphasis
26
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

in this approach is on becoming in relation—which takes place in interactions and
relationships. Broadly speaking, in relational leadership approaches people are
involved “in a co-construction of each other and the leadership process” (Sche-
dlitzki & Edwards, 2014: 115). Those scholars subscribing to a relational ontology
further claim that relations are subject-to-subject relationships, which means that
inﬂuence is necessarily mutual and all subjects are constantly (partially) recon-
structed as relations are established, intensiﬁed, and interrupted (Dachler &
Hosking, 1995). The main claim of relational leadership is thus that the self is a
relational construction made in relational processes, a dialogical self (Hosking,
2011)—compared with a singular independent (leader) self, trying to control
“others,” which is the typical Western conception of leadership (see leadership
style approach above). Leadership is thus about inﬂuential acts of organizing that
aﬀect the structuring of relations and interactions, in which deﬁnitions of social
order are negotiated, constructed, and enacted (Dachler & Hosking, 1995).
Attention is often concentrated on language and conversation, as relating is con-
ceptualized as a language-based process (Hosking, 2011) and language is treated as
the most important resource used to accomplish social reality (cf. Barge, 2012).
Everything that is said in conversations is in relationship to “others”: “other
people, other ideas, other conversations”; and each conversation is both old and
new (see, especially Cunliﬀe & Eriksen, 2011, p. 1434, in reference to Bakhtin).
The past is thus constitutive of the present, although not determining the present
(Langley & Tsoukas, 2010). In other words, “current conversations draw on past
conversations; past ‘voices’ are mobilized in current utterances” (ibid., p. 5). This
does not necessarily mean that the conversation results in shared understanding
and that such understanding is recalled in the “right” way in the coming con-
versations, but that current utterances are resourced by past utterances. This
means that certain constructions are decisive for which actions and talks may
become actual and which not, which talks become possible to supplement, which
paths the process of constructing reality takes and which not (Crevani, 2011). Or,
in other words, diﬀerent constructions resource and constrain “how processes ‘go
on’ and the realities that are made” (van der Haar & Hosking, 2004, p. 1023).
Hence, for those scholars mostly inﬂuenced by a relational ontology (not only a
process perspective), the “responsibility” for leadership lies with the collective,
throughout the organization, not with individual leaders, and a larger number of
relationships are legitimized as having to do with leadership.
Hence, theoretically, the unit of analysis is the interactional dynamic that unfolds
throughout the organization. But empirically, the focus is still often on leaders as
they relate. The main preoccupation is, in fact, to de-centralize leadership from
“individuals” to “relations,” in particular, co-constructive (subject-to-subject)
relations, rather than to fully explore the potential to de-centralize leadership to
“the activity of doing work,” something that may be more fully explored by
scholars adhering to leadership-as-practice.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
27

To be acknowledged at this point, however, is that both the relational leader-
ship approach and leadership-as-practice are aimed at producing less individualis-
tic and more processual accounts of leadership in which entitative/relational
ontologies co-exist. In the case of relational leadership this means that construc-
tionist approaches may see “relational” as an epistemological position (for
instance, see Cunliﬀe and Hibbert, Chapter 3, this volume) in which inter-actions
(see Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume) are central for how meaning is created and
in which the lived experience of people is central (for example by building on a
phenomenological tradition). Other scholars are closer to a relational (strong
process) ontology, in which relational processes are foregrounded in the form of
trans-actions (see Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume) in which people and the world
are in constant becoming, which means that the lived experience is not focused
on to the same extent. Moreover, in the leadership-as-practice movement we
have a range of positions on the scale entitative-relational, as the chapters in this
book make evident and as we will discuss below. Here it is important to notice
that even outside relational leadership discussions (e.g. Hernes, 2008), and outside
organization theory at large, there are scholars arguing for relational ontologies
(for instance, Massey 2005) that enable processual understandings of phenomena.
We will develop such a discussion later in the chapter.
We conclude by providing examples of research questions and of empirical
studies related to relational leadership to make the comparison with leadership-as-
practice clearer. Typical research questions focus on what is done in relations and
include: How do relational dynamics contribute to structuring (entitative-soft if
the focus is on individuals in relations, relational if the focus is on the dynamics)?
How do we relate to each other and what is the consequence for leadership
(entitative-soft if the focus is on how leaders/followers relate to each other, rela-
tional if the focus is on how people and leadership emerge from the relationship)?
How can we recognize the primacy of relationships in everything we do (Gergen
and Hersted, Chapter 9, this volume)? How are organizational realities and
identities constructed in relations (entitative-soft if the focus is on individual’s
identities, relational if the focus is on how the relationship constitutes identities
and realities)? But also, how do leaders talk about their relationships and what do
they see as being important in those relationships (entitative-soft) (Cunliﬀe &
Eriksen, 2011)? As mentioned above, this is one of the tensions within the rela-
tional leadership literature: to what extent are we analyzing leaders in relation and
acting through relations compared with unfolding relations achieving leadership?
Also, although theoretical conceptualization is ample, empirical studies based on a
relational ontology are rather limited.
To make more visible for the reader the character a relational leadership study
may have, we refer to two examples. The ﬁrst example, Box 2.2, comes from the
constructionist side of relational leadership informed by an entitative view of reality
in which the focus is on exploration of the way in which leaders and followers
relate to each other. As the text makes explicit, the idea of the hero-conductor is
28
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

challenged by de-centering leadership to the relational dynamics between the
conductor and the followers—hence its entitative character. The dimensions that
Koivunen and Wennes (2011) examine are also described as practices in their
article, in the sense of how a leader can practice leadership relationally (the leader
as practitioner as in Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume), suggesting that studies of
relational leadership on the constructionist entitative-soft side may inform
normative accounts of the leader as a practitioner.
BOX 2.2 A FIRST EXAMPLE OF RELATIONAL LEADERSHIP
Koivunen and Wennes (2011) provide an example of relational leadership by
looking at leadership in orchestras (p. 58).
“We claim that symphony orchestra conductors engage in a speciﬁc form
of leadership that consists of relational, aesthetic and embodied pro-
cesses. Based on our data analysis and the reading of theory we label
these three dimensions (1) relational listening (relational activity in the
theoretical section), (2) aesthetic judgment, and (3) kinaesthetic empathy
(embodiment). […]
This leadership approach examines the sophisticated interaction pro-
cesses between the conductor and the musicians. The process involves
nonverbal communication and is based on the craft of playing an instru-
ment, knowledge of repertoire and skillful sense perception, listening in
particular. Collective virtuosity in an orchestra takes place through hear-
ing the sounds with skillful listening. At the core of interaction lies the
music. The conductor is part of the orchestra who helps the musicians in
their work and receives the music and listens to the quality of the music.
The conductor listens to the sound produced by musicians, and based on
that auditive material helps them to play together by directing solo parts,
showing phrasing and articulations, and estimating the balances between
different instrument sections. In this approach to leadership, the con-
ductor does not force the orchestra to play according to her pre-existing
idea of music interpretation but ﬁrst listens to the orchestra and then
works from that on. This marks a distance to the dominating view of the
conductor as the leader with full control and authority (task-oriented and
rational) (Hosking, 1988)”.
The second example, Figure 2.2, is an analysis one of us (Crevani, 2011) made
of conversations at work, in which formal leaders may or not be involved. These
conversations are presented in the form of comic strips to reproduce interactions
that retain some of the elements that are so easily lost when writing dialogues.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
29

FIGURE 2.2 A second example of relational leadership
30
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat
...Pt?OACTlVE GAl-EG INGrEA/? OF GtrrINS,
t?ECEIVINS, PHONE CAUG Ft?OM CUGrOMEt?G...
ANN
..AN/? ON rHIG GI/?E r GAY WE
/?ON'r HAVE ANY AcrlVE GAl-EG.
MEMet?ANE [ANorHEt? pt?o/?ucrj
IG /?IFFEt?ENr rHOUs,H GINCE rr'G
ON out? PArCH, GO ro GPEAK:, eur
ON rHAr GI/?E WHEt?E LEONAt?/? IG,
WHAr HE'G GaLINs" WE /?ON'r
AVE ANY ACTIVE GAl-EG rHEt?E.
WHEN WE rALK IN OUt? err rr
GOt?r OF eaONs,G ro rHE
CUGrOMEt?G AN/? t?ELATlONG AN/?
rHAr GOt?r OF rHINs" tr'G Nor
t?EAUY rHAr K.IN/? OF GAl-EG
WE't?E rALKINs, Aeour NOW.
tTl/S
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
eECAUGE HE /?OEGN'r GaL.
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG r WOUl./? GAY,
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG
tTl/S
PUMPG tTl/S
PUMPGtTl/S
PUMPG

For example, it becomes graphically apparent that conversations are not ordered
as people interrupt each other or ﬁnish each other’s sequences. What is empha-
sized is the conversation, the interaction in terms of the words said. Figure 2.2
gives an example of one short part of one of these conversations. Of course it is
not possible to give the reader enough information to motivate why this inter-
action is doing leadership in the limited space at our disposal (for such an analysis,
please refer to Crevani, 2011). The idea is instead to give the reader a feeling of
what the “unit of analysis” is, namely the conversation or the interaction as it
unfolds. We propose that the example in Figure 2.2 provides an instance of those
studies that contribute to both relational leadership and leadership-as-practice by
adhering to a relational ontology and de-centering leadership to situations in
which work is carried out.
Leadership-as-practice: A practice centered approach
Leadership-as-practice emphasizes the importance of practices, not the practitioner
(leader). It follows exactly the other way around from the style approach. The
practice approach does not ask what style is typical for a particular leader, but
what kind of practice enables a speciﬁc identity or agency (Nicolini, 2012). Lea-
dership, seen from this perspective, is co-constructed by actors in certain practices/
practice; the “unit of analysis” is thus not a single “unit,” but bundles of related
actions or “the work of leadership” as it takes form in patterns of action and
interaction (which are routinized when looking for practices, respectively emergent
when looking for practice). Leadership-as-practice is based on a process perspec-
tive, which means considering the world as “an ongoing routinized and recurrent
accomplishment” (Nicolini, 2012, p. 3.) In addition, practice approaches
acknowledge relationality by conceptualizing “the world as a seamless assemblage,
nexus, or confederation of practices” (ibid., p. 3) and rejecting the “idea that the
world comes nicely divided into levels and factors” (ibid., p. 8) as advocated by
the leadership style approach. Practice theories also highlight the critical role of
the body and material things in all social aﬀairs. They respect the importance of
discursive practices for the constitution of organizational life, but stress that lan-
guage and discourse alone cannot account for all organizational aspects (e.g.
Endrissat & von Arx, 2013; Sergi, Chapter 6, this volume).
The leadership-as-practice approach hence acknowledges the importance of
everyday activity, performances, and interactions, that is the doings of leadership.
Whereas the leadership-as-practice studies that are grounded in a strong process
focus on practice as it unfolds (which is very similar to relational leadership, see
above), the entitative-soft strand looks for patterns of action (which we refer to as
practices, see above). The latter is similar to the leadership style approach in that
both focus on what is done (the actions, behavior). The diﬀerence is that atten-
tion is not centered on the behavior of one person but on more distributed pat-
terns of action. Therefore, looking for leadership practices means looking not
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
31

only at actions performed by one person in a formal leadership positions but,
more generally, at how actors get on with the work of leadership. Thus, it also
includes the “un-heroic” work of practitioners. However, this does not suggest
that any activity is a practice. Instead, practices are seen as “conﬁgurations of
actions which carry a speciﬁc meaning” (Nicolini, 2012: 10). The focus is on the
routinized ones that occur repeatedly and represent a form of social knowledge that
only members of a speciﬁc community recognize and understand. It is in this
sense that practices represent collectively shared knowledge (Denis et al., 2010).
Although both foci (practices and practice) are possible within an “as-practice”
perspective, empirical research in the latter instance is still scarce. So far, most
studies follow an entitative-soft understanding and focus on the practices of lea-
ders as they do leadership and, hence, do not fully explore the possibilities opened
up by a practice perspective that actually foregrounds action and emergence
rather than individuals. This book gathers a number of scholars that dig deeply
into some crucial aspects of what leadership-as-practice has meant and may mean,
thus providing grounds for further studies that more fully embrace the relational
practice view.
The idea of leadership-as-practice has thus informed rather diﬀerent empirical
studies that contribute to processual understandings of leadership by con-
ceptualizing leadership as socially constituted, by examining in a ﬁnely graded
manner micro-level activities and their eﬀects (Denis et al., 2010), by highlighting
the time dimension when accomplishing work (Holmberg & Tyrstrup, 2010), by
trying to perform leadership development programs promoting leaderful practice
(Raelin, 2011), by taking into consideration everyday actions as leadership and
seeing individuals as “ﬁelds of relationships” (Carroll et al., 2008), and by analyz-
ing leadership as stretched over leaders, followers, and the material and symbolic
artifacts in the situation (Spillane, Halverson & Diamond, 2004).
Possible research questions include: What is leadership work? How is leader-
ship achieved? Where and how is leadership work done? What are the recurring
patterns of action that we can observe? (For all questions, consider them: entitative-
soft if the focus is on the practices of oﬃcial leaders/humans/non-humans; relational
if the focus is on emergence; e.g. how “inﬂuence” is being produced or “direction”
changed).
Methodologically, leadership-as-practice means researching leadership as a
“lived” experience rather than a “reported” experience in standardized questionnaires
(see the example provided in Box 2.1). It requires paying attention to the speciﬁc
context in which the phenomenon takes place including possible contradictions
and ambiguities. To come close to the practice(s), often (non-)participant obser-
vations have been the method of choice (Crevani, 2011) and so have narrative
interviews (Rouleau, 2010). The aim is to study people in their “natural” context
and to explore the nature of a social phenomenon over time/space; to study
mundane activities in organizations as they take shape on a daily basis to capture
the lived experiences of individuals and working dynamics (Nicolini, 2012).
32
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

Other chapters in this book, in particular Chapter 12 by Kempster, Parry, and
Jackson, lend further insight into these methodological challenges.
To illustrate the leadership-as-practice approach, we provide an example from
the work of Endrissat and von Arx (2013), which describes how leadership is
achieved during a large-scale strategic change in a university hospital (Box 2.3).
The excerpt gives an illustration of the entitative-soft perspective on leadership-
as-practice, that is the perspective in which a number of practices, or repeated
patterns of action that constitute leadership, are identiﬁed. In this example, one of
such practices is relying on the self-organization of the professionals (physicians), a pattern
that was repeatedly witnessed. Consequently, leadership was achieved in the
interplay among the oﬃcial project leader’s actions and the professionals’ values and
norms, which were re-created in their daily actions. What we want to illustrate
with this short excerpt is the focus on situated acting, involving a number of
actors, that gives direction to organizing, something typical of this kind of
leadership-as-practice approach.
BOX 2.3 A FIRST EXAMPLE OF LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE.
Excerpt taken from Endrissat and von Arx (2013: 293):
Leadership practice: relying on the self-organization of the professionals
(along hierarchies and patient-paths). The physicians’ work practices are
highly standardized and largely pre-structured by the patient. The ethical
rule to always act for the patient’s well-being is deeply anchored in the
physicians’ practice. This provides a frame of reference regardless of
the work structures or organizational chart in place. As a consequence,
the physicians’ everyday practices remain the same on the day that the
new structure ﬁnally comes into force. The main concern is less about
how the initiative is implemented than about whether all the patients
will receive correct treatment. The physicians therefore cope relatively
well with the reorganization. The self-organization is supported by typi-
cal ‘patient pathways’. The physicians seem to switch to an emergency
mode, in which they all work with enormous dedication. Each of them
‘adopts’ their patients (personalization) and, step-by-step, steer them
past the system problems.
The other example illustrates the focus on practice with a stronger relational
ontology (Box 2.4). The emphasis here is on interactions and the kinds of
conversational movements taking shape in the ﬂow of the interactions.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
33

BOX 2.4 A SECOND EXAMPLE OF LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE.
This example is taken from Carroll and Simpson (2012). The researchers have
analyzed an online conversation and categorized the different statements
according to which frames were mobilized. In their analysis the researchers
focus on the different kinds of movements between frames to produce
knowledge about ongoing processes from which leadership emerges.
Example of frames mobilized are “school,” “expedition,” “performance,”
“intermediary.” For instance, the expedition frame is clear in this statement: “I
don’t believe we should be addressing what their expectations are at all. How
about taking them on a journey?” (p. 1295); and the school frame in “THEY
CANNOT SHUT DOWN THE DISCUSSION! (yes I meant to shout) … from
where I sit I feel he was lecturing us like naughty kids … (Puhlease) … give us
some credit for getting the real game … the meeting is not a student council
meeting!” (p. 1298).
The interesting dynamics are then how movements between such frames
take place—the researchers focus on three: kindling, stretching, and span-
ning. Each movement has different implications for the emergence of new
direction (leadership).
Given the focus on dialogue and emergence, this example (similar to the
example in Figure 2.2) provides an illustration of an empirical study that can
contribute to both the leadership-as-practice and the relational leadership litera-
tures. Thus, whether it is a study informing relational leadership or leadership-as-
practice is not a question of data collection but of interpreting the data and
theoretical framing.
Discussion of comparative element I: “Same same, but different”
While the comparison between leadership styles and leadership-as-practice
approaches is not particularly challenging given that the ontological premises, and
thus the unit of analysis, are clearly diﬀerent, the comparison with relational lea-
dership proves more diﬃcult. As anticipated, both relational leadership and
leadership-as-practice approaches apply a process perspective to reality and leadership.
Leadership is thus a phenomenon taking place as work is done, in space and time.
What makes a distinction hard is that in both approaches we have some studies
that follow a relational ontology and some that are more entitative (entities
involved in processes) that we have characterized as entitative-soft to distinguish
them from approaches that are purely entitative (as for the leadership style
approach or the leader-as-practitioner position in Simpson, Chapter 8, this
volume). In other words, our ﬁrst comparison involves one entitative approach
(leadership styles) and two approaches that include entitative-soft and relational
34
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

positions. As outlined above, leadership-as-practice and relational leadership
overlap to a large extent, particularly when the empirical focus is grounded in a
relational (strong process) ontology. Subscribing to a relational ontology (rela-
tional leadership and leadership-as-practice) means to try to understand and name
emergent processes of production of direction, thus foregrounding the momen-
tary, the co-evolving, and the ﬂow. The diﬀerence between relational leadership
and leadership-as-practice studies in this case is, we propose, a question of focus.
Relational in relational leadership is often conceptualized in terms of human
dialogue and thus often concerned with discursive practices, such as in the form
of text or language (Dachler & Hosking, 1995). With a practice perspective,
which builds on post-humanist approaches among others, relational often means
interactions, which may include both humans and non-humans. Hence, the
leadership-as-practice perspective is concerned with language but also oﬀers more
conceptual means to include other elements such as the body, objects, and the
“form” of leadership other than just talk (Endrissat & von Arx, 2013). In both
cases, empirical studies focusing on relational processes are still relatively rare,
which makes it rather diﬃcult to see the consequences of such positions when
doing research.
Concerning more entitative-soft studies in leadership-as-practice, that is those
identifying a set of “practices” in which leadership goes on, and more entitative-
soft positions in relational leadership, that is those attending to how people are in
relations, we propose that both approaches contribute to de-center leadership as a
phenomenon from individuals to processes, but in diﬀerent ways. Relational lea-
dership de-centers from independent individuals to beings-in-relation, whereas
leadership-as-practice approaches identifying leadership practices de-center lea-
dership from individuals to patterns of action. Hence, relational leadership pro-
vides the means to focus on the construction and re-construction of human
relations (whether by focusing on conversations or on long-term developments),
whereas leadership-as-practice is interested in recurring patterns of action, that is on
already stabilized patterns of action. Figure 2.3 illustrates these distinctions.
On a more critical note, one could argue that the leadership-as-practice studies
have moved our attention to leadership as activity accomplished in interactions,
whether in particular situations or over longer periods of time. But, when doing
empirical research, scholars tend to grant actors some degree of intentionality and
individual motivation (for instance, Denis et al., 2010). Actors choose which
practices to deploy and the eﬀects of such practices can be observed and classiﬁed.
And despite leadership-as-practice principally acknowledging that leadership can
be achieved by actors other than formal leaders, many empirical studies still focus
on formal leaders (e.g. Carroll et al., 2008), with some notable exceptions that
more clearly foreground practice (e.g. Carroll & Simpson, 2012). Thus, while
interactions gain in signiﬁcance, the step to making the practice as what “comes
ﬁrst,” and not actors, is not completely taken. Even in the case of relational lea-
dership, empirical studies continue to largely focus on the leaders (e.g. Cunliﬀe &
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
35

Eriksen, 2011). In this sense, both the relational leadership and leadership-as-
practice approaches have an ambition to re-focus research from individuals to
“the social,” but there is a need for further empirical studies to make this shift complete.
This is no easy endeavor as discussed by Kempster, Parry, and Jackson (Chapter 12, this
volume), also given the multiplicity of perspectives in leadership-as-practice (see the
chapters in this volume)—a quandary also to be found in other “as-practice”
approaches (as in strategy-as-practice; see, e.g., Golsorkhi, Rouleau, Seidl & Vaara,
2010). This book therefore aims at pointing the reader towards the richness of the
leadership-as-practice movement and to provide the ground for developing it further.
To conclude, despite having shown more or less strong similarities between the
three diﬀerent leadership approaches, we propose that the “unit of analysis,” or
the focus of empirical interest, diﬀers, at times greatly, at times more slightly. The
leadership style approach focuses on the leader and his or her typical behavior in
an entitative fashion. This clearly diﬀerentiates such an approach from the other
two approaches we selected. Whereas Figure 2.3 illustrated the overlaps and dif-
ferences between relational leadership and leadership-as-practice, Table 2.1
demonstrates the common points and diﬀerences in more detail.
FIGURE 2.3 A conceptual comparison between relational leadership and leadership-as-
practice.
36
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat
THE
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER
LEADER

TABLE 2.1 Comparison between three leadership approaches by unit of analysis.
Leadership styles
Relational leadership
Leadership-as-practice
Ontology
Entitative
Entitative-soft (weak
process)
Relational (strong process)
Practices: Entitative-soft
(weak process)
Practice: Relational
(strong process)
Characteristics
Leader-centered
Individual actors acting in
isolation, separated from the
world on which they act
Linearity from intention
to intervention
Performance is suppo-
sedly determined by purpose
Dualism—distinction
subject-object—inﬂuence
stems from one person (the
leaders) and aﬀects another
person (the follower)
Decentering the leader
Focus is on indivi-
duals and how they
relate to each other,
how they construct
relationships with each
other, how they (re)
construct their iden-
tities in relationships
Subject-subject
relationships
Decentering the leader
Focus is on the relationship
and how it enables leadership
to emerge and for people/sub-
jectivities to become
Subject-subject relationships
Decentering the leader
Practices are build-
ing blocks of
organizing
Practices as sources
of meaning and
identity
Practices are gov-
erned by “habitus,” by
a modus operandi
rather than from con-
scious intent
Subject-subject
relationships
Decentering the
leader
Logic of practice
inﬂuences processes
of becoming
Practice is a recur-
sive encounter
Subject-subject
relationships
Empirical
focus
Individuals in leadership
positions (leader centered)
Typical/routinized behavior
Patterns of behavior that can
be generalized
Relationships
Dialogue
Mutual adjustment
Collaborative learning
Collective sensemaking
Situated activity, the “doings” of
leadership
Typical/routinized behavior
Patterns of behavior that are reoccurring
Emotions, embodiment, materiality
Examples of
research ques-
tions, e.g., if
leadership is to
be studied in
professional
organizations
What is the leader’s typical
leadership behavior in his/
her interaction with
professionals?
Which leadership beha-
vior is the most eﬀective?
How is leadership co-
constructed in rela-
tions between people
belonging to diﬀerent
professions?
In what kind of relational
dynamics are courses of action
being set and how is the emer-
gent construction of the pro-
fessional boundaries related to
such processes?
How do relational dynamics
contribute to structuring?
Which professional
practices contribute to
producing direction?
How is leadership
work achieved in the
interaction between
humans and non-
humans?
How is leadership
produced? How does
the re-construction of
professional norms
intertwine with the
emergence of
leadership?

Strategy, coordination, leadership: Social accomplishments from a
practice perspective
As the practice perspective is gaining in momentum among organizational scholars, it
can be used to help understand diﬀerent organizational phenomena, such as, tech-
nology-as-practice (e.g. Orlikowski, 2000); knowledge and learning-as-practice (e.g.
Nicolini, Gherardi & Yanow, 2003; Raelin, 1997), strategy-as-practice (e.g. Chia &
MacKay, 2007; Whittington, 1996; Golsorkhi et al., 2010), and coordination-as-
practice (e.g. Jarzabkowski, Lê & Feldman, 2012). In these contributions, the focus is
often on practices (rather than “practice”) that are mostly seen as “building blocks”
that help understand organizing and organizational phenomena. However, the
challenge of applying a practice perspective to these diﬀerent areas is that various
organizational outcomes might be achieved through the same everyday actions and
doings contributing to organizing. That is, the question might arise how we can discern
and diﬀerentiate analytically between the organizational phenomena when the “units
of analysis” in all of them are practices (or practice). To address this issue we follow
Nicolini (2009), who suggests “zooming in” on the social accomplishments of practices.
For our second comparison, we thus consider the similarities and diﬀerences among
leadership, strategy, and coordination from a practice perspective. We chose
strategy-as-practice as one ﬁeld to which to compare leadership-as-practice given the
lively community around this ﬁeld which has, over the years, produced a number of
interesting studies. Moreover, when adopting a practice perspective, it may no
longer be obvious what is strategy and what is leadership, which makes such discus-
sion necessary. We chose coordination-as-practice as a second ﬁeld of comparison
given that, although the ﬁeld is not as established as strategy-as-practice, the possible
overlap with leadership-as-practice is clear, for instance, leadership has been deﬁned
in terms of alignment (Drath et al., 2008), which is also what coordination-as-
practice is said to be about. Before delving into such a discussion, it seems necessary
to comment on the consistency of the ﬁelds. For the sake of clarity in this chapter, we
will simplify and summarize in a few sentences what each ﬁeld is focusing on, but the
reader should keep in mind that “practice” is not “one theory” but rather a number
of theoretical approaches (Nicolini, 2012) and, consequently, also each “as-practice”
ﬁeld may include studies that are rather diﬀerent. The recent handbook of strategy-
as-practice, for example, organizes contributions to the ﬁeld depending on whether
they consider practice as a phenomenon (the focus is on what people actually do), a
theoretical perspective (practice-centered theory is used in analyzing empirical
situations), or an ontology (reality is fundamentally understood as constituted of
bundles of practices) (Golsorkhi et al., 2010).
Strategy-as-practice: Negotiating future directions
Common to studies of strategy-as-practice, coordination-as-practice, and leadership-
as-practice is that they are concerned with how space of action in organizing is
38
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

produced and the courses of action, or the development of interrelated trajec-
tories, aﬀected. Yet, we propose that the three ﬁelds shed light on diﬀerent
aspects of such processes. Unfortunately, such diﬀerence in focus and the relation
between the ﬁelds is seldom discussed. What makes matters even more diﬃcult is
that concepts such as leadership and strategy are not always clearly deﬁned. In
particular, in the strategy-as-practice literature it may be diﬃcult to ﬁnd deﬁni-
tions of what “strategy” work is (for example, in Golsorkhi et al., 2010). Our
reading of such literature is that the accomplishment of strategy may be argued to
be the ongoing negotiation of future order and an intentional path forward to such
order, hence diﬀering in this case from leadership in its temporality (which we
argue, below, is about the present). Moreover, a number of scholars are also con-
cerned with how such future order becomes inscribed and enacted in the present.
Some strategy texts, for example, have performative eﬀects (see, e.g., Vaara, Sorsa
& Pälli, 2010). One could argue that the practice approach allows us to look
at how paths forward are (re-)made real and relevant, rather than taking the
“playground” and the “plan for the game” as given. As a consequence,
focusing on practices suggests we move our attention from strategy as a ﬁn-
ished text to what ordinary actors (including objects) do when they strategize/engage in
strategy work. Such an enterprise may take diﬀerent shapes, from very detailed analysis
of individuals in conversation inspired by an ethnomethodological tradition (Samra-
Fredericks, 2003) to critical discursive approaches of textual agency (Vaara et al.,
2010), two examples that illustrate the diversity of the strategy-as-practice
ﬁeld—and this is both an opportunity and a challenge (Golsorkhi et al., 2010).
Box 2.5 reproduces a small excerpt from the work of Samra-Fredericks (2010),
who tries to trace the shaping of strategic directions by highlighting the “facts”
that are being accomplished (see Box 2.5). Again, the excerpt is too short for the
reader to get an understanding of the full empirical situation (for this, please refer
to Samra-Fredericks, 2010), but it helps to illustrate what kind of empirical material
and data analysis can be employed within the strategy-as-practice perspective. As
mentioned above, the example shows an ethnomethodological approach in
which conversational dynamics are analyzed in detail. By means of such analysis,
the researcher is able to say something about the process in which strategic
direction is produced, or, in our own words, how future order is negotiated.
To conclude, strategy-as-practice is a broad approach that provides the oppor-
tunity for a variety of methods to study its social accomplishment: the negotiation or
enactment of future order. Both the negotiation and enactment of future order intersect
with the doings of leadership and may take place in the same interactions in
which leadership emerges. However, diﬀerent from strategy-as-practice, we
propose, and discuss below, that leadership-as-practice has to do with the present
and the emergence of premises for shaping new spaces of action and moving forward
in certain directions rather than mobilizing notions of the future, in particular an
organized future.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
39

BOX 2.5 AN EXAMPLE OF STRATEGY-AS-PRACTICE
This excerpt comes from the reproduction of a conversation involving people
working on strategic documents that Samra-Fredericks (2010) uses to illus-
trate how data interpretation from a strategy-as-practice perspective can be
informed by ethnomethodology and conversation analysis. The dialogue is
reproduced according to speciﬁc conventions of conversation analysis that
make it possible to analyze also the form the conversation takes in terms of
sequentiality and organization of talk.
Coordination-as-practice: Alignment and co-orientation
The accomplishment of coordination-as-practice is the moment-by-moment
achieving of alignment and co-orientation, which brings and increases order and
stabilizes the collective course of action (e.g. Jarzabkowski et al., 2012). Such an
understanding of coordination moves our focus from formal coordination forms
(e.g., roles or hierarchy) to more emergent forms: coordination is what ordinary
people and objects achieve together—it is emergent and recursive. The coordi-
nation-as-practice ﬁeld is not yet as established as in the case of strategy-as-prac-
tice or leadership-as-practice, but the recent work by Jarzabkowski and colleagues
(2012) clearly indicates that coordination research has taken the “practice turn.”
5
strategist 1
what did you say on that (.) you said (.) when you say [name
of division] do you mean [Group name]?
strategist 2
er yeah [name of company] and the organization, the external
market
strategist 1
I’d think I’d call1 that recent trends [quietly speaks as reads]
10
survival’ [reads] it’s another bit that goes in there, I think
you’ve got it somewhere else but the urm the dirt cheap asset
prices need to go in there
strategist 2
yeah I’ve got that in the main body of the report and the
competition but yeah we can put that in there as well
15
strategist 1
I think its part of the (.) if you made that into market
structure=
strategist 2
=yes=
strategist 1
= what that says is (.) here’s a big consolidation piece
[inaudible three words] its (.) consolidation [as he writes]
(Samra-Fredericks, 2010, p. 236)
40
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

In their article, Jarzabkowski and colleagues (2012) analyze the dynamics between
ostensive coordination mechanisms and the enactment of speciﬁc performances in
the creation of new coordinating mechanisms. As leadership is also concerned with
the emergence of order, we believe it is relevant to compare the two as-practice
approaches with respect to their social accomplishment. We propose that the diﬀerence
is, as is the case for strategy-as-practice and leadership-as-practice, the analytical focus of
the organizational phenomenon in which we are interested and to which we are con-
tributing, and what knowledge we are producing. In the case of coordination, the aim
is to understand how collective action is achieved in practice by stabilizing the
relation between diﬀerent trajectories, such as courses of action, whereas in the case
of leadership the aim is to understand how direction and movement are produced.
A recent study on perfume-making by Endrissat, Islam and Noppeney (2015)
provides an example of approaching the study of coordination with a practice
perspective (see Box 2.6).
BOX 2.6 COORDINATION-AS-PRACTICE—EXAMPLE.
The example is analyzed in detail in Endrissat, Islam and Noppeney (2015).
Central to the coordination in the design process under study (i.e. perfume
making) is an object, the so-called mood board. Mood boards are part of the
“brieﬁng” situation in which a creative director or a client communicates to
the development team basic information about the new product. The mood board
is able to communicate a “mood” or a theme through aesthetically enriched
material such as visual images. In their study, the researchers analyze how
the object plays a central role throughout the creative process of producing
a new product (including the fragrance, the packaging, the advertising,
etc.). The data analysis shows how the mood board is interacting with the
people involved, who were physically placed in different locations and could
not meet face-to-face on a regular basis. When focusing on practice, we can see
that the mood board is able to balance the seemingly contradictory require-
ments of coordinating and providing creative freedom in creative processes.
It coordinates via practices of (a) setting the scene, (b) directing activities
and aligning sub-products, and (c) establishing a point of reference. It pro-
vides creative freedom via (a) leaving room for interpretation, (b) providing a
source of inspiration, and (c) allowing self-expression and signature style.
The challenge in this case, as in many other settings, is to balance the need for
coordination, which means aligning the actions performed by diﬀerent actors
with the need for creativity, which means leaving space for emergent and diver-
gent trajectories. The researchers emphasize the role played by “mood boards,” an
object that is used for brieﬁng the actors involved in the process regarding what the new
product should be about. The mood board displays aesthetic rather than technical
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
41

aspects of the product idea, and succeeds to maintain plurality while also directing and
aligning. By means of this example, we want to illustrate how an analysis using coor-
dination-as-practice may proceed. The focus is on practices enabling co-orientation
of action, but also how the possibility of “bringing materiality in” is more fully
explored than in a number of current leadership-as-practice empirical studies, a
lack that is also addressed by Sergi (Chapter 6, this volume).
Leadership-as-practice: Producing direction and setting the course
of action
The accomplishment of leadership may be said to be the moment-by-moment pro-
duction of direction, or collective agency in changing and setting courses of action (e.g.
Crevani, forthcoming; Carroll & Simpson, 2012; Drath et al., 2008; Raelin,
2014). Whereas traditional leadership theory takes direction as a “given,” as linear
and as unproblematic, the concept of practice allows us to appreciate the
“organic” nature of courses of action that change and/or intensify as people
interact. Although there may be formal courses of action that have been
sanctioned by the upper management, the courses of action that take form as
people work may diﬀer from those sanctioned, and are constantly under
construction, contested, and changing. The formal leader has no chance to
control such courses of action, which are the result of social interactions
throughout the organization. Hence, leadership-as-practice refocuses our atten-
tion from what (extraordinary) individuals are, to what ordinary people and
objects do as they engage in leading. Leadership-as-practice is about collaborative
agency (Raelin, 2014) and about weaving together co-evolving trajectories in a
movement toward the future (not the mobilization of future order in the present,
as in strategy-as-practice).
To exemplify the focus a leadership-as-practice study may take, we refer to the
work of Raelin, who brieﬂy describes in Chapter 1 of this volume a number of
activities that cannot be linked to single individuals but are rather inherently
social and interactional in their nature. These are scanning, signaling, weaving,
stabilizing, inviting, unleashing, reﬂecting (Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume).
Another example may be found in the work of Carroll and Simpson (2012) who
identify “framing movements” in conversations, which they label kindling,
stretching, and spanning (see Box 2.5 above which illustrates Carroll and Simp-
son’s (2012) analysis of the attention paid to the micro-interactions and dialogical
dynamics that make up leadership). Thanks to such movements, new realities and
rationalities, such as opening up or closing down the shared space of action, may
emerge. Although the focus of this contribution is on direction and movement or
a form of agency in ﬂow (see Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume), there are also
studies of an entitative character more traditionally focused on the practices
mobilized by formal leaders. Denis et al. (2010), for instance, show the
42
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

development of certain initiatives over time and the kind of practice that formal
leaders develop.
Discussion of comparative element II: Blurred lines
The “as-practice” movement has rapidly grown in the last decade as the approa-
ches that fall under such a label have helped scholars come closer to studying
organizing while organizing is taking place, something that has both a theoretical
relevance (ﬁlling a void in our understanding of “organization” as a phenom-
enon) and a practical relevance (coming closer to the experience people at work
have of this phenomenon). Practices are by deﬁnition “bundled,” and there is no
practice that makes sense in isolation. Practice is also a construct that directs our
attention to the ongoing, social nature of organizing and to its holistic character,
opposed to other approaches that present static snapshots and single out the causes
that lead to a certain result (Langley, Smallman, Tsoukas & Van de Ven, 2013).
Hence, it is a fundamental characteristic of the practice idea that there are not
diﬀerent discrete practices leading to diﬀerent discrete results. Rather, bundles of
practices are studied to understand organizing—what we have called the “entitative-
soft” approaches. Taking a relational approach and focusing on “practice,” rather
than “practices” means embracing even more the holistic nature of reality and
organizing in particular. Moreover, acknowledging the active role of objects,
representations, and materiality suggests that we take a fresh look at what happens
in organizations.
Most of the studies that are available at the moment in strategy-as-practice,
coordination-as-practice, and leadership-as-practice are extending a focus on
practices (the entitative-soft perspective) and thus on the building blocks of
organizing. However, although this brings many insights, one challenge of con-
sidering organizing activities from a practice perspective is that the formerly dis-
tinct categories and labels—such as strategy, coordination, leadership—might
actually collapse; they all become practices of organizing. It can happen that the
same building blocks (e.g., providing direction) can be part of leadership as much
as it can be part of coordination or strategy work. The question arises as to
whether the distinction among the ﬁelds of research (strategy, coordination, lea-
dership) still makes sense or simply represents a remainder of an entitative
approach. If so, the practice perspective would require an entirely new approach
to studying organizational phenomena, an approach in which we do not repro-
duce the constructs that we have inherited from more traditional approaches but
refer to all of them as “organizing in relation.”
We believe that it is valuable to understand that people “do” several “things”
at the same time; there is no sequentiality in our action in the sense that simple
chains of cause‑eﬀect relations are not possible to identify. But we are also con-
vinced that it may be fruitful to analytically diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent kinds
of social accomplishments and to consider them as complementary to each other,
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
43

all contributing to organizing processes from somewhat diﬀerent angles. Our
understanding is that the “as-practice” movement has a great potential to advance
those ﬁelds that have focused on single individuals and discrete phases of complex
processes (e.g. strategy, coordination, leadership), but to make such a contribu-
tion, the diﬀerent ﬁelds might have to be addressed with their speciﬁc terminol-
ogy. Moreover, from a practical point of view, when working with development
in organizations, it may be easier to design and participate in development
initiatives that have labels with which one is familiar, for example strategy. The
challenge is to change how we are used to thinking about such familiar concepts
so as not to get stuck in a static view of complex phenomena. In sum, for the
researcher it is important to be familiar with the grounds of the practice approach,
which are common across the ﬁelds. To which “as-practice” ﬁeld one is con-
tributing, will ultimately be a question of emphasis and empirical interest: What is
our research interest? What are we trying to understand? Where do we put the
empirical emphasis? What we have proposed is that strategy-as-practice has to do
with the production and enactment of future order, coordination-as-practice with
the stabilization of order by means of alignment of courses of action, and leader-
ship-as-practice with the emergence of direction for courses of action. Put slightly
diﬀerently, if, following Massey (2005), we conceptualize the world as a mesh of
co-evolving trajectories (people, objects, physical places, etc.), we could say that
strategy-as-practice has to do with the intentional production and enactment of
future relational conﬁgurations, coordination-as-practice with the stabilization of
relational conﬁgurations, and leadership-as-practice with the ongoing emergent
shaping of relational conﬁgurations.
As regards similarities and overlaps between studies focusing on strategy-as-
practice, coordination-as-practice, and leadership-as-practice, all three areas of
research focus on the practice of ordinary actors, which includes actors who do not
necessarily hold oﬃcial positions or roles as leaders or strategists and which also
includes non-human actors such as objects and materiality. The recognition that
objects are central to practices is probably best established in the ﬁeld of coordi-
nation research (see, e.g., Okhuysen & Bechky, 2009 for an overview) and
strategy-as-practice (e.g. Golsorkhi et al., 2010), but is increasingly highlighted by
leadership-as-practice scholars (Sergi, Chapter 6, this volume). Looking back at
the “as-practice” examples we have provided, it is possible to see that the same
examples might have been analyzed as instances of another kind of “as-practice”
modality if the researchers had interpreted the processes from another angle. For
instance, the study on the process of creative projects (Endrissat et al., 2015)
focuses on coordination but could also be read as a study of how leadership is
achieved in the interaction between human actors and materiality.
Although the presence of such overlaps may be surprising, even annoying, at
ﬁrst sight, one could argue that it is actually reasonable as reality does not come in
discrete units but is—according to a practice perspective—entangled and com-
plex. Knowledge produced about one aspect of the phenomenon, such as
44
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

“organizing,” enriches the understanding of other aspects of the phenomenon.
This implies that we need to develop more arenas in which the diﬀerent “as-
practices” can meet. The fact that the boundaries are blurred provides scholars
and practitioners with an intriguing opportunity to learn from each other’s ﬁelds.
Finally, although the phenomena of strategy and coordination have concrete
manifestations in the form of diﬀerent kinds of documents, which often means
that the study of practices is anchored, in one way or another, to such material
manifestations (for instance the production of strategic texts), leadership has no such
a material manifestations. This may be one reason for often anchoring the phe-
nomenon to individuals in formal leadership positions. It requires scholars to more
clearly deﬁne what they mean by “leadership” when taking a practice approach
and to discuss how to study this phenomenon. On the other hand, the notion of
leadership is also mobilized in organizations and such mobilization produces
eﬀects on the collective space of action—what Crevani et al. (2010) call the per-
formativity of leadership. In this sense the three phenomena, strategy, coordination,
and leadership, are diﬀerent as these notions are mobilized in diﬀerent situations and
with diﬀerent eﬀects, emphasizing the multifaceted understanding of processes in
organizations.
To sum up, although traditional studies of strategy, coordination, and leader-
ship may be placed in clearly separated ﬁelds and provide distinctive results, taking
a practice approach means that the boundaries between the empirical phenom-
enon of interest, the analytical framing, and, consequently, the ﬁelds of research
themselves become blurred. One may even argue that phenomena, analyses, and
ﬁelds collapse into one phenomenon (organizing), one analytical framework
(practice), and one ﬁeld of research (organization studies). We have put forward
the argument that this is reasonable—we have bundles of practices contributing
to organizing processes—but that there is a value in upholding the boundaries,
although blurred, to make the largest impact on theory and practice.
Conclusion
This chapter tries to help orient newcomers to the leadership-as-practice ﬁeld by
comparing related constructs on two important dimensions: “unit of analysis” and
“social accomplishment.” To promote discussion, we have had to simplify some
of the research positions and tried to emphasize (sometimes over-stressed) com-
monalities as well as diﬀerences, well aware that, in conducting research, some
analytic distinctions get blurred and commonalities may not be obvious. Our
hope is that the reader will beneﬁt from our interpretation of the positions that
we have sketched in this chapter and can more clearly see the contribution of
leadership-as-practice, its uniqueness as well as its interdependence with other
constructs. The two dimensions of comparison are important given that they are
at the core of a research project, making it necessary to reﬂect on them when
producing knowledge about leadership. This kind of reﬂection is, however,
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
45

seldom made explicit and some of the constructs are at times used inter-
changeably, as for instance in the case of leadership-as-practice and relational
leadership. In a similar way, questions about “what is the diﬀerence?” when it
comes to diﬀerent “as-practice” approaches remain largely unanswered, poten-
tially risking alienation of newcomers. We therefore saw the need to discuss these
issues in this chapter. We want to be clear that with this chapter we do not claim
to having deﬁned the ﬁeld once and for all, or that our distinctions are the only
or “correct” ones. Rather, we want to put some relevant elements on the table
and start a discussion about the need (or not) for diﬀerent constructs and about
how to trace (permeable and blurred) boundaries in a meaningful way that
respects researchers’ own convictions as well as helping a newcomer orient her/
himself. This discussion is, thus, relevant for those who want to embark on the
study of leadership by adopting a non-traditional approach. But it should also be
relevant for those people “doing leadership” at work, as it has implications for
how to proceed when trying to develop leadership. Depending on the “unit of
analysis,” the development eﬀort will have to be tailored in a speciﬁc way,
focusing on what the approach argues “leadership” is to meaningfully develop
leadership competence, which may be either individual or collective.
References
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). Managers doing leadership: The extra-ordinarization
of the mundane. Human Relations, 56(12), 1435–1459.
Barge, K. J. (2012). Systemic constructionist leadership and working from the present
moment. In M. Uhl-Bien & S. Ospina (Eds.), Advancing relational leadership research
(pp. 107–142). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Barker, R. A. (2001). The nature of leadership. Human Relations, 54(4), 469–494.
Blake, R. R., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). The managerial grid. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing
Company.
Blake, R. R., & Mouton, J.S. (1978). The new managerial grid. Houston, TX: Gulf
Publishing Company.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Carroll, B., & Simpson, B. (2012). Capturing sociality in the movement between frames:
An illustration from leadership development. Human Relations, 65(10), 1283–1309.
Chia, R., & MacKay, B. (2007). Post-processual challenges for the emerging strategy-as-
practice perspective: Discovering strategy in the logic of practice. Human Relations, 60(1),
217–242.
Crevani, L. (forthcoming).
Is there leadership in a ﬂuid world? Exploring the ongoing
production of direction in organizing. Leadership.
Crevani, L. (2011). Clearing for action: Leadership as a relational phenomenon. Doctoral Thesis.
KTH The Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Cunliﬀe, A. L., & Eriksen, M. (2011). Relational leadership. Human Relations, 64(11),
1425–1449.
46
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

Dachler, H. P., & Hosking, D. M. (1995). The primacy of relations in socially constructing
organizational realities. In D. M. Hosking, H. P. Dachler, & K. J. Gergen (Eds.), Manage-
ment and organization: Relational alternatives to individualism (pp. 1–29). Aldershot:
Avebury.
Denis, J. L., Langley, A., & Rouleau, L. (2005). Rethinking leadership in public organiza-
tions. In E. Ferlie, L. Lynn, & C. Pollitt (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of public management
(pp. 446–467). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Denis, J. L., Langley, A., & Rouleau, L. (2010). The practice of leadership in the messy
world of organizations. Leadership, 6(1), 67–88.
Drath, W. H., McCauley, C. D., Palus, C. J., Van Velsor, E., O’Connor, P. M. G., &
McGuire, J. B. (2008). Direction, alignment, commitment: Toward a more integrative
ontology of leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 19, 635–653.
Döös, M., Backström, T., Melin, M., & Wilhelmson, L. (2012). Isolated cases or wide-
spread practice? The occurrence of sharing managers in Swedish working life. Economics
and Business Letters, 1(3), 23–36.
Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 108(2), 233.
Endrissat, N., & von Arx, W. (2013). Leadership practices and context: Two sides of the
same coin. Leadership, 9(2), 278–304.
Endrissat, N., Islam, G., & Noppeney, C. (2015). Visual organizing. Balancing coordina-
tion and creative freedom via mood boards. Journal of Business Research, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.10.004.
Golsorkhi, D., Rouleau, L., Seidl, D., & Vaara, E. (Eds.) (2010). Cambridge handbook of
strategy as practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Graeﬀ, C. L. (1997). Evolution of situational leadership theory: A critical review. Leadership
Quarterly, 8(2), 153–170.
Graen, G., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Develop-
ment of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a
multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.
Grint, K. (2005). Leadership: Limits and possibilities. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hernes, T. (2008). Understanding organization as process. Theory for a tangled world. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Holgersson, C. (2013). Recruiting managing directors: Doing homosociality. Gender, Work
& Organization, 20(4), 454–466.
Holmberg, I., & Tyrstrup, M. (2010). Well then—what now? An everyday approach to
managerial leadership. Leadership, 6(4), 353–372.
Hosking, D. M. (1988). Organizing, leadership and skilful process. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(2), 147–166.
Hosking, D. M. (2011). Telling tales of relations: Appreciating relational constructionism.
Organization Studies, 32(1), 47–65.
Jarzabkowski, P. A., Lê, J. K., & Feldman, M. S. (2012). Toward a theory of coordinating:
Creating coordinating mechanisms in practice. Organization Science, 23(4), 907–927.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1951). Human organization and worker motivation. In L. R.
Tripp (Ed.), Industrial Productivity (pp. 146–171). Madison, WI: Industrial Relations
Research Association.
Koivunen, N., & Wennes, G. (2011). Show us the sound! Aesthetic leadership of symphony
orchestra conductors. Leadership, 7(1), 51‑71.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
47

Langley, A., Smallman, C., Tsoukas, H., & Van de Ven, A. H. (2013). Process studies of
change in organization and management: Unveiling temporality, activity, and ﬂow.
Academy of Management Journal, 56(1), 1–13.
Langley, A., & Tsoukas, H. (2010). Introducing ‘Perspectives on process organization stu-
dies’. In T. Hernes & S. Maitlis (Eds.), Process, sensemaking, & organizing (pp. 1–26).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patterns of aggressive behavior in experimentally
created social climates. Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 271–301.
Likert, R. (1961). New patterns of management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Massey, D. (2005). For space. London: Sage.
Nicolini, D. (2009). Zooming in and out: Studying practices by switching theoretical
lenses and trialing connections. Organization Studies, 30(12), 1391–1418.
Nicolini, D. (2012). Practice theory, work & organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nicolini, D., Gherardi, S., & Yanow, D. (2003). Knowing in organizations: A practice-based
approach. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe Inc.
Northouse, P. G. (2007). Leadership: Theory and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Northouse, P. G. (2010). Leadership: Theory and practice (5th edition). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Okhuysen, G. A., & Bechky, B. A. (2009). Coordination in organizations: An integrative
perspective. The Academy of Management Annals, 3(1), 463–502.
O’Reilly, D., & Reed, M. (2010). ‘Leaderism’: An evolution of managerialism in UK
public service reform. Public Administration, 88(4), 960–978.
Orlikowski, W. J. (2000). Using technology and constituting structures: A practice lens for
studying technology in organizations. Organization Science, 11(4), 404–428.
Orlikowski, W. J. (2010). Practice in research: Phenomenon, perspective and philosophy.
In D. Golsorkhi, L. Rouleau, D. Seidl, & E. Vaara (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of strategy
as practice (pp. 23–33). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oshagbemi, T., & Gill, R. W. T. (2004). Diﬀerences in leadership styles and behavior
across hierarchical levels in UK organizations. Leadership and Organization Development
Journal, 25(1), 93–106.
Packendorﬀ, J., Crevani, L., & Lindgren, M. (2014). Project leadership in becoming: A
process study of an organizational change project. Project Management Journal, 45(3), 5–20.
Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). Shared leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of
leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Raelin, J. (1997). A model of work-based learning. Organization Science, 8(6), 563–578.
Raelin, J. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7(2), 195–211.
Raelin, J. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership, Online First. Published online before print 25 November,
doi:10.1177/1742715014558076.
Rouleau, L. (2010). Studying strategizing through narratives of practice. In D. Golsorkhi,
L. Rouleau, D. Seidl, & E. Vaara (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of strategy as practice (pp. 258–270).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Samra-Fredericks, D. (2003). Strategizing as lived experience and strategists’ everyday
eﬀorts to shape strategic direction. Journal of Management Studies, 40(1), 141–174.
Samra-Fredericks, D. (2010). Researching everyday practice: The ethnomethodological
contribution. In D. Golsorkhi, L. Rouleau, D. Seidl & E. Vaara (Eds.), Cambridge
handbook of strategy as practice (pp. 230–242). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
48
Lucia Crevani and Nada Endrissat

Schatzki, T. R., Knorr-Cetina, K., & Savigny, E. (2001). The practice turn in contemporary
theory. London: Routledge.
Schedlitzki, D., & Edwards, G. (2014). Studying leadership: Traditional and critical approaches.
London: Sage.
Spillane, J. P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J. B. (2004). Towards a theory of leadership
practice: A distributed perspective. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 36(1), 3–34.
Stogdill, R. M., & Coons, A. E. (Eds.) (1957). Leader behaviour: Its description and measurement.
Columbus: Bureau of Business Research, Ohio State University.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17, 654–676.
Uhl-Bien, M., & Ospina, S. (Eds.) (2012). Advancing relational leadership research: A dialogue
among perspectives. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Vaara, E., Sorsa, V., & Pälli, P. (2010). On the force potential of strategy texts: A critical
discourse analysis of a strategic plan and its power eﬀects in a city organization. Organization,
17(6), 685–702.
van der Haar, D., & Hosking, D. M. (2004). Evaluating appreciative inquiry: A relational
constructionist perspective. Human Relations, 57(8), 1017–1036.
Whittington, R. (1996). Strategy as practice. Long Range Planning, 29(5), 731–735.
Wood, M. (2005). The fallacy of misplaced leadership. Journal of Management Studies, 42(6),
1101–1121.
Wright, P. L. (1996). Managerial leadership. London: Routledge.
Mapping the leadership-as-practice terrain
49

3
THE PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS OF
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE FROM A
HERMENEUTICAL PERSPECTIVE
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert
Why is an understanding of the philosophy of practice important
to studying and theorizing practice?
It would be easy to think that a philosophical understanding and the study of
practice are contradictory, because philosophy is often viewed as a discipline
abstracted from lived experience. In this chapter we argue that an understanding
of philosophy is crucial in highlighting the pluralism of practice as we both
experience and study it. This pluralism is evidenced in practice-based studies in
general, for example, Sandberg and Dall’Alba (2009) observe that practice-based
approaches in Organization Studies draw on communities of practice, activity
theory, socio-cultural theories, and actor network theory. Additionally, practice
scholars utilize narrative (Fenton & Langley, 2011) and ethnomethodological
(Samra-Fredericks, 2003; Nicolini, 2009) approaches. It is also evidenced in the
range of philosophical positions utilized by leadership-as-practice authors in this
book: for example, from Jackie Ford’s critical (Chapter 11), Barbara Simpson’s
pragmatist (Chapter 8), and Ken Gergen and Lone Hersted’s dialogic (Chapter 9)
approaches. Although there is no uniﬁed approach to practice, as Schatzki (2001)
notes, a central core is that practices are “embodied, materially mediated arrays of
human activity centrally organized around shared practical understandings” (p. 2).
The value of viewing the world in this way is that it draws attention to actual
practices—to what is done in relation to leadership, work, strategy, organizing,
etc.—by people in complex and open circumstances. In this way, practice-based
studies also oﬀer a way of bridging the theory‑practice divide.
As a means of situating our chapter, we turn to Feldman and Orlikowski
(2011), who identify three approaches to practice: empirical, theoretical, and
philosophical.


An empirical focus sees practice as the object of study by examining everyday
activities in organizations (e.g., Bechky, 2003; Kellogg, 2011). One example
using empirical data to illustrate leadership-as-practice is that of Crevani,
Lindgren and Packendorﬀ(2010, p. 204) who draw attention to the constructed
nature of leadership practice by drawing on interactions within a meeting.

A theoretical focus articulates the theoretical relationships and logic under-
pinning practices as a means of explaining them. For example, Engeström’s
(2004) activity theory identiﬁes and explains the development, structure, and
multiple relationships in activities and practices, while Feldman’s work
around routines and improvisations oﬀers a diﬀerent theoretical lens (e.g.,
Feldman & Rafaeli, 2002). Within the leadership-as-practice arena, Raelin
(2011) has theorized leadership-as-practice as the emergent collective order-
ing of ideas and actions, and as a more ideologically democratic leaderful
practice characterized by collectiveness, concurrency, collaboration, and
compassion (p. 204).

A philosophical focus addresses the ontology and epistemology of practice,
particularly that practice is an ontological formation organized around
notionally shared understandings. Schatzki (2005), for example, draws on
Heidegger to propose an ontology of practice in which social life transpires
in the connections between practices and materialities in a context. Similarly,
Gherardi (2006, 2009) argues that practices are intimately interwoven in
constructing social and organizational realities and that the many diﬀerent
understandings of “practice” relate to the epistemic position of the
researcher. She oﬀers an epistemology—an ecology—of practice in which
practices are studied as practical, situated, unstable, and political activities.
From this we begin to understand that “practice” from both general and
leadership-as-practice perspectives is a construct that is multiple and contested
(Geiger, 2009). This diversity can be explained by the various philosophical
assumptions that practice scholars work from.
The range of philosophies underpinning practice is vast: for a critical lens on
practice we need to go to philosophers including Foucault (1976) and Lyotard
(1979); for a reﬂexive lens on practice to scholars including Bourdieu (1972),
Garﬁnkel (1967), and Schutz (1972); for pragmatist-driven approaches to Dewey
(1938) and Mead (1938); for a socio-material lens to Latour (2005); and a com-
plexity lens to Law and Mol (2002). Barad (2003), for example, developed a
posthumanist performativity in which the world is “made” in intra-actions or
material discursive practices. This range is reﬂected in the varying positions taken
by authors in this book, whose work is based on the ontological and epistemo-
logical assumptions underpinning their work. Not least of these assumptions is
what we might mean by understanding, which has implications for how we
perceive the study of (and participation in) practice to be meaningful (c.f.
Gadamer, 2013).
Philosophical and critical basis
51

We suggest that an understanding of how philosophical assumptions inﬂuence
the work of research is key to recognizing and valuing the insights that pluralism
can bring to understanding particular phenomena (Cunliﬀe, 2011). The contrary,
a single paradigmatic stance, can lead to paradigmatic defensiveness; conﬂict over
deﬁnitions; debates about “validity” and “generalizability”; and whether “good”
knowledge is universal or situated, abstractable, or immanent.
In this chapter, we will begin by addressing three main philosophical positions,
and go on to explore how the various philosophies of practice relate to leadership-
as-practice. In particular, we focus on phenomenological and hermeneutic
underpinnings of leadership-as-practice, which incorporate the work of philoso-
phers including: Heidegger (1962), Gadamer (2013/1975), and Ricoeur (1992).
We then tentatively outline plausible articulations of the leadership practices that
can be viewed through each philosophical lens, along with associated character-
izations of leadership and its ethical stances. We conclude with suggestions for
research that arise from our philosophical speculations.
Philosophical underpinnings of practice
In explaining the multiple approaches to practice-based studies, it is important to
address the fundamental ontological and epistemological assumptions that under-
pin our work. Such assumptions inﬂuence how we view, study, and theorize the
phenomena of interest. It is therefore important to ask:

What is the ontological nature of practice?

What does “good” knowledge about practice look like?

What are the implications for studies of practice?
Elsewhere, in trying to answer these questions from a general organization
studies perspective, the ﬁrst author of this chapter has articulated three knowledge
problematics: objectivism, subjectivism, and intersubjectivism (Cunliﬀe, 2011).
Problematics are “a cross-disciplinary sense of where our questions come from,
what is thinkable and not thinkable in the name of social inquiry in particular
historical conjunctions” (Lather, 2006, p. 46), and are based on ontological and
epistemological assumptions that lend each problematic an internal logic and dif-
ferentiate it from others. A problematic inﬂuences how we view our topic of
research, what we see as “data,” how we collect, interpret, and theorize from that
data, and how we write our research accounts. More recently, she has examined
the implications for practice studies (Cunliﬀe, 2015). We brieﬂy outline the phi-
losophical assumptions underpinning each problematic and their implications for
studying practice (Table 3.1).
From an objectivist ontology, practice and practices are studied as objects
separate from the people engaged in them. Meaning lies within the practice itself
(Schatzki, 2001) and they are studied in terms of patterns, generalizable
52
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

characteristics, routines, and socio-material contingencies. This is encapsulated in
Nicolini’s (2011, p. 603) intention “to substitute the dominant belief that subjects
are the ultimate source of meaning and knowledge with the view that knowledge
and meaning reside in a nexus of practices … .”
From a subjectivist ontology, humans are very much involved in shaping
practices and researchers study the meanings that people give to the “mundane”
everyday work in which they are engaged, that is people’s multiply interpreted
lived experiences. Carroll, Levy and Richmond (2008) take a more subjectivist,
social constructionist perspective to study the diﬀerent ways in which participants
on a leadership development program articulate their practice. Subjectivist scho-
lars are also interested in the intentionality of people around their practices, as
TABLE 3.1 Three problematics (Cunliﬀe, 2015, p. 444)
Objectivism
Subjectivism
Intersubjectivism
Ontology
A real concrete social
reality existing inde-
pendently from us.
Humans as socialized
into that reality
Realities socially con-
structed in the inter-
actions, discursive
practices, language
use, and conversations
of people. Humans as
actors and inter-
preters, shaping and
shaped by under-
standings of “realities”
Shared, unique, and
contested under-
standings of social
“realities” created
between people in
and across moments
of time and space.
Humans embedded
in relationships with
others at many levels
Epistemology
Search for structures,
laws, systems, rules,
behavioral patterns,
categories, processes,
roles, generalized
identities, and rela-
tionships between
elements
Knowledge and
knowing occurring in
the mundane and
indexical activities of
people
A knowing in-situ
from within the
moment of interac-
tion and conversa-
tion. Meanings and
understanding
created ﬂeetingly
between people
Practice
Practice is studied as
an object or phe-
nomenon—abstracted
from the context,
situated interactions
and intentions of
people. Generalizable
characteristics, models
and, theories of prac-
tice can be identiﬁed
Practice is embedded
in the actions, inter-
actions, and conversa-
tions of people in a
particular context.
We need to under-
stand the actors’
intentions, interpreta-
tions, and study how
they talk about their
experience to gen-
erate interpretive
insights
Practice is complexly
interwoven in
responsive relation-
ships between
people, in which
meanings, actions,
and our sense of
what’s going on,
shifts in and through
time and across rela-
tionships. Insights
and transitory under-
standing are shaped
between people
Philosophical and critical basis
53

exempliﬁed in the following quote from a Federal Security Director talking about
why he holds meetings: “I have my weekly staﬀmeetings with the staﬀ. They
have their individual team meetings … I want them to tell me what they think
needs to be done. So we do have this cross-dialogue back and forth in terms of
what is going on out there” (Cunliﬀe & Eriksen, 2011, p. 1434).
An intersubjective ontology is based on the notion of “we-ness,” that we are
always selves-in-relation-to-others. As such, it draws on the work of hermeneutic
phenomenologists such as Ricoeur (1992) and Merleau-Ponty (1964). Our prac-
tices and understanding of such practices are shaped between us (intentionally and
otherwise), in situ, in our relationally responsive interactions and conversations
(Shotter, 2008). Intersubjectivism diﬀers from subjectivism in that it is not about
individual subjects and their interpretations and actions (I’s) but about the
betweeness or “we’s.” There are few practice-based intersubjective studies.
Working from a practice perspective, Küpers (2013) develops the related but
diﬀerent concept of inter-practices in leadership, which he says involves explor-
ing: “the interplay of entwined embodied materialities, subjectivities, and inter-
subjectivities
of
practices
of
leading
and
following
with
its
multimodal
orchestration of bodies and material artifacts and discourses” (p. 342). We suggest
that “inter-practices” fall within an objectivist problematic because the focus is
not on the interpretations of people within their lived experience but on the
inter-practices themselves. In the following section we move on to elaborate
phenomenological approaches to practice, which begin to conceptualize our lived
experience from a more intersubjective perspective.
Phenomenological approaches to leadership-as-practice
Phenomenologists are interested in understanding and explaining who we are in the
lived world. For a number of hermeneutic phenomenologists, such as Ricoeur
(1981), the hermeneutic task focuses on an interpretation of texts (which also
includes discourse), the polysemy or multiple meanings of language, and a critique
of the theory of knowledge in the human sciences. The three philosophers selected,
Martin Heidegger, Hans-George Gadamer, and Paul Ricoeur, additionally have
been concerned with extending the task of hermeneutics beyond an epistemolo-
gical one to an ontological one, in other words from only addressing ways of
knowing and developing a methodology to compete with scientiﬁc modes, to
also include an interrogation of ways of being, that is what does it mean “to be.”
They question why, when studying the world, we classify, categorize, and code
“objects,” when in our lived moments we do not experience the world in that
way. In the following discussion we outline the main arguments of each philo-
sopher that relate particularly to leadership-as-practice, and brieﬂy address their
implications for leadership learning and development. These are summarized in
Table 3.2 and explicated below. For a more general review of phenomenological
thinking and leadership, see Ashman (2007) and Lawler (2005).
54
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

Being and the entwinement of practice: A Heideggerian perspective
A number of practice-based scholars draw on the work of Heidegger (e.g.,
Sandberg & Tsoukas, 2011; Schatzki, 2005), in particular, Heidegger’s con-
ceptualization of Being, the life-world, entwinement, and intelligibility. In Being and
Time (1962), Heidegger argues that to determine the nature of Being, we have
ﬁrst to inquire into our own mode of Being in the world, to “get provisionally
articulated in [our] Being” (p. 27). Phenomenologists are particularly concerned with
the given social nature of our immediate lived experience or life-world, and for
Heidegger this means that Being cannot be conceptualized apart from the world and
the context in which it is embedded: Being is nowhere and everywhere because it does
not reside in an entity but in what is to hand—the many objects and under-
standings in our world. Our life-world has a throwness quality in that we are tossed
TABLE 3.2 The philosophical underpinnings of leadership-as-practice
Heidegger
Gadamer
Ricoeur
Practice
We live in a world in
which social interac-
tions, actions, prac-
tices, and meanings
are contextualized
and make sense
within speciﬁc spaces
of intelligibility (life-
world, entwinement,
being-in-the-world)
An intrinsically her-
meneutic means of
enacting an event of
understanding, that
involves dialogue in
two dimensions:
synchronically with
(others in) our social
contexts and diachro-
nically with our
tradition(s)
Narrative emplot-
ment of life and
selves in lived
experience. The
nature of ethical
selfhood
Leadership-as-
practice
Leadership takes place
in “everyday practical
coping” activities.
Authentic individuals
recognize they are
inseparable yet diﬀer-
ent; are sensitive to
taken-for-granted
conventions and
norms
A fusion of horizons
in which that towards
which one is orien-
ted, is situated in
understanding
through dialogue
between individuals
in which notions of
leading and following
are situated in the
context of mutual
inﬂuence
Individuals recognize
and understand the
importance of being
ethical selves in rela-
tion to others. Also
the nature of ethical
practice
Leadership
learning
Requires reﬂexive
attunement within an
unfolding world. May
only occur with dis-
ruption to unnoticed
practices
The development of:
a rich awareness of
the contextual
breadth and the his-
toricity of one’s situa-
tion and a reﬂective
return to tradition
Individuals are
reﬂexively aware of
how they narrate
their own and others
identities and worlds
in joint action and
interactions
Philosophical and critical basis
55

into a world without choice or prior knowledge, a world that is diﬃcult to fully grasp
because we are inseparable (entwined) in a relational whole of people, objects, activities,
culture, history, and so on. In this relational whole are speciﬁc ways of being (being-in-
the-world) which help us make sense because we live within spaces of intelligibility,
social interactions, actions, practices, meanings, etc. What this means is that because
we are preoccupied with our everyday practices, with getting on with whatever
we are doing, be it leading, nursing, driving … , we don’t notice or think about them.
Therefore, Heidegger’s (1962) argument is that everyday experience is about
primordial, non-deliberate ways of being and doing. We dwell, or are caught up
in a world in which we instinctively incorporate objects and materialities. Chia
and Holt (2006) draw on Heidegger’s work to argue that strategy unfolds in
“everyday practical coping actions” (p. 637)—based on strategists’ familiarity, and
mundane and “absorbed involvement,” with their world. In relation to leadership
this means understanding the practice of leadership from within the practice and
that the situation and site in which leadership is done will inﬂuence particular
ways of behaving, saying, and engaging with the objects and people around.
Leadership is reframed as a social practice inseparable from context, in which a
“practice and its members are co-constituted; neither can exist without the other”
(Sandberg & Dall’Alba, 2009, p. 1355). From a Heideggerian perspective it is
only when individuals are in relationship with a meaningful totality that they can
understand and be understood because the totality inﬂuences and orients the
types of activities, behaviors, and identities that are signiﬁcant and proper. A
practice therefore becomes intelligible through distinctions about what matters:
key activities, the tools to hand, and a “teleological structure” or purpose which
gives the practice its deﬁning features (Sandberg & Tsoukas, 2011, p. 343). Because
we cannot take ourselves out of the world, understanding means seeing the possi-
bilities that may emerge in our lived experience. Drawing on Heidegger’s contrast
of building (deliberate mental activity and motivated actions by individuals) and
dwelling (unreﬂective, unfolding actions), Carroll et al. (2008) develop seven discourses
of dwelling (habits, process, consciousness, awareness, control, everydayness, and
identity) from the ways in which participants on a leadership development pro-
gram articulated and rearticulated their practices. They propose that researchers
could combine building and dwelling as a way of developing more knowledgeable
and new practices out of previously unquestioned habits.
Also of relevance to leadership-as-practice is the attention Heidegger (1962)
brings to the interplay of two ways of Being: authentic and inauthentic. Authentic
relates to a way of Being that embodies care and commitment, whereas inauthentic
refers to living in a way that may involve imposed, normative, and conventional
modes of life that are pre-conceived, unexamined and care-less. We cannot
escape the latter, nor can we overthrow it—but if we are not care-ful, we can
lose ourselves in it. We therefore have to see what meaningful action we can take
and how we may act in authentic ways. Authenticity is recognizing our Being is
inseparable from others and our world, and also recognizing our diﬀerences.
56
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

Over the last 10–15 years, the notion of authentic leadership has gained popularity,
but often in a more building than a dwelling sense. In leadership studies, authenti-
city is seen as improving proﬁts and sustainable growth through self-awareness, self-
development, leading through values, leading with head and heart, and being yourself
(George, 2003; George, Sims, McLean & Mayer, 2007). Shamir and Eilam, for
example, argue that
authentic leaders can be distinguished from less authentic or inauthentic lea-
ders by four self-related characteristics: 1) the degree of person role merger i.e.
the salience of the leadership role in their self-concept, 2) the level of self-concept
clarity and the extent to which this clarity centers around strongly held values
and convictions, 3) the extent to which their goals are self-concordant, and 4)
the degree to which their behavior is consistent with their self-concept.
(Shamir & Eilam, 2005, p. 399)
We can even develop instruments to measure authentic leadership (e.g., Neider &
Schriesheim, 2011). Sparrowe (2005) argues that constructing “authenticity” in
these ways, is very leader-centric, narcissistic and does not recognize multiple views
and selves. He is one of the relatively few leadership scholars (see also Jackson, 2005;
Nyberg & Sveningsson, 2014) who draw on phenomenology (particularly the work
of Ricoeur) to explicate authenticity as a form of narrative self: “When narrative
recounts how an individual acts out of character yet, in time and through a succes-
sion of events, he or she comes to their senses, it portrays inauthenticity and then
authenticity in the story of a life” (p. 430). Authenticity in a phenomenological
sense is about understanding, being responsible, and being true to ourselves in
relation to the pressures and inﬂuences around us (Cunliﬀe, 2009).
How might those involved in leadership then begin to learn and possibly
change their practice? Zundel (2013) argues that from a Heideggerian perspective,
because we are thrown into an undeﬁnable world, we learn not by disengaged
reﬂection, as common in many leadership courses, but by a whole body “walking
around” and sensing possibilities in our worlds—a contemplative thinking. Phe-
nomenology draws attention to embodied leadership practice (Ladkin, 2008;
Sinclair, 2011), which connects with such a pre-reﬂective dwelling in and walk-
ing around. “Phenomenologically, practices and practising are embodied and as
such inter-involve various bodily modes of belonging, relationships and practical
engagements” (Küpers, 2013, p. 337). In other words, we live in a sense-world,
we feel practices, and practices are inscribed in our bodies. Heidegger himself
suggests that temporary breakdowns or disruptions oﬀer moments for reﬂection
within practice that involve questioning one’s very being in the practice.
Watch me unravel, I’ll soon be naked
Lying on the ﬂoor (lying on the ﬂoor)
(Weezer, Undone-The Sweater Song)
Philosophical and critical basis
57

Segal (2010) addresses the impact of such “unraveling” on our practical ways of
coping. He argues that the “conditions in which the philosophical question of
leadership becomes important is when we lose all sense of leadership” (p. 384):
when old taken-for-granted practices and ways of being are questioned and need
to be replaced with new. Breakdowns, such as a leadership crisis, and “unravel-
ing,” and feelings of self-doubt about our role, abilities, values, or relationships
cause us to question our everyday ways of coping, how we are “existentially” in
our practice, and require us to “feel our way” around the circumstances in which
we ﬁnd ourselves. Segal suggests that breakdowns can be an impetus for learning
leadership, but that this requires a “reﬂexive attunement” in which we question
our assumptions, ways of talking, and acting in our practices.
Interpretive practice as/for leadership: A Gadamerian perspective
In this section of the chapter we focus on Gadamer, and particularly on his
principal work Truth and Method (Gadamer, 2013 [1975]; note that the revised
edition has a useful afterword that directly addresses practice). This magnum opus
has some roots in Heidegger’s work, perhaps most directly in relation to Hei-
degger’s Ontology: The Hermeneutics of Facticity (Heidegger, 1999 [1928]), although
it clearly also shows connections to Being and Time (1962); Palmer (2010) pro-
vides further debate on these connections. Building on Heidegger, Gadamer
focuses on the universality of hermeneutics, focusing on reﬂection on and within
the everyday inescapability of interpretation, rather than situations of disruption
that lead to moments of particular reﬂective awareness. In doing so, he oﬀered
distinct possibilities for how hermeneutics was to develop, both as an approach to
method in the human sciences but more importantly as a way of framing under-
standing as ontology; or, combining both, as “the ontological grounding of the
humanities’ practices” (Davey, 2010).
Practice is then, for Gadamer, hermeneutic practice; interpretation is to be seen
as intrinsic to human experience and practice and is eﬀectively our way of being.
Thus every interpretation (of a text, object, conversation … ) is a “real” event, a
genuine presentation of the “being” of the thing, an instantiation but not a sum-
mation of it. From this point of view interpretations are realities, but they are not
exhaustive realities (c.f. Fristedt, 2010). How is this so? Gadamer approaches his
ontological characterization of interpretive practice by arguing that humans are
linguistic beings (partly through the idea that “being that can be understood is
language”), whose every experience is always already interpretive.
Although Gadamer initially builds up his characterization through a con-
sideration of engagement with works of art and texts, a picture of to-and-fro
hermeneutic dialogue within a fusion of horizons is argued to apply to every
event of interpretation/understanding. Thus a dialogue between persons takes (or
at least can take) the same pattern (Hibbert, Siedlok & Beech, 2014). But it is
important to understand what is meant by the fusion of horizons to make sense of
58
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

this. To do so, we need to begin with an understanding of the particular situation,
which is to say the horizon, of an individual interpreter. Every interpreter (that is
every individual) is historically and linguistically situated. Thus on the one hand, one
interprets diachronically from within a tradition as experience is grounded in
encounters in which the world: “… is constantly being handed over to us—traditur—as
an open totality. It is experience and nothing but experience. It is always co-present
when the world is experienced, when unfamiliarity is cancelled, when something
becomes clear, when insight happens …” (Gadamer, 2006, p. 48).
But on the other hand, one also interprets synchronically from within the
current social context of debate. And these diachronic and synchronic dimensions
(c.f. Vandevelde, 2010, who labels the dimensions “vertical” and “horizontal”)
constitute our horizons, tied together in language. What may be understood
between ourselves and a text or ourselves and another happens within language in
the interpretive space aﬀorded by the fusion of horizons: “ … the interpreter and the
text each possess his, her, or its own horizon and every moment of understanding
is a fusion of these horizons” (Gadamer, 2006, p. 45).
Thus the nature of experience is always interpretive, and represents an event of
understanding into which we are drawn. From this view, practice is the eﬀecting
of interpretation, in relation to particular tradition(s) that characterize under-
standing within a particular context or sphere of human activity. But this is not
limited to the unconscious workings of tradition nor is it, in the manner of the
natural sciences, simply about the interpretive move between the presuppositions
proper to that sphere, and the application of them in practice.
Instead, Gadamer (2013 [1975]) argued for the possibility of critical reﬂection
within practice; and Prado (2010, p. 151) took this further by arguing that
Gadamer’s project was generative, as its intent was “to instill openness to intel-
lectual diversity and possibility, rather than to inculcate intellectual practices and
dispositions … ” Malpas and Zabala (2010, p. xv) agree, arguing that: “Pluralism,
engagement and conversation are three key consequences of hermeneutical
thought and practice—and not only as it plays out politically, but also ‘philoso-
phically.’” That is, practice, from a Gadamerian philosophical hermeneutic per-
spective, therefore involves reﬂection and unforeseen possibilities emerging in
understanding. This is because individuals can enter dialogue on the “horizontal”
contextual dimension (Vandevelde, 2010), which potentiates new events of
understanding that add to the historical “vertical” dimension of tradition—and
vice versa.
Thus the dialogical nature (or at least potential) of interpretive practice allows
the interpreter to use tradition to speak to context and context to speak to tra-
dition. Over time, an individual’s experience of (interpretive) practice further
enriches their ability to engage in dialogue. For this reason Davey argued (Davey,
2011, p. 48) that “practices have their rules, but good practice is not a matter of
blindly following them [instead, individuals develop through] a prolonged prac-
tice of discernment.” Gadamer (2013 [1975]) and his followers see the dialogic
Philosophical and critical basis
59

development of the individual through the practice of interpretation—and the
interpretation that is practice—as intrinsic to the character of our social life. Risser
(1997, p. 115–116) puts it this way: “Hermeneutics as practical philosophy
uncovers (in its theoretical attitude toward the practice of interpretation) the
insight that practical rationality is unique to our social life as a natural human
capacity.”
Gadamer (2013 [1975]) also, following Aristotle, associated this intrinsic human
capacity in the practice of interpretation with practical rationality (phronesis). He
regarded practice as its own domain of knowledge that should not be displaced
by the technical rationality of the natural sciences, and was scornful of the mis-
understanding (or forgetting) of practice in the natural sciences: “ … since science
views its purpose as isolating the cause of events—natural and historical—it is
acquainted with practice only as the application of science. But that is a ‘practice’
that requires no special account. Thus the concept of technology displaced that of
practice; in other words, the competence of experts has marginalized political
reason” (Gadamer, 2013, p. 581)
Gadamer argued against the apparent triumph of technical rationality in “… an
age credulous about science to the point of superstition” (2013, p. 577). Instead
he suggested that the personal development of hermeneutic practice was not like
the acquisition or reﬁnement of some technique; this is because of the dialogic
nature of understanding, in which that which we seek to understand (or through
which we encounter understanding) speaks to us and addresses us in our historical
situation:
… in hermeneutics history co-determines the consciousness of the person
who understands. […] On this depends the whole richness of the herme-
neutic universe, which includes everything intelligible. Since it brings this
whole breadth into play, it forces the interpreter to play with his own pre-
judices at stake. These are the winnings of reﬂection that accrue from prac-
tice, and practice alone. […] In truth hermeneutic experience extends as far
as does reasonable beings openness to dialogue.
(Gadamer, 2013, p. 592)
What Gadamer (2013) is suggesting is that in understanding in genuine, dialogic
interpretive practice (and he argued that anything less is inauthentic), our basis for
understanding is in play along with that which we seek to understand. The stakes
are maximal, as our ends are matters for reﬂection (perhaps for discovery) along
with the means, in the same event of interpretation. This is because practice is not
reﬂective in relation to some ultimate purpose, but instead in relation to a con-
sistency in our practice, a consistency that is about historical continuity. Historical
continuity is established through the series of events of interpretation through
which we receive tradition and hand it on (c.f. Hibbert & Huxham, 2010). This
is a continuity that, therefore allows for change through generations:
60
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

It is thus that the guiding image of the individual as of the society is formed,
and in such a way that the ideals of a younger generation, precisely in dif-
fering from those of an older, determine them further—that is, establish
them—through the concrete practice of their own behaviour within their
own ﬁeld of play and context of ends.
(Gadamer, 2013, p. 594–595)
Overall practice, from a Gadamerian perspective, is intrinsically hermeneutic, and
involves dialogue that encompasses synchronic engagement with (others in) our
social contexts and diachronic engagement with our tradition(s). Through this
interpretive engagement, practice provides a continuity of understanding as
tradition, in and through the events of understanding that we (co-)create.
From this Gadamerian view of practice we see leadership-as-practice as a situ-
ated event in dialogue; inﬂuence is in play in these events, but those interpreted
as “leading” and “following” are both inﬂuenced. The situatedness of such
events—in both the social context of current debate and the historical context of
tradition—is important. Within this context the inﬂuence that enables leadership
is rhetorical, and appeals to individuals reﬂectively and holistically:
It is the realm of practice and humanity in general […] where controversial
issues are decided by reasonable consideration. The arts of rhetoric and
argumentation (and their silent analogue, thoughtful deliberation with one-
self) are at home here. If rhetoric appeals to the feelings, as has long been
clear, that in no way means it falls outside of the reasonable.
(Gadamer, 2013, p. 592)
But, critically, reason and reﬂection is argued to be open to participants in the
dialogue, and this means that the ends that an individual seeks to advance are
open to question, as well as the means (or desired action that is sought from
others). The dialogic nature of the event of understanding means that the pre-
sumed ends are not necessarily given, as (as discussed earlier) individuals under-
stand diﬀerently within the conceptual space opened up by the fusion of
horizons. Gadamer’s view of reasonable reﬂection is not a picture of a tidy and
easily delimited process, but instead a situation in which everything is in play:
What role does reason play in the context of human practice? In every case it
takes the general form of reﬂection. That means it does not merely apply
reasonable, eﬃcient means in order to achieve pregiven purposes and ends. It
is not conﬁned to the realm of purposive rationality. […] Hermeneutic
reﬂection makes ends conscious as well, and not in the sense of a knowledge
of previously established ultimate ends, followed by reﬂection about the
legitimacy of means.
(Gadamer, 2013, p. 593)
Philosophical and critical basis
61

How can one engage in learning for leadership if one accepts that the dialogic
nature of understanding means that both means and ends are in play (and there-
fore at risk)? For Gadamer (2013) this relates to grounding in tradition, and an
authenticity that is rooted in consistency with the past. This grounding gives those-
who-would-be-leaders some anchorage in their current social context, so that
their practices can be both a new instantiation and a continuing of the history of
interpretation.
This Gadamerian take on practice and leadership-as-practice leads to further
questions: about how the creative, dialogic relationship of self and other is to be
understood in hermeneutic experience; and about how the continuity of under-
standing between events in conversation and the long-term (hi)story of tradition
is eﬀected. For answers to these questions—on the relationship of self and other,
and the relationships between conversational time and narrative time—we leave
Gadamer and turn to Ricoeur.
Practice and narrative self: A Ricoeurian perspective
Practice is activity considered together with its complex context and in particular
with the social conditions which give it meaning in a world actually experienced.
(Granger, 1968 cited in Ricoeur, 1981, p. 136)
Paul Ricoeur (1981, 1988, 1992) has written extensively on hermeneutics, nar-
rative, and ethical selfhood. His work has rarely been taken up in the leadership arena,
but has much to oﬀer in relation to leadership identity and ethics (see Cunliﬀe &
Eriksen, 2011; Nyberg & Sveningsson, 2014; Sparrowe, 2005, for examples).
Ricoeur (1988) argues that we make sense of and shape our lives and our
identity as narrative: “To answer the question ‘Who?’ … is to tell the story of a
life” (p. 246). He suggests that we do so by emplotting or constructing a coherent
narrative from narratives we already know (e.g., narratives about those in leader-
ship positions—what they do and what they are) and discordant events and
situations we face. The narrative is never complete as situations are always open
to further interpretations and new meanings. And while we might narrate the
story from our own perspective, we do so from many intersecting narratives
around us—other characters are involved. He therefore extends Heidegger’s
notion of Being, suggesting that otherness mediates between self and the world, not
just another person separate from us but someone who is an integral part of who
we are: we are selves-in-relation-with-others, that is intersubjectivity. Therefore
our identity is a narrative identity, an “unending work of interpretation” (1992,
p. 179), and because it is interpreted in interactions with others, it is also a way of
connecting us to others (p. 117). Ricoeur also argues that human action is based
on description, narration, and prescription (1992, p. 114) because narratives help
us make sense of situations, evaluate them, and then decide what to do. As
Sparrowe (2005, p. 426) states, “For Ricoeur, narrative is a bridge between what
62
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

is lived and what is told, between tradition and innovation, between what was,
what is, and what might be, and between an author of a narrative and a reader … .”
The “self” is created by constructing a coherent narrative around what it means
to be in leadership. In this way, a person is both “a reader and the writer of his
own life” (Ricoeur, 1988, p. 246).
Ricoeur also argues that narration and narrative identity bring an ethical
responsibility because they are always in relation to others. “The actions reﬁgured
by narrative ﬁctions are complex ones, rich in anticipations of an ethical nature.
Telling a story … is deploying an imaginary space for thought experiments in
which moral judgement operates in a hypothetical mode” (1992, p. 170). Based
on the work of Ricoeur, Cunliﬀe and Eriksen (2011) develop the notion of
relational integrity: the need for those in leadership positions to be “sensitive,
attuned and responsive to moments of diﬀerence, and feel responsible for working
with those diﬀerences” (p. 1438). They argue that this shifts attention from
individualistic forms of leadership to more relational ones, where those involved
in leading recognize they are always speaking and acting in relation to others and in
doing so narrating meanings, organizational “realities” and identities in lived
experience. From Ricoeur’s perspective, ethics are not just institutional but are
also interpersonal, relating to ethical selfhood and how we treat others. This
means individuals need to develop a reﬂexive awareness of themselves in relation
to others and recognize their responsibility to act and relate in ethical ways.
A reﬂexive understanding of how we make sense of ourselves in relation to
others can be accounted for and conceptualized through the Ricoeurian (1992)
idea of emplotment. Sparrowe summarizes emplotment in this way: “The
emplotment of the self is not a process of winnowing what is distinctively one’s own
from all that surrounds one; instead, it is a process of crafting a distinctive plot
through which one’s own character takes shape. It involves experimentation with
provisional story lines, counterfactual pasts, and hypothetical futures” (2005, p. 432)
This process of emplotment provides for a distinctive approach to leadership
learning. In particular, it oﬀers four particular ways in which individuals may
develop both their own sense of self in a relational context, and the rhetorical
capabilities to use their sense and story of oneself as a means of working with
others. The ﬁrst of these approaches to leadership learning is through engagement
with classic (in Gadamer’s (2013) sense) narratives, especially those of a bio-
graphical nature (c.f. Sparrowe, 2005), and even more particularly where these
classics are seen as accounts of the enactment of virtue(s) (c.f. Schedlitzki, Jarvis &
MacInne, forthcoming). The second approach is through practice in narrating—
developing the ability to narrate one’s own story—but importantly, in the context
of life with others that are taken seriously and valued as oneself (Ricouer, 1992). The
third is to be creative about narratives and narrative identity. Ricoeur suggests
that engagement with literature can lead to more creative narratives (pp. 148,
162)—individuals can then re-story themselves through access to characters and
stories in ﬁlms and other media (Kelan, 2013; Schedlitzki, et al., forthcoming).
Philosophical and critical basis
63

Concluding discussion
We began by highlighting the philosophy underpinning practice-based studies in
general, arguing that the contested nature of practice can be traced to the various
ontological and epistemological positioning of practice-based scholars. We then
examined the implications for leadership-as-practice. In particular, we focused on
three hermeneutic phenomenological scholars and assessed how some of their
ideas have inﬂuenced—and may inﬂuence—leadership-as-practice. Heidegger,
Gadamer, and Ricoeur draw attention to the importance of social context and
lived experience and how our experience helps us to make sense. Heidegger and
Ricoeur particularly elaborate the relationship between Being/selfhood and our
world. Gadamer also illuminates the horizons within which we understand that
relationship: our historical situation which provides the ground of being and the
dynamic social context that opens up the possibility of interpreting (and enacting)
ourselves diﬀerently as relational beings. But these summary points should not
mask the fact that there are some tensions and distinct diﬀerences between three
philosophical perspectives in terms of their insights for leadership and leadership-
as-practice. There are three particular areas that we wish to highlight, each of
which could be a useful focus for further reﬂection and research. These three
areas of tension are: if and how individuals might shape organizations through
practices; how particular characterizations of “leaders” can be associated with each
of these perspectives; and the alternative stances on leadership ethics that ﬂow
from these. Each of these is addressed in turn below.
Shaping “organizations” through leadership practices
Each of the three focal authors in this account oﬀers quite distinct diﬀerences in
our expectations of what leadership practices may achieve within organizations.
From a Heideggerian perspective, leadership-as-practice is concerned with
everyday coping through interrupting unawareness and enabling authenticity
moment-by-moment. Care-ful (Heideggerian) practice thus aims at authenticity
in a relational context, but does so by (aiming at) enabling individuals to avoid
being subsumed in thoughtless practice in those contexts. Heidegger also argues
that the sleeping consensus of a population needs to be questioned for there is no
once-and-for-all, ﬁxed idea of superiority or truth. Thus, the authenticity of
everyone is crucial: it is the authenticity of Ginsberg’s Howl:
The bum’s as holy as the seraphim!
The madman is holy as you my soul are holy!
(Ginsberg, 2001 [1956])
An authenticity that is at best tenuously understood, that can seem strange to
those that are “going with the ﬂow.” And this kind of (leadership) practice casts
64
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

its inﬂuence constructively in the turn of a conversation, but destructively/disturbingly
perhaps much further. Care-ful, Heideggerian practice is not easily associated
with the conventional idea of leadership, which aims at inﬂuencing a collective
towards a determined purpose over any substantial scale. For the purpose is always
at issue, because social interactions, actions, practices, and meanings are contextualized
and make sense only within speciﬁc spaces of intelligibility.
Gadamer perhaps takes us further towards the conventional leadership of
organizations by surrendering such an independent view of authenticity. Rightly
associated with conservatism, Gadamer’s (2013) appeal to tradition implies that
our practices are always constructed from and judged against the historical con-
text. A shared tradition (one accommodated to some degree in a fusion of hor-
izons) thus provides a basis for this or that leadership practice as being understood.
But rhetorical and linguistic practice that appeals to tradition is in some ways led by
it—that which speaks from (with) tradition asserts itself in being understood—and
thus leadership-as-practice is constrained to surrender not to others in the current
social context, but to those in the past (c.f. Hibbert & Huxham, 2010). It is constituted
in a fusion of horizons, in which that towards which one is oriented is situated in
understanding through dialogue between “leader(s)” and “follower(s),” but the
leader may be construed as the tradition as well as the individual. Nevertheless we can
imagine skilful dialogic practice that deploys the content of tradition with a degree of
imagination and rhetorical ﬂair to oﬀer some preferred sense of direction.
Ricoeur (1992) brings imagination to the fore in emplotment. Fiction (drawn
from culture and tradition) provides a source of thought-experiments that allow
for variations in the narrative template for organizing ourselves and our stories (Spar-
rowe, 2005). Although not totally detaching practices from the ground of tradition as
the basis of intelligibility, this view allows for creative practices to reach beyond
the established historical context of understanding. Leadership-as-practice is
authorial when seen in this light; practices of narration and narrating are central.
Overall we see an interesting dynamic emerging between the perspectives and
the practices that they foreground. Gadamer helps us to see the practices of
grounding and explaining, in which connections to tradition and language are made
and the possibility of understanding is enabled. Heidegger’s work suggests prac-
tices of disturbing and detaching, in which the everyday practicing of lived experi-
ence under the sway of tradition is interrupted and observed. Ricoeur’s insights
show the practices of composing and narrating, in which an interrupted and some-
what shaken tradition is recognizable, but turned to new purposes. Holding all
three of these views in tension seems to provide for a plausible understanding of
what leadership as hermeneutic, phenomenological practice(s) may entail.
Leadership practices and leadership ethics
In the preceding discussion we set out diﬀerent hermeneutical perspectives on
leadership practices and oﬀered related characterizations of leadership. In this
Philosophical and critical basis
65

section we oﬀer a brief articulation of the ethical positions that can be associated
with each characterization. The Gadamerian practices of grounding and explain-
ing are associated with legitimating ends against the interpreted historical content
of tradition(s) (Gadamer, 2013). As such they can be characterized as supporting
deontological ethics. In contrast the Heideggerian practices lead to relational ethics
of care (Segal, 2010), as the equality of all and our interdependence are highlighted
(although there is also an eﬀort to disturb the complacent acceptance of this). The
Ricoeurian (1992) position also has been strongly associated with relational ethics
(Cunliﬀe & Eriksen, 2011), but the imaginative and creative potential of narrative
emplotment and engagement with ideal narrative ﬁgures suggests virtue ethics.
Thus overall, there are diﬀerent ethical stances and priorities associated with prac-
tices developed from each of the philosophical positions. Does this, then, make
“balanced” leadership a state of moral relativism, or signify conditions in which
someone is called to account in ways that are speciﬁcally associated with their
current mode of practicing? These are issues yet to be debated.
Emerging possibilities for research
To conclude, we wish to oﬀer three indicative suggestions for research that have
emerged from our philosophical speculation. First, we have outlined a number of
particular kinds of practices that are suggested by considering leadership from each
of the hermeneutic perspectives we have explored in this chapter. Ethnographic
research that walks alongside individuals in their contexts of practicing might
illuminate the degree to which our picture is useful, suggest alternative con-
ceptualizations, and perhaps provide an account of how the various practices are
enacted and connected over time. Second, research within the same contexts
might also show the degree to which individuals are ﬂuent in the enactment of
diﬀerent sets of practices (that is, diﬀering in scope and scale) and how we might
better characterize them and the eﬀects with which they are associated. Third,
extensive interpretive conversational research with those identiﬁed as representing
particular kinds of leadership practice would help us to understand the felt moral
strengths, tensions, and dilemmas as they are experienced.
References
Ashman, I. (2007). Existentialism and leadership: A response to John Lawler with some
further thoughts. Leadership, 3(1), 91–107.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter
comes to matter. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801–831.
Bechky, B. A. (2003). Sharing meaning across occupational communities: The transformation
of understanding on a production ﬂoor. Organization Science, 14(3), 312–330.
Bourdieu, P. (1972). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership-as-practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
66
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

Chia, R., & Holt, R. (2006). Strategy as practical coping: A Heideggerian perspective.
Organization Studies, 27(5), 635–655.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Cunliﬀe, A. L. (2009). The philosopher leader: On relationalism, ethics and reﬂexivity—A
critical perspective to teaching leadership. Management Learning, 40(1), 87–101.
Cunliﬀe, A. L., & Eriksen, M. (2011). Relational leadership. Human Relations, 64(11), 1425–1449.
Cunliﬀe, A. L. (2011). Crafting qualitative research: Morgan and Smircich 30 years on.
Organizational Research Methods, 14(4), 647–673.
Cunliﬀe, A. L. (2015). Studying strategizing through ethnographic methods. In D. Golsorkhi,
L. Rouleau, D. Seidl & E. Vaara (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of strategy-as-practice (2nd
edition) (pp. 435–450). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davey, N. (2010). Truth, method and transcendence. In J. Malpas & S. Zabala (Eds.),
Consequences of hermeneutics (pp. 25–44). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Davey, N. (2011). Philosophical hermeneutics: An education for all seasons? In P. Fairﬁeld
(Ed.), Education, dialogue and hermeneutics (pp. 39–60). London: Continuum.
Dewey, J. (1938). Logic: The theory of inquiry. New York: Holt.
Engeström, Y. (2004). Developmental work research: Expanding activity theory in practice. Vol
12.
International
Cultural-Historical
Human
Sciences.
Germany:
Docupoint
Magdeburg.
Feldman, M. S., & Orlikowski, W. J. (2011). Theorizing practice and practicing theory.
Organization Science, 22(5), 1240–1253.
Feldman, M. S., & Rafaeli, A. (2002). Organizational routines as sources of connections
and understandings. Journal of Management Studies, 39(3), 309–332.
Fenton, C., & Langley, A. (2011). Strategy as practice and the narrative turn. Organization
Studies, 32(9), 1171–1196.
Foucault, M. (1976). The archaeology of knowledge. New York: Harper Row.
Fristedt, P. (2010). Philosophical hermeneutics and the relativity of truth and meaning.
International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 18(4), 473–492.
Gadamer, H.-G. (2006). Classical and philosophical hermeneutics. Theory, Culture and
Society, 23(1), 29–56.
Gadamer, H.-G. (2013). Truth and method, revised second edition. London: Bloomsbury.
(Original English edition: 1975, London: Bloomsbury.)
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Geiger, D. (2009). Revisiting the concept of practice: Toward an argumentative understanding
of practicing. Management Learning, 40(2), 129–144.
Ginsberg, A. (2001 [1956]). Howl and other poems. San Francisco: City Lights.
George, B. (2003). Authentic leadership: Rediscovering the secrets to creating lasting value. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
George, B., Sims, P., McLean, A. N., & Mayer, D. (2007). Discovering your authentic
leadership. Harvard Business Review, February, 129–138.
Gherardi, S. (2006). Organizational knowledge: The texture of workplace learning. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
Gherardi, S. (2009). Introduction: The critical power of the ‘practice lens’. Management
Learning, 40(2), 115–128.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. Oxford: Blackwell.
Heidegger, M. (1999). Ontology: The hermeneutics of facticity. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press. (Assembled by his students from his 1928 lecture series and published posthumously.)
Philosophical and critical basis
67

Hibbert, P., & Huxham, C. (2010). The past in play: Tradition in the structures of
collaboration. Organization Studies, 31(5), 525–554.
Hibbert, P., Siedlok, F., & Beech, N. (2014). The role of interpretation in learning prac-
tices, in the context of collaboration. Academy of Management Learning and Education.
Available online early, doi: 10.5465/amle.2014.0004.
Jackson, K. T. (2005). Towards authenticity: A Sartrean perspective on business ethics.
Journal of Business Ethics, 58(4), 307–325.
Kelan, E. K. (2013). The becoming of business bodies: Gender, appearance, and leadership
development. Management Learning, 44(1), 45–61.
Kellogg, K. (2011). Hot lights and cold steel: Cultural and political toolkits for practice
change in surgery. Organization Science, 22(2), 482–502.
Küpers, W. M. (2013). Embodied inter-practices of leadership—Phenomenological per-
spectives on relational and responsive leading and following. Leadership, 9(3), 335–357.
Ladkin, D. (2008). Leading beautifully: How mastery, congruence and form create the
aesthetic of embodied leadership practice. Leadership Quarterly, 19(1), 31–41.
Lather, P. (2006). Paradigm proliferation is a good thing to think with: Teaching research
in education as a wild profusion. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 19(1),
35–57.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Law, J., & Mol, A. (2002). Complexities: Social studies of knowledge practices (2nd edition).
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Lawler, J. (2005). The essence of leadership? Existentialism and leadership. Leadership, 1(2),
215–231.
Lyotard, J. (1979). The postmodern condition. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Malpas, J., & Zabala, S. (2010). Introduction: Consequences of hermeneutics. In J. Malpas
& S. Zabala (Eds.), Consequences of hermeneutics (pp. xi–xviii). Evanston, IL: North-
western University Press.
Mead, G. H. (1938). The philosophy of the act. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). Signs (R. C. McCleary trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Neider, L. L., & Schriesheim, C. A. (2011). The authentic leadership inventory (ALI):
Development and empirical tests. Leadership Quarterly, 22(6), 1146–1164.
Nicolini, D. (2009). Zooming in and out: Studying practices by switching theoretical
lenses and trailing connections. Organization Studies, 30(12), 1391–1418.
Nicolini, D. (2011). Insights from the ﬁeld of telemedicine. Organization Science, 22(3),
602–620.
Nyberg, D., & Sveningsson, S. (2014). Paradoxes of authentic leadership: Leader identity
struggles. Leadership, 10(4), 437–455.
Palmer, R. (2010). Two contrasting Heideggerian elements in Gadamer’s philosophical
hermeneutics. In J. Malpas & S. Zabala (Eds.), Consequences of hermeneutics (pp. 121–131).
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Prado, C. (2010). Gadamer and Rorty: From interpretation to conversation. In J. Malpas &
S. Zabala (Eds.), Consequences of hermeneutics (pp. 147–160). Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Raelin, J. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7(2), 195–211.
Ricoeur, P. (1981). Hermeneutics and the human sciences: Essays on language, action and interpretation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
68
Ann L. Cunliffe and Paul Hibbert

Ricoeur, P. (1988). Time and narrative, Vol. 3. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1992). Oneself as another. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Risser, J. (1997). Hermeneutics and the voice of the other. Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
Samra-Fredericks, D. (2003). Strategizing as lived experience and strategists’ everyday
eﬀorts to shape strategic direction. Journal of Management Studies, 40(1), 141–174.
Sandberg, J., & Dall’Alba, G. (2009). Returning to practice anew: A life-world perspective.
Organization Studies, 30(12), 1349–1368.
Sandberg, J., & Tsoukas, H. (2011). Grasping the logic of practice: Theorizing through
practical rationality. Academy of Management Review, 36(2), 338–360.
Schatzki, T. R. (2001). Introduction: Practice theory. In K. Knorr Cetina, T. R. Schatzki
& E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 1–14). Abingdon:
Routledge.
Schatzki, T. R. (2005). The sites of organizations. Organization Studies, 26(3), 465–484.
Schedlitzki, D., Jarvis, C., & MacInnes, J. (forthcoming) Leadership development: A place for
storytelling and Greek mythology? Management Learning, doi:10.1177/1350507614560303.
Schutz, A. (1972). The phenomenology of the social world. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Segal, S. (2010). A Heideggerian approach to practice-based reﬂexivity. Management
Learning, 41(4), 379–389.
Shamir, B. & Eilam, G. (2005). “What’s your story?”: A life-stories approach to authentic
leadership development. Leadership Quarterly, 16, 395–417.
Shotter, J. (2008 [1993]) Conversational realities revisited: Life, language, body and world.
Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Publications.
Sinclair, A. (2011). Body possibilities in leadership. London: Sage.
Sparrowe, R.T. (2005). Authentic leadership and the narrative self. Leadership Quarterly, 16(3),
419–439.
Vandevelde, P. (2010). What is the ethics of interpretation? In J. Malpas & S. Zabala
(Eds.), Consequences of hermeneutics (pp. 288–305). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Zundel, M. (2013). Walking to learn: Rethinking reﬂection for management learning.
Management Learning, 44(2), 109–126.
Philosophical and critical basis
69

4
DEMOCRATIC ROOTS
Feeding the multiple dimensions of
leadership-as-practice
Philip A. Woods
Understanding the understanding of leadership
What is good leadership? Is leadership about the exercise of power? What is the
role of ethics in leadership? Such questions, and many others, are behind the drive
to understand the concept of leadership.
Much attention, accordingly, is given to addressing the phenomenon of lea-
dership analytically, that is to advancing how it can be understood and described
in better ways that then inform practice and reﬂections on leadership. Both the
movement to understand leadership as leadership-as-practice (L-A-P) and other
approaches, such as moves to see leadership as distributed, have sought to do this.
For example, L-A-P is concerned to learn more about “where, how, and why
leadership work is being organized and accomplished” (Raelin, 2011, p. 196);
Gronn (2002) argues that understanding leadership is better served by focusing on
a “unit of analysis” that includes varieties and patterns of distributed leadership
beyond the more familiar focus on the single leader or the senior elite.
I ﬁnd it helpful to see these approaches to conceptualizing and describing lea-
dership in the light of the sociological theory of analytical dualism (Archer, 2003).
The debate about the agency/structure divide in sociology concerns the question
of who, or what, makes society. Is it people (and their agency—a concept also
addressed by Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume); or is it social forces such as social
class, organizations, and culture? Both seem to be important. However, for many
the idea of seeing the latter as forces distinct from people is to reify them: it is to
render to them an ontological existence that they do not warrant. After all, if
there were no people, there would be no social class, organizations, and other
social structures. But if the view is taken that people are the sources of social life,
this ignores the very real eﬀects of social phenomena beyond individuals’

control—factors such as social class, gender, ethnic inequalities, and the eﬀects of
diﬀerent cultures and structural positionings within organizations that have tan-
gible impacts on people. How can this divide be overcome? One way is to col-
lapse the agency and structure into one entity—the “duality of structure”—that
encompasses them both (Giddens, 1979). In this conception, the rules and struc-
tures of society are internal to the individual and only made real when people act
and interact with others: they are “memory traces” (Giddens, 1986, p. 25). This,
however, compresses everything into the individual. Archer (1995, 2003) makes a
convincing case that to understand social life we need to recognize the power and
real eﬀects of both agency and structure. This means recognizing that agency and
structure interact continuously over time and that the elements of structure are
emergent phenomena of this process. Although there may be ontological argu-
ments about how or whether structures can be conceived as “real” phenomena, it
makes sense heuristically—because structure has recognizable consequences for
people—to envisage agency and structure as separate dimensions of the ongoing
ﬂow of social life. To take this further, in my view, it helps to articulate the
analytical frame as a trialectic process (Figure 4.1)—an ongoing interaction
between structure, person, and practice (or action) (Woods, 2005). Within this
FIGURE 4.1 Trialectic process.
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
71
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1
FIGURE 4.1

continuous interaction, social structures—cultures, institutions, and patterns of
relationships—emerge.
There are implications for understanding leadership. Conceived as a social
process in this trialectic framework, leadership is not reducible to individual actions,
nor to personal capabilities, nor to social determinants such as institutional inter-
ests, cultures, and patterns of relationships. Leadership is, rather, a process that is
emergent: leadership emerges from ongoing interactions between the person (the
self’s capabilities, motivations, values, intentions, etc.), practice (actions with and
through other social actors), and structure (the patterns of relationships, cultural
ideas and values, institutional structures, and resource dependencies within which
the person and their practice are located).
It has to be asked, however, whether a framework that is analytical in intent is
suﬃcient for a practice such as leadership. The answer rests in part on how we
understand practice. One way is to understand practice as behavior, a pattern of
activity and the carrying out of techniques and procedures. Practice in this perspective is
deﬁned by its outward features—that is, the actions and their consequences—and
the surface intentions that guide and motivate the actions.
Another way is to understand practice as a process co-formed with others and
through an interactive relationship with a well-spring of personal and social fac-
tors. These factors are an active part of practice, shaping and feeding the outward
features of action and in turn aﬀected by action and its consequences. In other
words, practice is continuously interacting with and being formed by structural
and personal factors as in the trialectic process illustrated in Figure 4.1. These
factors include the ideas and values that ground the intention giving rise to action,
and the meaning that action has or comes to have as it interacts with other people
and their actions. Practice, from this perspective, is an unfolding activity that is
co-constructed and involves enacting and creating knowledge, values, identities,
and power relations (Gherardi, 2003).
In a study of interpretations of entrepreneurialism for educational purposes, my
co-researcher and I found it helpful to recognize the layers of meaning that
contextualize the interpretations (Woods & Woods, 2011), and in particular to
recognize that these layers include “architectonic” principles, that is principles
which “relate to the fundamental structuring elements of a person’s overall view
of life” (McLaughlin, 1996, p. 12). Architectonic principles can take diﬀerent
forms: religious, democratic, economistic, spiritual, secular, and so on. A person
may be guided or inﬂuenced (explicitly or implicitly) by one or more of these
kinds of architectonic principle. The principles will have a particular detailed
content according to the cultural background, reﬂections, education, and ongoing
dialogues of the person. Architectonic principles, although powerful, are not
necessarily unchanging. They can be tested and altered through experience and
interaction with other social actors. The “overall view of life” represented by
these architectonic principles does not stand apart from practice, but imbues it
with preﬁgured senses of what is good, appropriate, and feasible. Ideas on what is
72
Philip A. Woods

good, right, and to be valued are part of these worldviews. Hence, ethical view-
points inform and are integral to practice.
In summary, two key points are apparent from the above discussion. Firstly,
leadership is emergent. The practice of leadership takes place within a trialectic
process of structure, person, and practice; and it is a continuous exercise of social
construction between interacting parties (Raelin, 2011, pp. 197–198). Secondly,
as well as knowledge, identities, and power relations, leadership carries, enacts,
and constructs values and ethical viewpoints.
Two views of the ethical nature of human beings
The analytical drive of L-A-P places a premium on recognizing and studying
what is. If it is accepted, however, that leadership carries, enacts, and constructs values
and ethical viewpoints, it follows that any understanding of leadership that has nothing
to oﬀer concerning the ethical and values dimension of leadership practice will
fall short. By its nature, study and research that are to be relevant to leadership
practice have to address questions about the ethical aspects of leadership ends,
processes, and consequences. They cannot suggest what is good leadership with-
out having some stance on what is ethically good. That stance then provides a
basis to consider whether any particular example of leadership is conducive or
otherwise to the well-being and development of those aﬀected by that leadership
(which includes those who are designated as leaders). It is important to explore,
therefore, with regard to any understanding of leadership its (stated or unstated)
viewpoint concerning what is ethically good for people. This applies to L-A-P.
Arguably, certain ethical viewpoints are embedded in much of the writing
around L-A-P. For example, a concern to understand how some people may be
marginalized through processes of leadership practice suggests an ethical interest in
disparities of power and patterns of unjust exclusion. If so, identifying and
problematizing injustice implies an ethical view on the value of social justice and
participation. L-A-P is viewed as possessing a “natural aﬃnity” with democracy
(Raelin, 2011, p. 195), which resonates with a recent focus on “collaborative
agency” that involves “fair dialogical exchange” (Raelin, 2014, p. 7). Yet Raelin
(2011, p. 204) also suggests that L-A-P can be considered more neutral than
“leaderful practice,” as the latter is explicitly based on democratic values and requires
“the co-creation of a community by all who are involved interdependently in its
development.”
The practice in any particular context that is the focus of study by L-A-P as an
analytical perspective is not of necessity or by deﬁnition fair and democratic.
Practice is also “contestation” (Raelin, 2011, p. 197). The co-construction of
practice can be the site of conﬂict, exclusion, the exercise of power and clashes of
interest, which may challenge and undermine social justice and democratic values.
People engaged in inﬂuencing the work and direction of an organization can
equally be carriers of institutional and personal interests and of cultural ideas that
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
73

position others hierarchically according to signiﬁers that may include gender, social
class, and ethnic background. Research on the practice of distributed leadership
provides examples of social positioning and power diﬀerences that emerge privile-
ging, for example, one gender as against another (e.g. Scribner & Bradley-Levine,
2010; Woods & Roberts, 2015).
We have to dig deeper into the philosophical anthropology underpinning L-A-P
to get a sense of its underlying ethical orientation in relation to democracy.
While L-A-P is “consistent with democratic practices and outcomes” (Raelin, 2014,
p. 14), is it in fact more closely aligned with or grounded in democratic values?
People are beings capable of the creative accomplishment of working together in
ways that generate leadership as a practice. That includes creatively co-constructing
the ethics and values in leadership practice which have ramiﬁcations within and beyond
the organization (Western, 2013). From the L-A-P perspective, people in organizations
are essentially relational beings. They do not act as individuals—that is, as the generators,
each suﬃcient to itself, of their actions. They are communicative beings whose inter-
actions are not conﬁned to instrumental exchanges that seek to cause or inﬂuence
change: their interactions include expressive exchanges about feelings, ideas, and
knowledge, and conversations that share meanings and are part of making sense of their
work, selves, and organizational contexts (Raelin, 2011, pp. 200–201). They are com-
municative beings who embody some kind of “overall view of life” and expression of
architectonic principles that frame a perspective on what is good and right.
I want to focus on a particular aspect raised by the question of whether L-A-P
is in fact more than consistent with democratic values but intimately aligned with
or grounded in them. The aspect I am focusing on is the ethical nature of the
person that comprises one element of the trialectic social process—that is, the way
of being that will lead to living ethically, or which at least is most conducive to
developing towards a life that is ethically good. What is it in the ethical nature of
human beings that enables people in leadership practice to be co-creators of
values and action that are ethically good?
To assist in answering this question, it is helpful to recognize two contrasting
views of the ethical nature of human beings—a philosophy of dependence and a
philosophy of co-development—and to show their connections with diﬀerent
understandings of leadership.
Philosophy of dependence
The ﬁrst is the view that, to be ethically good, people need to be directed and to
follow an authority and rules. The latter will curb and shape the imperfections of
the human being. This is termed a philosophy of dependence here. The belief
underlying this perspective is that ethical signposts can be discovered and ethically
correct action established by following the principle, theory, or vision that
expresses ultimate moral truths, and that an authority (a leader or set of leaders) is
necessary to show which is the right principle, theory, or vision and to translate this into
74
Philip A. Woods

rules for practical action that others may follow. The choice of which principle, theory,
vision, and rules is crucial. The key implication for the follower is that, to be part
of the good, ethical direction of change, they need to ﬁnd the right leader who
can make this choice.
The dependence cultivated by this philosophy is upon rules and the authority
of the leader. The nature of the foundation of those rules and the authority of the leader
can take diﬀerent forms. For example, one basis for such authority is the notion
that the correct ethical signposts can be found in a fundamental set of ideas—such
as a revelatory text, an ultimate ideology or a set of foundational principles—and a
leader who knows what needs to be done to shape the world so that it moves in the
direction required by those ideas. This leader is followed because they can identify
the authoritative rules and “principle-based theory” (Fryer, 2011, Chapter 2) that
show the true ways to be and act in the world and can work out the right action
from these rules or principle. Another basis is the charismatic visionary who is taken
to be the fount of true knowledge and sets out the path for people to follow. The
charismatic visionary may be the leader; or a follower of the visionary may embody
or interpret his or her beliefs convincingly enough to be the charismatic leader in
the name of the visionary. Leaders setting forth fundamental ideas or visions as
the lodestar of change are governed by an ethic of ultimate ends (Weber, 1970).
Another kind of leader could be ﬁrmly ﬁxed to following a utilitarian or con-
sequentialist principle: namely, the notion that “what happens to human lives”
(Sen, 2009, p. 213) as a result of an action is the overriding criterion for decisions.
In contrast with the ethic of ultimate ends, this is Weber’s (1970) ethic of
responsibility in which the political leader judges decisions according to their
consequences. In a further variant, the leader may use his or her judgment to
balance both the ethic of ultimate ends and the ethic of responsibility as the
situation requires, on the grounds that neither in itself is suﬃcient: the leader, as
Weber argues, has to face up to the tensions between these two ethics and come
to a judgment informed by both. The challenge and diﬃculties of making prac-
tical judgments informed by an ultimate ethic such as duty and a consequential
concern for suﬀering is illustrated by Sen’s (2009, pp. 208–214) discussion of a
warrior’s dilemma in ﬁghting a just war: Sen shows how Arjuna—the warrior in
the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata—leans towards the need to minimize death and
suﬀering while also recognizing the imperative to follow his duty.
My concern here, however, is not the virtues or otherwise of the diﬀerent
ethical orientations of leaders, but the relationship between followers and leader
encapsulated by the philosophy of dependence. In this perspective, followers—to
be able to choose the ethical way—are dependent on the leadership they are
given. They do not choose ethical ends or wrestle with clashing ethical impera-
tives. They require “conditioning socialisation” (Hellesnes, 1976, p. 18, quoted in
Moos, 2004, p. 7) which reduces them to objects that have to be shaped to serve
the right aims. The key implication for the follower is the imperative to ﬁnd, or
to be given, the right leader.
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
75

One manifestation of this is the Messiah leadership discourse that grew to be
particularly inﬂuential from the 1980s, in which the leader creates the vision that
imbues organizational members with a sense of direction and enthusiasm (Western,
2013, p. 218). The idea of the Messiah leader is compelling and attractive for some,
but it is also problematic. For example, it depends on heroic leaders being able to
live up to the ethical demands of such powerful leadership. And, as Fryer (2011, pp.
53–56) argues, translating rules (as promulgated by the leader) into practice is not as
straightforward as it might seem: followership requires degrees of interpretation and
discernment. More fundamentally, relying on authority and abstract rules can have a
deleterious eﬀect on people’s ethical sensibilities, as Montesquieu (among others)
warned (Dallmayr, 2007, p. 110). If people are reliant on authorities for answers to
problems, under the pressure of expectations those authorities can end up oﬀering
fake remedies or following avoidance strategies in an eﬀort to take people’s minds
oﬀthe real problems (Heifetz, 1994, pp. 72–73).
The philosophy of dependence is consistent with performative governance. Or,
we might say, there is an aﬃnity between the two. This is because performative
governance essentially encourages widespread followership, even though it is also
associated with advocating and almost idolizing (heroic, transformational, Messiah)
leadership. Performative governance promotes a nexus of institutional and cul-
tural pressures that deﬁne priorities and values in terms of narrow, measurable, and
economistic criteria, and neo-liberalism as the “common sense” way of under-
standing society (Ward et al., 2015a,b; Woods, 2013). In relation to individuals, it
promotes performative subjective autonomy. By this I mean a sense of having
some freedom to bring about change through one’s own volition and informed
by one’s self identity (subjective autonomy), but having also a predisposition to
use any such discretion (such as that facilitated by distributed leadership) to act in
ways consistent with a managed identity that is deﬁned by the values and prio-
rities of neo-liberal and competitive governance measured by narrow calculations
of achievement (Woods, 2014). There is, then, an aﬃnity between the philosophy
of dependence and performative subjective autonomy (Figure 4.2).
FIGURE 4.2 Aﬃnities
76
Philip A. Woods
philosophy of dependence
performative subjective autonomy
philosophy of co-development
democratic subjective autonomy

On the other hand, the philosophy of dependence is inconsistent with the
L-A-P perspective. L-A-P eschews the category of “follower” because it conﬁnes
the vast majority of organizational actors to a dependent and compliant role
(Raelin, 2011, p. 202).
Philosophy of co-development
A second view is that, to be ethically good, people need to discover and unfold
from within themselves—their deeper, enquiring, or higher selves—the potential
for knowing and feeling what is true and beautiful and right; and to do this they
need space, support, and opportunities to learn with others. This is termed a
philosophy of co-development here. The philosophy of co-development incor-
porates the subjectivist view of ethics (in which individual conviction and intui-
tion are to the fore) as well as the inter-subjectivist view (in which ethical
understanding is constructed socially through the sharing of diﬀerent viewpoints
and cultures) (Fryer, 2011, p. 8). Combining these two views is consistent with
the idea of leadership as a collaborative agency (Raelin, 2014, pp. 7, 9): the latter
involves both co-dependent parties interacting to create practice and meaning and
individuals generating intuitive ideas (which they share through dialogue).
The “co” in the philosophy of co-development is there to highlight the fact
that the practice envisaged by that philosophy is interactive. The person, includ-
ing the cardinal features characteristic of being human, is shaped and developed
positively or negatively through continual processes of interaction within the
trialectic process (Figure 4.1) and with other social actors. Interaction is integral to
understanding the ethical capacity of human beings. Recognizing this has been part
of the reaction (e.g. Habermas, 1987; MacIntyre, 2007) to liberal individualism
and the individualistic nature of Enlightenment assumptions. Such recognition—
of the power and inﬂuence of societal structures—does not negate the signiﬁcance
and value of the individual person. Personal development is not individualistic,
but individual and interactive. Radical analyses such as that of Marx emphasize
the power of economic structural relationships, yet also entail changes in con-
sciousness, self-knowledge, and assumptions about how we position ourselves in
relation to others.
It is important to emphasize that the interactive processes to which the philo-
sophy of co-development refers are both cognitive and aﬀective. Habermas’s
discourse ethics has been criticized for being too focused on argument, leaving
out the potential for self-transcendence which gives rise to an “aﬀective bond”
with others in the communicative community (Joas, 2000, p. 181). The aﬀective
and aesthetic aspects of relationships are crucial in understanding the practical
experience of approaches such as distributed leadership that entail dialogue, col-
laborative working, and shared learning. Research on leadership which is dis-
tributed suggests that where it works well it involves, inter alia, the creation of a
particular kind of social environment (Woods, 2014; Woods & Roberts, 2013,
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
77

2015). The kind of social environment created, I suggest, is one characterized by
holarchy—that is, a texture of social relationships in which people are valued
individually as people and for their unique contribution to the co-creation of a
greater whole. Holarchy is an expression of “organic belonging” (Woods,
2005)—an ethically grounded relationship between unity (the organization or
community) and diversity (the persons), which constitutes a social structure in
which the whole and the parts are equally valued. In addition, it is a social
environment which is characterized by shared valuing and appreciation of that
which uplifts and enriches the senses (including social relationships)—the aesthetic
dimension of social life.
This kind of social environment can be described, therefore, as being char-
acterized by holarchic aesthetic rationality, which involves a sense of belonging,
ﬂexibility, ﬂuidity, openness, respect, trust, and everyday relationships that are
mutually aﬃrming and carry a sense of equality (meaning that relationships are
not exclusively and rigidly deﬁned by formal hierarchies of authority).1 Its open,
egalitarian aesthetic rationality gives a diﬀerent sense of being and feeling from
instrumental rationality and, arguably, opportunities for a richer, holistic development
of human capabilities.
A philosophy of co-development is not readily consistent with the performa-
tive subjective autonomy referred to above. Rather, it has an aﬃnity with
democratic subjective autonomy (Figure 4.2)—that is, autonomous agency that
uses discretion to act in ways consistent with a self-identity that seeks holistic
development, cooperation, participation, inclusion, and concern for others, as well
as critical independent-mindedness (Woods, 2014). A further, more detailed
delineation of the philosophy of co-development is oﬀered in the following section.
Recognizing a democratic root of L-A-P
The previous section considered what it is in the ethical nature of human beings
that enables people in leadership practice to be co-creators of values and action
that are ethically good. The discussion was driven by the question of whether
L-A-P is more than “consistent with democratic practices and outcomes” (Raelin,
2014, p. 14). The discussion suggests that L-A-P is grounded in a view of the
ethical nature of human beings described by the philosophy of co-development.
To put it in its simplest and starkest form, the philosophy of dependence apparent
in the dominant contemporary policy contexts spreads followership and only an
illusion of leadership (even among most senior leaders): it promotes subservience
to the accountancy of performance measurements and the “naturalness” of
market values. By contrast, L-A-P spreads an awareness of the ubiquity of lea-
dership and eschews followership, and is more closely aligned with the philosophy
of co-development.
As an architectonic principle, the philosophy of co-development is in need of
some detailed content to help guide practice. The rich conception of democracy
78
Philip A. Woods

in which I have grounded my work on democratic leadership can help, I would
suggest, in providing that content. It is in a tradition that recognizes an innate
capacity for ethical agency that is ultimately of greater importance than the
formalism of institutions and rules. This human capacity is a key foundation of
what I came to term holistic democracy (Woods, 2005, pp. 11–18, 40–41;
2006; 2011, pp. 9–12), which is concerned with facilitating people’s ﬂourishing as
human beings and with recognizing and transforming oppressive inequalities and
injustices. A rich democracy (holistic democracy) entails, inter alia, personal
change that aspires to as true an understanding as possible not only of tech-
nical and scientiﬁc matters but also the “big” questions of enduring values,
meaning, and purpose, through the development of all the person’s human
capabilities (spiritual, cognitive, aesthetic, aﬀective, ethical, physical) (Woods,
2011, p. 10).
The Oxford philosopher, T. H. Green, is a stepping stone in the tradition to
which I refer, through his writing emphasizing the importance of substance over
form (de Sanctis, 2005). An appreciation of the key ideas in that writing helps, I
believe, in crystallizing the philosophical anthropology at the heart of holistic
democracy. Within the person there is a capacity to develop an inner sense of
ethical goodness and a related impetus to bond with others. People have the
capability to recognize that they can evolve towards a “more perfect form of
existence” (Green, 1886, p. 326) and that they are bound to their “fellow-citizen
in the unity of a common object, which gives to the private pursuits of [their]
daily life their value and spiritual meaning” (Green, quoted in de Sanctis
2005, p. 24). For Green this inner capacity is of divine origin. But the point
of his work, and that of others who followed, was not to infer a set of rules from
a divinity, but to argue that there is something in the nature of “ordinary con-
sciousness” that lays the basis for ethical and spiritual progress (Vincent & Plant,
1984, p. 17).
Without the kind of metaphysical certainty that an unquestioned religion may
give, it is much more diﬃcult, however, to oﬀer a unifying account of the genesis
of values that can guide action. Joas (2000, pp. 170–171) in his sociological dis-
cussion of the genesis of values argues, from a pragmatist perspective, that ethical
action is always experimental and that we can only develop our conception of
what is good and right experimentally in contingent conditions. Nevertheless, he
also argues that there is a need to seek values that have a reasonable claim to
universalism, as well as respecting diversity of identities and viewpoints, and he
gives room to the question of a “religiosity under post-metaphysical conditions”
(op. cit., pp. 165, 179, 186). What I believe this line of reasoning points to is the
importance of recognizing the human capacity for various experiences of con-
nectedness, described as mystical, spiritual, or in other ways, studied by William
James and others (James, 1985; Hay, 1994; Woods, 2007). Acknowledgement of
the necessity of recognizing some transcendent source of meaning through a sense
of connectedness can be found in the literature on leadership. For example, while
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
79

emphasizing the importance of understanding the collective and distributed
nature of leadership, Western (2013, p. 262) also recognizes the value of people’s
capability to draw from the resources of the “human spirit.” Other examples include
research by Beneﬁel (2005), Kinjerski and Skrypnek (2004), and Woods (2007).
Thinking back to the trialectic process (Figure 4.1), the development of the
person—aspects such as connectedness, ethical sensibilities, and self-awareness, as
well as capabilities that include skills and cognitive learning—is but one part of
leadership. There are multiple aspects to leadership that are distributed or democratic,
and these can be understood within the headings of person, structure, and
practice. It is helpful therefore to think in terms of “multiple distributions” and
to recognize that some aspects are more distributed than others (Woods & Roberts,
2015). An overview of aspects that may be more or less distributed (and therefore
more or less concentrated) can be given using the trialectic process as a
framework.
For this purpose, structure (drawing from Archer, 1995, as discussed in Woods,
2003) is subdivided into institutional structures (the framework of roles, resource
allocations, formal authority relations, and boundaries formed by committees,
departments, work groups, and the like), culture (the ideas, values, knowledge,
and beliefs that are shared and/or inﬂuential across the organization), and
social structures (the patterns and textures of social relationships). These are
important distinctions with practical implications for the study of leadership-as-
practice and the degree of distribution or concentration apparent in an
organization.
The person within the trialectic could in principle be analytically subdivided
too—for example, into the diﬀerent dimensions of human capability (such as the
cognitive, aﬀective, and spiritual) referred to above. However, the emphasis on
the holistic nature of the person, in which these dimensions interrelate and
impact on each other, suggests that for the purpose of oﬀering an overview of
multiple dimensions the concept of the person should not be segmented. Simi-
larly, practice, although in principle it might be segmented, is not subdivided in
the overview of multiple distributions below. This is because of its unfolding and
interactive character, which is complex, varied, and involves enacting and con-
structing numerous aspects of organizational life that include knowledge, values,
identities, and power relations.
The notion of multiple distributions highlights the point that there may be
diﬀerent degrees of distribution (or concentration) in each of these dimensions
of the trialectic process. The following is an overview of these multiple
distributions.
Structure
Institutional: Roles, resources, and authority relations can be designed in ways that
spread opportunities to be involved and recognized as contributors to leadership.
80
Philip A. Woods

This may involve strategies such as widening membership of committees, teams,
and working groups so that those not in formal leadership roles are actively
engaged in change, and allocating resources (ﬁnancial and other forms, like time)
that support engagement and development as co-leaders. Equally, some aspects of
institutional structures may be designed or work in practice in ways that exclude
or narrow opportunities for enabling people to be recognized, active, and eﬀective
participants in leadership.
Cultural: The kind of knowledge and values concerning leadership that are
encouraged and become part of the organizational discourse are important. For
example, an organizational culture in which leadership is viewed and valued as a
phenomenon that emerges from ongoing ﬂows of interactions across the organi-
zation and its hierarchy, and not one that arises simply from the actions of the
single leader or small leadership elite, communicates a message of inclusion to
organizational members. Seeing and valuing leadership in this way takes time to
permeate an organization. And it may well be that such an inclusive organiza-
tional message plays out diﬀerently and is communicated less clearly in some parts
of the organization than others. In other words, the knowledge and values that
construct understandings of leadership may be diﬀerentially distributed across
groups and sub-cultures within the organization.
Social: An open, inclusive social environment encourages participation in leader-
ship and the sharing and testing of new ideas. This refers to the holarchic aesthetic
rationality highlighted above in which relationships involve a valuing of
people as individuals for themselves, and a sense of belonging, social equality,
ﬂexibility, ﬂuidity, openness, respect, trust, and mutually aﬃrming relationships.
Such a social environment may not necessarily be a consistent feature across an
organization. Organizational members’ experience of relationships and interac-
tions can vary according to the diﬀerent groups, sub-cultures and departments
within which they are located or identiﬁed with.
Person
A variety of capabilities and personal characteristics are important in inﬂuencing
the degree to which people feel enabled and are prepared for being a contributor
to leadership. These personal factors can include conﬁdence, feelings of trust and
respect, motivating values that encourage participation, and skills and experience
in communication, co-leadership, and team-working. A rich democratic for-
mulation of leadership, such as that provided by holistic democracy, suggests
that the best leadership also entails a distributed capacity to exercise ethical
judgment and to be responsive to a feel for social justice and fairness and to a
sense of deep connectedness with people, nature, and spiritual sensibilities.
Personal capabilities and characteristics are aﬀected by the predispositions and the
prior experience that the person brings to the organization, and also by the
experience, personal reﬂections, and professional and personal development that
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
81

the person undergoes as an organizational member. Personal capabilities and
characteristics are therefore likely to diﬀer between individuals, and although they
are not ﬁxed, their distribution is in some measure likely to be aﬀected by struc-
tural variables such as position in the organizational hierarchy and professional and
educational background. It is important to recognize, however, that it cannot be
assumed that all such personal factors are more likely to be better developed
among the more powerful and privileged: a capacity and feel for ethical matters
and social justice, for example, may be more keenly developed among those with
less power and without formal authority; and people may discover and develop
previously unrecognized skills through new opportunities to engage in leadership
practice. The range of capabilities and characteristics that people have and how
these develop and emerge across the organizational membership will aﬀect the
distribution of engagement in leadership and innovative change.
Practice
Leadership practices comprise a complex and continuous stream of actions that
constitute meetings (formal and informal), communication ﬂows, decisions, ideas
sharing, and myriad forms of interaction. The actions that make up this con-
tinuous stream of activity arise, as the trialectic process suggests, within a context
in which the “inner workings” of persons interact with the structural features
(institutional, cultural, social) of their organizational context. Leadership emerges
from these day-to-day individual and collective leadership actions, which is to say
that their (planned and unplanned) eﬀects inﬂuence and shape the direction and
nature of the organization and the eﬃciency and quality of organizational services
and outcomes. The kinds of leadership actions and interactions that occur across
the organization, how they vary in diﬀerent contexts within the organization, and
the ways in which organizational members and other stakeholders are included or
excluded, are some of the factors important in understanding the distribution of
leadership practice.
This section has suggested a richly democratic formulation (based on holistic
democracy) of the philosophy of co-development. If such a formulation is
accepted as underpinning L-A-P study and research, L-A-P can be said to have its
roots in an understanding that the humanity of people is expressed through
their collaborative development as ethical and democratic actors. This is more than
saying L-A-P is consistent with democratic practices and outcomes. It is to
assert that good leadership practice, from the L-A-P perspective, advances the
values of a rich conception of democracy which includes the holistic well-being
of people and social justice. This section has also suggested that the notion of
multiple distributions is a helpful way of recognizing the breadth and challenges
involved in making leadership more distributed and democratic. In the next
section, I consider brieﬂy some of the implications for L-A-P of these
conclusions.
82
Philip A. Woods

Implications for L-A-P
Firstly, the conclusions of the last paragraph do not mean abandoning the analy-
tical drive of L-A-P. The analytical argument of L-A-P that the unit of leadership
analysis should not be the single, designated leader remains a powerful one.
Recognition of an explicit, democratic root, however, means that L-A-P is able
to extend its reach into normative questions that are inescapably part of leadership
practice.2 Some studies within the L-A-P perspective may be more analytical in
scope and purpose, whereas others may take a more normative and critical
perspective.
Secondly, following from the latter point, it would be valuable to make sure
that in these early times of the L-A-P movement an active strand of research is
developed within L-A-P that critically interrogates leadership practices. This
strand of research puts to the fore, for example, the investigation of conﬂict,
power abuse, and social injustice. An indication of what one aspect of this strand
of critical L-A-P research could look like is given by Ford (Chapter 11, this
volume).
Thirdly, critical L-A-P research needs to reﬂect on, deploy and develop the
appropriate conceptual tools and theories for its purposes. Ford (Chapter 11, this
volume) connects L-A-P to the work of Critical Leadership Studies and reﬂects on
gender and other bases for diﬀerence and exclusion in leadership practices. Con-
sideration can also be given to the distinctive values-base of L-A-P as discussed in
this chapter in terms of a democratic philosophy of co-development and to the
question of what it means to critically interrogate leadership practices from this
perspective.
Fourthly, the concept of multiple distributions provides an analytical frame-
work for such critical interrogations. The multiple distributions framework poses
the question: To what degree and in what ways are factors giving rise to leader-
ship distributed in each of the elements of the trialectic process (structures, person,
and practice)? This may be answered through a systematic audit of these elements.
A systematic audit can be a means of investigating L-A-P in one setting or as a
way of organizing the gathering of data in diﬀerent cases to compare diﬀering
realities of L-A-P across those cases. An audit of multiple distributions may ask
the kind of questions in Box 4.1, which can draw from a variety of conceptual
tools: for example, the notion of distribution of capitals—the properties of people
and groups, such as social and professional capitals, which inﬂuence perceived
relative worth, social positioning, and the exercise of inﬂuence and power
(Noordegraaf & Schinkel, 2011; Woods & Roberts, 2015); critical ideas such as
the proposition that participation in performative cultures promotes “responsibi-
lisation” rather than genuine involvement (Rose, 1999, p. 214); and the contrast
between democratic subjective autonomy and performative subjective autonomy
(Woods, 2014). The questions in Box 4.1 are by no means intended to be a
deﬁnitive list, but are oﬀered as illustrative.
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
83

BOX 4.1 MULTIPLE DISTRIBUTIONS FRAMEWORK
Structure
Institutional
What roles (formal and informal) exist to provide leadership opportunities?
What institutional mechanisms are there to facilitate collaborative working
and the sharing of ideas and learning from innovations?
To what extent is formal authority distributed across the organization?
Are there institutional mechanisms to facilitate participation in setting the
strategic direction and values of the organization?
Who allocates resources (not only ﬁnancial, but also time for example)? To
what degree is there devolved decision making about use of resources? Are
resources allocated to support engagement and development as co-leaders?
Cultural
What assumptions, ideas, and values does the organization convey about
what leadership means? Is greatest value placed on top-down leadership by
senior leaders, or is a message sent out that participation in leadership is
valued from across the organization?
To what extent is there a shared view among organizational members about
leadership in their organization? Do they view leadership as hierarchical, or do
they
see
and
value
leadership
as
a
practice
that
occurs
across
the
organization?
Social
How do organizational members perceive and experience relationships in the
organization?
To what extent are belonging, respect, trust, and feelings of support dis-
tributed equally across the organization?
Is the organization’s internal social environment experienced as open, ﬂuid,
and encouraging of boundary spanning by some, but as closed, ﬁxed, and
dominated by boundaries by others?
Person
Do people feel they are part of their organization’s leadership practice? Is it
part of their identity as organizational members?
What is the distribution of personal leadership capabilities and capitals across
the organization?
Who has access to personal and professional development opportunities? Do
these opportunities encourage critical reﬂection and the holistic development
84
Philip A. Woods

of human capabilities that support participation in leadership practice and
reduce inequalities in personal capitals?
Practice
In what ways are opportunities to initiate change and to work in genuinely
collaborative ways distributed among organizational members? In what ways
are organizational members included in or excluded from different kinds of
leadership practices?
Who in day-to-day practice is most inﬂuential in initiating and inﬂuencing change?
What are the scope and limitations for practicing democratic subjective
autonomy in contrast to performative subjective autonomy?
Conclusion
This chapter has sought to argue that the L-A-P perspective on leadership should
see itself as having a root in democratic values. The chapter has also introduced
the notion of “multiple distributions” of leadership and put forward an analytical
framework based on this to help in framing critical investigations of leadership as
a distributed and democratic phenomenon.
It has been argued that the democratic root of L-A-P is best conceived as
drawing from a rich conception of democracy (speciﬁcally holistic democracy).
Democratic practice from this perspective involves working subjectively and
inter-subjectively towards two aims that interconnect: development as whole
human beings, with ethical, spiritual, cognitive, and other dimensions, and
inclusive participation, which involves critically interrogating injustices and power
abuses and changing these through practice. Explicit recognition of this rich
democratic root would help L-A-P to extend its reach into questions of ethics,
values, and human well-being that are inescapably part of leadership practice.
Notes
1 The concept of holarchic aesthetic rationality is discussed in more detail in Woods (2014).
2 See Woods and Woods (2013) for a discussion that makes a distinction between an
analytical model of distributed leadership (DL) and an applied model of DL—the latter
involving implications about how leadership should be conducted. The article argues
that a deeper approach to the latter is needed, grounded in principles of holistic
democracy and social justice.
References
Archer, M. S. (1995). Realist social theory: The morphogenetic approach. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
85

Archer, M. S. (2003). Structure, agency and the internal conversation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Beneﬁel, M. (2005). The second half of the journey: Spiritual leadership for organizational
transformation. Leadership Quarterly, 16(5), 723–747.
Dallmayr, F. (2007). In search of the good life. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky.
Fryer, M. (2011). Ethics and organizational leadership: Developing a normative model. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gherardi, S. (2003). Knowing as desiring: Mythic knowledge and the knowledge journey
in communities of practitioners. Journal of Workplace Learning, 15(7/8), 352–358.
Giddens, A. (1979). Critical problems in social theory. London: Macmillan.
Giddens, A. (1986). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. Oakland,
CA: University of California Press.
Green, T. H. (1886). On the diﬀerent sense of ‘freedom’ as applied to will and to the
moral progress of man. In R. L. Nettleship (Ed.), Works of Thomas Hill Green, Vol. II
(pp. 308–333). London: Longmans, Green & Co.
Gronn, P. (2002). Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 13, 423–451.
Habermas, J. (1987). The theory of communicative action: The lifeworld and the system. Boston:
Beacon Press.
Hay, D. (1994). “The biology of God”: What is the current status of Hardy’s hypothesis?.
The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion, 4(1), 1–23.
Heifetz, R. A. (1994). Leadership without easy answers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hellesnes, J. (1976). Socialisering og technokrati [Socialisation and technocracy]. Copenhagen:
Gyldendal.
James, W. (1985 [1902]). The varieties of religious experience. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Joas, H. (2000). The genesis of values. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Kinjerski, V. M., & Skrypnek, B. J. (2004). Deﬁning spirit at work: Finding common
ground. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 17(1), 26–42.
MacIntyre, A. (2007). After virtue. London: Bloomsbury.
McLaughlin, T. (1996). Education of the whole child? In R. Best (Ed.), Education,
spirituality and the whole child (pp. 9–19). London: Cassell.
Moos, L. (2004). Introduction. In J. MacBeath & L. Moos (Eds.), Democratic learning: The
challenge to school eﬀectiveness (pp. 1–18). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Noordegraaf, M., & Schinkel, W. (2011). Professional capital contested: A Bourdieusian
analysis of conﬂicts between professionals and managers. Comparative Sociology, 10, 97–125.
Raelin, J. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7(2), 195–211.
Raelin, J. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership. Online First, 25 November 2014.
Rose, N. (1999). Powers of freedom: Reframing political thought. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
de Sanctis, A. (2005). The ‘Puritan’ democracy of Thomas Hill Green. Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Scribner, S. M. P., & Bradley-Levine, J. (2010). The meaning(s) of teacher leadership in an
urban high school reform. Educational Administration Quarterly, 46, 491–522.
Sen, A. (2009). The idea of justice. London: Allen Lane.
Vincent, A., & Plant, R. (1984). Philosophy, politics and citizenship. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ward, S. C., Bagley, C., Lumby, J., Woods, P. A., Hamilton, T., & Roberts, A. (2015a).
School leadership for equity: Lessons from the literature. International Journal of Inclusive
Education, 19(4), 333‑346.
86
Philip A. Woods

Ward, S. C., Bagley, C., Lumby, J., Woods, P. A., Hamilton, T., & Roberts, A. (2015b)
What is “policy” and what is “policy response”? An illustrative study of the imple-
mentation of the leadership standards for social justice in Scotland. Educational Manage-
ment Administration & Leadership. Published online before print 6 March 2015, doi:
10.1177/1741143214558580.
Weber, M. (1970). Politics as a vocation. In H. H. Gerth & C. W. Mills (Eds.), From Max
Weber: Essays in sociology (pp. 77–128). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Western, S. (2013). Leadership: A critical text (2nd edition). London: Sage.
Woods, G. J. (2007). The “bigger feeling”: The importance of spiritual experience in
educational leadership. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 35(1), 135–
155.
Woods, P. A. (2003). Building on Weber to understand governance: Exploring the links
between identity, democracy and “inner distance”. Sociology, 37(1), 143–163.
Woods, P. A. (2005). Democratic leadership in education. London: Sage.
Woods, P. A. (2006). A democracy of all learners: Ethical rationality and the aﬀective roots
of democratic leadership. School Leadership and Management, 26(4), 321–337.
Woods, P. A. (2011). Transforming education policy: Shaping a democratic future. Bristol: Policy
Press.
Woods, P. A. (2013). Drivers to holistic democracy: Signs and signals of emergent,
democratic self-organising systems. In S. M. Weber, M. Göhlich, A. Schröer, H. Macha
& C. Fahrenwald (Eds.), Organisation und partizipation: Beiträge der kommission organisa-
tionspädagogik (pp. 343–355). Berlin: Springer VS.
Woods, P. A. (2014). Hierarchy and holarchy: Leadership for equity and democracy in
performative school culture. Paper presented at Oxford Education Research Sympo-
sium, University of Oxford, 11–13 December.
Woods, P. A., & Roberts, A. (2013). Distributed leadership and social justice: A case study
investigation of distributed leadership and the extent to which it promotes social justice
and democratic practices. In L. Moos & P. Hatzopolous (Eds.), School leadership as a
driving force for equity and learning: Comparative perspective (pp. 148–170). European Policy
Network on School Leadership. Available at www.leu.lt/download/14539/c3_ep
nosl-2_del4.1.pdf (accessed 8 January 2015).
Woods, P. A., & Roberts, A. (2015). Distributed leadership and social justice: Images and
meanings from diﬀerent positions across the school landscape. International Journal of
Educational Leadership. Published online before print, 1 June, 2015, doi: 10.1080/
13603124.2015.1034185
Woods, P. A., & Woods, G. J. (2011). Lighting the ﬁres of entrepreneurialism? Con-
structions of meaning in an English inner city academy. International Journal of Technology
and Educational Marketing, 1(1), 1–24.
Woods, P. A., & Woods, G. J. (2013). Deepening distributed leadership: A democratic
perspective on power, purpose and the concept of the self. Vodenje v vzgoji in izo-
braževanju (Leadership in Education), 2, 17–40. (English version available at https://herts.
academia.edu/PhilipWoods).
Multiple dimensions of leadership-as-practice
87


PART II
Embodied nature


5
LEADERSHIP AS IDENTITY
A practice-based exploration
Brigid J. Carroll
Introduction
Imagine going into an organization as a leadership researcher with a particular
interest in identity and not being able to talk or communicate in any way. That
means not being able to question anyone about how they deﬁne and understand
leadership or identity and perceive how either and both occurs. All one can do is
observe people going about their daily work, listen to their ongoing conversa-
tions, and attempt to identify what is done that appears to be recognized as lea-
dership identity. That’s the practice challenge in a nutshell: uncovering what
constructs such as leadership mean in “whole” worlds where people in speciﬁc
contexts, interconnected in their tasks, produce something we call work. A
researcher cannot isolate their particular construct (in this case leadership identity),
invite people to talk to it explicitly, exclude other constructs that wander into
such discussions (such as management or teamwork or role), and rely on people’s
description of what they think or do. Such a researcher walks into the middle of
multiple, ongoing, unfolding, processes where their privileged construct, if it is
there at all, is intertwined with all manner of other social processes in the
complexities of organizational life.
This chapter recounts such a scenario and attempts to explore how leadership
and identity play out in pure practice. Of course pure practice is largely an ideal
and researchers tend to be given a starting point. The starting point in this case
was to shadow a team leader for a morning and learn about leadership in this
organization from observing their interactions. Although this sounds like it could
be a thoroughly conventional “follow a leader” study, this researcher assumed
that the so-called team leader reﬂected a role more than an identity and could be
doing any number of things (management, administration, human resources,

specialist IT work) over the course of the morning. In short she had made no
assumptions that leadership identity could be understood from studying this par-
ticular individual but thought this individual was as good as any to follow into the
life of this organization and see what kind of leadership activity emerged once in
the space. It is important to state from the outset that this researcher was theory-
led in making such distinctions and was bringing theory as a sensitizing lens to
assist in grappling with complexity unlike “the blank page” mindset of someone
engaged in a more grounded theory exploration. A range of critical, process, and
practice theories were helping this researcher hold leadership identity in a place of
curiosity while suspending assumptions of what leadership or identity might look
like and how those might be attached to individuals or groups. Although a
number of interactions were observed, this chapter will only focus on one.
Locating leadership in observations of interactions is not an easy enterprise, to
say the least (Kelly, 2008). It is certainly not straightforward to diﬀerentiate lea-
dership from other social processes that happen in work environments such as
management and technical expertise. One has the issue of deciding what is lea-
dership and what is not. Researchers therefore tend to combine observations with
interviews as a result to provide a point of calibration between how someone(s)
attributes or talks to leadership as opposed to how they practice leadership. This
can create its own issues where talk of leadership often contradicts practice of
leadership. For instance Sveningsson and Larsson (2006) talked to a manager who
aﬃrmed his leadership as transformational and visionary but who was observed
doing very mundane and routine managerial/administrative work. The researchers
concluded that the subject of this study might be indicative of many knowledge-
type workers thrust into managerial roles who create a fantasy leadership identity
as opposed to any real leadership practice.
Clearly talking about leadership and doing leadership do not always equate to
the same thing. Equally clearly, this phenomena we call identity would appear to
sit on the more intangible and abstract end of the organizational construct scale. If
I propose to investigate identity through predominantly observing leadership
practice as opposed to interviewing subjects about their leadership practice then I
have a considerable challenge on my hands. So why would I take this on? When
academics discuss identity in a research-related piece of writing like this one, it
can often sound esoteric, objectiﬁed, and somehow diﬀerent from how most of
us identify and are identiﬁed as “who we are” multiple times a day. Yet, identity
is considered absolutely central to contemporary existence and is one of the big
diﬀerentiators between our modern society and more traditional ones (Giddens,
1991). Given the practice context in this identity chapter, I seek to engage with
identity as intimate, intuitive, and resolutely “common,” albeit ﬂuid and ambig-
uous in leadership moments and episodes, and seek to demonstrate how seeing
and working in identity ways can shape and impact leadership practice.
This chapter will be built around an interaction that the author observed on a
visit to a high tech, high growth, rapid pace, entrepreneurial, medium-sized
92
Brigid J. Carroll

business. Both the team leader and this interaction leader were chosen by the
organization as exemplars of the kind of leadership that occurred in this context.
This interaction then becomes a site to interrogate the identity emergence and
dynamics of the leadership that did (or did not) shape the work of one of its
teams. A layering of conceptual material from literatures that help recognize and
work with identity will be introduced: practice, practice-oriented identity studies,
and leadership identity. The overall intent is to explore how identity impacts
leadership practice and whether it is possible to access identity work without
predominantly relying on collecting “talk” of leadership practice. I propose that a
practice orientation to both leadership and identity has the potential to oﬀer
unique insight into the mutual construction of leadership identity by both orga-
nization and subject, and holds some promise of not over-estimating either the
subject or the context in such a process.
A stand-up meeting
Picture a very large, open plan room with approximately 100 people in. Those
100 people are sitting in front of computers in rows. Most of the rows are hor-
izontal with pods of about 16 people facing each other. A number of long ver-
tical rows bisect the room and seemingly construct boundaries that carve the
room up into a number of areas or rectangular spaces. That all sounds very
ordered and organized but the room doesn’t feel that way at all. People are
standing, chatting, and leaning over their stations, bags are on the ﬂoor, books
(science ﬁction mostly) pile awkwardly on desks, lots of cartoons and reproduced
visuals are pinned up behind computers and small toys, ornaments, ﬁgurines
perch on computers and printers and in fact on any available technology. You
wouldn’t call it a loud room at all as people seem to talk fairly quietly between
themselves but it’s casual, relaxed, untidy, and personal. On the walls are a whole
lot of work charts. Some of them are graphs showing work completed and many
are tables of post-it notes on the move from the left-hand column to the right-
hand as work is moved through “ready,” “doing,” “testing,” and “completed”
stages. By the quantity of graphs and tables on the walls, it is clear there are a
number of teams in this room and they are pretty busy going by the sheer
quantity of post-it notes at varying points of completion.
The team on which we are going to focus is in the far right of the room in the
corner. When I get there they are all sitting at their desks and working on their
computers. Like all the teams in this hall, they develop complex software and
online infrastructure. I perch on an unoccupied chair watching them. Although
some work alone, many work together in front of multiple screens. It’s not silent
and intent work like somehow I have pictured software construction to be.
There’s gentle talking between people, multiple screens ﬂying up on computers,
people looking at them and away and then back again, people walking round and
on the move and swiveling chairs to join in to other conversations and swivel
Leadership as identity
93

back again. Although it seems discontinuous work in the sense of people moving
between diﬀerent modes, it still seems like everyone has their own work on
which they are focusing.
There’s a team leader I’ve been shadowing for the morning. Let’s call him Dan
after one of the science ﬁction authors piled up on his desk. Dan would be in his
early 30s and is wearing super casual jeans, brown T-shirt, sneakers, and a baseball
cap—which doesn’t make him stand out given combinations of those constitute a
sort of uniform in this room. He has a team of about eight. His team of eight
encompasses a number of young women and men who look fresh out of uni-
versity (assuming they are out of university as the organization does have an
internship scheme) and some older men (40s). One of the women smiles at me and
strikes up a conversation about what she is doing. In the midst of that conversation
she glances at Dan and says “I see the koosch ball. It’s team time.”
I look up and see Dan has got a koosch ball out of the drawer of his desk. It’s
an old, battered one that looks like it has got lots of use. He’s still sitting at his
chair, which is in a vertical row facing away from his team where some of the
other team leaders sit, and he’s lightly tossing it from hand to hand. That action is
visible from where his team are sitting. No-one jumps up or ﬂicks to attention
but slowly over the next few minutes I start to notice them disentangling from
their work. Some push their chairs back and swivel around looking around the
area, some speed up their keyboard work as if they need to save or send quickly,
while others begin what sounds to be a more casual conversation over greater
distances with people further away. Dan himself starts to talk intently to one of
his team members all the while bouncing the koosch ball. Somehow things feel
in limbo as if people are transitioning into something else without a word being
spoken. After a few minutes Dan gets up and walks towards the closest bank of
post-it notes and starts to move some of them. People slowly join him when
ready and there’s spontaneous chat as people point to post-it notes. Things get
quite animated with lots of laughter. The last few in the team come up to the
board and without me quite noticing how they do so, they form a more formal
circle and go quiet.
Dan is holding the koosch ball and he starts to talk. There’s no formal opening
up of the conversation and he seems to start as if this conversation is continuing on
from one they have all had prior. He seems to be ﬁlling people in on where work
is at and it sounds pretty frank to me. There’s comments like “I’m not sure where we
are heading on this … ” and “we thought we’d be done here but it’s obvious we
aren’t … .” The team members listen but don’t join in. Then he stops, glances
round the circle, and throws the koosch ball to someone; that someone simply
recounts what they are working on individually. There isn’t much eye contact
and again the group listens. Dan listens too. When that person stops they look
around for a moment and throw the koosch ball to someone else. And on it goes.
One of the older guys (let’s call him Spike) has more energy than others. He
hops from foot to foot, makes more eye contact than anyone else, and seems to
94
Brigid J. Carroll

be barely suppressing a desire to speak. That is unusual as no-one so far has
openly pre-empted wanting it. On getting the koosch ball he launches into a
very animated account of trying to solve a bug or glitch in the system without
being able to successfully locate it. At this point spontaneous conversation breaks
out and others join in and it’s actually becoming a conversation where people are
genuinely interacting. The conversation goes to and from Spike as more than half
the group joins in. Dan stays fairly quiet at this point but shows he is engaged by
nodding, making one-word-type comments (“yup,” “true”). After 3 or 4 minutes
he joins in. He says, “So there’s two ways being suggested to move on this thing
right?” He looks at Spike and Spike nods and leaps in again gesticulating wildly
and adding other dimensions of this search for a bug or as he puts it “more than
one.” Again people look up and begin to nod and join in. Another few minutes
pass and Spike eventually passes on the koosch ball but not until completing his
spiel to the degree he wants to.
Everyone has had a go and the last person throws the ball back to Dan. Dan
tosses the ball in his hand and says “we all good to go on?”, but doesn’t seem to
expect an answer and no-one seems to expect to give him one. Dan glances at his
watch and rushes oﬀto his next meeting. Given I’m shadowing, I rush oﬀtoo
but I glance back to see Spike still standing with a couple of people who he had
ﬁred up in the stand-up meeting. Still gesticulating and still talking furiously
between them.
Through the lens of practice, identity, and leadership
There’s nothing about this story I imagine that would appear dramatic or unusual.
Some readers would smile in recognition at the baseball cap, ﬁgurines on com-
puters, and the series of post-it notes inviting movement on the walls. They
would be those who know the feel of an IT space perhaps. Others could equally
be shaking their head at a space that seems to run on such casual, quirky, non-
urgent lines. They could be those whose own work space has a very diﬀerent
rhythm. Regardless of how familiar or alien this story is, it should be recognizable
as a representation of work practice or of what really happens. Before we inter-
rogate the identity and leadership in it, however, let’s put words to what it means
to take a practice perspective.
Practice
Attention to practice is driven by a sense of a gulf between researcher treatments
of topics versus the lived experience of them and a sense that much of our
research seems to “strip out most of what matters” (Weick, 2007, p. 18). Practice
theory therefore begins by asking the question “what do practitioners experience
‘out in the real world’” (Weick, 2003, p. 453) although, in contrast with how it
might appear, that is anything but a straightforward question. In fact, answering
Leadership as identity
95

that question means an entirely diﬀerent kind of research attention and inquiry.
Out in the “real world” practitioners do not tend to abstract and separate out
processes and treat them as “stand-alone entities.” In the “real world,” practi-
tioners encounter processes such as leadership “in a holistic manner” as “a
meaningful, unfolding totality” (Sandberg & Tsoukas, 2011, p. 341). “What
people actually do” (Carter, Clegg, & Kornberger, 2008, p. 88) is not easily
captured by any research that works predominantly with practitioner’s cognitive
accounts of analyses of pre-set independent constructs such as leadership.
The premise we are oﬀering here is that practice theory invites us closer to the
lived reality of what people actually do. To do so it needs to grapple with a
number of theoretical challenges. The ﬁrst is the inherent situatedness, relation-
ality, and interdependence of any self, other, artifacts, and contexts. That means
any practice pursuit of identity and leadership engages with them amidst rela-
tionships, artifacts, and contexts. The second is the temporality of existence where
action cannot be neatly sequenced as in a ﬂowchart but is instead “entangled” in
“anticipation, uncertainties, and urgency” (Nicolini, 2009, p. 123) meaning
practitioners negotiate choice, decisions, and ambiguity at every step. This makes
things like identity and leadership more of a practical accomplishment than the
managed project that appears in many of our textbooks.
If we put together the relational and temporal principles of practice theory
then we end up with a focus on what Dreyfus (1991, p. 69) has called “absorbed
coping” where practitioners are immersed and embodied in a whole inter-
connected world. Much of the time this is routine, automatic and below the
threshold of a cognitive, rational grasp but some of the time, when things
become confused or unpredictable (something Dreyfus calls a temporary break-
down), we move to “involved thematic deliberation” (Dreyfus, 1991, pp. 72–73)
or what Yanow and Tsoukas (2009) refer to as “analytic reﬂection” where we
consciously pay attention to how and what we are engaging with. We would
propose that identity and leadership through a practice lens are accomplished
through both absorbed coping and involved thematic deliberation.
Our account of the standing meeting earlier in the chapter is thus an account
of the “absorbed coping” of Dan and his team. At this stage of the chapter you
should have a sense of this team amidst their world surrounded by the objects and
people that constitute such a world. Any leadership achieved by anyone is done
amidst rows of computer monitors, post-it notes, youth in jeans and sneakers,
pyramids of science ﬁction books, cult series ﬁgurines, and reprinted cartoons. In
most leadership literature, the everyday clutter and direct spatial context of lea-
dership is usually absent or at best referred to only tangentially and minimally.
However, it should be clear that any leadership that might happen in this space is
constrained and enabled by this space and the objects and people in it. Given that
no-one has single oﬃces, conversations happen when people swivel their chairs
close to others and begin talking where they are or as people walk through or
from/to the large room. Something like a stand-up team conversation ritual
96
Brigid J. Carroll

makes total sense given that this workforce is never far from computer screens
(even in meetings they bring and look at their laptops and tablets), and hence
needs something or someone to call them into a diﬀerent form of communication
and connection with each other. A practice approach draws us into “a whole
world” (given of course this “whole world” of a large team room sits in a further
“whole world” of an organization and sector) where the doing of the con-
structs we academics like to study (in this case leadership and identity) are intimately
intertwined with the routines that weave through real time, everyday space and
work.
Identity
It is rare to study identity amidst the “whole world” in which practitioners live.
The closest we would have to such an approach is ethnographic studies with their
thick description of place, space, rituals, and norms, and the people who operate
through such conﬁgurations. However, ethnographic studies of leadership are
rare to say the least, with far more priority given to the direct verbal attribution
or claiming of leadership through survey instrument or interview kinds of meth-
odologies. The nearest to what we are trying to do here would be discourse
approaches to leadership which seek for evidence of leadership in text (spoken or
written forms of language such as in the form of a speech, email, prospectus), talk
(within formal or informal conversation), and interaction (encounter between
people that includes verbal and non-verbal engagement). Certainly discourse
approaches would be congruent with a practice-type approach but there are other
identity points of reference. We will seek to make these points visible in this
section, while acknowledging the tensions in reading identity primarily through
observation, as in the need to “refrain from objectifying identities as observable
entities” (Ybema, Keenoy, Oswick, Beverungen, Ellis, & Sabelis, 2009, p. 304).
Identity is generally represented as a struggle between the expectations of self,
others, and organization/community/society (Sveningsson & Alvesson, 2003). It
is a struggle because in that intersection of expectations, individuals feel the need to
represent themselves with coherence and distinctiveness while at the same time being
aware of palpable contradictions, precariousness, ﬂuidity, multiplicity, and frag-
mentation. Wrestling with such a struggle means that identity is an ongoing
question or “project” (Giddens, 1991), which complicates choices of who to be and
what to say and do in any moment. Identity researchers gravitate to discursive
methods because that is where identity work (struggle) is most likely to be visible.
Observation is deemed a much more ambiguous identity research site given it
is often identity coherence and distinctiveness that is most in view and not iden-
tity struggle. Nor can a researcher assume that a calm, conﬁdent, and assured
identity performance does not involve signiﬁcant precariousness and contra-
diction; or the reverse where evident identity diﬃculty and ambiguity belie a
strong distinctiveness or coherence. On the other hand, scholars of interviewing
Leadership as identity
97

in particular (Alvesson, 2003; Holstein & Gubrium, 2003) argue that the inter-
views that researchers predominantly use to probe into identity are not windows
into identity work in real work/leadership contexts. Rather, they suggest, inter-
views are better seen as performances or constructions oriented at the research
context, the perceived expectations or hopes of the researcher, and the nature of
the interviewer/interviewee. Practice theory and approaches oﬀer a bridge
between what a researcher can see and feel on site alongside what they can hear
and interpret prior or subsequent to the practice being explored.
In practice terms the starting place is with a “permanent dialectic between the
self and social structure” with identity having “a potential mediating quality”
(Ybema et al., 2009, p. 300). In the stand-up meeting story we see a whole host
of mediating elements that construct the identities possible in this team. We see a
team creating the culture of their organization just as that culture creates the
identities in and of the team. Thus when Dan pulls on his jeans and dons his
baseball cap, another team member puts another science ﬁction book on the
teetering pile and diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the team swivel their chair round to
be immersed in a software discussion, they all sustain a way of being in this
organization like others before them and doubtless others after them. However,
they in turn are responding to the historical and cultural texture of an organiza-
tion that distinctively blends the ability to look and behave casually with an
extreme high performance pace and tolerance for uncertainty. In short their work
identities are mediated through self and social structure mutually and simulta-
neously. This marks a signiﬁcant departure from many identity studies in which
identity appears to be often singular (something constructed by a self) and internal
(constructed through self-stories and reﬂection).
From a practice perspective, identity thus is “complex, recursive and constantly
under construction” (Ybema et al., 2009, p. 301). Given it is these things, “it
implicates social maneuvering and power games” (Ybema et al., 2009, p. 306). So
we see Dan as the possessor of the team koosch ball but unable or unwilling to
verbally call the team to their stand-up meeting. He uses movement (walking
away from his station), location (standing by the team process and results chart),
and silence (waiting quietly for others to join him) to get this meeting started.
Likewise his team does not rush to the meeting but keeps talking, ﬁnishes oﬀ
their phase of work and swiveling their chairs amongst each other. We could read
this sequence of actions as Dan “maneuvering” to gain the authority needed to
start the meeting and his team illustrating their power to join him (or not) in a
timely manner. The eﬀect is of a form of minimalist authority where team leader
and team act in interdependent ways to produce this event called a stand-up
meeting. Individual and collective agencies are at play here as all “choose” to take
part in this event and make their process of “choosing” quite visible.
Given we are not relying on anyone’s reﬂection or discussion of leadership and
identity to give insight into these, a new set of identity dimensions is required.
This chapter is going to highlight three constitutive practice elements that
98
Brigid J. Carroll

traditionally have not been strong in identity research: physical space, routines
and artifacts. I’m going to argue that these are particularly signiﬁcant in giving
insight into leadership identity.
Physical space
Physical space can be considered “inseparable” from the knowledge that is its very
purpose (Lee & Amjadi, 2014, p. 723). Physical space is “intimately bound up
with intentions, occupations and purposes,” which makes it integral to the con-
struction of identity (Dewey, 1938 [1991], p. 52, in Miettinen & Virkkunen,
2005, p. 443). Physical space provides an “emotional home for expert selves”
(Knorr Cetina, 1997, p. 9). In the standing meeting account the physical space
shapes a complex leadership space. Dan and the other team leaders sit facing away
from their team but, apart from facing a diﬀerent direction, they have identical
desks, chairs, computers, and garb. We could interpret this in a number of ways: that
team leaders are minimally diﬀerentiated from the members of their teams and share
more similarity and proximity than diﬀerence; that distinction through position or
title seems of little signiﬁcance in this world; that team leaders sitting together
suggest that the vertical relationships between team leaders are signiﬁcant.
Team leaders sitting facing away from their teams is harder to interpret. From
shadowing Dan more broadly I saw that much of what a team leader does was
advocate, speak, and contribute on behalf of the work their team is charged with
or represent the work of their team to other team leaders and beyond them to
project, group, division, and executive leaders. Facing those other teams and the
rest of the organization literally and symbolically then makes sense. Facing away
from their own team similarly seems to have meaning. We could read it as a
signal to the team that space is their own to lead, manage, ﬁll, and shape, and
from what the researcher could see while there, this is exactly what they were
doing. As such facing away indicates that team leaders are not or should not be in
micro-management, supervision, or surveillance over their teams. Their location
on the periphery or boundary of team space, then, indicates a certain identity
position for a team leader but a host of choices as well. Watching Dan move
between being one of the team (wheeling his chair to join a conversation
between members of his team), one of the team leaders (leaning back in his chair
talking between them) and in terrain not connected with his team (leaning
against a wall chatting to the overall project heads), shows Dan shaping a team
leader modus operandi in relation with the overall spatial conﬁguration in which
he practices.
Routines
At the core of this observation is a routine (the stand-up meeting). It is rare to
focus attention on routines when researching leadership, given that leadership is
Leadership as identity
99

more often linked to exceptional moments and contexts more than mundane and
recurrent ones. If we take a practice approach to leadership seriously though, the
routines that make up the day-to-day series of activities that constitute the work
of the organization are precisely where we need to look for the presence (or
absence) of leadership. After all “organizational routines have been regarded as the
primary means by which organizations accomplish much of what they do”
(Feldman & Pentland, 2003, p. 94), and one could wonder how signiﬁcant a
contribution leadership is to what organizations do if it cannot be found in such
“primary means.”
Process and practice theories have created a renewed interest in routines.
Routines in the past have been predominantly too quickly associated with stabi-
lity, repetition, inﬂexibility, and even inertia, and considered of limited interest to
scholars precisely because of these characteristics. However, increasingly scholars
are seeing that routines are equally central to change processes and indeed are
prime sites of variation, improvisation, and possibility (Feldman & Pentland,
2003). This more recent theorization on routine highlights its importance to
constructs that are signiﬁcant for leadership such as organizational or collective
learning, conﬂict and power, interpersonal relationships, and meaning/inter-
pretation. From a practice perspective, routines focus us particularly towards the
“performance” of collectives and their choices or strategies that are always
“enmeshed in far-reaching, complex, tangled webs of interdependence” (Feld-
man & Pentland, 2003, p. 104). If this is so then researching routines should shed
light on distributed, relational, shared, and emergent conﬁgurations of leadership
in which practice approaches are most interested.
In terms of this chapter we need to understand routines as integral to identity
work. This should make intuitive sense given that we deﬁned identity work
previously as the tension between representing self in stable and coherent ways in
the face of the ongoing struggle in “forming, repairing, maintaining, strengthen-
ing or revising” such representations or constructions (Sveningsson & Alvesson,
2003, p. 1165), which appears to parallel the precarious tension between stability
and change in routines themselves. Consequently, there are two ways of analyz-
ing routines with respect to identity: routines as either a resource or discipline for
identity (Brown & Lewis, 2011).
Routines are a resource for identity where individuals creatively craft a con-
struction of self within the possibilities, discourses, and relationships that are
nested in such routines. Such a crafting is never unfettered and without constraint
but nonetheless there are myriads of conﬁgurations, shapes, openings, contra-
dictions, and spaces to claim for any sustained identity work in even the most
established of routines. Equally we note that routines can be understood in dis-
ciplinary terms where usually hidden or disguised in the routine are dynamics of
power and control that seek to manufacture certain identities above others. Pre-
cisely because such power and control are hidden and/or disguised then, while
identities appear freely chosen, they are in fact a form of regulation co-opting and
100
Brigid J. Carroll

pre-selecting what identity representations are available. We are going to hold
routines as both a resource and discipline for identity work and therefore in an
ongoing tension.
The stand-up meeting routine demonstrates such a tension well. Clearly it is
designed to pull people out of fairly autonomous and individual work trajectories
and pull them together to pay attention to their existence as a team and the work
that is located across and between them. Conﬁning the speaking role to the posses-
sion of the koosch ball in theory gives anyone the capacity to claim and use a space of
action (see the next section); however, a very tight script operates throughout this
routine with only a few minutes available for each person. Like all routines this one has
an ostensive dimension (the structure and “rules” which govern it) and a perfor-
mative dimension (the improvisational and adaptive choices which people make
momentarily any time the routine is activated) (Feldman & Pentland, 2003). In
the version of the routine we see Dan is low key, serious, and rational whereas
Spike is ﬂamboyant, passionate, and energetic. That combination in this particular
performance of the routine could be read in leadership terms as Dan holding the
kind of structure and format that allows one of his team (such as Spike in this case)
to seize the limelight, command the attention of the team, and redirect collective
thinking in a particular direction that Dan could not have known about prior to
beginning the routine. This surely is distributed leadership in action?
However, it is important to remember that Dan has the ultimate power over
the koosch ball and the ability to mobilize and complete the routine when the
koosch ball is in his hands. We note that such power over the koosch ball does
not halt or stop the conversation between Spike and team members after the
stand-up meeting has ﬁnished, suggesting that the koosch ball is a catalyst or
intermediary of leadership action that can extend beyond and from the routine.
Artifacts
Identity is usually talked about as something one has (or more normally struggles
with), rather than the proposition that who we are/want/need to be is intimately
connected with artifacts. Nevertheless, it should be diﬃcult to picture yourself or
anyone else without a relationship to artifacts, be they computers, PowerPoint,
books, power tools, or sports equipment. A practice approach argues that we
have identity partly because of the artifacts with which we are associated. In the
stand-up meeting story the key artifact is a koosch ball and we will use this
koosch ball to explore the relationship between identity and artifact. I should
note, however, that the choice of the koosch ball as a key artifact is a fairly
arbitrary one. The process and results chart marking the location of the stand-up
meeting could be considered equally important as could the swiveling, wheeled
chairs that allow the team members to form and reform in diﬀerent conﬁgurations
at will. All artifacts, no matter how unexceptional they are, signify something
about how work is produced between people.
Leadership as identity
101

However, artifacts have traditionally been overlooked in organizational studies,
let alone leadership, because they have been seen as passive adjuncts to far more
signiﬁcant phenomena such as environments, structures, strategies, cultures, and
technologies. Things people held or used or worked with from this research
perspective could be understood as mere props for personalities, stories, and
activities far more deserving of research attention. If we take up the challenge of
studying processes like leadership “as they really happen”; however, then the
simple truth is leadership happens as individuals and groups use, hold, and work
with artifacts (see, e.g., Sergi, Chapter 6, this volume). The ﬁrst challenge to
doing so is to rethink the very nature of artifact, object, and tool. The tendency
when we think of these at all is to view them as ﬁxed, static, instrumental, and
something to be merely used. The last of our terms “tool” would come the closest
to such a deﬁnition; however, in leaving even tools in such a space, we neglect
their role as intermediaries with the ability to broker realities such as power,
status, control, and knowledge. Beyond tool, objects, and artifacts have an even
more complex existence. If we could view them as historic, symbolic, textual,
emotional, and social and not just “object-like,” then we could see their capacity
to facilitate identity, meaning, relationship, and purpose.
Stopping seeing artifacts in terms of “thingness” means beginning to see them
as “non-ﬁxed,” active, agentic, and as epistemic or capable of embodying what is
not known (Nicolini, Mengis, & Swan 2012, p. 613). Nicolini and his colleagues
invite us to view artifacts as “triggers of contradictions and negotiation” that set
up a “problem space” (Nicolini et al., 2012, p. 621). It is the diﬀerence between
seeing a koosch ball as a mere toy that is good to hold or throw versus seeing it as
a signifying object with the capacity to constitute a leadership space. In the stand-
up meeting account the very sight of it in Dan’s hands signals a moving away
from individual work stations into “team time” and a collective communication/
workﬂow ritual. At the moment as the team catches sight of the koosch ball, we
can begin to sense “the problem space” that the koosch ball creates. The team has
choice in how they respond to the koosch ball after all. Dan’s actions seemed to
recognize this as he chose to juggle it in his hands for 3 to 4 minutes, walk
casually up to the section of the wall with their posters full of post-it notes,
immerse himself with the post-it notes, and in eﬀect wait patiently for his team to
pull themselves out of their work of the day and respond. That he never gave a
verbal instruction or any sign of impatience could be read as an understanding of
his team’s “space of action” (Holmer-Nadesan, 1996) at this point.
However, artifacts are also symbols of authority that can be used to exercise or
challenge power (Lee & Amjadi, 2014, p. 724), signify status, conﬁrm depen-
dence, independence or interdependence, and inﬂuence or shape individual and
collective trajectories (Swan, Bresnen, Newell, & Robertson, 2007, p. 1814).
Given that Dan is in possession of the koosch ball, he would have had some
conﬁdence that his team acquiesce in the ritual to follow. Certainly he seems
comfortable in not giving any instructions or direction beyond the visibility of the
102
Brigid J. Carroll

koosch ball and his movement to the wall to make this ritual happen. Artifacts
then “can be used to mobilize action” (Swan et al., 2007, p. 1814). Dan pre-
sumably is a team leader even without the koosch ball in his hand but when he
appears with the koosch ball and walks towards the spot by the wall he is mobi-
lizing what someone in his team called “team time” and a diﬀerent kind of
connection and communication between his team.
Miettinen and Virkkunen (2005, p. 443) remind us that “norms of action and
cognition are objectiﬁed into artifacts,” hence the koosch ball opens up a certain kind of
team time norm. We could see the stand-up meeting then as a breaking of the
more technical/technology-oriented conversation/meeting norms of the rest of
the day which the koosch ball enables. Both Dan and his team potentially
become something diﬀerent in the circle with the koosch ball. Indeed “the
(re)constitution of objects is a central resource in the development of professional
and organizational identities” (Engeström & Blackler, 2005, p. 312), and the koosch
ball constitutes a diﬀerent suite of identities. The identities on which we need to
focus in this chapter are leadership ones so we’ll bring leadership into this chapter
directly and then turn to the question of leadership and identity.
Leadership
If you have read even a little of this book, you will be aware that tracking Dan
for evidence of leadership is a forlorn endeavor for a practice-oriented approach.
Hopefully it has become evident that while shadowing Dan was a point of entry
into the organization, we have looked for leadership of which he is a part more
than leadership which he “does.” The introduction of this book states that a
practice perspective would look for leadership “in immanent collective action
emerging from mutual, discursive, sometimes recurring and sometimes evolving
patterns in the moment and over time among those engaged in the practice”
(Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume). If we read our interaction through the lens of
this deﬁnition, we see the stand-up meeting as a routine or recurring pattern of
activity in which this team engages. Leadership does not exist prior to the inter-
action but emerges (or not) from this meeting. That makes leadership a collective
property or what this deﬁnition refers to as “mutual,” where those who are part
of the interaction play some role, whether they know it or not, in how leadership
emerges. One way we can ask this of our interaction is to ask “what leadership
conﬁgurations emerge when interactants share a newly formed leadership space?”
(Chreim, 2015, p. 7).
We have already discussed that this space opens up when the team leader (Dan)
picks up the koosch ball and moves to the designated part of the wall where this
group tracks its progress. This is a routine that happens every day at approxi-
mately the same time but even though it is a routine it is not a pre-determined
one. Both Dan and team have a myriad of choices about who to be in this
recurring routine. Remember, our artifact, the koosch ball, constructs a “problem
Leadership as identity
103

space” (Nicolini et al., 2012, p. 621) that participants can mediate, negotiate,
challenge, adapt, and subvert. Every time Dan picks up that artifact and throws it
to someone else, he can never be entirely sure what will happen. Chreim (2015,
p. 21) proposes “the more ambiguous the space the greater the room for actors to ﬁll
in” and that such “practices help structure the emergent leadership conﬁguration.”
On the day we see this stand-up meeting, it is Spike who is proactive about
gesturing for the koosch ball, who creates real energy and conversational
dynamics in the circle, and who creates some meaning that others seem to relate
to both in the meeting and beyond. Dan alternatively listens, stays quiet, checks
his understanding with Spike and the team, and waits for Spike to pass the koosch
ball on. Dan maintains authority in this interaction as he paces the meeting and
ensures the koosch ball passes to others but Spike gives the team something to be
involved in and contribute to. Any leadership that we are prepared to recognize
here happens within a conﬁguration of Dan, Spike, and the team in relation to
each other, their context and its norms, and the artifacts (post-it notes and koosch
ball) that constitute the uncertainties and possibilities in and from this interaction.
Given this interaction on this day played out in this manner, something new may
be possible that was not there previously. Looking back at Spike and teammates
still talking vigorously as both Dan and researcher leave, suggests the seeds of
something possible. We might be prepared to call such emergent energy, connection,
focus, and meaning evidence of leadership.
Leadership and identity
This chapter so far has interrogated “the absorbed coping” of one of the
teams in this organization. However, having a researcher track Dan for a sub-
stantial part of the day probably did constitute a “temporary breakdown” of rou-
tine which did occasion some reﬂection and rationale from Dan as we walked to
diﬀerent parts of the building for diﬀerent interactions. Thus, to this observational
material we can add some of Dan’s reﬂections about leadership. Dan thought the
stand-up meeting went well but did not elaborate. In terms of his role, he likes
being a team leader, admits that the technical leading aspect of his role is most
comfortable and compelling and that he has to intentionally work at the rela-
tional “leading people” side of what he does. However, he made a distinction
between leader and leadership that seems crucial here. In terms of leadership he
admitted, that although he cannot exactly deﬁne leadership, he senses it is more
than having an aggregation of leaders and feels the absence of something in this
space. That absence is typiﬁed by him realizing he does not have something he
needs like a contract or piece of information or some kind of larger leadership
story that relies on some kind of cross-organizational collaboration and culture
and that the largely technical environment directed by leaders does not enable that.
This feeling of something missing, which he names as leadership, is something to
him that seems to encompass something diﬀerent from his team leader role.
104
Brigid J. Carroll

Hence in a few simple sentences, Dan conjures up the complexity of leadership
in this context and a sense of the struggle that contains his identity work. One
possible researcher interpretation is that by “absence of leadership” he means the
connected, collaborative, cross-organizational kind of leader-ship conﬁguration
that is diﬀerent from having leaders. This was corroborated by other team leaders
who overheard Dan at this point and joined in the discussion. If we put the clues
we have together on practice, leadership, and identity, we get a subtle and mul-
tidimensional picture of leadership identity in practice. Dan, Spike, and the team
in this interaction create leadership (or not) in a particular spatial conﬁguration
replete with signiﬁcant artifacts and existing routines. Leadership if it happens
here at all happens on the work, and that work has been historically, culturally,
temporally, and relationally constituted. While we have focused on Dan and to
some extent Spike, the identities of all participants in this interaction are being
shaped by a context that privileges a casual belonging, a fast paced and unpre-
dictable culture, and a deep love and fascination with technical work. In this
interaction we see a very competent technical expert (Dan) in a work routine that
only a team leader with an artifact can drive but that any participant (think Spike)
can co-create with him and others if they choose to. For a few moments “a
problem space” opens up, rendering Dan silent and Spike drawing the attention
of others. Once such “a problem space” has been negotiated, new action and
possibility are theoretically possible.
Identity work in this organization revolves around the struggle between the
ever-present technical drama of the work and the absent signs of something else
that Dan for one is prepared to call leadership. We would imagine that this
struggle manifests itself diﬀerently for any individual but for Dan it is evoked in
moments when he swivels round to engage in the technical talk he loves with his
team and the times he stays with his back to the team and talks to the other team
leaders around him, perhaps looking or trying to create this missing commu-
nication, connection, and direction he calls leadership. There are hints of struggle
when he lets the koosch ball call the team into the stand-up meeting without
using his voice, authority, and position overtly. Again there are clues of struggle
when he moves post-it notes around the poster and begins the meeting as if he is
picking up the conversation from when they last were here and avoids a formal
opening of the meeting. Dan’s identity work is a constant shifting and transition
between the technical and leadership dimensions of his role amidst the awareness
and worry that leadership, even though not deﬁned, is absent. Dan is a team
leader and a good one in the eyes of his organization given his selection as our
shadow subject, but he shows us that being team leader does not add up to the
presence of leadership.
While this is a less personalized and internal identity study perhaps than many
in identity-oriented research, nonetheless, we oﬀer it as a powerful and practice-
embedded look at how identity shapes leadership in the intersection of individuals,
their context, and their relationships.
Leadership as identity
105

Implications for leadership and its development
The purpose of this book as a whole is to show what kind of diﬀerence a practice
approach can make to the study of leadership and more particularly in terms of
this chapter, how a practice approach to identity opens up still further insights and
innovations into leadership and its development.
If, as a practice approach such as this one demonstrates, leadership is spatially
conﬁgured, relationally distributed, artifact-mediated and embedded in multi-
processual routines (intertwined leadership, management, and expert processes),
then it is the co-existence, rather than the separating out, of leadership with other
social processes that practitioners most need insight into and assistance with.
Using leadership, as we often do, as a loose umbrella term that covers authority,
expertise, inﬂuence, power, accountability, and even management risks more
than theoretical imprecision. It also impedes the capacity of teams and collectives
to sustain the sparks and seeds of action and innovation that begin in routines
such as this one and increasingly carry the intra-preneurial future of an organiza-
tion. For example we would argue that this chapter shows Dan using his
authority in understated ways that succeed in inviting a leadership voice from
within his team (such as Spike) to coalesce the expertise of the team in ways that
are not possible when they are not talking together in this way. We could also
speculate that whether such leadership energy can be sustained beyond the dura-
tion of this routine is going to rely on the team taking joint accountability for the
issue Spike raised, Dan ﬁnding ways to keep distributing power through to Spike
and his allies to pursue a resolution, and combinations of people committed to
inﬂuencing the stakeholders and processes that “create” bugs in complex systems.
Dan is right to understand that being “team leader” does not in any way ensure
that leadership even exists and let alone is eﬀective. Every time someone is
appointed division, group, or team leader, dynamics of authority, power, inﬂu-
ence, expertise, accountability, and management need to be re-negotiated and
constituted if leadership is to accompany such appointments.
This might feel well near impossible if leadership was the result of deliberate,
intentional, strategically planned activity but at the very least, a practice perspec-
tive points to far more resources that can be mobilized to create possibilities for
leadership than are commonly recognized and mobilized. This chapter drew
attention to spatial conﬁgurations, routines, and artifacts as pivotal sources and
disciplines for leadership. All three enact leadership in largely symbolic, relational,
and emergent ways that, although often hard for practitioners (and researchers) to
put cognitively into words, nevertheless “speak” intuitively and innately to the
way the work has been done, is done, and could be done in the future. Taking
these resources/disciplines seriously might mean re-conﬁguring spaces more fre-
quently to enable diﬀerent team, group, and organization dynamics, experi-
menting with all sorts of technologies (not just information technologies but
material tools and objects) and designing/adapting new rituals/routines that create
106
Brigid J. Carroll

diﬀerent and new interactions. What could be most game changing of all are
those spatial conﬁgurations, routines, and artifacts that constitute the leadership of
others around and beyond the division, group, or team “leader.”
This chapter proposes that identity becomes center-stage when the focus
moves to how leadership emerges from the practice of people connected to each
other through their work. It is important to discuss why that is. Traditionally,
leadership has been associated with an individual’s skills (Conger, 1992) or their
position and standing and what individuals do (often talked about as compe-
tencies, Carroll, Levy, & Richmond, 2008) on the assumption that leaders bring
leadership (or not) to a role or position or challenge. In other words, leader and
leadership were deemed as existing a priori to whatever context it would be
actioned in. Such a viewpoint makes it sensible to pay attention to how indivi-
duals turn into leaders and subsequently what they can do to exercise leadership.
However, a practice approach views any context or interaction as potentially ripe
for immanent leadership action depending on how those involved understand
themselves in relation to each other, their context, their shared work, and their
purpose. That makes leadership associated with what people perceive they need
to be (as opposed to what they need to do) and the series of tensions, judgments,
and ambiguities that come into play as we negotiate being one thing or another.
How we decide to be, though, is a more nuanced and complex enterprise through
practice theory than many other identity approaches as individuals create and
adapt leadership identity through how they use and move through organizational
spaces; what artifacts and objects they collect, surround themselves with, and involve in
conversation and action; what routines they build, take part (or not), and disrupt;
and how they respond and react to the choices others are making. Leadership identity
for those in this chapter is a complex struggle between the institutional norms and dis-
courses this organization acquiesces to, historical and current decisions that re-create
the structure of this organization every day, and the agency that individuals seize and
ﬁnd in the gaps and cracks of what often appears as ﬁxed and permanent.
This would appear to have signiﬁcant implications for leadership development
in particular. Leadership development removed from the spaces, routines, and
artifacts that situate the leadership required makes little sense. Such spaces, rou-
tines, and artifacts in fact become a starting point for making the norms, resour-
ces, and disciplines that constrain and enable certain kinds of leadership over
others visible and able to be talked about. At that point identity work and
dynamics become central terrain for growing the repertoire of participants to be
diﬀerent in their leadership. Eventually, experimenting with other spaces, rou-
tines, and artifacts holds the promise of disrupting historic and existing practices
that do not achieve the kind of work needing to be done in the future and
crafting new and novel practices that make possible what is not in existence yet.
This approach to development requires the introduction and support of “identity-
scapes” (Shortt, 2012) that grow and sustain the kind of leadership attuned to
complex, uncertain, and dynamic contexts.
Leadership as identity
107

Finally this chapter proposes that we need to change how we research identity
and leadership, identity in particular. If we were to take this chapter seriously,
then, we would be asking our research subjects (who would not just be desig-
nated “leaders” but those connected to work where leadership might or might
not happen) to construct journals of a typical day or week to identify the routines
that anchor their week. We would attend those routines, not just once but
multiple times, to observe the diﬀerent performances of a routine and where
diﬀerent leadership possibilities are created. Of particular interest would be how a
leadership trajectory is sustained beyond or across routines, structures, and posi-
tions, who plays a part in that, and what that part or contribution is. We would
not interview in the sense of doing “an” interview but would be in ongoing
conversation with those involved and connected in the “work.” Interviewees
would become sense-making partners to their “involved thematic deliberations,”
as who they are and what they do in their leadership moves from tacit to aware
in the multiple but momentary “breakdowns” that occur daily between expec-
tations and realities. Such “talk” is placed alongside the insight we get from
embodied movement, use of material artifacts, negotiation of structures and
spaces, and sensemaking of others to craft a more “structurational” understanding
of how identity is forged moment by moment between the agentic and structural
realities of doing leadership in a particular context.
References
Alvesson, M. (2003). Beyond neopositivists, romantics, and localists: A reﬂexive approach
to interviews in organizational research. Academy of Management Review, 28(1), 13–33.
Brown, A. D., & Lewis, M. A. (2011). Identities, discipline and routines. Organization
Studies, 32(7), 871–895.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Carter, C., Clegg, S. R., & Kornberger, M. (2008). Strategy as practice. Strategic Organization,
6(1), 83–99.
Chreim, S. (2015). The (non) distribution of leadership roles: Considering leadership
practices and conﬁgurations. Human Relations, 68(4), 517–543.
Conger, J. A. (1992). Learning to lead: The art of transforming managers into leaders. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Dewey, J. (1938 [1991]). ‘Logic’: The theory of enquiry. The later works of John Dewey, Vol. 12
(J. A. Boydston Ed.). Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1991). Being-in-the-world: A commentary on Heidegger’s being and time, division I.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Engeström, Y., & Blackler, F. (2005). On the life of the object. Organization, 12(3), 307–330.
Feldman, M. S., & Pentland, B. T. (2003). Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a
source of ﬂexibility and change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(1), 94–118.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
108
Brigid J. Carroll

Holmer-Nadesan, M. (1996). Organizational identity and space of action. Organization
Studies, 17(1), 49–81.
Holstein, J. A., & Gubrium, J. F. (2003). Inside interviewing: New lenses, new concerns.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kelly, S. (2008). Leadership: A categorical mistake? Human Relations, 61(6), 763–782.
Knorr Cetina, K. (1997). Sociality with objects: Social relations in postsocial knowledge
societies. Theory, Culture & Society, 14(4), 1–30.
Lee, C.-F., & Amjadi, M. (2014). The role of materiality: Knowing through objects in
work practice. European Management Journal, 32(5), 723–734.
Miettinen, R., & Virkkunen, J. (2005). Epistemic objects, artefacts and organizational
change. Organization, 12(3), 437–456.
Nicolini, D. (2009). Zooming in and zooming out: A package of method and theory to
study work practices. In S. Ybema, D. Yanow, H. Wels & F. Kamsteeg (Eds.), Organi-
zational ethnography. Studying the complexities of everyday life (pp. 120–138). London: Sage.
Nicolini, D., Mengis, J., & Swan, J. (2012). Understanding the role of objects in cross-
disciplinary collaboration. Organization Science, 23(3), 612–629.
Sandberg, J., & Tsoukas, H. (2011). Grasping the logic of practice: Theorizing through
practical rationality. Academy of Management Review, 36(2), 338–360.
Shortt, H. (2012). Identityscapes of a hair salon: Work identities and the value of visual
methods. Sociological Research Online, 17(2), 22.
Sveningsson, S., & Alvesson, M. (2003). Managing managerial identities: Organizational
fragmentation, discourse and identity struggle. Human Relations, 56(10), 1163–1193.
Sveningsson, S., & Larsson, M. (2006). Fantasies of leadership: Identity work. Leadership, 2(2),
203–224.
Swan, J., Bresnen, M., Newell, S., & Robertson, M. (2007). The object of knowledge:
The role of objects in biomedical innovation. Human Relations, 60(12), 1809–1837.
Weick, K. E. (2003). Theory and practice in the real world. In H. Tsoukas & C. Knudsen
(Eds.), The Oxford handbook of organization theory (pp. 453–475). Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press.
Weick, K. E. (2007). The generative properties of richness. Academy of Management Journal,
50(1), 14–19.
Yanow, D., & Tsoukas, H. (2009). What is reﬂection‐in‐action? A phenomenological
account. Journal of Management Studies, 46(8), 1339–1364.
Ybema, S., Keenoy, T., Oswick, C., Beverungen, A., Ellis, N., & Sabelis, I. (2009).
Articulating identities. Human Relations, 62(3), 299–322.
Leadership as identity
109

6
WHO’S LEADING THE WAY?
Investigating the contributions of materiality to
leadership-as-practice1
Viviane Sergi
Introduction
What is leadership? This question has been puzzling thinkers and researchers alike
for centuries. More prosaically, how can a phenomenon as elusive as leadership
be studied and captured: “where” could leadership be? The answer to this ques-
tion has most frequently been couched in terms of individuals—exceptional ones,
ordinary ones, single persons, or teams. This key question has also led to the
development of a variety of answers and approaches, typologies, and checklists—
most of them pointing to the idea that leaders, as individuals, can develop, tweak,
perfect, expand, and change their leadership. Leadership’s eﬀectiveness has thus
received much attention over the years (Collinson, 2005). Consensus in this ﬁeld
remains rare, however (Collinson & Grint, 2005). In this chapter, I do not aim to
add to this vast literature, nor will I develop an in-depth critique of it. Rather, I
will explore what diﬀerent researchers have been calling for recently: the inclu-
sion of materiality in investigations—and in conceptualizations—of leadership (see
Denis, Langley & Rouleau, 2010; Fairhurst & Connaughton, 2014; and Hawkins,
2015, among others). Instead of asking who might be leading, I start from a dif-
ferent question: what is leadership made of ? This second question might sound
like a convoluted variation of the ﬁrst one, but, as I will discuss in this chapter, it
opens the door to a diﬀerent investigation of leadership in action. Echoing
Hawkins (2015), my view is that including materiality in leadership study is not
only possible and relevant in theoretical terms, but that it has value when it
comes to understanding this phenomenon.
Being a researcher preoccupied with materiality, my reﬂection on leadership
was sparked by this tendency towards a strict centering of leadership on individuals—
be they singular (for an example of this criticism, see Fletcher, 2004) or plural (for

an overview, see Denis et al., 2012). By locating leadership in and around persons,
and by using a language that directly or indirectly evokes leadership as something people
have, we researchers have paid great attention to notions like traits, personality, char-
isma, and, more recently, interpersonal relationships. These concepts speak of
leadership as a phenomenon concerned solely with persons: their characteristics
(who they are), their competencies (the skills they have), or even their activities
(what they do on a daily basis). There is no doubt in my mind that leadership is
about persons and that they need to be at the heart of our inquiries into leadership.
However, in these pages, I wish to explore the possibility of understanding and
conceptualizing leadership diﬀerently: ﬁrst, by adopting the practice perspective,
and, second, by actively accounting for the contribution of materiality to leadership
interactions. What can we understand about leadership if we start our inquiries
from a diﬀerent empirical and analytical point? This is exactly what the leader-
ship-as-practice approach proposes by suggesting that we shift the locus of leader-
ship from individuals to collective, material, and embodied practices enacted in
context. The practice perspective, as applied to leadership, approaches this phe-
nomenon as it is performed and allows us to consider a variety of elements that are
woven into this performance. In doing so, it joins other constructionist and rela-
tional approaches that reconceptualize leadership through action, interactions, and
relations (see for example Cunliﬀe & Eriksen, 2011 and Fairhurst & Grant, 2010).
Leadership studies have only recently adopted the practice perspective. Leadership-
as-practice is still an emerging stream of research that promises to understand
leadership from the starting point of its performance. These studies all ask a cen-
tral question (albeit in diﬀerent ways): How does leadership happen in situ? A
central tenet of this stream of study is to move the focal point of inquiry from
leaders to leadership itself (Crevani, Lindgren & Packendorﬀ, 2010), which is
then seen as something accomplished on a daily basis in organizational settings.
The premise of these studies is that leadership emerges from interactions hap-
pening in context. This root is crucial to all studies of organizational phenomena
inﬂuenced by the so-called “practice turn” (Schatzki, 2001), such as strategy-as-
practice (e.g., Golsorkhi, Rouleau, Seidl & Vaara, 2010; Vaara & Whittington,
2012), project-as-practice (e.g., Blomquist, Hällgren, Nilsson & Söderholm, 2010;
Hällgren & Wilson, 2008), practice studies of technology (e.g., Orlikowski,
2007), learning (e.g., Gherardi, 2005), and accounting (e.g., Fauré & Rouleau,
2011). All of these studies are grounded in the ideas that a better, more detailed
understanding of these phenomena requires moving closer to action and con-
sidering what is routinely done by actors as they engage in these activities. In many
instances, the practice perspective has been embraced by researchers in organiza-
tion studies as a theoretical inspiration to enlarge the view of who, in organiza-
tional settings, contribute to action. For instance, this impulse has been at the
core of the strategy-as-practice stream of research, in which many researchers
have emphasized that strategy is not something an organization has, but rather
something that people do—implying that, in this context, the deﬁnition of who is
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
111

involved in such a “doing” of strategy must be expanded to include more
“ordinary” actors than were usually presented in the more mainstream literature
on strategy (for an overview of strategy-as-practice, see Vaara & Whittington,
2012).
Over the last ﬁfteen years, we have seen practice studies of organizational
phenomena multiply and reﬂections on what happens in practice deepen. We
have seen a similar movement towards this practice in the vast ﬁeld of leadership,
which has opened a number of interesting lines of inquiry. These studies have
oﬀered us detailed accounts of how leadership is produced or experienced in
various settings (e.g., Carroll, Levy & Richmond, 2008; Denis et al., 2010) and
how it creates context for action (e.g., Endrissat & von Arx, 2013), while show-
ing us the variety of actors involved in this production (e.g., Raelin, 2011) or
revealing how such a daily production unfolds (e.g., Vine, Holmes, Marra, Pfeifer
& Jackson, 2008). These contributions all show that leadership is much more than
the acts of “great men” presenting speciﬁc traits (Fletcher, 2004). Given that a number
of studies belonging to the leadership-as-practice stream have ﬁrmly anchored their
inquiry in opposition to the dominant leader-centric approach to leadership—
aiming simultaneously at criticizing this conception and at renewing our under-
standing of it (see, for example, Crevani et al., 2007, 2010)—it is not surprising to
note that leadership-as-practice studies have mainly dealt with what is done by
human actors in context, as they go about their tasks. When the leadership-as-
practice agenda suggests moving our view of leadership closer to action, one of
the key questions it investigates becomes, “Who contributes to action?”, wherein
“action” is speciﬁcally understood as “action that constitutes leadership.”
Yet, as a number of researchers (including those in this volume) have under-
lined, there is much more at play than a simple focus on “what people do.”
Recent contributions to the practice perspective in organization studies have
highlighted the various elements that are implied in practice and have tried to
document them to develop a ﬁner understanding of practice itself. Materiality is
always involved when it comes to deﬁnitions of practice. Both Schatzki (2001)
and Reckwitz (2002)—who oﬀered two commonly used deﬁnitions of practice
in organization studies—placed materiality at the heart of practice. More recently,
Nicolini (2012) teased out various elements involved in the notion of practice
and categorized them as ﬁve dimensions: work and eﬀort, materiality, agency,
knowledge, and power. Following the identiﬁcation of these ﬁve fundamental
dimensions of practice, and underlining the ubiquity of the concept of practice in
many social theories, Nicolini proposed a “theoretical toolkit” approach to attend
to them. These ﬁve dimensions underline the richness and inherent complexity of
the concept of practice. They also highlight the challenge that studying practices
poses to researchers, and it may be quite diﬃcult to simultaneously address all of
these dimensions in a single study. However, as it relates to my reﬂection,
Nicolini’s work on the concept of practice demonstrates that materiality is an
integral part of the notion of practice.
112
Viviane Sergi

Recognizing the active contribution of materiality to action (and following
recent calls to address the place of materiality in leadership), my contribution
revolves around the inclusion of materiality in the leadership-as-practice agenda.
As I will explore, turning to practice to rejuvenate the study of leadership may be
highly stimulating, both for researchers and practitioners alike, but doing so
should not lead us to simply focus on what human beings do, in context and over
time; it should lead us to deepen our engagement with every facet of the concept
of practice, including materiality. However, attending to and investigating mate-
riality in the context of leadership-as-practice requires more than a sensitivity to
“objects”; it calls for a diﬀerent theoretical framing to ﬁnely capture how mate-
riality participates in leadership. So far, materiality has only been vaguely studied in
leadership. Inspired by Nicolini’s toolkit approach, I will mobilize a few theore-
tical insights to anchor our reﬂection on materiality. I will then illustrate, through
a vignette, how these insights can strengthen our understanding of leadership. I
will conclude by discussing some of the implications of my proposal.
What constitutes leadership? Combining insights to explore the
material dimension of leadership
The approach I propose in this chapter is based on two shifts in leadership
thinking. As explained in the introduction, the ﬁrst one detaches leadership from
leaders. The second one suggests seeing leadership as a set of practices that have
organizing eﬀects, and therefore conceptualizes leadership as a consequence (an
eﬀect) of collective action, not as one of its causes. Combined, these two shifts
can lead us to formulate diﬀerent questions about leadership: If leadership is not
solely about individual leaders, then what contributes to this phenomenon? If
leadership is a result of collective action, who—and even what—helps in produ-
cing these results, these eﬀects? Both questions are based on a speciﬁc view of
leadership: one that points towards a more processual, collective, and mundane
view of it. First, this conception is processual because action is always happening in
situ, unfolding over time. Second, it emphasizes the collective, as leadership is
viewed as an interactional joint performance. Third, it is mundane because seeing
leadership as unfolding and emerging from interactions requires a focus on daily,
and even banal, situations and interactions. The ﬁrst two characteristics have
theoretical implications and must be considered for the inclusion of materiality in
our conception of leadership. The third one has rather methodological implica-
tions, requiring researchers to observe and describe in detail what is happening
over time. I will begin by addressing the processual and collective characteristics that
are inherent to the conception I propose here; then I will address the materiality
of leadership more directly.
As mentioned, moving from a leader-centric perspective has been at the core
of a number of recent developments in the ﬁeld of leadership (Denis et al., 2012).
Conceptions such as shared (Pearce & Conger, 2003), distributed (Gronn, 2002),
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
113

and relational (Uhl-Bien, 2006) leadership have all emerged in reaction to the tradi-
tional focus on the single, individual leader. In spite of their diﬀerences, these alternative
conceptualizations all put forward the idea that leadership should be approached
through interactions and relationships between actors. Some of these conceptions
even go a step further, explicitly suggesting a diﬀerent basis rooted in process ontology.
In essence, process ontology posits that the world is in constant movement,
deﬁned by continual change rather than stability (see Rescher, 2012, for an
overview of process ontology, and Helin, Hernes, Hjorth & Holt, 2014 for a dis-
cussion of processuality in the works of various thinkers in social sciences). Process
ontology leads us to focus on action, and on processes through which phenomena
happen, over time and in context (Chia, 1997; Hernes, 2008). It is beyond the scope
of this chapter to discuss process ontology (see Helin et al., 2014 or Hernes, 2014,
for well-developed discussions), but the key idea is that process ontology renews the
way we deﬁne organizational phenomena by placing action at their core. It also allows
us to adopt a view of leadership as a form of organizing, continually on the move.
Albeit still marginal, process thinking is not absent from studies on leadership.
For example, viewing leadership in a processual fashion and as emerging in the
course of action, Hosking (1988) has suggested that leadership should be seen as
an organizing activity involving the negotiation of a social order. In her devel-
opment of a relational theory of leadership, Uhl-Bien (2006) has highlighted that
the relational dynamics underlying the emergence of leadership in context are
processual. Crevani et al. (2010) also have advocated this processuality, not simply
as a characteristic, but as an ontological positioning that favors a recentering on
leadership to replace the traditional focus on leaders. Finally, Wood (2005) has
gone even further by postulating that leadership does not reside “inside” individuals
and that it is fundamentally a question of movement.
Closely related, but without necessarily theorizing leadership as shared, other
studies in this ﬁeld investigate leadership as it is done. These studies of the “doing”
of leadership all look at what is happening in context, done by leaders and fol-
lowers, some of these studies even blurring these two traditional categories in
leadership research. For example, by focusing on what leaders did, Pye (2005) has
proposed viewing leadership as a sense-making process. By investigating ordinary
actions performed by managers, Alvesson and Sveningsson (2003) show that
“leadership” has a lot to do with making mundane activities appear, discursively
speaking, out of the ordinary, rather than being a distinct category of actions. Finally,
Holmberg and Tyrstrup (2010) have also considered leadership as an everyday activ-
ity, showing how it is driven by the daily events, and that it implies improvisation
and sense-making. Despite their diﬀerences, these studies are all anchored in the
ordinary performance of leadership. They point to the daily production of direction
and to the organizing properties of leadership (Larsson & Lundholm, 2010, 2013).
What might appear as a detour via process ontology is in fact a necessary
intermediary step, as it oﬀers a strong basis for placing action at the heart of the
deﬁnition of leadership. Deﬁned as an ontological anchoring, the primacy given
114
Viviane Sergi

to action invites us to look at leadership as a social construction emerging in situ
and in interactions, deploying itself via diﬀerent activities or practices, and evol-
ving through time and action. This ontological basis is fundamental as it is the
common thread between various theoretical insights that may be combined to
reﬂect on the materiality of leadership.
If, as Pentland and Singh (2012) have suggested, focusing on action may seem
normal when we speak of leadership, it may also be a relevant starting point from
which to address materiality, a concept that they consider challenging to deﬁne, and
that is often left underspeciﬁed in studies (Cooren, Fairhurst & Huët, 2012). As
they state: “Materiality is not about artifacts, people, ideas or any thing. Or rather,
it is about all of them, but they only become material when they inﬂuence a
particular course of action or events that we value. Materiality is all about actions,
values, and consequences in context” (2012, p. 294). Materiality has been men-
tioned in relation to leadership, but only in a handful of studies. For example, in
Chapter 5, Carroll discusses the place of artifacts in the mundane production of
leadership. Also, some studies addressing distributed leadership have included
objects and the role they can play (Mailhot, Gagnon, Langley & Binette, in press;
Mulcahy & Perillo, 2010; Oborn, Barrett & Dawson, 2013; Spillane, Halverson
& Diamond, 2001). However, in most cases, human actors and objects tend to
remain separated: objects are mobilized in context and help (or hinder) leaders.
Oborn et al. (2013) may go the furthest in this line of thinking, suggesting that
“leadership enactment entails engaging with materiality” (p. 256) and that this
materiality “conﬁgure[s] the relationships between social actors” (p. 268). Yet, most
of these studies are missing what is necessary to fully account for materiality in
(leadership) action: enlarging the concept of agency so as not to limit it to human actors.
It is this focus on action that makes it possible to get closer to materiality in
leadership; by delving into action and reframing leadership based on what is
happening in situ, materiality is already and irremediably part of the scene.
Inspired by Latour’s idea that non-humans play a key role in human collectives
by contributing to stabilizing the world (Latour, 1993) and by his proposition of
viewing agency as hybrid, as distributed between human and non-human actors
(Latour, 1994), a limited number of studies on leadership have explored how
materiality actively intervenes in the unfolding of action. Hawkins (2015), drawing
notably on Latour’s idea of hybrid agency, suggests that objects cogenerate lea-
dership, therefore arguing that including materiality in leadership studies “focuses
on the processes by which certain eﬀects, like leadership, come to matter to us, or
‘materialize’” (p. 953). The challenge then becomes to fully acknowledge how
such a cogeneration of leadership happens. This is where it can be fruitful to
consider insights from one stream of studies in organizational communication
Turning to organizational communication at this point might appear unusual.
However, a stimulating line of inquiry called the communicative constitution of
organizations (from now on, “CCO”), has burgeoned over the past ﬁfteen years.
Situated at the intersection of communication and organization studies, this
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
115

perspective explores ontological questions related to the existence, persistence,
and transformation of organizations. In the words of Brummans, Cooren, Robi-
chaud and Taylor, (2014): “[w]hat sets this research apart from other areas of
inquiry are its novel ways of theorizing and analyzing how organizations as
discursive-material conﬁgurations are reproduced and coproduced through
ongoing interactions” (p. 173). In general terms, the CCO perspective builds on
the idea that communication is not simply happening in organizational settings
and around organizational phenomena, but that it is constitutive of them—in
other words, communication materializes them (Ashcraft, Kuhn & Cooren,
2009). As Cooren, Kuhn, Cornelissen and Clark (2011) state:
the general claim is that if communication is indeed constitutive of organi-
zation, it cannot be considered to be simply one of the many factors involved
in organizing, and it cannot be merely the vehicle for the expression of pre-
existing “realities”; rather, it is the means by which organizations are estab-
lished, composed, designed, and sustained. Consequently, organizations can
no longer be seen as objects, entities, or “social facts” inside of which com-
munication occurs. Organizations are portrayed, instead, as ongoing and pre-
carious accomplishments realized, experienced, and identiﬁed primarily—if
not exclusively—in communication processes.
Seen in this light, organizational communication is all about co-construction and
co-orientation (Cooren et al., 2011). In the words of Taylor and Robichaud
(2004): “Organization is the struggle to attain co-orientation, not merely a by-
product of it” (p. 403). Everything that participates in this co-construction and
co-orientation has to be considered, including anything that could be treated as
material (texts, objects, tools, bodies, architecture, etc.). So far, with the excep-
tion of a few studies, like that of Fairhurst and Cooren (2009), the CCO per-
spective has mainly been suggested as a relevant line of inquiry for the study of
leadership. Yet, as Tourish (2013) has argued, acknowledging the processual and
communicative dimensions of leadership has a clear potential for renewing and
extending our understanding of it. As he discussed elsewhere, “leadership can best
be viewed as a ﬂuid process emerging from the communicatively constituted
interactions of myriad organisational actors” (Tourish, 2014, p. 80). The CCO
perspective invites us to view leadership as an ongoing process, discursively and
materially constituted in interactions involving a wide range of human and non-
human actors. CCO is an interesting theoretical framework for the investigation
of materiality in leadership because of its process ontology, its attention to inter-
actions as they are creating and shaping (constituting) organizational phenomena,
and its inclusion of materiality via a hybrid conception of agency.
Adding materiality to the study of leadership might seem a bit of a stretch to
some researchers. Slightly skeptical readers might question why materiality should
be considered when investigating leadership. First, my argument is not to suggest
116
Viviane Sergi

that “things” can lead as humans can. Hybrid agency posits that agency is not
located in actors—human or non-human—but rather emerges out of the asso-
ciations between human and non-human actors as they happen in context. In this
sense, action is always sociomaterial, echoing what has been said about the
sociomateriality of practices (see for example Feldman & Orlikowski, 2011 and
Orlikowski, 2007). There is a proximity between this relational conception of
agency and what researchers who work on developing a relational understanding of
leadership have suggested. The main diﬀerence lies in the space allocated to
materiality. Second, the documented eﬀects of materiality on collective action, like
creating shared understanding, bridging actors and perspectives, or facilitating
cooperation (see studies on boundary objects, like Bechky, 2003 and Yakura, 2002,
for example), also can be seen as some of the commonly attributed eﬀects of lea-
dership. Other studies have shown that materiality can give a sense of direction
and help in obtaining commitment and assigning tasks (see for example Callon,
2002; Sergi, 2013; and Winsor, 2006), eﬀects that we can easily associate with
leadership. When we think about leadership in terms of speciﬁc eﬀects, the ﬁeld
of who and what can produce these eﬀects suddenly widens. As studies that oﬀer a more
active role to materiality in organizational action often note, making such a move
should not be interpreted as “removing” or “denying” agency to humans; it
simply sheds a diﬀerent light on organizational action. This widening has been
nicely captured by Cooren’s (2006) idea of organizations as “plenum of agencies,”
where the agencies can be human, non-human, textual, architectural, etc.
To summarize, from the practice perspective, materiality is one of the key
dimensions identiﬁed in the deﬁnition of practice. Following this identiﬁcation,
the central issue becomes how to approach and address materiality. To do so, I
have ﬁrst suggested fully embracing a process ontology, because such a position
allows researchers to get closer to action as it unfolds—in this case, a speciﬁc form
of action we label “leadership.” By getting close to leadership as action, we come
to see it as more of a product of collective interactions, as a result—in other words,
as an eﬀect of collective action. In turn, this focus on what is happening in situ
leads us to ask the following question: What contributes to action and what
makes a diﬀerence in it (Cooren, 2004; Latour, 2005)? This question allows us to
redeﬁne the notion of agency, enlarging it to include materiality. Inﬂuenced by
the Latourian idea of hybrid agency (amongst many other inﬂuences), the CCO
perspective proposes to investigate how organizational phenomena, such as lea-
dership, are constituted in communication—which implies considering both humans
and non-humans as they are interacting, conversing, and involved in a variety of pro-
cesses. Although embracing this line of inquiry in leadership studies has clear
potential, as Tourish (2013, 2014) and Fairhurst and Connaughton (2014) have
underlined, this potential remains to be explored. This chapter should be seen as a
rejoinder to their calls to adopt this communicative lens in the study of leadership.
In line with these ideas, I have proposed two shifts in leadership study. The
ﬁrst one moves away from individual leaders and towards leadership, while the
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
117

second one, rather than viewing leadership as a cause of action, sees it as a consequence
of collective action, in which more than humans participate. Pushing these ideas
further, I suggest conceptualizing leadership as one of the products of collective action,
as the consequence of social practices accomplished through interactions involving
various actants (to use Latour’s concept), and as happening via processes con-
stantly in movement. Moreover, to distinguish leadership from other products of
ongoing ﬂows of action, I propose considering products that not only propel and
drive the continuation of action, but speciﬁcally those have directing, shaping,
and/or ordering eﬀects on the endeavors in which the actors are involved. I have
chosen these three broad categories of results for empirically identifying leadership
because they evoke the etymology of the word “leadership,” which refers both to
the action of guiding and to the notion of shape (Harper, 2015). My line of
thinking also has been inﬂuenced by Crevani et al. (2010) and Lindgren, Pack-
endorﬀand Tham. (2011), who have suggested that leadership should be viewed
as interactions constructing direction, co-orientation, and action space.
Empirical illustration
One of the strengths of the CCO perspective comes from its detailed empirical
applications. Indeed, given its strong methodological commitment to ethno-
graphic work and description, Cooren (2006) has evoked the “radical empiri-
cism” associated with the perspective. Moreover, such detailed descriptions have
the power to oﬀer vivid illustrations of the constitutive eﬀects of communication.
To illustrate the potential of the CCO perspective, I will use a vignette borrowed
from a larger ﬁeld study inﬂuenced by the ethnographic tradition (Czarniawska-
Joerges, 1992; Van Maanen, 2001). This case study revolved around the Graph
Project, a software development project taking place in a Montréal-based com-
pany named Soft-A.2 The study’s initial aims were to (1) develop a processual
view of the way the project was organized over time, (2) identify the practices that
made the project happen, over time, and (3) reveal how materiality contributed
to these processes. The ﬁeldwork consisted of observing meetings, conducting
interviews, and collecting documents.3 Given the nature of the work done in the
project—in particular, writing code—documents were key to studying the pro-
ject and seeing its management materialize. Work in software development teams
at Soft-A entailed many individual tasks, and meetings were the main locus of
collective work. I did not have permission to record the meetings; therefore I
was unable to capture exactly what was said. Nevertheless, I noted all the
interactions between team members, paying attention to the way activities and
discussions developed, and who (or what) intervened during the conversations.
My analysis led me to consider the results of these episodes of collective work
through the unfolding of collective action. Although I could not conduct con-
versation analysis as is often done in CCO studies, I collected the necessary
material to analyze the interactions and their eﬀects on the team’s actions. During
118
Viviane Sergi

my ﬁeldwork, I also collected numerous documents such as plans, reports, and
emails. In addition to the meetings, the production, circulation, and discussion of
documents were central processes in the Graph Project. All meetings included
long discussions of such previously circulated documents. It is through this com-
bination of meetings, individual work, and documents that the Graph Project was
structured, managed, and completed (see also Sergi, 2012).
With this study, I simultaneously looked at what the human actors did and also
how non-human actors sustained action. I proposed and illustrated that all the
processes and interactions in this project proﬁted from the presence of various
objects and tools, such as documents. They played a key role in constituting the
project—but one that was diﬀerent from the role of the human actors. Their
presence shaped everyone’s work and helped the project become tangible and
hold on over time. They made a diﬀerence by facilitating, supporting, and
advancing the project. It should be noted that what documents did—like making
visible, articulating, and signaling various elements—is also linked to the proper-
ties of this class of objects. Textual objects are particularly apt at conveying a high
degree of detail, moving through space and time without changing, and lasting,
that is they are “immutable mobiles” (Latour, 1986). It is according to these
properties that they were mobilized in the project, and it is also because of them
that they had signiﬁcant consequences for its realization. Overall, the actions they
accomplished are among those that make any project happen: materializing the
product, the work, and the collective; exposing and explaining what has been
done, indicating the path to follow, initiating thought and discussion, organizing
work, and warning and reminding team members of priorities and constraints (see
Sergi, 2013, for more details about documents’ contributions in projects).
In other words, understanding how the Graph Project moved from idea to
completed product led me to discuss the various contributions made to this pro-
cess by human and non-human actors, thus highlighting the project’s socio-
materiality. The material collected and analyzed during this case study oﬀers many
examples of leadership as being elaborated both by humans and non-humans
during these team meetings. Following the ideas I discussed in the ﬁrst section of
this chapter, I identify leadership as what directed, shaped, and ordered the pro-
ject’s unfolding. The next section oﬀers a detailed illustration of one such instance
of leadership’s hybrid production.
The chosen vignette corresponds to an episode taken from the beginning of
the project, which revolved around a team meeting and a document mobilized
during this moment of collective work. This is the team’s fourth meeting and
four team members are present: Sally, the project leader, Frank and Oliver, the
main software programmers who will have the task of rewriting the code, and
Matt, Sally’s direct supervisor, whose presence is required to keep this project
aligned with other projects happening simultaneously at the company.
A document—identiﬁed as “Document 7”—has been distributed by email
before the meeting is held. Document 7 exposes for the ﬁrst time the full
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
119

approach that the team could follow to complete its work. It exposes how the
work on part of the Graph application will be undertaken. Many screenshots
accompany the code and illustrate how the Graph application will look once the
code has been rewritten. The document explains what this work will entail and
gives meticulous indications to the other developers; it informs the team members of all
the modiﬁcations that need to be covered. The document also suggests ways to
approach the work described within. But not everything pertaining to this approach
has been covered before the meeting; passages in the document are written in
capital letters so that the developers do not lose sight of them. Document 7 is also
illustrated with other ﬁgures, including one that oﬀers an overview of the application’s
elements, revealing which ones will be newly developed, and where they will be
inserted in the code. This ﬁgure shows what will be concretized, provides reminders
of all the details that must be adjusted, and highlights the continuity between past and
future versions of Graph. Finally, Document 7 contains a section entitled “Limita-
tions” that warns of the absence of an element that might have to be developed later
on. The document ends with the next tasks to be completed and the number of days
allotted to each of them, thus directing the developers’ subsequent work.
After three previous meetings mainly dedicated to deﬁning and specifying the
nature and details of the Graph Project, the fourth meeting is more technical. Its
main goal is to answer the questions of how to concretize decisions that have
been made and agreed on, and how to conduct development. After the lengthy
discussions that characterized earlier meetings and led to the deﬁnition of the
Graph Project, the team members feel they know enough about the project’s
parameters to start considering its thorny technical issues. Deciding what the new
Graph application will do and what it will look like is one thing, but ﬁguring out
how to achieve this is another, as it involves thinking about how each part of the
code works and imagining how, once brought together, these changes will
interact with each other. Envisioning the work to accomplish is diﬃcult, espe-
cially this early in the project; yet, it is necessary in order to plan, organize, and
direct its development. This meeting is dedicated to laying the foundation for the
actual realization of the work.
During the meeting, most of the discussions revolve around constraints,
options, and choices. Two sources of constraints are evoked. The ﬁrst stems from
the project on which they agreed (what is expected of the new Graph applica-
tion), and the other is associated with choices made when the previous version of
Graph was written. The team’s work is complicated by the fact that many
directions could be taken in producing the new Graph application; each of them
must be considered at this stage of the project, before altering the code. Also,
because the team is developing a more detailed view of the project, aspects that
could not be discussed before, such as technical elements, are now open to con-
sideration. The exchanges cover every possibility the team members are con-
sidering, weighing each one’s strengths and weaknesses. These possibilities will
not make a diﬀerence for the end users as they are not altering the Graph
120
Viviane Sergi

application’s interface; however, the possibility they choose will impact their daily
coding work. A series of interactions happen in these discussions and they all
adopt a similar form: one of the developers makes a suggestion or asks a question,
and the rest of the team, Sally included, discusses it. Sally closes the exchange by
stating which decision has been taken, validates it with the developers, and then
distributes the tasks to be accomplished.
The company’s development methodology helps the team decide on the pos-
sibilities with which it is presented. Following a developer’s comment about the
“best moment” to start one of the many development tasks, the team members
then ask themselves to which step of the methodology the particular task belongs.
Given that technical elements do not always ﬁt in pre-deﬁned categories, the
team members have to negotiate before agreeing on the best time to work on a
task. This methodology also helps the team sort out what needs to be done
sooner rather than later, and thus prioritize all the tasks that must be completed.
Finally, all team members also conduct time estimations. When a task is mentioned,
someone estimates the number of days needed to complete the task, which the
other team members then evaluate based on their previous experiences.
Work organization and distribution is intertwined with the technical discus-
sions. Altogether, these exchanges reveal that the team is thinking collectively;
questions are asked, possibilities suggested, answers proposed and debated, and
explanations given. Even though everyone participates in these discussions, dis-
tinctions between team members are visible in their interventions. The devel-
opers, Frank and Oliver, refer to technical points, and the project manager Sally
translates them in management terms. Technical concerns are paramount this
early in the project. For example, at some point, the team recognizes a delicate
technical issue but is unable to decipher the mystery surrounding its discovery.
The exchanges move from being about the technical issue, to trying to organize
how to approach and deal with this unknown element. At a certain point, Matt
tells Sally, “You’ll have nice questions to answer … ,” implying that this element
will be diﬃcult to solve. In the presence of this mystery, the team members
search for the best expert to consult. Uncovering this element awakens not only a
technical question, but also a managerial one. This puzzling element—and the
consideration that comes with it—opens the door to a broader management dis-
cussion, one that touches on planning, sequencing of the tasks to start, and
numbers of days to allot to each of these tasks. Most of these management deci-
sions can only be made by referring to the technical dimensions of the project,
but these have to be converted into managerial terms by Sally. She is particularly
comfortable in this position as she has a strong technical background and much
experience in leading projects. Towards the end of the meeting, she outlines her
expectations for the next meeting, structuring the work to be completed, and
identifying the targets to be reached. While presenting what has to be produced
(in technical terms), she invokes project management issues: number of meetings
to hold, allocation of tasks, and the time necessary to complete them.
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
121

In this ongoing and collective reﬂection, Document 7 plays an important and
active role. First, the meeting is a direct consequence of its production. Without
this document, the team members would not have been summoned to work on
it, nor united at that speciﬁc moment in time. Document 7 can thus be seen as a
temporary link, with the responsibility of assembling the otherwise dismantled
team. Globally speaking, Document 7 encourages the team members to talk
during the meeting, stimulating collective reﬂection. It also organizes the team’s
collective work: team members follow the order in which technical points are
enumerated in the document. But Document 7 should not be seen as a simple list
of points to cover; it is an intermediary object (Vinck, 2009) in itself, a part of the
work that leads to the completion of the project. The team questions its content,
but also reﬁnes it as lines of the document are singled out, scrutinized, and
rewritten. All copies of Document 7 are covered with annotations by the end of
the meeting.
At some point, the team members start considering a section of code exposed
in Document 7. While they are reading, Frank, who prepared this code, explains
his course of action and exposes the reasons for his proceeding in this way. Once
he has ﬁnished, Oliver joins the discussion and explains how he is going to build
on Frank’s work. This section of Document 7 helps articulate what has already
been accomplished and what remains to be done. The ﬁgure included in Docu-
ment 7 supports and illustrates Oliver’s explanations. In the course of this discus-
sion, Sally and Matt question Frank about how he has articulated certain elements
and about his reﬂection during this process. This second point is particularly
important to share as it will help in guiding the other developers in their future
work. They need to know what he has considered while preparing Document 7,
what he has included and rejected, because this helps the team members create a
uniﬁed approach to the work.
In the end, the team reaches a decision that, given its complexity, requires
them to hold two more meetings during which they thoroughly cover the tech-
nical work sketched out during this meeting. This complexity was expected by
the team, but they did not know when it would appear, nor which speciﬁc form
it would take. This episode of collective work has not only allowed the team
members to begin planning the work in a more detailed way, but also to slowly
discover exactly what elements will be technically challenging. At this point, they
are gradually including these challenges in their management of the project. As
this snapshot of the Graph Project shows, this management is the fruit of a joint
process, a consequence of interactions and collective work. After this meeting, the
developments’ foundations are laid and agreed on; the priorities for the next
weeks are identiﬁed, described, and shared; and the planning and organization of
the work are set. The project has gained in direction, shape, and order.
Leadership (understood, as presented, either as directing, shaping, or ordering
eﬀects stemming from interactions and collective action) is produced through the
accumulation and articulation of many small elements: the answer to a question, a
122
Viviane Sergi

ﬁgure in a document, and the steps of the methodology. Seen in this light, lea-
dership appears as a rather mundane bricolage, collectively elaborated as the inter-
actions between team members unfold, the fruit of social practices aiming at
making the project happen and helped by the various objects used by the team
members. Of course, not everything that was resolved, negotiated, decided on, or
established during this meeting should be interpreted as leadership. For example,
discussing technical possibilities has more to do with the writing of the code than
with leadership.
As previously discussed, taking materiality into account in studying leadership
should lead to viewing how the assemblage of humans and non-humans con-
tributes to creating leadership eﬀects. It can be suggested that the intertwining of
humans and non-humans (of which the most signiﬁcant non-human is Docu-
ment 7) generated direction, shape, and order during this moment in the project’s
life. It is also possible to identify which eﬀects were created, at one point or
another, by everyone and everything involved. By analyzing the vignette pre-
sented, we can recognize who or what produced some of the directing, shaping,
and ordering eﬀects that I associate with the collective production of leadership.
This ﬁrst requires listing all the eﬀects that are created in interactions between
human and non-human actors. They must then be sorted, as not all eﬀects are
related to leadership. Those linked to leadership can then be associated with the
three broad categories of leadership eﬀects. Table 6.1 summarizes the eﬀects
associated with this vignette I presented.
When comparing the state of the Graph Project before and after this meeting,
it appears to have gained direction, shape, and order. Taken together, it is the
combination of the people who met at that time, what they said, the choices they
made, and what helped in producing a sense of direction that created leadership,
temporarily, for the project. It is in this sense that leadership appears as a processual,
collective, and mundane eﬀect of unfolding action.
By choosing this approach, my intention was not to reduce the importance of
human actors formally identiﬁed as “leaders.” As my illustration has shown, Sally,
the project leader, had a decisive inﬂuence on what happened during this speciﬁc
episode by impacting the orientation of the meeting and having the power to
impose decisions. In this sense, it is important to consider people in leadership
positions, either formal or informal, and their speciﬁc mark and impact on the
course of action. But if our inquiries question what leadership is by looking out-
side the individual leader’s choices and behaviors, I believe it is fundamental that
we open this phenomenon’s deﬁnition to include other actors, so as to take into
consideration anything that can have what I have labeled “leadership eﬀects.” I
have deﬁned such eﬀects in terms of directing, shaping, or ordering, and used my
illustration to reveal that these eﬀects can be produced by a variety of elements:
the project leader, the interactions and discussions between all team members at
the meeting in question, Document 7 (via its presence and its content—lines of
code, ﬁgures, list of tasks, etc.), and the development methodology.
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
123

Documents make a diﬀerence in the production of leadership, as I have speci-
ﬁcally shown in this vignette. This diﬀerence has led Cooren (2004) to talk of
textual agency, which I also have explored (Sergi, 2013). If Document 7 makes a
notable contribution to the process of elaborating leadership, its contribution goes
beyond the speciﬁc instances where this production of leadership takes place.
Generally speaking, because documents can be seen as immutable mobiles
(Latour, 1986), exert a stabilizing power over the collective (Brown & Duguid,
2000; Geisler, 2001), and can make people act (Winsor, 2006), they not only
help in solidifying the project and its numerous dimensions, but also expand, out
of meetings and other instances of collective work, the directing, shaping, and
ordering results produced in situ. Leadership, understood in these terms, is (at least
partly) extended out of its site of collective elaboration. Document 7 will thus
help stabilize what has been negotiated, in terms of direction, shape, and order,
during the meeting. Because of their properties, texts grant greater stability to
elements important to the continuation of action that would otherwise be more
TABLE 6.1 Producing leadership during the team meeting
Eﬀects produced during the interactions
Category of leadership eﬀects

Negotiating what should be included and excluded
from this project (Document 7, team members)

Deﬁning targets to be reached before the next meeting
(Sally, project leader)

Exposing the work to be done, suggesting ways to
approach it (Document 7, team members)

Giving indications to developers (Sally, Document 7)

Warning of an element’s absence, reminding of its
importance for later on (Document 7)
Directing

Laying the foundation of the development (Document 7)

Discussing constraints and options: debating possibi-
lities, making choices (team members)

Showing what will be concretized through screenshots
of the predicted ﬁnal result (Document 7)
Shaping

Sequencing and prioritizing the tasks to accomplish
(Sally, development methodology)

Planning and estimating time (Document 7, team
members)

Choosing the best expert to consult about a newly
encountered technical mystery (team members)

Illustrating the relationships between various compo-
nents (Document 7)

Identifying the next tasks to be accomplished and the
time allocated to complete them (Document 7, team
members)
Ordering
124
Viviane Sergi

fragile and transient. After all, such a greater stability is obtained by mobilizing, or
bringing into perspective, resources other than human actors (Latour, 2005;
Strum & Latour, 1999). It is this general contribution of materiality that makes it
especially relevant to the deﬁnition of leadership, and to its study.
Ultimately, this example also demonstrates that leadership, as collectively ela-
borated, can stabilize the project: it gives it shape (in the form of parameters to
respect and tasks to complete), provides direction (where to go now, what to
pursue, what to do next), and orders future action (by attributing work and
deciding on the sequence of tasks to be accomplished). But such stabilization
should not be confused with stability. As other scenes taken from the Graph
Project would have shown, that which was produced via this speciﬁc assemblage
provided leadership, but only for a certain time. From the work’s progress, new
technical surprises arose and time management diﬃculties were experienced. In turn,
the leadership eﬀects produced after this meeting became corroded by subsequent
actions and unplanned circumstances, leading to a dismantling of this assemblage.
The perspective explored here alludes to a provisional view of leadership, as
eﬀects that may last, or that may need to be re-produced over time.
Discussion and conclusion
To address the question of what leadership is, I have put forward three ideas in
this chapter: ﬁrst, that by rooting leadership in process ontology, we can see it as
being processually elaborated while action is unfolding; second, leadership can be
understood as a result, as an eﬀect of action, and, more precisely, in terms of
eﬀects that produce directing, shaping, and ordering eﬀects; and third, these
eﬀects stem from assemblages of human and non-human actors, simultaneously
highlighting the materiality of leadership as well as its collective nature. Seen in
this light, leadership appears as a provisional heterogeneous assemblage that
changes, unexpected events, and the twists and turns of action can erode. As such,
leadership is never fully stabilized, and reproducing leadership is always needed, as
action evolves over time.
My reﬂection began with the practice perspective. As mentioned by various
researchers (like Nicolini, 2012; Reckwitz, 2002; Reckwitz, 2001), the deﬁnition
of the concept of practice already includes materiality, therefore making it
intrinsically part of any practice. Viewing leadership as a practice thus implies
acknowledging the place materiality holds in its daily production. However, until
recently, materiality has rarely been included in leadership. To enrich our
understanding of leadership, I have brieﬂy presented in this chapter how such an
inclusion could be achieved, both theoretically and empirically. The commu-
nicational nature of practices is rarely acknowledged in the practice perspective,
while it is clear that interactions and practices happen through communication.
As for leadership studies, communication has often been discussed, but very rarely
in light of the CCO perspective. When we study practices, we observe people
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
125

acting. In the context of leadership, we observe people interacting. Commu-
nication is already there, at the forefront. That is where leadership emerges; thus,
it is not a stretch to give communication an important place in the production of
leadership. It is an especially fruitful idea to deﬁne communication not as a vessel
or as a resource, but as constituting phenomena. With its focus on processes and
interactions and its hybrid conception of agency, CCO represents a promising
and stimulating perspective for leadership studies.
My aim in presenting the selected vignette was two-fold. First, theoretically
speaking, it served to brieﬂy illustrate the potential of combining the previously
described perspectives. I must underline, however, that this is only a partial illus-
tration. Without the exact transcription of the conversations that took place
during the meeting, some details regarding the local performance of leadership
have been lost. The CCO-inspired approach can best be accessed when one can
conduct conversation analysis, as, indicated by the variety of organization studies
inﬂuenced by this stream of research, detailed accounts of what is happening in
context and in interactions are the key empirical materials needed. This approach
thus calls for a sensitivity to unfolding action and a broadening of that which is
considered to be participating in this action, hence justifying why a process
ontology and a hybrid view of agency are relevant bases for such an approach.
Given this ontological anchoring, this approach could be applied to a number of
organizational phenomena, and I have tried to showcase its potential for the study
of leadership in the present chapter. Second, concerning method, this vignette
gives an idea of how such studies are conducted and on what their analysis must
focus. My approach can therefore be understood as a resolutely micro and
empirical one that starts with—and stays close to—mundane action happening in
organizational settings.
It is in this sense that I propose seeing leadership as a collective elaboration,
always in action, being both socially and materially produced in situ. Moreover, it
is by focusing not only on human actors but also on objects that I suggest con-
ceiving leadership production as a co-construction. Fairhurst and Cooren (2009)
have discussed how presence, this elusive quality of leaders, is both a hybrid
construction and an attribute of individuals. My vignette should be seen as
belonging to this same line of thinking, but with the diﬀerence being that I have
looked at leadership, not leaders. However, just as they argued in their article, I
view leadership as an assemblage, a combination of various contributions elabo-
rated in situ that build on each other.
This perspective has a number of consequences. First of all, it implies that lea-
dership must always be understood in context, and that it is fruitful to see it not as
the cause of action, but as one of its consequences. Because it is a product of
action, leadership is intimately tied to the social practices deployed, which points
to the importance of seeing and understanding which actors are involved, what
they are trying to achieve, and what they are struggling with when they are
acting in organizational settings. Adopting a strong process ontology leads us to
126
Viviane Sergi

see leadership as being created, constructed, and made up, but also as transient and
provisional. This indicates that leadership cannot be taken for granted, as it can
become eroded by changes, unexpected events, and twists and turns. It also points
towards the idea that leadership will (and might even have to) change form over time,
depending on the circumstances. Directing, shaping, and ordering eﬀects may be
needed at all times in any organizational activity or endeavor, but the particular form
they take will be closely connected to that which is happening at the moment.
Also, paying more attention to materiality when investigating leadership has
beneﬁts for our inquiries into this phenomenon. It leads to a ﬁner understanding
of how leadership is produced, as it becomes viewed as an emergent product of
human and non-human actors (Fairhurst & Cooren, 2009; Hawkins, 2015;
Mulcahy & Perillo, 2010). It can also lead us to identify the conditions and
practices that help produce, or hamper, the leadership needed for the continuation
of action. Finally, it also allows for considering how the design of material ele-
ments used and mobilized in organizational settings can inﬂuence their contribu-
tion to leadership in action and, more generally, to what is collectively achieved.
From a broader standpoint, one of the diﬃculties associated with the approach
explored in this chapter pertains to the deﬁnition of leadership I have put forward.
As is sometimes the case with studies adopting a strong process ontology, distinguishing
the organizational phenomena from one another may prove to be complex. Are
the eﬀects I have identiﬁed in the brief analysis presented here really a question of
leadership? Could they be linked to other phenomena, like organizing? My
answer to this relevant question would be to simply follow one of the key
methodological principles of the CCO perspective: start and work from the terra
ﬁrma of interactions (Cooren, 2006). Seen in this light, there is no “essence” to
leadership: there are only interactions constituting what can be interpreted by
actors and researchers as leadership. Yet, the risk of diluting the concept of lea-
dership (Denis et al., 2012) remains and researchers should keep this in mind
when conducting studies from this perspective.
Finally, this chapter has only touched on the vast topic of materiality, and the chosen
vignette mobilized one speciﬁc category of materiality: documents. But materi-
ality alludes to something much wider than simple objects. It would, therefore,
be highly relevant for studies following the approach proposed in these pages to include
the body in their empirical analysis, and also to better consider physical space. Bodies
and embodiment have been studied in leadership (see for example Ropo, Sauer &
Salovaara, 2013; Sinclair, 2005), and so has physical space (like in the case of
Carroll, Chapter 5, this volume), but these topics have clear research potential,
especially from the practice and CCO perspectives, as applied to leadership.
Notes
1 This chapter has beneﬁted from presentations given on this topic at the ISLC con-
ference in Lund, Sweden (2010), and at two symposiums at the Academy of
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
127

Management (2012 and 2014). Comments received during these presentations have
contributed to developing and strengthening this chapter’s ideas. I thank the various
participants I met during these events for their valuable questions and remarks.
2 Details regarding the company and the persons interviewed have been modiﬁed to
ensure conﬁdentiality.
3 I observed 22 meetings, conducted 25 interviews, and collected 80 documents.
References
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). Managers doing leadership: The extra-ordinarization
of the mundane. Human Relations, 56(12), 1435–1459.
Ashcraft, K. L., Kuhn, T. R., & Cooren, F. (2009). Constitutional amendments:
“Materializing” organizational communication. Academy of Management Annals, 3(1), 1–64.
Bechky, B. A. (2003). Object lessons: Workplace artifacts as representations of occupational
jurisdiction. The American Journal of Sociology, 109(3), 720–752.
Blomquist, T., Hällgren, M., Nilsson, A., & Söderholm, A. (2010). Project-as-practice: In
search of project management research that matters. Project Management Journal, 41(1), 5–16.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2000). The social life of information. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Brummans, B., Cooren, F., Robichaud, D., & Taylor, J. R. (2014). Approaches in research
on the communicative constitution of organizations. In L. L. Putnam & D. Mumby
(Eds.), Sage handbook of organizational communication (3rd edition) (pp. 173–194). London:
Sage.
Callon, M. (2002). Writing and (re)writing devices as tools for managing complexity. In
J. Law & A. Mol (Eds), Complexities: Social studies of knowledge practices (pp. 191–218).
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Chia, R. (1997). Essai: Thirty years on: From organizational structures to the organization
of thought. Organization Studies, 18(4), 685–707.
Collinson, D. (2005). Dialectics of leadership. Human Relations, 58(11), 1419–1442.
Collinson, D., & Grint, K. (2005). Editorial: The leadership agenda. Leadership, 1(1), 5–9.
Cooren, F. (2004). Textual agency: How texts do things in organizational settings.
Organization, 11(3), 373–393.
Cooren, F. (2006). The organizational world as a plenum of agencies. In F. Cooren, J. R. Taylor,
& E. Van Every (Eds.), Communication as organizing: Practical approaches to research into the dynamic
of text and conversation (pp. 81–100). Mahwah, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cooren, F., Fairhurst, G. T., & Huët, R. (2012). Why matter always matters in (organi-
zational) communication. In P. M. Leonardi, B. A. Nardi & J. Kallinikos (Eds.), Mate-
riality and organizing: Social interaction in a technological world (pp. 296–314). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Cooren, F., Kuhn, T. R., Cornelissen, J. P., & Clark, T. (2011). Communication, orga-
nizing and organization: An overview and introduction to the special issue. Organization
Studies, 32(9), 1149–1170.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2007). Shared leadership: A postheroic
perspective on leadership as a collective construction. International Journal of Leadership
Studies, 3(1), 40–67.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26, 77–86.
128
Viviane Sergi

Cunliﬀe, A. L., & Eriksen, M. (2011). Relational leadership. Human Relations, 64(11),
1425–1449.
Czarniawska-Joerges, B. (1992). Exploring complex organizations: A cultural perspective. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Rouleau, L. (2010). The practice of leadership in the messy
world of organizations. Leadership, 6(1), 67–88.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Sergi, V. (2012). Leadership in the plural. Academy of Manage-
ment Annals, 6(1), 211–283.
Endrissat, N., & von Arx, W. (2013). Leadership practices and context: Two sides of the
same coin. Leadership, 9(2), 278–304.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Connaughton, S. L. (2014). Leadership: A communicative perspective.
Leadership, 10(1), 7–35.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Cooren, F. (2009). Leadership as the hybrid production of presence(s).
Leadership, 5(4), 469–490.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Grant, D. (2010). The social construction of leadership: A sailing guide.
Management Communication Quarterly, 24(2), 171–210.
Fauré, B., & Rouleau, L. (2011). The strategic competence of accountants and middle
managers in budget making. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 36(3), 167–182.
Feldman, M. S., & Orlikowski, W. J. (2011). Theorizing practice and practicing theory.
Organization Science, 22(5), 1240–1253.
Fletcher, J. K. (2004). The paradox of postheroic leadership: An essay on gender, power,
and transformational change. Leadership Quarterly, 15(5), 647–661.
Geisler, C. (2001). Textual objects: Accounting for the role of texts in the everyday life of
complex organizations. Written Communication, 18(3), 296–325.
Gherardi, S. (2005). Organizational knowledge: The texture of workplace learning. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publications.
Golsorkhi, D., Rouleau, L., Seidl, D., & Vaara, E. (2010). Cambridge handbook of strategy-as-
practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gronn, P. (2002). Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 13(4),
423–451.
Hällgren, M., & Wilson, T. L. (2008). The nature and management of crises in construc-
tion projects: Projects-as-practice observations. International Journal of Project Management,
26, 830–838.
Harper, D. (2015). Leadership. In Online etymology dictionary. Available at www.etym
online.com/index.php (accessed 29 May 2015).
Hawkins, B. (2015). Ship-shape: Materializing leadership in the British Royal Navy.
Human Relations, 68(6), 951–971.
Helin, J., Hernes, T., Hjorth, D., & Holt, R. (2014). The Oxford handbook of process
philosophy and organization studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hernes, T. (2008). Understanding organization as process: Theory for a tangled world. London:
Routledge.
Hernes, T. (2014). A process theory of organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holmberg, I., & Tyrstrup, M. (2010). Well then—What now? An everyday approach to
managerial leadership. Leadership, 6(4), 353–372.
Hosking, D. M. (1988). Organizing, leadership and skilful process. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(2), 147–166
Larsson, M., & Lundholm, S. E. (2010). Leadership as work-embedded inﬂuence: A
micro-discursive analysis of an everyday interaction in a bank. Leadership, 6(2), 159–184.
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
129

Larsson, M., & Lundholm, S. E. (2013). Talking work in a bank: A study of organizing
properties of leadership in work interactions. Human Relations, 66(8), 1101–1129.
Latour, B. (1986). Visualisation and cognition: Thinking with eyes and hands. In H. Kuklick
(Ed.), Knowledge and society studies in the sociology of culture past and present, Vol. 6 (pp. 1–40).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1994). On technical mediation: Philosophy, sociology, genealogy. Common
Knowledge, 3, 29–64.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lindgren, M., Packendorﬀ, J., & Tham, H. (2011). Relational dysfunctionality: Leadership
interactions in a Sarbanes-Oxley Act implementation project. European Journal of
International Management, 5(1), 13–29.
Mailhot, C., Gagnon, S., Langley, A., & Binette, L. F. (in press). Distributing leadership
across people and objects in a collaborative research project. Leadership. Online before
print, doi: 10.1177/1742715014543578.
Mulcahy, D., & Perillo, S. (2010). Thinking management and leadership within colleges
and schools somewhat diﬀerently: A practice-based, actor-network theory perspective.
Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 39(1), 122–145.
Nicolini, D. (2012). Practice theory, work, and organization: An introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Oborn, E., Barrett, M., & Dawson, S. (2013). Distributed leadership in policy formulation:
A sociomaterial perspective. Organization Studies, 34(2), 253–276.
Orlikowski, W. J. (2007). Sociomaterial practices: Exploring technology at work. Organization
Studies, 28(9), 1435–1448.
Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). Shared leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of
leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Pentland, B. T., & Singh, H. (2012). Materiality: What are the consequences? In P. M.
Leonardi et al. (Eds.), Materiality and organizing: Social interaction in a technological world
(pp. 287–295). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pye, A. (2005). Leadership and organizing: Sensemaking in action. Leadership, 1(1), 31–49.
Raelin, J. A. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7(2),
195–211.
Reckwitz, A. (2002). Toward a theory of social practices: A development in culturalist
theorizing. European Journal of Social Theory, 5(2), 243–263.
Rescher, N. (2012). Process philosophy. In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Available at
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/process-philosophy/ (accessed 29 May 2015).
Ropo, A., Sauer, E., & Salovaara, P. (2013). Embodiment of leadership through material
place. Leadership, 9(3), 378–395.
Schatzki, T. R. (2001). Introduction—practice theory. In T. R. Schatzki, K. Knorr-Cetina,
& E. von Savigny (Eds.), The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 1–14). London:
Routledge.
Sergi, V. (2012). Bounded becoming: Insights from understanding projects in situation.
International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 5(3), 345–363.
Sergi, V. (2013). Constituting the temporary organization: Documents in the context of
projects. In D. Robichaud & F. Cooren (Eds.), Organization and organizing: Materiality,
agency, discourse (pp. 190–206). New York: Routledge.
Sinclair, A. (2005). Body possibilities in leadership. Leadership, 1(4), 387–406.
130
Viviane Sergi

Spillane, J. P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J. B. (2001). Investigating school leadership
practice: A distributed perspective. Educational Researcher, 30(3), 23–28.
Strum, S., & Latour, B. (1999). Redeﬁning the social link: From baboons to humans. In D.
Mackenzie, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The social shaping of technology (2nd edition) (pp. 116–125).
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Taylor, J. R., & Robichaud, D. (2004). Finding the organization in the communication:
Discourse as action and sensemaking. Organization, 11(3), 395–413.
Tourish, D. (2013). The dark side of transformational leadership: A critical perspective. New
York: Routledge.
Tourish, D. (2014). Leadership, more or less? A processual, communication perspective on
the role of agency in leadership theory. Leadership, 10(1), 79–98.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676.
Vaara, E., & Whittington, R. (2012). Strategy-as-practice: Taking social practices seriously.
Academy of Management Annals, 6(1), 285–336.
Van Maanen, J. (2001). Afterword: Natives ‘R’ us: Some notes on the ethnography of
organizations. In D. Gellner & Hirsch, E., (Eds.), Inside organizations: Anthropologists at
work (pp. 231–262). Oxford: Berg.
Vinck, D. (2009). De l’objet intermédiaire à l’objet-frontière. Revue d’anthropologie des
connaissances, 3(1), 51–72.
Vine, B., Holmes, J., Marra, M., Pfeifer, D., & Jackson, B. (2008). Exploring co-leadership
talk through interactional sociolinguistics. Leadership, 4(3), 339–360.
Winsor, D. (2006). Using writing to structure agency: An examination of engineers’
practice. Technical Communication Quarterly, 15(4), 411–430.
Wood, M. (2005). The fallacy of misplaced leadership. Journal of Management Studies, 42(6),
1101–1121.
Yakura, E. K. (2002). Charting time: Timelines as temporal boundary object. Academy of
Management Journal, 45(5), 956–970.
Materiality and leadership-as-practice
131

7
TURNING LEADERSHIP INSIDE-OUT
AND BACK-TO-FRONT
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
John Shotter
What determines our judgment, our concepts and reactions, is not what one man is
doing now, an individual action, but the whole hurly-burly of human actions, the
background against which we see an action.
(Wittgenstein, 1981, no. 567)
Introduction: philosophical “scene setting”
Raelin (2014) calls for “the reframing of leadership, as we know it” (p. 2), for us
to no longer see it as residing simply in the traits or behaviors of single, special
individuals, but to see it as a practice, as “the release of agency through its incar-
nation as a dialogic structure” (p. 2). By “agency,” Raelin means a form of colla-
borative agency in which, rather than as individuals acting separately from each
other, people acting in relation to each other become able to do things that they
cannot do apart. As he sees it, something is created in people acting within
two-way, back-and-forth, dialogic relations with each other that is impossible in
one-way, monological relations.
Indeed, Raelin goes so far as to question whether the idea of leadership-as-
practice can continue to be expressed in terms merely of “an inﬂuence relation-
ship between leaders and followers.” Instead, he suggests that we now need to
“turn leadership on its head… [and to] consider whether a relationship of lea-
dership may occur without inﬂuence in either direction” (p. 10)—for, in an
inﬂuence relationship, people try to manipulate each other into carrying out ends
that are not mutually created. When this is the case, power is exerted, and leadership
is reduced simply to management, a movement toward new horizons is reduced
to the eﬃcient implementation either of already existing ends, or of ends imposed

on a group of people by outside others. Whereas, as we shall see, when people in
truly dialogic relationships meet, as Bakhtin (1986) puts it, “without rank” (p. 97),
the creation of uniquely new ends, both unforeseen and unforeseeable, becomes a
possibility.
But more than this is at issue: What is special about seeing what we call leadership
as emerging in the course of an unfolding, dialogically structured process, occurring
among all concerned within a social group, is that it is impossible to hold any of
the individuals involved responsible for its emergence. I say “what we call lea-
dership” because, as will become clear, as Raelin (2014) suggests, once we enter
into two-way, dialogical (Bakhtin 1986; Gadamer, 2000) relations with the others
in our surroundings, rather than one-way, monological ones, we ﬁnd that, rather
than discovering pre-existing things in our inquiries, we continually bring such
“things” into existence. As a consequence, its “ownership” can be shared by all—
it “belongs” to no-one in particular. Further, in such processes, everything that
happens, everything that even single individuals do, happens in response to, as
well as in anticipation of, how others in the group have already acted, and/or will act
in the future. Thus in such circumstances as these, all involved can feel that they are
working towards a common good (Sandel, 2012), towards ends of their own critical
creation, in that as a dialogically emerging outcome, it cannot be arrived at by any merely
“technical,” “logical,” or “calculational” means. For besides those directly
addressed in such processes, at work in the background to any dialogue, as
Bakhtin (1986) makes clear, is what he calls the superaddressee, a third party
“whose absolutely just responsive understanding is presumed, either in some metaphysical
distance or in distant historical time” (p. 126, emphasis added).
However, given our upbringing in western, Cartesian-Newtonian forms of
thought, it is not at all easy to see leadership in this non-mechanistic and non-
technocratic fashion. For, not only later in life as professional academics and
intellectuals, but from birth, we are immersed in a common sense in which it is
taken for granted that the world is made up of separate, nameable things in motion
according to discoverable laws, rules, or principles—a common sense that, as we
shall see, is very diﬃcult to question and to move beyond. Thus, those of us who
see scientiﬁc methods and modes of thought, along with theories couched in
unambiguous technical concepts, as providing the only pathway to reliably eﬀective
action, will see little sense in the re-orientations I will propose below, especially to
the extent to which I will extol the value of ill-deﬁned and unﬁnished notions,
open to yet further speciﬁcation. How can clarity ever emerge from vagueness?
But as will become clear (I hope), if we are to take the fact that we owe our
own very way-of-being-in-the-world—even as the self-contained Cartesian-
Newtonian, rationalistic thinkers we currently take ourselves to be—as dependent
on our living immersion in essential dialogically structured social worlds, then we
need, not just to turn leadership on its head, but to turn it inside-out. We need to
see leadership (along with many other major concepts in organization studies),
not as something within particular people, but as something particular people are
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
133

always within, and which is always open to being fashioned among them in this,
that, or some other particular fashion in accord with the circumstances within
which it is needed.
But even more than this, as well as turning it inside-out, we will also need to
turn it back-to-front, in the sense of needing to reverse the direction of our inquiries,
to explore the nature of what is occurring in a social group before “leadership-
events” as such can occur. Thus, as Raelin (Chapter 1, this volume) makes clear
in introducing the whole notion of leadership-as-practice, the purpose of this
volume is to “extend its conceptualization through a number of critical themes
that have not been suﬃciently explored or, in some cases, not explored at all” (p. 1).
And indeed, in introducing, primarily, the works of Wittgenstein (1953, 1969,
1980, 1981) and Bakhtin (1986), I will be exploring quite a number of other lines
of thought not usually explored at all by aﬃcionados only of social scientiﬁc
modes of thought within the ﬁelds of organizational, leadership, and management
studies. In fact my exploration will primarily be a philosophical one aimed, as
Wittgenstein (1953) puts it, at bringing to light “what is possible before all new
discoveries and inventions” (no. 126). For we need to be clear, not only about
what is already at work within us enabling us to “come up with” metaphors,
images, or theoretical formulations that we feel able to accept as “being like,” or
as “representing” a particular “state of aﬀairs” of concern to us, but also about
what kind of world we take it for granted that we are living in.
The nature of the common sense background to our lives
What actually thinks within a person is not the individual himself but his social
community. The source of his thinking is not within himself but is to be found in
his social environment and in the very social atmosphere he ‘breathes’. His mind is
structured, and necessarily so, under the inﬂuence of this ever-present social
environment and he cannot think in any other way.
(Fleck, 1979, p. 47)
Common sense is judgement without reﬂection, shared by an entire class, an entire
people, an entire nation, or the entire human race.
(Vico, 1968, para. 142)
How do we manage not to live in constant fear and uncertainty, but with a
degree of conﬁdence and trust that the others and othernesses in the world
around us, will relate to us as we expect and anticipate them to do? Clearly, we
do not in our daily lives live as research scientists, continually cudgeling our brains
as to how to act for the best in each situation we encounter. Mostly, we just act,
spontaneously, as the circumstances “call for us” to act. We act, we say, “intui-
tively,” “instinctively,” or “naturally” without the need, seemingly, for deliberate
ratiocination (see Sadler-Smith, 2010). Clearly, this way of mentally relating
ourselves to our surroundings spontaneously is quite diﬀerent from our more
134
John Shotter

deliberate, cognitive ways. Currently, in our more reﬂective, cognitive moments,
we clearly still think of ourselves as living in a Cartesian-Newtonian world (see
section below Our Cartesian-Newtonian ontology and the kind of thinking it invites).
But once we switch from thinking and talking of “things,” and of human
activities—from within that Cartesian-Newtonian, mechanistic world, in which
everything exists in separation from everything else, to thinking of them from
within an organic or living “world” of growing and developing “things,” in which every
“thing” is dynamically related to every “thing” else—then everything changes.
We need a diﬀerent, more ﬂuid ontology to the “atomistic,” Cartesian ontology
basic to current, rationalistic forms of thought. Indeed, in viewing “things” in a
living manner in our inquiries, we need to explore their relations to their sur-
roundings, and to notice how they show those relations to their surroundings in
the manner of their growth—for instance, we can “see” in the uneven shape and
distribution of one tree’s branches and foliage, how it has grown in relation to its
close neighbors; or how, in the rings in its trunk, we can “see” the good summers
and bad winters it has weathered. Consequently, in seeing everything, every
“thing,” as having its being only within its unfolding relations to its surroundings
(Shotter, 2015a), many of our very basic assumptions need to be reversed.
Thus, instead of seeing life as simply residing inside this or that particular
organism—and as drawing on the non-living resources in its surroundings for its
sustenance—we need to see it as emerging and growing within a back-and-forth
communication-like process occurring within the many currents of intra-mingling
activities from within which it emerges. I use the preﬁx “intra-” here, rather than
“inter-” because, following Barad, 2007, like the intricate system of currents in the
earth’s oceans, such currents all exist only in relation to each other (as well as, of course,
in relation to the moon, the earth’s axis, etc.)—and such streams of activity clearly
do not exist in independence from each other, prior to their intermingling.
Whereas, by contrast, in viewing something mechanistically, we ignore its sur-
roundings and its eﬀorts at growing in a particular manner in relation to them, and
attempt to “see” into its inner workings, to discover the inner, hidden causes of its
behavior. In other words, we will need to see the livingness of all things as being
like the swirls or vortices, or many other dynamic stabilities, that emerge creatively
from within initially, somewhat disorderly, ﬂuid streams of activity. In short, do
not ask what goes on inside such things, but what such things go on inside of.
Indeed, to be even more radical:
Instead of starting our inquiries ‘downstream’ or ‘after-the-fact’, so to speak,
with nameable, idealized, simply located, theoretical simplicities, and trying
to build them up into complex entities, we must ﬁnd the starting points for
our inquiries further ‘upstream’ or ‘before-the-fact’, and begin from within the
midst of the complicated and diﬀuse ﬂow of the many intra-twined activities occurring
out in the local circumstances within which we are embedded.
(Shotter, 2015b)
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
135

At the root of all these changes is not only a change in our focus, in what we
attend to, but also a change in our ways of looking, in what after each moment of
ﬁxation we look for next. In other words, a change in the sequencing of what we
expect to be connected to what, as we survey the circumstances confronting us—a
change in the embodied taken-for-granted structures of anticipation with which we
go out to meet those around us, ready to respond to them in ways meaningful
both to them and ourselves.
In short, a change in our common sense, as Vico notes above, is in the judgments
we make spontaneously, without reﬂection, that result in the responsive feelings
(movements) occurring within us in relation to what we see before us. As Fleck
(1979) points out above, to repeat: “The source of [a person’s] thinking is not
within himself [or herself] but is to be found in his [or her] social environment
and in the very social atmosphere he ‘breathes’” (p. 47), and it is diﬃcult for those
of us “caught up in” such ways of thinking, to think in any other way. This is not
at all a matter of Janis’ (1972) “group think,” in which individual members try to
minimize conﬂict and reach a consensus decision without critical evaluation of
alternative ideas or viewpoints, and by isolating themselves from outside inﬂu-
ences. It is much deeper. As Wittgenstein (1953) puts it, we are held captive by a
“picture,” and we cannot easily “get outside it, for it [lies] in our language and
language seemed to repeat it to us inexorably” (no. 115).
We need to distinguish between the kind of language-inﬂuenced thinking that
we, as socially accountable adult thinkers, do deliberately and know of ourselves
as being able to do deliberately, and the kind of language-mediated thinking that
just happens, spontaneously within us. In this language-mediated thinking, we are
unaware of its source, or of the degree to which it is in fact shaping and limiting
in what it makes available to us to think-with (Shotter, 2010, that is the kinds of
images and metaphors that we take “naturally” to be like crucial aspects of the
circumstances we deal with in our daily lives. This distinction, as we shall see, is
crucial, as unlike our deliberate thinking—which requires an anxious eﬀort on our
part to “get it right”—the thinking that just happens within us is of a kind that
seems to occur eﬀortlessly.
Although what I will call the after-the-fact properties of this kind of thinking
have been extensively described in individuals (e.g., see Kahneman, 2011), we
still lack a before-the-fact (explicated further in Conclusions) account of what is
involved in our coming to as a member of a social group who all exhibit a ver-
sion of this spontaneous, eﬀortless way of thinking as the contextual background
to their more deliberate forms of thought. In short, a theme that has not yet been
suﬃciently explored, is what is involved in a particular social group coming to
share a particular common sense, such that each member—on ﬁnding themselves at
any one moment with a particular experience in a particular circumstance of
concern to the group—makes use of a before-the-fact set of shared judgments as to
how they should respond. That is, their judgement should be expressed as being like
this rather than like that, or as “calling for” this action rather than that (Shotter &
136
John Shotter

Tsoukas, 2014a,b)—for such a speciﬁc before-the-fact judgment arouses a speciﬁc
anticipation.
This before-the-fact role of judgment—unlike its after-the-fact role, as to whether
an event is good or bad for us—is concerned with what kind of event an otherwise
indeterminate event is to count as for us. Indeed, as Wittgenstein (1953) noted: “If
language is to be a means of communication there must be agreement not only in
deﬁnitions but also (queer as this may sound) in judgments” (no. 242). Thus in
possession of such a shared system of anticipation arousing judgments, as a
member of a linguistic community, we judge that the various noises coming out
of people’s mouths are not just variations of breathy sounds, but that some
sequences of verbal sounds are questions while others are answers, and similarly,
that some bodily gestures are friendly and others aggressive, and so on and so on.
Indeed, as Dewey (1929 [1958]) put it long ago, “to understand is to anticipate
together, it is to make a cross-reference which, when acted upon, brings about a
partaking in a common, inclusive, undertaking” (pp. 178–179). For the others
around us can only coordinate their behavior with ours if we all share in a
structure of anticipations, such that we can all, in our verbally articulated utterances,
arouse anticipations in each other as to our possible next steps.
But as Wittgenstein (1969) went on to say later, to emphasize again the
importance of the shared nature of such before-the-fact anticipation creating judg-
ments: “I did not get my picture of the world by satisfying myself of its correct-
ness; nor do I have it because I am satisﬁed of its correctness. No: it is the
inherited background against which I distinguish between true and false” (no.
94). And without this “inheritance,” our routine understanding of each other
within a linguistic community would be impossible. A common sense is not only
what a dialogue happens in, it also determines what it can occur in relation to.
However, although acknowledging it as “inherited” situates the process of a
group coming to possess a common sense within the general, back-and-forth
commerce of a group’s everyday life activities, it does not clarify the nature of
that process any further. For clearly, it is not inherited genetically like blue eyes,
but is learnt informally after birth—very like learning our ﬁrst language—in the
course of people’s everyday, spontaneous involvements with the particular others
and othernesses around them. Thus, the learning process at work here is utterly
diﬀerent from classroom teaching, for what we learn is not facts or information,
but, to repeat, what we call “shared judgments”: that in this particular circum-
stance we should act like this and not like that. Learning to judge things as the
others around us do, means that we must learn to relate ourselves to “events” or
“things” occurring in our surroundings—dynamical things that can only be heard
or seen in the unfolding temporal organization of our living, responsive relations
to our circumstances—and to talk of them in a distinctive manner, to describe them
being like Xs, rather than like Ys, while still being in fact diﬀerent from Xs, and thus
still amenable to other likenings as well. And to learn in this spontaneous way,
without any explicit teaching, is something that our body does for us, so to speak,
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
137

to a greater or lesser extent, according to the extent of our engaged involvements,
the training we receive, and the degree of practice we exert. And indeed, work-
ing in terms of likenesses and similarities (and diﬀerences) rather than correspondences,
that is identities, is also central, as we will see, to the Wittgensteinian approach I
am taking here.
From problem-solving to the task of gaining “orientation”
Thus, as I see it, there are two major kinds of diﬃculty in our lives, not just one:
there are 1) cognitive diﬃculties or diﬃculties of the intellect; and 2) diﬃculties of orientation
or diﬃculties to do with ways of relating ourselves to our surroundings, what
Wittgenstein calls diﬃculties of the will. Indeed, as he remarks:
What [can make] a subject hard to understand—if it’s something signiﬁcant
and important—is not that before you can understand it you need to be
specially trained in abstruse matters, but the contrast between understanding
the subject and what most people want to see … What has to be overcome is
a diﬃculty having to do with the will, rather than with the intellect
(Wittgenstein, 1980, p. 17)
For often, our initial impulse is to pick out and name what we see as existing in
separation from all else around it; it is that impulse that we need to “put on hold,” so
to speak, if we are to go dialogical.
1.
We can formulate diﬃculties of the intellect as problems which, with the aid
of clever theories, we can solve by the use of a “manipulational” form of
reasoning, making use of inner mental representations that correspond to an
outer reality in the sense set out long ago by Heinrich Hertz (1894 [1956]):
“We form for ourselves images or symbols of external objects,” he said,
“and the form that we give them is such, that the necessary consequents of
the images in thought are always the images of the necessary consequents in
nature of the things pictured” (p. 1).
2.
Diﬃculties of the will, however, are of a quite diﬀerent kind, for they are to
do with how we orient ourselves bodily towards events occurring around us,
with how we relate ourselves to them, the ways in which we see them, hear
them, experience them, and value them—for these are the anticipatory ways
of looking that determine (in the sense of “giving shape to”), the lines of
action we resolve on as appropriate within the essentially indeterminate
situations which we ﬁnd ourselves to be in.
For instance, with the well-known faces/vase ambiguous ﬁgure, if we ﬁrst look
with the overall schema of a face to guide us in our expectations, we could look
ﬁrst from what might possibly be a forehead to an expected eye region, and then to
138
John Shotter

an expected nose region, and so on. Eventually, we are looking from all these
details (if each of these expectations is to an extent fulﬁlled) to the overall per-
ception of a face—in short, the ﬁgure can satisfy the expectations aroused by a
face-way-of-looking. Similarly, with a vase-way-of-looking, we can look from a
bowl region to a stem region to a base region, and ﬁnd that that can be satisﬁed by
the ﬁgure too. Where here, of course, I am making use of Polanyi’s (1967, p. 10)
well-known from-to structure of tacit knowing. If we were just to say that ﬁrst we
see faces and then we see a vase, that is describe our experience of the ambiguous
ﬁgure in terms only of our achievements, we would lose that in so doing, we swit-
ched from ﬁrst trying to see faces, and what that trying consisted in. Thus, the
precise nature of our before-the-fact orientation is a crucial, determining factor in
how we “go out to meet” and to “look over” what is arrayed before us in our
surroundings.
Indeed, we can be so focally attentive to what we are expecting to see and
anticipating what we will see next, that we can be utterly blind to other events
occurring in our surroundings (e.g. see Simons, 2000). It is hence all too easy,
given our everyday, Cartesian-Newtonian common-sense ontology, to ignore
that, intrinsic to all living activities, is not only their general spontaneous respon-
siveness to events occurring in their surroundings, but their particular and unique
nature.
Distinguishing between what we think we want and what our real need is, is
crucial. For it is only too easy to say that what we want is leadership; while our
real need is for us to feel oriented, to feel that we know “where” we are in rela-
tion to all the others around us, and the part we can contribute to all of us
achieving a common goal. Thus, as Todes puts it, in each new situation we
encounter, our ﬁrst task in getting oriented is trying to make clear to ourselves,
what it is in that situation that we lack; as he puts it:
the whole sense of our exploration and discovery of the world is prompted
by the sense of having been initially lost in the world … It was not that we
had lost something, but that we were lost … Our whole quest of discovery is
thus initially prompted by need rather than desire. It is initially ‘directed’ not
to get what we want but to discover what we want to get … The meeting
of a need ﬁrst makes the need recognizable for what it is.
(Todes, 2001, p. 177)
Our wanting “leadership” does not at all make clear what in the particular situation
we happen to be, is actually needed—after the particular need has been met, of
course, we will then say: “Ah last, some leadership has been exhibited.”
Indeed, to return to the point I made above—about not asking what goes on
inside people, but what people go on inside of—we can now note that, as Witt-
genstein (1981) put it above, it is within the context of “the whole hurly-burly of
human actions” (no. 567) that we can see the meaning of a particular activity; even
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
139

if that meaning is a need for something sensed as lacking (Todes, 2001). This is
brought home very nicely in the case of Dan, a team leader in an IT company,
that Carroll (Chapter 5, this volume) is “shadowing” for a morning. Although he
admits that, she says, “he doesn’t really know what leadership is … he feels
the absence of it often and that absence is typiﬁed by him realizing he doesn’t
have something he needs like a contact or piece of information or some kind of
larger direction and that the largely technical environment and work doesn’t
enable that. This feeling of something missing, which he names as leadership, is
something to him that seems to encompass something diﬀerent from his team
leader role” (p. 104).
Yet, as Carroll makes clear in her account of his intra-activities within his team,
he aims to have a work space that is “their own to lead, manage, ﬁll, and shape,”
(p. 99), without him having to tell them in any speciﬁc detail what to do within
it. In this sense, we can agree with Barker (1997), “… it is not the leader who
creates leadership, it is leadership that creates the leader” (p. 354)—if, that is, we can
see the use of the word “leadership” in a before-the-fact, rather than an after-the-fact
manner.
Our Cartesian-Newtonian ontology and the kind of thinking it invites
I resolved … to speak only of what would happen in a new world, if God were to
create, somewhere in imaginary space, enough matter to compose it, and if he
were to agitate diversely and confusedly the diﬀerent parts of this matter…. and
afterwards did no more than to lend his usual preserving action to nature, and to let
her act according to his established laws.
(Descartes, 1968, p. 62)
This image of our world as made up of separate entities in lawful motion is per-
vasive in almost all our everyday thinking, and still rife in much of our profes-
sional forms of talk in business and organizational studies. Thus, for instance, we
talk of leadership, management, decision making, of strategies, of marketing, of branding,
of workplace organization, of the seven factors comprising the McKinsey 7S model, as
if all these nameable features of the business and organizational world can be
identiﬁed and studied as self-contained entities in a scientiﬁc manner, and as if
research in relation to each topic is research on “the same thing.”
Indeed, under the inﬂuence of the Cartesian-Newtonian ontology implicit in
our current, taken-for-granted idea of what it is to be rational, there is a tendency
to orient towards all the circumstances we ﬁnd bewildering or disorienting (along
with those that are strange and new to us), as if they pose a problem for us, a
problem that we can solve by a process of reasoning involving a number of well-
known steps: 1) analyze the newness or strangeness as a problem to be solved into
a set of already well-known, nameable elements; 2) ﬁnd a pattern or order among
them; 3) hypothesize an agency responsible for the order (call it, say, “leadership,”
140
John Shotter

or some other such entity); 4) ﬁnd further evidence for the agency being at work
in the world; 5) enshrine the agency in a theory or theoretical system; 6) manip-
ulate the strangeness (now known in terms of the theory) to produce an advan-
tageous outcome; 7) call this “the solution” to the problem; 8) turn “to apply” the
theory elsewhere.
Motivating the idea that this is a “sure ﬁre” way of arriving at an eﬀective way
of coming to a “correct” way of acting in what initially was a puzzling situation,
is Descartes’ (1968) idea that: “[The] long chains of reasoning, quite simple and
easy, which geometers use to teach their most diﬃcult demonstrations, had given
me cause to suppose that everything … is linked in the same way … [so that]
there can be nothing so distant that one does not reach it eventually, or so hidden
that one cannot discover it” (p. 41); and this, so to speak, “sets the scene” for us
as to what counts as “thinking rationally.”
As I want to contrast this “geometric” or “calculational” form of thought with
a more dialogical-hermeneutical form, it is useful to consider the nature of this
process in terms of both its properties, and its eﬀects on the self of investigators:
1.
The properties of the process:
It is a search for regularities;
It establishes a single order of connectedness among certain perceived aspects
of one’s circumstances;
Occasionally, “the solution” can occur “in a ﬂash of insight”;
It works wholly within the realm of the already known to elaborate it
internally.
2.
Eﬀects on the self of the investigator:
The self of the investigator remains unchanged in the process;
We remain outside the other or otherness, we are “set over against” it;
We are not engaged or involved with it;
We do not get to know it “from within” its functioning within its own
context of existence;
We acquire extra knowledge about it in the form of facts or information;
We gain a mastery over it.
But it may very well be that our ability to sustain a scientiﬁc discourse in
relation to a situation puzzling us may owe more to the sameness of the words
we use in talking about it, than the sameness of the phenomena in relation to
which we are talking (and writing). There is a “categorizing” tendency at work in
language that can easily mislead us into thinking that the meaning of words is an
inherent property of the words themselves; and to forget that their meaning is
dependent on their use within a particular context. Thus, the words used within a
particular context have a meaning that is no longer quite the same when these
words are reproduced out of context. Thus, to repeat, do not ask what goes on
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
141

“in” our expressive actions, what their content is, but what our actions go on
within, what they are contained in—for this is what is involved in moving from the
urge to relate to the others and othernesses around us objectively, to relating to
them in a dialogical-hermeneutical manner. It is their singular, situated meaning, not
their ﬁxed, pre-established form or shape, that matters to us.
Entering into dialogical-hermeneutical relationships with others;
beginnings and beginnings, but no endings
There is an altogether diﬀerent way of relating ourselves to the others and
othernesses around us: we can “enter into” a dialogically structured relationship
to them, and, as we “dwell on, or with” them for a while, we can gradually
arrive at an orientation toward them as their “inner nature” becomes familiar to
us. This is similar to how we get to know our “way around” inside a city which
is at ﬁrst unfamiliar to us by exploring its highways and byways according to the
diﬀerent projects we try to pursue within it.
In becoming familiar with “things’ in our surroundings in this way, we can
come to know, not just their inert, objective nature, but to know them in terms
of a whole realm of possible responsive, living relations that we might have to
them. We can come to orient toward them in terms of their yet-to-be-achieved
values, the “calls” they might exert on us to “go on” with them in one way rather
than another—where the development of sensitivities to such calls is, of course,
not at all a part of the problem-solving process.
The sequence of steps involved, and their nature, is quite diﬀerent from those
of the problem-solving process outlined above:
1.
We need to begin by treating the other or otherness as still radically
unknown to us;
2.
We must then “enter into” dialogically structured relations with it, that is
become involved or engaged with it;
3.
To do this, we must “open” ourselves to being spontaneously “moved by
it,” we must relate to it responsively and responsibly—this is crucial: we
always know when a person is “with” us or not, whether at a party they are
responsively “following” us, or whether they are looking over our shoulder
to ﬁnd others they want to be with;
4.
This sense of contiguity, of contingency, of the other’s responses to us being
contingent on our own, is very basic—present even in new-born children;
5.
To “enter into” dialogically structured relations with another requires
“tact,” “courtesy”;
6.
We must not only “follow” the other, but also provide opportunities for
them to “follow” us;
7.
The other “calls on” us—comes both to be “with” us, as well as to “call
out” responses from us;
142
John Shotter

8.
The other can aﬀect us, move us—their meaning for us in the responsive
movements they “call out” from us;
9.
We are “answerable” (partially) to their calls as they are (partially) to ours—we
do not reply to every aspect of their inﬂuence upon us.
The descriptions of the character of the above nine steps, all have to do with
the nature of our living relations to the others and othernesses around us; the
following ﬁve steps are to do with the nature of the consequences of our meetings
with those others in that manner:
1.
An “it” appears between us: produced neither solely by “me” or by “you”
(see the mention above of Bakhtin’s (1986) notion of the superaddressee, who
calls upon all participants to “do justice” in their responses to the expressions
of those around them);
2.
The “it” is our it: there is poiesis at work between us—the sensed creation of
an overall tension or tendency requiring satisfaction;
3.
The tendency has a shaped and vectored sense to it;
4.
Central to our giving shape to our actions is our sensitivity or sensibility, not
only to the particular details of the other’s responsive activities, but also to
this “it”;
5.
As we “dwell on, with, or within” the detailed nature of our current
situation, there is a gradually growth of familiarity with its “inner nature”;
6.
Once in focus, we can have a sense of the value of its yet-to-be-achieved
aspects, its horizon, the prospects it oﬀers us for “going on” within it;
7.
We can gain a sense of “at homeness,” an orientation within it, we can
come to know our “way about” in relation to it, to ﬁnd our “footing”
within it.
In contrast to processes occurring within a Cartesian-Newtonian ontology, in terms
of both its properties, and its eﬀects on the self of investigators, dialogical-hermeneutical
processes could not be more diﬀerent:
1.
The properties of the process: “once-occurrent events of Being” (Bakhtin,
1993, p. 2) or singularities are crucial—what matters are single, unique events
that make a diﬀerence. Rather than collecting data, we need to talk in terms
of “noticings,” of what we are “struck by.” In so doing, we can establish a
multiply ordered sense of connectedness among all the perceived aspects of the
others and othernesses around us, but our familiarity with it grows only
gradually and is never ﬁnished; it exists on the edge between the radically
unknown and the realm of the known, and is continually at work expanding
its boundaries.
2.
The eﬀects on the selves of those involved: people’s selves are changed in such
encounters. We become involved with, immersed in, the “inner life” of the
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
143

other or otherness around us; everything we do is partly shaped by those
others, in being a response to what they are doing or might do. At ﬁrst
wholly “bewitched” by the “authoritative voice” of our predecessors, as our
familiarity with it grows, that voice becomes one voice among the many
other voices within us. Rather than mere knowledge of its nature, we gain
orientation towards it, that is we grasp how to “go on” within a changed
relation to it; but we never gain mastery over it, or any other voices—others
can always surprise us, no matter how familiar to us they have become.
Indeed, to go a step further, central to the whole dialogical approach to language
use, as outlined by Bakhtin (1981), is the claim that:
The word in living conversation is directly, blatantly, oriented toward a
future answer-word; it provokes an answer, anticipates it and structures itself
in the answer’s direction. Forming itself in an atmosphere of the already spoken,
the word is at the same time determined by that which has not yet been said but
which is needed and in fact anticipated by the answering word. Such is the situation
of any living dialogue.
(Bakhtin, 1981, p. 280, my emphasis)
But more than this, as Bakhtin also makes clear:
An utterance is never just a reﬂection or an expression of something already
existing and outside it that is given and ﬁnal. It always creates something that
never existed before, something absolutely new and unrepeatable … [The]
something created is always created out of something given (language, an
observed phenomenon of reality, an experienced feeling, the speaking sub-
ject himself, something ﬁnalized in his world view, and so forth). What is
given is completely transformed in what is created.
(Bakhtin, 1986, pp. 119–120)
And what is created belongs to all the participants within the dialogue.
The use of “general concepts” in relation to “particular
hermeneutical unities”
The leadership process is like a river. Contained by its bed (the culture), it can be
said to be ﬂowing in one direction, yet, upon close examination, parts of it ﬂow side-
ways, in circles, or even backwards relative to the overall direction. It is constantly
changing in speed and strength, and even reshapes its own container. Under cer-
tain conditions, it is very uniﬁed in direction and very powerful; under other
conditions it may be weak or may ﬂow in many directions at once.
(Barker, 1997, p. 352)
144
John Shotter

In fact, even more than just a ﬂowing river, we can imagine the whole process of
leadership-as-practice as beginning with drops of rain (intimations of new possi-
bilities) falling here and there but nowhere in particular. At ﬁrst gathering in
rivulets, which then run into streams, which then intra-mingle into rivers, which
after much wandering and meandering (as Barker suggests), run into estuaries, and
ﬁnally into the sea, with gravity giving a “direction” to the whole, ﬂowing process.
Where the placement of each drop is not at all decisive, as the ﬁnal result is
determined by the overall direction of gravity—where this image is taken from
Fleck (1979), who is concerned to understand how, in scientiﬁc research, “a
‘true’ ﬁnding can arise from false assumptions, from vague ﬁrst experiments, and
from many errors and detours … ” (p. 78).
I have outlined this image in some detail as I think the kind of dialogically
structured activity that we conduct in coming to our prima facie understandings of
each new situation we encounter—before formulating a more organized plan of
activity of how to act within it—has a similar sequential, developmental trajectory.
We have to “wander” around in each new circumstance, “wondering” as to the
meaning of each new feature we encounter, testing possible ways in which to
express its nature in words, while sensing how it “talks back” to us as to whether
our words are ﬁtting or not, and as we do so, gradually coming to a grasp of its
nature as an intra-connected whole. With each feature, each “part” of the whole,
coming to draw its nature from its placement, and thus its unique relations or the
unique part it comes to play, within the unfolding dynamics within the develop-
mental growth of the whole. And in picking up a fragment here, and another
there, we seem to arrive gradually, in a kind of dialogical, back-and-forth process, at a
unique sense of, or feeling for, a particular situation, prior to our going on to use
our words in describing that situation in a “ﬁtting,” that is socially acceptable,
representational fashion. Thus another image that I would like to suggest here, is
that the particular unities of meaning we come to construct in our “wanderings”
and “wonderings” are similar to those we construct as we read a text.
Indeed, the hermeneutical process involved—that of coming to a uniquely new,
not previously experienced understanding—is quite diﬀerent from the general
kinds of understanding we seek in scientiﬁc forms of inquiry. Clearly, we do not
begin our reading with a pre-established “framework” or set of abstract concepts
representing features of the reality portrayed in the text, in terms of which the
meaning of the ﬁrst words we encounter need to be “interpreted” and “under-
stood” as particular instances of something more general, with all their uniqueness
lost. Nor is it the case, as we pick up a signiﬁcant fragment here and another
there, that we are aiming at ﬁnding a single, ﬁnalized meaning for all time, an
objective understanding that can be represented by a purely spatial (pictorial) form.
Instead, we begin by being prepared to immerse ourselves within an at-ﬁrst
indeterminate whole in its full individuality (as the unique, distinctive whole it is),
known to us at ﬁrst only globally, as situated within a particular genre (as a novel,
textbook, instruction manual, etc). We then proceed to conduct a step-by-step
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
145

movement, from part-to-whole and back again as we read each word, gradually
specifying or internally articulating their meaning in relation to a gradually
developing living order adapted to the undistorted accommodation of all the par-
ticular, discernible details we encounter in our explorations within the original
global whole. And what is special about this process, is that it is something that
our bodies seem to do for us, unconsciously and spontaneously, without our
having to carry it out deliberately.
Further, in connecting disparate and diverse things, such particular hermeneutical
unities are quite unlike abstract concepts formulated in terms of a set of features or
properties that are, in general, common to a whole set of diﬀerent circumstances.
As we shall see, rather than working merely to collect a set of disparate things
into a category, solely in terms of their shared similarities, they can be used in
connecting such things into an inexhaustible network, not of features common to
all, but of similarities and diﬀerences, and of many diﬀerent kinds of relationships.
Indeed, they are each particular unities formed from a collection of unmerged
particularities, within which the particularities are inter-linked without losing
their particularity. Indeed, it is important to emphasize that they are not mixtures,
or amalgams, or blendings, or an averaging, but outcomes of a very basic human
power. A power that, as Vico (1988) puts it, “fashions the images of things … at
the same time that it originates and produces new forms … it is this that diﬀer-
entiates the forms of things, sometimes separating them, at other times mixing
them together” (pp. 42–43). While focusing on one facet of such a whole, we
also seem able to move forward or back to become aware of others, or even
sideways, to see its “placement” as a unity within a larger landscape of other such
unities.
Further, to the extent that they consist in people’s expressions, within a parti-
cular circumstance, they are organized into a unique structure of particular anticipa-
tions which can guide us in our uttering of meaningful talk in relation to that
circumstance. They work to couple us into a forward-hearing immersion within
the unfolding ﬂow of whatever social activity we are involved—an anticipatory
sensing that I would like to compare with what we can all sense as at work
within us, as we make the eﬀort to sequence our words in our own everyday
speakings.
In the natural sciences, it is perfectly alright to begin our inquiries by reﬂecting
on the world around us and to guide our further inquiries by the expectations
aroused in us by “our conceptualizations.” I put the phrase “our conceptualiza-
tions” in quotes because, in natural science-based, theory-ﬁrst approaches, we
assume that to solve the problems we face, we must discover the actual entities
hidden behind appearances that are causing our diﬃculties. We assume we can
begin to do this by the empirical testing of deliberately formulated representations
of those entities, while ignoring the already socially shared anticipations inﬂuen-
cing the structure of our everyday responses to the words used in such formula-
tions. But there is something wrong in trying in our everyday lives to make use
146
John Shotter

of our concepts in this way. As William James (1909/1996) points out: “When
we conceptualize, we cut out and ﬁx, and exclude everything but what we have
ﬁxed. A concept means a that-and-no-other … whereas in the real concrete sensible
ﬂux of life experiences co-penetrate each other so that it is not easy to know just
what is excluded and what not” (pp. 253–254).
What we cut out and ﬁx in our everyday lives is a region from the ﬂowing
reality within which we all are immersed, in which intramingling strands of
activity have created a dynamic stability (Shotter, 2013) that we all can notice, a
conﬂuent aspect, a region that exists as such only in relation to everything else around
it, which cannot exist in separation from it. Yet we have an over-riding urge to
treat such noticeable regions that we can point out to others, as a self-contained
nameable “things” that can be taken as separate from all other such things. Yet, if we
were to divorce them from their dynamic embedding in their ﬂowing sur-
roundings, as the relational things they are, they would cease to exist (Shotter,
2015a). Yet, we have, need, and still make perfectly good use of our concepts in
our daily lives, in the face of their somewhat limited nature. How is this possible?
Clearly, we need to distinguish between what we can call formal, representa-
tional, or Cartesian forms of thought, and poetic, responsive, or Wittgensteinian forms.
That is, between 1) ways of thinking in which people commit themselves to
using a “framework,” “perspective,” “theory,” or “model,” that they take as cor-
responding with reality, and through which they perceive and act on the world
around them—which elsewhere (Shotter, 2010) I have called aboutness-thinking;
and 2) forms of thought in which people make use of particular understandings—
what Wittgenstein (1953) called “objects of comparison,” that are meant, he says, “to
throw light on the facts of our language by way not only of similarities, but also
of dissimilarities” (no. 130). In this kind of (essentially dialogical) thinking—
which elsewhere I have called withness-thinking (Shotter, 2010)—people may feel
free to use a whole set of such “poetic comparative devices” in looking at and
acting within their surroundings world without feeling wholly committed to any
of them. At least initially, a task in our everyday lives is to begin explorations in
relation to the (intuitive?) sense of unique possibilities open to us in our current
circumstances, not in relation to established general facts, and then to proceed
further to articulate our particular circumstances in more inner detail.
In the past, of course, such talk of feelings and sensings and intuitions has been
thought of as being utterly unscientiﬁc, as clearly lacking in objectivity—that is, as
not only failing to be “true” to “reality” but also as lacking in public shareability.
Thus investigations into such experiences have been dismissed as merely idiosyn-
cratic and introspective, as leading to a focus on events that, in Cartesian terms,
we would quite unsuitably call, “merely subjective.”
Such remarks, clearly, are misplaced. We only have to attend to what we all in
one sense of “know” in coming to be a speaker/listener of our native language,
to appreciate that such a form of embodied knowing can be (like a common
sense), for almost all practical purposes, shared among a group of people. Indeed,
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
147

that we can all perceive meanings in the stream of a noises issuing from the
mouths of our fellows is nothing short of amazing.
Yet about that stream, as William James remarked:
The truth is that large tracts of human speech are nothing but signs of direction
in thought, of which direction we nevertheless have an acutely discriminative
sense, though no deﬁnite sensorial image plays any part in it whatsoever …
Their function is to lead from one set of images to another … Now what I
contend for, and accumulate examples to show, is that ‘tendencies’ are not
only descriptions from without, but that they are among the objects of the
stream, which is thus aware of them from within, and must be described as in
very large measure constituted of feelings of tendency, often so vague that we
are unable to name them at all.
(James, 1890, pp. 253–254)
It is our sharing in those feelings of tendency, of which we have an acutely dis-
criminative sense, that allows us all (mostly) to be able to coordinate our own
unique individual utterances and actions in with those of the others around us.
Indeed, as Rorty (1999) comments: We cannot regard truth as a goal of
inquiry. The purpose of inquiry is to achieve agreement among human beings
about what to do, to bring consensus on the end to be achieved and the means to
be used to achieve those ends. Inquiry that does not achieve coordination of
behaviour is not inquiry but simply wordplay (p. xxv).
From “after-the-fact” to “before-the-fact” accounts of leadership
How, then, does all this relate to how we think about and talk about leadership?
Evidently, as we have seen, what we call our conceptualizations can be used in two
very diﬀerent ways: 1) one is in an after-the-fact representational fashion, as stating a
claim about the factual nature of the hidden reality thought to be responsible for
observed events, that is “as a preconceived idea to which reality must correspond”
(Wittgenstein, 1953, no. 131). In other words, after having collected some data
(observations) from our circumstances, we apply our concepts in a retrospective,
explanatory fashion, as aids in our thinking, in our attempts at solving “the problems”
we assume we are facing. In this use, as we will be making precise claims as to the
nature of the reality we are occupying, they will need to be formulated in a clear
and unambiguous manner; and our aim in listening to what a person has to say
will be to “get the picture,” and our critical task will be to assess whether it is a
“picture” we can agree with or not. This use, clearly, is in line with what Raelin
(2014) calls “the individualistic paradigm” (p. 2), in which a single person tries to
exert a one-way, monologic inﬂuence on those around them.
In the other, 2) we listen for how a speaker’s sequence of words in their speaking
can “move us,” how they can work in us as a before-the-fact aid to our perception to
148
John Shotter

direct our attention, not only to this aspect of what is happening in our current
circumstances rather than that, but also, as Bakhtin (1981) points out, to arouse
particular feelings of anticipation (tendency) within us as to what, possibly, might
happen next. It is this switch to looking at leadership, prospectively, in the course
of its occurrence, to see the many diﬀerent ways in which it can be displayed,
rather than retrospectively, after its happening, in an attempt to explain it, that
makes all the diﬀerence. For a start, instead of seeing leaders as already existing
beings possessing special but very general capacities and faculties, less well devel-
oped in those designated to be their followers, we need to see leadership, as such,
as gradually emerging within a social group, and as taking on one or another
speciﬁc form in accordance with the needs (Todes, 2001) of the circumstances in
question.
Our after-the-fact models of leadership have, for the most part, as Barker (1997)
points out, been “deﬁned ostensively” (p. 347), by referring to people already
occupying leadership positions. But as he makes clear, this approach—in which
named outcomes of a productive process are posited as the ideal forms that guide the
process towards their own productive realization—leaves us ignorant of the actual
process of leadership itself, especially in those situations in which “the goals (of
leadership) are not speciﬁc, or when the imposition of order does not solve the
problem” (p. 350). Indeed, a logical circularity is involved here which, if we were
doing logic rather than conducting a practical inquiry, would be called petitio
principii—the fallacy of assuming as a premise a statement that has the same
meaning as the conclusion. “The fallacy that arises,” said Dewey (1896), “is vir-
tually the psychological or historical fallacy … A state of things characterizing an
outcome is regarded as a true description of the events which led up to this
outcome; when, as a matter of fact, if this outcome had already been in existence,
there would have been no necessity for the process” (p. 368). That is, we could
have gone straight to the outcome rather than having to perform a complicated
sequence of movements in reaching it.
In an attempt to move away from the heroic model, from what Barker calls
the “dyadic supervisor/subordinate relationship” (p. 350), he suggests that lea-
dership be conceptualized as “a dynamic process of interaction that creates
change,” and that if it is, “then the leadership roles may not be, perhaps should
not be, clearly deﬁned” (p. 351). Indeed, he goes further to suggest that leader-
ship is a developmental process in which those being trained to work in a company
come to develop an “understanding of themselves and a conventional base from
which to explore experiences: in other words, they learn to ‘manage’ themselves”
(p. 359).
It is just this process, in which those in a company come to “manage” them-
selves, that Storch and I (Storch & Shotter, 2013) explored in the consultancy
company, of which Storch himself had been a founding partner. A little like Dan
in Carroll’s account, but more deliberately, Storch had set out to create a com-
pany (Attractor) in which the “leader” was not in any sense an authoritarian,
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
149

heroic leader—an ideal form leader—but an “imperfect” or “good enough” leader.
This terminology was suggested by Anne Marie (an employee, not her real name)
who, in describing her sense of the leadership in Attractor, said:
it is not by the book … it has no manual … so one has to ﬁnd one’s own
direction and way into it, and it then becomes the way that one really
believes in. It may sound a bit silly to talk about ‘imperfect’ leadership, but
there is also something really down to earth about it, something very human.
It doesn’t become a distant leader out of reach—it oﬀers you an opportunity
to feel yourself instead of just following the pretty roads laid out for you.
Another, similar comment was oﬀered by Brandt (a senior manager):
Being employed in Attractor is not about being good enough theoretically
but about daring to let go of perfection and to be present. I practice this in
relation to all new employees. I give people a kind of a paradoxical message:
You can become much better, but at the same time you are good enough—
otherwise you would not be here!
(quoted in Storch & Shotter, 2013)
If, as Barker suggests above, leadership involves a developing, dynamic process of
intra-activity, then leadership roles cannot be (and, perhaps, should not be) clearly
deﬁned. There are no ideal forms of it. Thus, just as Winnicott (1988) suggested
the term “good-enough mothering,” both “to convey an unidealized view of the
maternal function,” while still holding in mind the “absolute dependence” of the
baby on its environment, while it is “always travelling towards (but never reach-
ing) independence” (p. 90), so we (Storch & Shotter, 2013) suggested the notion
of “good-enough leadership” for similar reasons. In other words, we saw a lea-
dership process at work in Attractor that began much as mothering begins, with a
sensitivity and a responsiveness to what she senses as our needs (Todes, 2001)—the
unsatisﬁed tensions she can perceive us as feeling in the incipient, that is not-yet-
wholly-clear intentions she can see us as trying to execute—as she feeds, comforts,
plays, and otherwise actively intra-acts with us.
And what such a mother does for us, in our learning to become an autono-
mous, self-controlling member of our own society and culture, is not to sit us in a
classroom and to embark on teaching us in accord with a pre-planned curricu-
lum, but to circumstance or to occasion (Adato, 1980) situations in which we can,
not only satisfy (some) of our incipient intentions, but also learn from her their
social value, their meaning. Thus, at this early stage in our development, it is our
“tryings” (and “failings”) that are important to her, not our achievements. Storch,
in approaching the employees in Attractor in a similar manner (as they themselves
described it), seemed to have created a company of consultant-practitioners able
to develop (and sustain) their own autonomous ways of working, while at the
150
John Shotter

same time, still displaying and sustaining a certain “house style.” As I see it, Dan is
depicted as just such a “good-enough” leader in Carroll’s account (Chapter 5, this
volume).
Also, as Simpson (Chapter 8, this volume) illustrates, whereas inter-actions, as
we call them, start with independently deﬁned actors, and lead us into investiga-
tions of what happens between them, trans-actions—or intra-actions, as I have
called them—lead us into conducting our inquiries in a very diﬀerent fashion,
into observing and inter-relating a whole range of detailed activities within the
organization in question. As she points out:
If organizational practice is understood as the unceasing ﬂow of actions by
means of which work is accomplished, then leadership surely resides in those
emergent turning points, or leadership moments, that re-orient the ﬂow of
practice towards new, or at least diﬀerent, directions. Without leadership, the
ﬂow of practice would continue unchanged, but even with leadership
(understood in terms of trans-actional agency) there is still no guarantee of
success in terms of instrumental outcomes. Agency simply produces move-
ment; there is no presumption that change is necessarily for the better,
although a lack of change is unlikely to be sustainable over the long term.
(Simpson, Chapter 8, this volume, pp. 169–70, my itals)
In other words, although it may seem that heroic leaders can achieve pre-ordained
outcomes by the sheer strength of their characters, the opposite would seem to be
the case. Simpson’s account of how the New Zealand rugby team, the All Blacks,
has maintained an average win rate of 75% over their entire 110 years of history,
illustrates the impossibility of explaining this record of success in terms of any
individual leader-practitioners who might be identiﬁed with this sports team. As
she argues, correctly I think, we can ﬁnd at work distributed throughout all the
team’s activities, on and oﬀthe ﬁeld, an aspect of every way of thinking about
leadership that we have ever proposed as important (Simpson, Chapter 8, this
volume).
I have already mentioned Carroll’s account (Chapter 5, this volume) of how
Dan occasions (Adato, 1980) his situated leadership at crucial moments, when he has
a sense of a need for his team to come together, a sense of lack, the need to regain
a shared orientation. Thus the stand-up koosch ball meeting begins with him stat-
ing, as Carroll notes, with some “pretty frank” comments: “‘I’m not sure where
we are heading on this …’ and ‘we thought we’d be done here but it’s obvious
we aren’t …’ The team members listen but don’t join in” (Carroll, Chapter 5,
this volume, p. 94). Dan then throws the koosch ball at someone, who simply
recounts what they are working on; and then Spike launches into a very ani-
mated account of a bug or glitch in the system that he cannot locate, and an
animated conversation breaks out among the group. After 3 or 4 minutes, when
everyone in the group has had a say, Dan after remarking that there seem “two
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
151

ways to move on,” draws the stand-up meeting to a close with: “we all good to
go on?”—a shared orientation seems to have been regained, at least for the
moment. And Dan rushes oﬀto another meeting, to leave his team again, each to
their own devices.
Conclusions: leadership-as-practice
What makes agency collaborative, given that agency requires a social interaction to
begin with, is that it be a fair dialogical exchange among those committed to a
practice; in particular, that the parties display an interest in listening to one another,
in reﬂecting upon perspectives diﬀerent from their own, and in entertaining the
prospect of being changed by what they learn.
(Raelin, 2014, p.7).
Thus, as we move from an after-the-fact use of the concept of leadership to its very
many before-the-fact uses, as a consequence of another person’s words “calling out”
responses from us that we might not have exhibited ourselves, we can ﬁnd—as
Raelin (2014) suggests in the quote above—that there is the prospect of our
being changed. This change occurs not merely by gaining a new item of factual
knowledge, but in our very being-in-the-world by how we can be aﬀected by
other people’s words. Indeed, as Carroll notes:
In the stand-up meeting story we see a whole host of mediating elements
that construct the identities possible in this team. We see a team creating the
culture of their organization just as that culture creates the identities in and of
the team … they in turn are responding to the historical and cultural texture
of an organization that distinctively blends the ability to look and behave
casually with an extreme high performance pace and tolerance for
uncertainty.
(Chapter 5, this volume, p. 98)
This describes a speciﬁc form of situated leadership, similar to that exhibited in
the All Blacks and in Attractor, a form of leadership that aﬀects everyone in their
identity, in who they “are” both to themselves and to the others around them.
Thus what is so special about such situated leaders is that instead of “the
leader” imposing aims of his or her own desiring, they can occasion dialogically
structured circumstances within which the needs of each team or company
member can come to expression, and in such circumstances, they can each
experience themselves as coming to live in a new world in which “things,” previously
rationally invisible to them can come “into view.”
Thus, it is in this second, dialogic use of our many diﬀerent concepts of leadership—
using them in a prospective, descriptive manner with the aim, not at all of solving
problems (at least, not immediately), but of acquiring an orientation, a way of
152
John Shotter

relating ourselves to events in our surroundings—that they can be of great prac-
tical use to us. Each particular concept can, in terms of the structure of anticipations
that it can arouse in us, as we look over or survey the situation before us, allow us
to “see,” not only what the situation is, but to see how this aspect within it is
connected that aspect and so on. It is this comparison between these two diﬀerent
uses of our concepts—in terms of their orientation towards giving us science-like
accounts and philosophical accounts of cognitive and of perceptual help to us—that I
see as crucial to clarifying the meaning of Raelin’s (2014, and Chapter 1, this
volume) account of leadership-as-practice for our inquiries into the nature of
what we call leaders, and leadership.
If it is the case, as Raelin (Chapter 1, this volume) has outlined, that leadership
needs to be studied, not in terms of the traits or behaviors of special individuals,
but as a dialogical, community process, then there is need, not for yet more sci-
entiﬁc explorations driven by the urge to arrive at a ﬁnal, correct, general account
of what leadership is, but for more particular, situated, philosophically structured
inquiries into how, what we call leadership can emerge in many diﬀerent ways in
this, or that, or some other particular situation (see O’Connor, 1995; Shotter,
2015b). It is with this, perhaps less ambitious aim in mind, that I have provided
the dialogical-hermeneutical account I have begun to articulate above. It is less
ambitious because it is, of course, tantamount to proposing that we relinquish the
still unfulﬁlled—and, as I see it, forever unfulﬁllable—dream of seeking the very
general concept of leadership we desire. Also, it is being content with the limited,
partial, and situated results we can in fact obtain—which, in the end, will, I believe,
perhaps surprisingly, turn out to be of far greater practical use and value to us.
References
Adato, A. (1980). “Occasionality” as a constituent feature of the known-in-common
character of topics. Human Studies, 3, 47–64.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogical imagination (C. Emerson and M. Holquist trans. and
M. Holquist Ed.) Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. (V. W. McGee trans.). Austin,
TX: University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1993). Toward a philosophy of the act, with translation and notes by V. Lianpov,
edited by M. Holquist. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter
and meaning. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.
Barker, R. A. (1997). How can we train leaders if we do not know what leadership is?
Human Relations, 50(4), 343–362.
Descartes, R. (1968). Discourse on method and other writings. Trans. with introduction by
F. E. Sutcliﬀe. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Dewey, J. (1896). The concept of the reﬂex arc in psychology. Psychological Review, 3, 13–32.
Reprinted in W. Dennis (Ed.), Readings in the history of psychology. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1944.
Dewey, J. (1929 [1958]) Experience and nature. New York: Dover.
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
153

Fleck, Ludwik (1979). Genesis and the development of a scientiﬁc fact. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press (originally publishede 1935).
Gadamer, H.-G. (2000). Truth and method (2nd revised edition) (J. Weinsheimer and D. G.
Marshall trans.). New York: Continum.
Hertz, H. H. (1956). The principles of mechanics. New York: Dover (orig. German published
1894).
James, W. (1890 [1950]) Principles of psychology, Vols. 1 & 2. New York: Dover.
James, W. (1996). A pluralistic universe: Hibbert lectures at Manchester College on the present situa-
tion in philosophy. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press (originally published
1909.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Groupthink: Psychological studies of policy decisions and ﬁascoes. Boston:
Houghton Miﬄin.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. London: Penguin Books Ltd.
O’Connor, E. (1995). Undisciplining organizational studies: A conversation across
domains, methods, and beliefs. Journal of Management Inquiry, 4(2), 119–136.
Polanyi, M. (1967). The tacit dimension. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Raelin, J. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership, Online First, 25 November.
Rorty, R. (1999). Philosophy and social hope. New York: Penguin.
Sadler-Smith, E. (2010). The intuitive mind: Proﬁting from the power of your sixth sense.
Chichester: John Wiley.
Sandel, M. (2012). What money can’t buy: The moral limits of markets. London: Penguin Books.
Shotter, J. (2010). Social constructionism on the edge: ‘Withness’-thinking and embodiment.
Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos Institute Press.
Shotter, J. (2013). Reﬂections on sociomateriality and dialogicality in organization studies:
From ‘inter- ‘to ‘intra-thinking’… in performing practices. In P. R. Carlile, D. Nicolini,
A. Langley & H. Tsoukas (Eds.), How matter matters: Objects, artifacts, and materiality in
organization studies (pp. 32–57). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Shotter, J. (2015a) On “relational things”: A new realm of inquiry—Pre-understandings and
performative understandings of people’s meanings. In R. Garud, B. Simpson, A. Langley, &
H. Tsoukas. The emergence of novelty in organizations (pp. 56–79). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Shotter, J. (2015b) Undisciplining social science: Wittgenstein and the art of creating situ-
ated practices of social inquiry. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, Article ﬁrst
published online: 22 January, doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12080.
Shotter, J., & Tsoukas, H. (2014a) Performing phronesis: On the way to engaged judgment.
Management Learning, 45(4), 377–396.
Shotter, J., & Tsoukas, H. (2014b) In search of phronesis: Leadership and the art of
judgment. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 13(2), 224–243.
Simons, D. J. (2000). Current approaches to change blindness. Visual Cognition, 7 (1/2/3),
1–15.
Storch, J., & Shotter, J. (2013) ‘Good enough’, ‘imperfect’, or situated leadership: Developing
and sustaining poised resourcefulness within an organization of practitioner-consultants.
International Journal of Collaborative Practice, 4(1), 1–19.
Todes, S. (2001). Body and world, with introductions by H. L. Dreyfus & P. Hoﬀman.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vico, G. (1968). The new science of Giambattista Vico (T. G. Bergin & M. H. Fisch Eds. and
trans.). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
154
John Shotter

Vico, G. (1988). On the most ancient wisdom of the Italians (L. Palmer trans.). Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Winnicott, D. (1988). Babies and their mothers. London: Free Association Books.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe trans.). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On certainty (G. E. M. Anscombe & G. H. von Wright Eds.
and D. Paul & G. E. M. Anscombe trans.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1980). Wittgenstein’s lectures: Cambridge, 1930–32 (D. Lee Ed.). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1981). Zettel (2nd edition) (G. E. M. Anscombe & G. H. V. Wright
Eds.). Oxford: Blackwell.
A dialogical-hermeneutical account
155


PART III
Social interactions


8
WHERE’S THE AGENCY IN
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE?
Barbara Simpson
Leadership-as-practice is one of a number of emergent threads in the leadership
literature that seek to de-center the individual “leader,” turning the analytical
gaze instead towards more contextualized, participatory, engaged, and relational
understandings of leadership. Such a radical re-theorization necessarily entails a
close examination of all the adjacent constructs that are implicated in conven-
tional leader-centric thinking. Concepts such as traits, capabilities, and behaviors,
which are explicitly aligned with individual “leaders,” clearly have limited relevance
to this new conceptualization of leadership. However, there are other important
concepts that cannot be so readily expunged from the new leadership lexicon.
For instance, the classical sociological categories of “agency” and “power” seem
integral to any understanding of leadership as a way of moving and acting in the
world (Raelin, 2014). Re-examining such key categories is, therefore, an essential
prerequisite to the emergence of new ways of understanding leadership.
In this chapter, I set about the task of unraveling “practice” to reveal what
agency might mean in the context of leadership-as-practice. To facilitate this
analysis, I invoke a framework proposed by the Pragmatist writers John Dewey and
Arthur Bentley (1949 [1960]) in their book Knowing and the Known, which reports
the collaborative inquiry that unfolded between them over more than ﬁfteen
years of correspondence (Ratner & Altman, 1964). Their project was to develop a
new vocabulary that would restore the epistemological wholeness of human
experience without having to reduce it to either the experiencing of idealism, or
the experienced of realism. In their analysis, they sought to highlight the
assumptive and empirical implications of diﬀerent modes of inquiry by identifying
three distinct categories of action: self-action, inter-action, and trans-action.1
Dewey and Bentley described self-action as a “[p]re-scientiﬁc presentation in
terms of presumptively independent ‘actors,’ ‘souls,’ ‘minds,’ ‘selves,’ ‘powers,’ or

‘forces,’ taken as activating events” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949 [1960], p. 72). In
their view, this self-actional orientation remains dominant in contemporary social
science thinking, and indeed it is precisely this dominance in the ﬁeld of leader-
ship that has prompted the call for new approaches such as that promised by
leadership-as-practice.
The second category, inter-action, is in Dewey and Bentley’s view a product
of the scientiﬁc thinking that characterizes the modern world. They deﬁne inter-action
as a dyadic way of acting in a world that comprises “particles or other objects
organized as operating upon one another” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949 [1960], p. 73).
This type of thinking underpins much of the recent literature that casts leadership
as shared, pooled, or spread ((Denis, Langley, & Sergi, 2012). The ﬁnal category,
trans-action, departs from the other two modes of action at an ontological level.
Whereas self-action and inter-action share an ontological commitment to a reality
comprising identiﬁably discrete entities, trans-action invokes a processual ontol-
ogy that attends to emergent becoming rather than substantive being (Tsoukas &
Chia, 2002). Reﬂecting this ontological diﬀerence, Dewey and Bentley deﬁned
the trans-actional as “see[ing] together, extensionally and durationally, much that
is talked about conventionally as if it were composed of irreconcilable separates”
(1949 [1960], p. 69). This trans-actional view resonates with at least some of the
literature that Denis et al. (2012) classify as “producing leadership.”
In what follows, I will explore each of these modes of action in turn, elabor-
ating on their deﬁnitions, and then exploring their implications for the notion of
agency. In each case, I also consider what leadership might mean in relation to
these diﬀerent expressions of agency.
Leadership as self-action
Dewey and Bentley critiqued self-action as a primitive treatment of knowledge
that pre-dates scientiﬁc thinking. They dismissed it as an archaic, or antique
approach, but one that nevertheless deserves attention as a comparator with
the more sophisticated modes of inter-action and trans-action. The central
assumption of self-action is that things, or entities, act under their own powers
(1949 [1960], p. 108), reﬂecting vitalist assumptions that attempt to account for
unexplained events in terms of invisible forces, or an élan vital that somehow,
mysteriously animates lived experience. As a philosophical movement, vitalism
was largely discredited in the natural sciences during the nineteenth century as
scientists increasingly sought explanations for empirical experience in terms of
underlying mechanisms. Arguably, however, vitalism continues today as a strong
inﬂuence in the social sciences where the complexities of lived/living experience
resist reduction to mechanistic logics that draw overly simplistic connections
between discrete phenomena.
This debate between vitalism and realism is to some extent reﬂected in another
well-worn debate—that between free will and determinism, or agency and
160
Barbara Simpson

structure. The self-actional freedom to act according to one’s own will is here
contrasted with a realist world view in which actions are determined by social
norms and structures. On one hand, agency implies the self-actional expression of
rationality, autonomy, and expertise, while on the other, structure reﬂects the
normalizing and deterministic inﬂuences of social contexts (Caldwell, 2005).
However, as has been well recognized by, for instance, Giddens (1984) and
Bourdieu (1990), this dualistic separation between agency and structure causes
problems for those who seek a more wholistic appreciation of practice. Over the
past half century or so, social theorists have become increasingly skeptical of
overly rationalized models of agency, dismissing them as excessively psychological
in their analytical focus, and too committed to the assumption that individuals can
shape their own worlds. In the words of Emirbayer and Mische (1998, p. 962) “[t]he
concept of agency has become a source of increasing strain and confusion in social
thought … maintain[ing] an elusive, albeit resonant, vagueness.”
Questions about agency, and in particular about the nature and eﬀects of self-
action are nowhere more evident than in the leadership literature. There is a vast
body of work (for a comprehensive review, see for instance Bolden, Hawkins,
Gosling, & Taylor, 2011) that focuses on the self-action of individual “heroic”
leaders, who are regarded as circumscribed entities possessing an inherent, though
somewhat mysterious “power to” take action. Agency is expressed in practice by
those leader-practitioners who are recognized as having this power to act. Thus
leadership and agency are inextricably and tautologically inter-related. Research
in this domain tends to follow the principles of methodological individualism,
attending to the unique qualities of these leader-practitioners, which although
perhaps correlated with perceived success, oﬀer no insight into how particular
qualities actually produce leadership. It is this failure of explanation that led
Alvesson and Sveningsson (2003) to accuse leadership of mysteriously disappear-
ing whenever analysis seeks to go beyond the superﬁcial. In a similar vein,
Fletcher (2004) argued that the puzzling resilience of patently inadequate notions
like “charismatic leadership” may be accounted for by hidden, and consequently
under-explored phenomena such as gender dynamics. This in turn suggests an
urgent need for more subtle approaches to research that can penetrate beneath
the surface of leadership. The lack of explanatory power of the self-actional view
also has knock-on eﬀects for leadership development, which often seeks to improve
the skills and competencies of individuals, but without adequate theoretical or
empirical justiﬁcation for this focus.
Leader-centerism, and its associated centering of agency, results in the public
gloriﬁcation and viliﬁcation of individual “leaders” as their stars are seen to wax
and wane. In the celebrity culture that increasingly dominates Western con-
sciousness, this privileging of the actions of individuals results in dysfunctional
understandings that fail to inquire into the more systemic and social dimensions of
agency and change. For instance, the post-match press conference that follows
most elite sports ﬁxtures draws attention to speciﬁc individuals such as the team
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
161

captain and the coach/manager, attributing the team’s successes and failures to
these individuals and their extraordinary talents. For most of the fans, this press
conference is as close as they’ll ever get to their team, so it is inevitable that they
will focus their adulation on these imputed leader-practitioners. However, this
focus is unsupportable for a team like the All Blacks, New Zealand’s national
rugby team, which has maintained an average win rate of 75% over its entire 110
years of history, making it “possibly the most successful sports team, in any code,
ever” (Kerr, 2013, p. vii). It is simply not possible to explain this record of success
in terms of the individual leader-practitioners who have been associated with this
team over these many years.
Leadership as inter-action
For Dewey and Bentley, the notion of inter-action owes much to the modernist
epistemology of Sir Isaac Newton, for whom the world is an extended mechan-
ism comprising material entities acted on by simple forces to produce instru-
mental outcomes, but where the entities themselves remained unaltered in this
process. Inter-actions were classically assumed to occur independently of context.
That is “[s]pace and time were treated as the absolute, ﬁxed, or formal framework
within which the mechanics proceeded—in other words, they were omitted from
the process itself” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949 [1960], p. 111). It is this assumption
that underpins the whole of experimental science, which supposes that reality
may be understood by holding some variables constant while others are manipu-
lated to explore the consequences of their speciﬁc inter-actions. Although this
decontextualization of lived experience has been vigorously critiqued over many
years now, inter-actional models in the social sciences nevertheless often retain a
sense of rational and autonomous inter-actors that are independent of each other,
and of their spatial and temporal contexts.
A popular metaphor for this inter-actional view is that of a game of billiards, where
balls act on each other bringing about changes in speed and direction of movement,
but remaining unchanged in themselves. Billiard balls inter-act with each other in a
controlled environment, a billiard table, where the interplay of forces between
them may be reasonably anticipated. Obviously, however, billiard balls on the forest
ﬂoor, or on a ski slope, or in a speeding train might not inter-act in the same pre-
dictable ways. Furthermore, it is highly improbable that billiard balls remain
unchanged over prolonged periods of play. Inter-action, however, oﬀers no ade-
quate means of engaging with entities if the nature of their being is constantly changing.
Inter-acting entities may be understood as things, essences, actions, states of
being, discourses, practices, institutions, or indeed any circumscribed, substantialist
unit of inquiry. Understanding movement and interplay between inter-actors
must begin from a pre-formed sense of what these entities are. Emirbayer (1997)
pointed out that this preference for “things ﬁrst” is deeply ingrained in language,
especially the English language, which ﬁrst structures experience with nouns, and
162
Barbara Simpson

only then uses verbs to express the movements of these “things”. For Dewey and
Bentley, inter-action is necessarily dualistic in opposing, or balancing one “thing”
against another “in causal interconnection” (1949 [1960], p. 108). Thus the inter-
actional context is one of dialectical struggle as inter-actors jostle for position and
inﬂuence. Out of this struggle, emergent entities are further deﬁned, or re-
deﬁned, in between the inter-actors. The focus of research in the inter-actional
domain then, is centered on entities. Researchers in this domain often employ
variance techniques (Langley, 1999), which although they may demonstrate cor-
relations between emergents and inter-actors, nevertheless leave unanswered
questions about how change actually comes about.
From this inter-actionist stance, agency takes on a quite diﬀerent meaning from
the self-actional “power to” exercise one’s own will. Rather, it is re-deﬁned in
dyadic terms as “power over,” or between (inter-) entities. It is the capacity to
inﬂuence other inter-actors, which implies deliberate intentionality in its appli-
cation, but as is also the case for self-action, agency continues to be centered on
the acting entities. The diﬀerence is that it need not be conﬁned to certain indi-
viduals as it can shift around, residing temporarily in a variety of entities. Fur-
thermore, scholars in the science and technology studies tradition (e.g. Callon,
1986; Latour, 1987; Pickering, 1995) argue for a non-human form of material
agency that is irreducible to conventional expressions of human agency; in other
words, inter-actors may be human or non-human. Agency then, is not simply an
inherent quality of the self-actor, but rather it is directed towards other entities
through practices, or routinized sequences of activities, around which inter-
actions are coordinated and organized. These practices are the cultural contexts
that circumscribe inter-active agency, deﬁning “communities of practice” within
which agency may be disciplined and routinized in the form of standard operating
procedures. Pickering (1995, p. 16) suggested that practices are to human agents
as machines are to non-human agents: “they are both repetitive and machinelike
and they collaborate in performances.” He proposed therefore, that the study of
practices belongs within the domain of cultural studies, where context is recognized
as an important determinant of inter-action.
Leadership scholars have enthusiastically embraced inter-action as potentially more
fruitful than self-action as an underpinning orientation. Arguably it is inter-actions
between leaders and followers that dominate the majority of recent developments
in the leadership literature (Drath, McCauley, Palus, van Velsor, O’Connor, &
McGuire, 2008; and also the extensive literature on Leader-Member Exchange
(LMX) theory, e.g. Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). Those seeking a more plural, less indi-
vidualized expression of leadership have explored the possibilities of leadership that is
collective, collaborative, participative, or distributed (Denis et al., 2012), where agency
still resides in individuals, but perhaps only temporarily or in ways that are delimited by
other inter-actors. Inter-action also admits the possibilities of leadership through non-
human, discursive, and more systemic forms of agency by recognizing the potential
for action to emerge between competing inter-actors and from disparate practices.
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
163

The common ground in all inter-actional approaches to leadership is that entities
come ﬁrst, and the connections or networks that animate these entities are secondary
(Emirbayer, 1997). For example returning to the All Blacks, their former coach,
Graham Henry, attributed their success, at least in part, to what he calls “dual leader-
ship”. That is, a shared leadership that allows any team member to “step up” at any time
and take responsibility for ﬁnding a way to win. Thus the players are all potential leaders
who are expected to actively contribute to each other’s leadership. The metaphor that
Henry uses to describe this form of leadership is “pass the ball,” which means “enabling
and empowering the individual by entrusting them with responsibility for the success
of the team” (Kerr, 2013, p. 47). In this manner, leadership is continuously passed
among the players and their managers, directly challenging more conventional
notions of centralized, top-down management. The ball-in-motion is the connec-
tion, or the interplay, between players, but it is the players themselves who are the
developmental focus of the “pass the ball” metaphor as they each step into leadership.
A brief philosophical diversion
In passing from the self-actional and inter-actional to the next section, where I
discuss the trans-actional, we cross what Steyaert (2007, p. 465) referred to as an
“invisible line” between the conventional discourses of research, and new and
radically diﬀerent ways of thinking about, and engaging with processes of inquiry.
This line separates what I will characterize as representationalist and performative
approaches, a distinction that is already well-established in social science debates
(e.g. Anderson & Harrison, 2010), but is far less evident in the contemporary
organization studies literature.
According to Barad (2007), representationalism is a by-product of the Cartesian
separation of objects from subjects, and of things from other things. It assumes
that the stuﬀof the world can be accurately represented by words, signs, and
concepts, and that language can be treated as “a transparent medium that trans-
mits a homologous picture of reality to the knowing mind” (Barad, 2007, p. 97).
However, in the desire to represent the world faithfully, as it really is, the sig-
niﬁcance of practices gets bracketed out, especially the practices that produce
representations. Critical scrutiny of representationalism ﬁrst began when the
physical sciences started to inquire into the actual processes of producing scientiﬁc
knowledge. Dewey also was very critical of what he called the spectator theory of
knowledge, which privileges the knowledge claims of those who are located
outside the experiences they describe. In his view, this account of knowledge
production is linked to the impossible quest for epistemological certainty (Dewey,
1929). To be clear about these critiques though, the challenge to representation-
alism does not prohibit the use of representations. Indeed, how else can we talk
about, and account to others (and ourselves) for our experience? “The issue at
hand is what role representations play and how referentiality is conceived”
(Barad, 2007, p. 410, endnote 15).
164
Barbara Simpson

Critics of representationalism have called for more non-representational the-
ories (Thrift, 2008), or at least a move to more-than-representational modes of
inquiry (Lorimer, 2005). This in turn has led to increasing interest in performa-
tivity as an alternative account that seeks to understand how subjects are called
into being. Here, thinking, observing, and theorizing are material-discursive
processes that engage with, and are part of the experienced world (Barad, 2007).
Whereas representationalism assumes determinate objects that may be apperceived
by knowing subjects, performative accounts understand subjects and objects as
co-emergent in their entangled engagements. The performative idiom contests
that most basic, and largely unexamined assumption of representationalism that
language can determine what is real, shifting instead to a process ontology that
focuses on a world of practice, movement, and doing. As Donna Haraway (1992,
p. 313) remarked, “the world is precisely what gets lost in doctrines of repre-
sentation and scientiﬁc objectivity.” Performativity seeks to transcend sub-
stantialist Cartesianism, but in doing so, it demands a radical rethinking of how
practice becomes, and how we can engage with questions of this becoming
through our own practice of research. Thus the invisible line between repre-
sentationalism and performativity marks a fundamental ontological distinction that
has profound implications for how we engage with, and frame research questions.
Leadership as trans-action
In dramatic contrast with the representationalist, substantialist ontology common
to Dewey and Bentley’s deﬁnitions of self-action and inter-action, trans-action
puts process ﬁrst. Its starting point is a world that is active and in continuous ﬂow,
a world ﬁlled with agency (Pickering, 1995) where “things” are provisional and
evanescent (Shotter, 2015), serving only to punctuate the ﬂow and make it sen-
sible. This processual ontology invites a radically diﬀerent way of thinking and
talking about our world, one that rejects representationalist assumptions. The
challenge here is to develop a genuinely performative language that is distinct
from the more familiar idiom of representationalism. This new language must
contest the dualistic assumptions that carve our worlds up into discrete and oppos-
ing entities, turning attention instead towards movement, ﬂux, ﬂow, emergence,
passage, continuity, conﬂuence, diﬄuence, turbulence, and smoothness. This is
precisely what Karl Weick was getting at when he exhorted us to “become stingy
in [our] use of nouns, generous in [our] use of verbs, and extravagant in [our] use
of gerunds” (Weick, 1979, p. 44).
Many scholars in pursuit of more performative language have taken to
inventing or redeﬁning words in ways that better reﬂect the ongoing processes of
engagement with, rather than objective separation from, the worlds in which we
live. Indeed, Dewey and Bentley have themselves inserted hyphens in the labels
for their three categories of action precisely because they wanted to distinguish
their language from more conventional usage. Similar emphases have been
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
165

sought, for instance, by Heidegger (2010, p. 53) in his “being-in-the-world,”
which encompasses the existence of the self in relation to the whole, by Barad’s
(2007, p. 33) use of “intra-action” to express the emergent and mutual con-
stitution of meanings through material-discursive engagement, and by the dis-
tinction that Shotter (2006, p. 585) makes between “withness-thinking” and
“aboutness-thinking,” which highlights the diﬀerences between performative and
representationalist idioms, respectively. Other writers, such as Bruno Latour
(2005), have invented entirely new terms (e.g. “immutable mobiles”) and radi-
cally redeﬁned common terms (e.g. “translation”) to access new ways of thinking
and speaking about the wholeness of lived/living experience. Eﬀective navigation
through this terminological mineﬁeld requires an in-depth understanding of the
ontological and epistemological assumptions underpinning these various terms in
their usage.
Put simply, trans-action “is to be understood as unfractured observation—just
as it stands, at this era of the world’s history, with respect to the observer, the
observing, and the observed” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949 [1960], p. 104). Rather
than entitavizing life and splitting it up into fragmented representations, Dewey
and Bentley were seeking a wholistic and temporal way of accounting for our
lived/living experience. Trans-action “regards extension in time to be as indis-
pensable as is extension in space (if observation is to be properly made), so that
‘thing’ is in action, and ‘action’ is observable as thing, while all the distinctions
between things and actions are taken as marking provisional stages of sub-
jectmatter to be established through further inquiry” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949
[1960], p. 123). The constituent “parts” of trans-action can never be understood
by extracting them from the whole; simple causality is undone by the mutual
emergence of all the constituting elements, which thus act as both context and
outcome in the ongoing ﬂow.
Given Dewey and Bentley’s earlier references to the linkage between the sci-
entiﬁc thinking of classical mechanics and the modernist assumptions of inter-
action, it is perhaps unsurprising that they continued to draw on developments in
science to map the more post-modern orientation of trans-action. In particular,
they referred to the shift in focus from material substances to ﬁelds of energy,
marked for instance by Maxwell and Einstein, as evidence for an ontological shift
in science that is paralleled in the move from inter-action to trans-action. They
were careful though, not to claim superiority of the latter mode of inquiry. In the
same way that scientists ﬁnd it more or less useful to conceive light as particles or
waves depending on the question they are seeking to answer, so also the choice
between inter-actional or trans-actional modes of action will depend on the
questions being asked. Dewey and Bentley did, however, suggest that trans-action
oﬀers the potential for fresh insights into the questions that are of central interest
to researchers today.
Whereas inter-action starts with independently deﬁned inter-actors and then
investigates what happens between them, trans-actors are implicated as the
166
Barbara Simpson

ongoing, relationally relevant meanings that emerge from trans-actions (Simpson,
2009). Trans-actors, whether they be human or non-human, micro or macro, are
deﬁned within, rather than prior to, the dynamic unfoldings of trans-actional
“becoming.” The performative idiom resists the reduction of dynamic move-
ments to constituent elements that may be aﬀorded any concreteness beyond the
trans-actional situation. Such elements are regarded as transitory abstractions that
necessarily dissolve, or are at least questioned, as particular situations evolve. Thus
this approach seeks to liberate us from the rigidities of dualistic, substantialist
thinking. Dewey and Bentley (1949 [1960], p. 133) illustrated how this works
with the example of a hunter who shoots a rabbit. This situation may be func-
tionally accounted for “in an interactional form in which rabbit and hunter and
gun enter as separates and come together by way of cause and eﬀect.” However,
if we are to explain this event in the broader societal context of what it means to
hunt “[n]o one would be able successfully to speak of the hunter and the hunted
as isolated with respect to hunting.” It is in the constitutive entwining and con-
tinuous reﬁguration of hunter, hunted, and hunting that an unfractured observation
of the situation may be realized.
Another distinguishing feature of the trans-actional view is its commitment to
emergence, understood as the unanticipated generation and development of
novelty, which is integral to any understanding of performativity. Trans-actional
engagements transform trans-actors as they enact new and unfolding meanings in
ongoing trans-actions, whereas inter-actors and self-actors remain unchanged
through their actions. The notion of emergence (at least in the West) has a long
history, reaching back more than 2500 years to Heraclitus, but it is only in the
past 150 years that it has once again become a matter for serious consideration by
scholars. Over this period, emergence has been variously interpreted through spa-
tial, relational, and temporal lenses, as, respectively, a self-organizing phenomenon, a
network phenomenon, or a processual phenomenon (Garud, Simpson, Langley,
& Tsoukas, 2015). Whereas the ﬁrst two of these lenses focus self-actionally and
inter-actionally on what novelty emerges, the third is more concerned with how
the process of emergence unfolds trans-actionally. Writers who contributed most
to early developments of a trans-actional understanding of emergence include
Henri Bergson, Alfred North Whitehead, Karl Marx, and the American Pragma-
tists, especially Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, John Dewey, and George
Herbert Mead. This view is also evident in contemporary organization studies,
especially in the sensemaking and organizational learning literatures (see for
example Weick, 1995), and also in the dynamic notion of “becoming” (Tsoukas
& Chia, 2002). For all of these writers, emergence is understood as a process that
is immanent in the spatial and temporal unfolding of performative experience.
The performative idiom invites a processual view of practice as the ongoing,
trans-actional accomplishment of work. Pickering (1995, p. 4) made a critical
distinction between “practice” as the work that extends and transforms meanings
over time, and “practices,” which he described as speciﬁc sequences of activities,
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
167

or routines, that may be invoked repeatedly to simplify day-to-day experience.
Whereas practice is continuously emergent, practices are valued for their routi-
neness. If it is practices that characterize the sphere of inter-actions, then it is the
continuously evolving spatial and temporal entanglements of practice that
uniquely deﬁne the trans-actional perspective. Practice is concerned with the
perpetually unfolding dynamics of living, which Bakhtin (1984, p. 293) framed in
terms of dialogue: “Life by its very nature is dialogic. To live means to participate
in dialogue: to ask questions, to heed, to respond, to agree, and so forth.” It is a
process of meaning-making that continuously generates something new. Just as
Heraclitus famously claimed that it is not possible to step into the same river
twice, Bakhtin recognized that the same words cannot convey precisely the same
meaning when spoken in a diﬀerent context.
Mead (1934, pp. 253–260) developed this notion of dialogue in terms of a
conversation of gestures. Rather than an instrumental inter-actional transmit/
receive model of communication, his conversation of gestures is concerned with
the dynamics of social coordination and cooperation, which he argued are
dependent on being able to stand in the shoes of others, taking on their roles and
attitudes. So for instance, when I oﬀer a communicative gesture it is moderated
by the response that I can anticipate by trying to put myself in the position of the
other. Both I and my respondents are thus integral to, and inseparable from, the
conversational process in which we are engaged, and through which we each
acquire a self-critical awareness of our emerging social situation.
Hence social control, so far from tending to crush out the human individual
or to obliterate his self-conscious individuality, is, on the contrary, actually
constitutive of and inextricably associated with that individuality; for the
individual is what he is, as a conscious and individual personality, just as in as
far as he is a member of society, involved in the social process of experience
and activity, and thereby socially controlled in his conduct.
(Mead, 1934, p. 255)
It is conversation then, conceived broadly in terms of both words and actions,
that provides the vehicle for the performative becoming of practice.
If we accept this trans-actional view of practice as the ongoing dialogical
accomplishment of meaning, how then should we understand the notion of
agency? In an inter-actional sense, agency is deﬁned in opposition to structure, as
the source of change in an otherwise stable world. However, it is precisely this
type of dualistic thinking that is challenged by the trans-actional approach, which
starts from the experience of living in a ﬁeld of continuity and ﬂow, rather than a
world that has already been sliced up into discrete entities. What is needed is a
conceptualization of agency that builds on “doings” over time rather than the
isolated “doers” of action. Both Giddens (1984) and Bourdieu (1990) have
recognized the limitations that dualistic (entitative) thinking imposes on our
168
Barbara Simpson

understandings of practice, but in seeking solutions, neither has engaged a fully
performative idiom with its underlying anti-dualistic and processual assumptions.
My own thinking in this respect has been signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by Mead’s
less well-known work The philosophy of the present (Mead, 1932), in which he
explored the temporality of emergence in social trans-actions (Simpson, 2014).
For him, the present moment is the continuously emerging locus of conscious
action. It draws simultaneously on pasts and futures as epistemic resources that
inform present actions, and which are also continuously re-forming as we
endeavor to stand in each other’s shoes. New presents emerge “betwixt and
between the old system [past] and the new [future]” (Mead, 1932, p. 73) as
turning points that redirect the ﬂow of practice. Without these turning points,
Mead argued, there cannot be any experience of temporality or movement; we
are eﬀectively suspended in time and space until the next turning point arises.
Agency then, is manifest in the movements and directional shifts associated with
turning points. “[I]t is an enactment, not something that someone or something
has” (Barad, 2007, p. 178). This deﬁnition makes no recourse to either human or
non-human agents that “cause” change, seeing agency instead in the continuously
unfolding movements of social engagement. Here it is practice, rather than actors
or agents, that is prior to agency.
Consistent with the principles of Pragmatism shared by Dewey and Mead, this
trans-actional account is profoundly democratic. As such, it has been criticized for
naivety in failing to address issues of power. This criticism, however, is founded
on an entitative understanding of power as some “thing” to be acquired, pos-
sessed, and exercised over others by self-actors or inter-actors. To the extent that
trans-actions generate movement and change, they are arguably saturated in
power and inﬂuence, but in a way that shapes movement rather than as a prop-
erty of discrete entities. Follett (1996), another Pragmatist thinker, contrasted the
“power over” of inter-actionism against “power with,” which she described as
jointly developed, coactive power. Whereas the inter-actional view distributes
agency and power among multiple entities, I suggest that it is only by stepping
away entirely from entitative thinking, as the trans-actional approach does, that
we can come to a truly decentered and performative perspective on agency. Then
[o]ur task is not to learn where to place power; it is how to develop
power … Genuine power can only be grown, it will slip from every arbi-
trary hand that grasps it; for genuine power is not coercive control, but
coactive control. Coercive power is the curse of the universe; coactive
power, the enrichment and advancement of every human soul
(Follett, 1996, p. 119)
This close connection between agency and movement has particular appeal when
it comes to thinking about leadership. If organizational practice is understood as
the unceasing ﬂow of actions by means of which work is accomplished, then
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
169

leadership surely resides in those emergent turning points, or leadership moments,
that re-orient the ﬂow of practice towards new, or at least diﬀerent, directions.
Without leadership, the ﬂow of practice would continue unchanged, but even with
leadership (understood in terms of trans-actional agency) there is still no guarantee
of success in terms of instrumental outcomes. Agency simply produces movement;
there is no presumption that change is necessarily for the better, although a lack
of change is unlikely to be sustainable over the long term. This view of leadership
usefully informs inquiries that seek to unravel the complexities of how leadership
arises and how it is sustained in organizational practice. Empirical studies that take
this stance are still few and far between, possibly because although decentering
leadership is an intellectually appealing idea, it is still diﬃcult to operationalize in
practice. Examples include the study by Crevani, Lindgren, and Packendorﬀ
(2010), who traced the real-time development of performative actions in meetings
to show how leadership moments emerge as re-directions and re-orientations.
They were particularly concerned to emphasize “the potential of leadership in every
situation” (2010, p. 84). Carroll and Simpson (2012) took a diﬀerent approach based
on conversational trans-actions posted on an online forum. They identiﬁed lea-
dership moments in the sociality that emerges when one trans-actor is able to stand
in the shoes of another, producing new meanings for all of the participants. In
addition, there are a few examples of scholars who are theorizing from a trans-
actional perspective (see for example Hosking, 2011; Shotter, 2006), providing
exemplars that could usefully be brought in to the leadership literature.
Returning once again to rugby, the spirit of the All Blacks is a work-in-progress,
continuously weaving a sense of purpose that not only has meaning for every
current player, but is also linked to All Blacks of the past and All Blacks not yet
born. This strong sense of history and the responsibility to leave a legacy for
future players is a reﬂection of the Maori idea of whakapapa, which refers to the
genealogical lineage of ancestors, stories, myths, and symbols that brings each of
us to the present moment, and extends from us into the unending future. The
abiding symbol of the All Blacks’ whakapapa is the black jersey, which each player
wears on the ﬁeld of play with a strong sense of responsibility to “leave the jersey
in a better place” (Kerr, 2013, p. 14) for the future of the game.
When a player makes the All Blacks, they’re given a book. It’s a small black
book, bound in ﬁne leather, and beautiful to hold. The ﬁrst page shows a
jersey—that of the 1905 Originals, the team that began this long whakapapa.
On the next page is another jersey, that of the 1924 Invincibles, and on the
page after, another jersey, and another, and so on until the present day. It is a
visual whakapapa, layered with meaning, a legacy to step into. The next few
pages of this All Black handbook remind you of the principles, the heroes,
the values, the standards, the code of honour, the ethos, the character of the
team. The rest of the pages are blank. Waiting to be ﬁlled
(Kerr, 2013, p. 183)
170
Barbara Simpson

This whakapapa is, in eﬀect, the meaning of leadership that has emerged trans-
actionally, and continues to evolve as the story of the team. It reminds players of
their time and place in history, and invites an ongoing collective conversation
about the team’s future. By placing leadership at the heart of what they do, the
All Blacks manifest a genuinely performative and processual practice.
Discussion
My argument in this chapter draws on Pragmatist writers such as John Dewey,
George Herbert Mead, and Mary Parker Follett, for whom “practice” was a key
preoccupation as they sought to advance an understanding of practical action that
is both relevant to, and informed by the lived/living processes of concrete human
experience (Bernstein, 1972; Simpson, 2009). There is rich potential for fresh
insight to be drawn from their comprehensive articulation of a philosophy of
practice, suggesting useful ways of extending the notion of leadership-as-practice.
I am conscious that the explicitly scientiﬁc basis of Dewey and Bentley’s three
categories of action may be alienating for readers who do not have a disciplinary
background in science. However, science has been probing the trans-actional
domain for at least the past 100 years, so there is a lot to be gained by reaching
across the entitavizing boundaries of disciplinary thinking to explore the wider
domain of postmodern inquiry.
Drawing on Dewey and Bentley’s (1949 [1960]) three categories of action
(self-action, inter-action, and trans-action), I have teased out three contrasting
expressions of agency, which in turn relate to three diﬀerent process perspectives
of leadership-as-practice: “The Leader-Practitioner,” “Leadership as a set of
practices,” and “Leadership in the ﬂow of practice.” Each of these is grounded in its
own unique set of philosophical assumptions and distinguishing characteristics (sum-
marized in Table 8.1). Firstly, the Leader-Practitioner is the most familiar model in the
contemporary leadership literature. Here, agency is a matter of an objectively
distinct, individual agent’s expression of free will exercised through the presumed
inherent power of the agent to take action. It is understood purely in terms of the
attributes of the agent with neither physical nor social contexts having any bear-
ing on events. This practitioner-centric view of leadership resonates with Dewey
and Bentley’s “self-action,” but it is widely critiqued for its lack of explanatory
power and its tendency to resort to mysterious or invisible forces to account for
actions. The underpinning ontology associated with this perspective assumes an
objective reality populated by discrete entities that exist independently of any
observer, and which can be universally represented in words and images.
Secondly, leadership may be understood as a set of practices. Here I draw on
the distinction made by Pickering (1995) between practices and practice, where
the former comprise the routines and standard operating procedures that are
learned and sustained through inter-actions in organizations and other social
contexts. Although these practices are socially constructed, they readily take on
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
171

entitative qualities that may resist change. This orientation towards practices
assumes circumscribed entities inter-acting in a relatively stable environment to
construct relatively persistent practices, all of which may be described in sub-
stantialist representationalist terms. The site where agency plays out is in the
spaces between entities as they endeavor to inﬂuence each other by exerting
“power-over.” The outcomes of inter-actions are contingent on their context,
but the context itself functions as a stable crucible within which inter-actions
occur. The nature of inter-actions is deﬁned by the inter-actors, which may be
human or non-human, thing or discourse, but are always associated with each
other through dyadic or network linkages. Consistent with the modernist
underpinnings of the inter-actional model, time is regarded as an independent
variable that marks the orderly passage of events. Whether it is measured by the
ticking of a clock or the dawning of a new era, time provides a chronological
context that sits outside, rather than within inter-actions.
Thirdly, leadership may be understood from within the ﬂow of practice, where
here practice refers to the wholistic and continuous nature of the collective eﬀort
that transforms the meanings of situations (Pickering, 1995). This orientation
towards ﬂow and ongoing accomplishment invites a performative idiom, by
which I do not mean to imply a diametric opposition to representationalism, but
rather a very diﬀerent way of engaging in inquiry. Performativity does not deny
the representational importance of words and images in our conversational trans-
actions, but it does aﬀord greater priority to ﬂow and process. In this idiom, the
origins of presents cannot be explained by chronologically distant pasts, but
rather, are constantly in-the-making through trans-actional improvisation. These
presents are continuously enacted by trans-actors whose trans-actional engage-
ments not only transform their contexts, but also their selves. Agency here is no
longer dependent on individual agents to carry the action; rather it is manifest in
the movements and changing directions that emerge as trans-actors seek to
coordinate their work together. These trans-actions are saturated in power that
arises as a collectively developed, co-active “power with,” and they are also
threaded through with relationality and temporality as the generation of meanings
unfolds through the conversational dynamics of mutual engagement. The funda-
mentally processual and performative dimensions of this trans-actional view of
leadership demand vigilance to avoid falling back into the familiar territory (and
language) of representationalism in research.
These three practice perspectives of leadership are roughly aligned with the
typology comprising “practitioner,” “practice,” and “praxis” that was originally
proposed by Whittington (2006) in relation to strategy-as-practice, and has sub-
sequently been introduced into the leadership domain by Carroll, Levy, and
Richmond (2008). I have endeavored to deepen understanding of this typology
by delving into underlying philosophical assumptions and their implications for
related sociological constructs such as agency and power. My analysis reveals a
fundamental cleavage between representationalist and performative approaches to
172
Barbara Simpson

leadership research, a duality that is already evident elsewhere in the organization
studies literature. For instance, Latour (1986) diﬀerentiated between ostensive and
performative approaches to power, and adopting this same duality, Feldman
(2000; Feldman & Pentland, 2003) has elaborated an extensive theory of routines.
Similarly, in the area of organizational cognition and learning, Thompson (2011)
distinguished between the entitative notion of “communities of practice,” and the
related process of “legitimate peripheral participation.” It is in the nature of dua-
lities that, unlike dualisms, they cannot be resolved or reconciled (Dewey, 1917);
they oﬀer two diﬀerent, and fundamentally incommensurable approaches to
understanding phenomena such as power, agency, learning, and leadership.
Thompson (2011) quite rightly pointed to the problems that arise when ontolo-
gically distinct constructs are allowed to drift together, generating confusion and
challenging the authority of any claims to new knowledge.
By way of example, “relational leadership” has been used to describe both
inter-actional (Uhl-Bien, 2006) and trans-actional approaches (Hosking &
Shamir, 2012), which I have diﬀerentiated in terms of the representationalist/
performative duality. This apparent blurring of paradigms occurs because the
underlying distinction between “entity” and “constructionist” positions used by
Ospina and Uhl-Bien (2012) is confounded by the double meaning of con-
structionism: it may refer to either entitative or processual approaches depending
TABLE 8.1 Comparison of three diﬀerent practice perspectives of leadership
The Leader-Practitioner
Leadership as a Set of
Practices
Leadership in the Flow
of Practice
Category of
action
Self-action
Inter-action
Trans-action
Agency
Exercise of free will
Inﬂuencing others
Ongoing coordinated
accomplishment of
work
Power
Power to …
Power over …
Power with …
Context
Irrelevant
Structure as a ﬁxed
container within
which action takes
place
Context and trans-
actors are mutually
engaged in an
emergent whole
Relationality
Irrelevant
Dyadic and network
inter-linkages
Mutually constituting
temporally unfolding
relationships
Temporality
Irrelevant
Time as an indepen-
dent variable
Temporal experience
is enfolded in and
emergent with
trans-actions
Ontological
assumption
Substantialist,
Representationalist
Substantialist,
Representationalist
Processual,
Performative
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
173

on whether the researcher focuses on what has been constructed, or how constructing is
going on. It is the former entitative approach that appears to inform Ospina
and Uhl-Bien’s continuum of leadership stances, which spreads along the objective/
subjective dimension of ontology (2012, p. xxxiii, ﬁgure I-1). Both ends of this
spectrum draw on an inter-actional understanding of entities as either objects or
subjects; however, neither engages with the trans-actional dynamics of practice. To
avert confusion, and following Emirbayer (1997) and Hosking and Shamir (2012),
my preference is to reserve the term “relational leadership” for trans-actional
practice, in which trans-actors are both within and emergent from the ﬂow of process.
Recognizing the problems of paradigm incommensurability in the leadership
literature, Ospina and Uhl-Bien (2012) have argued for an accommodation of the
plurality of approaches seen in the interplay between paradigms. I also see this as a
productive way forward for the emergent ﬁeld of leadership-as-practice. Para-
phrasing Deleuze and Guattari (2004, p. 428), representational science stabilizes
and solidiﬁes the vagueness and transience of performative science, which in turn
continually seeks to liberate representationalism from its bounding constraints.
Although the “Leader-Practitioner” and “Leadership as a set of Practices” orien-
tations are already well established in the literature, neither is able to shuck oﬀthe
“epistemological straightjacket of modernism” (Carroll et al., 2008, p. 372). Both
of these approaches remain constrained by a representationalist idiom that focuses
inquiry ﬁrst on entities, and only then on the actions of these entities. The third
orientation, “Leadership in the ﬂow of Practice,” is a radical departure from
substantialist and representationalist approaches that is explicitly processual and
performative in its theoretical and philosophical positioning. I argue that this
orientation has much to oﬀer to both the re-theorization of leadership, and the
practical understanding of leadership as an ordinary everyday process that bubbles
up naturally in any organizational setting. However, for this contribution to be
realized, it is imperative to challenge the dominant discourses that are deeply
embedded in our modern Western ways of thinking and acting. My hope is that
the leadership-as-practice community will pay particular attention to developing a
language that goes some way towards breaking down the uncritical blending of
potentially incommensurable modes of inquiry.
In conclusion, I am proposing that all three practice perspectives of leadership,
each with its own unique expression of agency and power, have legitimate
oﬀerings to make in both the theory and practice domains, but there is analytical
value in teasing them apart to gain deeper understandings of leadership-as-practice.
It is clear, for instance, that the All Blacks engage all three orientations in their
weekly practice of training and development:
1.
Immediately after the Saturday game, a press conference engages with the
heroes (Leader-Practitioners) of the day. This is often the only image of
leadership accessible to fans and other external observers, so they inevitably
acquire a somewhat distorted view of how leadership works within the team.
174
Barbara Simpson

2.
The following day, the team meets to analyze (inter-actionally) the game
and to set in place the practice routines to be followed in the coming days.
This meeting is facilitated by the coaches, who also draw in experience and
insight from the on-ﬁeld leadership (a shared leadership model).
3.
The remainder of the week sees a gradual transfer of responsibility and
ownership to the players themselves, allowing them to become sensitized to
the trans-actional possibilities of turning points generated in the ﬂow of the
game. “By the time they play on Saturday the players have taken over the
asylum” (Kerr, 2013, p. 49).
Each perspective oﬀers diﬀerent insights into the nature of the All Blacks’ lea-
dership, and the absence of any one would inevitably result in an impoverished
analysis. However, given the very diﬀerent assumptions underpinning each
orientation, I would be wary of any attempt to produce a grand uniﬁed theory of
leadership. There is much more subtlety to be had from treating each as a distinct
lens for analysis.
Note
1 Here I follow Dewey and Bentley in hyphenating these three words to emphasize their
diﬀerent implications for practice, “enabl[ing] us to stress the inner confusions in the
names as currently used” (Dewey & Bentley, 1949 [1960], p. 108).
References
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003). The great disappearance act: Diﬃculties in doing
‘leadership’. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 359–381.
Anderson, B., & Harrison, P. (Eds.) (2010). Taking place: Non-representational theories and
geography. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics (C. Emerson trans. and Ed.). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter
and meaning. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.
Bernstein, R. J. (1972). Praxis and action. London: Duckworth.
Bolden, R., Hawkins, B., Gosling, J., & Taylor, S. (Eds.). (2011). Exploring leadership:
Individual, organizational & societal perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). The logic of practice (R. Nice, trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Caldwell, R. (2005). Things fall apart? Discourses on agency and change in organizations.
Human Relations, 58(1), 83–114.
Callon, M. (1986). Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the
scallops and the ﬁshermen of St. Brieuc Bay. In J. Law (Ed.), Power, action and belief.
London: Routledge.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
175

Carroll, B., & Simpson, B. (2012). Capturing sociality in the movement between frames:
An illustration from leadership development. Human Relations, 65(10), 1283–1309.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (2004). A thousand plateaus (B. Massumi, trans.). London:
Bloomsbury Academic.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Sergi, V. (2012). Leadership in the plural. Academy of Management
Annals, 6(1), 211–283.
Dewey, J. (1917). Duality and dualism. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientiﬁc
Methods, 14, 491–493.
Dewey, J. (1929). The quest for certainty. New York: Milton, Balch, & Co.
Dewey, J., & Bentley, A. F. (1949 [1960]). Knowing and the known. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Drath, W. H., McCauley, C. D., Palus, C. J., van Velsor, E., O’Connor, P. M. G., &
McGuire, J. B. (2008). Direction, alignment, commitment: Toward a more integrative
ontology of leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 19, 635–653.
Emirbayer, M. (1997). Manifesto for a relational sociology. American Journal of Sociology,
103, 281–317.
Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency? American Journal of Sociology, 103(4),
962–1023.
Feldman, M. (2000). Organizational routines as a source of continuous change. Organization
Science, 11, 611–629.
Feldman, M., & Pentland, B. (2003). Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source
of ﬂexibility and change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48, 94–118.
Fletcher, J. K. (2004). The paradox of postheroic leadership: An essay on gender, power,
and transformational change. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 647–661.
Follett, M. P. (1996). Mary Parker Follett Prophet of Management: A celebration of writings from
the 1920s. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Garud, R., Simpson, B., Langley, A., & Tsoukas, H. (2015). Introduction: How does novelty
emerge? In R. Garud, B. Simpson, A. Langley, & H. Tsoukas (Eds.), Process research in orga-
nization studies: The emergence of novelty in organizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of a theory of structuration. Berkeley and
Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relations-based approach to leadership: Develop-
ment of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying a
multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.
Haraway, D. (1992). The promises of monsters: A regenerative politics for inapproriate/d others.
In L. Grossberg, C. Nelson, & P. Treichler (Eds.), Cultural studies. New York: Routledge.
Heidegger, M. (2010). Being and time (J. Stambaugh trans., D. J. Schmidt, Ed.). Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press.
Hosking, D. M. (2011). Telling tales of relations: Appreciating relational constructionism.
Organization Studies, 32(1), 47–65.
Hosking, D. M., & Shamir, B. (2012). Dialogue: A dialogue on entitative and relational
discourses. In M. Uhl-Bien & S. Ospina (Eds.), Advancing relational leadership research: A
dialogue among perspectives (pp. 463–476). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Kerr, J. (2013). Legacy: 15 lessons in leadership. London: Constable.
Langley, A. (1999). Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of Management
Review, 24(4), 691–710.
176
Barbara Simpson

Latour, B. (1986). The powers of association. In J. Law (Ed.), Power, action and belief.
London: Routledge.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lorimer, H. (2005). Cultural geography: The busyness of being ‘more-than-representa-
tional’. Progress in human geography, 29(1), 83–94.
Mead, G. H. (1932). The philosophy of the present. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self and society. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Ospina, S., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2012). Introduction—Mapping the terrain: Convergence and
divergence around relational leadership. In M. Uhl-Bien & S. Ospina (Eds.), Advancing
relational leadership research: A dialogue among perspectives (pp. xix–xlvii). Charlotte, NC:
Information Age Publishing.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency and science. Chicago, IL and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Raelin, J. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership.
Ratner, S., & Altman, J. (Eds.). (1964). John Dewey and Arthur F. Bentley. A philosophical
correspondence, 1932–1951. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Shotter, J. (2006). Understanding process from within: An argument for ‘withness’-thinking.
Organization Studies, 27(4), 585–604.
Shotter, J. (2015). On “Relational Things”: A new realm of inquiry—Pre-understandings
and performative understandings of people’s meanings. In R. Garud, B. Simpson, A.
Langley, & H. Tsoukas (Eds.), Process research in organization studies: The emergence of
novelty in organizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simpson, B. (2009). Pragmatism, Mead, and the practice turn. Organization Studies, 30(12),
1329–1347.
Simpson, B. (2014). George Herbert Mead. In J. Helin, T. Hernes, D. Hjorth, & R. Holt
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of process philosophy and organization studies. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Steyaert, C. (2007). ‘Entrepreneuring’ as a conceptual attractor? A review of process the-
ories in 20 years of entrepreneurship studies. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development,
19(6), 453–477.
Thompson, M. (2011). Ontological shift or ontological drift? Reality claims, epistemolo-
gical frameworks, and theory generation in organization studies. Academy of Management
Review, 36(4), 754–773.
Thrift, N. (2008). Non-representational theory: Space, politics, aﬀect. London: Routledge.
Tsoukas, H., & Chia, R. (2002). On organizational becoming: Rethinking organizational
change. Organization Science, 13(5), 567–582.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17, 654–676.
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social psychology of organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Whittington, R. (2006). Completing the practice turn in strategy research. Organization
Studies, 27(5), 613–634.
Where’s the agency in leadership-as-practice?
177

9
DEVELOPING LEADERSHIP AS
DIALOGIC PRACTICE
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted
The movement toward understanding leadership as an emergent outcome of
interlocking practices represents a profound shift in leadership scholarship. This is so
in several signiﬁcant ways. In contrast with much traditional inquiry, the focus
shifts from independent entities to interdependent or co-constituting amalgams.
Thus, there are no leaders independent of the relationships of which they are a
part. Leadership is thus an emergent outcome. Further, the relational amalgams of
interest include not only human beings, but the physical world of which they are
a part. Thus, reconceptualized is the concept of “social” in the social science tra-
dition. The present movement also departs from tradition in its emphasis on
process as opposed to ﬁxed attributes or structures. For example, rather than
assessing the traits of good leaders or the structure of the organization, the focus
shifts to the possibilities of ever changing patterns. Finally, the focus on leadership-
as-practice favors a replacement of structuralist explanations of human action with
a post-structuralist orientation. Muted are explanations of leadership that rely on
processes or structures lying behind a pattern of action—psychological on the one hand
and macro-structural on the other. Rather, the explanatory emphasis is centered
on the ongoing patterns of relationship. For example, to explain the function of a
given utterance, we might look to the pattern of ongoing exchange in which it is
embedded—including bodily actions, the physical surrounds, and the traditions
from which it draws.
At the same time, it is important to realize that this movement in leadership
scholarship is also synchronous with developments elsewhere in organizational
studies, and indeed within the intellectual and professional world more generally.
The shift of focus from independent entities to relational amalgams has captured
the interest not only of organizational scholars (see, e.g., Gergen, 2009; Hosking,
Dachler, & Gergen, 1995; Uhl-Bien, 2006), but scholars across the sciences (see,

for example, Donati, 2011; Mitchell, 1988; Pickering, 1995). Similarly, organi-
zational theorists have joined ecologists and post-humanists, among others, in
attempting to undermine the human/non-human binary (Braidotti, 2012; Law &
Hassard, 1999). Possibly reﬂecting the rapid transformation in global conditions,
the shift from structure to process has been pivotal in both organizational scho-
larship (Helin, Hernes, Hjorth & Holt, 2014; Hernes, 2013; Hernes & Maitlis,
2010) and elsewhere in the intellectual world (Gergen, 2015). More radically, this
focus on process subtly undermines major assumptions of the positivist orientation
to social science. Because entities disappear into co-constitution, and stabilities
give way to process, the traditional scientiﬁc commitment to illuminating a sys-
tematic, and predictable world of cause and eﬀect falls moribund (Deleuze, 1994;
Ingold, 2011; Keller, 2006). And, it is possibly the twentieth-century shift in lit-
erary theory—from structuralism to post-structuralism—that paved the way for
contemporary explanations that focus on relations among actions themselves, as
opposed to oﬀ-stage abstractions.
These are enormously stimulating developments in theory, metatheory, and
metaphysics. As the present volume attests, they have also given rise to new forms
of organizational analytics and approaches to research. But what is to be said
about the contribution of these ideas to ongoing practices in contemporary
organizations? At what point do these innovative developments in theory and
inquiry begin to make a diﬀerence to our common forms of leading, organizing,
and daily living? There is no falling back on the early empiricist view that our
theories and research are somehow laying up treasures in the storehouse of Truth.
Rather, as academics we too are engaged in an array of practices. The question is
whether our academic practices remain lodged within our own circles of partici-
pation, or can be used for the enrichment of cultural life. It is to such ends that
we address ourselves in the present oﬀering.
Both authors have a longstanding interest in relational leading, and most rele-
vant, to the function of dialogue in leadership practice (Hersted & Gergen, 2013).
Whether an organization prospers or perishes, in our view, depends importantly
on the relationships among its participants. These relationships are primarily dia-
logic in character. Thus, the important question is whether our dialogic practices
can bring diverse people or groups into productive coordination, ease or eradicate
conﬂict, motivate and inspire people, and handle the emotional dynamics that
bring people together or push them apart. We also believe that dialogic processes
are optimally conceptualized in terms of practice, as that term is employed in the
present volume. However, for us, the major challenge is one typically described
as knowledge transfer. If dialogue is conceptualized as a form of relational practice,
how are those skills acquired that will contribute to eﬀective organizational
functioning? It is this question we address in what follows. First, we outline our
approach to “dialogue-as-practice.” This will be useful in placing the study of
dialogue ﬁrmly within the leadership-as-practice (L-A-P) framework. However,
in many learning contexts—seminars, workshops, publications, and training
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
179

programs—we also ﬁnd it useful to sketch out some of these assumptions as pre-
lude to practical engagement. With these assumptions in place, we will then
describe two pedagogical practices focused on leadership development. As we shall
see, these will also link L-A-P to the educational process itself. We thus explore
the synchronous relationship between leadership, dialogue, and education-as-practice.
Dialogue as coordinated action
As a scholarly endeavor, disquisitions on dialogue are impoverished. There is an
enormous body of literature centered on the individual person. Psychological
explanations of human behavior move across the full spectrum of the social sciences.
Although less voluminous, there is ample inquiry into the nature of social groups
or structures—families, organizations, nation states, etc. In eﬀect, if we presume
that the world is made of up independent entities, our interest will center on the
nature of the entities. And if we primarily understand the world in these terms, rela-
tionships between and among the entities become diﬃcult to theorize. Typically,
we resort to billiard-ball, cause-and-eﬀect explanations. Historically, the study of
dialogue—inherently a relational phenomenon—is thus a late-comer to the academic
world, and ﬁnds no home in any traditional ﬁeld of study.
Furthermore, in cases in which dialogue has taken center stage, most accounts
are highly prescriptive. Most theorists celebrate dialogue as a cherished form of
exchange. Diﬃculties result from the reasons for cherishing dialogue being many
and varied. In Buber’s seminal work (Buber, 1923), dialogue is a special way of
orienting to the other, in which boundaries are broken, and one ultimately
approaches a state of spiritual unity. David Bohm’s (1996) popular book, On
Dialogue, deﬁnes dialogue as a form of communication from which something
new emerges; participants must evidence a “relaxed, non-judgmental curiosity”
(p. ix). Grudin’s On dialogue champions the “reciprocal exchange of meaning … ”
(Grudin, 1996, p. 11). In contrast, Putnam and Fairhurst (2001) see dialogue as a
route to the convergence of views. Eisenberg and Goodall (1993) are concerned
chieﬂy with enhancing the voices of minorities. Isaacs (1993) deﬁnes dialogue as
“a sustained collective inquiry into the processes, assumptions, and certainties that
compose everyday experience” (p. 25). And for Maranhao (1990), dialogue
should generate the kind of skepticism that invites continuous inquiry.
Rather than equating “dialogue” with any particular vision of ideal inter-
change, we ﬁnd it useful to return to the simple, traditional, and more neutral
deﬁnition of dialogue as conversation. Of course, this deﬁnition is also ambiguous
and conceptually thin. Moreover, most existing accounts of dialogue derive from
the individualist tradition. Each participant serves as an independent entity, and
their utterances are viewed as outward expressions of private mental states—
intentions or meanings. On this account, dialogue is a form of inter-subjective
connection or synchrony. Public actions are expressions of private meanings. We
will not describe here the profound and intractable shortcomings of this dualist,
180
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

or mind-world, account of communication (see, e.g., Gergen 1994). Rather, in
keeping with the L-A-P orientation, we bracket the realm of mind (the struc-
turalist orientation), and focus on discursive actions themselves. We focus on the
function of utterances within ongoing conversation. We draw here especially
from Wittgenstein’s (1963) metaphor of the language game, Garﬁnkel’s (1965)
explorations of ethnomethodology, Austin’s (1962) illumination of the perfor-
matory character of speech, Shotter’s (1984) concept of joint-action, and the
writings of the Bakhtin circle (Bakhtin, 1981) on dialogism.
Given dialogue as a public practice, how can we theorize the process as rela-
tional, or co-constituted? Here it is useful to begin with the utterance as a simple,
vocal sound. At what point, we might ask, does a vocal sound become a word,
that is, a meaningful component in a system of language? In a recent ﬁlm, Mr.
Turner, Timothy Spall portrays the famous painter J.M.W. Turner as a man little
given to articulate expression. Rather, in this portrayal Turner frequently
responds to his consociates with a series of grunting sounds, or utterances. Yet,
the sounds are neither random nor biologically necessitated. Rather, they serve as
meaningful integers within the conversational ﬂow. What grants them the status
of words is essentially the manner in which they function within the ongoing
conversation. For example, if someone is speaking to Turner, he grunts periodi-
cally at the close of the speaker’s sentence. The speaker would then proceed to
the next sentence. One might say that the utterances indicated that Turner was
paying attention, and whether he agreed with the speaker or not, aﬃrmed that
the speaker was understood. Or, to put it otherwise, the grunts came to be language
as they were integrated into a pattern of coordinated action (or co-action).
To press further, the particular meaning of an utterance is not contained in
itself, but acquires its meaning largely by the way it is taken up by one’s con-
sociates. If one tells a story, and no-one pays attention, the story is no more
meaningful than random grunts. However, if others respond in laughter, the story
becomes humorous; if they respond in anger, the story has been an irritant. The
story is neither humorous nor irritating in itself, but becomes so in the process of
co-action. In this context, Wittgenstein’s (1963) metaphor of the language game
is also useful. The metaphor calls attention speciﬁcally to the coordinated or rule-
relevant activities of the participants in generating meaning. The words, “strike” and
“home run” acquire their meaning by virtue of the way they function in talk of
baseball. Words invented by a single individual (a “private language” in Witt-
genstein’s terms) would not in themselves constitute meaningful entries into dia-
logue. In this sense, the traditional binary separating monologue and dialogue is
misleading. The term monologue cannot refer to the utterances of one person
alone, for such utterances would fail to communicate. It would not constitute
language. The meaning of any utterance depends on its functioning within a
relational matrix. Monologue is better understood as an extended (or dominating)
entry of a single voice into a dialogue; in this sense monologue is dialogue with
uneven participation.
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
181

The process of co-action is not simply an exchange of words alone. Again to
draw from Wittgenstein (1963), the language games in which we participate are
embedded within broader forms of life. This is ﬁrst to draw attention to the
embodied character of dialogue. Clearly the eﬃcacy of spoken words is fastened
to the simultaneous movements of the speakers’ bodies, tone of voice, and phy-
sical proximity. The eﬃcacy of one’s words may depend importantly, for exam-
ple, on whether one is clutching a shovel, a dagger, or a bouquet of ﬂowers.
Further, dialogic eﬃcacy cannot ultimately be separated from the material con-
text. Thus, the meaning of “strike” and “home run” do not only depend on the
rules of baseball talk, but on their function within a form of life that includes
balls, bats, bases, ﬁelds, players, umpires, hotdogs, and so on. Broadly speaking,
the ways in which we walk, talk, laugh, cry, worship, engage in warfare, and
virtually everything else we do, become sensible—or not—by virtue of colla-
borative action. In Bakhtin’s terms, “to live means to participate in dialogue.”
And by implication, we gain insight into leadership-as-practice by viewing it
through the lens of dialogue as practice.
In what follows, we oﬀer two applications in the domain of leadership devel-
opment that take dialogue as the linking vehicle to eﬀective leadership practice.
In the scenarios depicted, readers will note that the unit of analysis is the rela-
tional process, not the actions of individuals. As a leadership practice, the out-
comes of the process may be a transformation of the very pattern that encouraged the
ﬁrst word or gesture. In this way dialogue can potentially overturn the historical
trajectories in which we live.
Dialogic scenarios: Generative and degenerative
With the concept of co-action in place, we may explore its potential both for
patterning and emergence. Every conversation is at once familiar and unique. It is
familiar because we always borrow from past traditions of co-action. Indeed, if
we did not draw from a common tradition it would be diﬃcult to communicate at
all. At the same time, every conversation is unique, as history and context are
always changing. The same words spoken a second time will not have the same
signiﬁcance as the ﬁrst time, simply because they are a repetition. Consider
warnings, reprimands, or funny stories. The polysemic process is without termi-
nus. Yet, it is useful to focus ﬁrst on that which is familiar, as it provides the
background against which we can treat the challenge of emergence.
Drawing from pragmatic linguistics, the concept of the adjacency pair is helpful,
directing our attention as it does to the linking of two utterances, ﬁrst from a
speaker and then from a responder. What is most interesting about such pairs is
their conventionality. If you have been exposed to the ﬁrst, you will typically be
conscious of what can or cannot follow. Among the simple cases: question/answer;
compliment/appreciation; greeting/greeting; request/comply. We also ﬁnd in these pairs
an illustration of the principle of co-action as just described. A question becomes
182
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

a question by virtue of its being answered; an answer is an answer by virtue of its
following a question; nor can compliments and greetings stand as such until there
are compliances and reciprocal greetings. Daily life proceeds as smoothly as it does
primarily because we simply repeat the familiar sequences. However, our con-
versations are seldom limited to a single pair. Conversation unfolds over time, and
can take many diﬀerent directions. We can term these broader patterns dialogic
scenarios. Dialogic scenarios are common patterns of conversation. Three of them
are especially important in terms of skillful engagement in dialogue: sustaining,
generative, and degenerative scenarios. Sustaining scenarios are embodied in the
common, day-to-day conversations or chit-chat that has no speciﬁc goal.
Although such conversation may seem a waste of time in the organizational set-
ting, it is in just such conversation that participants are assured of their good
standing, forge friendships, create trust, and otherwise contribute to a positive
morale. In generative scenarios, however, there are often goals—either implicit or
explicit. Here the participants build on each other’s contributions, as one might
say, the conversation “goes somewhere.” There is learning, creativity, and possi-
bly a sense of delight. Many of the dialogues suggested by the literature on
creativity by design (Gaynor, 2002) or which take place in the “design” phase of
an Appreciative Inquiry (Cooperrider, Sorensen, Whitney & Yaeger 2000) would
be illustrative. In both cases, participants are positioned in such a way that they
add signiﬁcance and dimension to each others’ oﬀerings.
In contrast, degenerative scenarios move toward silence, animosity, or the
breaking of a relationship altogether. They may begin subtly: one oﬀers a pro-
posal, and the reply is a critique; one gives an order, and there is sullen resistance;
one blames the other, and the reply is counter-blame. All these adjacency pairs
can invite subsequent degeneration. Arguments can often take the form of
degenerative scenarios. Argumentation as a scenario is particularly interesting in
terms of co-action. Each interlocutor attempts to present a strong position.
However, the antagonist will typically locate ways of discounting the position—
through inattention, changing the subject, or demonstrating the weakness of the
position. In eﬀect, what the speaker takes to be a strong argument does not reg-
ister in the dialogue as a strong argument. Likewise the oﬀering of the antagonist.
Professionals concerned with conﬂict reduction are often resistant, then, to
Habermas’ (1981) view that the honest exchange of good reasons will produce
accord. The good, objectively supported reasons of one are subverted by the
good and objectively supported reasons of the other. Practices of bargaining,
mediation, and collaborative peace building oﬀer more promise.
Conversational choice-points
As proposed, dialogue borrows from longstanding traditions or scenarios. With
suﬃcient repetition, the moves become naturalized. They have been practiced so
often that they sometimes seem biological in origin. We are told, for example,
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
183

that responding to an attack with aggression is a genetic propensity. This natur-
alization of our conventions is especially important in the case of degenerative
scenarios, for it is just such scenarios that can bring tension, antagonism, and dis-
ruption to an organization. It is here that the concept of conversational choice-
points is important. In principal, whatever is said makes no requirements on what follows.
An utterance only comes into meaning through the co-active response. An
utterance only becomes blame or criticism, for example, by virtue of how it is
supplemented in the utterance that follows. In this sense, every turn in an ongo-
ing dialogue oﬀers a choice-point. Whatever has been said, the next speaker has
options to create its signiﬁcance. Thus, in every utterance, one has the potential
to move the conversation in a generative or degenerative direction. This is only a
“potential,” and not a determinant, as one’s interlocutor now stands at a choice-point,
and the signiﬁcance of one’s utterance can be reshaped.
At times it is diﬃcult to realize the availability of these potentials. One
becomes “lost in the argument,” or “moved by righteous indignation.” Yet, as
we have seen, every utterance also bears traces of myriad contexts of usage; every
utterance is polysemic in potential. What might conventionally seem to be “a
funny story,” for example, may also be seen as “an ingratiating tactic,” “narcis-
sistic,” “a wasting of time,” “an avoidance of intimacy,” and so on. In a Bakhti-
nian sense, participants bring with them heteroglossial repositories—vast and
largely unused potentials for shifting the direction of dialogue. The challenge of
leadership is that of accessing the repository, or indeed, forging new amalgams.
For example, the scenario of mutual blame—in which Person A blames Person B
for a failure, and B replies by blaming A—is ubiquitous. The direction is degen-
erative. Yet, history does supply a range of less obvious moves in the game,
including apology, accepting partial blame, making light of the situation, aban-
doning the scenario either through silence or commentary on the scenario itself.
The important point is that mutual blame is not a ﬁxed scenario; participants
always have a choice of whether and how to play.
Understanding as a relational achievement
We ﬁnally turn to the issue of understanding. It has long been held that dialogic
process can play a key role in producing mutual understanding. Whether such
understanding is a matter of moving from chaos to order, or resolving conﬂicts
within the organization, dialogue is the major means to this end. How is it, then,
that we come to understand each other, and why is misunderstanding so
common? What is it to “understand” for which dialogue serves as the vehicle?
These are important questions, but we rapidly realize that the traditional concept
of understanding is unserviceable. Our common view of understanding draws
from the dualist tradition touched on above. As we say, to understand someone is
to “know what’s on his mind,” “what’s in her heart,” “what she is thinking,” and
the like. That is, we rely on a structuralist view that meaning lies somewhere
184
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

“inside the head” and words, gestures, and facial expressions are only the vehicles
through which meaning is conveyed to others. What can a post-structural
approach oﬀer as an alternative? Here it is ﬁrst useful to touch on the proble-
matics of the traditional view. The problem of interpreting other minds has
challenged some of the West’s most learned scholars for several centuries. In
philosophy the challenge is often characterized as the “problem of other minds”
(see, e.g., Avramides, 2001; Ryle, 1949); for Biblical scholars it is the problem of
hermeneutics, or how to properly interpret text. How is one to understand God’s
intentions from the words of the Bible, the Prophet’s wishes from the verses of
the Koran, or an author’s intentions from a poem or complex text? For some 300
years, hermeneutic scholars have been devoted to working out a plausible ratio-
nale for justifying interpretations of texts. Yet, there is no commonly accepted
solution. The problem is particularly diﬃcult to solve, because there is no prin-
cipled relationship between “a thought” and an utterance; no utterance is a
necessary indicator of any particular thought. If a colleague says to an oﬃce mate,
“I am not happy with your work,” is this an indication of a minor frustration, a
major irritation, or simply a casual comment? Or, perhaps it is not any form of
unhappiness, but simply the individual’s style of talking, a power maneuver, or a
signal of pathology. Or, perhaps it is none of these … or all of them simulta-
neously! Yet, any attempt to clarify the meaning of the utterance will yield but
another utterance (or bodily signal). Because this signal too has no principled con-
nection with an intention, its meaning remains equally ambiguous. The interpreter
can never exit the hermeneutic circle, a self-referring process in which no interpretation
can be justiﬁed save through reference to yet another interpretation.
It is here that the post-structural view becomes a major asset. On this account,
we abandon the mind/action dualism, and turn attention to the process of co-
action. In this frame we can trace the production of mutuality not to minds, but
to collaborative action. This view, in turn, gives us new purchase in the problem
of what it means to understand. Mutual understanding may essentially be viewed
as a form of scenario, or in Austin’s (1962) terms, a mutually felicitous pattern of
coordinated actions. It may be, for example, to tell a story of grief to which the
other replies with sympathy, to tell of a troubled situation to which the reply is
quiet advice, or to voice a strong opinion to which the other assents. Reducing
conﬂict in an organization is thus to move within dialogue in such a way that a
degenerative scenario is subverted, and replaced with a sustaining or generative
scenario. Mutual understanding, then, is akin to dancing smoothly or paddling a
canoe together.
Leadership and the development of dialogic skill
We shift now to a more direct concern with enriching dialogic practices in the
context of organizational leadership. In developing leadership-as-practice, what
learning processes can best impart “dialogic knowledge?” Here we immediately
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
185

confront a signiﬁcant challenge. We traditionally view knowledge as inhering in a
set of propositions. Thus, books and journal articles are means of disseminating
knowledge, and the library is viewed as a storehouse of knowledge. The learning
process is essentially about mastering and applying propositions, and the central
pedagogies are didactic in form. We might thus conclude that the mastery of the
above account of dialogue would enhance skillful participation in dialogue. There
is some wisdom in this view, but it is limited. A manager might well be sensitized
by this account to the relational nature of dialogue and the many ways in which
his or her words may be misunderstood; he or she might begin to search for new
“ways to talk” and begin to understand how much his or her status as manager
depends on relating well to those about. But, ultimately, this account is a form of
“propositional knowledge”; these are propositions “about the world” but
removed from speciﬁc locations of applicability. This practice in “knowing that”
gives us little purchase in the market place of “knowing how” to participate in
the practice of dialogue. One cannot learn to be a skilled tennis player entirely
through reading a book on tennis. How, then, to move theory into action? In
what follows we share two approaches in which we have been engaged. The ﬁrst
relies on dialogic rehearsal and reﬂection, and the second on role-play.
As scholars, we ﬁrst turned naturally to our major means of imparting what we
take to be knowledge: the written word. But in this format how could we move
from propositional knowledge to knowledge in practice. The diﬃculty is com-
pounded by the fact that one cannot be dialogically skilled as an independent
individual. Leadership is created in co-action, and no participant can control the
meaning of his or her own utterances. Any proposition dictating “how to do it”
would not only be misleading, but continue to support the tradition of the indi-
vidual leader. We thus set out to write a form of textbook, Relational leading:
Practices for dialogically based collaboration. In each chapter we ﬁrst included accounts
of various aspects of dialogic process, reﬂecting many of the ideas discussed above.
In eﬀect, the reader was introduced to a practice orientation to leading. The
intent here was not to dictate practice, but to sensitize the reader to dimensions of
his or her subsequent practice. Second, we created a set of dialogic scenarios—
written scenes from everyday organizational life. Our aim was to engage our
readers in a vicarious rehearsal, that is to draw them into the drama in such a way
that they might imaginatively pretend they were participating. In this way we
were making use of a common cultural process in which we listen to stories as if
we are the protagonist. Importantly, we listen to stories by commonly asking
ourselves, “what would I do under the circumstances?” In this way we subtly
prepare ourselves for future contingencies.
Yet, because of its inherently unpredictable character, we felt that sensitization
and vicarious rehearsal of dialogue were insuﬃcient. We thus added a third and
reﬂective component to the pedagogical process. Rather than didactically
explaining to readers why we thought certain conversational moves were superior
to others, we attempted to energize their own reﬂection. If there are
186
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

fundamentally no “right” or “wrong” moves in a conversation, to what should
one be sensitized? For what should one be readied? An analogy to learning skills
in chess is relevant. A teacher can develop on paper an array of possible board
conﬁgurations, and ask the learner what move he or she would make in each of
these cases. The two of them could then discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
each. One thus gains increased sensitivity to the pros and cons of possible moves.
We drew from a repository of scenarios common to organizational life,
including for example, scenarios related to team development, guided organiza-
tional change, interpersonal conﬂict, organizational innovation, and coaching.
Perhaps the greatest challenges to leadership originate in contexts of conﬂict—
disagreements, jealousies, injustices, competitions for power, and so on. As we
have also seen, conﬂict can commence with any adjacency pair, and the slide into
degenerative scenario can be rapid. This means that those in leadership positions
can easily be swept into such scenarios. Here we share one such conﬂict into
which we invited our readers (from Hersted & Gergen, 2013):
We’re in a development department of new products in the computer games
industry. Claudia is the manager of the department with 30 employees, and
Kevin is the head of one of her project groups.
KEVIN: Look Claudia. I need to talk to you. Do you have a moment?
CLAUDIA: Of course. What’s up?
KEVIN: It’s about the decision you made yesterday at the staﬀmeeting about
closing down the new project.
CLAUDIA: Yes. So, what’s the problem?
KEVIN: I was very surprised that you decided to close down the new project
without talking to me about it ﬁrst.
CLAUDIA: Well, I knew that you would just ﬁght against closing the project,
so why should I discuss this issue with you?
KEVIN (RAISING HIS VOICE): Well, I’m the coordinator of that project. You
appointed me to be responsible for it, and I’ve been working hard on it.
I really put a lot of eﬀort into it. So don’t you think you owe me some
respect? You should have talked to me about it before announcing the
closure?
CLAUDIA: Don’t be so emotional, Kevin. This project had become a waste of
money. You knew that, and just kept working on it without monitor-
ing what was going on. It wasn’t paying oﬀ, and I tried to tell you that
in a dozen ways. It was an interesting and expensive experiment, but it’s
now time to just let it go.
KEVIN: This isn’t fair! The project was under development, and we just
started it four months ago. We’re in the middle of a process, and we’ve
been involving a lot of people and stakeholders. How can you just close
it down without discussing it with me? I could have shown you the
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
187

strategy for the project … and you might have understood the logic …
actually we were on a good track … .
CLAUDIA: Actually I gave you a chance, Kevin, but you and your people
didn’t create any results, and you didn’t listen. Look, the competition in
our business is hard, and we can’t waste our resources on projects that
don’t pay oﬀ. I have to make the decisions here, and they aren’t easy.
But this one was clear.
KEVIN: Well I’m fully aware of how we spend our resources. I just think that
you should have talked to me ﬁrst. The way you did it was disrespectful
to me and to the people who’ve been working hard on this project.
CLAUDIA (RAISING HER VOICE): Oh… Kevin, your arrogance is the problem
here. I dropped the project because you weren’t capable of realizing
what a failure it was! Anyway, you should respect my decisions without
questioning. I am the boss, after all, and I need to work with people
who trust my decisions; so don’t ﬁght against me. The issue is closed.
(Kevin walks out of Claudia’s oﬃce, slamming the door. The next day he
delivers his resignation.)
At the close of the scenario we invited the readers into reﬂection. We posed
several questions that created connections between the actions in the case and the
conceptual framework outlined earlier. Consciousness of the scenario-like quality
of such interchanges, the possibility for multiple constructions, and the origins of
meaning in co-action were all paramount. We thus asked, for example, “How
would you characterize the scenario in this conversation?” with the intent of
sharpening the reader’s consciousness of the way in which the co-active moves
escalated the hostility. We then asked, “Can you trace the responsibility for the
outcome?” with the aim of drawing attention to the co-active creation of the
scenario. To highlight the socially constructed nature of the realities each brought
to bear, we asked, “Did either Claudia or Kevin have the better argument? Was
either right?”
Crucially, we also directed attention to the conversational choice-points. We
asked where in the dialogue could either Kevin or Claudia have made a diﬀerent
move, one that could possibly invite the other into a less antagonistic reply. We
encouraged readers to dip into their own conversational repositories to locate
more satisfactory alternatives. Could they avoid the degenerative slide? In sum,
our attempt was to develop a new form of “textbook” in leadership, one that was
congenial with the conception of leadership, dialogue, and learning as practice.
Developing dialogic skills in action
If the aim of leadership development is to enhance skill in practice, the limits of a
text-based pedagogy are clear. There must be immersion in the actual practices,
188
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

an enlargement in “knowing how,” such that leaders become “creative way-
farers” in dialogic relationships. In this light, one of the authors (LH) developed a
leadership development practice that situated potential leaders in the context of
ongoing action. The pedagogical practice here made major use of role-playing,
combined with creative reﬂection. The main idea was to develop a skill-enhancing
pedagogical method drawing from the rich traditions of the dramatic arts and
group coaching. In the case of the dramatic arts, playing the role of another
person—for instance a young boy, a colleague, a mother—the “actor” begins to
move and speak as the other. During the role-playing the “actor” becomes bodily
involved and begins to experience the world from the perspective of the other;
hereby acquiring the skill to “identify with the other.” In this process the “actor”
begins to grasp and understand the logic of the other person and the context
from which he or she re-acts in various situations. The ability to change
perspective and identify with others can be an important step in enhancing
leadership skills in connecting to and relating sensitively to others. The role-
playing directs attention to diﬀerent embodied ways of responding (see also
Shotter 2012), which means an expansion in communicative resources. This
learning through mimesis is fundamental to role-playing.
At the same time, as in the preceding practice, the idea was to add a reﬂective
dimension to the role-playing. In addition to enriching one’s skills for dialogue
and action, it seemed essential to expand consciousness of the skill. Through
reﬂection, one can generalize across diverse contexts, deliberate on shortcomings,
and actively consider new alternatives. In part, this concern with reﬂection was
realized as participants both enacted roles and commented on the process. Often,
they were encouraged, on the basis of their comments, to create and enact
alternative scenarios. In this way they became active “spect-actors” (Boal, 1979).
To intensify reﬂection and create a collaborative learning space, we made use of a
reﬂecting team consisting of individuals who looked at the episodes from multiple
perspectives without judging the “actors.” By working with the reﬂective team,
the participants began to reﬂect on the episodes and possibilities for improvement
through alternative actions. Through the dialogue the participants began to
practice reﬂection-on-action with the hope of enhancing their subsequent capacities
for reﬂection-in-action (Schön, 1987). Essentially, then, through a process of
engaged role-playing combined with polyphonic reﬂection, the hope was that
participants would acquire both dialogic skill and an expanded relational awareness
in their daily organizational practice.
The dialogue training involved some 60 participants over an 18-month period,
and included those in managerial positions and employees in an institution that
provided care for neglected adolescents. In the project the participants worked
with episodes from their own organizational context—episodes selected and
presented by the participants themselves. These episodes dealt with challenges
concerning communication and relationships, and reﬂected tensions that often
had led to polarization, alienation, and conﬂict within the organization and in
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
189

relation to the surroundings. These tensions and conﬂicts not only involved
managers, employees, and external working partners, but the young people living
at the institution, their parents, and other important actors. Episodes touched on the
use of force, sexual abuse, prostitution, alcohol and drug abuse, deviation from
the institutional rules, tensions among managers and employees, conﬂicts in the
group, along with ethnic and cultural conﬂicts within the organization.
The chosen episodes often contained what Mezirow calls disorienting dilem-
mas (Mezirow, 1994). According to Mezirow, working with disorienting
dilemmas can lead to important and possibly transformative learning. Drawing
from these dilemmas, the participants physically played out and experimented
with diﬀerent scenarios, employing what we might call embodied imagination.
While working with these challenging episodes or disorienting dilemmas, we
questioned the actual practice (in gentle ways) and tried to look at the epi-
sodes from new perspectives and to reﬂect on and experiment with diﬀerent
options for communication and action. The idea was to move from degen-
erative to generative scenarios by focusing on conversational choice-points. In
this way, the project worked with the notion of learning-from-within a social
situation and reﬂecting on it. Learning is here understood as being embedded
within relational action, experience, and experimentation. The eﬃcacy of
these experiences was further enhanced through the following components.
Learning goals
Working from within a constructionist premise and drawing on inspiration
from action research, it was important to initiate the dialogue training process
by inviting the participants into a dialogue about the desired learning out-
comes. While talking about learning goals and listening to each other, the
participants clearly inspired each other and several of them started building on
each others’ ideas by adding dimensions to their own learning goals. Among
the learning goals, the participants mentioned their wish to explore how they
could talk together more openly, become better at listening and communicating,
gain clarity on their roles and tasks in the institution, and be more appreciative.
The participants wrote their learning goals in personal notebooks and after a little
dialogue in plenary, they presented these on a poster hanging on the wall. During
the process of dialogue training we often returned to these learning goals, and
some were modiﬁed and reﬁned by the participants themselves. For instance, one
of the leaders declared in the ﬁrst phase “I wish to be clear in my communica-
tion” as his personal learning goal, and then later on in the process, he modiﬁed it
to “I wish to be clear and appreciative in my communication.” This kind of
development suggested that the group was engaged in a transformative learning
process.
190
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

Rules for play
The dialogue training was extremely serious on the one hand, and on the other,
it also contained many playful aspects. The latter were important to loosen up
and build conﬁdence among the participants as well as to enhance motivation.
According to earlier research, rules, play, risk-taking, and creativity can be con-
sidered closely connected and interwoven (Chemi, Jensen & Hersted 2015).
According to Huizinga (2002) play is a “free activity” that is more or less struc-
tured by its own rules and unfolds in accordance with its own boundaries of time
and space. Play is “standing quite consciously outside ‘ordinary life’ as being ‘not
serious,’ but at the same time absorbing the player intensely and utterly” (p. 2).
Therefore, to create a frame for the work, we agreed on rules for being present,
focused, non-judgmental, and respectful.
Facilitation
LH served as the facilitator throughout the process. The ﬁrst task was a matter of
ensuring a nurturing and trusting frame for the role-play experiences. Further-
more, it was important to ask reﬂective questions to facilitate dialogue. In these
processes it is essential that the facilitator takes a humble or not-knowing-position,
while simultaneously organizing and guiding the process. The facilitator must
encourage the participants to imagine alternative scenarios in appreciative and
respectful ways. It is a question of being and moving with the participants, but at
the same time carefully challenging their taken-for-granted assumptions. The
facilitator can never be fully neutral (impossible from a constructionist perspective),
but should attempt to be an attentive observer and an inspiring co-creator.
The polyphonic reﬂecting team
As a central feature of the learning, in each role-playing session selected partici-
pants served as a reﬂecting team. Participants were told that they were not
obliged to do the role-playing, and that it was fully legitimate to participate as
observing and reﬂecting team members. The selected members were positioned
as active observers of the episodes enacted by their colleagues. Before the mise-en-
scène began, each of the reﬂecting team members was given tasks by the facilitator
consisting of observing and listening from speciﬁc perspectives, for instance the
perspective of an adolescent, a teacher, a social worker, a team leader, the director
of the local municipality, a representative from the union, a mother, a father, etc.
The team was encouraged by the facilitator not to express judgments but instead
to show curiosity and wonder in humble ways based on their observations. The
reﬂecting team members spoke directly with the role-players by invitation from the
facilitator, and they were also encouraged to talk together publicly as a team
about what they had observed during the role-play. Sometimes a member from
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
191

the reﬂecting team was inspired to join in and replace one of the role players to
experiment with alternative ways of moving in the dialogue.
General learning outcomes
Was this form of learning-as-practice eﬀective in strengthening skills in leading
through dialogue? “Eﬃcacy” is always a problematic word, as there are important
questions of power and multiple perspectives in terms of what counts as eﬀective,
for whom, and with what consequences. However, it was important to acquire a
sense of how this form of pedagogy was experienced by the participants, and if
there were ways in which it could be improved. To this end three semi-structured
focus group interviews were conducted, each of one hour’s length, with three
representatives from diﬀerent categories of participants in each focus group (e.g.
designated leaders, pedagogues, social workers, school teachers, kitchen workers,
and people employed in the administration). The feedback from the participants
suggested that the process yielded positive learning outcomes. In the following
we oﬀer a few of the comments from these focus group interviews concerning
embodiment, plurality in perspective, and improvisational readiness.
Body consciousness
Something that makes this approach diﬀerent from more traditional leadership
training methods is its dimension of embodiment. One learns in and through
action. We are dealing here with embodied knowledge, or in Shotter’s (2012) terms,
a knowing-from-within or an understanding of a relational-responsive kind (p. 107).
However, from a pedagogical standpoint the important question is whether par-
ticipants emerge with an enriched sense of the ways in which bodily expressions
contribute to dialogic outcomes. There are positive indications. As one of the
participants expressed:
It is important to consider if it is appropriate to assume a relaxed and loose
body posture depending on the person you are having a conversation with.
It is also essential to think about how open and inviting your appearance is,
and just all in all to think about if the position you are sitting in is suitable for
the social environment. Often I am sitting with my arms crossed like this,
and this position I mostly try to avoid at work also depending on who I am
talking to.
Another added:
The awareness of one’s own bodily expression is really important, and I have
deﬁnitely felt this awareness, which is a good thing. Also if I know that I am
going to have a certain conversation with someone, I am now able to run
192
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

the event through in my head before the meeting starts and use some of the
things we have learned. I am able to imagine which scenarios will possibly take
place in the forthcoming conversation … and I also use this when dealing
with other colleagues but in a diﬀerent way.
This latter remark was particularly interesting, as it expanded the pedagogical aims
of the project. It suggests that role-playing invites the imaginative rehearsal of
possible scenarios as a kind of private theatre where inner dialogues take place. One
may then enter dialogue with greater preparedness and a larger conversational
repertoire.
Plurality in perspective
As reasoned earlier, role-playing the lives of others should be useful in expanding
perspectives. One learns in an embodied way how to identify with the other. A
number of participants aﬃrmed that indeed the practice did succeed in enriching
perspectives. As one of the managers expressed:
When circumstances ask for it, you remember some of the things you have
learned and are much more aware of what kind of position and approach
you should choose. Because of that, I ﬁnd the exercises rather useful. When
I’m going to engage in a conversation with someone, I think about the dif-
ferent techniques I can choose from, and sometimes I take the perspective of
a student and place myself in his/her position. That would possibly work
when trying to get a social worker to take a diﬀerent approach and ask the
right questions like: how would you think about it if you were in the stu-
dents’ position? […] I have made use of that method, also in relation to the
teachers. In speciﬁc situations I have asked the teachers to identify with the
students, and feel what it is like to be in their situation.
Another participant expanded on the issue of perspective:
Well, I think it is very useful to experiment with diﬀerent perspectives. If
you are dealing with a person it is unquestionably a good idea to try and see
things from the other person’s perspective. And, the ability to do that is
something you can work on for the rest of your life, because it is actually
very diﬃcult to see things from a diﬀerent perspective than your own.
Sometimes speciﬁc situations cause particular reactions, and … well, in that
way I ﬁnd the things we have learned very useful.
It is interesting to see that the participants realized the emergent character of
dialogue, the signiﬁcance of context, and the utility of reﬂection in preparing for
improvisation.
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
193

Readiness for improvisation
Given the enormous variations in the content of any scenario, and the fact that
every turn oﬀers a choice-point for multiple alternatives to follow, the key to
successful participation is improvisation. One of the aims was that participants
would come away with an enhanced ﬂexibility and a readiness to adapt and
create as the situation allowed. The preceding remark suggested that many did
beneﬁt in this way. As one of the participants also pointed out:
During the role-playing exercises I have learned a lot and received a diﬀerent
and new view of certain conﬂicts and aspects, and I know that my group
members had the same experience. After the exercises I often heard people
talking: “why didn’t we do it like that, why didn’t we say this instead of
that … ?” In that way it deﬁnitely seems like we all learned a lot.
It appeared that the training challenged taken-for-granted assumptions. By
reﬂecting from diﬀerent perspectives and trying out alternative solutions the par-
ticipants appeared to expand their repertoire of communicative acts. We empha-
sized the point that there are always multiple ways of responding and one always
has a choice. One of the managers added:
It’s the real challenge, I think, when trying to use all these things looking
forward. Acknowledgement is the necessary and important thing here. For
instance when X is saying: “Maybe we should try to replay the thing you
just did before?” I ﬁnd it a great idea. It is useful to think about what you
can change and do better … and, also trying to learn from each other.
These comments and others from the focus group interviews suggest that role-
playing, combined with a polyphonic reﬂecting team, can be a useful tool for
facilitating leadership development. Instead of illuminating ﬁxed, linear strategies
for action, emphasis was put on improvisation or “wayﬁnding” (Chia & Holt
2008) in a continuous and largely uncharted interchange. The majority of the
managers and employees said that they learned a lot about communicating with
their colleagues, other working partners, the adolescents living at the institution,
and the parents of the adolescents. They also noticed the beginning of positive
change in their organizational culture. In general, it appeared that the educational
practice contributed to the participants’ communicative skills in constituting rea-
lity, building up generative and sustainable relationships, constituting identities,
and the creation of new opportunities and new practices in the organization.
Conclusion
Our aims in this chapter have been several. First, we have attempted to link the
account of L-A-P with an account of dialogic process. By unpacking a theory of
194
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

dialogue-as-practice, we can see more clearly some of the implications for action
in the organizational context. The actions of people take place, by and large,
within dialogic relationships. Further, we have attempted to link these twin
concerns with the challenge of leadership development. How can the theoretical
orientation of L-A-P be cashed out in terms of developing dialogic skills? This led
us, in turn, to conceptualize the pedagogical process of leadership development as a
practice (essentially, pedagogy-as-practice). In this context we reported on two
attempts to enhance leadership skills in dialogue, the ﬁrst text-based, and the second,
action-based. Although these accounts are necessarily limited, and leave many
important questions unanswered, there are several implications that deserve spe-
cial attention. At the outset is the more general question of how to link the
highly general and abstract array of concepts included in the practice orientation
to leading to actual activity. In part this is the question of the pragmatic utility of
practice theory. As we see it, the focus on dialogue is ideally situated as a linking
vehicle. While it is diﬃcult to know how to formulate such concepts as rela-
tionality, process, and emergence in terms of ongoing action, the practice of
dialogue is experience near. Thus, to articulate a theory of dialogue in terms that
are congenial with the general orientation, lends itself to actionable consequences.
To extend this discussion, it is an interesting question as to whether the con-
ceptual components of a theory of dialogue may be eﬀectively extended to the
full range of activities comprising organizational life. For example, a theory of
dialogue is primarily focused on discursive exchange. At the same time, the practice
of dialogue is a fully embodied performance. But in what degree can the concepts
congenial to this context (e.g. co-action, scenarios, choice-points) be extended to
non-discursive actions (e.g. relations with technology, food, nature, physical
structures)? Herein lies a topic for rich discussion.
A second issue emerges from the particular practices of leadership development
outlined above. A practice orientation to leadership is unique in its removing leadership
from the minds and actions of individuals, and placing it within co-constituting
relationships. While intellectually bracing, such a view is diﬃcult to assimilate
into leadership development programs composed of participating individuals. In
eﬀect, one works with individuals as a means of enhancing a relational process.
And for the individual, there is no skilled action until another’s actions aﬃrm it as
a skill. Is such a pedagogy not misconceived? As suggested in the second project
described above, it is fruitful to work with multiple participants at diﬀerent levels
in the same organization. Enhanced coordination within such groups should
contribute to the organization’s collective intelligence and capability for action.
Yet, we should not underestimate the potential of individual-centered devel-
opment for relational enrichment. We have laid out a theory of dialogue that
points to the potential for an individual, at any choice-point, to perform in such a
way that the ensuing dialogue may move in either a generative or degenerative
direction. And, while the performance does not demand or require the inter-
locutor’s subsequent response, there is what Pearce and Cronen (1982) call a
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
195

logical force that will favor one response over another. If greeted by a friend, it is
highly conventional to return the greeting (as opposed, for example, to singing a
song or staring at one’s shoes). Failing to respond with a greeting is to risk alie-
nation. Thus, the greater the one’s resources for performance, the more likely
one may enlist the cooperation of the other. In the project described above,
trainees were essentially increasing their resources for action at the choice-point.
Like seasoned basketball players, they were learning how to move eﬀectively
within the ongoing ﬂow of complex relational patterns. In this sense, action and
reﬂection may indeed contribute to one’s capacity to invite less conﬂictual, and
more productive relationships within the organization and without.
References
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. New York: Oxford University Press.
Avramides, A. (2001). Other minds. London: Routledge.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M.M. Bakhtin. C. Emerson &
M. Holquist (Eds.) Austin: University of Texas Press.
Boal, A. (1979). Theatre of the oppressed. New York: Theatre Communications Group.
Bohm, D. (1996). On dialogue (L. Nichol, Ed.). New York: Routledge.
Braidotti, R. (2012). The posthuman. London: Polity.
Buber, M. (1923). I and thou. New York: Scribner.
Chasin, R., Herzig, M., Roth, S., Chasin, L., Becker, C., & Stains, R. (1996). From dia-
tribe to dialogue on divisive public issues: Approaches drawn from family therapy.
Median Quarterly, Summer Issue 13(4).
Chemi, T., Jensen, J. B., & Hersted, L. (2015). Behind the scenes of artistic creativity: Processes
of learning, creating and organizing. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Chia, R., & Holt, R. (2008). Strategy as wayﬁnding. Paper for the 24th EGOS Colloquium.
Amsterdam.
Cooperrider, D. L., Sorensen, P. F., Whitney, D., & Yaeger, T. F. (2000). Appreciative
inquiry: Rethinking human organization toward a positive theory of change. Champagne, IL: Stipes.
Deleuze, G. (1994). Diﬀerence and repetition (P. Patton, trans.). New York: Columbia
University Press. (Original work published 1968).
Derrida, J. (1976). Of grammatology (G. C. Spivak, trans.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press. (Original work published 1967).
Donati, P. (2011). Relational sociology: A new paradigm for the social sciences. London: Routledge.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1965). Studies in ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gaynor, H. (2002). Innovation by design. New York: AMACOM.
Gergen, K. J. (1994). Realities and relationships: Soundings in social construction. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Gergen, K. J. (2009). Relational being: Beyond self and community. New York: Oxford
University Press
Gergen, K. J. (2015). From mirroring to world-making: Research as future forming.
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 45, 287–310.
Grudin, R. (1996). On dialogue: An essay in free thought. New York and Boston: Houghton
Miﬄin.
Habermas, J. (1981). Theory of communicative action V.1. Boston: Beacon Press.
196
Kenneth J. Gergen and Lone Hersted

Helin, J., Hernes, T., Hjorth, D., & Holt, R. (2014). The Oxford handbook of process
philosophy & organization studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hernes, T., & Maitlis, S. (Eds.) (2010). Process, sensemaking, and organizing. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hersted, L. & Gergen, K. J. (2013). Relational leading: Practices for dialogically based collaboration.
Chagrin Falls, OH: TAOS Institute Publications.
Hosking, D., Dachler, H. P. & Gergen, K. J. (Eds.) (1995). Management and organization:
Relational alternatives to individualism. Aldershot: Avebury. Reprinted on WorldShare
Books: www.worldsharebooks.net, 2012.
Huizinga, J. (1955). Homo Luden: A study of the play element in culture. Boston: Beacon Press.
Ingold, T. (2011). The perception of the environment: Essays on livelihood, dwelling and skill.
London: Routledge.
Isaacs, W. N. (1999). Dialogue and the art of thinking together. A pioneering approach to commu-
nicating in business and in life. New York: Doubleday.
Keller, C. (2008). On the mystery: Discerning divinity in process. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press.
Law, J., & Hassard, J. (1999). Actor network theory and after. London: Wiley.
Maranhao, T. (Ed.) (1990). The interpretation of dialogue. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
McNamee, S. and Gergen, K. J. (2001). Relational responsibility. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mezirow (1994). Understanding transformation theory. Adult Education Quarterly, 44, 222–232.
Mitchell, S. (1988). Relational concepts in psychoanalysis: An integration. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Pearce, B., & Cronen, V. (1980). Communication, action, and meaning: The creation of social
realities. New York: Praeger.
Pickering, A. (1995). The mangle of practice: Time, agency, and science. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Rahim, S. A. (1994). Participatory development communication as a dialogical process. In
S. White, K. Sadanandan Nair & J. Ascroft (Eds.), Participatory communication, working for
change and development. New Delhi: Sage.
Rodriguez, A. (2001). Diversity as liberation (II): Introducing a new understanding of diversity.
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Hutchinson.
Shotter, J. (2012). Social construction on the edge: ‘Withness’-thinking and embodiment. Chagrin
Falls, OH: TAOS Institute Publications.
Taylor, J. R., & Van Every, E. J. (2000). The emergent organization: Communication as its site
and surface. Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Thatchenkery, T. J. & Upadhyaya, P. (1996). Organizations as a play of multiple and
dynamic discourses: An example from a global social change organization. In D. J. Boje,
R. P. Gephart & T. J. Thatchenkery (Eds.). Postmodern management and organization theory
(pp. 308–330). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly 17, 654–676.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a socio-cultural practice and theory of education.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1963). Philosophical investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe trans.). London:
Blackwell.
Yankelovich, D. (1999). The magic of dialogue: Transforming conﬂict into cooperation. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Developing leadership as dialogic practice
197

10
CONVERSATIONAL TRAVEL AND
THE IDENTIFICATION OF
LEADERSHIP PHENOMENA
Caroline Ramsey
Introduction
Amidst all the leader-celebratory treatments of leadership (Hosking, 2011), there
has been over the last 15 years or so, an emerging exploration of leadership that is
distributed, shared (Denis, Langley & Sergi, 2012; Thorpe, Gold & Lawler, 2011),
or understood in terms of relationships (Uhl-Bien, 2006) or as a practice (Crevani
Lindgren & Packendorﬀ, 2010; Raelin, 2011). Undoubtedly, these relational and
practice approaches have provided new insights into leadership, and an emerging
array of empirical work has started to explore the relational practices involved.
Several authors (e.g. Denis et al., 2012; Shamir, 2012) have, however, challenged
relational leadership writers to deﬁne what actually constitutes leadership from
their relational perspective and how it can be distinguished from other organiza-
tional processes. For only then, it has been argued, can leadership be researched as
a distinct phenomenon. In a sense, the leadership-as-practice movement is able to
respond to this challenge by pointing to activities (see, e.g., Crevani and End-
rissat, Chapter 2, this volume; Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume). In this chapter I
set out to oﬀer an optic for examining leadership created relationally in the
practice of moment-by-moment interplay. My focus will be on conversation,
which I will treat primarily as an invitational, ontological practice. I shall argue
that conversations “travel” as participants improvise on the contributions of
others, moving conversations in emergent trajectories, along topic lines towards
conclusions or diﬀerences, and via a variety of modes, for example argument,
questioning, or aﬃrmation. It is, I shall argue, the way that conversations travel
that provides us with access to the relational practices that create and distinguish
organizational phenomena such as leadership.

This argument will be built in four stages. First, I will provide a brief resume of
relational approaches to leadership that have emerged strongly in the last ten to
ﬁfteen years. Next, I will discuss how we can build vocabularies for discussing
moment-by-moment talk and leadership in organizations and, in so doing, can
identify moments of leadership. Third, I will introduce some extracts of talk from
a meeting by way of an illustration of how conversational travel can be used and
the insights that can be gained through such an optic. Finally, I will use this
illustrative empirical material to engage diﬀerent discursive practices of inquiry in
dialogue with conversational travel considering where they may contribute to
each other in developing a richer, empirical study of relational leadership.
Relational treatments of leadership
The exploration of leadership as a particular type of relationship rather than as a
status, task, or capacity has picked up pace over the ﬁrst decade of the new cen-
tury. Mary Uhl-Bien (2006) has drawn on Hosking and Morley’s (1991) distinc-
tion of entitative and relational treatments of relating, to distinguish between two
diﬀerent ways that researchers have centered relationships in their study of lea-
dership. Entitative approaches see relationships as taking place between entities such
as leaders and followers, be they organizations, teams, or individuals. Our
understanding of those relationships would be based, therefore, on the attributes,
attitudes, and intentions of those entities. So, in focusing on leadership relation-
ships, researchers have attended to the properties and behaviors of individuals.
Uhl-Bien identiﬁes several streams of research within this entitative (she uses the
term entity) approach to leadership-within-relationships. Most focus on leader-
follower relationships, albeit within diﬀerent contexts or focuses for study. So,
Uhl-Bien has used leader-member exchange (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995) to
explore leader follower dyads, and Hollander (1995) attended to the cognitive
and perceptual processes of identifying leaders. Elsewhere, charismatic (Howell &
Shamir, 2005), network (Balkundi & Kilduﬀ, 2005), and post-industrial (Rost,
1995) contexts have been studied to examine diﬀerences in leadership relations.
In contrast, a relational approach (Uhl-Bien, 2006) theorizes leadership as
emerging amidst relational processes, rather than through an individual’s actions
within relationships. Uhl-Bien (2006) draws heavily on the relational con-
structionism of Dian Hosking and her colleagues (Dachler, 1991; Dachler &
Hosking, 1995; Hosking, 1988, 2007, 2011; Brown & Hosking, 1986; Hosking
& Fineman, 1990; Hosking & Morley, 1991) to build a picture of research
attending to the relational activities of participants within emergent leadership
relating. More recently other approaches, for example, practice-based (Raelin,
2011; Crevani et al., 2010), process (Wood, 2005), or performative (Denis et al.,
2012), also foreground social relating as generative of leadership.
Uhl-Bien (2006) articulates a relational research agenda as asking:
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
199

… how the processes of leadership and management in organizations
emerge—e.g., how realities of leadership are interpreted within the network
of relations; how organizations are designed, directed, controlled and
developed on the bases of collectively generated knowledge about organiza-
tional realities; and how decisions and actions are embedded in collective
sense-making and attribution processes from which structures of social
interdependence emerge and in turn reframe the collectively generated
organizational realities.
(Uhl-Bien, 2006, p. 662)
This is social constructionism with a strong cognitive emphasis: “realities of lea-
dership are interpreted,” organizational management is based on “collectively
generated knowledge,” and actions are “embedded in collective sense-making.”
In more recent work, Fairhurst and Uhl-Bien have contrasted two models of
communication; a transmission model and a meaning-centered approach.
Although there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in this approach, I would suggest that
they both continue to have a cognitive, sensemaking emphasis. Transmission
models understand communication as a “conduit” (Fairhurst & Connaughton,
2014), while a meaning-centered view of communication asserts that “ … the
processes by which meanings get created, contested, and negotiated are funda-
mental to understanding leadership” (Fairhurst & Uhl-Bien, 2012, p. 1046,
emphasis added). One of the authors that Fairhurst and Connaughton identify as
taking a meaning-centered view is John Shotter. I want to suggest that we can
engage helpfully with Shotter and his colleagues (Shotter, 1996, 2008, Chapter 7,
this volume; Shotter & Katz, 1996; Cunliﬀe, 2002) in a somewhat diﬀerent
manner. I would suggest that they oﬀer us an ontological (in contrast with an
epistemological or meaningful) treatment of communication. Talk, argued Shot-
ter, gestures, strikes, and moves are emergent realities created in a “temporal
unfolding” ﬂow (Shotter, 2006, p. 588). It is this third, generative model of
communication that I want to work with for the remainder of this chapter.
This alternative strand of relational constructionist argument foregrounds a
world, or history-making dynamic to social relating (e.g. Hosking, 2000; Hosking
& McNamee, 2006; Shotter, 1996, 2008; Ramsey, 2014; Simpson, 2009; Carroll
& Simpson, 2012). Here attention is focused on the action performed rather than
sensemaking; leadership activity is understood as socially created. Such a shift in
our attention will become signiﬁcant as I attempt to build a method and frame
for inquiry within relationally created leadership.
Developments required in relational treatments of leadership
Both Uhl-Bien (2006) and Denis and his colleagues (2012) have written of a need
to develop (a) a richer empirical base for a relational perspective and (b) a clearer
articulation of what constitutes a phenomenon that might be called leadership.
200
Caroline Ramsey

To a considerable extent Uhl-Bien’s (2006) call for empirical work has been met
(e.g., Carroll & Simpson, 2012; Crevani et al., 2010; Cunliﬀe & Eriksen, 2011;
Fairhurst, 2007; Fairhurst & Connaughton, 2014; Larsson & Lundholm, 2010;
Fairhurst & Uhl-Bien, 2012; Wodak, Kwon & Clarke, 2011). However, it is
worth pointing out that, with the exception of Carroll and Simpson’s research, in
all the other speciﬁc studies there is a pre-identiﬁed leader relating with other or
others. There is a problem here, as once a researcher identiﬁes a leader it then
becomes possible to locate their relational actions within the intentions, attitudes,
or discursive strategies of the leader and followers. This will, consequently, blind
us to the agency of relational processes that writers such as Hosking (2007, 2011;
Dachler and Hosking, 1995) point toward.
The issue of what actually constitutes leadership; what, in Drath and his colleagues’
(Drath et al., 2008) words, is its ontology is left somewhat uncertain. Indeed,
Alvesson and Svengingsson (2003) have argued persuasively from their empirical
research that leadership as a distinguishable concept disappears when organizers are
asked to account for their organizing. Kelly (2014) made a similar point when he
argued that leadership is an “empty signiﬁer … that does not signify anything speciﬁc or
ﬁxed” (p. 905). In a way, this uncertainty (Denis et al., 2012) is part of what drives
researchers back to predeﬁned leaders, for the relational activity of an identiﬁed
leader is most certainly of interest. This, however, returns us to the work of the
entitative researchers that Uhl-Bien (2006) identiﬁed and reduces our ability to attend
to the relational practices that create leadership. So what is it that constitutes
leadership? How can we identify it in its occurrence within relatings rather than in
its personnel and identities? To be able to explore this question, I need to develop
vocabularies for considering conversations and thus the leadership created in them.
Building a vocabulary and repertoire of conversational travel
In many ways it is too restrictive to limit relational practices to talk. Looks, tone
of voice, gestures, and actions, for example, all convey meanings and relational
invitations. However, given that my intent in this chapter is to explicate and
discuss the way in which conversations’ travel oﬀers an optic for examining rela-
tional leadership, I will centre my discussion on talk in conversation. Even so,
when we reach the illustrative analysis of a conversation, tone of voice and speed
of conversational turns are noted as being signiﬁcant.
Although many authors have now started to point to the importance of rela-
tional processes in constituting organizational phenomena, the methods by which
we may inquire into the nature of these processes, such as conversation, are still
complicated and partial. Within the organizational ﬁeld (good reviews can be
found in Fairhurst, 2007; Fairhurst & Uhl-Bien, 2012; Fairhurst & Connaughton,
2014; Nicolini, 2013), the methods that have been commonly used generally
work on the basis of seeking to split conversation into its constituent parts. So
conversation analysis might draw our attention to turn taking and sequential
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
201

turns, whereas those using big “D” discourse analytic methods (Alvesson & Kär-
reman, 2000; Burr, 2003) would look for how systems of wording from wider
communities are used, and still others might look for how frames, humor, or
particular word forms are used. The logic of these methods is that if we can only
ﬁnd the “bricks” from which conversations are built, then we might be able to
“see” how they are put together and understand the relational processes of a
phenomenon, such as leadership, better. There are, however, problems with this
overall project to explore the building of conversation from its constituent parts.
In particular, writers such as Searle (1995), Shotter (1995), and Barad (2003) have
argued that conversations are “primitive realities,” and that splitting them down
will obfuscate as much as clarify. A question that might be helpful to explore is,
therefore; how can we study conversations as “wholes?”
Three shifts in our analysis will facilitate our exploration of conversations. First,
we can treat talk as invitational rather than meaningful. Such a move allows us to
draw on the performative approach to talk in Speech Act theory. Second, we can draw
on Gergen’s (1994, 1995) articulation of the act + supplement relating within the
social construction of power. This then leads to a third shift, which is to make use
of oﬀers with acceptances or blocks from improvised theatre (Johnstone, 1999). I
will explore each shift more carefully.
Talk as invitational
In suggesting that we can treat talk as invitational, I am not arguing that talk has
no meaning. I am, rather, suggesting that we can examine talk as a relational
activity that contributes to succeeding action. Our talk not only expresses mean-
ing, it also invites response. Bakhtin (1981) suggested that every utterance antici-
pates the next utterance and our utterances are, in a sense, called forth by prior
utterances. Shotter and his colleagues (Shotter, 1996; Shotter & Katz, 1996;
Cunliﬀe 2002) proposed an understanding of talk as being a social poetics where
our talk is relationally responsive to a ﬂow of conversation. The talk not only
conveys content, but also moves, strikes, gestures. Its eﬀect is as much visceral as
cognitive. In this way, talk not only invites, it also contributes. That I talk to you
about tennis, rather than the topic of leadership at a conference, might contribute
to you questioning who might win the next major championship. However, it
will not determine that you do so as you draw our conversation back to the
leadership topic discussed in the previous session. This point that our talk invites
and contributes to the direction of our conversation rather than determines it,
will become important in later sections.
My argument makes sense within a performative understanding of talk. Talk
does things. Austin (1962) and later Searle (1969) developed speech act theory,
where talk was understood in terms of locution (the words used), illocution (the
intent of the words used), and perlocution (the eﬀect of the words used). Much
of Searle’s development of Austin’s earlier work focused on the illocutionary
202
Caroline Ramsey

force of an utterance. However, this is to see only one element of the whole of
conversation. Later, Searle (1995), in arguing that conversation is a primitive
reality, drew our attention to the perlocutionary force in conversation, suggesting
that a conversation was created within a collective or shared intentionality. Barad
(2003) makes a similar point as she suggests that our utterances are intra-actions
within a phenomenon. The shift that we are being asked to make here is to see
conversation as the generative player, rather than the individual. A participant’s
utterance is now seen not so much as an expression of his or her thought or inten-
tion, but as an intra-action only gaining agency within that particular conversation
at a particular moment to a particular eﬀect.
Sequential talk as a process of act + supplement
Following this logic, talk takes an ontological form of invitation to relate and
contribute to how that relating might go on. The next question is to explore
how intra-actions within a conversation create action. In seeking a relational
appreciation of power, Gergen (1994, 1995) argued that the meaning (and we
could add intention) of any act is always equivocal until supplemented. So, my
advice (an act) might be received by you as wise counsel (a supplement), in which
case our relationship will develop accordingly. On the other hand, should you
take my words as an unwelcome intrusion, then our relationship will develop on
a diﬀerent trajectory altogether. Of course, the meaning and intention will not be
ﬁnalized in one supplement, for each utterance will supplement any prior
response. In my example, it might be that noticing your irritation at my intrusion,
I apologize and explain myself in a manner that is more acceptable to you. Our
conversation is therefore travelling along a trajectory created by the intra-actions
of our acts and supplements, always capable of taking twists and turns, accelerating
or tarrying at diﬀerent moments.
Supplements: accepting or blocking offers
Improvised jazz has had a signiﬁcant impact on organization studies. Surprisingly,
improvised theatre, with its use of talk and verbal coordination has prompted
fewer articles and where it has been discussed (e.g. Dusya & Crossan, 2005) it has
been in terms of encouraging creativity. Improv theatre does, however, have the
potential to provide us with a helpful perspective on the moment-by-moment
manner in which we organize. When an actor initiates a scene by movement or
speech, (s)he is said to have made an oﬀer (Johnstone, 1999), which other per-
formers can either accept or block. Accepting does not imply agreement, but
rather works with the scene or narrative proposed by the initial movement or
speech; an acceptance may ﬁt entirely with the initial act or develop it somewhat.
A block refuses to work with the initial act and shifts the scene or plot in some
way. Acceptance or block is not a simple either/or choice but will involve many
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
203

shades of either accepting or blocking. Interestingly, Johnstone (1999) has an
entire chapter on the ways that improv performers might block an oﬀer, but very
little on how (s)he might accept it.
Conversation travel and moments of leadership
We have now laid out a vocabulary of language tools with which we can con-
struct a relational, or performative, approach to conversation. As conversational
participants talk together, they supplement prior contributions and so a con-
versation develops, perhaps by changing topic, pausing to consider important
points or hurrying to a conclusion. The language of improvised theatre allows us
to hear how certain lines of conversation are blocked or accepted and so the
conversation travels, constructed through a shared intentionality that need not be
broken down into constituent parts. Once seen in this light, conversations travel in
a trajectory: along topic lines, towards agreement or conﬂict or, perhaps, towards
the performance of phenomena such as winning, losing, concluding, or leading.
Conversations might also be said to travel by diﬀerent modes, say argument,
inquiry, or aﬃrmation.
I want to suggest and, I hope, illustrate, that as we watch or hear a conversa-
tion travel, so we will be able to notice times when the trajectory or the mode of
a conversation changes. I call these moments of leadership. At such moments we
can explore the social interplay that creates them. This perspective on leadership,
as moments within social relationship, re-imagines leadership not as a particular,
distinct type of organizational behavior but as a possible quality of any organiza-
tional relating where a diﬀerence is made. Consequently, it treats Denis and his
colleagues’ (Denis et al., 2012) question about how leadership might be diﬀer-
entiated from other forms of organizational behavior by encouraging us to look
for moments of leadership within all forms of organizational relating. More needs
to be said.
Building a vocabulary and repertoire of leadership
Shamir (2012) made two criticisms of what he termed a radical social construc-
tionist approach to leadership. First, he argued, that the “multiple realities” pre-
mise of social constructionism does not support a study of the regularities and
patterns involved in leadership processes. Second, by arguing that leadership will
be diﬀerent in every situation, a social constructionist approach fails to create a
usable, and useful, distinction between leadership and other social relations. For
reasons that I explain below, I am not certain that I need to identify a distinct and
consistent deﬁnition of leadership that would satisfy Shamir’s challenge. How-
ever, even if I would seek to hold any characterization I make of leadership
lightly, it still makes sense for me to explore and outline a vocabulary of
204
Caroline Ramsey

leadership that I think will render a relational perspective useful to discursive
leadership researchers.
As Alvesson and Spicer (2012) point out, ﬁnding a clear deﬁnition of leadership
is very diﬃcult, with two-thirds of articles not oﬀering any deﬁnition, the ﬁnal
third providing no common view with new developments in distributed leader-
ship, for example, adding further complications. I am persuaded by Wood’s
(2005), Alvesson and Svengingsson’s (2003), and Kelly’s (2014) arguments that
the phenomenon is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd clearly in empirical study of human
practice. As people recount events, they might explain what happened through
the language of leadership. And, I suspect that all of us (readers and writer) would have
positive and negative stories of our own organizational life that make immediate
sense if recounted in the language of leadership. For example we might recount a
period where we were ﬁnding work diﬃcult and tell of someone who helped us
through to a resolution of our diﬃculties. Of course, many language tools are
available to us. Maybe this person counseled us, taught us, inspired us, encour-
aged us, and so on, but which of these language tools belong in the language of
leadership? Or maybe we’d speak of a friend, a conﬁdante, a teacher, or cleric?
This, it seems to me is the strength of Kelly’s (2014) argument that leadership is a
second order construct that makes sense, post hoc, of phenomena that made a
diﬀerence.
So, before I identify my current, and possibly transitory, position in relation to
a meaning-use of leadership, I would want to challenge an assumption that is to
be found in Shamir (2012) and Denis et al. (2012) and that raised concerns for
Fairhurst and Uhl-Bien (2012). The assumption is that in deﬁning leadership in
some manner, I will also be distinguishing it from other social processes. One
possible argument is that leadership is distinct from, say, social inﬂuence. In dif-
ferent ways, Eisler (1988) and Gilligan (1982) argued that there were two models
of talk for handling diﬀerence; to look for diﬀerences and distinctions or to look
for linkages and relatedness. Eisler called the ﬁrst method a dominator model
(Gilligan wrote of a masculine voice), for the construction of diﬀerences and
distinctions inevitably leads to a scope for ranking and, ultimately, the ability for
one voice to dominate another. Eisler argued that a practice of linking and
relating diﬀerences can be expressed within a partnership model of relating (Gil-
ligan’s term was a feminine voice). Rather than look for what distinguishes and
marks out leadership as a distinct organizational phenomenon, I want to leave
open the possibility in my research that I may notice what connects and relates
leadership as a process with other processes that shape our organizations. I want to
leave open the possibility that leadership and other social or organizational prac-
tices might, in Bakhtin’s (1984) term, interplay because, like Dostoevsky’s char-
acters, these practices are unﬁnalizable; they are always in the process of becoming
something more, or less.
Kelly’s (2014) argument that leadership has an “ideological function” rather
than an ontological being is helpful here. Both Wood (2005) and Kelly (2008)
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
205

argued that our research seeking after leadership produces a category mistake,
which precludes us from being able to see the very object of our study. Indeed,
Alvesson and Svengingsson (2003) suggest that once you explore leadership
empirically, it disappears entirely as a distinct phenomenon, lost in a variety of
diverse and often contradictory descriptions of actions and relations. Like Ryle’s
(1949) tourist in Oxford still looking for “the university” as they are shown col-
leges, laboratories, and senate buildings, so leadership researchers continue to
search for leadership when a whole array of actions and relations relevant to an
account of leadership are available. As Shotter (2006) has pointed out, Wittgen-
stein would ask us not to look for new, signiﬁcant-but-hidden dynamics but
rather to look at the very obvious things that are happening, which we so often
do not notice. The importance that Kelly attaches to the ideological function of
leadership ﬁts nicely with Barad’s (2003) post-humanist articulation of agency.
For Barad, an idea—such as leadership—is real and has an agency as it makes a
diﬀerence. Kelly argues this very point saying “leadership … makes a diﬀerence”
(Kelly, 2014, p. 912, emphasis in the original). It should probably be noted that
“a diﬀerence” is not necessarily restricted to change.
Still, it would make sense for me to articulate what kind of idea of leadership I have in
mind, so to speak, as I write this chapter. I have argued above for a shift in our attention
on conversation away from illocutionary matters of intention and locutionary
matters of what is said (the sequential, but discreet contributions to a conversation
from participants) towards a perlocutionary emphasis on how a conversation tra-
vels. In the light of this position, Drath and his colleagues’ (Drath et al., 2008)
articulation of leadership being identiﬁable in its outcomes of direction, align-
ment, and commitment, is attractive. However, from a practice perspective,
Crevani and her colleagues (Crevani et al., 2010) suggested that this focus on entities
called outcomes is inadequate for creating a process ontology for leadership in the
making. Consequently, one way of identifying leadership contexts might be to look
for times when conversations navigate, align, or commit. For an analyst, working
after the fact with text, audio, or video recordings, it will be straightforward to see
these processes as emergent but may be less easy to do for participants within the
moment of organizing (Shotter, 2006). In the same way, that Shamir (2012) sug-
gested that there will always be an element of asymmetric power within leader-
ship relations, so I would expect that there will always be a degree of
intentionality; that leadership will involve an element of intentional construction of
direction, alignment, and commitment. Intentionality is tricky and, as argued above
from Searle and Shotter, is best understood as a collective or shared process.
However, within the moment-by-moment unfolding of action and interplay, par-
ticipants’ actions will also invite and contribute intentionality to the social performance
and co-participants will be able to supplement any intention that they notice.
I do, however, want to hold this deﬁnition lightly for two reasons. First, I am
not a little concerned that this deﬁnition might, in Barad’s terms, have an agency
over my writing and drag me, unintentionally, towards a “concretizing” category
206
Caroline Ramsey

error (Kelly, 2008; Wood, 2005). Second, I am proposing that we look “at”
leadership-as-practice through a new optic: conversational travel. In making such
a suggestion, I want to leave myself open to noticing new and surprising things
“about” leadership.
An illustrative example
To illustrate the kind of leadership-as-practice research that I think can become
possible, given a use of conversational travel as an optic, I will use extracts from a
video-recorded meeting. The extracts below are taken from an extended array of
video material, recorded during a six-month investigation conducted by a con-
sultant who is present in the conversations I extract. In an early journal-type
segment, he explains his interest as being about how useful his extensive experi-
ence within private industry might be to managers and clinicians working in the
British National Health Service. There are over a hundred hours of professionally
recorded video material from this inquiry.1 I can make no claim that the parti-
cular meeting that I have chosen is representative of other meetings during the
inquiry; indeed, in some regards this meeting is quite diﬀerent from other formal
and informal conversations. However, my intent at this moment is merely to
illustrate a possible inquiry practice rather than provide an authoritative account of
conversation that justiﬁes my theorizing on the nature of meetings or conversations
in general.
Essentially, the four extracts below construct two matched pairs that illustrate
processes of oﬀering, blocking, or accepting. They are taken from a conversation
between four participants (the consultant, a CEO, a general manager, and a sur-
geon) evaluating past and proposing future actions in a project to cut waiting lists
at a general hospital in England. The video was transcribed and then watched
repeatedly to identify moments when the conversational travel appeared to
change. Once identiﬁed, those moments were extracted by taking about 20 lines
before and after for closer analysis. For this chapter I chose two such moments of
leadership and provide below a pair of extracts for each moment; in each case one
extract shows a period of conversation in which little seems to happen in terms of
generating a conversational trajectory that all participants buy into. In the second
extract of each case, a change in conversational mode or trajectory occurs.
An overview of the conversation
The meeting lasted just over an hour and a constant refrain was the consultant’s
bewilderment about the way the department had approached reducing waiting
lists. As the story emerges, it appears that the department had tried a range of
actions and initiatives to enable faster or more productive working practices.
Finally, it seems that an answer was found in the apparently simple expedient of
working two extra surgery sessions per week. The consultant on twelve separate
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
207

occasions expresses surprise at the length of time it took the department to work
through diﬃcult options while ignoring an apparently obvious and easy one.
CONSULTANT: That’s actually what we’re talking about. I have to say, I don’t
understand how we’ve gone round so many other [options] … You know, if
that’s [two extra sessions] the answer, why didn’t we start with that? Why?
He uses somewhat diﬀerent words each time, but this is the gist of what might
be called a conversational gambit (surprise gambit), positioning himself one down,
as a questioner, so as to invite other participants to be surprised, seeing their
current organizing practices as strange and so worthy of discussion and improve-
ment. Later in the meeting, these “surprise gambits” are reinforced by questions
about communications, expertise. and wasted eﬀort.
The hospital team never picks up on the consultant’s “surprise” theme. In
improvisational terms they block this oﬀer whenever it is made. Instead they
celebrate the learning they’ve done, the way the team has worked enthusiastically
together and discovered options that won’t work. On two occasions, however,
this riﬀof “surprise” oﬀer and block is broken, and it is these two occasions that I
want to explore more closely so as to highlight the potential contribution of
conversational travel to leadership inquiry.
Of locums and substantive posts
Extract 1 comes shortly after one of the consultant’s (Con) “surprise gambits.”
The surgeon (Surg) counters his surprise by arguing that the UK’s national health
service is not like the private sector, with management able to do what it likes
such as sacking people or building what it likes, etc. The conversation continues:
Extract 1
CON: I understand the complications but actually the solution here is very simple,
isn’t it? You know, if you buy the argument that you want to do is to get
down to a nil waiting list, and you don’t want it to be any net extra cost, just
getting two sessions going—to my surprise, I mean, I hadn’t thought it was as
simple as that, but apparently it is—solves the problem. It’s not talking about
ﬁring anybody or, you know … we’re actually talking about maybe adding
to what we do. It’s not a negative thing this. It’s a positive thing. It’s not
having to face up to a load of redundancies. There aren’t those issues
involved in this. It’s actually quite straightforward.
SURG: It basically comes to the physical space. We as ophthalmology, we have to
work in a dedicated ophthalmic theatre. Other people, they can share it.
There’s an empty theatre maybe you can …
208
Caroline Ramsey

CON: We have the space.
SURG: Where’s the space?
CON: As I understand it there’s another session available on a Monday morning
and there’s another session …
SURG: We are using that.
CON: Another session available on a Monday morning, as I understand it. There’s
a free session available on a Monday morning in the same theatre.
What we see here might be called a “contest” conversation. The surgeon blocks
the consultant’s oﬀer that this move is not threatening by moving the topic to
space for surgery. Lines 9–18 see the conversation bouncing back and forth in
short contributions at speed; each countering the other’s point. This extract is not
untypical of much of the meeting’s talk. However, a few moments later the sur-
geon picks up on the consultant mentioning surgery space on Friday afternoon
and the conversation goes on:
Extract 2
SURG: But once I think, which is coming to August next year or even before
that, once we’ve established and changed with the modernization of the
Medical Career Center, we know what we are doing, and I think we have a
meeting on 20th October, Brian, to discuss that particular issue, to change
titles maybe of some of our staﬀ. Then they can do it on their own.
CON: How do you change title? Is there a process you have to go through?
SURG: Because we will lose them otherwise. They are well-trained people and
they are already at their end stage, and at the moment their title is trainees.
They cannot operate on their own physically. You have to be there with
them.
CEO: Even if they are …
SURG: Even if they are capable.
CEO: Even if … even if the case …
CON: What swings them from that status to being able to operate on their own?
CEO: Well, them not being a trainee. They need to get a substantive appoint-
ment, basically, where they’re not a trainee.
SURG: Then they will be a surgeon.
CEO: Then it’s, to some extent, it’s up to the organization then to sign them oﬀ.
SURG: Sign them oﬀ. Yes.
CEO: Suitable for performing …
CON: And when can you do that?
SURG: We’ll do that once … when they ﬁnish their training period oﬃcially.
CON: And they ﬁnish oﬃcially.
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
209

Here we can see quite a signiﬁcant change in the conversation, and the audible
change is also signiﬁcant, for the surgeon’s oﬀer creates a shift to talking about
careers, training, and regulations about when a trainee surgeon can operate
without supervision. From line 6 onwards the tone of the consultant’s contributions
changes. He is seeking information about a topic in which he does not have the
necessary information. He is, in eﬀect, accepting a “one down” position, but this
time, I would suggest, it is no gambit. He genuinely needs information before
being able to contribute helpfully. The surgeon and CEO explain the process by
which trainee surgeons qualify and then move to substantive roles where they can
operate without supervision, therefore making use of the extra theatre sessions
that the consultant has been discussing.
I want to suggest that there is a signiﬁcant change in the mode of conversa-
tional travel here, moving from what I have called a contest conversation to one
that is more exploratory. We could call this second extract a moment of leading,
but what is interesting is that once you get in amidst the moment-by-moment
relational processes of leadership, it is not easy to identify a leader. Three parti-
cipants, the consultant (l. 6), surgeon (ll. 7–9), and CEO (ll. 14–15) all contribute
to the turn in conversational travel; the leadership moment consists of both the
oﬀer and acceptance. Both are active and creative. Each utterance invites a
response and contributes to how that response can sensibly be made. Each pro-
vides and constrains the space for the continuation and emergence of a mode of
conversational travel.
Markets and growth
Sometime later the conversation has travelled on. There have been times when it
seems that the consultant’s constant refrain of the “surprise gambit” has created
defensiveness among the hospital team. During one such period, the surgeon and
general manager, perhaps fearing that they were being positioned as resisting
change, asserted their enthusiasm for initiating improvement processes so that
waiting lists could be reduced. In the next extract, the consultant uses this theme of
enthusiasm to emphasize how the ophthamology department wasted time and
eﬀort in several initiatives, which someone should have spotted immediately. He says:
Extract 3
CON: … And somewhere in this there’s a lesson to be learned, and it’s about
having an evaluation much more quickly that stops wasting your enthusiasm,
your enthusiasm and, to a certain extent, yours because you’ve been
removed from it, on things that aren’t going to work … I don’t doubt your
enthusiasm and I, you know, it’s not the end of the world, and it’s pretty
damn clear to me that we … where we go now is very obvious.
210
Caroline Ramsey

SURG: We are very focused.
CON: We are where we are, and we know where we go. We know what the
answers are. All that makes sense to me. There’s no point in now trying to
have some other magical solutions.
CEO: We know what won’t … We know now what won’t work.
CON: Yes, you do.
CEO: And to some extent that is important.
CON: That’s something. That’s something.
CEO: Because, actually at any one time, one of those things may have worked. At
any one time we may have had a breakthrough, you know.
CON: Do you think … ?
At this moment, the conversation seems to be in some kind of holding trajectory.
The consultant’s challenging oﬀer that time and enthusiasm have been wasted in
forlorn ventures is blocked by the surgeon’s comment about being “very
focused.” Then, there’s the CEO’s suggestion that at least they now know what
won’t work and so even these forlorn ventures had been worth trying. The
conversation continues in a similar manner for another four minutes or so dis-
cussing the problems of doing building work with operating theatres. The con-
versation then drifts into a discussion of demand for the surgeon’s work, and the
CEO makes the following remark:
Extract 4
CEO: But we’re back, really, to the sense that, one way, because even if we were
to take up this spare capacity we’ve got, we would consume that, and we’d
now then need to look at what next.
SURG: Exactly.
CEO: Because if we’re eﬃcient and eﬀective, the demand will increase.
CON: Will probably increase.
CEO: And we’ll be back to the same problem. We’ve run out of space again.
SURG: What do we do next?
CEO: And the issue we’ll come back to, we’d probably need a twin theatre of
some kind.
SURG: Yes.
CEO: But perhaps then we’re working to a diﬀerent timetable, time scale, and
we’re possibly looking at a diﬀerent business case in terms of income being
generated through that would pay it oﬀmore quickly.
CON: Are you starting to see people coming from outside the area?
CEO: Yes, we are.
SURG: We already have.
GM: We have.
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
211

SURG: We already have.
CON: In a signiﬁcant … ? That’s more than it used to be?
SURG: More than it used to be. We have because now all GPs in the area, they
get a leaﬂet by the health authority which is a laminated thing. They stick it
near their computer, and it will tell them, well, this hospital, oh, this is only two
months and this hospital’s four months. Do you like to go there? It’s only ten
miles. And I think we… it started working this, and I’ve got certainly a few
patients from Sheﬃeld recently.
CEO: I’ve got some ﬁgures on this.
CON: It’s such an important …
CEO: It’s gone up by something like 25% in terms of people from outside.
CON: Has it?
SURG: From outside
Now the trajectory of the conversation changes as they move from discussing
theatre design and build to discussing market demand and growth. As with
Extract 2, it is tricky to see the leadership coming from one person. The CEO
raises the topic as a problem of capacity (l. 7), the consultant asks the question
that continues the shift of the conversation (l. 14) and the GM (l. 17) and surgeon
(ll. 16 & 18) both accept the invitation to discuss patient demand growth. The
diﬀerent participants contribute to the leadership change, but none of them
design or direct it.
Conversational travel within discourse analytic inquiry:
A conversation
The brief analysis above is inadequate to building any substantive theory, but that
was never its intent. Rather, I have sought to illustrate how conversational travel
might be used within a micro-discourse analysis. In doing so, I have sought to set
up an opportunity for conversations with those who work with a variety of dis-
course analytic methods. In this section, I consider how conversational travel
might converse with three diﬀerent methods for analyzing small “d” discourse.
First, I consider Wodak and her colleagues’ critical discourse analytic work that
examined conversations where consensus was built more or less successfully
(Kwon, Clarke & Wodak, 2014; Wodak et al., 2011). Second, I will discuss
Larsson and Lundholm’s (2010) use of conversation analytic (CA) devices to
account for inﬂuence within mundane managerial contexts and, ﬁnally, I link to
Carroll and Simpson’s (2012) use of “framing movements” that created “turning
points” in an online forum conversation.
I noted above that the leadership enacted in Extracts 2 and 4 was ephemeral.
In an hour-long meeting that was marked more often by blocks than by accep-
tances, an exploration of why consensus was so hard to ﬁnd would be interesting.
Wodak and her colleagues contrasted two meetings, with the same participants
212
Caroline Ramsey

involved. In the ﬁrst meeting any consensus gained appeared to be short-lived
(Kwon et al., 2014), whereas they concluded that consensus building was more
successful in a second meeting. The diﬀerence between the meetings was in the
number of topics discussed and the length of time given to them. In the meeting that
failed to reach sustainable consensus they noticed that a “plethora of topics” were only
“superﬁcially addressed,” whereas the meeting that reached a sustainable consensus
involved a “recursive cycling through topics” (Wodak et al., 2011, p. 611).
It could be suggested, following Wodak and her colleagues’ argument, that the
consultant in the hospital meeting also kept returning to a similar topic. He kept
attempting to return the conversation’s focus to the length of time spent exploring
hopeless initiatives while missing the obvious one. From Wodak’s perspective he
was unsuccessful in building a sustained consent or even holding to his preferred
topic. How can we understand what was going on? It is interesting to note that
Wodak and her colleagues centered their attention on the discursive strategies of
leaders, while use of the optic of conversational travel attends more to the per-
locutionary creation of conversation by giving equal attention to the act, in this
case, of the consultant and the supplements of others in the meeting. A failure to
sustain the two particular lines of changed conversation trajectory or mode is also
visible in subsequent act + supplement relations.
Larsson and Lundholm (2010) also focus on a relationship and the moment-by-
moment relating of an identiﬁed leader (Ronald) and subordinate (Ken). It is signiﬁcant
that in the extract they analyze, the leader’s agenda dominates the conversation.
They take care to note that the subordinate cannot be seen as a following dope in
the conversation because they show how he too is active in his use of member-
ship categorization and contribution to the sequential ﬂow of their conversation.
Larsson and Lundholm’s work is an important contribution to our understanding
of the conversational working of organizational management. How managers and
their subordinates talk in the reconciling of agendas for action is surely important.
Looking back on the extracts above, it would make an interesting analysis to
examine the meeting looking, for example, at membership categorization actions.
For example is the consultant categorized as an outsider who does not understand
the values and practices of the NHS? Do his repeated surprise gambits break into
a sequential ﬂow of conversation in an unhelpful manner? A conversational ana-
lytic inquiry into the meeting I considered above would certainly yield insights.
However, conversation analysis works with identiﬁed, and in Bakhtin’s term,
ﬁnalized participants acting, more or less strategically out of and within their
locally endorsed interactional practices. In contrast with Bakhtin (1984), this is
investigation of interaction, not interplay, and valuable though it may be, CA
drags Larsson and Lundholm into an entitative analysis of individual’s actions;
missing key elements of the relational creation of a phenomenon. So, member-
ship categories are used rather than seen as being in construction. Furthermore,
the situation in the hospital meeting room was quite ambiguous as to who was
the “leader” at that particular moment. The CEO, consultant, and surgeon all
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
213

could, and perhaps did, make bids for primacy in terms of authority, but the
perlocutionary impact of the conversation is uncertain in terms of the identity of
a leader. Does it not make sense to take an alternative, but not exclusive, shift of
attention to the perlocutionary conversation and see in key moments socially
performed, act + supplement processes of leadership?
Carroll and Simpson’s (2012) examination of an online leadership development
course is more congenial with the use of conversational travel as an optic in two
ways. Even more than in the meeting I looked into above, any claim to posi-
tional authority-leadership in the group they studied was impossible. So, here was
an investigation not of how leaders might act-talk, but of the relational processes
that emerged into perlocutionary leadership. Second, and perhaps most interest-
ing in their articulation of framing in conversation is what potential help the three
discursive movements that Carroll and Simpson identiﬁed—kindling, stretching,
and spanning—might have oﬀered the consultant in framing his conversation in a
way that he appeared to fail to do.
Each of these methods of inquiry would contribute insight to my study of the
consultant’s meeting with hospital management above. However, I have also
noted where they bring constraints to what a researcher can notice. Additionally,
I would want to propose that use of conversational travel as an optic can con-
tribute to these micro-discursive methods of leadership research in three ways.
First, attending to conversational travel can help relational leadership researchers
select where to look. By oﬀering a device by which moments of leadership can
be picked out from the background of conversations, conversational travel can
enable discursive researchers to explore the relational processes that are aﬀecting a
shift in or a re-invigoration of practice. So, it might be that exploring ongoing
relations through the conversational travel optic might have drawn Larsson and
Lundholm’s attention to diﬀerent moments in Ronald and Ken’s conversations,
not typiﬁed by dominance of the manager’s agenda. Perhaps there might have
been other conversations where Ken articulated a “vision” for this particular
client that shifted Ronald’s view? The conversation Larsson and Lundholm stu-
died will have been nested in other conversations. This is only speculation, of
course, but my point is that conversational travel can pick out signiﬁcant
moments that might be missed by other discourse analytic devices. It does also
suggest that we should seek to add a longitudinal element to our current, mostly
episodic research into micro-discursive processes. In the case of our hospital
meeting, there are additional episodes that a fuller investigation into the rela-
tionally performed leadership could draw on to understand better the oﬀers and
blocks within this meeting.
This point directs our attention to the second contribution that conversational
travel can make, for it turns our attention away from the people with their stra-
tegies and sensemaking to the conversations of which they are a part. In doing so,
it foregrounds processes of relational construction and interplay as generative
processes rather than interactions that are the consequence of people’s actions. So,
214
Caroline Ramsey

in the case of Wodak and her colleagues’ study of the two meetings, fore-
grounding the mode and trajectory of conversational travel might have drawn
their attention to the impact of discursive strategies of others in those meetings
rather than the emphasis on the senior executives’ discursive strategies, which
leads us to the third contribution that attention to conversational travel might
make to leadership-as-practice research. For one of the intriguing things that
comes out of my brief study of one short meeting is that, at the moments of
leadership, it was not one person that led but several utterances that contributed
to the change in conversational trajectory and/or mode through improvisational
act (oﬀer) and supplement (acceptance or block). Using conversational travel as an
optic resources inquiry gives equal weight to all intra-actions (Barad, 2003),
exhibiting them as a potential agency to make a diﬀerence in conversation.
Implications for the study of leadership
I have conceded that the above study is illustrative of conversational travel as an
optic of inquiry and is inadequate to the task of reaching conclusions about lea-
dership in conversation. Rather it is a gesture, a noticing or a pointing toward
possible inquiry. My interest in this chapter has been to explicate and illustrate the
potential of conversational travel to the study and practice of leadership. Still,
however, I want to argue that this short study raises some interesting points that
merit further investigation by L-A-P researchers.
The study of leadership as a social practice: Gestures towards
future research
For academics engaging with the phenomena of leadership, there are four impli-
cations of this study that merit further investigation. First, with all the limitations
that I acknowledge above, this study does seem to highlight a social practice of
leadership that does not require a prior accreditation of leader and follower roles.
In both Extracts 2 and 4, by looking at the conversational travel and its constituent
processes of act + supplement (oﬀer-block/acceptance), we can watch as several
people shape (lead) changes in the mode or trajectory of a conversation’s travel. A
signiﬁcant point to note here is that an improvisational “acceptance” is not
necessarily a passive compliance with another character setting the agenda.
Rather, the improv acceptance can also act generatively as an accelerant, adding
emphasis and signiﬁcance to a topic or mode of conversation. The extracts above
provide us with evidence that an overly clear distinction between action and
response, leader or follower will tend to obstruct our view of the co-created,
moment-by-moment agency of sequential utterances. This is a creative interplay
of emerging phenomena, rather than an interaction of ﬁnalized actors. Attending
to conversational travel helps the analyst notice and explore the agency of the
conversation rather than the actors.
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
215

Second, I would want to note the ephemerality of the leadership we see.
Following Bakhtin’s (1984) lead, by understanding the participants in our con-
versational extracts as unﬁnalized characters, we do not see one participant
adopting the role of leader within a particular social process and then maintaining
it. Instead we see several participants’ contributions leading the conversational
travel at diﬀerent moments. For example, less than ten minutes after the change
away from the consultant’s “surprise gambit” in Extract 4, he returns to this
gambit again. Just as leadership appears to be built in the moment-by-moment act
+ supplements of several participants, so those participants appear to both initiate
or respond, oﬀer or block/accept on diﬀerent occasions.
This ephemerality is tricky. The question that it poses is whether leadership
that has no sustained eﬀect is any kind of leadership at all. What conversational
travel, by its focus on moment-by-moment, jointly performed conversations,
brings to our attention are episodes of ephemeral and sustained moments of lea-
dership. Shamir (2012) in arguing that leadership will always involve some ele-
ment of asymmetric power acknowledges that this is problematic, but that this
very problem raises the need for further research. In the same way, I want to
suggest that identifying moments of leadership in relating that might be ephem-
eral or sustained is interesting and worthy of more research. These extracts, when
analyzed through the optic of conversational travel, point to an ebb and ﬂow in
leadership relations that would not be so visible if looking at the relating activities
of established leaders and followers.
Third, attending to leadership within conversational travel, seems to oﬀer
researchers a signiﬁcant shift of attention away from the illocutionary activities
(Austin, 1962) of intentions, plans, and strategic use of discursive practices.
Instead, conversational travel draws our gaze to a perlocutionary (Austin, 1962)
process of social interplay. This is methodologically interesting because it does not
require researchers to hypothesize about what is going on inside the heads, so to
speak, of the participants or interpret meanings from their actions and words.
Instead we have laid before us a perlocutionary performance. Of course, there
will then be an interpretive process of sense making, but this can be done
through an explicit dialogue between data and theoretical or conceptual frames.
Finally, looking at leadership through the optic of conversational travel points
to a modiﬁed identity of leadership; rather than being a distinct form of organi-
zation it appears as a possible quality of any organizational relating. An emphasis
on the perlocutionary force in moments of leadership turns our attention away
from the people who lead, their skills, intentions and strategies, and actions
towards the relational moments that stimulate change or reinforce stability, the
moments that make a diﬀerence (Kelly, 2014). Leadership is therefore seen as an
emergent, ephemeral, and socially performed moment that makes a diﬀerence in
organizing. Furthermore, this quality of leadership may well be noticed in a wide
range of organizational phenomena; as judgments are made or conclusions
reached,
as
persistent
ways
of
working
(organizational
culture?)
become
216
Caroline Ramsey

sedimented or changed, or as workers are motivated, trained, or alienated. Of
course, one line of inquiry might be into how some individuals seem to be reg-
ularly visible in such moments of leadership, so much so that they become labeled
as leaders. I think, however, that there are many more interesting questions to ask
about leadership, and the conversational construction of that manner of relating,
before looking at particular individuals again. These brief extracts appear to
engage with Alvesson and Svengingsson’s (2003) suggestion that, when examined
empirically, leadership disappears. However, I would suggest that as we see the
diﬀerent participants interplay, there is a suggestion that it is not leadership that
disappears, but leaders.
Note
1 I was not involved in this original inquiry or recording, but was provided access to these
extracts as a member of staﬀat the Open University, UK. I would like to acknowledge
that institution’s generosity in allowing me to continue working with these recordings.
References
Alvesson, M., & Kärreman, D. (2000). Taking the linguistic turn in organizational research:
Challenges, responses, consequences. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 36(2), 136–158.
Alvesson, M., & Spicer, A. (2012). Critical leadership studies: The case for critical performativity.
Human Relations, 65(3), 367–390.
Alvesson, M., & Svengingsson, S. (2003). The great disappearing act: Diﬃculties in doing
“leadership”. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 259–381.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: The University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Balkundi, P., & Kilduﬀ, M. (2005). The ties that lead: A social network approach to lea-
dership. Leadership Quarterly, 16(6), 941–961.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter
comes to matter. Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801–831.
Brown, H., & Hosking, D. M. (1986). Distributed leadership and skilled performance as
successful organization in social movements. Human Relations, 39(1), 65−79.
Burr, V. (2003). Social constructionism. London: Routledge.
Carroll, B., & Simpson, B. (2012). Capturing sociality in the movement between frames:
An illustration from leadership development. Human Relations, 65(10), 1283–1309.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Cunliﬀe, A. L. (2002). Social poetics as management inquiry: A dialogical approach. Journal
of Management Inquiry, 11, 128–146.
Cunliﬀe, A. L., & Eriksen, M. (2011). Relational leadership. Human Relations, 64(11), 1425–1449.
Dachler, H. P. (1991). Management and leadership as relational phenomena. In M. V.
Cranach, W. Doise & G. Mugny (Eds.), Social representations and the social bases of knowl-
edge (pp. 169–178). Bern: Hogrefe & Huber.
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
217

Dachler, H. P., & Hosking, D. M. (1995). The primacy of relations in socially constructing
organizational realities. In D. M. Hosking, H. P. Dachler, & K. J. Gergen (Eds.), Management
and organization: Relational alternatives to individualism (pp. 1−28). Aldershot: Avebury.
Denis, J.-L., Langley, A., & Sergi, V. (2012). Leadership in the plural. Academy of
Management Annals, 6(1), 211–283.
Drath, W. H., McCauley, C. D., Palus, C. J., Van Velsor, E., O’Connor, P. M. G., &
McGuire, J. B. (2008). Direction, alignment, commitment: Toward a more integrative
ontology of leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 19, 635–653.
Dusya, V., & Crossan, M. (2005). Improvisation and innovative performance in teams.
Organization Science, 16(3), 203–224.
Eisler, R. (1988). The chalice and the blade. London: Unwin
Fairhurst, G.T. (2007). Discursive leadership: In conversation with leadership psychology. Los
Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Connaughton, S. T. (2014). Leadership: A communicative perspective.
Leadership, 10(1), 7–35.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2012). Organizational discourse analysis (ODA):
Examining leadership as a relational process. Leadership Quarterly, 2, 1043–1062.
Gergen, K. J. (1994). Realities and relationships. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gergen, K. J. (1995). Relational theory and the discourses of power. In D. M. Hosking,
H. P. Dachler, & K. J. Gergen (Eds.), Management and organization: Relational alternatives
to individualism. Aldershot: Avebury.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a diﬀerent voice: Psychological theory and women’s development. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Graen, G. & Uhl-Bien, M., (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Develop-
ment of leaders-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Applying
a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.
Hollander, E. P. (1995). Ethical challenges in the leader-follower relationship. Business
Ethics Quarterly, 5(1), 55–65.
Hosking, D. M. (1988). Organizing, leadership and skilful process. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(2), 147–166.
Hosking, D. M. (2000). Ecology in mind, mindful practices. European Journal for Work and
Organizational Psychology, 9(2), 147–158.
Hosking, D. M. (2007). Not leaders, not followers: A post-modern discourse of leadership
processes. In J. R. Meindl & B. Shamir (Eds.), Follower-centered perspectives on leadership: A
tribute to the memory of James R. Meindl (pp. 243–263). Greenwich, CT: IAP.
Hosking, D. M. (2011). Moving relationality: Meditations on a relational approach to
leadership. In A. Bryman, D. Collinson, K. Grint, B. Jackson & M. Uhl-Bien (Eds.),
Sage handbook of leadership. London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Hosking, D., & Fineman, S. (1990). Organizing processes. Journal of Management Studies,
27(6), 583−604.
Hosking, D. M., & McNamee, S. (Eds.) (2006). The social construction of organization.
Malmo: Liber AB.
Hosking, D. M., & Morley, I. E. (1991). A social psychology of organising. Chichester:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Howell, J. M., & Shamir, B. (2005). The role of followers in the charismatic leadership
process: Relationships and their consequences. Academy of Management Review, 30(1), 96–112.
Johnstone, K. (1999). Impro for storytellers. London: Faber and Faber Ltd.
Kelly, S. (2008). Leadership: A categorical mistake? Human Relations 61(6), 763–782.
218
Caroline Ramsey

Kelly, S. (2014). Towards a negative ontology of leadership. Human Relations, 67(8), 905–922.
Kwon, W., Clarke, I., & Wodak, R. (2014). Micro-level discursive strategies for con-
structing shared views around strategic issues in team meetings. Journal of Management Studies,
51(2), 265–290.
Larsson, M., & Lundholm, S. E. (2010). Leadership as work-embedded inﬂuence: A
micro-discursive analysis of an everyday interaction in a bank. Leadership, 6(2), 159–184.
Nicolini, D. (2013). Practice theory, work and organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Raelin, J. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7(2), 195–211.
Ramsey, C. M. (2014). Management learning: A scholarship of practice centred on attention?
Management Learning, 45(1), 6–20.
Rost, J. C. (1995). Leadership: A discussion about ethics. Business Ethic Quarterly, 5(1), 129–142.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Hutchinson.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1995). Collective intentions and actions. In P. Cohen, J. Morgan & M. E. Pollack
(Eds.) Intentions in communication. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, MIT Press.
Shamir, B. (2012). Leadership research or post-leadership research? Advancing leadership
theory versus throwing the baby out with the bath water. In M. Uhl-Bien & S. M.
Ospina (Eds.), Advancing relational leadership research. Charlotte, NC: Information Age
Publishing Inc.
Shotter, J. (1995). In conversation: Joint action, shared intentionality and ethics. Theory and
Psychology, 5(1), 49–73.
Shotter, J. (1996). Social construction as social poetics: Oliver Sacks and the case of Dr P.
In B. Bayer & J. Shotter (Eds.), Reconstructing the psychological subject. London: Sage.
Shotter, J. (2006). Understanding process from within: An argument for ‘withness’-thinking.
Organization Studies, 27(4), 585–604.
Shotter, J. (2008). Conversational realities revisited. Taos, NM: The Taos Institute.
Shotter, J., & Katz, A. (1996). Articulating a practice from within the practice itself:
Establishing formative dialogues by the use of a ‘social poetics’. Concepts and Transformations,
1, 213–217.
Simpson, B. (2009). Pragmatism, Mead, and the practice turn. Organization Studies, 30(12),
1329−1347.
Thorpe, R., Gold, J., & Lawler, J. (2011). Locating distributed leadership. International
Journal of Management Reviews, 13(3), 239–250
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676.
Wodak, R., Kwon, W., & Clarke, I. (2011). Getting people on board: Discursive lea-
dership for consensus building in team meetings. Discourse and Society, 22(5), 592–644.
Wood, M. (2005). The fallacy of misplaced leadership. Journal of Management Studies, 42(6),
1101–1121.
Conversational travel and leadership phenomena
219


PART IV
Application


11
GENDERED RELATIONSHIPS AND THE
PROBLEM OF DIVERSITY IN
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE
Jackie Ford
Introduction
Conceptions of leadership as a practice are concerned with how leadership
emerges as a practice rather than residing in the traits, character, or behaviors of
individuals—in which traditional approaches to the study of leadership place
emphasis. This practice “unfolds through day-to-day experience. The social and
material-discursive contingencies impacting the leadership constellation … do not
reside outside of leadership but are very much embedded within it” (Raelin,
Chapter 1, this volume, p. 3). Its focus is very much on a purposive nature to the
practice in which the participants’ eﬀorts seek a distinctive outcome.
What is apparent from the emerging discussions within the nascent but devel-
oping leadership-as-practice (L-A-P) literature is that it still dwells within the his-
torical context of the organization and its teams of people. Owing to this tendency
to be historically developed, the practice view of leadership may run the risk of
reinforcing many traditional or perhaps taken for granted assumptions about orga-
nizational life, including assumptions of gender neutrality, as well as presumed neutrality
in relation to other multiple-layered social identities such as race/ethnicity, social class,
age, sexuality, etc. It may also ignore power diﬀerentials and continue to privilege
long-established patterns and institutionalized norms, as explored later.
The practice view of leadership, on the other hand, rejects notions of indivi-
dual inﬂuence and control, and a linear and monolithic approach in favor of
collective engagement, divergence, intersubjectivity, and ambiguity. Of further
signiﬁcance in L-A-P debates is the crucial importance of interrogating the taken
for granted assumptions and meanings that “bear the imprint of social domina-
tion” (Raelin, 2008). Given the relational and material nature of the L-A-P
approach, there is value in adopting a critical, post-structural lens to explore the

situated and embodied aspects of leadership as a way of drawing attention to the
issues of diversity and inclusion that still pertain within organizational life.
The practice view oﬀers those of us who study leadership the opportunity to
explore many levels of interaction among individuals. Their material worlds,
language, and embodied experiences are also as meaningful as the artifacts, tech-
nologies, and physical arrangements, as well as the interpersonal and intercultural
relationships. However, there is perhaps a danger that the power asymmetries and
embodied and material representations may be marginalized in such research, and
this chapter makes a strong plea for researchers (and practitioners) to keep these
issues very much to the fore of their thinking. Recognizing the intersubjective
dynamics and their complexity, ambiguity, and tensions are important, especially
in their challenges to the individualistic and controlling aspects of more traditional
ways of viewing leadership. Thus, engagement with qualitative, intersubjective
and discursive (narrative) forms of inquiry and ethnographic approaches will usefully
generate co-constructed knowledge. However, it still may not surface the under-
lying power, gendered (and other) diﬀerences that impact on such relationships.
These are at the heart of explorations that this chapter seeks to oﬀer.
Current writings on leadership, such as from recent Critical Leadership Studies
(CLS) literature, suggest a need to explore these hidden aspects of diﬀerence and
the process of concealment within the practice of leadership. In L-A-P, we would
wish to learn about the full scope of dynamic exchange that constitutes leader-
ship, in other words, not only what is said but also what is not spoken. Who is
included in such dynamic exchanges and who is not party to the collaborative
interactions in the workplace?
My own career journey and experiences to date, combined with my research
over the last twenty years lead me to argue for a more critical and reﬂexive
account of what is happening in the organizational world under the guise of
leadership. I am interested particularly in the relationships between people in
organizations and am critical of the theories that reduce them to homogeneous
beings, trapped in the prevailing way of thinking or talking. There is more than a
stirring of interest in research into critical leadership studies that focus on het-
erogeneity rather than homogeneity, on diﬀerence rather than conformity, and
the L-A-P agenda provides us with an opportunity to understand and experience
leadership from within a much richer, contextual lens.
Raelin (2011, p. 195) suggests that the L-A-P approaches seek out leadership
“in its music and activity rather than in the traits and heroics of individual actors.” This
raises important observations through a critical lens on leadership studies—in which the
embodied and the material are manifest—which are the focus of this chapter.
Scope and purpose of the chapter
1.
To provide a background for a more critical approach to the study of
leadership;
224
Jackie Ford

2.
To use ideas informed by CLS and especially feminist post-structural the-
ories to explore the taken for granted assumptions and power asymmetries
that belie traditional theorizing in this area; and
3.
To explore L-A-P theorizing that goes beyond mainstream notions of leadership
and looks in-depth at power, knowledge, language, and (inter)subjectivity as
inter-related strands through which to examine and revise our understandings
of leadership.
Critical approaches to the study of leadership
As we know from earlier chapters and from our wider readings within leadership
studies, heroic and individualistic forms of leadership still dominate the literature
in which much energy is invested in elaborate claims that the appointment of an
eﬀective leader will lead to the transformation of an organization, its people, and
structures, moving it to a higher level of achievement through an almost super-
natural process. This aﬀords a central and heroic status to the leader as corporate
savior, or as an organizational redeemer. The model is one of organizational idol,
endowing leaders (usually at the pinnacle of the company) with a high-status
leadership role in transforming the organization. The connotations with biblical
imagery and prophet-like behaviors are not lost on critiques of this cult industry
(Tourish, 2013). Much of this literature focuses almost exclusively on the nature,
the types, and the need for leadership and this has led to the valorization of
masculine characteristics and behaviors as the norm—while at the same time
pretending and/or assuming gender blindness.
Major criticisms of this masculine, heroic discourse are that individual diﬀerence
is denied, context ignored, and little or no consideration is given to the inﬂuence
of diverse settings as well as diverse subjectivities and power relationships within
which people in organizations operate. Furthermore, there is a broad tendency both
in leadership research and among practitioners to focus exclusively on the top director
or executive roles, to portray the leader as a superior being, uni-directionally
interacting with subordinates. Such studies fail to recognize both the ubiquity of
leadership in organizations (its presence at all levels of the hierarchy) together with
an understanding in more recent literature that we occupy multiple subject posi-
tions (both at work as well as within wider identities) that require us—at various
times—to move between and within our various roles as leaders, followers, team-
workers, peers, parents, partners, friends, etc. (Ford, 2006; Ford, Harding &
Learmonth, 2008; Fournier & Grey, 2000; Raelin 2008, 2014; Watson, 2001).
Until the last decade or so, there has been an almost total absence of theorizing
on leadership that goes beyond positivist approaches. We are now beginning to
see a turn to critical studies of leadership that opens opportunities to redress this
imbalance and to generate research and theorizing that draws from other dis-
ciplines and perspectives. This recognizes that there is a need for leadership studies
that tell us something about the subjective, the personal, and the interpersonal,
Gendered relationships and diversity
225

and about how people talk and dream about leadership. Although there is evi-
dence of change, this is nevertheless a slow process (Tourish, 2011).
More of a momentum is gathering pace through an emerging body of writing
on what is being referred to as “Critical Leadership Studies” (CLS) (Ford, 2010;
Collinson, 2011; Harding, Lee, Ford & Learmonth, 2011). CLS is deﬁned as “the
broad, diverse and heterogeneous perspectives that share a concern to critique the
power relations and identity constructions through which leadership dynamics
are often produced, frequently rationalised, sometimes resisted and occasionally
transformed” (Collinson, 2011, p. 181). CLS scholars frequently draw from the
more established ﬁeld of Critical Management Studies (CMS), which has long
sought to provide a critique and challenge to the taken-for-granted assumptions
in mainstream management theorizing; to expose asymmetrical power dynamics;
and to open up new ways of thinking and alternative forms of organizing and
managing. As Collinson (2014, p. 37) argues, “CLS builds on CMS to highlight
the numerous inter-related ways in which power, identity and context are
embedded in leadership dynamics.”
The collective term, CLS, does not oﬀer a unifying theory (as that would
undermine its intentions to include more pluralistic and multitudinous ways of
understanding leaders and leadership), but it seeks to problematize mainstream
perspectives that overshadow writing and thinking on leadership. These conven-
tional approaches have tended to undervalue the complexity and diversity of
leadership dynamics and have accepted without question the notion that leaders
are in charge and that followers will carry out their orders. Drawing on more
exploratory, interpretive and in-depth questioning of the research and practices of
management and organization studies, such critical research provides opportu-
nities to reconsider the dominant discourses of leadership and to explore a plurality
of interests and voices that shed fresh light on the research ﬁeld. It enables a
challenge to basic assumptions in use in mainstream leadership research, especially in
relation to appreciating the complexity of workplace dynamics, developing alter-
native ways of researching, conceptualizing, and practicing leadership (Collinson,
2014; Ford et al., 2008; Ford, 2015; Tourish, 2013).
These critical approaches also require the researcher to move from a positivist
stance of the objective pursuit of the truth, and towards a more active and
reﬂexive role “constructing the very reality s/he is attempting to investigate”
(Chia, 1996, p. 42). As academics in our research, we construct leaders and create
leadership as much as we study them. That is, we make visible something called
leadership and we develop subject positions (characteristics and identities of lea-
ders) into which those who are designated organizational leaders will step.
However, we cannot assume a straightforward translation of theory into the
constitution of subject positions or identities. We need to look at the social,
material, and cultural contexts into which we assume theories are inserted.
So, why do we need such studies? Critical leadership scholars (as well as L-A-P
scholars), recognize that so much of the writing on leadership is constructed
226
Jackie Ford

through a leader‑follower pairing, with the followers being the (subordinated or
inferior) other to the leader’s (dominant or superior) position. A more critical and
reﬂexive approach to the study of leadership is needed, which pays attention to
situations, events, institutions, ideas, social practices, and processes that may be
seen as exercising undue inﬂuence of those involved as leaders. More speciﬁcally,
a post-structural approach oﬀers a theoretical basis for analyzing the subjectivities
(the very identities) of men and women in relation to language as well as other
cultural practices and material conditions. This approach allows us to look with
fresh lenses on leadership theories. The whole sense of leadership itself is both
historical and subject to change, and thus universal theories on leadership are
open to challenge and debate (Ford, 2015). Post-structural thinking throws a
challenge to the subject in the Western philosophical tradition of the dis-
embodied abstract individual governed by conscious and rational thought.
Instead, it seeks to problematize the still pervasive assumptions of whole and
coherent subjects with a uniﬁed sense of who we are (our identity or sub-
jectivity). Post-structuralism thus calls attention to the way the considerable
industry of leadership has shaped our ideas and resulted in reductionist views of
what it means to be a leader.
As I’ve hinted above, leadership can be perceived as a performative process, in
which the use of the very word “leader” brings into being socially constructed
positions whereby some individuals must aspire to a complex identity, which
others follow (Butler, 1993). To deﬁne and describe leadership is to recognize its
slippery nature, its meaning shaped by both the individuals’ own experiences,
personal background, and reﬂexive thoughts, as well as by other people involved
within the local context (Alvesson, 2002; Ford et al., 2008; Smircich & Morgan,
1982). Nevertheless, a recognition of the social context and the socially con-
structed nature of leadership may still overlook a fundamental dimension in the
study of organizational life, notably that this performative process of leadership is
achieved through a range of exclusionary practices that aim to oﬀer a standar-
dized, one-dimensional deﬁnition of what a leader in an organization is expected
to be. One such exclusionary practice is the failure to consider the androcentric
nature of organizational life and the lack of recognition of this concept in many
organizational research studies. The adoption of a critical feminist post-structural
stance enables consideration of such shortcomings and may oﬀer useful reﬂections
for those who embrace L-A-P approaches.
Gender, diversity, and embodiment: A critical feminist
study of leadership
Organization theory has traditionally and right up to the 1970s neglected gender
aspects. Employees have been viewed either from a supposedly gender neutral
(male) perspective, or from the point of view that considers only the male part of
the organizations as interesting. Even those texts that purport to discuss the
Gendered relationships and diversity
227

people-related issues in organizations fail to take account of concerns such as
gender, women, men, femininity, and masculinity (Legge, 1995). Despite the
development of extensive scholarship on gender and organizations, mainstream
accounts continue to ignore the relationship between organizational arrangements and
gender. Hatch (2010, cited in Jeanes, Knights & Yancey Martin, 2011) maintains
that nearly all theories of organizations and management ignore gender, and
Jeanes et al. (2011) argue that the resounding silence on explorations of gender
implicitly conveys that gender considerations are just not an issue. Feminist
organizational analyses and the study of men and masculinities, on the other
hand, have problematized the depiction of gender in organizations, and a range of
theoretical perspectives have been adopted in the pursuit of exposing such neglect.
These studies have included consideration of essentialist and constructed accounts
of gender; boundaries between families and work organizations; between processes
of production and reproduction; the domination of gender power and gender
class and race; and the powers and paradox of sexuality. Thus not only have
gendered considerations been absent from study, but so have other multiple layered
social identities such as race/ethnicity, age, social class, disability, and sexuality.
Recent years have witnessed some progress in studies of gender and organiza-
tions, and this has served the purpose of calling into question the assumed
gender-neutral and gender-absent nature of organizational theory that mainstream
writing perpetuates (Acker, 1998). In many ways, mainstream organizational
theory continues to be constructed as non-gendered, although there remains
ample evidence that it is written from the perspective, culture, and discourse of a
male with its “espoused theories of empiricism, rationality, hierarchy, leadership,
management and other masculinised concepts” (Hearn & Parkin 1993, p. 149).
Whereas men are portrayed as ﬁtting organizational behavior, women are asso-
ciated with the “feminine” characteristics of caring, nurturing, and sharing that
are deemed to be more appropriate for the domestic sphere and the reproduction
of the home and the family. So, the cultural construction of femininity around
body and emotions, and of masculinity around disembodiment and rationality,
has made men the “natural” inhabitants of organizational life, while positioning
women as out of place in organizations (Gherardi, 1995). Furthermore, Gherardi
argues that the presence of women in organizations calls for “remedial” work that
seeks to address the ambiguity that their position as “female occupants in a male
world” creates. Remedial work refers to individual and collective strategies that
may be used by both women and men to restore the (gender) order when such
order has been disturbed by women stepping out of their feminine position.
Fournier and Keleman (2001) identify many studies that show the eﬀort that
women have to invest in presenting what Judy Marshall (cited in Fournier &
Keleman) calls “viable public images,” images that make them acceptable in the
organizational world (see also Gherardi, 1995; Brewis, 1999). For example,
women may make themselves acceptable in employment by being discrete and
invisible; by requesting permission to speak in meetings or other behaviors
228
Jackie Ford

demonstrating a lack of assertiveness, so as to repair the damage done by “infringement
of the symbolic order of gender” (Gherardi, 1995, p. 141).
Writers on leadership have also largely ignored gender theories. This absence is
rather peculiar given a widespread recognition that organizations contribute
actively to the ways in which gendered (and other) identities are constructed
(Ford et al., 2008). The gendered identity permissible among managers is limited to
that of heroic masculinity. Connotations of leadership in the literature frequently
take the form of the masculine competitive, aggressive, controlling, and self-reliant
individualist, and thus the question as to whether leadership is indispensable in
our organizations may hinge on whether we perceive a need to continue to support
notions of forceful, manipulative, logical masculine practices. This serves to rein-
force the dominant ways in which the practice of leadership involves strong ele-
ments of masculinity that act to strengthen male identities and thereby reproduce
asymmetrical gender relations (and other multiple-layered social identities) in
organizational life. The whole notion of leadership has been historically constructed
through a dyadic leader‑follower pairing (Raelin, 2014), with the followers being
the (subordinated) other to the leader’s (dominant) position (Ford et al., 2008).
Understandings of leadership and heroic masculinity have been so closely
interwoven as to be both invisible and indivisible. Leadership theories have “pretended
gender neutrality or displayed gender blindness but have inevitably imported male
values and characteristics as the norm, and have been phallocentric—viewing the
world implicitly from a masculine point of view” (Hopﬂand Matilal, cited in
Fulop & Linstead, 2009, p. 522). This privileging of men and masculinity is
apparent and yet remains frequently unreported within management texts and
practices, and appears especially to be the case when leadership behavior is
examined within organizational settings. Feminist critics point out how the
existing body of organization and management theory assumes implicitly that
managers and workers are male, with male stereotypic powers, attitudes, and
obligations. The delineation of organizational structures, alleged forms of organi-
zational cultures and everyday workplace practices have all been depicted as
constituting the “ideal employee” and especially the ideal manager as a dis-
embodied and rational ﬁgure, one which ﬁts more closely to the cultural images
of masculinity rather than femininity. Femininity, on the other hand, has tended
to be associated with embodiment, emotions, and sexuality; as such, it is con-
stituted as subordinate to “male” rationality and possibly out of place in rational
organizations (Acker, 1990, 1998; Calas & Smircich, 1992; Ford, 2006; Fournier
& Keleman, 2001). Leadership practices can thus be seen as a mechanism for
masculine domination and not the neutral, objective, and unproblematic
approaches that mainstream literature, or possibly practice perspectives may sug-
gest (Calas & Smircich, 1991; Collinson & Hearn, 1994; Fletcher, 2004; Fondas,
1997; Sinclair, 2011).
A more critical and reﬂexive approach to the study of leadership is needed.
More speciﬁcally, a post-structural feminist approach oﬀers a theoretical basis for
Gendered relationships and diversity
229

analyzing the subjectivities of men and women in relation to language, other
cultural practices, and the material and embodied conditions of their lives. In
relation to my own research interests, such an approach allows fresh light to be
shed on leadership theories. My research study of leadership within a major local
authority in England provides such an illustration. I interviewed 18 managers
drawn from senior, middle, and junior managerial roles, using in-depth life his-
tory narrative methods both for data gathering and analysis (Ford, 2006). In
depictions of leadership, my analysis shows how managers adopt the language and
rhetoric of one approach to leadership, while at the same time as practicing a
totally contradictory approach. Trudie was one of the four female directors
employed within the council in a front-line service directorate. What is of nota-
ble interest in her account is the extent to which she described how she drew on
the co-existence of macho-management and post-heroic discourses of leadership.
Trudie was passionate, articulate, and explicit about what to her represented
eﬀective and ineﬀective leadership in local government organizations. In common
with many of the other managers interviewed, Trudie’s narrative presents a
deliberate shift in more recent years away from adopting a more stereotypically
feminine approach to her work and managerial relationships, and towards per-
forming a masculine subject position, presenting a more competitive macho
approach. Her account provided numerous examples of the extent of her adop-
tion of what she construed as masculine behaviors and acquiring the skill to
“think like a man” and this is illustrated in her discussion of how she chose to stay
at work rather than take a family holiday so that she could ensure that her
directorate beneﬁtted ﬁnancially from informal corridor deals on budgetary
negotiations:
I would love to get away February half-term break and I’ve got my diary
clear. Daren’t book it, ‘cos that might be the week […] that corridor deals
are done on the political budget-making and, you know, the same was true
[last year] and I had a week clear and I didn’t go and that week, a con-
versation in the corridor made a million pound’s diﬀerence and if I hadn’t
been there, we wouldn’t have had a million pounds in the budget. So the
nature of the job is such that some things have to take precedence.
It was evident from Trudie and other respondents that the prevailing organiza-
tional culture highly valued those managers who achieved targets and delivered
eﬃciency savings, reinforcing competitive masculine practices of striving to
maintain the largest share of the scarce resources across directorates and perpetu-
ating the “old boys’ network” in which key decisions are made outside of the
formal organizational arrangements, in corridors or other ad hoc settings. This
adoption of masculine norms of behavior is consistent with wider ﬁndings in the
literature in which female (and male) managers construct themselves as powerful
forces in a competitive and challenging environment.
230
Jackie Ford

Similar discourses of macho management cultures were observable from the
transcripts of both middle-level managers (service heads) and front-line (principal
and senior) oﬃcers. Timothy has been working as a Service Head for the last ten
years. He depicted his approach to leadership as one that recognized the need to
support and encourage staﬀand yet reﬂected that this was something to which he
had not paid much attention in recent years. He recognized that there was a
danger of becoming so embroiled in dealing with the day-to-day pressures and
demands of the job that there was a risk of neglecting the personal and inter-
personal relationships. He argued that “you get so entrenched in where you have
to be that you tend to forget about everything else.”
The accounts of these managers highlight how the dominant leadership dis-
course within the organization reproduces a traditional macho-management
identity and practice. While the male directors sought to distance themselves
from this dominant discourse, at the same time their accounts also reveal who
they are as managers in the organization, but also how diﬀerent leadership and
organizational discourses compete with one another (Ford, 2006).
Gendered accounts of leadership can add considerable value as a challenge
to universal theories of leadership. Furthermore, recent debates from diversity
and inclusion scholars are opening up new ways to explore organizational
practices that include leadership (Ford & Harding, 2007; Ford, 2010; Romani
& Holgersson, 2015).
L-A-P scholars are advised to pay heed to gendered accounts of leadership and
to recognize the importance of inclusivity, polyvocality, and diversity in leadership
studies. By being inclusive, barriers for all organizational participants are removed
such that they are freely able to contribute to the collaborative endeavors of lea-
dership. Polyvocality embraces the presence of multiple voices rather than the
privileging of the one voice (the putative leader), and diversity in leadership stu-
dies encompasses heterogeneity across organizations rather than the valorizing of
just one particular hegemonic approach.
Understanding leadership calls for the consideration of social processes, a cul-
turally sensitive and locally based interpretive approach that is mindful of individual’s
experiences, identities, power relations, and inter-subjectivities. It also embraces
the presence of a range of masculine and feminine workplace behaviors. Greater
awareness of the various discourses and positions that constitute subjectivities
allows elucidation of oppressive discourses and subject positions.
Looking at leadership through a gendered perspective also exposes the many
assumptions relating to gender neutrality and makes possible an exploration of
why people at work operate in the ways that they do and why organizations are
organized and policies enacted in the ways that they are (Ely. Foldy & Scully,
2003). Feminist theories, across the diﬀerent traditions, provide challenge to our
understandings of our social life and knowledge, and one of the most signiﬁcant
contributions of feminist theories has been both the exposure and problematizing
of gender relations (Flax, 1993) as explored below.
Gendered relationships and diversity
231

The value of feminist theory
Feminist theory aﬀords several intellectual and practical values. First, it sustains
social criticism by revealing subordination and the moral and political implications
of that subordination. Making intellectual sense of the subordination of women
has turned out to be a more encompassing project than political analyses of it may
suggest, as it has exposed much of the white, male, able-bodied, and heterosexual
bias of the history of ideas and of society. It has enabled feminist scholars to reveal
several distinct errors, notably sexism (i.e. taking men to be of greater value than
women) and androcentrism (taking maleness or masculinity to be the norm for
human-ness or humanity). Second, feminist theories provided lenses through
which ideas and social practices can be analyzed. These theories have shown that
much of what we do, and how we conceptualize what we do, is aﬀected by
gender. Third, such theorizing oﬀers visions of liberation, of what life, people,
and society would be like without the subordination of women, or of black and
other minorities or on the grounds of class or able-bodiedness or sexuality.
Feminist post-structuralism and CLS
Feminist post-structural perspectives call into question the gender categories,
which earlier approaches (such as liberal and structural) regard as given and
unproblematic. Feminist post-structural accounts provide a challenge to such
studies for treating men and women as uniﬁed groups and undiﬀerentiated cate-
gories. They recognize the uncertain, shifting, and unequivocal meanings of such
terms as men and women, male and female.
Arslenian-Engoren (2002) suggests that the philosophical underpinnings of the
feminist post-structural framework can be found in the adoption of the post-
structural philosophy of Foucault, which enables us to analyze and challenge
notions of meaning, a uniﬁed subjectivity and relationships of power in modern
society. Weedon (1997, p. 40) deﬁnes feminist post-structuralism as “a mode of
knowledge production which uses post-structuralist theories of language, sub-
jectivity, social processes and institutions to understand existing power relations
and to identify areas and strategies for change.” These concepts of language,
subjectivity, and power are core features of post-structural thinking.
So, feminist post-structural analyses result when gender issues are incorporated
into a post-structural framework. It oﬀers a means to understand and alter hier-
archical social networks that use power to silence and marginalize discourses
related to gender. Feminist post-structural writers seek to transform gender
dimensions, to develop new ways of understanding sexual diﬀerences and to
uncover androcentric biases within socially, politically, and culturally established
institutions. It is recognized that there are many forms of post-structural thought,
rather than any unifying concept, but what these various forms share are funda-
mental assumptions about knowledge and power, language and discourse, and
232
Jackie Ford

subjectivity, and these are explored brieﬂy in the next section. The focus of my
research interest in post-structural theories is the extent to which they can be
appropriated so as to oﬀer a gendered understanding of organizational life.
Feminist post-structural theories replace unitary notions of woman and femi-
nine gender identity with plural and multifaceted constructions of social identity,
treating gender as one relevant strand, but also considering other strands such as
class, race, ethnicity, and age (Calas & Smircich, 1996, p. 237)
In sum, feminist post-structuralism enables fresh light to be shed on leadership
theories. The whole notion of leadership itself is both historical and subject to
change. Feminist post-structural perspectives have sought to deconstruct existing
metanarratives and develop new theoretical approaches, which insist on historical
and geographical speciﬁcity and no longer claim universal status. Thus, universal
truths around leaders and leadership are open to challenge and debate.
Power, knowledge, language, and subjectivity
Attention to subjectivities and social identities also surfaces many questions about
the role of power and knowledge in leadership practices and the context within
which leadership is enacted. As has been noted elsewhere, leadership and power
are inextricably intertwined (Burns, 1978; Ospina & Foldy, 2009; Carroll, Ford &
Taylor, 2015; Ford, 2015). By exploring questions of diversity in leadership studies
we can consider not only the Foucauldian interpretations of the productive
resource of power and agency, but also seek to make sense of the “web of insti-
tutionalized inequities that systematically, and at the expense of others, provides privi-
lege to some communities and some perspectives” (Ospina & Foldy, 2009, p. 877).
Furthermore, explorations of leadership and power allow us to consider questions
of agency and ways in which individuals and groups resist or transform such
injustices in ways that generate opportunities for neglected voices to be heard.
Reﬂecting on my research study of managers within the local authority, func-
tionalist perspectives of leadership eﬀectively ignore the impact of broader social
relations in their consideration of the complexity of interpretations of leadership.
What is increasingly important is the need to consider the multiplicity of meanings
attached to the concept of leadership, and the way that the role of subjectivity
and agency is underplayed (Bresnen, 1995).
What emerged from this study is that there are two dominant accounts of
leadership, but these are asymmetrical. Macho discourses are clearly in the ascen-
dancy, and there is little evidence of post-heroic approaches occurring in practice.
This suggests that power and control is also relevant as well as social identities.
What these managers depicted is the co-existence of competing and contradictory
discourses of leadership (in symbolic senses) to the extent that considerable anxiety,
fear, and insecurity is experienced (in material senses).
Rather than the dominant leadership discourses forming the managers’ sub-
jectivities, these vied as sources of power among many others, including life
Gendered relationships and diversity
233

outside work, gendered diﬀerences and approaches and diﬀering career patterns
that warrant further research and analysis (Ford, 2006; Ford & Collinson, 2011). It
is therefore important to explore in depth the diverse eﬀects of diﬀerent social
experiences and contexts that inﬂuence how leadership is conceptualized and
practiced. This also leads me to call for more reﬂexive understandings of our role
as academic educators and developers. Nancy Harding and I expressed concern
about the dangers inherent in leadership development programs in their produc-
tion of formulaic, prescriptive, and competency-based outcomes that serve to
limit the ways in which managers as putative leaders can practice the craft of
leadership that such programs seek to foster (see Ford & Harding, 2007). Our
ambition was to introduce managers to more reﬂexive, critical, collaborative, and
dialogical approaches to practicing leadership that draw more on their experiences
and relationships in the workplace, and that encourage those involved in leader-
ship practices to become more aware of how they (co-)constitute, maintain, and
retain control over their shared realities and multiple leadership identities.
Through exploring a power lens on L-A-P we can better acknowledge the
signiﬁcance of social inequalities and potential injustices in the workplace. As L-
A-P decenters the individual while recognizing the role of evolving practices, the
practices themselves, including their inequities, need to be revealed and decen-
tered. The role of agency is clearly central to such issues and a focus on social
identities (including race, gender, class, age, sexuality, etc.) more readily accent-
uates structural and cultural issues in the workplace, which in turn reinforce the
signiﬁcance of considering both micro and macro dynamics of power that inevi-
tably inﬂuence the experiences of leadership in the workplace (Ospina & Foldy,
2009). Structural concerns include recognizing that social relations at work are
part of a deep-seated, broader system of relations between unequal social groups
based on gender and/or class and/or race. Of central concern here is the creation
by dominant groups of structures that serve the interests of these groups and seek to
maintain this group’s dominance. In relation to gender for instance, diﬀerences are
identiﬁed as an underlying social division in which women are systematically
oppressed to service the interests of other more powerful social groups, particularly
men but also whites and ruling classes (Halford & Leonard, 2001).
Post-structural theory rejects the notion of absolute truth and objectivity in
favor of the plurality of meaning. As feminists have observed, dominant concep-
tions of “reality” and “truth” in patriarchal Western society have tended to be
male constructs, which reﬂect and perpetuate male power interests (Flax, 1993;
Gavey, 1997). As suggested in the previous section, feminist explorations have
exposed diﬀerent truths and realities and these have cast doubt on the notion of one
reality and one truth. Similarly, from a post-structural perspective, knowledge is
socially constructed through “a speciﬁc kind of production with deﬁnite relations to
the social and material world” (Venn, 1984, cited in Gavey, 1997, p. 52). Thus
knowledge is ephemeral and inherently unstable; it is not neutral and is closely
associated with power, with power generating knowledge and knowledge
234
Jackie Ford

initiating power. So, those who are deemed to have the power to regulate what
counts as truth (e.g. the position as leaders in organizations) are able to maintain
their access to material advantages and power. Feminist post-structural goals of
scholarship include developing understandings or theories that are historically,
socially, and culturally speciﬁc and that are explicitly related to changing oppressive
gender relations. Thus, rather than the realist endeavor to discover reality, reveal the
truth, or uncover the facts, the feminist post-structural project is concerned with
disrupting and displacing oppressive knowledge and meaning.
Thus, goals of scholarship within post-structural feminist theory include
developing understandings that are historically, socially, and culturally speciﬁc,
and that are explicitly related to changing oppressive gender relations. Rather
than “discovering” reality, “revealing” truth or “uncovering” the facts, feminist
post-structural writers would instead, be concerned with disrupting and displacing
dominant (oppressive) knowledge (Gavey, 1997). Feminist post-structural writers
recognize the diverse, fragmented, and contradictory lives of men and women in
organization. Attention is focused on gendered subjectivities (and other multiple,
layered social identities) and their plurality, ambiguity, and fragmented nature
within asymmetrical power relations.
Turning to language, the liberal humanist view of language is seen as trans-
parent and expressive, merely reﬂecting and describing pre-existing subjectivity
and human experience. Feminist post-structuralism is predicated on the under-
standing that language and discourse constitutes subjectivity. Meaning is actively
created through language and is therefore neither ﬁxed nor essential. In terms of
discourse, Weedon’s feminist post-structural account is inﬂuenced by the Fou-
cauldian notion that language is always located in discourse, which is deﬁned by
Hollway (1989, p. 231) as “a system of statements which cohere around common
meanings and values that are a product of social factors, of powers and practices,
rather than an individual’s set of ideas.” So, this reﬂects particular ways of con-
structing meaning, based speciﬁcally on particular groups, cultures, and historical
periods. Feminist post-structuralists seek to emphasize the material bases of power,
notably social, economic, and cultural arrangements and the need for change at
this level of discourse. These discourses are multiple, oﬀering numerous conﬂicting
ways of giving meaning to the world. They oﬀer “subject positions” (Hollway,
1984) for individuals to take up, and these various positions (identities, behaviors,
ways of seeing the world) vary in terms of the power they oﬀer individuals.
Constituted through language and discourse, subjectivity refers to the “con-
scious and unconscious thoughts and emotions of the individual, her sense of self
and her ways of understanding her relation to the world” (Weedon, 1997, p. 32).
Positivist research usually locates an essential, coherent and unique nature and
subjectivity in the individual, whereas post-structuralism seeks to “decenter the
subject.” Rather than the humanist assumptions of a uniﬁed, rational self, feminist
post-structuralism proposes a subject that is fragmentary, inconsistent, and con-
tradictory. It denies the existence of an essential female or male nature and seeks
Gendered relationships and diversity
235

to problematize the hegemonic assumptions that we are whole and coherent
subjects with a uniﬁed sense of identity, and drawing on Kristeva’s psychoanalytic
understanding of subjectivity and language, witnesses instead a subject in process.
Thus a post-structural position on subjectivity relativizes the individual’s sense of
self by making it in eﬀect a discourse that is always in the process of becoming
(Chia, 1996) and is open to continuous redeﬁnition. However, this is not to deny
the importance of particular forms of individual subjective investment, which can
have a powerful impact on our identities. Nor is it to deny the signiﬁcant role of
material structures such as work, family, education, and so on, all of which constitute
and discipline our sense of self.
Flax (1993) challenges unitarist approaches to subjectivity and promotes the
importance of exposing the historically constituted character of all ideas about
human nature. She argues that feminist concepts of gender have many implications
for our thinking about subjectivity. She suggests (p. 97):
feminists argue that our thinking about and practices of gender are historical
artefacts, that gender is an eﬀect of complex, historically variable sets of social
relations in and through which heterogeneous persons are socially organized
as members of one and only one of an exclusionary and (so far) unequal
pair—man and woman.
In this way, masculine and feminine identities are not determined by a pre-given,
unchangeable biological substratum but are created by and reﬂect structures of
power, language, and social practices, and our struggles with and against these
structures.
Applying these notions to our endeavors to deﬁne leadership can be seen as a
means of exerting control or seeking to regulate individuals’ identities within
organizations. Such approaches provide putative leaders with a means of self-
regulation and self-monitoring in which they are “cultivated” to become
“autonomous, self-regulating, proactive individuals” (du Gay, 1996, p. 60, see
also Rose, 1999). Managers’ very identities and senses of self are thus crafted by
their experiences in workplace settings. Through deﬁning the leadership practices
and behaviors expected of their workers, organizations may unwittingly provide a
vocabulary and way of behaving that constrains managers qua leaders into how
their very identity is constructed. The powerful voices of the organizational
“leaders” seek to persuade the rest of the workforce to conform to organizational
norms and behaviors (Alvesson & Willmott, 2002; Knights & Willmott, 1992).
In response, managers and other professionals within these organizational set-
tings may (or may not) collaborate in this discursive production of themselves by
adopting the very behaviors and skills that are being promulgated. Once having
taken up a particular position as one’s own, a person inevitably sees the world
from the vantage point of that position and in terms of the particular images and
beliefs that this perspective oﬀers. Management consultants and indeed academics,
236
Jackie Ford

trainers, and educators seek to deﬁne and ﬁx the concept of leadership on the
organization’s behalf and thereby collude in the presentation of a core identity for
identiﬁed leaders within organizations (Ford & Harding, 2007). This view pre-
sumes a unitary identity, a coherent view of the self against which it is possible to
gauge whether an individual’s actions are true or false, genuine or spurious, good
or bad. Furthermore, it embeds an assumed homogeneity of approach to
leadership.
Through researching and theorizing on gender, it is possible to expose the
mythical character of self-determining, individualistic and autonomous ideas of
subjectivity. Gender is one of the conditions of possibility of modern subjectivity.
Gendering “is an integral part of the process of becoming and being an individual
subject. One becomes a boy or a girl, not a person” (Flax, 1993, p. 97). Our
language and sets of social practices exist through which (gendered) subjectivity is
constituted and by which individuals make sense of it to themselves and others.
As gendering is such a complex and over-determined process, it is not possible to
be conscious of all its determinants, eﬀects, and consequences. In the very nature
of going about our daily lives, of working and having relationships, our gendered
selves are made to ﬁt with and be intelligible to others. In this way, we are
“inserted into pre-existing, gendered social locations and practices” (Flax, 1993,
p. 97). So, questions of gender and other multiple layered social identities are too
important to ignore in writings on leadership, management, and organization.
Summary and implications for leadership-as-practice
A subjectivist, post-structural perspective shows how depictions of leadership are
thoroughly embedded in relationships and experiences, in local context—and
thus, in practices. This encourages the development of more relational, inter-
subjective approaches and disrupts the complacency that is present in many con-
temporary accounts of leadership. Developing subjective approaches opens up the
possibility for reﬂection, for questioning assumptions and for surfacing diﬀerent
meanings and so creating, through the acts of dialogue, new meanings and
understandings. Allowing a subjective perspective or inter-subjective exchange,
can lead to wider possibilities for development. In many respects this might be
seen as anathema to traditional views as it presents the opposite of the universal or
immediately generalizable experience, which competence-based approaches to
leadership, for example, dictate. These traditional approaches still underpin much
research and practitioner debate in the study of leadership that more recent L-A-P
and CLS-inspired accounts seek to challenge.
Such relational and inter-subjective approaches provide greater opportunities to
encourage deeper insights by examining interpersonal dynamics, which open up
unconscious motivations. They challenge the ﬁxing and coding of “leaders” that
more conventional approaches to leadership appear to encourage. The intention
is to build on joint conversations between the managers and their staﬀ, peers,
Gendered relationships and diversity
237

boss, and others in the employment relationship while taking account of the
particular institutional contexts in which these relationships take place. This
encourages us to recognize the importance not only of diﬀerence (by gender,
race, class, age, sexuality, etc.), but also to embrace and value such diversity and
strategies for inclusion in our workplaces.
Injecting a critical voice that can inform more reﬂexive and collaborative
practices may be one way of encouraging a leadership-as-practice approach that
turns away from the demands of coordination and control towards relational and
inter-subjective practices. The encouragement of self-reﬂexivity and critical
questioning of taken-for-granted aspects of the experiences of managers may
facilitate a determined critique among managers that can lead to resistance to
organizational control. This may be achieved through active interpretation of
storied accounts of peoples’ experiences and reﬂexive dialogical critique in which
many interpretations can be surfaced and in which we can make sense of peoples’
experiences in numerous ways.
Some of the implications of such thinking for L-A-P require much closer
interrogation of what has perhaps been overlooked in the search for more colla-
borative forms of engagement. This raises a number of questions that L-A-P
scholars and others interested in more critical perspectives on leadership studies
should explore. So, for example, is L-A-P and its underlying ideology, such as one
proposed by Philip Woods (Chapter 4, this volume) as that of “co-development,”
truly emancipatory or does it run the risk of continuing—even if inadvertently—
to require workers to engage in a rational dialogue that may marginalize or even
ignore issues of sexism, racism, and other exploitations that maintain the pre-
dominant phallocentric social order? Some of the early L-A-P accounts seem to
present a degree of value neutrality but we know that any exploration of the
social and material practices and discourses of leadership will need to contend
with issues of gender and other multiple social identities such as race, age, social
class, sexuality. Similarly, as I explore above, such identities will be replete with
ambiguities and contradictions.
Second, what is the stance of L-A-P in relation to diversity and inclusion?
How can the collective potential of L-A-P be achieved to ensure that the voices
of other than white males are heard in more collaborative forms of leadership?
There is a risk that control of work processes and conversations may still be
regulated by power elites who can manipulate the organizational discourse by
advancing “best practices” and other structural and cultural norms and expecta-
tions that are still embedded within historical traditions. Can participants identi-
ﬁed as part of any leadership constellation join together to resist oppression from
such elites and democratically control their own fate? Otherwise, might L-A-P
discourse merely re-institute existing identities that give a false sense of harmony
between workers and managers?
Finally, is there access to sources of knowledge production so that any corre-
spondence between knowledge and power is exposed and made contestable? The
238
Jackie Ford

development of new knowledge would need to take account of the social, political,
historical, and cultural processes that have led to existing practices.
Towards more critical thinking on leadership
This is a really stimulating time to be researching and studying leadership—never
mind the challenges of actually practicing it. We note from debates within this
book—as well as discussions within CLS more broadly—that traditional approa-
ches to studying leadership continue to privilege the leader within hierarchical
structural representations. Organization charts list leaders as those most senior (and
therefore most important) in these companies. There appears to be much con-
sensus in the leadership literature that leaders and leadership are important in
today’s organizations. It is taken for granted that leadership exists within organi-
zations and that it can be improved and that its main purpose is to maximize the
eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of organizations. The roles that leaders need to
undertake now include the model of a leader such that the very self (the sub-
jectivity) of the leader is consumed in this leader identity. In eﬀect, we become
the leader and all that this entails as an identity. But we do not believe that this is
the whole picture. Such uncritical ways of seeing leadership are thus disciplinary,
exclusionary, and highly conservative.
Emerging and more critical theories of leadership recognize the more dis-
persed, ﬂexible, ﬂuid and decentralized forms of organizations that encourage a
shared, distributive, and relational leadership dynamic that has informed the work of
L-A-P scholarship (Carroll, Levy & Richmond, 2008; Crevani, Lindgren & Pack-
endorﬀ, 2010; Raelin, 2011, 2014). There is more than a stirring of interest in
more critical leadership studies that focus on plurality, ambiguity, complexity, and
heterogeneity rather than homogeneous and uni-dimensional forms, presenting us
with new opportunities to understand and experience leadership from within
much richer, contextual empirical studies. So, this analysis does not just stop at
the pursuit of critique and theorizing about what scholars are writing. It also
oﬀers some emancipatory potential: of new ways of thinking about, researching,
and practicing leadership in organizations.
References
Acker, J. (1990). Hierarchies, bodies and jobs: A gendered theory of organizations. Gender
and Society, 4(2), 139–158.
Acker, J. (1998). The future of gender and organizations. Gender, Work and Organization,
5(4), 195–206.
Alvesson, M. (2002). Understanding organizational culture. London: Sage.
Alvesson, M., & Willmott, H. (2002). Identity regulation as organisational control:
Producing the appropriate individual. Journal of Management Studies, 39(5), 619–644.
Arslenian-Engoren, C. (2002). Feminist poststructuralism: A methodological paradigm for
examining clinical decision-making. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 37(6), 512–517.
Gendered relationships and diversity
239

Bresnen, M. (1995). All things to all people? Perceptions, attributions and constructions of
leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 6(4), 495–513.
Brewis, J. (1999). How does it feel? Women managers, embodiment and changing public
sector cultures. In S. Whitehead & R. Moodley (Eds.), Transforming managers: Gendering
change in the public sector. London: UCL Press.
Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper and Row.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter. New York: Routledge.
Calas, M., & Smircich, L. (1991). Voicing seduction to silence leadership. Organization Stu-
dies, 12(4), 567–602.
Calas, M., & Smircich, L. (1992). Using the F word: Feminist theories and the social
consequences of organizational research. In A. J. Mills & P. Tancred (Eds.), Gendering
organizational analysis. New Park, CA: Sage.
Calas, M., & Smircich, L. (1996). From the woman’s point of view: Feminist approaches
to organizational studies. In S. Clegg, C. Hardy & W. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of organi-
zation studies. London: Sage.
Carroll, B., Ford, J., & Taylor, S. (Eds.) (2015). Leadership: Contemporary critical perspectives.
London: Sage.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Chia, R. (1996). The problem of reﬂexivity in organizational research: Towards a postmodern
science of organization. Organization, 3(1), 31–59.
Collinson, D. (2011). Critical leadership studies. In A. Bryman, D. Collinson, K. Grint,
B. Jackson & M. Uhl-Bien (Eds.), The Sage handbook of leadership (pp. 179–192). London: Sage
Collinson, D. (2014). Dichotomies, dialectics and dilemmas: New directions for critical
leadership studies? Leadership, 10(1), 36–55.
Collinson, D. & Hearn, J. (1994). Naming men as men: Implications for work, organisation
and management. Gender, Work and Organisation, 1(1), 2–22.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Ely, R., Foldy, E. & Scully, M. (Eds.) (2003). Reader in gender, work and organization.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Flax, J. (1993). Disputed subjects: Essays on psychoanalysis, politics and philosophy. London: Routledge.
Fletcher, J. K. (2004). The paradox of postheroic leadership: An essay on gender, power
and transformational change. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 647–661.
Fondas, N. (1997). Feminization unveiled: Management qualities in contemporary writ-
ings. The Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 257–282.
Ford, J. (2006). Discourses of leadership: Gender, identity and contradiction in a UK
public sector organization. Leadership, 2(1), 77–99.
Ford, J. (2010). Studying leadership critically: A psychosocial lens on leadership identities.
Leadership, 6(1), 1–19.
Ford, J. (2015). Leadership, post-structuralism and the performative turn. In B. Carroll, J. Ford
& S. Taylor (Eds.), Leadership: Contemporary critical perspectives (pp. 233‑254). London: Sage.
Ford, J., & Harding, N. (2007). Move over management we are all leaders now. Management
Learning, 38(5), 475–493.
Ford, J., & Collinson, D. (2011). In search of the perfect manager? Work-life balance and
managerial work. Work, Employment and Society, 25(2), 257–273.
Ford, J., Harding, N., & Learmonth, M. (2008). Leadership as identity: Constructions and
deconstructions. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
240
Jackie Ford

Fournier, V., & Grey, C. (2000). At the critical moment: Conditions and prospects for
critical management studies. Human Relations, 53(1), 7‑32.
Fournier, V., & Keleman, M. (2001). The crafting of community: Recoupling discourses
of management and womanhood, Gender, Work and Organization, 8(3), 267–290.
Fulop, L., & Linstead, S. (2009). Leadership and leading. In S. Linstead, L. Fulop & S. Lilley
(Eds.), Management and organization: A critical text (2nd edition) (pp. 473–538). London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Gavey, N. (1997). Feminist poststructuralism and discourse analysis. In M. Gergen & S. Davis,
Toward a new psychology of gender: A reader (pp. 49–54). London: Routledge.
du Gay, P.(1996). Consumption and identity at work. London: Sage.
Gherardi, S. (1995). Gender, symbolism and organizational cultures. London: Sage.
Halford, S., & Leonard, P. (2001). Gender, power and organizations. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Harding, N., Lee, H., Ford, J., & Learmonth, M. (2011). Leadership and charisma: A
desire that cannot speak its name? Human Relations, 64(7), 927–950.
Hearn, J., & Parkin, W. (1993). Organizations, multiple oppressions and postmodernism.
In J. Hassard & M. Parker (Eds.), Postmodernism and organizations (pp. 148–162). London: Sage.
Hollway, W. (1989). Subjectivity and method in psychology: Gender, meaning and science.
London: Sage.
Jeanes, E., Knights, D., & Yancey Martin, P. (Eds.) (2011). Handbook of gender, work and
organization. Chichester: Wiley.
Knights, D., & Willmott, H. (1992). Conceptualising leadership processes: A study of senior
managers in a ﬁnancial services company. Journal of Management Studies, 29(6), 761–782.
Legge, K. (1995). Human resource management: Rhetoric and realities. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Ospina, S., & Foldy, E. (2009). A critical review of race and ethnicity in the leadership
literature: Surfacing context, power and the collective dimensions of leadership. Leadership
Quarterly, 20(6), 876–896.
Raelin, J. A. (2008). Emancipatory discourse and liberation. Management Learning, 39(5),
519–540.
Raelin, J. A. (2011). From leadership-as-practice to leaderful practice. Leadership, 7, 195–211.
Raelin, J. A. (2014). Imagine there are no leaders: Reframing leadership as collaborative
agency. Leadership, Online First, 1–28.
Rose, N. (1999). Governing the soul: The shaping of the private self. London: Routledge.
Romani, L., & Holgersson, C. (2015). Inclusive leadership for sustainable work practices.
In L. Zander (Eds.), Research handbook of global leadership: Making a diﬀerence. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Sinclair, A. (2011). Leading with the body. In E. Jeanes, D. Knights & P. Yancey Martin
(Eds.), Handbook of gender, work and organization (pp. 117–130). Chichester: Wiley.
Smircich, L. & Morgan, G. (1982). Leadership: The management of meaning. Journal of
Applied Behavioural Studies, 18(3), 257–273.
Tourish, D. (2011). Leading questions: Journal rankings, academic freedom and performativity:
What is, or should be, the future of Leadership? Leadership, 7(3), 367–381.
Tourish, D. (2013). The dark side of transformational leadership: A critical perspective. London:
Routledge.
Watson, T. (2001). In search of management: Culture, chaos and control in managerial work
(revised edition). London: Thompson Learning.
Weedon, C. (1997). Feminist practice and poststructuralist theory (2nd edition). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Gendered relationships and diversity
241

12
METHODOLOGIES TO DISCOVER
AND CHALLENGE
LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry and Brad Jackson
In search of leadership-as-practice
The preceding chapters outline the nature of the phenomenon of leadership-as-
practice. They speak to a variety of aspects impacting its emergence, recursivity,
and ongoing construction. Research to provide insight, theorization, and con-
tribution to a phenomenon that is continually becoming will not be straightfor-
ward and will necessitate careful consideration in design. To address such
complexity, this chapter outlines the view that approaches to researching leader-
ship-as-practice require three foci: ﬁrst, attention to the ontology of what is being
researched—for example being clear on the unit of analysis; second, related to the
diﬃculties of researching L-A-P, the pursuit of a holistic methodological practice
such as using multiple techniques to help illumination and triangulation; and,
third, a focus on generating theory, especially process theorizing.
As outlined in particular by Carroll (Chapter 5, this volume) and Sergi
(Chapter 6, this volume), the assumed ontology of leadership-as-practice focuses
on activity that occurs between people and materiality situated within particular
contexts. Such situated activity has a rich history, and such activity is in continual
emergence shaped by antecedents and recursive interactions. These aspects place
some striking challenges to researching leadership-as-practice. Notions of under-
taking experiments, issuing questionnaires, and engaging in interviews are pro-
blematic. For example, who do we issue the questionnaire to or invite for
interviews if practice occurs between people? Can we create an experiment to
measure activity if it is a phenomenon that is inextricably linked to a history, and
a place? How can we measure this activity through these instruments and proce-
dures? In essence it seems highly unlikely that this is possible. In this sense we
problematize the applicability of nomothetic approaches typical of the natural

sciences that focus on objective phenomena with epistemic goals of generalization
and the search for truths. However, this does not mean that theorizing is impos-
sible in L-A-P research that is mostly based on the ideographic method typical of
the humanities which strives to understand the meaning of contingent, unique, and
often subjective phenomena. We assert the opposite to be the case. Theorizing
should be the primary outcome.
Ontological clarity
We suggest that researchers engaging in exploring leadership practice need to start
with a clarity of ontological thinking and imaginatively craft techniques that serve
as relevant and rigorous approaches to illuminate, describe, and explain leadership
practice. That is, we adopt Bhaskar’s (1978) axiom of the need for epistemology
to be the handmaiden to ontology. To this end, we encourage L-A-P researchers
to design and apply a range of techniques that can be focused on the continual
sense of grasping historic antecedent inﬂuence, phenomena emergence, becom-
ing, and recursivity. We anticipate that such a range of techniques can be applied
within speciﬁc studies to enable emerging themes to be triangulated to render
greater conﬁdence in accurately discerning and describing the phenomenon
under examination and greater conﬁdence in the plausibility of explaining why such
practices have become manifest and how these practices are recursive. Although
such descriptions and explanations are situated, we suggest that it is desirable that
researchers seek to compare sites of investigation to discern commonalties of
explanations.
Not that any two practices would be the same. How could this be? How could
two or more sets of leadership practices have the same histories, have the same
actors, have the same materialities, or the same sense of meanings associated with
being, doing, and knowing within a speciﬁc context. What we suggest instead is
comparative research which would seek to identify common or generative inﬂu-
ences on practice emergence and recursivity and would describe and explain the
variation: in a sense a process theorization of leadership-as-practice.
Theory-testing is relevant but far from exhaustive. It has a role to play but its
role needs to be considered carefully. We have a phenomenon that has a history,
is contextual and embedded in relational knowing, being, and doing, and that is
continually emergent. These dynamic properties of emergence and recursivity
that malleably interact with socio-materiality require an acceptance that, at best,
theory-testing would lay out as limitations associated with levels of analysis. We
suggest an emphasis on theorizing in which contribution would be placed on
plausibility and practical adequacy rather than inferential generalization. Yin’s
(1994) notion of analytic generalizability drawn from case comparison has value
but caution is needed when developing theory in the form of testable proposi-
tions or through searching for facts with a nomothetic theory output. This is
because we are seeking to understand a phenomenon and not a population. In
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
243

this way an expectation would lean towards ideographic qualitative rather than
predominantly quantitative methods, with opportunities for mixed methods.
There are general research issues that also must be incorporated. One issue
might be the notions of criticality and critical realism, which lend themselves to
ideographic methodologies. Another issue which also lends itself to ideographic
methodologies is the role of agency, ideology and “historical” abduction. A third
issue is that data which reﬂect dialogue, activity, relational-ness, and artifacts/
symbols/language could just as feasibly be used in ideographic as nomothetic
methods.
In
essence
we
suggest
the
importance
of
building
a
holistic
methodology.
Holistic methodology
The holistic methodology opens up particular lines of investigation to examine
the commonalities among various L-A-P cases. For example, how does leadership
get accomplished between people? Is there a tendency for particular inﬂuences
shaping practice emergence to be prevalent? Do these become manifest in similar
ways and similar combinations? Although the holistic approach gives priority and
necessity to examine context, we should not rule out “traditional” or mainstream
leadership methods that require quantitative data and analyses. However, in the
spirit of leadership-as-practice, and being true to the methodological validity that
comes with data triangulation, we see quantitative research as data—data that are
analyzed qualitatively along with observations, interviews, discourse, documents,
and the full range of information available.
The contextual contingencies of leadership must be understood and their
impact tested. Also, we can test qualitatively for the emergence of themes and
categories that explain how context impacts leadership practice(s). However, we
suggest that research needs to give emphasis to levels of analysis and adopt
approaches that can make this highly visible. For example, we recognize Pawson
and Tilley’s (1997) notion of realist research, which seeks to identify outcomes
(emergent and recursive leadership-as-practice) shaped by particular mechanisms
embedded in a speciﬁc contextual frame (team, organization, profession, sector,
nation, global). Similarly, discourse analysis of practices can be examined speciﬁ-
cally and also compared/critiqued across micro, meso, grand, and mega levels
(Alvesson & Karreman, 2000).
Process thinking
The processual nature of leadership practice must be understood if we wish to
generate knowledge about how it emerges and unfolds. Processual phenomena
lend themselves to fully qualitative methodologies. Ethnographies and grounded
theory are examples that are relevant here and we shall illustrate how such
approaches along with others can be utilized.
244
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

We expect that leadership-as-practice research mostly will be informed
through ideographic research, particularly in the early stages of theorizing.
Building out from ﬁrm foundations, we fundamentally need to know the rich
detail of experiences to ﬁrst describe what appears to be site-speciﬁc leadership-
as-practice. Yet such research should not necessarily feel constrained from going
further to explain and compare (even test) these explanations. For example, how
might a theory oﬀered from one site be present in other sites, what processes
shape practice manifestations, and are they present in other situations? If they are, do
they operate in similar ways? Or are some processes present but not having the
same eﬀect (perhaps because of the dominance of site-speciﬁc processes); or are
they not present and the manifestation of L-A-P is a consequence of a very dif-
ferent conﬁguration of inﬂuences? Through such comparative examination,
theory development of L-A-P may emerge. This would always be contingent and
therefore not inferentially generalizable. This is not the goal. Rather we see
process theorization as able to illustrate plausible explanations for the manifesta-
tion of L-A-P at higher levels of abstraction, and that this resonates with practi-
tioners. If it resonates, then the theory is getting close to the reality of
practitioners and has relevance to everyday leadership practice, in other words,
the theory is becoming practically adequate (Kempster & Parry, 2011).
Chapter structure
The chapter is structured to provide an illustration of this epistemological
approach. We have written the chapter from the position of a researcher wishing
to commence the journey of revealing, describing, and explaining leadership-as-
practice. We have not sought to address methodological issues relevant to each
chapter of this book in turn. This would result in a form of encyclopedia of
methods. Rather we seek to outline how research could be undertaken with the
primary goal to develop theorization on L-A-P. The outline of our chapter is as
follows. We ﬁrst examine methodological debates from the related area of strategy-
as-practice. This is most illuminating and indicates a series of avenues as well as
cul-de-sacs that fellow researchers have traveled. We draw on this learning to
give us a heads-up on expected challenges and some steps to take and those to
avoid. Building on this we travel our own methodological journey. We suggest
that the journey should commence with having a commitment to theorizing
upfront and throughout. We give emphasis to process theorizing of leadership-as-
practice as suitable to the ontology of L-A-P with its historic, emergent, and
recursive nature. We outline a holistic and integrated methodology linked to such
theorizing. We suggest that process theorizing can connect description, explana-
tion, and measurement orientations thereby building up from the ground a the-
oretical understanding of leadership-as-practice. Considerations of units of
analysis, sampling, and triangulation are explored along with aspects of data access
and ethics. Subsequently, we consider a series of approaches to both data
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
245

collection and data analysis that can be utilized in the holistic methodological
approach. We conclude the chapter with an outline of Cultural Historic Activity
Theory (CHAT) and the opportunity it holds for L-A-P research as an integrating
method to align the preceding approaches.
Learning from others: Strategy-as-practice
We are, of course, never alone in our quest. Studying practice has been explored
by many before us (perhaps the earliest Bourdieu 1977; Giddens, 1984; and sub-
sequently Schatzki, Knorr Cetina & Von Savigny, 2001; Reckwitz, 2002). So
what can we learn from others before we plough on with approaches for
research? A most useful ﬁeld to draw from is that of the strategy-as-practice (S-A-P)
ﬁeld. There have been debates and commentaries that shed much light on cul-de-sacs
to be avoided and fruitful avenues to be explored.
Prominent in the debates regarding the exploration of S-A-P research is the
notion of modes or orientations of research. Orlikowski (2010, pp. 23–28) has
helpfully summarized this into three modes:

The ﬁrst—an empirical mode—is practice as a phenomenon which sees
researchers having a “commitment to understanding what practitioners do in
practice” (2010, p. 24). Approaches reﬂect a desire to be grounded in the
empirical world with a degree of scepticism of theorizing as this cannot
capture the complex detail of what actually happens in practice. The essence of
the mode is to “bridge the gap” between theorizing and lived experience
through “illuminating the empirical details of organisational life on the
ground” (2010, p. 24). The consequence to research is a commitment to deep
engagement, observing, or working with practitioners. Issues of open access,
managing large quantities of qualitative data, and ethical responsibilities
require careful consideration.

The second—a theoretical mode—is practice as a perspective which focuses
on everyday activity to point to the “structural consequences that are pro-
duced, reinforced or changed through time” (Orlikowski, 2010, p. 24). In
this way practice as a perspective seeks to develop practice theories that
subsequently are used to study organizational activity. It is a sense of seeing
practice as a lens through which to examine social reality. Any research
orientation towards theorizing lends itself to approaches that seek to build
and apply theories, such as grounded theory and ethnography. Tensions exist
though in such theory development in embracing the emergent sense of
practice and what aspects to bracket out or draw boundaries around.

The third—a meta-theoretical mode—is practice as a philosophy that gives
ontological primacy to practice as constituting social reality. Schatzki, for
example, asserts that social life is constituted as “nexuses of practices and
material arrangements” (Schatzki, 2005, p. 471). This view clearly has much
246
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

resonance to arguments in this book (see, e.g., Crevani & Endrissat, Chapter
2, this volume; Sergi, Chapter 6, this volume). It suggests ﬁrst and foremost a
challenge to traditional social research that draws on a representational epis-
temology. In its place the practice as a philosophy assumes a performative
epistemology in which “knowing comes from a direct material engagement
in the world” (Schatzki, 2005, p. 30). The result is a malleable interaction
shaping the emergence of social reality.
The approach we draw on to structure the remainder of the chapter is the
second mode—that of practice as a theoretical perspective. This is the realm in which
the ﬁeld of leadership studies has been most predominantly situated. It is the
realm, therefore, in which the L-A-P perspective can most readily demonstrate its
relative worth compared with other more established methodologies. We will
describe approaches that seek theory development to help explicate the phe-
nomena of leadership-as-practice. Prior to engaging in this discussion we need to
look again at the lessons learned from S-A-P research that reﬂect mode two.
Approaches to undertaking practice as perspective in S-A-P
Drawing on the work of Langley and Abdullah (2011), S-A-P research can
broadly be seen to adopt an empirical focus on activity that has been informed by
two earlier methods prevalent in strategy research (see, e.g., Eisenhardt, 1989;
Gioia, 2004). Both are usefully instructive for L-A-P seen through the practice as
perspective theorization mode.
Langley and Abdullah (2011, p. 205) suggest that both are directed by distinct
epistemological tenets. The Eisenhardt (E) case method is post-positivist with the
aim of developing theory in the form of testable propositions, through searching
for facts with a nomothetic theory output. The Gioia (G) case method is inter-
pretive. It seeks to model informant meanings drawn from an understanding of
events with an output of a process model (that could be novel). Both seek to
theorize/model processes beyond the context of the data. The “E” method seeks
multiple cases with a sharp focus on one key dimension while seeking to be
similar on other dimensions; the data are gathered through interviews with a
broad range of interviewees, with data analysis seeking to measure the impact of
this dimension across multiple sites against performance. The “G” method gives
attention to a single case selected for what it can reveal while relying on inter-
views complemented by observations, with the data analysis building a process
model from informant perspectives akin to grounded theory.
We are sympathetic to the aims and objectives of both methods. Both seek to
provide diﬀerent insight oﬀerings. “G” can be used to address a gap and build a
theory/model by obtaining an in-depth understanding of a phenomenon within a
single context. Subsequent “G” research will elaborate on the phenomenon, in
some instances conﬁrming its presence but also oﬀering an explanation for any
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
247

diﬀerence. “E” allows this theory/model to be tested in multiple contexts to
provide a greater conﬁdence of the theory more broadly, in a sense enhancing the
plausibility of the theory. For example, Langley and Abdullah (2011, p. 220) draw on
the work of Johnson, Prashantham, Floyd and Bourque, (2010) to illustrate the
use of multiple case studies, building from an early in-depth case, to focus on a
particular dimension of success and failure in strategy workshops using ritual
theory. In contrast, Balogun and Johnson (2004) used a single case and applied it
as an interpretive lens to examine diaries to analyze middle-manager sensemaking.
The practice turn has oﬀered up several methods that might be useful for L-A-P
analysis. S-A-P researchers sought to understand strategy practitioners, like we
wish to understand those involved in leadership, and the emerging recursive
patterns of socio-materiality within activity (Langley & Abdullah, 2011, p. 219).
The methods that have been utilized to reveal implicit knowledge and socio-
materiality in practice have been ethnographic (see, e.g., Rouleau, 2005).
Recursivity has been illuminated through in-depth longitudinal studies (Kaplan,
2011). Narratives and vignettes have been used to reveal underlying socio-political
dynamics (Rouleau, 2005, 2010).
An emerging insight from the S-A-P community is that a commitment to
theories of social practice provides a strong grounding for the research. Langley
and Abdullah (2011) suggest that the lack of uniﬁed theory and an eclectic
breadth of vocabulary make it diﬃcult to integrate S-A-P contributions. How-
ever, they helpfully suggest three common elements to practice theorizing: ﬁrst,
knowledge is embedded in practical activity and it is tacit, thereby limiting the
utility of interviews; second, material objects are deeply entwined in everyday
practices “mediating how and what is accomplished” (2011, p. 221), hence the
given assumption of socio-materiality. The implications for research give salience
to methods that enable ﬁne-grained attention to how material elements interact
with agents to recursively shape practice. Kaplan’s work on the impact of Pow-
erpoint slides speaks loudly to the method of “cartography” to guide data inter-
pretation of the practices within presentations (Kaplan, 2011, p. 21). Third,
building on the preceding two elements, is the fundamental notion that practices
are recursive. This necessitates a long timeframe to see the unfolding and emer-
gent nature of recursivity in practices making longitudinal research a necessity to
illustrate this process (see Jarzabkowski, 2008).
The publication of S-A-P work is also illustrative and informing. The volu-
minous data that emerges from practice-oriented research have been problematic
to ﬁt journal expectations about such aspects as credibility, validity, and con-
tribution. Emerging hints and tips suggest that the metaphor of the microscope
may be helpful (Rouleau, 2005), such as in examining “the whole through its
tiny parts.” Rouleau’s use of vignettes is highly regarded to give a strong credible
examination of an “underlying phenomena whose workings are ﬁnely traced out
developing a cumulative understanding” (Langley & Abdullah, 2011, p. 223).
Another well-regarded approach to illustrate recursive manifestation of practices is
248
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

the use of a sawtooth representation where action and institutional structures are
portrayed as parallel lines that interact (see, e.g., Barley & Tolbert, 1997, and its
application in S-A-P in Jarzabkowski, 2008; or in critical realist studies such as in
Harrison & Easton, 2004).
Our overall assessment of the S-A-P research eﬀort to date has been the limited
coherence of its empirical research towards theory building as well as its limited
connection with practitioners, which is somewhat ironic given its name and its
intent. The S-A-P community appears to suﬀer from the lack of epistemological
recognition of the “practice turn” (Chia & MacKay, 2007). The eﬀect is to sug-
gest that S-A-P is a “community of people interested in similar empirical phe-
nomena and drawing on a loose collection of theoretical lenses that have
something to do with practice” (Langley & Abdullah, 2011, p. 224). This rather
prophetic comment should hold some powerful cautionary resonance with L-A-P
researchers who are keen to enter the fray. At the time of this writing, it is
understood that S-A-P colleagues report that leading “American” journals have
been rejecting practice-based research for its lack of broad theorizing and repli-
cation. The inability of the S-A-P community to connect their work with prac-
titioners is a critical challenge for L-A-P researchers not to repeat. Keeping
relevance and rigor in a close-coupled relationship from the outset would,
therefore, seem to be highly desirable for researchers, practitioners, and for any
leadership development activity to keep well in mind.
What can be known about L-A-P?
The primacy of theory development
The question of this section orients discussion to design approaches that address
how a scholarly contribution can be framed. We outlined at the beginning of the
chapter the necessity of researchers being explicitly clear on the ontology being
addressed. The emergent and recursive nature of L-A-P requires a holistic
research strategy that seeks to contribute through the development of theory. As a
ﬂedging development in the ﬁeld of leadership studies, L-A-P has a wonderful
opportunity to guide the development of theorizing from the ground up. This
process would begin by setting out a broad canvass of the phenomena that con-
stitute L-A-P (as outlined in the preceding chapters), and then seek to frame/
guide research to move from exploration, through description and explanation
ultimately onto measurement. In such a framing we suggest researchers should
embrace the notion of community contributions such as through linking to
others’ work, ﬁlling in gaps, revealing new areas as well as challenging contribu-
tions; and all the while being clear on their contribution to L-A-P theory devel-
opment. In this way we are challenging leadership scholars to practice and model
the type of distributed leadership that many propose as the highest form of
leadership.
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
249

With regard to theory development, the ﬂedgling nature of L-A-P suits the
encouragement to embrace broad notions of grounded theory focused on social
processes. It need not follow strict protocols and procedures from diﬀerent epis-
temological camps, such as: post-positivism (e.g., Corbin & Strauss, 1990), con-
structionism (Charmaz, 2006), and critical realism (Kempster & Parry, 2011).
Rather, it sees the necessity of developing process theories of what is occurring
within speciﬁc contexts. These explicit contexts are called the substantive context,
from which a substantive theory will emerge. Some of the context-based beneﬁts
of process theories allow for:

embracing the recursive and emergent dynamics within L-A-P;

giving attention to the idiosyncratic nature of contextual practices;

pointing to antecedent inﬂuences; and

addressing the temporal nature of practices.
Importantly, although process theories can be compared in diﬀerent contexts,
the principle of grounded theory seeks to illuminate social processes in a parti-
cular context related to a speciﬁc phenomenon. Parry (2002) and Parry and
Meindl (2002) have operationalized several grounded theory research projects
into questionnaire research and surveyed nationally for the manifestation of these
processes across the country. The result is the Social Processes of Leadership (SPL)
scale. With questions like “people in my team facilitate the ﬂow of information
within the work unit” and “people in my team rely on each other for support,” it
resonates clearly with the practice notion of leadership. This theory of the social
process occurring is oﬀered up for comparison with other contexts. The approach
can embrace either or both of the “E” or the “G” approaches to the case method
described above. In this way both nomothetic and ideographic approaches can be
combined, although sequencing is likely to prove useful in theory development.
We illustrate this in Table 12.1.
In essence Table 12.1 seeks to show how an integrated approach focusing on
process theorization that builds from the ground up can enable mixed methods to
be applied to researching L-A-P. In the spirit of multi-method research, L-A-P
studies can and should combine ideographic and nomothetic methods. By way of
TABLE 12.1 An integrated approach to process theorization
Stage
Context
Grounded theory:
Level of analysis
Approach
Description
Single
Process of single context
Ideographic
Explanation
Single and
multiple
Process common across
contexts
Ideographic and
nomothetic
Measurement
Multiple
Process common across
contexts
Nomothetic
250
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

example, Kan and Parry (2004) triangulated data that were holistically analyzed
qualitatively by the Grounded Theory method. The data that were analyzed
consisted of conventional qualitative interview and focus group data, but were
also complemented by survey data using the MLQ. The variation across data
provided for a rich explanation of the phenomenon. This research was the subject
of Kempster and Parry’s (2011) promotion of critical realist grounded theory. As
with most social process research, the basic social processes that came from this
research resonated with the “practice” notion of leadership. Grounded theory
research emphasized the social processes at stake, and importantly, it examined
leadership within a substantive context. In light of the experiences and lessons
learned from the S-A-P research, the integration of both stages of research,
methods and levels of analysis leading to theory generation are most important if
L-A-P is to gain broader credibility and make a lasting contribution to leadership
studies. Connected with credibility is the need to build out from single cases.
Following Bryman’s (2006) call, we suggest a holistic approach to research that
either adopts multiple methods within an ideographic frame or mixed methods
across both nomothetic and ideographic frames in the form of both qualitative
and quantitative studies.
Developing a holistic research approach
Why do we need a holistic approach? Fundamentally, this addresses the concern
identiﬁed in S-A-P research of the very real diﬃculty of revealing the tacit and
subterranean nature of practice. In our introduction we asserted that relatively
traditional instruments applied to cross-sectional research, such as interviews and
questionnaires, cannot illuminate what’s occurring in suﬃcient depth to get trac-
tion on the socio-materiality of situated leadership practices. In-depth approaches
such as observation are necessary. However, we suggest that single techniques
alone may both reveal and obscure what is occurring. Multiple methods designed
to capture aspects in a holistic manner are, therefore, encouraged. In this way, the
beneﬁts of triangulation can be demonstrated. Triangulation within a single context
is most important to gain the credibility of the proﬀered process theory.
How do we show that a single case is valuable? At the early stages of devel-
oping L-A-P, there is the necessity to take a deep plunge into a speciﬁc context
to reveal the underlying practices, occurring in the leadership constellation (see, e.g.,
Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume). Relating back to Table 12.1, detailed descrip-
tions of single cases need to be made. Subsequent research can begin to test
emerging theories to see if they are applicable in other contexts and highlight
why they may require reﬁnement, but initially depth is all important. For exam-
ple, without depth how can the antecedents of the socio-materiality be drawn out?
Without in-depth multi-methods, how can we know how the socio-materiality
has changed through time? Furthermore, longitudinal research is essential to
capture the unfolding nature of recursive practices and their eﬀects. Such
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
251

recursivity may take various forms, and diﬀerent techniques may illuminate dif-
ferent aspects. Triangulation of in-depth multi-methods provides credibility to
the emerging process theorization. As researchers, we should be able to justify the
necessity of single case research through ideographic research, and get published in
the mainstream journals should we so desire! More importantly, we will have obtained
a richer grasp of what is transpiring so that both theorists and practitioners can
gain in insight.
However, in the process of going deep, it is clearly important to carefully
delineate the unit of analysis. In a commentary on undertaking S-A-P research,
Johnson, Langley, Melin and Whittington, (2007) guided researchers to consider
the importance of choosing and deﬁning the unit of analysis being examined.
Johnson et al. (2010) highlighted the need to attend to micro details of practice,
yet also pointed to the vexed issue of how micro? For example, how would
studying what people wore at a particular planning retreat provide support to
process theorization? In this case the micro unit would probably need to be
extended to a planning retreat and draw on: past episodes of retreats, activities
leading up to the retreat, the context of the organization, the purpose of the
retreat, histories shaping the relationships, the physical setting for the retreat,
organizational political pressures, and, ﬁnally, the clothes people wear.
Issues of access and ethical considerations
The nature of the unit of analysis and the depth of research relate to aspects of
access and research ethics. The ability to undertake in-depth research through
observation of meetings, or even attending a planning retreat, is problematic.
Aspects of conﬁdentiality and perceived disruption to organizational activity are
understandable concerns. Creating the time available for undertaking research that
involves being in an organization for extended periods is diﬃcult for both the
researcher and the host organization to manage. Such problematic issues are
magniﬁed in longitudinal research. As a validity question, researchers being pre-
sent in everyday practices impacts the practices observed. So when we speak of
multi-methods, there is a pragmatic perspective that needs to be grasped; namely,
what is doable? In some respects problematic aspects of obtaining and sustaining
access can lead to innovations for data collection, such as video-taping meetings,
asking people in a speciﬁc leadership relationship to keep blogs, keeping diaries,
or capturing critical incidents. Alongside these multi-methods, time-bound
observations and informal interviews can be undertaken. Nomothetic research
can side-step many of the access issues through the use of questionnaires and
structured interviews, but the temptation must be resisted, otherwise the tacit
subterranean dimensions of socio-materiality will be overlooked. The issue of
multi-methods has already been addressed. Rather than duplicating the research,
which is often a problem with multi-methods, the answer might lie in triangu-
lation. Kan and Parry (2004) have already opened up the possibility of using
252
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

triangulated data. Triangulated data give us a holistic view on practice without
the worry of duplicating the research. An example of such an approach is the
Social Processes of Leadership (SPL) scale (Parry, 2002), which, ironically, is the
nomothetic operationalization of multiple ideographic research projects into
social processes of leadership.
Some approaches to reveal L-A-P: Mostly ideographic
The key word here is to “reveal” L-A-P. At this point, we are not proposing to
test for L-A-P or to test for links between L-A-P variables. We are looking for
what might emerge from a more holistic examination of the phenomenon of
L-A-P. With criteria like “emergent” and “holistic,” such research will tend
to more readily lend itself toward ideographic rather than nomothetic meth-
ods. We will examine the following suggested methodologies by way of
provocation.
Narrative and conversational analysis
Parry and Hansen (2007) argued that people follow the story as much as they
follow the “leader” or even what the titular leaders say. Hence, the narrative
becomes important to understanding how people interact in a practice sense in
organizational settings. There is no one “narrative analysis,” although some people
study the narratives that occur in organizations. Very little leadership research has
examined the narratives of organizations, let alone the narratives of leadership.
Usually, it is done within the context of charismatic or inspirational leadership,
and even then, invariably as a vehicle of senior business or political leaders.
Consequently, narrative becomes a skill of the leader, rather than a practice that is
shared or distributed across the population of a leadership practice. However, the
narrative, or the story in the abstract that people follow becomes important,
especially within L-A-P.
Parry and Kempster (2014) used aesthetic narrative positivism to study the
identities and narratives, indeed the narrative identities, of charismatic leadership.
The data for this research came from the lived experience of executives. The
implicit theories and the lived experiences of managers were translated into
identities and movie genres that seemed to reﬂect the images that people had
in their minds about charismatic leaders whom they had experienced. In so
doing, data were both nomothetic and ideographic. The analysis was both
qualitative and quantitative. This research can be replicated within the substantive
contexts of leadership practices in a range of environments. Narrative and con-
versational analysis lends itself to a dramaturgical mode of research. Burke’s dra-
maturgical analysis has already been used by Sinha and Jackson (2007) to research
leadership practices and processes. There is much scope for this in future L-A-P
research.
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
253

The Critical Incident Technique (CIT)
The Critical Incident Technique was developed by Flanagan as “a procedure for
gathering certain important facts concerning behavior in deﬁned situations” (Fla-
nagan, 1954, p. 335). The epistemological foundations of CIT are “rooted in the
phenomenological research tradition,” where the purpose is “to enter another’s
frame of reference so that the person’s structures of understanding and inter-
pretive ﬁlters can be experienced” (Brookﬁeld, 1990, p. 179–180). It encourages
respondents to discuss their own experiences through recalling of incidents, rather
than commenting on a speciﬁc interview question (Collis & Hussey 2003, p. 165).
CIT allows respondents to tell their incidents in a way that could be described as
stories or narratives (Bryman & Bell, 2003). Snell sees the value of CIT as stem-
ming from “being grounded in the complexities of actual practice in the ﬁeld
setting, rather than being based on mere espousals and generalisations by respon-
dents” (Snell, 1999, p. 511). As such, it provides a most useful approach to
explore leadership practice with its attention on situated activities. It has a sense of
a forensic focus “to go straight to the heart of an issue and collect information
about what is really being sought” (Easterby-Smith, Thorpe & Jackson, 2008, p.
150). It asks of respondents to recall what happened, how it happened and why?
Chell suggests that CIT allows “development of case-based theory grounded in
actual critical events” (Chell, 1998, p. 71), reﬂecting much of the Gioia approach
we described earlier. Chell goes on to assert that CIT is a technique of data col-
lection that “enables one to understand the context of action, the tactics, strate-
gies and coping mechanisms adopted and the outcomes, results or consequences
of people’s actions and the new situation with which they are faced” (1998, p.
62). The CIT has been used successfully in a number of research studies in such
areas as health and nursing (Norman, Redfern, Tomalin & Oliver, 1992); edu-
cation (Brookﬁeld, 1990; Woods, 1993; Preskill, 1996); and extensively in small
businesses (Tjosvold & Weicker, 1993; Chell, 1998; Chell & Pittaway, 1998;
Cope & Watts, 2000; Kaulio, 2003). Save for the recent work of Gregory (2010),
there is limited use of CIT in the ﬁeld of leadership. We suggest it holds much
promise to support grounded process theorizing on L-A-P.
Ethnography and autoethnography
Ethnography is a long-established method for researching sociological and
anthropological phenomena in organizational settings. A study of culture is the
essence of anthropological research. We appreciate by now that understanding
the culture of the leadership setting is central to an understanding of L-A-P. We
need to understand “what is going on,” to quote a well-worn and oft-repeated
mantra. The culture of the leadership context can be researched using Bass and
Avolio’s (1994) Organizational Description Questionnaire (ODQ). This instru-
ment tests the transformational and transactional characteristics of organizational
254
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

culture. Now that we can understand the utility of triangulation, if not of multi-
method research, we can see that data sourced via the ODQ can complement
more traditional ethnographic data sourced ideographically and give a fantastic
insight to L-A-P processes and phenomena.
However, there are many types of organizational ethnographies, and many ways
of “doing” ethnography. One such method is organizational autoethnography.
There is no one clear deﬁnition of what autoethnography is. Essentially however, it is a
hyper-reﬂexive modiﬁcation of ethnography. In one sense, the researcher interviews
her or his self. Therefore, autoethnography oﬀers a great potential contribution to
organizational research. As explained by Boyle and Parry (2007), the intensely
reﬂexive nature of autoethnography as an autobiographical form of research,
allows the organizational researcher to connect intimately the personal to the cultural
through a “peeling back” of multiple layers of consciousness, thoughts, feelings, and
beliefs. Consequently, autoethnography provides some of the richest and most original
data available to organizational researchers, and to L-A-P researchers in particular. We
have the chance to delve deeply into the emotional impact of leadership practice
on other members as well as on those who provide the leadership.
However, Kempster and Stewart (2010) and Kempster and Iszatt-White (2013)
have taken the argument one step forward. They have argued for, and researched
and
published
the
method
called
co-constructed
or
co-produced
auto-
ethnography. Rather than expecting one person to be both researcher and sub-
ject, this method allows the key person still to be the subject of this powerful
hyper-reﬂexive method, but to have a researcher “looking over their shoulder”
and coaxing along the insights and the interpretations. In this way, the embedded
knowledge is both generated and conveyed to the reader while being placed
within the context of an extant body of knowledge. The researcher is part-
mentor and part-coach as the subject interrogates their own experience of L-A-P.
Possibly more than any other method, co-constructed autoethnography might
provide the richest form of insight into leadership-as-practice.
Activity theory: A method for integrating approaches to
researching L-A-P?
The preceding discussion has given emphasis to ideographic approaches that are
encouraged to be drawn together into a holistic methodology to obtain the
beneﬁts of triangulation. We conclude the chapter by exploring the application of
a social theory to L-A-P research, that of cultural historic activity theory
(CHAT). This is because the theory holds out much promise for L-A-P as it
reﬂects the key tenets of practice-based theorizing; namely, socio-material emer-
gence and recursivity, focus on collective and structured meaning, and activity
informed through history and developed through interaction.
We considered a complementary alternative, that of Actor-Network-Theory
(ANT). ANT has been considered to be a process-oriented sociology (Law, 1992)
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
255

that provides an array of concepts, techniques, and principles with which to
examine the construction of relationships. Callon (1986) argues that ANT
attempts to oﬀer a perspective, complete with its own language, for analyzing the
co-evolution of society, technological artifacts, and knowledge of nature. A key
tenet in ANT is that the “stuﬀof the social isn’t simply human”(Law, 1992, p. 381),
giving equal weight to the agency of human and “non-human” actors. We sug-
gest that ANT could be reinterpreted as a method for exploring L-A-P because
of its focus on materiality, relationships, and various actors, and how these ele-
ments shape activity and ongoing transformation. However, we have settled on
CHAT for the following reasons: ﬁrst our familiarity with it; second, and
importantly, for its attending to the relationship of history and emergent situated
practices malleably interacting with materiality to shape orientation to activity;
and third, for the overt purpose of process theorizing.
Activity theory as a community of leadership practice
Cultural-historical activity theory (CHAT) has already presented itself as a useful
tool for research in organizational studies (Blackler, 1993, 2009), strategic prac-
tices (Jarzabkowski, 2003), human resource management practices (Ardichvili,
2003), and organizational and individual learning (Schulz & Geithner, 2010).
Activity theory draws from the work of Vygotsky (1978) who drew on a
Marxist assumption of human nature continuously changing through productive
activity (Blackler, 1993; Engeström, 2001). Engeström suggested that “the indi-
vidual [should] no longer be understood without his or her cultural means, and
society [should] not be understood without the agency of individuals who use
and produce artifacts” (Engeström, 1987, p. 5). Drawing on Takoever and
Kempster’s (2014) interpretation of CHAT in the context of leadership as practice,
activity theory is depicted as system of activity where the triangle of action
(object—subject—artifacts) is situated within the context of existing and pre-established
rules, community, and division of labor (see Figure 12.1).
Engeström (2001, pp. 136–137) suggests four principles of the activity system
that have much resonance to leadership-as-practice:
1.
The prime unit of analysis is a “collective, artifact-mediated and object-
oriented” activity system.
2.
The multi-voiced nature of an activity system where individuals bring their
lived experience, values, interests and opinion is such that the activity system
“carries multiple layers and strands of history engraved in its artifacts, rules
and conventions” (2001, p. 136).
3.
The activity systems emerge, develop, and are recursive and transformational
over long periods of time, and their evolution needs to be understood
through their history of evolving activity, discourses, and materialities.
256
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

4.
As activities are open systems, every time a new element is adopted (e.g., a
new idea, or tool, new structure, new people) it will collide with the old
elements and lead to emergence.
We suggest that CHAT can be used as a structure to look holistically at L-A-P.
It oﬀers up a framework to guide methodological thinking as well as a research
design and data analysis. It can help delineate a unit of analysis. Taking the
example of what to wear to an away-day, activity theory would be able to frame
the examination. The wearing of clothes to work is a routine set within expec-
tations and assumptions of the community, the leadership relationships, and the
nature of the work being undertaken. The change of clothes can be seen as an
artifactual change and the resulting impact on the away-day being the object
of activity. CHAT asks researchers to look at the changing nature of the object of
activity and the various elements impacting the activity and see how they have
changed through time. Focusing on the diﬀerent nature of clothes worn at pre-
vious away-days can be explored in-depth as well as other activities and expec-
tations, such as personnel changes from previous years, evolving norms, diﬀerent
expectations and discourses, and so forth. In this way CHAT looks back to
explain and provides rich descriptions. It can enable process theorizing of the
changes and the recursive patterns related to a particular unit of analysis, but
situated in a broader understanding of practice. In this way it can allow for rich
FIGURE 12.1 The activity system of a community of leadership practice
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
257
Tools and concepts
Concepts and theories,
Discourse of leadership
AGENTS
Leader, followers
Explicit and implicit rules
Organisational culture
Personal values and beliefs
SITUATED COMMUNITY
ROUTINES - > OUTCOMES
Leader-follower relationship
Organisation and role
structures
Roles and responsibilities

theorizing drawn from a unit of analysis. Finally, it is a framework that can helpfully
examine both formal and informal aspects of practice and connect both together.
For example, how does the small talk in the corridor (Larsson & Lundholm,
2010; Sjostrand, Sandberg & Tyrstrup, 2001) play out in the boardroom?
Conclusion
It is telling but not that unusual for a new research ﬁeld called L-A-P, about which most
of the chapters in this collection speak enthusiastically and persuasively, to oﬀer pro-
mise of L-A-P as a “new dawn” for leadership studies. Similarly L-A-P proffers its
relative merits compared with the more established mainstream approaches that have
predominated during the “long night” of the subject. This chapter has gently and
politely suggested that we need to get over the expansive “critique, potential and
promise” phase of a new research approach and settle down to the “real” and con-
siderably less exciting but critical task of working out how we are actually going to
conduct empirical research that will be robust, insightful, compelling, and inﬂuential
beyond our own immediate community of research practice.
It is to this somewhat daunting, at times onerous, but necessary task that we
have dedicated our attention in this chapter. In this task we have been guided by both
the salutary and cautionary track record of the “advanced” guard that the considerably
larger and better resourced S-A-P research community has conveniently presented us.
After all, shouldn’t strategy always preﬁgure leadership? In light of our smaller yet
typically more enthusiastic numbers and our comparatively limited resources, it is
imperative that we consider the possibility of practicing the kind of distributed
and systemic leadership that we so often actively proselytize yet rarely, with the
notable exception of the editing of this currently volume, actually practice.
This quality of leadership should not only extend to members of our
immediate research community but to other leadership scholars located in diﬀer-
ent but related research traditions, as well as the leadership practitioners that we
aim to better understand, educate, and transform. Related to this, we wish to
close by making a plea for a stronger commitment to conducting empirical work
despite its time-consuming, expensive, and uncertain nature rather than yet more
conceptual critiques and polemic propositions. By way of incentive, we humbly
submit that it will be the cleverly designed and exceptionally well-executed
empirical studies that will ultimately win the day for L-A-P research. We hope
that those who are suﬃciently committed to the L-A-P worldview will be spe-
ciﬁcally assisted by this chapter and the volume in general. Go forth and practice
to your heart’s content!
References
Alvesson, M., & Karreman, D. (2000). Varieties of discourse: On the study of organizations
through discourse analysis. Human Relations, 53(9), 1125–1149.
258
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

Ardichvili, A. (2003). Constructing socially situated learning experiences in human
resource development: An activity theory perspective. Human Resource Development
International, 6(5), 310–325.
Balogun, J., & Johnson, G. (2004). Organizational restructuring and middle manager
sensemaking. Academy of Management, 47(4), 523–549.
Barley, S. R., & Tolbert, P. S. (1997). Institutionalization and structuration: Evidence from
observations of CT scanners and the social order of radiology departments. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 31, 78–108.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1994). Transformational leadership and organizational culture.
International Journal of Public Administration, 17(3/4), 541–555.
Bhaskar, R. (1978). A realist theory of science. New York: Harvester Press.
Blackler, F. (1993). Knowledge and the theory of organizations: Organizations as activity
systems and the reframing of management. Journal of Management Studies, 30, 863–884.
Blackler, F. (2009). Cultural-historical activity theory and organization studies. In A. L.
Sannino, H. Daniels & K. D. Gutierrez (Eds.), Learning and expanding with activity theory
(pp. 19–39). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boyle, M., & Parry, K. W. (2007). Telling the whole story: The case for organizational
autoethnography. Culture & Organization, 13(3), 185–190.
Brookﬁeld, S. (1990). Using critical incidents to explore learners’ assumptions. In J. Mezirow
(Ed.), Fostering critical reﬂection in adulthood: A guide to transformative and emancipatory
learning (pp. 177–193). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bryman, A. (2006). Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: How is it done?
Qualitative Research, 6, 97–113.
Bryman, A., & Bell, E. (2003). Business research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Callon, M. (1986). Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the
scallops and the ﬁsherman of St. Brieuc Bay. In J. Law (Ed.), Power, action and belief: A
new sociology of knowledge? London: Routledge.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis.
London: Sage.
Chell, E. (1998). Critical incident technique. In G. Symon & C. Cassell (Eds.), Qualitative
methods and analysis in organisational research: A practical guide (2nd edition) (pp. 51–72).
London: Sage Publications.
Chell, E., & Pittaway, L. (1998). A study of entrepreneurship in the restaurant and café
industry: Exploratory work using the critical incident technique as a methodology.
Hospitality Management, 17, 23–32.
Chia, R., & MacKay, B. (2007). Post-processual challenges for the emerging strategy as
practice perspective: Discovering strategy in the logic of practice. Human Relations, 60(1),
217–242.
Collis, J., & Hussey, R. (2003). Business research: A practical guide for undergraduate and
postgraduate students (2nd edition). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cope, J., & Watts, G. (2000). Learning by doing: An exploration of experience, critical
incidents and reﬂection in entrepreneurial learning. International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Behaviour and Research, 6(3), 104–124.
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (1990). Grounded theory research: Procedures, canons and
evaluative criteria. Qualitative Sociology, 13: 3–21.
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R., & Jackson, P. R. (2008). Management research (3rd edi-
tion). London: Sage Publications.
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
259

Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management
Review, 14(4), 532–550.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity–theoretical approach to developmental
research. Helsinki: Orienta Konsultit Oy.
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical
reconceptualization. Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 51(4), 327–358.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gioia, D. A. (2004). A renaissance self: Prompting personal and professional revitalisation.
In R. E. Stablien & P. J. Frost (Eds.), Renewing research practice (pp. 97–114). Stanford,
CA: Stanford University
Gregory, S. (2010). ‘Purchasing prostitutes in Paris’: An exploration of the inﬂuence of ethics on
the decisions of managers. PhD Thesis, Lancaster University.
Harrison, D., & Easton, G. (2004). Temporally embedded case comparison in industrial
marketing research. In S. Fleetwood & S. Ackroyd (Eds.), Realism in action in management
and organisation studies (pp. 194–210). London: Routledge.
Jarzabkowski, P. (2003). Strategic practices: An activity theory perspective on continuity
and change. Journal of Management Studies, 40, 23–55.
Jarzabkowski, P. (2008). Shaping strategy as a structuration process. Academy of Management
Journal, 51(4), 621–650.
Johnson, G., Langley, A., Melin, L., & Whittington, R. (2007). Introducing the strategy as
practice perspective. In G. Johnson, A. Langley, L. Melin & R. Whittington (Eds.),
Strategy as practice: Research directions and resources. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, G., Prashantham, S., Floyd, S., & Bourque, N. (2010). The ritualization strategy
workshops. Organization Studies, 31(12), 1589–1618.
Kan, M., & Parry, K. W. (2004). Identifying paradox: A grounded theory of leadership in
overcoming resistance to change. Leadership Quarterly, 15(4), 467–491.
Kaplan, S. (2011). Strategy and PowerPoint. An inquiry into the epistemic culture and
machinery of strategy making. Organization Studies, 22(2), 320–346.
Kaulio, M. A. (2003). Initial conditions or process of development? Critical incidents in
the early stages of new ventures. R&D Management, 33(2), 165–175.
Kempster, S., & Iszatt-White, M. (2013). Towards co-constructed coaching: Exploring the
integration of coaching and co-constructed autoethnography in leadership development.
Management Learning, 44(4), 319–336.
Kempster, S., & Parry, K. W. (2011). Grounded theory and leadership research: A critical
realist perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 22(1), 106–120.
Kempster, S., & Stewart, J. (2010). Becoming a leader: A co-produced autoethnographic
exploration of situated learning of leadership practice. Management Learning, 41(2), 205–219.
Langley, A., & Abdullah, C. (2011). Templates and turns in qualitative studies of strategy
and management. Research Methodology in Strategy and Management, 6, 201–235.
Larsson, M., & Lundholm, S. E. (2010). Leadership as work-embedded inﬂuence: A
micro-discursive analysis of an everyday interaction in a bank. Leadership, 6(2), 159–182.
Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor-network: Ordering, strategy and heterogeneity.
Systems Practice and Action Research, 5(4), 379–393.
Norman, I. J., Redfern, S. J., Tomalin, D. A., & Oliver, S. (1992). Developing Flanagan’s
critical incident technique to elicit indicators of high and low quality nursing care from
patients and their nurses. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 17, 590–600.
260
Stephen Kempster, Ken Parry, and Brad Jackson

Orlikowski, W. J. (2010). Practice in research: Phenomenon perspectives and philosophy.
In D. Goldsorkhi, L. Rouleau, D. Seidl & E. Vaara (Eds.), Strategy as practice (pp. 23–33).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parry, K. W. (2002). Hierarchy of Abstraction Modelling (H.A.M.) and the psychometric
validation of grounded theory research. International Journal of Organisational Behaviour,
5(5), 180–194.
Parry, K. W., & Hansen, H. (2007). The organizational story as leadership. Leadership, 3(3),
281–300.
Parry, K. W., & Kempster, S. J. (2014). Love and leadership: Constructing follower narrative
identities of charismatic leadership. Management Learning, 45(1), 21–38.
Parry, K. W., & Meindl, J. R. (2002). Models, methods and triangulation: Researching the
social processes in our societies. In K. W. Parry & J. R. Meindl (Eds.), Grounding lea-
dership theory and research: Issues, perspectives and methods, pp. 199–221. (Leadership
Horizons series, J. Meindl, series editor). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Pawson, R., & Tilley, N. (1997). Realistic evaluation. London: Sage.
Preskill, H. (1996). The use of critical incidents to foster reﬂection and learning in HRD.
Human Resource Development Quarterly, 7(4), 335–347.
Reckwitz, A. (2002). Towards a theory of social practices: A development in cultural
theorizing. European Journal of Social Theory, 5(2), 243–263.
Rouleau, L. (2005). Micro-practices of strategic sensemaking and sensegiving: How middle
managers interpret and sell change every day. Journal of Management Studies, 42(7),
1413–1441.
Rouleau, L. (2010). Studying strategizing through narratives of practice. In D. Goldsorkhi,
L. Rouleau, D. Seidl & E. Vaara (Eds.), Strategy as practice (pp. 258–272). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Schatzki, T. R. (2005). The sites of organizations. Organization Studies, 26(3), 465–483.
Schatzki, T. R., Knorr Cetina, K. & Von Savigny, E. (2001). The practice turn in social
theory. London: Routledge.
Schulz, K. P., & Geithner, S. (2010). Individual and organizational development as inter-
play: An activity oriented approach. German Journal of Research in Human Resource Man-
agement, 24, 130–151.
Sinha, P., & Jackson, B. (2007). A dramaturgical inquiry into sensemaking and sensegiving
processes during an organisational crisis. Paper presented at the Academy of Management
Meeting, Philadelphia, PA.
Sjostrand, S. E., Sandberg, J., & Tyrstrup, M. (2001). Invisible management: Social construction
of leadership. London: Thompson Learning.
Snell, R. S. (1999). Obedience to authority and ethical dilemmas in Hong Kong companies.
Business Ethics Quarterly, 9(3), 507–526.
Takoever, V., & Kempster, S. (2014). The reappearing practice of leadership. 12th
International Studying Leadership Conference, Rome, 12–14 December 2013.
Tjosvold, D., & Weicker, D. (1993). Cooperative and competitive networking by entre-
preneurs: A critical incident study. Journal of Small Business Management, January, 11–21.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Woods, P. (1993). Critical events in teaching and learning. London: Falmer Press.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. London: Sage
Methods to discover leadership-as-practice
261

13
DOING LEADERSHIP-AS-PRACTICE
DEVELOPMENT
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James
From leader development to leadership development
Organizations continue to invest substantial time and resources in leadership develop-
ment. Business schools and other providers oﬀer hundreds of in-house/customized
and open enrolment executive programs on leadership as well as executive coaching
for leadership. Although framed as leadership development, we argue that the focus of
these programs is predominantly on improving the capabilities of managers and on
nurturing new leaders. Thus, most leadership development is currently leader
development (Day, 2000; Day, Fleenor, Atwater, Sturm & McKee, 2014). What
Bennis (2007) has described as the Leadership Tripod (leader, followers, and shared
goals) provides the underpinning for much leadership development activity,
which explicitly or implicitly reﬂects a leader-centered ontology, in other words,
focused on the traits, styles, actions, and competencies of the individuals who
have been formally assigned leadership roles or have potential to become leaders.
If leadership is understood as residing in people (as leader-centered “entities”)
or on the dyadic relationship between leader and followers, then it follows that
leader development should focus on who leaders need to be. Given that the his-
torical basis for leadership has largely been developed through the stories of
individual leaders “who grab our attention” (Ladkin, 2010, p. 11) and notions of
heroism (Gronn, 2002), leader development programs often focus on developing
in (ordinary) people something that some (extraordinary) leaders “have.” As such,
leader development emphasizes personal growth—values, qualities, and beha-
vioral styles that make for “good” leaders, including proﬁle, status, position,
power, and top-down/administrative leadership practices (Uhl-Bien & Marion,
2009). Although learners may explore their personal, historical, and cultural
conceptions of leadership on leader development programs, they are rarely invited

to challenge these deeply rooted assumptions about leadership or aﬀorded the
opportunity to explore new constructions of leadership-as-practice. Walking into many
classrooms, one can see the leadership/management distinction written on ﬂip
charts and these virtually always state that leaders provide vision or that leadership
provides a strategy that cascades through the organization, leaders are inspirational,
etc. As these assumptions shape the way organizational members perceive, act, and
evaluate leadership, the result of leader development is that individuals often leave
programs with the idea that they must be inspiring, visionary, connected to
people in transformational relationships, more emotionally intelligent, and so on,
rather than being equipped to deal with the complex, collaborative, cross-
boundary, adaptive work in which they are increasingly engaged (Heifetz, 2009;
Heifetz & Linsky, 2002; Uhl-Bien, Marion & McKelvey, 2007).
Leader development programs are often driven by competency frameworks,
specifying an “underlying characteristic of an individual that is causally related to
eﬀective or superior performance in a job” (Boyatzis, 1982, p. 21). Consequently,
leader development provides individuals with methods for assessing their perfor-
mance and developmental needs against skills and characteristics that have been
pre-determined as leading to success in their organizations, with outcomes being
measured, often through 360-degree feedback, in terms of suitability for promotion.
Competency thinking tends to be oriented towards “ﬁxing the faults of indivi-
duals” so that they can individually perform better as leaders (Turnbull James &
Ladkin, 2008). This “ﬁxing” may involve increased self-awareness, skill, and
competency enhancement, reﬂective practice, and depth personal development to
unlearn unhelpful attitudes and behaviors to access greater inherent personal
potential (Turnbull James & Ladkin, 2008). There are a number of problems with
competency thinking, which stem from the processes of reduction and fragmen-
tation (Carroll, Levy & Richmond, 2008). Bolden and Gosling (2006, p. 147) argue
that competencies impose structure, predictability, and constraint at the expense
of vitality, life, originality, and distinctiveness that is inherent in leadership. Thus,
competencies do not provide “a suﬃciently rich vocabulary” for the complex,
diverse, and connected nature of leadership (2006, p. 158). Competencies based
on past experiences and success may not be relevant and appropriate for the
future (Carroll et al., 2008), and with competency-based programs people are sent
away to learn their leadership (Raelin, 2007), resulting in individuals acting and
performing in isolation to others and context (Carroll et al., 2008). Too many
leader development initiatives rest on the assumption that one size ﬁts all and that
the same group of skills or style of leadership is appropriate regardless of location,
organizational culture, or mandate (Carroll et al., 2008). This is problematic, for
example, when universal competencies developed in multinational organizations
may not ﬁt or be understood by local managers who hold a completely diﬀerent
conception of leadership (Wang, Turnbull James, Denyer & Bailey 2014).
An alternative to leader development is based on our entering a post-heroic
leadership age (Fletcher, 2004; Gronn, 2002), whereby leadership is “ … viewed
Leadership-as-practice development
263

as a widely dispersed activity which is not necessarily lodged in formally desig-
nated leaders … ” (Parry & Bryman, 2006, p. 455). Rather than looking for
leadership in people, we need to look for leadership in organizational practice.
The acts of leading can take on multiple directions, transcend formal hierarchies,
and involve multiple actors. From this perspective, actors, regardless of hier-
archical position can enact practices that are traditionally viewed as leader beha-
viors or acts of followership. Rather than focusing on dyadic inﬂuence, leadership
can also be viewed as “dynamically changing networks of informally interacting
agents” (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007, p. 302). Leadership occurs in the “space between”
individuals (Lichtenstein et al., 2006). It is a “social inﬂuence process through
which emergent coordination (e.g., evolving social order) and change (e.g., new
approaches, values, attitudes, behaviors, ideologies) are constructed and pro-
duced” (Uhl-Bien, 2006, p. 667). Consistent with Weick’s (1979) call to focus on
organizing processes as opposed to organizations, leadership-as-practice addresses the
processes of leading rather the characteristics of leaders. However, it is not enough
to understand simply what leaders do (Hosking, 1988, p. 147); instead, we must
examine how practices are performed and their meaning expressed by examining
the “inﬂuential acts of organizing that contribute to the structuring of interactions and
relationships.” L-A-P is concerned with how leadership is produced, how goals are
accomplished, and the practices (acts, activities, and interactions) that are under-
taken as actors “get on” (Chia & Holt, 2006, p. 647) with the work of leadership.
Construing leadership-as-practice requires a diﬀerent approach if there are
multiple actors undertaking leadership practices, working collectively in the situa-
tion and over time. Such an approach acknowledges and makes central the ﬂuidity,
interrelatedness, and complexity of leadership. It requires us to bring the “-ship”
back (Grint, 2010) into leadership development. This new leadership develop-
ment agenda poses signiﬁcant challenges for those (providers, clients, learners)
whose mind-set is leader development (Carroll et al., 2008). In the following
section we develop a set of principles that can guide but not prescribe what might
be required for developing leadership-as-practice development (LaPD).
Principle 1: Reviewing and renewing the leadership concept held by
learners and their organizations
Every organization has embedded unconscious assumptions about leadership.
These assumptions have been termed the leadership concept (Probert & Turnbull
James, 2011). In LaPD learners are encouraged to engage in more critical reﬂec-
tion to review and/or renew their shared leadership concept (James & Burgoyne,
2001). LaPD involves learners in addressing collectively Ladkin’s ontological
question of “what kind of phenomenon is leadership?” (Ladkin, 2010, p. 3). This
is a fundamental starting point because the way we know leadership “ … pro-
vides clues about where we might usefully look for it” (Ladkin, 2010, p. 16).
LaPD examines the leadership concept by asking who, or what, is doing
264
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

leadership, where and when? Addressing these questions reveals that leadership
resides in a dynamic system rather than a single leader. LaPD acknowledges that
the work of leadership is distributed far and wide in an organization and that
middle- and lower-level employees engage in leadership practices (Spillane,
2004). LaPD recognizes that leadership is a social process that is as much lateral
across a range of individuals connected with each other in practice as it is vertical
from top managers to a cadre of followers (Pearce & Conger, 2003). LaPD
encourages diversity and involves multiple team members in stimulating discus-
sion about diﬀering views of the same processes (Crevani, Lindgren & Packendorﬀ,
2010). LaPD broadens and redeﬁnes the who is engaged in leadership by exploring
leadership in diﬀerent sites and diﬀerent organizational roles. Taking the practice of
leadership as the object of analysis (Gronn, 2002) helps detach leadership from person-
ality (Raelin, 2007) and focuses attention on the interactional and social rather than the
rational, objective, and technical aspects of leadership (Carroll et al., 2008). LaPD
involves mindset work (Carroll et al., 2008) because underlying assumptions
(Alvesson, 1996) and established patterns (Plowman et al., 2007) about the work
of leadership are surfaced and questioned, helping learners appreciate that leadership
occurs in a complex, indeterminate, and relational world (Carroll et al., 2008).
Principle 2: Surfacing and working with leadership processes,
practices, and interactions
LaPD takes a relational orientation and starts with processes and not persons, and
views leadership as made in the doing (Hosking, 1988). LaPD explores what,
where, how, and why leadership work is being organized and accomplished
(Raelin, 2003). It focuses on “leadership processes, practices and interactions”
(Crevani et al., 2010, p. 78) and normal everyday activities. LaPD examines how
these develop over time, the conditions and relations that lead to their emer-
gence, and their eﬀects including the moral, emotional, and relational aspects
(Raelin, 2003). LaPD may address “concertive actions,” that Gronn (2002)
describes as spontaneous collaboration patterns and the intuitive understandings
that emerge between colleagues. Thus, LaPD supports what Shotter (2006) calls
“withness”-thinking or the meta-competencies to help people understand how to
apprehend the immanent conditions when interacting and learning with others in
the workplace (Raelin, Chapter 1, this volume).
LaPD explores how leadership functions are performed collectively, such as
setting a mission, actualizing goals, sustaining commitment, and responding to
changes (Parsons, Bales & Shils, 1953). LaPD also focuses on leadership outcomes
such as achieving a collective sense of direction and committing to the adaptive
work of the organization and its purpose through alignment of system and pro-
cesses to support these (Drath et al., 2008). Rather than being directed and con-
trolled, LaPD recognizes that leadership practices often take place “on the hoof”
(Chia & Holt, 2006, p. 643), involving “skilled, improvised in-situ coping”
Leadership-as-practice development
265

(Chia, 2004, p. 33), “skilled improvisations” (Weick, 1996), “practical coping”
(Chia & Holt, 2006), and dialogue and collaborative learning (Raelin, 2008). LaPD
also pays attention to leadership practices in “ordinary work” and “ordinary habits”
(Carroll et al., 2008, p. 369), “the everyday” (de Certeau, 1984), “unheroic work”
(Whittington, 1996, p. 734), “mundane activities” (Alvesson & Sveningsson,
2003a, p. 1435) and “nitty-gritty details” (Chia, 2004, p. 29) of leadership work.
The focus of LaPD is on how and to what extent these practices are performed
as much as by who performs them (Raelin, 2007). LaPD focuses on the language
used to convey these interactions to generate a deeper understanding of leader-
ship in context. It is especially important to identify not only what actions are
taken, but to explore with learners why in some situations practices manifest as
“extra-ordinarized” leadership practices (Alvesson & Sveningsson, 2003a, p. 1435),
whereas in others the claimed characteristics of leadership seemingly dissolve and
disappear (Alvesson & Sveningsson, 2003b).
Principle 3: Working in the learners’ context on their organizational
problems and adaptive challenges
LaPD acknowledges the complexity of the context in which leadership must
function and adapt (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007). The relationship between leadership
and context is not static, but is constantly shifting and changing (Cilliers, 1998).
Leadership is “embedded in a complex interplay of numerous interacting forces”
(Uhl-Bien et al., 2007, p. 302). Context is not “an antecedent, mediator, or
moderator variable; rather, it is the ambiance that spawns a given system’s
dynamic” (Uhl-Bien & Marion, 2007, p. 187). Therefore, LaPD is deeply
embedded and originates out of the context and the challenges that people in the
organization face collectively. LaPD focuses on “social sites in which events, enti-
ties, and meaning help compose one another” (Schatzki, 2005, p. 480). LaPD
explores leadership work as a “lived” experience rather than a “reported”
experience (Samra-Fredericks, 2003). Rather than learning about leadership,
LaPD focuses on “managers’ real problems” (Whittington, 2004, p. 62) and
explores “the scene of everyday action” (Chia, 2004, p. 30). LaPD is experiential,
interactive, situated, embodied, sustained, and involves relational activities that
create a new kind of engagement with others and the world. Certain sites may be
more conducive than others for LaPD. For example, LaPD might engage learners
in addressing wicked problems (Grint, 2005), adaptive challenges (Heifetz 1994),
or complex, collaborative, cross-boundary work (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007), which
may oﬀer the opportunity to uncover the essential work of leadership. In
responding to complex challenges, learners need to think about leadership as
interventions in a system and practices that produce adaptive capability. Complex
adaptive challenges focus attention on roles, relations, and practices in a speciﬁc
organizational context, and require conversations and learning with people who
share that context. In LaPD change is not achieved through the implementation
266
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

of a known process (Kotter, 1996), but requires the disruption of existing patterns
and experimentation to enable emergent futures (Plowman & Duchon, 2008).
As noted earlier, leadership may also emerge in mundane, everyday social actions,
especially in instances that call for a change in direction.
LaPD involves asking the right questions not providing the right answers
(Grint, 2005; Heifetz, 1994) and creating the conditions for the emergence of
innovative and creative responses to problems in the face of adaptive needs of
the organization (Heifetz & Laurie, 1997). This involves directing attention to
the issues (Heifetz, 1994), “reading” complex dynamics and seeing interconnections,
injecting ideas and information, fostering interconnectivity and creating linkages
(Uhl-Bien et al., 2007), as well as “counter-moves, altered or new strategies,
learning and new knowledge, work-around changes, new allies, and new tech-
nologies” (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007, p. 303). These practices constitute leadership
because they involve “intentional, local acts of inﬂuence to create change to
enhance the viability of the organization” (Uhl-Bien & Marion, 2007, p. 638).
Adaptive work, generates “small ‘t’ transformational change” (Heifetz & Laurie,
1999, p. 11) through a combination of reﬂection (internalizing) and mobilization
(engaging relationally and socially). Van Velsor and McCauley (2004) echo the
need for interdependence and learning together, suggesting that interdependent
groups often need to identify emerging organizational problems and pull together
across boundaries to work on shared challenges. LaPD works with the tensions
and paradox created by the entanglement of both adaptive and administrative
leadership practices (Uhl-Bien & Marion, 2007). This may mean understanding
what kind of enabling practices are required through sense-making of the current
leadership balance between administrative and adaptive leadership and of the
“entanglement” of administrative and adaptive leadership in the organization, the
historical positioning of the organization and its capabilities (Uhl-Bien, 2006).
Principle 4: Working with the emotional and political dynamics of
leadership in the system
Although a degree of tension is needed to provoke change, any heightened
emotionality needs to be contained within productive ranges (Krantz, 2001) to
create the conditions for adaptive responses (Heifetz & Linsky, 2002). Organiza-
tional systems create tensions and anxiety when those with authority acknowl-
edge that they do not have the answers (Grint, 2005), when staﬀbegin to
appreciate that the solution to problems is going to take a long time to construct
and will require constant eﬀort to maintain (Grint, 2005). If unaddressed in
LaPD, anxiety can occur in the “not knowing,” as the political dynamics of
power, inﬂuence, and competition are unleashed. As such, leadership is often so
diﬃcult to achieve that even where learners consider it appropriate and even
necessary, they may be very unwilling to attempt it (Grint, 2005). In LaPD support
is given to people working collectively with these organization dynamics.
Leadership-as-practice development
267

A systems psychodynamics approach provides one framework for exploring
how the leadership practices in the organization can generate high levels of
anxiety and how they can be reduced. It focuses on how these dynamics impact
some groups or individuals, and how the emotional and political dynamics in the
system as a whole need to be addressed if better practices are to be established and
maintained. The advantage of the systems psychodynamic approach is that the
learning is about the self in role and in relation to the system. This allows a wider
and deeper view to focus on what is involved in the problem and how it can be solved
(Armstrong, 2005; Gould, Stapley & Stein, 2001; Huﬃngton, 2006). LaPD theorizes
individuals in ways akin to Fletcher’s (2004) “self-in relation.” From this per-
spective individuals are linked to one another “into an interdependent, symbolic,
tacit, unconscious, and collusive nexus in which their interactions and shared
fantasies and phantasies create and represent as one the group-as-a-whole” (Wells,
1985, p. 114). A systems psychodynamic perspective allows for the examination
of ﬁne-grained group dynamics and oﬀers a useful approach to understanding
what happens in complex systems when traditional leadership is less dominant
(Fitzsimons, Turnbull James & Denyer, 2011). Furthermore, the systems psycho-
dynamic tradition has an established educational methodology, Group Relations,
which can be introduced into management programs (James, Jarrett & Neumann,
1998). This learning methodology is experiential and allows learners to learn
about the unconscious emotional dynamics present in groups and organizations.
LaPD recognizes that politics are inherent in organizational life as organizations
are pluralist involving many diﬀerent interest groups (Arroba & James, 2005;
Baddeley & James, 1987). As the assumptions about the tight control of tradi-
tional leadership are loosened and the importance of collective action to shape
and disrupt organizational agenda is heightened, the focus on politics in LaPD
becomes even more essential. Leadership has to be achieved without the poli-
ticking and Machiavellian politics people imagine being essential while incorpor-
ating the natural political dynamics that occur as people interact to achieve
individual and mutual goals. LaPD emphasizes integrity and provides a practical
framework to develop political wisdom. Baddeley and James (1987) suggest two
essential practices: Reading the context, which can be done collectively as well as
individually, and Carrying personal concerns so that the focus can be on organi-
zational challenges and ways of intervening to nudge change by bringing in dissident
or less heard voices, networking, and using collaborative eﬀort.
Doing LaPD: Collaborative leadership learning groups (CLLGs)
We do not provide the four LaPD principles as a blueprint for all leadership
development activity. Neither do we believe that they should apply to every
leadership-learning event. This is because it may prove impossible to engage all
four principles depending on the depth, length and brief for the leadership
development work. For example, a short program may not be able to move
268
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

beyond reviewing and renewing the leadership concept held by learners and their
organizations (principle 1), without focusing attention on leadership processes,
practices, and interactions, embedding learning in context by addressing directly
emergent organizational challenges, and helping learners cope with the emotional
and political dynamics of leadership. However, some leadership development
interventions can be designed in a way that provides learners with the experience
of working collaboratively on organizational challenges in ways that allow for the
emergence of leadership processes, practices, and interactions, and confronting
learners with the emotional and political dynamics of leadership.
Collaborative leadership learning groups (CLLGs) are particularly suited to
addressing all four LaPD principles. Whereas action learning groups tend to focus
primarily on the organizational challenge and individual or group learning about
the organizational challenge, in CCLGs the focus is on learning about collabora-
tion and shared leadership practices. In CLLGs solving the problem is a by-product
of eﬀective collective action. CLLGs are anchored in practice, bringing together
learners who can identify and work together on the challenges they face collec-
tively. Some general learning objectives for the program may be described to help
scope and focus the intervention but the precise learning outcomes cannot be
predetermined because learners decide collectively on what they hope to
accomplish to achieve their mission. LaPD becomes a mechanism for the colla-
borative identiﬁcation, formulation, and resolution of shared organizational
learning needs. Learners commit to one another’s learning and are mutually
accountable for the learning outcomes. The program experience is a valuable
learning environment in which many aspects of organizational learning can be
incorporated through reﬂection on the experience as it unfolds.
Collaborative leadership learning groups create what Heifetz and Laurie (1997)
refer to as a “holding environment,” a “safe” site to explore the tensions, diﬃcult
experiences, and emotions involved in leadership. Learners attempting to work
together can engage in a process to address a complex problem and are required to
cope with political power plays or anxieties about the task. The role of the tutors
is critical in LaPD because they raise appropriate questions, highlight issues, supply
relevant materials, and pay careful attention to the dynamics of the group when
they meet. LaPD is not “content/theory free” and is not just purely sense-making
and reﬂection on collective participant experiences, but introduces an element of
inquiry whereby learners and tutors collectively search for potential solutions to
the problem or issue to be addressed. Accessing relevant information may take
place through reviews of existing literature, expert inputs, or visits to organiza-
tions with a good reputation in the ﬁeld. Thus, CLLGs achieve learning by
integrating three forms of knowledge (James, Mann & Creasy, 2007):
1.
knowledge that the learners themselves bring, their accumulated understanding,
and insights and leadership challenges from prior experience;
Leadership-as-practice development
269

2.
practical and theoretical public knowledge, which might serve to frame,
support, illuminate, or challenge participants’ assumptions and thinking;
3.
knowledge that is collaboratively constructed or developed through the
practices, processes, and interactions in the program.
A particularly powerful form of LaPD encourages learners to facilitate the formation
of collaborative leadership learning groups in their organization to help address
the organizational issue while helping the learners appreciate how to help develop
a learning environment for others. Learners on the program receive support from
tutors, but in parallel they work to facilitate CLLGs in their own organizations
thereby creating distributed leadership patterns and leading learning (Turnbull
James, Mann & Creasy, 2007). Figure 13.1 shows how LaPD can be achieved
through CLLGs.
Example of LaPD 1: Program for a major housing association in
the UK
We turn next to a description of several examples of LaPD in action. The ﬁrst
case takes place in a major housing association in the UK (Turnbull James, 2011).
The start point was typical of most requests to tender: the speciﬁcation was very
FIGURE 13.1 Leadership-as-practice development and collaborative leadership learning
groups
270
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James
Forms of knowledge
Knowledge that the learners
themselves bring
Practical and theoretical public
knowledge
Knowledge that is collaboratively
constructed or developed
Learning Process
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themse
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves
the
themselves
themselves
themselves
themselves
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themsel
themselves bring
themselves bring
themselves bring
themsel
themselves bring
Reviewing and
renewing the
leadership concept
Leadership Principles
Surfacing and
working with
leadership processes,
practices and
interactions
Working in the
learner's context
Working with the
emotional and political
dynamics of
leadership in the
system

traditional, leader development. However, the Executive Group, with support
from the tutor team, recognized that they needed solutions to real organizational
challenges and that they needed simultaneously to shift the culture and re-think
how they did business, rather than simply up-skill their managers. The aims
emerged as the generation of collaborative and shared leadership to create more
engagement and innovation within the organization. This purpose coalesced as
the executive top team realized that there was only a limited amount of change that
they could personally direct and that traditional top-down leadership was not the
approach that would work in their very challenging competitive context. The
tutor team helped the organization to realize that what they proposed entailed
deep levels of collaboration requiring social and emotional ﬂuency. The program
was designed to combine development work tailored to this purpose while at the
same time providing a hard business edge. In this case collaborative leadership
learning groups were chosen as the mechanism for learning about and establishing
shared leadership practices while changing a traditional hierarchical organization.
The program was reframed as the establishment of a Leadership Academy,
signaling that it was not just “a course.” It was designed initially as a three-day
residential module in which learners would work in collaborative learning groups
and engage in learning events that would enhance their capacity for interacting with
each other to learn collaborative leadership practices. The residential module used a
variety of methods from depth psychology, music, and theatre, and a safe envir-
onment was established to facilitate deep learning. Seeded into the module were
the organizational projects around which learners were to collaborate. The pro-
jects were carefully set up to be related to the organization’s ﬁve-year strategic
plan and to bring people from diﬀerent parts of the organization to work together.
The initial workshop was followed by three facilitated one-day events so that
learners could work in their collaborative leadership learning groups. Where this
diﬀers from commonly used projects and action learning sets in leader develop-
ment is that the focus of the program, supported by the organization’s Executive
Group, was how to do collaborative work and establish collaborative leadership practices.
The project outcomes were regarded as a by-product of the group learning work.
The early phases of the program were challenging. Initially, the Executive
Group itself had to work out how the culture needed to change to support
collaborative working in the organization. There was a critical moment when the
Executive Group suddenly realized that they were central to the success of the pro-
gram (not as is often the case, where in many customized programs the Executive
Group’s role is to pay the bill and assess the program outputs). They realized that
they would to have to let go and give learners on the program space to do more.
They would have to adapt their leadership practices and do it diﬀerently if this
was going to be a reality for the whole organization. Consequently, the Execu-
tive Group was the ﬁrst cohort selected for the program, followed by the top 20
senior managers, then the rest of the management group in subsequent cohorts
(targeted at the top 250 out of about 1200 in the organization). Each cohort had
Leadership-as-practice development
271

a sponsor who was part of the Executive Group. The sponsor conducted brief-
ings, spent a day during their residential with the cohort, and then followed the
group all the way through. Each project (four collaborative learning groups per
cohort) had a project sponsor whose role was to model collaborative and shared lea-
dership practices for their project group. The commitment of the CEO was absolutely
crucial and remained so for the life of the Academy, lasting several years.
The learning from the ﬁrst three cohorts was published and distributed in the
organization. As the program evolved and much project work relating to funda-
mental strategy had already been done, rather than engage in less important pro-
jects, later cohorts worked on embedding shared and distributed leadership into
their part of the organization. Lessons were also published for internal circulation.
The outputs were evidence of the impact the program had on the organization as
a whole. In addition, a range of evaluation methods were used, including an
evaluation at the end of the three-day workshop, facilitated meetings, exchanges
with managers yet to attend but observers of others’ change, review meetings,
and a “House Values” exercise with 300 staﬀ, where the meaning of shared
and collaborative leadership for them was explored. Over a year after the pro-
gram, ten Leadership Academy “graduates” were developed through a formal
process to become CLLG facilitators themselves. A further 100 team leaders
attended a two-day program designed to increase their capability in colla-
borative learning practices. The focus of the selected projects was innovation and
enhancing the organization’s reputation as a thought leader in its Sector.
Example of LaPD 2: A global services company
The second case is an ongoing program with a services company working in 32
countries across Europe, Asia, and the Americas, with plans to expand its Asian
market. The company has grown through acquisition and has local companies
owned by the parent company in the EU, working successfully all over the
world. However, as it is headquartered in the EU, all these countries need to
comply with corporate governance rules emanating from the parent company
home country and with the banking and ﬁnancial rules and compliance require-
ments (the client also provides ﬁnancial services), which have become more rig-
orous in the EU and must now be applied to the local organization. It is a classic
problem for international organizations that must think and act both locally and
globally. The local companies are very entrepreneurial which is why they have
been acquired. They have global clients who do not want local creative solutions
but want the same service wherever they operate. To stay alive, the local orga-
nizations need to be adaptive to local competition. One example of the tensions
this creates is in the area of pricing, where in some regions charging European
prices would put them out of business. Another key leadership challenge is gen-
erational: they have traditional long-serving executives, particularly in the head-
quarters, whose experience and expertise are crucial but who are failing to keep
272
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

up with digital aspects of the business and who have traditional ideas regarding
the exercise of leadership. The company is concerned that it will not retain the
younger, entrepreneurial managers it needs for the future.
The request to tender for a leadership program was refreshingly open: they
asked for a creative approach that would embrace multiple learning methods
including project work. Although providing a list of desired outcomes, there was
no speciﬁcation of how to achieve these. The drive behind the program was to
bring people together to make sense of real issues, develop learning around these
in the classroom, and bring in expertise from faculty/experts who could help
them learn about latest thought leadership speciﬁcally in relation to these
issues. The design that emerged incorporated residential modules that enabled
cohorts to come from around the globe to work together face-to-face, as well
as networked online learning and collaborative leadership learning groups. The
networked learning element was a key feature and allowed people from across
the organization to come together for signiﬁcant conversations about the organi-
zational strategy, about understanding their context in terms of economic and
social trends, and about creating an understanding of how business needs to be
done diﬀerently as complexity increases. Learning began before the face-to-face
sessions through dedicated webinars linking faculty, executives, and learners, and
online conversation spaces and materials were made available through the provi-
der’s Knowledge Interchange—an extensive library of videos, exercises, read-
ings, e-learning modules, expert inputs, and executive interviews, which had
been developed over more than a decade. Learners identiﬁed their own personal
preferences and assumptions by completing online questionnaires that were used
to identify and raise self-awareness of what strengths they bring to new ways
of working and what they might need to be aware of in themselves if they
are to embrace collaborative working practices. Each cohort had “business
sponsors” (higher level senior executives) whose role was to raise the visibility and
proﬁle of the program outputs and the learners—a powerful incentive for the
learners.
The ﬁrst residential module focuses on developing collaborative practices
within the program’s project teams and challenging and extending learners’
existing leadership concepts. Learners work experientially on dialogue and
inquiry, applying these to their group work. They work on contracting in the
group to engage in collaborative practices and collective learning and explore how
this may be counter-cultural either organizationally or nationally, and the
implications for them of working in this new way. During this module they
work face-to-face with their executive coach. The coaches are selected
because they bring an organizational context approach (this is explored more
extensively in the executive coaching section below). This means they work
from the perspective of what is going on in the organization that impacts how
people take up their roles, work together, or manage the boundaries around the
work they are doing.
Leadership-as-practice development
273

The residential is followed by project work in regional groups (to take account
of time zones and travel for online and face-to face-activity) on key strategic
imperatives for the business over a six-month period. For this they receive further
executive coaching and group consultation from their executive coach. The
executive coach works with all members of the group, observing the group in
action because their remit is to help the group and its members learn to adopt new
collaborative leadership and learning practices, not just personal growth. The stra-
tegic projects stretch learners as they develop thought leadership for the organi-
zation. The project outputs, in terms of business proposals or changes, are
considered a by-product or added bonus of learning about collaborative leadership
practices.
Doing LaPD: Executive coaching
Executive coaching is increasingly used in conjunction with open or customized
executive development programs or as a stand-alone leadership development
process. In the example of LaPD 2 above, coaching was an important element of
a broader LaPD program and was used as a vehicle for managing and containing
new uncertainties and anxieties that emerge through exposure to the project,
through the requirement to develop new leadership practices, and through the
extended personal exposure to headquarters senior executives. The focus of the
coaching is very much on the business system and the dynamics emerging as
change unfolds and on how individuals experience these and relate to the col-
lective learning experience. For example, learners confront resistance and group
dynamics that might undermine desired change, how they can contribute to the
projects, and how they can take this back to their home workplace. The focus is
not on personal development but in developing in role and in context.
Stand-alone executive coaching can also be a powerful approach to LaPD. The
term, executive coaching, covers a wide range of methods, approaches, and
underlying assumptions, although these are not always made explicit either in the
matching of coach and coachee or in executive coaching contracts. The impor-
tance of making these explicit for the purposes of leadership development can be
demonstrated by a piece in The Huﬃngton Post (La Bier, 16/8/13), which
describes a Stanford Business School survey that found that two-thirds of CEOs
want coaching but do not seek it. The danger is that often CEOs think executive
coaching is “remedial” but it can also increase self-awareness as a basis for lea-
dership eﬀectiveness. This is a popular conception but may be insuﬃcient given
the kind of leadership practices we are arguing need to be developed today.
Although executives often engage executive coaches upon a new appointment
to help them take up their new roles, and expect to learn skills and to gain per-
sonal growth (i.e., leader development) with their coaching work, many also
engage a coach when there are challenges that seem intractable or inexplicable.
For example, they may be well established in a role and something goes wrong,
274
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

or they ﬁnd that a political approach they developed for a previous political
situation is no longer eﬀective. Executive coaching, more obviously than many
other types of leadership development interventions, works in context and with
real workplace challenges. However, LaPD makes several requirements of
coaching that are less familiar. The coach must be able to challenge the idea that
the problem to be addressed in the coaching sessions is the coachee. The coach
must also understand that it is not personal emotional sensitivity alone that is
required in their coaching role but an ability to relate the issues the client brings
to the emotional and political dynamics operating in the wider organizational
system. Thus the coaching work is understood as triadic rather than dyadic—the
coach, the coachee, and the organization are all “present” in the room (Arm-
strong, 2005; Campbell & Huﬃngton, 2008). A further challenge for executive
coaching is that often the coachee is “left” with the coach “to sort out” and
return “ﬁxed” to the system. This was particularly important in the example
of executive coaching for the LaPD to be described in the example below
where the coach needed to manage the relationship with the sponsor of coaching
carefully, in this case the Director, avoiding collusion with the sponsor’s diagnosis
of the problem and managing feedback about the outcomes of the coaching
work.
Example of LaPD 3: Coaching for a senior executive team member
This is a composite case in order to fully preserve the anonymity of the indivi-
duals concerned. The organization was a global professional services ﬁrm and
gave director-level roles only to those in the required grade (a personal not job
grade). This meant that Directors were often in charge of functions of which they
had little prior experience and so needed to rely very heavily on their team
members’ expertise. Team members were themselves senior executives with
international responsibilities and reputations as experts. Directors needed to feel
that they were well briefed and that they could rely on team members to make
sure that, as Director, they did not make a legal or policy blunder that would
have external and internal repercussions. The coachee was one team member in
such a Directorate. The impetus for coaching arose from a critical appraisal with
the Director. Some criticisms, although legitimate, were surprising and more
typical of someone at a junior level in the organization and appeared on the
surface to be quite trivial. However, these led the boss to question this team
member’s leadership capability.
The organizational problems could be seen from diﬀerent perspectives, for
example failure to attend a monthly team meeting seen from the Director’s
viewpoint as a lack of commitment to the team. From the coachee’s point of
view, this was explained by being on an important business trip relevant to his
organizational role. Other complaints seemed more personal. For example, failure
to be able to get weekend cover for eldercare to attend a “voluntary” weekend
Leadership-as-practice development
275

team building event in another country was described as though the boss thought
the coachee should have left a vulnerable person to fend for himself. Six months
later, the boss still viewed it as evidence of lack of team commitment. It
seemed important to the coach to get below the surface criticisms and
understand what was going on in relation to the team as a system, rather than just
in the boss/coachee relationship or in terms of personal leader development for
the coachee.
Although some of the complaints appeared trivial, the coach also repeatedly
oﬀered data that emerged during the coaching sessions about the legitimacy of
other complaints. Because of the perceived unfairness of at least some of the
complaints, the coachee was worrying about them in detail rather than treating
them as a potential source of data to explore his leadership practice and the
dynamics operating in the team. It became clear that some kind of psychological
splitting was occurring: the boss had become “all bad” to the coachee and the
coachee was “all bad” to the boss. The coachee found it hard to look at the
whole feedback (good and bad) or to explore how this “all good/all bad”
dynamic also reﬂected the dynamics of the team. The boss appeared to have
“favorite children” among the direct reports, while simultaneously putting
emphasis on the idea of a team and collaborative working practices. Some team
members were clearly emerging as perceived “all good” team members. They
kept him informed, made him look on top of things, never left him to deal with
queries from other Directors at his level about activities he was unaware of or
could not answer. The collaborative practices required for leadership in this team
were obvious to the external coach, but the anxieties operating in a system in
which the Director’s personal, hierarchical “leader as out in front” concept was
challenged and this created complex authority relations. By focusing on dyads (as
if the team were made up of a number of good or bad one-to-one relationships
rather than group relations), he found a scapegoat and further exacerbated the
natural diﬃculties of embracing collective team practices.
One aspect of collaborative, shared, and distributed leadership that is seldom
addressed is the nature of lateral relations in hierarchical institutions. An under-
standing of these dynamics has something to oﬀer LaPD beyond those in tradi-
tional organizational structures. One lens through which to think about lateral
relationships is that of familial sibling relationships. Indeed, it could be argued that
leadership comes as much from lateral as vertical processes in organizations
(Armstrong, James & Huﬃngton, 2004). This is explored by Huﬃngton and
Miller (2008) and Mitchell (2003), who argue that understanding sibling dynam-
ics is central to understanding the challenges and experiences that moving to new
leadership practices engenders. This was a fruitful lens for coaching in this case
and suggested some of the team dynamics that needed to be addressed and which
were
not
amenable
to
working
with
leader
competences
or
personal
development.
276
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

Discussion
Aren’t we already doing LaPD?
Traditional leader development may involve something that resembles or claims
to be LaPD. However, while these interventions may support learning from dif-
ferent ontological assumptions and produce diﬀerent learning outcomes (Raelin,
2006), they are often used within a traditional leader development agenda with-
out deep consideration for the diﬀerent learning that is required for LaPD. What can
be provided in any leader development program can be extremely innovative and
involve activities such as retreats, outdoor development activities, using methods
originating from theatre, depth psychology, psychometrics, experiential learning,
traditional case studies and lectures, simulations, arts-based methods, shadowing
executives, action learning groups, stretch assignments and high proﬁle projects,
executive coaching and mentoring. Yet, facilitators and tutors on leader develop-
ment programs are often professionally deeply immersed in personal transformation
processes. The result is often an unhelpful melding of perspectives and approaches.
For example, we have heard tutors say that they are going to teach a class about
adaptive leadership style. We are also continually frustrated by program designers
who place LaPD sessions immediately after leader development sessions that might
involve something like a psychometric test. It is unreasonable to expect learners to
be able to switch rapidly between vastly diﬀerent perspectives on leadership.
There are also a number of learning activities that are regularly used in tradi-
tional leader development programs that address organizational challenges that
learners work on collectively. The program might involve collective activity, but
in leader development it would be used to identify the development needs of
learners by providing personal feedback on how individuals assumed the leader
role. Action learning, stretch assignments and strategic projects, executive coach-
ing, inter-modular application work, for example, all address real-life challenges
that positional leaders face in the organization, yet the focus is usually on produ-
cing leaders who can better resolve these challenges once they return to work.
Traditional leader development programs, even those that include activities such
as international assignments, coaching and/or mentoring, rarely question “what is
leadership” except through an individual and frequently competency-based lens.
Learners may learn about collaborative action and collective learning through these
processes, but it is not often explicit how this relates to the concept of leadership
that people carry away from the program or how this changes the leadership
culture and practices of the organization as a whole.
In traditional leader development the teacher, as an expert, is often assumed to
have knowledge to oﬀer that is to be transferred to the mind of the learner. The
focus is on the transfer of learning (learn now and apply later)—working with
problems from the workplace during the program and taking that work back to
the workplace to work with others who share the problem but are not on the
Leadership-as-practice development
277

program. Traditional leader development may also focus on the leadership prac-
tices required to produce desired outcomes, yet the agenda usually results in the
collation and sharing of a prescribed set of actions, that is it slips into the styles/
competency trap. As argued earlier, LaPD is not a question of deliberately
developing a leader style or acquiring a set of generalized capabilities that can be
transmitted from one individual to another.
Is it time to throw out the baby and the bathwater?
Given that many development programs fail to produce managers with the right
capabilities to exploit business international opportunities (Ghemawat, 2012) and
cope with the complex, collaborative, cross-boundary, adaptive work in which
they are increasingly engaged (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007), is it time to abandon leader
development for LaPD?
There are two key reasons why we warn against dismissing entirely the notion
of leader. First, while LaPD broadens and redeﬁnes the who is engaged in lea-
dership and focuses attention on the interactional and social, individuals are sent to
leadership development programs and these individuals often do need to develop
skills such as self-awareness and a clearer understanding of their personality to
appreciate how they can better relate to others and work eﬀectively in the
system. Learners on leadership development programs may also have formal lea-
dership positions and roles that cannot be dismissed. In leadership development,
learners require signiﬁcant individual support to manage the mindset shift (Carroll
et al., 2008) involved in renewing their leadership concept (Probert & Turnbull
James, 2011) and to manage expectations projected onto them relating to tradi-
tional notions of leader. Changing the leadership concept heightens feelings of
vulnerability, simultaneously removing the apparent, if illusory, protection aﬀor-
ded by more traditional, hierarchical structures. Leadership development also
needs to work with the emotional challenges entailed when learners exercise their
own authority on a wider organizational front to address organizational challenges
(Huﬃngton, James & Armstrong,, 2004). In short, a move away from traditional
leadership has emotional costs (Huﬃngton et al., 2004) that need to be recognized
and worked through at an individual level to embed new leadership practices.
Second, the purpose of any leadership development program is carefully
negotiated over time between the provider organization and the client. Where
program purchase is seen as a procurement process, LaPD may be hard to deliver
because the brief is too often speciﬁed around competencies. The provider has a
context that inﬂuences what type of learning opportunity it can oﬀer, for exam-
ple expectations of market and the purchaser’s previous encounters with the
provider. The purchaser’s context also inﬂuences what can be provided, such as
their assumptions about what is needed (client and participant may not be same
people), their history and current situation, the type of leadership development to
which they are accustomed, the sponsor and funding arrangements for the
278
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

learning. The four principles oﬀered in this chapter may guide the negotiation of
the learning design with purchasers but our experience is that they rarely share an
understanding of some of the new thinking on leadership, and it is often extre-
mely diﬃcult to challenge and shape deeply held assumptions about leadership
during a procurement process.
Existing LaPD programs also can be derailed in cases where the tutor team fails
to constantly address the sponsors and other stakeholders’ traditional notions of
leader and leader development. In example LaPD 2 above, the headquarters’
sponsors of the program wanted to ﬁnd comfort in the familiar process of struc-
turing and specifying how things will work precisely in the program and what
they can expect to get in return. Having agreed to a collaborative process with
many emergent features, the sponsors felt the need to turn it back into a more
traditional program. The provider program directors had to work very carefully
with this emotional and highly political dynamic, respecting the discomfort and
anxiety the program raises for the organization’s sponsors. While this is an
important part of the organization’s learning, navigating these dynamics requires
experienced and skilled consultants as client managers and program directors, who
are able to work with organizational learning rather than just program design.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have oﬀered a critique of traditional leader development and
competency thinking, and argue that LaPD requires a signiﬁcant departure from
traditional approaches to leader development oﬀered by providers such as business
schools. We have proposed four principles for LaPD that are consistent with the
perspective that leadership is co-constructed through acts, activities, and interac-
tions embedded within the situation in which it takes place. We suggest that
collaborative leadership learning groups and executive coaching can support
LaPD. The three case examples of LaPD show how these practices inform peda-
gogy, learning design, and interactions with learners. We argue that LaPD creates
tensions between the expectations held by clients and learners about “desirable”
leader traits, styles, and competencies, and the leadership practices required to
cope with the complex, collaborative, cross-boundary, adaptive work in which
they are increasingly engaged. We highlight the critical role played by program
tutors and program directors who need to understand how to support learning
from a leadership-as-practice (L-A-P) perspective with its diﬀerent ontological
assumptions and learning outcomes, and manage the emotional and highly political
dynamics LaPD programs raise for both learners and sponsors.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks go to our colleagues, Dr. Hilary Harris, Lester Coupland, and Jayne
Brown who generously shared their experiences as Executive Development
Leadership-as-practice development
279

Directors and their program designs with us, providing case study detail that ela-
borates the approaches described in the chapter. Many thanks also go to Clare
Huﬃngton: the Executive Coaching section draws on previously co-authored
papers, her conference paper on sibling dynamics co-authored with Sarah Miller,
and the case example was developed from conversations we have held over an
extended period reﬂecting on our own coaching experience to inform and
develop our own coaching practices.
References
Alvesson, M. (1996). Leadership studies: From procedure and abstraction to reﬂexivity and
situation. Leadership Quarterly, 7(4), 455–485.
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003a). Managers doing leadership: The extra-ordinarization
of the mundane. Human Relations, 56(12), 1435–1459.
Alvesson, M., & Sveningsson, S. (2003b). The great disappearing act: Diﬃculties in doing
“leadership”. Leadership Quarterly, 14(3), 359–381.
Armstrong, D. (2005). Organization in the mind: Psychoanalysis, group relations and organisational
consultancy. London: Karnac Books.
Armstrong, D., James, K., & Huﬃngton, C. (2004). The emotional costs of distributed
leadership. In C. Huﬃngton, D. Armstrong, W. Halton, L. Hoyle, & J. Pooley (Eds.),
Working below the surface: The emotional life of contemporary organisations. London: Karnac.
Arroba, T., & James, K. (2005). Reading and carrying: A framework for learning about
emotion and emotionality in organisational systems as a core aspect of leadership
development. Management Learning, 36(3), 299–316.
Baddeley, S., & James, K. (1987). Owl, fox, donkey, sheep: Political skills for managers.
Management Education and Development, 18(Spring), 3–19.
Bennis, W. G. (2007). The challenges of leadership in the modern world: An introduction
to the special issue. American Psychologist, 62(1), 2–5.
Bolden, R., & Gosling, J. (2006). Leadership competencies: Time to change the tune?
Leadership, 2(2), 147–163.
Boyatzis, R. E. (1982). The competent manager: A mode for eﬀective performance. New York:
John Wiley and Sons.
Campbell, D., & Huﬃngton, C. (2008). Organizations connected: A handbook of systemic
consultation. London: Karnac Books.
Carroll, B., Levy, L., & Richmond, D. (2008). Leadership as practice: Challenging the
competency paradigm. Leadership, 4(4), 363–379.
Chia, R. (2004). Strategy-as-practice: Reﬂections on the research agenda. European Management
Review, 1, 29–34.
Chia, R., & Holt, R. (2006). Strategy as practical coping: A Heideggerian perspective.
Organization Studies, 27(5): 635–655.
Cilliers, P. (1998). Complexity and postmodernism: Understanding complex systems. London:
Routledge.
Crevani, L., Lindgren, M., & Packendorﬀ, J. (2010). Leadership, not leaders: On the study
of leadership as practices and interactions. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 26(1), 77–86.
Day, D. V. (2000). Leadership development: A review in context. Leadership Quarterly, 11
(4), 581–613.
280
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

Day, D. V., Fleenor, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Sturm, R. E., & McKee, R. A. (2014).
Advances in leader and leadership development: A review of 25 years of research and
theory. Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 63–82.
de Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Drath, W. H., McCauley, C. J., Palus, C. J., Van Velsor, E., O’Connor, M.G., &
McGuire, J. B. (2008). Direction, alignment, commitment: Toward a more integrative
ontology of leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 19, 635–653.
Fitzsimons, D., Turnbull James, K., & Denyer, D. (2011). Alternative approaches for
studying shared and distributed leadership. International Journal of Management Reviews,
13(3), 313–328.
Fletcher, J.K. (2004). The paradox of post-heroic leadership: An essay on gender, power,
and transformational change. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 647–661.
Ghemawat, P. (2012). Developing global leaders. McKinsey Quarterly. Available at www.
mckinsey.com/insights/leading_in_the_21st_century/developing_global_leaders (accessed
29 September 2015).
Gould, L. J., Stapley, L. F., & Stein, M. (Eds.) (2001). The systems psychodynamics of
organizations. New York and London: Karnac Books.
Grint, K. (2005). Problems, problems, problems: The social construction of “leadership”.
Human Relations, 58(11), 1467–1494.
Grint, K. (2010). Leadership: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gronn, P. (2002). Distributed leadership as a unit of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 13, 423–451.
Heifetz, R. A. (1994). Leadership without easy answers. New York: Belknap.
Heifetz, R. A. (2009). The practice of adaptive leadership: Tools and tactics for changing your
organisational world. Boston: Harvard Business Press.
Heifetz, R. A., & Laurie, D. L. (1999). Mobilizing adaptive work: Beyond visionary lea-
dership. In J. Conger, et al. (Eds.), The leader’s change handbook. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Heifetz, R. A., & Laurie, D. L. (1997). The work of leadership. Harvard Business Review, 75(1),
124–134.
Heifetz, R. A., & Linsky, M. (2002). Leadership on the line: Staying alive through the dangers of
leading. Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Hosking, D. M. (1988). Organizing, leadership, and skilful process. Journal of Management
Studies, 25(2), 147–166.
Huﬃngton, C. (2006). Executive coaching—A contextualised approach to coaching. In
H. Brunning (Ed.), Executive coaching: Systems psychodynamic perspective. London and New
York: Karnac.
Huﬃngton, C., James, K., & Armstrong, D. (2004). What is the emotional cost of dis-
tributed leadership? In C. Huﬃngton, D. Armstrong, W. Halton, L. Hoyle, & J. Pooley
(Eds.), Working below the surface: The emotional life of contemporary organizations (pp. 67–82).
London: Karnac.
Huﬃngton, C., & Miller, S. (2008). Where angels and mere mortals fear to tread:
Exploring sibling relations in the workplace. Organisation and Social Dynamics, 8(1), 18–37.
James, K., & Burgoyne, J. (2001). Leadership development: Best practice guide for organisations.
Report for the Council for Excellence in Management and Leadership.
James, K., Jarrett, M., & Neumann, J. (1998). Group dynamics and unconscious organi-
zational behaviour. In R. G. Milter, J. E. Stinson & W. H. Gijselaers (Eds.), Educational
innovation in economics and business III. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Leadership-as-practice development
281

Kotter, J. P. (1996). Leading change. Boston: Harvard Business Press.
Krantz, J. (2001). Dilemmas of organizational change: A systems psychodynamic perspective.
In L. Gould, L. Stapley & M. Stein (Eds.), The systems psychodynamics of organizations
(pp. 133–156). London: Karnac.
Ladkin, D. (2010). Re-thinking leadership: A new look at old questions. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Lichtenstein, B., Uhl-Bien, M., Marion, R., Seers, A., Orton, J. D., & Schreiber, C.
(2006). Complexity leadership theory: An interactive perspective on leading in complex
adaptive systems. E:CO Emergence: Complexity and Organization, 8(4), 2–12.
Mitchell, J. (2003). Siblings: Sex and violence. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Parry, K. W., & Bryman, A. (2006). Leadership in organizations. In S. R. Clegg, C.
Hardy, T. B. Lawrence, & W. R. Nord (Eds.), The Sage handbook of organization studies
(2nd edition). London: Sage.
Parsons, T., Bales, R. F., & Shils, E. A. (Eds.) (1953). Working papers in the theory of action.
New York: Free Press.
Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). Shared leadership: Reframing the hows and whys of
leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Plowman, D. A., Solansky, S., Beck, T. E., Baker, L., Kulkarni, M., & Travis, D. V.
(2007). The role of leadership in emergent, self-organization. Leadership Quarterly, 18(4),
341–356.
Plowman, D. A., & Duchon, D. (2008). Dispelling the myths about leadership: From
cybernetics to emergence. In R. Marion, M. Uhl-Bien, & P. Hanges (Eds.), Complexity
theory and leadership: Leadership dynamics in the knowledge era (pp. 129–154). Greenwich,
CT: Information Age Publishing Inc.
Probert, J., & Turnbull James, K. (2011). Leadership development: Crisis, opportunities
and the leadership concept. Leadership, 7(2), 137–150.
Raelin, J. A. (2003). Creating leaderful organizations: How to bring out leadership in everyone.
San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Raelin, J. A. (2006). The role of facilitation in praxis. Organizational Dynamics, 35(1), 83–95.
Raelin, J. A. (2007). Toward an epistemology of practice. Academy of Management Learning
and Education, 6(4), 495–519.
Raelin, J. A. (2008). Work-based learning: Bridging knowledge and action in the workplace. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Samra-Fredericks, D. (2003). Strategizing as lived experience and strategists’ everyday
eﬀorts to shape strategic direction. Journal of Management Studies, 40(1), 141–174.
Schatzki, T. R. (2005). The sites of organizations. Organization Studies, 26(3), 465–484.
Shotter, J. (2006). Understanding process from within: An argument for ‘withness’-thinking.
Organization Studies, 27(4), 585–604.
Spillane, J. (2004). Towards a theory of leadership practice: A distributed perspective.
Journal of Curriculum. Available at www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0022027032
000106726 (accessed 27 September 2015).
Turnbull James, K. (2011). Leadership in context: Lessons from new leadership theory and current
leadership development practice. London: The Kings Fund.
Turnbull James, K., Mann, J., & Creasy, J. (2007). Leaders as lead learners: A case example
of facilitating collaborative leadership learning for school leaders. Management Learning,
38(1), 79–94.
Turnbull James, K., & Ladkin, D. (2008). Meeting the challenge of leading in the 21st
Century: beyond the deﬁcit model of leadership development. In K. Turnbull James &
282
David Denyer and Kim Turnbull James

J. Collins (Eds.), Leadership learning: Knowledge into action (pp. 13–34). Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006), Relational leadership theory: Exploring the social processes of
leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676.
Uhl-Bien, M., & Marion, R. (2007), Complexity leadership: Part 1: Conceptual foundations
(PB): Conceptual foundations Pt. 1 (Leadership Horizons). Greenwich, CT: Information Age
Publishing.
Uhl-Bien, M., & Marion, R. (2009). Complexity leadership in bureaucratic forms of
organizing: A meso model. Leadership Quarterly, 20(4), 631–650.
Uhl-Bien, M., Marion, R., & McKelvey, B. (2007). Complexity leadership theory: Shifting
leadership from the industrial age to the knowledge era. Leadership Quarterly, 18(4), 298–318.
Van Velsor, E., & McCauley, C. D. (2004). Introduction: Our view of leadership devel-
opment. In C.D. McCauley, & E. Van Velsor (Eds.), The Center for Creative Leadership
handbook of leadership development (2nd edition) (pp. 1–22). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wang, L., Turnbull James, K., Denyer, D., & Bailey, C. (2014). Western views and Chi-
nese whispers: Re-thinking global leadership competency in multi-national corporations.
Leadership, 10(4), 471–495.
Wells, L. Jr. (1985). The group-as-a-whole perspective and its theoretical roots. In A. D.
Colman, & M. H. Geller (Eds.), Group relations reader 2. A.K. Rice Institute.
Whittington, R. (1996). Strategy as practice. Long Range Planning, 29(5), 731–735.
Whittington, R. (2004). Strategy after modernism: Recovering practice. European Management
Review, 1, 62–68.
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social psychology of organizing (2nd edition). Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Weick, K. E. (1996). Drop your tools: An allegory for organizational studies. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 41(2), 301.
Leadership-as-practice development
283

INDEX
absorbed coping 96–7, 104
acceptances and blocks 202–4, 207–12,
214–16
act + supplement discourse 13, 27, 184,
202–4, 206, 213–16
action see agency; co-action; self-action;
inter-action; intra-action; leadership;
leadership-as-action (L-A-P); practice;
practices; trans-action
activity theory: CHAT, 7, 246, 255–8;
Engeström on, 51, 103, 256–7
Actor-Network-Theory (ANT) 255–6
adjacency pairs 182–3, 187
after-the-fact thinking 135–7, 148–53
agency: as a basis for the L-A-P approach,
2, 31, 42, 159, 234; Barad on, 206–7; in
Cartesian-Newtonian ontology, 140–2;
the CCO perspective on, 125–7;
change as a product of trans-actional,
151; in CHAT, 256; collaborative, 6,
9–10, 23, 42, 73, 132, 152; crisis versus
routine, 5, 96; democracy and, 73,
77–78; ethical, 79; the example of
Document 7 in the Graph Project,
118–25; hybrid, 115–17, 126; identity
and, 107; inter-actional, 12, 163, 169,
171–2, 203, 215; Latour on, 115–17;
and the notion of practice, 112, 132,
169–74; the of material objects and
spaces, 11, 115, 117–18, 125–7, 163,
256; power and, 172–4, 233–4;
self-actional, 12, 161, 163, 171;
textual, 124; trans-actional, 165,
168–71; versus structure, 5–6, 70–72,
160–1
All Blacks 151, 152, 162, 164, 170–1, 174–5
anthropology 74, 79, 254–5
anticipation: the cultural character of, 137–
8, 146; in dialogue, 168; the inﬂuence of
on ethics, 63; the inﬂuence of on
identity, 96; the potential of to blind or
compromise awareness, 139, 144, 146–9,
153; the role of in narrative, 63; tacit
knowing and common sense, 133–4,
136–7, 138–9, 146, 153
architectonic principles 72, 74, 78, 116–17
argumentation: as a key element of the
discourse ethics of Habermas, 77–78; as a
means of achieving understanding, 61; in
conversational travel, 198–9, 204; in
degenerative conversational scenarios,
182–3; an example dialogue of, 187–8
artifacts: the example of the koosch ball in
the stand-up meeting, 93–5, 98, 101–5,
151; the function of as symbols of
authority, 102–4; and materiality, 115;
the role of in establishing an individual’s
identity, 2, 11, 96, 101–3, 107, 256–7;
the signiﬁcance of to L-A-P research, 8,
32, 54, 104–8, 224, 244
assumptions: false that can lead to “true”
scientiﬁc ﬁndings, 145; feminist post-
structuralism as a challenge to humanist,
235–6, 237; the inﬂuence of ontological

and epistemological on practice-based
research, 51–52, 166, 171–5, 205, 242,
247–8; the inﬂuence of within
organizational and societal cultures, 77,
84, 135, 223, 225–32, 257, 264–5; LaPD
as a means of questioning, 268, 270,
273, 274, 277–9; Marxist regarding
human activity as a driver of change,
256; the need for researchers to suspend
when observing, 97; the of rationality
and linearity underlying some models of
leadership, 25, 107, 179; the of
representationalism, 165; performative
language as a means of challenging, 165,
168–9; petitio principii, 149; reﬂexive
attunement as a means of questioning,
58; the role of in scientiﬁc problem-
solving, 146, 149, 162, 164; the taken-
for-granted nature of social interactions
based on, 8–9; the underlying dialogue,
179–80, 191, 194; the underlying self-
action, 159, 160–1; the underlying the
notion of inter-action, 162; the
underlying the traditional model of
leadership, 9, 25, 107, 262–3, 268
Attractor consultancy company 149–50
authenticity: authentic individuals, 55;
authentic leadership, 57–58; as a way of
“Being”, 56; Gadamer on in practice,
60–62, 65; Heidegger on in care-ful
practice, 64–65
Bakhtin, M. M. 133–4, 143–4, 149, 168,
181–2, 184, 202
Barad, K. 51, 164–6, 169, 202, 203, 206,
215
Barker, R. A. 24, 140, 144–5, 149–50
becoming: the examination of individual in
post-structural subjectivity, 236, 237; as
the focus of practice theory, 3; in
relational leadership and L-A-P, 26–31,
37, 205, 242, 243; the role of in trans-
action, 160, 165, 167, 168
before-the-fact thinking 12, 135–40, 148–53
behavior: as an emerging process, 135, 223;
change in individual and organizational
as goals of L-A-P, 6, 136, 263; the focus
on individual by the leadership style or
entitative approach, 1–5, 12, 24–6,
36–8, 132, 159; gender-based, 228–31;
the Heideggarian concept of, 56;
judgment and coordination of, 136–7;
organizational, 204, 236; patterns of
routinized as the focus of practice
approaches, 5, 31–2, 37, 53, 72;
self-concept and, 57, 61, 236, 264;
traditional ideas of leadership, 225, 228–31
being: Heidegger on everyday experience,
55–58; in hermeneutic inquiry, 10;
singularities, 143
Bentley, Arthur 12, 159–60, 162–3, 165–7,
171
blocks and acceptances 202–4, 207–12,
214–16
body consciousness 192–3
calculational thought 140–4
care-ful practices 64–65, 66
Carroll, Brigid 11, 43–4, 53, 56, 91–108,
115, 140, 149–51, 170, 172, 212–14,
242
Cartesian-Newtonian thought 12, 133,
135, 139–41, 143, 147, 164–5
case studies, scenarios, and vignettes:
composite example of conﬂict between
managers, 275–6; conversational choice
points in conﬂict, 187–8; the Graph
Project, 118–22; the stand-up meeting,
93–5; the surprise gambit in
conversational travel (surgery
schedule), 207–11; see also dialogical
thinking
change: the achievement of through groups
in practice, 9; the achievement of
through intersubjective dynamics, 149,
189, 224–6; in action or in conversation
as a change in leadership, 13, 42–43;
agency and, 151, 152, 168–70;
autonomy and, 76; ethical existence and,
79, 81; the failure of the inter-actional
approach to explain, 163; the generation
of through trans-actions, 169; individual,
57, 79, 81–82, 110, 135–6; in leadership
studies as a goal of L-A-P, 1–2, 266–7;
organizational, 44, 82, 85, 127, 267–8,
271, 274; routine as a tool for
achievement of, 100–1; sociocultural,
60–61; the visionary or heroic leader as
an initiator of, 75, 161–2
coaching: executive, 273–6, 279; group,
189–92
co-action 181, 182–4, 186, 187–8
co-development: as an element of L-A-P,
10–11, 238; the democratic qualities of,
78–84; the philosophy of, 77–78; versus
the philosophy of dependence, 74, 78
Index
285

cognition: cognitive diﬃculties and
problem-solving, 138–42, 153; the
objectiﬁcation of onto artifacts, 103; the
of leadership, 6, 7, 11, 77, 79–80, 85,
96; organizational, 173, 199–200; versus
intuition, 134–5
collaborative leadership learning groups
(CLLGs) 268–70, 272
common sense ontology 12, 76, 133–8,
139, 147
communication: culture and environment
as transmitters of, 81; the emergence of
leadership through, 125–6; the meaning-
centered model of, 200; nonverbal, 29,
168; organizational, 115–18; the
transmission model of, 200; visual, 41;
see also talk
communicative constitution of
organizations (CCO) perspective
115–18, 125–7
communities of practice 7, 50, 163, 173
competencies: competency thinking, 263,
279; the development of leadership, 46,
161, 234, 263, 265, 277–9; expertise and
professional, 60, 107; the leader as a
focal point of traditional research, 5, 14,
111, 237, 262
conﬂict: as a concern of leadership
development, 8, 136; as a product of
change, 4, 73; examples of, 187–8,
275–6; the investigation of through
L-A-P research, 83; management, 100,
179, 183–5, 187, 190, 194–6, 204
constructionist approach 28–9, 53, 111,
173, 190, 200, 204
context: assumptions and interpretations,
72, 149; historical as an inﬂuence on
scientiﬁc inquiry, 60; historic as the basis
for perceptions of being and self, 64, 98,
238–9; the importance of cultural and
historical for L-A-P research, 8, 242–3;
the inﬂuence of historical and linguistic
on the individual, 58–59, 133, 182, 184;
the inﬂuence of historical on
hermeneutic practice, 60–62; the
inﬂuence of institutional or
organizational norms on, 107, 152, 223;
the inﬂuence of materiality on, 102; the
inﬂuence of socially-created activity on,
200; the interplay of tradition and,
65–66; the need of for leadership
development, 7, 55, 133; problematics
and, 52; process theory and, 250–1;
theory-testing, 243
contingency or situational leadership 21,
24, 25
conversation: act + supplement, 202–4,
213–16; analysis, 13–14, 40, 118, 126,
202, 213, 253; as an element of practice,
58–59, 64–65; as an invitational practice,
198, 201–3; as an object of research, 34,
39–40, 62, 94–5, 96–7, 118; bodily
expression in, 192–3; choice points,
183–4; “contest”, 208–9; context and,
53, 182–3; control of as a means of
enforcing hierarchies, 238; dialogue as,
180–1; exploratory, 209–10; generative
and degenerative, 183–4; the generative,
intra-actional nature of, 203–4, 214–15;
interaction through, 27, 29–31, 53, 54,
192; leadership identity through, 11, 97,
101, 103, 105, 107, 212–14; Mead’s
concept of dialogue as of gestures, 168;
in relational leadership, 26–31, 42,
198–9, 201–6, 213–16; scenarios, 183–4,
186–9; understanding and, 62, 74; see
also dialogue; talk
conversational choice points 183–4, 190,
194, 195–6; see also degenerative
dialogue; generative dialogue
conversational travel: as a means of
discerning emergence of leadership as a
practice, 13, 198–9, 207–8, 215–16; as a
research tool, 201–4, 206, 210; examples
of, 208–9, 210–12; example using the
surprise gambit, 207–16; the invitational
function of talk, 202–4; the use of in
discourse analysis, 212–15; see also talk
coordination-as-practice 10, 22, 40–42,
43–44
courses of action 25, 37, 39–42, 44,
114–15, 123
creative projects 41–42, 44
creativity in conversation 201, 203, 213,
215, 237, 267
Crevani, Lucia: the conceptualization of
leadership as a process by, 51, 111–12,
114, 118, 170, 198; the
conceptualization of practice as entitative
ontology by, 3, 6, 45, 206; on leadership
as practice, 21–46
critical incidents 14, 252, 254
Critical Leadership Studies (CLS) 9, 83,
224–6, 232–3, 237, 239
286
Index

culture: as an element of structure, 80–81;
architectonic principles, 72–74, 78;
artifacts in, 102; best practices, 238;
communities of practice, 7, 50, 163,
173; Cultural Historical Activity
Theory (CHAT), 7, 246, 255–8;
ethnography and autoethnography,
254–5; gender as a product of, 227–32;
the impact of performative
governance on, 76; the inﬂuence of a
researcher’s on their research, 73–74,
226, 228–9; the inﬂuence of cultural
norms on the emergence of leadership,
4, 7–8, 84; the inﬂuence of intercultural
relationships on L-A-P, 8;
the inseparability of individual and,
55–56, 70–72, 98, 256; interpretation
and meaning as products of, 72, 186,
235; organizational, 98, 104, 152,
230–1, 238–9, 271, 273; the
Organizational Description
Questionnaire (ODQ), 254–5;
organizational sub-cultures, 81; social
inequality, 234–5; thinking and practices
of gender, 229, 236; the transmission of,
150–1; the uses for by the practice view
of research, 224; see also norms
Cunliﬀe, Ann L. 10, 51–66
data: as a complement to theory in sense-
making, 216; empirical, 51; as
observations, 148; qualitative, 246, 253,
254–7; triangulated, 252–3; the uses of
in coordination-as-practice, 41; the uses
of in holistic methodologies, 244–6,
251–5; the uses of in L-A-P, 29, 34, 51,
83; the uses of in nomothetic as well as
ideographic methodologies, 244, 247–8,
253; the uses of in practice studies,
52–53, 248; the uses of in strategy-as-
practice, 39–40, 246–8; versus
noticings, 143
degenerative dialogue 182–5, 187–8, 190,
195; see also conversational choice points;
generative dialogue
democracy: architectonic principles and, 72;
democratic subjective autonomy, 78, 83,
85; holistic, 81–85, 85n2; the inﬂuence
of on L-A-P, 11, 51, 73–74, 78–80,
82–84; the need for intersubjective and
subjective work to achieve change in,
85, 169, 238
Denyer, David 14, 262–79
dependence: the leader-follower duality,
76; performative governance, 76; the
philosophy of, 74–77
Descartes see Cartesian-Newtonian
thought; philosophy
determinism 160–1
Dewey, John 12, 137, 149, 159–67, 169,
171, 173
dialogical thinking 144–8; see also
Cartesian-Newtonian thought
dialogue: as a co-creative product, 183,
189, 191; adjacency pairs, 182–3, 187;
agency and, 168–71; as a means of
achieving collective practice, 2, 4, 11,
12–13; as a means of dwelling in or with
other individuals, 142–4, 180; as an
inter-subjective connection, 180; as a
subject of ethnographic research, 8;
choice points in, 183–4; co-action and,
181, 182–4, 186; co-development and,
77, 180–1, 234, 237–8; common sense
and, 12, 76, 133–8, 139, 147; context
and, 58–59; as conversation, 180–1; the
conversation of gestures as, 168; the
dialogic nature of understanding, 60–61;
dialogic scenarios, 182–3, 182–4, 186;
the dialogic self as a product of relational
processes, 27; dialogic skill, 185–94,
194–6; dialogue-as-practice, 9, 179, 182,
194–5; the ends versus means for
participants in, 61; Gadamer on, 58–62;
generative and degenerative, 182–4, 185;
in interpretive practice, 58–62;
leadership as dialogic practice, 12,
42–43, 55, 144–8, 152–3, 182, 194–6;
leadership as the emergent outcome of,
12, 30, 34, 61, 132–3; life as, 168, 182;
Mead on, 168; as practice, 168; in
relational leadership, 35, 37, 77, 234,
237–8; the study of, 180; the
superaddressee in, 133; synchronic versus
diachronic, 10, 55, 59, 61, 180;
trans-action and, 168–71; words and
utterances in, 143–4, 181; see also
conversation; interpretation; monologue
and monological relations; talk;
understanding
discourse analysis 202, 212, 214, 244
distributed leadership: as a means of
understanding power and social
positioning, 74, 76–77; analytical versus
applied models of, 85n2; in CLLGs,
268–70, 272; dialogue, collaboration,
Index
287

and shared learning as characteristic of,
77, 276; the role of material objects in,
115; the stand-up meeting as an example
of, 93–5, 101; unit of analysis and, 70
dyadic leader-follower relationships 3, 9,
149, 163, 172–3, 229, 262
Eisenhardt method 247–8, 250; see also
Gioia method
emergence 166–7, 169, 182, 195, 242–3,
255, 257
empirical study: as an approach to practice
perspectives, 41, 44, 45, 50–51; the of
micro-level activities, 32; the persistent
focus of on individuals, 27, 35–6, 37; the
shortcomings and complexities of, 25,
170, 205, 206, 217, 258; the use of in
researching relational processes, 35–6,
198–201; the use of in strategy-as-
practice perspective, 39, 246, 247, 249;
the use of in studying categories of
action, 159; the use of in the natural
sciences, 146; the use of with the CCO
perspective, 118–27
emplotment 55, 62–63, 65–66
Endrissat, Nada 3, 10, 21–46
Engeström, Y. 51, 256–7
entitative-soft approach: as a technique
used by both leadership styles and L-A-P
researchers, 34, 37; as the basis for
patterns-of-action style research, 31,
32–3, 35, 43; the inﬂuence of relational
dynamics on the, 28–9; as opposed to
the individual-centric approach, 23
epistemology: Newtonian, 162; the of
action approaches to leadership
development, 7; the of Critical Incident
Technique (CIT), 254; the of Dewey
and Bentley, 159, 164; the philosophical
extension of to ontology, 54, 64, 159,
165–6, 243, 247; in practice
methodologies, 51, 52–53, 64; in
relational leadership, 28
ethics: as an element of practice research,
245, 246, 252–3; the assumed by a
philosophy of co-development, 77–78;
the assumed by a philosophy of
dependence, 74–77; the co-construction
of, 74; the ethical nature of human
beings, 73–74, 77–81; ethical selfhood,
55, 62–63; the inﬂuence of performative
governance on values, 76; the leadership
ethics assumed by L-A-P, 73–74, 78–82,
85; leadership practices and leadership,
65–66, 72–73; Ricoeur on, 55, 62–63;
subjectivist versus inter-subjectivist views
of, 77; see also values
ethnicity, race, and class 71, 74, 190, 223,
228, 233–5, 238
ethnography: as a tool for L-A-P
researchers, 2, 8, 14, 66, 248;
autoethnography, 255; the function of,
97, 254–5; the shortcomings of, 224; the
use of with process thinking, 244, 246,
248; the use of with the CCO
perspective, 118
exclusion 81, 82, 85; see also gender;
inclusion
experiments and experimentation: as a
means of achieving change, 79, 106–7,
267; as an element of role playing,
190–3; cognitive or thought, 7, 25, 63,
65; and the danger of false assumptions,
145
facilitators 191–2, 272, 277
feminist theory: critical leadership studies
(CLS) and, 232–3; the goals of, 235;
post-structuralist, 229–30, 232–3, 235;
thinking and practices of gender,
229–31, 236; the value of, 232; see also
gender, post-structuralism
focus groups 192, 194, 251
Ford, Jackie 13, 50, 83, 223–38
Foucault, Michel 51, 232, 233, 235
free will 12, 160, 171, 173
Gadamer, George 10, 52, 54–55, 58–62,
63, 64–66
gender: as a basis for exclusion, 83; the
associations and embodiments of
femininity, 229; the associations and
embodiments of masculinity, 229; the
contribution of to inclusive leadership,
237–8; Flax on, 236; gender boundaries
and categories, 228, 232; gender
dynamics, 161, 228–9, 234–5; gender
neutrality, 223, 225, 227–9, 231; the
ignoring of by organizational and
management theorists, 227–9; the
inﬂuence of on an individual’s thought
and actions, 232–3; the inﬂuence of on
distributed leadership, 73–74, 237–8; the
inﬂuence of on subjectivity, 236–7;
L-A-P treatments of, 13, 223–4, 231,
238; organizational arrangements,
288
Index

behaviors and, 227–9, 232; the
problematization of by feminist theorists,
228; thinking and practices of, 228–9,
230–1, 236; see also exclusion; feminist
theory
generative dialogue 13, 182–5, 190, 195;
see also conversational choice points;
degenerative dialogue
geometric thought 140–4
Gergen, Kenneth J. 12–13, 50, 178–96,
202, 203
Gioia method 247–8, 250, 254; see also
Eisenhardt method
Green, T. H. 79
grounded theory 92, 244, 246, 247, 250–1
Habermas, J. 77, 183
Heidegger, Martin 51–58, 62, 64–66, 165–6
hermeneutics: authentic leadership, 55–58;
as the basis for L-A-P, 52; and the
challenges of interpretation, 185;
dialogical-hermeneutical ontology,
141–2; hermeneutical unities, 141–8;
hermeneutic phenomenology, 54–55,
64; the of Gadamer, 54–55, 58–62, 64;
the of Heidegger, 54–55, 58, 64; the of
Ricoeur, 54–55, 62–63, 64; versus
calculational or geometric thought,
141–4
heroic leader: the as a being independent of
historic or cultural context, 24; the
charismatic, 75, 111, 161, 199, 253; the
example of the symphony orchestra
conductor, 28–9; the Messiah leader, 76;
the post-heroic leader model, 9, 230,
233; as the traditional model of
leadership, 24, 149–50, 161, 224, 229,
239, 262
Hersted, Lone 12–13, 50, 178–96
Hibbert, Paul 3, 10, 51–66
hierarchies: as the basis for organizational
decision-making, 9, 40, 74, 228, 232,
276; exclusion, 81, 82, 85; the impact of
changing, 14, 271, 278; the variation of
leadership styles and capabilities across
and within organizational, 25, 81–82,
225, 264; versus holarchies, 78, 81
history see context; culture; interpretation;
judgment; understanding
holism: as an approach to human
development, 78–82, 85, 161, 166, 172;
the CHAT method, 256–8; as
fundamental to organizing, 43, 96; the
Grounded Theory method, 92, 244,
246, 247, 250–1; holarchy, 78; holistic
democracy, 79, 81–82, 85; holistic
research methodology, 242, 244–6, 249,
251–3, 255
ideals: as a basis for change, 60–61; as
expected outcomes and forms, 135,
149–50; idealism, 135, 150, 159; and
narrative emplotment, 66; the potential
of to obscure reality, 149–50, 159, 229
identity: as an ongoing process, 97–9;
artifacts as tools for, 101–3; identity
performance, 97–8, 105, 107; narrative,
62–63, 253; the post-structural sense of
self, 227, 235–6; routine as a means of
deﬁning, 99–101, 103–4
ideographic method 243–5, 250–3, 255; see
also nomothetic method
illocution 202–3, 206, 216; see also
perlocution
immutable mobiles 119, 124, 166
improvisation: as a medium for aﬀecting
change, 100, 172; improvisational acts
and acceptances, 114, 215;
improvisational readiness, 192–4, 265;
the inﬂuence of on leadership models, 4,
51, 202–4
inclusion 78, 81, 224, 231, 238; see also
exclusion
inequalities and injustices: as concerns of
L-A-P, 83, 85, 234; the identiﬁcation
and problematization of, 9, 71, 73, 79,
233; as the products of conﬂict, 187
intelligibility 10, 55–56, 60, 65, 237
inter-action 159–59, 162–4, 165–74; see
also self-action; trans-action
interpretation: in the alignment of thinking
and perception, 4; architectonic
principles, 72–74; context as an
inﬂuence on, 59, 60–62, 72, 231; data,
34, 39–40, 52; the dialogical nature of,
58–60, 184–5, 254; Gadamer on, 58–62,
64–66; the Gioia case method, 247;
interpretive practice, 58–60; in
intersubjective practice, 54; as intrinsic to
human experience, 58, 64; multiple
interpretations, 10, 44; the of leadership
and followership, 76, 200, 216, 231,
233, 248; as practice, 59–61; in practice
approaches, 53; in research, 98; the
subjective quality of, 53, 60, 185, 231,
238, 254–5; tradition as an inﬂuence on,
Index
289

59–61, 66; see also dialogue;
sensemaking; understanding
intersubjectivity: as a complement to
subjectivity in achieving democratic
change, 85; intersubjective inquiry, 10;
in L-A-P, 8, 10, 223–4, 237–8; the of
the practice approach, 3, 6; the ontology
of, 52–54; versus subjectivity, 54
interviews: as a complement to
observations, 92, 244; as a means of
researching individual identity, 97–9,
108; as a means of studying individuals
in their natural context, 32, 108; as a
source of data, 97, 118, 242, 247–8,
251–2, 273; focus group, 192, 194;
narrative, 32, 254, 255; as performances
or constructs, 98
intra-action 5, 12–13, 51, 151, 166, 203
Jackson, Brad 13–14, 33, 36, 242–57
James, William 147, 148
judgment: aesthetic, 29; ethics and, 75, 81;
identity and, 107; the inﬂuence of
anticipation on, 136–7; the made by a
leader, 75; non-judgmental dialogue,
180, 191; as the product of human
interactions, 132, 136–7
Kelly, S. 201, 205–7, 216
Kempster, Steve 13–14, 33, 36, 242–57
knowledge: as a basis for shared social
order, 5, 32, 80–81, 200; as an attribute
of the charismatic leader, 75; as a
product of interaction, 7, 14, 73, 99,
179, 185–6; as a product of practice, 60,
72, 112, 248; assumptions regarding,
52–53, 173, 186, 232–4, 277–8;
autoethnography as a means of
communicating, 255; in CLLGs,
269–70; embodied, 192–3; the
inadequacy of during crisis, 5; the
investigator as interpreter of, 141, 144,
152; the post-structuralist interpretation
of, 234; power and, 13, 233–5, 238; the
problematics of, 52–53; the production
of, 24, 34, 44–45, 46, 164, 224, 238–9;
propositional, 186; scientiﬁc, 164; the
spectator theory of, 164
language: Bakhtin on the dialogical
approach to, 144; the categorizing
tendency embedded within, 141; the
embodiment of leadership through, 5,
26–7, 111, 205, 224, 230, 266; Foucault
on, 235; gender and, 227, 229–30,
235–6, 237; hermeneutics and, 54, 59;
language games, 2, 181–2; the liberal-
humanist view of, 235; the metaphor,
134, 136, 181; in post-structuralist
thinking, 232–3; representationalism
versus performativity, 162–3, 164–8,
172; the study of by L-A-P researchers,
8, 9, 35, 53, 97, 174, 225; subjectivity
and, 235–7; understanding and, 65,
136–7, 144, 147, 162–3; utterances, 137,
181; versus process ontology in deﬁning
reality, 165; Wittgenstein on, 136–7,
147, 181–2
Latour, Bruno: on hybrid agency, 115, 163,
173; on immutable mobiles, 119, 124–5,
166; on sociomateriality, 51, 115,
117–18
leadership: adaptive, 266–7; after-the-fact,
148–9; artifacts as identiﬁers of, 101–2;
authentic, 55–58; before-the-fact, 148,
149–53; Critical Leadership Studies
(CLS), 9, 83, 224, 226–7, 239; Critical
Management Studies (CMS), 226;
entitative, 23, 25, 26; the ephemerality
of, 144, 216; the ethics of, 65–66;
feminist post-structuralist goals in
redeﬁning, 232–3, 235–6; gender and,
227–34; the generative qualities of, 73;
good-enough, 150–1; the Graph Project
example of, 119–25; historical
assumptions concerning, 223, 227, 229,
232; and identity, 97–9; the inﬂuence of
routine on, 106–7, 173–4; the inﬂuence
of spatial conﬁgurations on, 106–7, 127;
the leader-practitioner, 12, 29, 37,
161–2, 171, 173, 174; the occurrence of
in situ, 11, 53, 111–17, 124, 126, 265;
organizing as a fundamental function of,
27, 113; practitioners, practice, and
praxis of power, 29, 172–3; processual,
developmental models of, 8, 11, 70–72,
113–18, 149–50, 171–2; situational or
contingency, 21, 24, 25; the
understanding of, 5, 8, 10, 12–13, 22,
70–74, 111
leadership-as-practice (L-A-P): as a
co-construction, 31–2; the activities of,
5, 6–7, 64–65, 97, 100–1, 106–7;
as a democratic process, 11, 51, 73–74,
78–80, 81–85, 169, 238; as a
hermeneutic unity, 141–8; as an
290
Index

ontological positioning, 114, 125,
141–8; as a product of relational
dynamics, 114, 198–207; culture as a
crucial element of, 231; the empirical
approach to, 51; the Gadamerian
approach to, 54, 55, 58–62; the Graph
Project example of, 118–25; the
Heideggerian approach to, 54, 55–58,
55; the ideology of, 8–9, 111; the
investigation of conﬂict as a priority of,
83, 100; leadership and practice, 3–6, 37;
patterns of action, 31–3, 35, 43;
phenomenological approaches to, 54–58,
64–65; the philosophical bases for, 51,
55; the processual nature of, 14, 28, 32,
106, 113–18; as the product of courses
of action, 114; responsibility versus
involvement, 83; the Ricoeurian
approach to, 54, 55, 62–63; subjective
approaches to, 225, 233, 237–8; the
theoretical approach to, 51; see also
process ontology
leadership-as-practice development (LaPD):
case study of executive dynamics, 275–6;
case study of motoring services
company, 272–4; case study of the the
housing association, 270–2; the
comparison of to traditional leader
development strategies, 277–9;
considerations in implementing, 278–9;
executive coaching with, 274–5;
principles for developing, 264–70
leadership development: the alteration of
work identity as a tool for, 107; the
cognitive elements of, 7–8, 262–3;
immersion in actual practices as a
requirement of, 188–90, 195–6; the
need of for historic and cultural context,
7; the non-cognitive elements of, 150–1
leadership styles approach 10, 23, 25–6,
34–5, 37
learning: the acquisition of judgment and
common sense, 137–8, 150; action, 7,
269, 271, 277; collaborative, 37, 189,
266, 271–2; collaborative leadership
learning groups (CLLGs), 268–70, 272;
collective, 100, 273–4, 277; leadership,
55, 63; the of dialogic knowledge,
185–90; organizational cognition and,
173; pedagogical approaches to L-A-P,
185–9, 192–5, 279; role-playing and
mimesis, 186, 189, 191–4; see also
sensemaking
Marx, Karl 77, 167, 256
materiality: the agency of, 11, 37, 43–44,
115, 117, 123; as an element of L-A-P,
110–13, 115, 117, 123, 125, 127, 256;
the example of Document 7 in the
Graph Project, 11, 118–25; the example
of the mood board, 41–42; in the
framework of CCO, 116–18, 125–7;
sociomateriality, 117, 119, 243, 248,
251–2
Mead, George Herbert 51, 167, 168–9, 171
meaning: artifacts and, 102, 104; the broad
context of human existence, 79; the
ﬂuid quality of in narratives and in
narrative identities, 62–63; intelligibility
and, 55, 56, 65, 184–5, 200; language,
dialogue, and, 54, 180–2, 184–5, 201–3,
235, 237; meaning makers, 4, 77, 168,
223–4, 235, 237; the post-structuralist
approach to, 232, 234–5; the power of
language to obscure, 141–2, 149;
practices as sources of, 32, 37, 52–53,
172, 264; as the product of a relational
matrix, 12–13, 72, 74, 145–8, 150,
163–70, 247; shared meanings, 6–11; see
also understanding
moment-by-moment: action, 13, 40, 199,
203, 206; leadership, 13, 42, 64, 198,
210, 213, 215–16
monologue and monological relations
132–3, 148, 181; see also dialogue
multi-methods 250, 251–2
multiple distributions analysis 11, 80, 82,
83–85
narratives and narrative identity:
conversational analysis, 253; Critical
Incident Technique, 254; emplotment,
55, 62–63, 65–66; the narrative self, 57,
62–63; the need for creativity in, 63, 65,
66, 100; Ricoeur on, 62–63, 65–66
networks: actor network theory (ANT), 50,
255–6; as elements of hermeneutical
unities, 146; as elements of L-A-P, 6,
264, 268; as elements of relational
leadership, 173, 199–200; as part of the
organizing process, 264; as secondary
developments of inter-actions, 164, 167,
172; as tools for enforcing hierarchies,
230, 232
Nicolini, D. 31–3, 38, 53, 102, 112–13
nomothetic method 242–4, 247, 250–3; see
also ideographic method
Index
291

norms: artifacts as complements to norms of
action, 103; behavioral, 225, 230, 236,
238; cultural, 4, 5, 24, 97, 229, 232; the
inﬂuence of on the exercise of
leadership, 33, 37, 55, 103–4; spaces,
artifacts, and routines as elements of
institutional, 107; see also culture
objectivity: in conﬂict resolution, 183; on
the ontological spectrum, 174; the
positivist ideal of, 226, 229, 265; the
rejection of by post-structural theory,
234; scientiﬁc, 165, 242–3; versus
subjectivity, 142, 145, 147, 174
objects see materiality
ontology: Cartesian-Newtonian, 140–2;
entitative as the basis for practices, 3, 23,
25, 31–5, 42–43, 171–2; entitative
versus relational, 10, 23, 26, 28–9, 36–8,
165, 173; the objective-subjective
spectrum, 174; the of intersubjectivity,
54, 62; the of the entitative or “style”
model of leadership, 21–2, 23–4, 36,
168–9; the of “we-ness”, 54, 62; the
overlap in of the L-A-P and entitative
processes of leadership, 26, 28–9, 31–5,
173–4; the post-structural rejection of
entitative, 12; relational, 23–4, 27–8, 31,
33–5, 174; representationalism versus
performativity, 165; theory testing and,
243
organizing: as a fundamental function of
leadership, 27, 114, 201, 206, 216; the
agency of objects in, 119; in “as-
practice” approaches, 22, 38, 39, 43–44,
45, 50; L-A-P as a tool for, 10, 23, 114,
264; a L-A-P example of, 33; leadership
as inﬂuential acts of, 27, 33, 37, 113–14;
and the notion of emergence, 167;
practices as building blocks for, 23, 37,
38, 39, 50, 113; processes, 22–3; the role
of “immutable mobiles” in, 119, 127
Parry, Ken 13–14, 33, 36, 242–57
patterns: of action, 25, 31–3, 35, 178, 248;
as a source of meaning, 52–53;
behavioral, 4, 5, 24–5, 37, 53, 185; in
Cartesian-Newtonian problem-solving,
140–1; contextual of predetermined
actions, 4, 12; evolving and changing,
103, 178, 267; the of linguistic
utterances, 181–3; recurring of action
and behaviors, 3, 24, 32, 35, 103, 257;
of relationships, 71–72, 73, 80, 178, 196,
223
patterns of action: as an tool of the
entitative-soft approach, 31; as
synonymous with practices, 31–3, 35
pedagogy see learning
performativity: the of leadership, 45, 51,
165, 167, 172; performative subjective
autonomy, 76–78, 83, 85
perlocution 202–3, 206, 213, 214, 216; see
also illocution
phenomenology: as a basis for studying
practice and L-A-P, 54–55, 57, 64–65,
254; Heideggerian, 55; hermeneutic,
54–55
philosophy: as an approach to practice,
50–52, 153; Cartesian-Newtonian
ontology, 140–4; hermeneutics, 58,
59–63, 185; the of Aristotle, 60; the of
Bentley, 159–67, 171; the of co-
development, 74, 77–79; the of
dependence, 74–77, 78; the of Descartes,
135, 140, 141, 147, 164–5; the of
Dewey, 99, 137, 149, 159–67, 171, 173;
the of Foucault, 51, 232, 233, 235; the
of Gadamer, 54, 55, 58–62, 64–66; the
of Heidegger, 54–58, 64–66; the of
Latour, 115, 117–18, 119, 124–5, 166,
173; the of Mead, 168–9; the of
Ricoeur, 54, 55, 62–66; the of T. H.
Green, 79; the of Wittgenstein, 132,
136–40, 147, 148, 181–2; the
ontological and epistemological
assumptions of practice, 52–54, 171–4,
246–7; phenomenology, 54–55; post-
structuralism, 184–5, 227; Pragmatism,
51, 79, 159, 167, 171, 182, 195;
vitalism, 160–1
physical space 99, 127, 208
pluralism: as an assumption of the practice
approach, 50, 52, 59; Critical Leadership
Studies as a tool for facilitating, 226–7;
role-playing to facilitate plurality in
perspective, 193
positivism and post-positivism 179, 225,
226, 236, 247, 250, 253
posthumanist performativity 35, 51, 179,
206
post-structuralism: as an approach that
questions the entitative view of
leadership, 12, 227; as a source of
support for L-A-P, 178, 223–4, 224–5,
237; as a vehicle for understanding the
292
Index

minds of others, 184–5; the fundamental
assumptions of, 232–3; interpretations of
knowledge through, 234; interpretations
of reality and truth through, 234; the
subjective approach to identity of, 227,
235–6; versus structuralism, 179, 184–5;
see also feminist theory
power: accountability, 9, 106; agency and,
169–70; artifacts and, 101, 102–3, 124;
asymmetric, 206, 216, 224, 225, 235; as
a thing versus power as a process, 169; as
a tool of exclusion, 73–74, 232, 233;
co-development and, 77; Critical
Leadership Studies as a tool for re-
examining identity and, 226; the
emergence of through trans-actions, 169;
ethics and, 73, 82; as the exercise of free
will, 12, 160, 171, 173; the exercise of
through inter-actions, 163–4, 169, 172;
the exercise of through self-action,
160–2; feminist post-structuralist studies
of, 232, 235, 238–9; gender and, 13,
223–4, 228, 232–4; Gergen on, 202,
203; hierarchies and, 9, 40, 74, 228, 232,
276; identity and, 98, 100–1, 106,
233–4, 236–9; inﬂuence, 132–3, 163,
169, 172; intentionality, 206; the
interactions of agency and structure as
determinants of, 71, 98, 101; knowledge
and, 233–7, 238–9; language as a tool of,
235–6; L-A-P and the democratic
concept of power, 83–85, 223, 231,
233–4, 238; leadership and the exercise
of, 83, 173, 233; post-structuralist studies
of, 232–3; “power over, ” versus “power
to” versus “power with,” 163, 169, 172,
173; practice as a generator of, 72, 73,
80; representationalist versus
performative, 172–3; routine and,
100–1; in the social context of act +
supplement, 202, 203; suppression and,
9, 232; traditional assumptions
about leadership and, 223–6, 228–31,
233–8
practice: agency in, 12, 42–43; as an
element of relational ontology, 23; as an
unfolding emergent dynamic, 23, 168;
Gadamer on hermeneutic, 59–60; the
intersubjective character of, 3; as its own
domain of knowledge, 60; as
perspective, 31–2, 35, 247–9; the
practice view, 3–4; versus practices, 3,
23, 31–2, 167–8, 171–2
practice approach: the focal points of the,
39, 97; practice-based studies, 32, 38,
43–45, 50–54, 64, 98; related traditions,
4–5, 22, 34–8, 39–42, 46; relationality as
an element of the, 31–2; versus the style
or entitative approach, 24–6, 31
practices: agency in, 12, 163, 172; the
breakdown or disruption of, 58, 65, 107;
as building blocks for organizing, 23,
111, 113; bundles of, 31, 38, 43, 45; as
collectively shared knowledge, 32,
55–57, 163; as conﬁgurations of actions,
32, 39, 41, 65, 118; contextual, 250–2;
the emphasis of in L-A-P, 31–4, 37–8,
171–4; inter-, 54; leadership as a series of
interlocking dialogical, 12, 35, 38,
125–7, 171–2, 178; patterns of action, 3,
31–3, 35, 43; the recursive nature of,
171–4, 243, 246, 248, 251–2; as
representations, 164; that constitute
leader behaviors, 264–7; that reinforce
socioeconomic hierarchies and biases,
227, 229–38; values as an inﬂuence on,
8, 59–62, 65–66; versus practice, 3, 23,
31–2, 167–8, 171–2
practice turn 21, 41, 111, 248, 249
practitioners: the agency of, 161–2; the
identities of, 97–9; leader-, 12, 26, 29,
31–2, 106, 161–2, 171–4; the treatment
of in practice theory, 95–7; the
treatment of in the L-A-P approach,
31–2, 245–6; the treatment of in the
leadership styles approach, 31–2
Pragmatism 51, 79, 159, 167, 171, 182, 195
problems: the Cartesian-Newtonian
approach to solving, 140–2, 146; as
diﬃculties of the intellect, 138–40;
interpretation and the problem of other
minds, 185; the LaPD approach to
addressing organizational, 266–9; mutual
cooperation to solve, 7; problematics,
10, 52–54; problematizing injustice to
establish ethical practices, 73, 226–8,
231, 232, 235–6; problem-solving,
138–40, 142, 146, 148; problem spaces,
102–5; the reliance on leaders to solve,
76
process: context and process theories,
250–1; process perspective, 26, 27, 31,
34, 171; process thinking, 114, 244–5;
see also unit of analysis
process ontology: as an alternative to
language in deﬁning reality, 165; as an
Index
293

alternative to perceiving leadership as
entitative, 206; the emphasis of on
relational and trans-actional processes,
28, 35; as experienced in trans-action,
165–71, 172–4; the focus of on action,
114, 125, 126; leadership as a, 125–7; as
part of the theoretical framework of
CCO, 116–17, 126; strong or relational,
23, 28, 31, 35, 37, 126, 127; the
variation of with diﬀerent modes of
action, 159–60; weak or entitative, 23,
26, 37; see also leadership-as-practice
(L-A-P)
processual approach: as a means of
understanding phenomena, 26; as a tool
for studying leadership in situ, 11, 14,
28, 32, 106; the entitative elements of
the, 23, 28; the Graph Project example,
118–25; the use of in researching
practice, 3, 113, 244
questioning: the absence of as leading to
organizational stagnation, 4, 133, 226; as
an element of conversational travel, 198;
as an element of reﬂexive leadership,
57–58, 61; as an element of subjective
L-A-P, 62, 237; as a tool for breaking
habits, 56–58, 61–62, 64, 228, 237–8; as
a tool for learning leadership, 191; verbal
sounds as, 137
questionnaires 25–6, 28, 32, 242, 250–2,
254–5, 273; see also surveys
Raelin, Joseph A. 1–14, 42, 51, 73, 132–3,
134, 148, 152–3, 224
Ramsey, Caroline 13, 198–217
realism 159, 160, 164, 244, 249–51
reality: as a construct, 187–9, 234–5; as a
product of relational narratives, 62–63;
the breakdowns between expectations
and, 108; the construction of to solve
problems, 138, 146–9, 162; conversation
as primitive, 202–3; the entitative view
of, 26, 28; the Gadamerian view of,
58–62; the holistic view of, 43; the
inter-actional view of, 160, 162;
interpretation as, 58–62; the
intersubjectivist view of, 52–54;
language as a means of constructing
subjective, 187–9; language as the
primary tool for achieving social, 27,
144, 194; the objectivist view of, 52–53;
the of leadership, 200; as perceived
through the situational or contingency
approach, 25; the potential of L-A-P to
reﬂect lived, 96, 245; the practice view
of, 38, 51, 246–7; the process view of,
34; the relational construction of,
199–200; the representationalist view of,
164–5; the self-actional view of, 160,
171; the social constructionist view of,
199–200, 204; the subjectivist view of,
52–54; the transactional view of, 166–7
reﬂexivity: as an element of L-A-P, 55,
238; as a stance for researchers, 226–7,
229–30, 234; collective as a means of
initiating change, 5; reﬂexive attunement
and ethics, 58, 63; Ricoeurian
emplotment as a means of achieving
individual, 63
relational leadership: the challenge in
deﬁning, 198–9; as compared to other
research approaches to leadership, 4–5,
10, 23–4, 28, 30–1, 34–8, 46; the
conductor-orchestra relationship as an
example of, 29; conversational travel as
one means of deﬁning, 201–2, 214; the
entitative characteristics of, 23, 26; the
focus of on “becoming in relation”,
26–31; inter-actional and trans-actional
practices, 173–4; the ontology
underlying, 10, 23, 43, 111, 114–17,
199; the processual characteristics of, 23,
26, 28; the unit of analysis, 23–4
relational ontology 23–4, 27–8, 31, 33–5
representationalism: as a complementary
tool to performativity in L-A-P, 174;
Cartesian, 147, 164; as characteristic of
the ontology underlying self-action and
inter-action, 165–6, 172; language-based
conceptual, 145, 148, 172; the
shortcomings of, 164–5; versus
performativity, 164, 165, 166, 172–3;
versus responsive thought, 147
retreats 252, 277
rhetoric 61, 63, 65, 230
Ricoeur, Paul 52, 54–55, 57, 62–66
role-playing 186, 189, 191–4
routine: as a basis for leadership identity,
11, 100–1, 103–4, 106; the alteration
from routine to crisis agency, 5, 96; the
automatic or sub-cognitive nature of, 96;
the breaking or reconﬁguring of, 4,
106–7; the concepts of practice and
practices, 3, 51–53, 167–8, 171; the
example of the stand-up meeting,
294
Index

99–101, 103–4; the focus of practice
approaches on, 97; the inﬂuence of on
leadership development, 106–7, 108
sciences: the human, 54, 58; the natural,
59, 60, 146, 160, 164, 242–3; scientiﬁc
methods, modes, and thinking, 10, 54,
133, 140–2, 145, 164–6, 179; the social,
160, 162, 180
self-action 12, 159–60, 163, 171, 173; see
also inter-action; trans-action
sensemaking 6, 37, 108, 200, 214, 248,
269; see also interpretation; learning;
understanding
Sergi, Viviane 11, 41, 110–28, 242
Shotter, John 11–12, 132–52, 166, 181,
192, 200, 202, 206, 265
Simpson, Barbara 3, 12, 23, 34, 50, 70,
151, 159–74, 212, 214
situational or contingency leadership 21,
24, 25
social accomplishments 10, 22, 38, 40, 41,
43, 45
Social Processes of Leadership (SPL) 250,
253
social structures 11, 70, 71–72, 78, 80, 98
sociomateriality see materiality
space: of action, 39, 42, 45, 101, 102; the
contribution of to the intelligibility of
interactions, 10, 55–56, 65, 107; in the
example of the stand-up meeting, 93;
Heideggerian, 55–56, 65; the inﬂuence
of on identity, 11, 98–9, 106–7; the
inﬂuence of spatial conﬁgurations on the
emergence of leadership, 99, 105, 106–7;
leadership, 102, 103, 104; physical and its
functions, 99, 127; the presence of power
relations in participatory spaces, 9;
problem, 102, 103–4, 105; the
reconﬁguring of as a means of changing
interactional dynamics, 106–7
Storch, J. 149–50
stories and story lines 63, 65, 98, 186, 254,
262
strategy-as-practice (S-A-P) 38–44, 111–12,
172, 246–9, 251–2, 258
structure: agency versus, 5–6, 70–71, 160–1,
168; as an element of trialectic process,
71–73, 83; of anticipations, 136–7,
144–7, 153; as context, 173; culture as
an element of, 80–81; identity as the
mediator between agency and, 11, 98,
108, 234, 236; the inﬂuence of on
leadership, 72–73, 80–81, 84, 173; the
inﬂuence of on practice, 72; the
inﬂuence of structural variables on
individuals and their actions, 81–82; in
objectivism, 53; as one of the distributed
elements of democratic leadership,
80–81, 83–84; the power of societal and
organizational structures, 77, 161, 234,
236, 238; social in holarchy, 78
subjectivity: as a complement to
intersubjectivity in achieving democratic
change, 85; as an element of leader
identity, 239; democratic subjective
autonomy, 78, 83, 85; gender and,
236–7; in L-A-P, 225, 233, 237–8;
performative subjective autonomy,
76–78, 83, 85; in post-structural
thinking, 227, 232–3, 235–7;
the role of questioning in the subjective
approach, 237; subjectivity versus
intersubjectivity, 54; versus objectivity,
174
supplement see act + supplement discourse
surveys 97, 250, 251, 274; see also
questionnaires
systems psychodynamics 268
talk: the agency of material items to
stimulate, 122, 124–5; as a means of
constructing leadership, 26–8; as an
invitational tool, 13, 202–3; as a tool and
product of reﬂection, 190–2; as a tool
for the study of practice, 53; context
and, 141–6, 181–2, 185–6; intentionality
and, 53–54, 58; of leadership versus
practice, 92–3; perception and, 187–8;
the sequential of act + supplement,
203–5; talking about versus the actual
reality of a phenomenon, 141, 145, 164;
see also communication; conversation;
conversational travel; dialogue
toolkit approach 112, 113
trajectories: changes in as leadership in the
moment, 13; in conversational
inter-actions, 198, 203, 204, 207,
211–13, 215; developmental, 145; the
interrelated nature of multiple,
co-evolving, 39, 41, 42, 44, 102; the
power of dialogue to change individual,
182
trans-action 3, 12, 28, 151, 160, 164–74;
see also inter-action; self-action
trialectic process 71–74, 77, 80, 82, 83
Index
295

triangulation 14, 242–5, 251–3, 255–6
Turnbull James, Kim 14, 262–79
Uhl-Bien, Mary 26, 114, 174, 199–201,
205
understanding: as a cultural product, 32, 56,
58–59, 61, 65, 76–77; as a product of
democratic interrelationships, 11, 77, 79,
137, 265–6; architectonic principles,
72–74, 78; assumptions as the bases for,
51–52, 53, 138, 145–7, 165–6;
authenticity and, 57; the basis of in
routine, 5; being and, 55–56; common
sense, 76, 137; the Critical Incident
Technique as a tool for, 254; the
dialogic nature of, 54, 60–61, 65; ethics
and, 77, 79–80; the Gadamerian concept
of, 55, 58–62, 64; the Heideggerian
concept of, 55, 56; the inﬂuence of
historical context on, 60–62, 64,
229–31, 235; the inﬂuence of
subjectivity on, 235–6, 237;
intelligibility, 10, 55–56, 60, 65, 237;
L-A-P goals in the of leadership, 78–82,
174–5, 254–5; new, 144–6; the of
leadership, 107, 108, 111, 114, 116–17,
125–7; as ontology, 58–59, 145, 149;
the phenomenological goals in, 54–55;
in practice theory, 5, 53, 60–61, 246–9;
the processual of phenomena, 28, 32,
133; reﬂexive, 63, 186, 189, 192; in
relational ontology, 35, 114–15, 116–17,
184–5; representational- versus
performative-based, 165–8; the
Ricoeurian concept of, 55, 63; the
shared resulting from conversation, 27,
202; ways of thinking versus forms of
thought, 147–8; see also dialogue;
interpretation; meaning; sensemaking
unit of analysis: as a co-construction of
actors, 31, 45–46; deﬁnition of the, 21,
23–4, 25, 182; the importance of
delineating, 242, 252, 257–8; the in
activity theory, 256; the variation of
among styles of leadership, 26–7, 31,
36–7, 70; see also process
utterances: adjacency pairs, 182, 183, 187;
verbal sounds, 137, 181
values: the co-creation of in holistic
democratic (L-A-P) environments, 74,
78–80, 83, 85, 256; in the context of
performative governance, 76, 78; the
cultural of an organization, 80–81, 84,
264; the inﬂuence of on language, 235;
the inﬂuence of on the personal sense of
leadership, 81–82; physical materiality as
an inﬂuence on, 115, 142; as tools of
leadership, 57, 58, 72–74; see also ethics
vitalism 160–1
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 134, 136, 137–9,
147–8, 181–2, 206
Woods, Philip A. 10–11, 71–85,
238
work: cultural assumptions, 84, 152, 223,
225–32, 257, 264–5; the inﬂuence of on
individual identity, 97–8, 105, 107;
organizational hierarchies, 9, 40, 74, 228,
232, 276; the role of institutional norms,
33, 37, 55, 103–4, 107, 236, 238; the
role of power elites, 238
296
Index

